We're going to do electric potential in this chapter, but let's start with electric potential energy.
We can use potential energy as far as electricity is concerned because the electrostatic force is a conservative force.
And that means that we can use this equation of work done by electric field,
and that work will be negative for change in potential energy.
As far as electric fields are concerned, we take S0 infinitely far away from the charge creating that electric field.
If we have an electric field and we place a test charge in that field, there's going to be an electrostatic force
that is going to cause displacement and we'll get to what happens later.
A change in potential energy just means the energy final minus the potential energy initial.
We know what work is. Work equals the dot product of force times the displacement vector.
We know what force is as far as electric fields are concerned. That is the charge times the electric field.
If we replace this into our equation and we change this into, remember this is now still an electric field,
but it's going to be Q, E, D, but because it's a dot product, the cosine of the angle between the field and the displacement.
Between the field and the displacement. In other words, if we look at the change in potential energy, which is negative,
it's right that in green, we're actually going to have that, we're actually going to have that, the change in potential energy is going to be negative Q, E, D cosine of theta.
Let's see what that means though. If you're given a problem in the direction of the electric field, say it's towards the right,
we place a positive test charge in this electric field and we say the displacement is in the same direction as the electric field.
In other words, the cosine of the angle is going to be cosine of theta, which is 1. So, the change in delta U is actually then going to be,
or let's say what is the work? Let's just first look at work done by the electric field.
So, the angle between those two are positive, 0 degrees, so that the cosine is 1, so we're going to have positive work here.
It's right there, in red. So, this work will be positive. If the work done by the electric field is positive, that means there's got to be a decrease in potential energy.
Think why that makes sense. If this is the electric field, that means there must be a positive on this side, a negative.
If I take a positive test charge and it moves in that direction, its potential energy is going to decrease.
If it's right up against the positive charge causing the electric field, of course it's going to have a high potential energy to move away,
because opposite charges repel each other. So, if it's in the opposite direction, so the displacement, the displacement direction is opposite,
that means that means that the cosine is 180 degrees, that will be negative. So, the electric field does negative work.
And that means the potential energy is going to increase, because the work done by the electric field is negative to change in potential energy.
Now, let's look at what happens to an electron. Here, it's 180 degrees, and zero degrees. So, the displacement of the electron is in the same direction as the electric field.
So, the cosine of that angle, which is zero degrees, will be one. But, the charge is negative. In other words, the work done by the electric field will be negative.
So, if you use this equation, use the sine for the electric discharge. And that means, also, the potential energy is going to increase. And that makes sense.
If the electron is moved towards the negative side of the electric field, it's going to have a, with negative charges in parallel,
which of its potential energy is going to increase. These two directions, 180 degrees apart, the cosine is negative.
Negative times that negative is positive, which makes sense as well. In other words, the potential energy is going to decrease.
In this video, I want to quickly define the concept of electric potential. And we're going to define electric potential, V, as the electric potential energy in an electric field divided by this charge put into that field.
So, if we have a charged object, that's going to be an electric field, say it's positive. In all directions, there will be an electric field. If you place a test charge in this field, it's going to have, at that specific spot, a potential energy.
That potential energy, if divided by the charge, the magnitude of the charge will give us the electric potential at that spot. An electric potential is then a scalar defined anywhere in an electric field.
And what we will always note, and what we will always note, is that there's also a concept of equipotential surfaces, and they are always perpendicular to electric fields.
So, if I have a uniform electric field in this direction, an equipotential surface will be perpendicular to that field at all times. Here, an equipotential surface will be such that it is perpendicular to the electric field in all areas.
So, how can we calculate electric potential? How can we calculate electric potential if we are given an electric field, in a given electric field E? It's very easy to derive. Let's start with a differential amount of work done.
That is going to work done. That is going to be force dot dS. Now, d is differential, s is actually the distance. So, we used to write work equals force times distance, that s is the distance as differential distance.
We know that force equals force. We know that force equals q times e. This is the charge of the test charge, and this is the electric field set up by the static charge. Don't get those two confused.
So, dW equals q times e dot dS. If we want to find work, that is going to just be the integral of dW, and that is going to be our test charge is constant. We can bring that outside of the integral.
We know that force integral of e dot dS, e dot dS. We know that v, now remember this is the work done by the electric field. We know that electric potential equals negative, the work done by the electric field divided by q.
If we substitute now, we will see that v equals negative q, integral of e dot dS, divided by q's. Our q's cancel, so we have now an equation for electric potential when we are given the electric field from some initial to some final displacement, e dot dS.
And let's look at this. And let's look at this. And let's look at an example. If I have here a uniform constant electric field, these are my field lines.
So, electric charge goes from some initial to some final position there. This is now my displacement vector. The angle between my displacement vector and my electric field vectors is zero degrees.
Cosine of zero degrees, so that we can also write this as v equals the integral from some initial to some final position of e. Well, it will be s actually, cosine theta. Don't get confused.
So, the angle is zero degrees. The angle is zero degrees. The angle is zero degrees, so that will be one. The electric field is constant everywhere.
Let me write it here. The electric field is constant, so we can just bring the electric field outside of the integral.
So, dS. From some initial to some final position. And of that distance there, let's call it d. So, that will just be ed. Quite easy. So, we have an equation calculating electric potential if we are given the electric field.
And then the displacement that we are going through. If this was our final position here, just for a quick instance, that means our displacement vector is here.
It's a 90 degree angle between our electric field vector. So, the cosine here will be 90 degrees. And that means zero.
And that's quite satisfying inasmuch as this will be an equipotential surface because everywhere it is perpendicular to the electric field vectors.
I'd like to revisit the previous problem where we had a uniform electric field. These are the field lines. And we went from point I to point F.
And we also had an intermediate point C. And we showed that this is an equipotential surface actually. And that our electric potential change there would be zero.
But what if we then go back to F? If the electrostatic force is indeed a conservative force, it should be path independent.
So, now remember, our equation for electric potential equals negative E dot dS. Negative E dot dS.
And what we found, basically, is if this was distance d, that V was going to actually be minus ED. It was going to be minus ED. The cosine of the angle was negative.
The electric field is negative. The electric field is the electric field, so that's from initial to final. The electric field is constant, can be brought out, so we're left with that distance.
Now, what if we go from C to F? Well, let's just have a quick look at what our angles are. This is the angle of the electric field, or let's just say, this is our displacement vector.
This is our E field vector. We put the two tails together, so we have an angle theta here. That is the angle between our two vectors. Our displacement vector and our E field vector.
In other words, in other words, in other words, in other words, this angle here is 90 degrees minus theta.
Now, to avoid confusion, let's just call this distance K. So, here we'll have minus EK. And let's call this distance L.
What is the sine of this angle? The sine of 90 degrees minus theta is opposite divided by hypotenuse, which is L.
If I can just put that here. In other words, L equals K divided by the sine of 90 degrees minus theta is actually the cosine of theta.
So, let's leave that there. So, let's leave that there. We'll have V equals negative, E is a constant, integral going from initial to final, ds. Cosine of theta. Let's not forget that.
The distance is this distance L. So, that's going to be V equals minus E times L times the cosine of theta. What is L? Well, there's L.
V equals V equals negative E. L is K divided by cosine of theta times the cosine of theta. Those cancel. And we let the V equals negative EK and V equals negative EK.
So, we've indeed shown that this electrostatic force or whatever. This movement from initial to final, this displacement is indeed, is indeed path independent.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
