Now, what if the electric field is not constant? Then we can't bring E out of our integral.
Let's just start again by noting that V, electric potential, equals negative, and from some initial to some final position, of E dot to dS.
We certainly know an equation for an electric field around a point charge. So let's have an example. This is an example of a point charge.
We know that equals 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0 over R squared. Now let's consider our point charge and a point P, a distance R away from our point charge, so the electric field there.
Let's also consider the electric field then infinitely far away. Let's imagine that this is infinitely far away.
So our electric potential at infinity, we set 0. And let's assume we take this charge from P all the way up to infinity.
So our electric field away from the point charge is in this direction, our displacement vector is in this direction, so the angle between them theta is going to be 0 degrees.
I hope that still comes out on the video in the corner there.
So we go from some initial, so the V at point P, let's say V final minus, let's not get confused, so V final minus V initial, final is going to be V at infinity minus V at P.
So that is going to be negative. So that is going to be negative. So going from point P to infinity of, we know what E is, 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0 times R.
Ds. Now, the cosine of 0 degrees is 1, so we can leave out the cosine. So ds, we can just replace that with dr. We're doing the same thing here, dr.
Let's just make some space here. Let's just make some space here. So we're going to get there by the seams of it.
Now, V final, or V final is V infinity, so that would be 0. So negative V at point P, remember this is going to be a negative, sorry, it's negative, is going to be negative.
We can bring out some of the constants, 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0. So then we can do that. Integral of going from point P, which is actually a distance R away, remember it was R away, make sure it would be R, to infinity of,
R, now remember this has got to be R squared, sorry, so just be careful I'm not making mistakes, so that's 1 over R squared dr.
This is a rather simple integral to do, the negative, well let's just do this, the two negatives would cancel.
So Vp is going to equal, but that's R to the power negative 2 actually, plus 1 will make it negative 1, bring that forward, so we're going to have a negative again,
negative 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0, and we'll have left 1 over R, and that goes from R to infinity.
That's rather simple to do as well.
So V at point P is going to be negative 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0, and here we're going to have 1 over infinity minus 1 over R.
Remember that R is the distance between the point charge and the point P that we wanted.
So V at point P is going to be 1 divided by infinity is 0, so we're left with negative 1 over R times this negative is just 1, so it's going to be 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0 R.
So we have an equation for the electric potential, the distance R away from a point charge, V equals 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0 R, which we derived from our initial equation.
We now know what the equation is for electric potential, the distance away from a point charge.
What if we're given a problem where we have an x-axis and we're given that this would be positive 5 E of charge and there is negative 15 E of charge.
And the distance here is, say, D equals 0.24 meters.
And we asked where on this x-axis might we find an electric potential of 0.
And it's immediately apparent that this can happen at two spots.
And a good way of tackling this problem is making a quantisium coordinate system and I would suggest putting x equals 0 on one of our charges.
Now if we look at this 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0 is a constant.
That means V is proportional to charge divided by the distance.
So those two are proportional.
In other words, the proportion of the two charges is also going to give us the proportion of the distances.
If we think about that.
There are actually various ways in solving this problem.
Let's look, I think, at the long method, at the long method of doing this.
What we, in actual fact, 1 is V1 plus V2 equals 0.
So there will be electric potential around this charge and around this charge.
And this is important to note that these are not vectors.
These are scalars.
In other words, that they will be sign sensitive here.
And we just need to algebraic sum of the two.
In other words, what we are really looking for, if we can put it here, is 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0 q1 over.
Now, let's first of all look, if this is positive 5 times 1.6 times 10 to the power of negative 19 Coulomb.
And this is negative 15.
If we look at a value on the negative x-axis, we are certainly going to find the spot A.
This is negative 15, in other words, a lot stronger than this.
In other words, probably going to be close in this region here.
If we set this value as negative x, this distance r must be 0 minus negative x.
So let's do that.
So that will be negative x there, plus 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0 q1, q2 over, well then this has to be 0.24 minus x.
Let's see, I think that's the way I had it before, and let's go to equal 0.
So q1 over negative x equals, if I bring this over to the other side, certainly these will cancel out.
So that is going to be negative q2 over 0.24 minus x.
And that is correct because, say for instance, x would be negative 10.
So we open 0.24 minus, minus 10, which will be plus 10.
And this will be for the r distance, which will be positive, that's what we want.
Negative, negative 10 will be positive 10.
So that's correct.
So we have to multiply out.
So that will be 5e times 0.24 minus x.
And that equals 15, negative, negative 15 is positive 15, times the negative will be negative 15e times x.
And if we multiply all of these out, let's take a calculator and do this.
See, if we come to the correct answer, so 5 times 1.6 to the power of negative 19 times 0.24, that's 1.92 times 10 to the power of negative 19, minus 5 times 0.6 to the power of negative 19.
That's going to be 8 times 10 to the power of negative 19 x.
And that equals negative, let's do 15, negative 15 times 1.6 to the power of negative 19.
It's going to be a negative 2.4 times 10 to the power of negative 19 x.
And that equals negative, let's do 15, negative 15 times 1.6 to the power of negative 19.
It's going to be a negative 2.4 times 10 to the power of negative 18 x.
If we take that over to the other side, we are left with 1.92 times 10 to the power of negative 19 equals.
So negative, sorry, 2.4 plus 8 times 10 to the power of negative 19.
These are negative 1.6 times 10 to the power of negative 18 x.
So negative, sorry, 2.4 plus 8 times 10 to the power of negative 19.
These are negative 1.6 times 10 to the power of negative 18 x.
If we divide this on the other side, so that will be 1.92 times 10 to the power of negative 19 divided by the negative 1.6 times 10 to the power of negative 19.
That is going to give us x equals negative 0.12 meters.
So at 12 centimeters, we are going to have, at 12 centimeters, we are going to have a v equals 0.
And remember this would all be for v infinity equals 0.
Now what about the positive x-axis?
Certainly again, there's got to be some ratio between q and r inasmuch as q1 over q2.
The absolute values of that is going to be 5e over 15e.
So q1 over q2, absolute value, is going to be 1 over 3.
So q1 equals a third of q3 in absolute values, and we know that is so.
That means r1 must also be a third of r2.
Because of this proportionality, it's directly proportional.
And we know if we add these two distances, this r and this r from this point, it's got to equal.
r1 plus r2 is equal 0.24.
But we know what r1 is, it's half, a third, sorry, a third of r2 plus r2 equals 0.24.
That means r2, 0.24 times 3 over 4 equals 9 over 50, which is 0.18 meters.
So if this is 0.18 meters, what is r1?
Well that would just be 0.24 minus 0.18 meters.
And that leaves us with, and that's quite easy, 0.06 meters.
So at 0.V here will also equal 0 at 0.06 meters.
Now we could have done the same thing.
I mean it's clear to see that v is not going to be 0 at a point beyond 0.24 meters.
Because this is positive 5, this is negative 15.
It's clear that 0 will be between the two.
We could have also done this in the long way as we did this side.
Inasmuch as we could have said that this distance here would be x.
So that it would have been a positive x.
And this distance would be 0.24, again 0.24 minus x, as we have there.
And we could have dealt with it in algebraic fashion as we did on this side.
But realizing that there's a proportionality here means that the proportionality between the two charges must be the same as the proportionality between the two distances.
And knowing that these two distances added here must equal 0.24.
So that's it for CRM and personnes that John was 5 on this side.
And that's the biggest challenge we've made.
And I hope so.
So it's we can honor.
And for sure this lure them anywhere like people just start them doing this.
This is fun.
