Let's carry on with our problems.
Two particles with identical charges are initially held at 3.2 x 10-3 meters apart.
The first has a mass given there.
If the first initially accelerates at 7 meters per second and the second at 9 meters per
second squared, so we calculate the mass of the second particle as well as the charge
on the two particles.
First of all they're both positive and they will form a third law force pair.
So they're going to repel each other with the same force.
So the force that the one feels due to the other will be the same the other way around.
And that is the important part of this problem.
If we look there the two forces are equal.
We know from Newton that force equals mass times acceleration.
So simple algebra getting mass on its own will be force divided by acceleration.
Now the important thing to realize here for you to get to the answer just compare the
two masses.
Certainly we were given a comparison of the two forces and we were given the two accelerations.
So there should be a ratio between the two masses and the two accelerations because the
forces are the same.
So certainly the two forces will cancel out and through simple algebra we're going to get
mass 2 on its own.
We know what mass 1 is.
We know what acceleration 1 is.
We know what acceleration 2 is.
Very easy then.
Two significant digits.
For the mass of the second particle 4.9 times 10 to the power negative 7.
So this is the most important step after you've realized that it's a third law force pair
and the two forces are equal.
Now simply through Coulomb's law we know force equals the electrostatic constant.
Multiply the two charges with each other.
Now we also know that force equals ma.
We know what m1 is and we know what acceleration 1 is so we'd rather use that than a small mistake
we might have made with mass 2 so rather use mass 1.
And that is going to be, we were told, that the charge is identical.
So that'll be q squared over the distance between them squared.
Simple algebra.
Just get q squared on its own and take the square root of both sides.
Do that on your own.
You'll find an answer.
You should find an answer of 7.1 times 10 to the power negative 11 Coulomb.
So just realize that this is q squared.
We were told they have an identical charge to start with.
A simple short problem.
A tiny sphere is initially, or tiny sphere initially contains a charge of uppercase q.
It is to give off charge q to a nearby sphere.
What ratio should qq be to maximize the electrostatic force between the two?
That's very simple.
It should be a half.
Think of it this way.
What is 5 times 5?
It's 25.
But 6 times 4, if you add them it still makes 10, but 6 times 4 is 24, 7 times 3 is 21,
so it gets less and less.
The maximum repulsive force between the two charged particles, attraction or repulsion,
depending on whether the charges are the same or not, should be when they are equal.
So the ratio between the two should be 0.5.
It will maximize the force between the two, the electrostatic force.
Particle 1 with charge we've given there and particle 2 with a negative charge are placed
0.1 meters apart.
Where should an unknown charge, q3, be placed to be in electrostatic equilibrium?
I think I've got a picture of it down here.
Yeah, there we go.
So it is like one of the previous problems in the previous video, but now we don't even
know what the charge is.
If we do consider it quickly, what if we put a positive charge here on the left?
So if this is x0 on the Cartesian coordinate plane that I've drawn here.
So on the left, if we put a positive charge, it's going to be repelled by charge one and
attracted by charge two.
So it looks, if we put a positive charge, it might be, it can be in static equilibrium in
as much as even though the distance to the negative charge is a lot longer, the negative
charge is a lot larger.
If we put a negatively charged particle on this side, it'll be attracted by q1, but it
will be repulsed by q2.
Once again, though, q2, though it might be further away, is a lot larger.
So a negatively charged particle could also be in static equilibrium here.
In between the two, if we put a positively charged particle, it's going to be repulsed
in this direction by q1 and attracted by q2.
So no static equilibrium, therefore positively charged.
A particle negatively charged is going to be pushed away and pulled to the negative side.
So no static equilibrium there.
To the right here, positive charge will be attracted and it will be repulsed.
But a much further away, much weaker charge on q1 means it'll have a net force in this
direction.
Negatively charged, going to be pushed away a lot stronger than the attraction all the
way to the weaker, much further away, q1.
So no static equilibrium there.
So irrespective of the charge we place it looks like, and on the negative x axis is where
we're going to find static equilibrium.
Now consider Coulomb's law, we know force equals electrostatic constant, the magnitude
of the two charges divided by the square of the distance between them.
Irrespective of the charge on them, on q3, f3 due to 1 and f3 due to 2 will be opposite
in sign and therefore it forms a third law force pair and we can write the two exactly
as we had in our previous problem there.
These will be the distances between them.
And it is squared, so the negatives are going to fall away.
So if I should place a particle there, if it was at minus 3 centimeters squared is still
going to be 9 centimeters squared from there.
How do we get the distance all the way to there?
Well, x minus l.
Even if x is minus 3 and l is positive 7, minus 3 minus 7 is minus 10, but squared is 100 centimeters
squared away from each other.
So that remains the same.
Look carefully as well on q2 here, it's the magnitude of q2.
So the absolute value, the positive value, again the electrostatic constant and q3 and
that's why it's irrespective of what the charge on q3 is, it's going to be fall away and through
simple algebra, multiply this out, get it to one side, you'll note that x is about negative
0.14 meters.
So just as we predicted here on the negative x-axis.
So important things to realize here.
Again, these forces are equal to each other, so you have two equations for the electrostatic
force.
One plus the other one, which one will be negative, has to equal zero electrostatic in equilibrium.
So put those two equal to each other.
Easy for the k and q3 to cancel out, and we're left with simple algebra to get rid of.
Note also, rather keep to this, it's two problems now that we've had for the distance between
q3 and q2, x minus l, it is squared, and that will be exactly the distance between them.
So we can see irrespective of what the charge of the force is, that is where you have to
place it for it to be in static equilibrium.
Thank you.
Thank you,INA.
