Now we're going to look at a slightly more complex capacitor. It's two cylinders cut
through the sides. Imagine two long thin cylinders. Positively charged inside, negatively charged
on this side. And so if I draw a Gaussian surface, well this inner radius is A, outer radius is B.
If I draw a cylindrical Gauss surface in between those two at a radius of the radius R, I can
see that through the end caps there will be no flux because the angle between the surface
vector and the electric field vector is 90 degrees, they're perpendicular. So the only
flux will be through the side walls and I know what the area of those side walls are going
to be. So if I look at my equation, again Gauss's law, I know what the equation for flux is,
I have put it there. And very simply that is going to end up being Q equals, the flux is
going to be constant through the whole surface of symmetry, so there's going to be epsilon
zero zero E times A. And what is the surface area of our cylinder? Well, Q is going to equal
epsilon zero E and that is going to be two pi radius and imagine the length. So from outside
here to inside on the other side of the wall is a length L. So if I get the electric field
on its own, that is going to be Q divided by 2 pi epsilon zero L times R. Once again the
potential difference between those two plates is given by this equation. Once again if I
go from the negative to the positive plate, so if I go from the negative to the positive plate,
there's a 180 degree angle between my displacement vector from here to here and my electric field
vector cosine 180 degrees is negative. So I'm going to do an integral again from A to B of the
cosine 180 degrees negates that negative and this is my field. Q divided by 2 pi epsilon zero L times
epsilon zero L times one over R and that dS I can make dR because we're just going from,
we're not dealing with this surface anymore, just going from and the radius from A to B. So don't
get confused why I write dR instead of dS. This is quite an easy integral and that is going
to be Q divided by 2 pi epsilon zero L natural log of the absolute value of R again from A to B so
that is just going to be the log of B divided by the log of A. I know that my capacitance is equal to
my charge divided by V. That is going to be Q over 1 times the reciprocal of V. The reciprocal of V is going
to be, let's see, 2 pi epsilon zero L divided by Q natural log of B divided by A and Qs cancel. So I didn't
put the whole of Q in there, this Q. So my capacitance for cylindrical capacitor there is 2 pi epsilon zero L divided by the
divided by the natural log of the natural log of the outer radius divided by the inner radius. There we go. I can use the same figure, the same schematic drawing for a capacitor that contains 2 spheres. So these are 2 hollow spheres. Again I'm going to have a
to be left with this equation for the enclosed charge for the enclosed charge in this Gaussian surface. So these are 2 hollow spheres. Again I'm going to be left with this equation for the enclosed charge in this Gaussian surface.
But the area will now be 4 pi epsilon zero L over by the natural log of the outer radius. And the area will be 2 x1 0 E times
there we go. So here we go. I can use the same figure, the same schematic drawing for a capacitor that just contains 2 spheres. So these are 2 hollow spheres. Again I'm going to be left with this equation for the enclosed charge in this Gaussian surface.
But the area will now be epsilon zero e times 4 pi r squared.
That is the area of a sphere of my Gaussian surface.
Once again, I go from negative to positive.
So that will leave me going from a to b, 180 degrees.
Again, my displacement vector will be opposite in direction from my electric field vector.
Negative times negative is a positive.
Let's just get the electric field on its own here.
So that is going to be q divided by 4 pi epsilon zero r squared.
So I'm left with that for e.
Let's just bring out all the constants all in one step.
So that is going to be q divided by 4 pi epsilon zero.
The integral going from a to b of r to the power negative two dr.
Once again, don't be concerned about that change.
So that is going to be negative q over 4 pi epsilon zero.
Here we're going to have 1 over r.
And going from, as I'm going to know, going from a, going from a to b.
Let's see if we've got that correct.
And going from a, going from a to b.
So that is going to leave us with negative q over 4 pi epsilon zero.
Here we're going to have 1 over b minus 1 over a.
And if I just rewrite this, this is going to be a, b, a minus b.
If I distribute this negative into there, I'm left with b equals q divided by 4 pi epsilon zero.
So b minus a over a, b.
I know that c equals q divided by v.
So I can divide all of this by q.
So for me, that will be q over 1 times the reciprocal of that,
which will be 4 pi epsilon zero, b minus a,
divided by q, and is that correct?
Divided by, sorry, a, b.
So the reciprocal of that will be a, b, divided by q, b minus a.
Q's will cancel.
So we have the capacitor for a spherical capacitor.
That will be 4 pi epsilon zero,
a, b, divided by b minus a.
See if we've got that correct?
4 pi epsilon zero, a times b, divided by b minus a,
with a being the inner radius and b being the outer radius.
