Let's do a problem where we actually expand on our relationship between resistivity and resistance.
Remember I said resistance equals resistivity times the length divided by the area.
What is meant by this?
In this example we are given an iron block and the resistivity of iron is given as 9.68 times 10 to the power of negative 8 ohm meters.
We are told that this block has a width of, in this example it is 1.2 centimeters and it has a height of 0.012 meters and it has a length of 0.15 meters.
Now think of this block in three dimensional proportions in as much as there will be a square and there will be a certain length.
Now we can apply, we can place this in an electrical circuit with a current in two ways.
We can apply it in the front or back, that is what is asking this question, or the side and then this back side.
So in both instances the area of contact front and back will be different and the length from doing it this way.
So if the wire goes in this way and out that way I should do it like this with contact area all over the side or like this.
So those are the two ways that this block, this iron resistor can be placed in our electrical circuit.
So that is where this comes in.
In other words, if we do it the first way, let's call this number one and this number two.
We are going to have the resistivity of iron, which we were given.
And then it is going to be multiplied by the length.
In this instance it is going to be 0.15 meters divided by this area here, which is going to be 0.012 meters squared.
So that will be the one.
And in the same block, if we apply it differently, it is still going to be the resistivity of iron.
Let's see where this is going.
The length is now going to be just the small 0.012 meters divided by our surface area is now going to be 0.012 meters times 0.15 meters as our surface area.
So the same block is going to give us a different resistance depending on what the orientation of it is in our circuit.
Now just remember one thing quickly.
If we do have a resistor, we put it physically into our circuit and it is attached completely to the whole plate there versus just a point contact.
The resistance, the current and the resistance, the charge density is going to be distributed differently.
You can see what I am trying to draw here.
So in all of these problems we assume that this contact here is done through a whole plate.
So there is contact over that whole surface or contact over this whole surface.
It is just a point, just a point of interest.
So depending on the orientation of this block, this is what is made by the relationship between the resistor and the resistor.
Resistance and resistivity as it pertains to the fact that resistance is directly proportional to the length divided by the area of our resistor.
So here we have quite a long and complicated problem.
We are given a section of a wire.
A current flows through this wire.
The wire comes in two sections.
There is section 1 and section 2.
Section 1 has a diameter of 4.00R and section 2, 2.00R.
So the diameter is half of what it is there.
Over this length L, which is 2.00 meters, there is a potential difference of 10 times 10 to the power negative 6 volt.
10 microvolt.
We are told that N equals 8.49 times 10 to the power 28 per cubic meter.
The charge carries there.
And we are asked what the drift velocity is in section 1.
What the drift velocity is in section 1.
Where do we start with this problem?
I suppose we write an equation for drift velocity that equals J over NE.
J over NE.
J being the current density.
Current density equals I divided by A.
So it will be I divided by A NE.
We don't have the current.
We have the areas, sort of.
We have N and we know what E is.
I can be rewritten.
Certainly I equals V over R.
Let's see if that helps us.
I think we were also told that this is made of copper.
So we know what P of copper is.
And I think if we look that up, we have P of copper is 1.69 times 10 to the power negative 8 ohm meters.
So we can certainly rewrite I in as much as R equals V over I.
So I is V over R.
So we'll have V over R A NE.
V equals R A NE.
So we know what V is.
But we don't know what, certainly what the resistance is.
But we know the relationship between resistance and resistivity.
So we can rewrite that.
V over, that is resistivity, area, length divided by area, length divided by area times NEA.
Those are going to cancel, so we are left with V over PLNE.
So that is certainly something, all the things that we have.
So let's just do that.
So V D, but this is in section 2.
We are only dealing with section 2.
So V over that section is 10.0 times 10 to the power negative 6 V, divided by.
P we know for copper.
P we know for copper, 1.69 times 10 to the power negative 8 ohm meters.
N we were given, 8.49 times 10 to the power 28 per cubic meter.
And we know what E is, that is 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 coulombs.
And when I did that on my calculator, did I do it?
Is it actually required?
Yes, we will get to it shortly.
Let me just do that with my calculator.
Let's have a look at that.
So that is 10, times 10 to the power negative 6, over 1.69, times 10 to the power negative 8, times 8.49, times 10 to the power 28.
times 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19.
And that's going to come out as, I'm sure I made a mistake recently, I forgot everything, PLNE.
Sorry, it's still divided by, there's 2 because it's 2 meters long.
So that is V D 2, apologies for wasting time on the calculator.
But it's 2.177, 9, 8, 9, something like that, times 10 to the power negative 8 meters per second.
But how does that equate to drift velocity in 1?
How does that equate to drift velocity 1?
What we have here, let's just look at that, because we do know the differences in the diameters.
So let's just look at that. V D equals I over A N E.
So that is I over PI R squared N E.
So if we just looked at drift velocity 2, V D 2, that is going to be I over PI.
And the radius here is half of the diameter, so that is just going to be, let's call that radius 2,
the radius 2 squared N E.
If we looked at drift velocity 1, that is also going to be I divided by PI, but that is going to be R1 squared N E.
Why are those two I's the same?
Well, the current doesn't, if you let in 50 ohms on this side, there's 50 ohms flying all over.
So the current in these two sections are going to be exactly the same.
The current density is going to be different.
The current density is going to be higher.
But the current that flows through here is the same, whether it's here or here.
So those two are the same.
So if we divide these two into each other, everything cancels out except our R values.
And this is going to be R1 squared divided by R2 squared.
And if we just look at R2, which equals, this is going to be R, and we look at R1, it's going to be 2R.
In other words, R1 equals 2 times R2.
So we can replace that in here for R1.
Let's just see if I've got this correct, that it's going to be R1 here.
That is 2 times R2 squared.
2 times R2 squared divided by R2 squared.
So drift velocity 2 divided by drift velocity 1 is going to equal 4 over 1.
Because the R2's will cancel and 2 squared's 4.
In other words, drift velocity 1 equals a quarter of drift velocity 2.
And we know what drift velocity 2 is.
So our answer divided by 4, that is going to give us approximately 5.44 times 10 to the power negative 9 meters per second.
So that is quite an enormous problem.
But if you follow it through and change your equations, change them, change them with no other equations to substitute and try to eventually get to a fraction there containing all the values that we were given in the problem.
And secondly, realize that current doesn't change just because the radius changes.
And just then look at the ratio so that you can replace them there.
And so in the end, not so difficult a problem.
Our last problem in this section.
We are told that there is an electric wire with a current.
And then a cable consisting of 125 strands connected solidly there.
And we are told that the resistance of each of these 125 wires is going to be 2.65 times 10 to the power negative 6 ohm.
And we are told that the total current flowing through, so I total, so that's per each individual strand, is 0.7575 0 amperes.
And we are asked, firstly, what is the current in each individual strand?
Well, the current flows in here.
It gets split into each individual wire.
So that's actually quite simple to do, in as much as, let's just see, this was the total, sorry, the total, no, individual.
Yeah, the individual resistance was given, the total current was given, and there's 125 strands.
So, the current through each individual one, is just going to be the current total divided by how many there are.
Because that current gets split up and flows individually through each identical wire.
So that's going to, I've done that, that's 6.00 times 10 to the power negative 3 amperes.
That will be through each individual one.
Second question, what is the potential difference across here?
Well, if I equals V over R, it is simply V equals I times R.
But that is over the complete system there.
So that must be I total times R total.
We know what the total current is across our wire system there.
But we don't know what the, we know what the individual, this is individual, resistance is.
But these, it's clear to see that these are packed in parallel.
They're not one wire after the other one.
So 1 over R total is going to be the sum of, from I equals 1, of 1 over R individual.
Fortunately, this is easy to do, we don't have to look at a special equation for that.
Because that's just going to be 1 over R individual.
Which is 2.65 times 10 to the power negative 6 ohm.
Plus another one.
Our denominators are all the same.
So we're just going to end up as 1 over R T is going to equal 125 over 2.65 micro ohm.
And that will leave us for the R total of, I've done it here, 21.2, so 21.2 nanopool.
So now we can do this.
Now we know what the total current is, 0.75.
And we know what the total resistance now is of this whole system.
And if we do that simple equation, I think we come to about 1.59 times 10 to the power negative 8.
So it correct the hour volt.
Which is about 15.9 nano volt.
So now we can clearly see what happens to current, what happens to potential difference,
and what happens to resistance and total resistance over a system like this.
