So let's look at the electric field due to a point charge.
We already said in the previous video to find an electric field due to a charge q at any point,
a distance r from the point charge, put a positive test charge, that's our q0 at that point.
And we saw that the electric field equaled the electrostatic force divided by the charge of the positive test charge.
But we need a proper equation considering the distance away from our charge creating this field.
And we do that by simply substituting this electrostatic force that we have from Coulomb's law into our equation that we had in the previous video.
You'll see that the just do that algebraically yourself.
You'll see that the test charge, the charge of the test charge cancels out and we are left with.
And here we have the magnitude of the electrostatic field equals the electrostatic constant times the magnitude of the charge causing that field.
Now that's not the test charge divided by the square of the distance away from that charge.
Remember one thing that the concept of superposition, the concept of superposition of electric fields do apply.
Let's see.
Here is a problem.
I'll just bring it up.
Now look at where these charges are placed and also note the magnitude of the charges.
We have plus 2q, negative 4q, negative 2q and we asked, well they're all at distance r from this origin and they're all at an angle here of 30 degrees, 30 degrees, 30 degrees.
And we asked what is the net electric field at the origin?
Well, we've just said that the law of superposition applies.
If we look at just that q1 at the origin, it is a positive charge.
So we know the electric field is going to be in line directly away because if we put a positive test charge there, it will experience an electrostatic force due to the presence of q1.
And that will be in this direction.
And we just said that in the previous video that the direction of the electric field, if the field line is a straight line, the electrostatic force and then the electric field will be in the same direction.
It is positive and therefore away from.
So we know an equation for the electric field that equals the electrostatic constant times the magnitude of this charge divided by the distance away from it squared.
And we'll get a simple vector in this direction, which we can just decompose into its components along the x and y axis.
Let's look at charge from the electric field from charge number 2.
It is also going to be in this direction.
Remember, if we put a positive test charge there, it's going to experience an electrostatic force in this direction towards.
And we know the field line will run towards a negative charge.
And if we get this vector for the electric field, also electrostatic constant times the magnitude of this charge.
So that'll be 2q, not negative 2q because absolute value magnitude divided by d squared, the distance away from this charge.
And that can also be deconstructed into x and y components.
Let's look at charge number 3.
It is going to be in this towards the first quadrant.
Easy to see. It's a negative charge.
Electric field is going to be towards it.
It can also be deconstructed.
So we're going to see we're going to have three x components in the same direction.
We're going to have two y components in the negative direction, one y component in the positive direction.
I'm not going to go through the whole, through this whole answer here.
It's very easy to see that we're just going to deconstruct.
We're just going to deconstruct this, for instance, cosine of 30 degrees.
That was for the x direction.
The y direction will be the sine of 30 degrees.
And the sine is just going to come from you realizing on a Cartesian coordinate system in which direction it's pointing,
so that you know that x is going to be either, well, all three of them will be positive.
And two y values are going to be negative, and one y value is going to be positive.
So you have to fill in, because we're dealing with magnitudes, you've got to think about the direction.
And if you do it on a Cartesian coordinate system, or you do vector notation,
it's easy enough to calculate in what direction that will be.
And we're simply going to vectorially add the x and the y's.
And if you do that on your own, let's just go down.
Because of the superposition principle, we're going to add all our x values there.
And look, all three of them were positive.
And then two negatives and one positive y direction.
Through symmetry, you'll see that that actually cancels out.
And we're going to get to an answer of 6.93 times electrostatic constant times q divided by d squared.
In the next video, we'll look at the electric field due to an electric dipole.
And that becomes a bit more interesting.
