Let's deal with another problem that has to do with power.
So a 5 amp current, 5.0 ampere current is set up in a circuit for 6 minutes.
So I equals 5.0 amperes. Our time is going to be 6 minutes.
And there are 360 seconds in 1 minute.
So that is going to equal 360 seconds that we require this current to run it.
By a rechargeable battery with a 6 volt EMF.
So EMF is going to be 6.0 volts. So this looks like an ideal battery.
The internal resistance. By how much is the chemical energy of the battery reduced?
So how much energy we need and answer in joules.
How on earth are we going to get from here to joules?
Well the simple thing to remember is that V equals IV.
So the power that we are going to require or the power that there is in this system of ours
is just going to be I times V which is 5 times 6 is 30.
So we are going to have 30 joules per second.
Going to be the power. And we are running it for 360 seconds.
That means the energy is going to equal 30 joules per second times 360 seconds.
And that will give us, let's have a look on a calculator.
30 times 3 is about 10,800. That equals 10,800 joules.
Since we are dealing with two significant figures here.
That is going to be approximately 11 kilojoules.
So first let's try and see how much power is in the circuit of yours.
And the most important equation to remember is power equals current times the potential difference.
And so that is easy, that is going to give us so many watts.
And remember what watts means.
There is no use looking at watts.
It means joules per second.
And we are running it for 360 seconds.
So in the end very simple to do.
Now we are becoming quite proficient with the use of power.
So let's see a certain car battery has an EMF of 12 volts.
12.0 volts.
We are using three significant digits.
It seems it has an initial charge.
It has an initial charge of 120 ampere hours.
And if we need to change that to seconds, that would be 3600 seconds.
It gives you one hour.
So we know that that is the charge that we have.
How do we know that this is coulomb?
It says that it has an initial charge of that charge is coulomb.
But how do we know that?
What is NPS?
Equals q divided by t.
dq dt is how we define the charge.
And we are multiplying it by time.
So, multiplying both sides by time.
So we live with charge.
So if this was coulomb per second.
Coulomb per second.
We are multiplying by seconds.
That leaves us with coulomb.
So that is the charge.
Assuming that the potential across the terminal stays constant
until the battery is completely discharged.
Well, how many hours can it deliver energy at a rate of 100 watts?
So our P is going to be 100 joules per second.
100 joules per second.
But how can we express this in terms of the charge?
Well, once again, it's important to remember P equals IV.
So the current that we are going to have from this
is going to equal power divided by V,
or in this instance, divided by the EMA.
We know what P is. It's 100 divided by 12.
100 divided by 12.
And so that's going to be amperes.
It's going to be amperes.
And that is just 25 over 3.
25 over 3 amperes that we are going to run.
So we know what I is going to be.
Now, I equals, I'm just going to ignore that phone.
Please do the same.
I'll just shut it down.
Let's get to the end of this problem.
We know that I equals Q over T.
In other words, T equals Q over I.
We know what Q is.
And we know what I is.
So very easy for us to get T.
So here, let's take a little to T.
Perfect.
그in quarters.
SF T
Let's take you long.
First, let's add two or three.
Here, you see two minutes.
Two minutes.
All right.
Let's break.
Let's break.
Let's break.
Let's break.
One minutes.
You see one second.
One minus eight.
You see two minutes.
Two minutes.
Two minutes.
One.
Currently, index two minutes.
