Let's just have a look at an interesting problem. If lightning strikes the earth, there's a certain current.
And that current is going to spread in a half sphere concentrically.
What if a person is standing here with his feet a distance delta r apart and this distance is d.
So what this person actually is is an electric circuit, the person itself has a resistance, and the current continues through him.
And we can certainly see what that current is, and we can have a look at what the potential difference is across these feet.
We know what delta v is. It is simply negative, the integral of going from some initial to some final position of e dot v s.
We're not concerned about the cosine of the angle here, both the electric field is in this direction and our displacement vector is in this direction.
But certainly the electric field is not going to be constant, and we need to express it in terms of, we need an equation that we express it in terms of distance.
This ds might as well be a dr.
Well, we certainly know that the resistivity equals electric field divided by current density.
Therefore electric field equals resistivity times current density.
We know that current density equals current divided by area, and the area of half a sphere would be i over 2 pi r squared instead of 4.
The ground only takes place up half of a sphere.
So that leaves us with e equals resistivity times current divided by 2 pi r squared.
Now, if we substitute them there, we'll see that delta v equals the negative of the integral.
Now we gain from a distance d to a distance d plus delta r, so from d to d plus delta r of, we have our full expression for e,
full equation for e here, p, rho, resistivity times current divided by 2 pi r squared, dr.
These are all constants, we can bring them out.
And we'll note delta v.
And we know that i equals v divided by r.
If we know v now and we are given the resistance of the human body, it's easy to see what the current is going to be through.
And if you look at it carefully, the closer you stand with your feet together, the smaller the current is going to be that flows through your body.
Let's have a quick look at Ohm's law.
Ohm's law, certainly it is not i equals v over r, but what it states is that materials,
by Ohm's law, when there is a linear relationship, a linear relationship between current, we have current here,
and we have potential difference on this axis, and we have a straight line.
In other words, our slope that we have here is a constant.
Any material that does that obeys Ohm's law.
You might manufacture a resistor that will have nothing, and then at a certain potential difference starts letting through current at an exponential rate there.
So Ohm's law, this is not Ohm's law, Ohm's law only states that there is a linear relationship.
There is a constant gradient of current versus potential difference.
Oh boy.
Let's have a quick look at the power in an electric circuit.
And we know that the potential energy is going to be q dot v.
It's the charge times the potential difference.
If we look at the differential amount of potential energy, that is going to be dq times v.
We know, though, that dq comes from i equals dq dt.
Therefore, du is going to be idt times v.
And if we take du dt, change the energy over time, that will be divided by dt there as well.
And this, we call power, it's going to just be iv.
So this is for any kind of rechargeable battery, resistor, light bulb, anything.
If we purely look just at a resistor, in other words, we're looking at thermal energy,
all of our current that goes through, the energy of that current gets converted to thermal energy.
And because we know that i equals v divided by r, we can replace i there.
That will give us p equals v times that v is v squared over r.
So that is replacing the i.
If we replace v, because v equals ir, we're going to have that this equals i times i is i squared times r.
So this is our base equation.
This is our base equation.
But remember that these two is only for resistors, because we've used what is not really Ohm's law.
If it obeys Ohm's law, we get this.
If a resistor obeys Ohm's law, we get this.
So this is only for resistors, and this is for our energy being dissipated into thermal energy.
We can use these two equations.
We can use these two equations.
