Now let's look at the electric potential due to an electric dipole.
This is our dipole with our negative charge here, positive there.
So our electric dipole moment vector from negative to positive will be there.
And we're interested in a point P.
In red, if you can see the red would be our distance vector.
And the angle that we are looking at between point P and our electric dipole moment
is always in the direction of the electric dipole moment and towards the displacement vector.
So that will be the angle between the two.
Now we're only interested in examples where the electric dipole moment,
the distance between the two charges and the distance we are interested in, are disproportionate.
In other words, this distance is going to be a lot more, this distance r.
It's going to be a lot more than this distance d.
So we've got to approximate things slightly.
Because it is so far away relative to this distance, we might as well look at these two as parallel lines.
And what we are looking for is the difference between these two, the distance from the positive and the distance from the negative pole.
You can clearly see that even if the distances are disproportionate, this displacement vector is going to be slightly smaller than this displacement vector.
And the difference is what we have here.
And the difference is what we have here.
We've just approximated this as the angle between the point P, the displacement vector to point P, and the electric dipole moment vector in this direction here.
And then it becomes clear, this is a 90 degree angle, that this distance here, which in essence is the displacement from the negative pole minus the displacement from the positive pole is going to be d cosine theta.
And another thing that we do need to approximate is that this distance is just r.
And that is what you'll be given in a problem, that this distance p is a distance r away from the electric dipole.
And r squared will then be r squared.
You'll see now why that's important.
So what in essence we're looking at here is v.
That is going to be the sum of the two electric potentials from the positive and the negative pole.
So we're looking at actually here v from the positive plus v from the negative pole.
We know what v is from point charge, and then there's one over four pi epsilon zero, q over r.
Now let's look at that for v1 and for v2.
That is going to be one over four pi epsilon zero.
The positive q divided by r positive.
And for v2 we're going to have one over four pi epsilon zero.
And that is going to be the negative q over r negative.
Let's add those two together as we have there.
So we're certainly going to have one over four pi epsilon zero.
As a common factor we're going to have q over r positive minus q over r negative.
Remember this is negative q.
We can also bring out q now as a common factor as well.
So that is going to equal q over four pi epsilon zero.
And that will be one over r plus minus one over r negative.
Still q over four pi epsilon zero.
And now we're going to have r positive, r negative over.
This is going to be r negative minus r positive.
We're going to have a negative.
Let's put it up here.
Let's put it up here.
That's going to equal q over four pi epsilon zero.
that's going to equal q over 4 pi x long zero, r negative minus r positive, we have a d, that's d cosine theta,
over, and the distance, this is going to be the distance squared, as we have d, over the distance squared.
So we have that the electric potential, the distance r away from an electric dipole is going to be q d cosine theta divided by 4 pi epsilon zero r squared.
And we can just replace this product q d with p, the electric dipole moment.
And just note exactly what theta is. Theta is the angle between the electric dipole moment vector and the displacement vector.
So if we're looking for point p up here with theta equals zero degrees, we're going to get a maximum electric potential there.
If we have it on the axis, negative 180 degrees away, that'll be negative one, and the electric potential there will be negative.
And on any point perpendicular here, or on this side, we're going to have a 90 degree angle.
In other words, the electric potential on this axis here is going to be zero if the cosine of 90 degrees equals zero.
So here we have the equation for electric potential, a distance r and an angle theta away from an electric dipole.
We're going to be zero.
機動 conversion and advisable.
I'm going to see the ог
t a lot of different aspects of this hole over thenego.
What could I do here with the term ciclo so I can emphasize to the sake?
There are stars on this side that are pres crashing and on this side that can improve Poseyittre.
