In this first video on electric charge, we're going to start off by looking at Coulomb's law.
Coulomb's law refers to the force between two charged entities, two charged objects or particles.
And it can be stated as an equation where we have the force between those two charges equal to the electrostatic constant.
And we see here the value of the electrostatic constant multiplied by the two charges, the magnitude of the two charges.
In other words, it's absolute values there. If it's negatively charged, one or both of them, it becomes positive.
It's the magnitude divided by the distance between them squared.
So this makes it an inverse square law.
In other words, the magnitude of the force falls off as the square of the distance between the two particles or objects.
It's also a third law force pair.
In other words, the one object will repulse or attract the other just as it is the other way around.
For every action, there's an equal and opposite reaction.
This force is also a vector.
So if the two charges are opposite in sign, they will attract each other.
And if the two charges are the same sign, they will repulse.
So let's look at this charge 2 here, this proton.
If we look at the force on it, on 2 due to particle 1, which is on this side.
Obviously, the force is in this direction as indicated.
The proton, Q3 on the other hand, will repulse this Q2.
And you can simply add these two to get your net force.
So they obey the law of superposition.
They also obey, in part at least, the shell theorem.
So a shell of uniform charge attracts a charged particle outside the shell,
as if all the shell's charge were concentrated at its center.
Assuming that the charge on the shell is much greater than the particle,
so that the effect of the particle on the redistribution of charge on the shell is negligible.
So all this means basically is if we look at a charged particle outside of the shell,
the distance between them is going to be from our charged particle,
our test charge, for instance, and the center of that sphere.
And if the particle is located inside the shell, it experiences no net electrostatic force.
Certainly it will have forces on it, but no net electrostatic force.
They will all cancel out.
A spherical conductor illustrates the principle shell theorem quite well.
And some would show that the excess charge spreads uniformly over the spherical conductor.
Our electrostatic constant can also be expressed in terms of the permittivity constant,
which we have there.
Epsilon subscript 0.
So much so that k equals 1 over 4 pi times this permittivity constant.
And here we have the value of the permittivity constant.
8.85 times 10 to the power negative 12 coulombs squared per newton per square meter.
And obviously we should not get confused between these two constants,
the permittivity constant and the electrostatic constant,
specifically the values in the SI units.
So here's a new expression for Coulomb's law.
And we have 1 over 4 pi times the permittivity constant
multiplied by the magnitude of the two charges
divided by the square of the distance between them.
Now where does this Coulomb come from?
The SI unit of charge is the Coulomb.
And it actually comes from the derivation of current.
And current is defined as a rate of change of charge with respect to time.
So 1 Coulomb is actually 1 ampere second.
We'll certainly get to that a bit later.
Just a first quick problem.
Two positively charged particles are fixed in place on the x-axis.
The charge on particle 1 is such and on particle 2 looks like double that.
The distance between them is 0.02 meters.
It seems as if we have three significant digits here.
So we should always check that in our answer.
Part 1.
We are asked to calculate the magnitude and direction
of the electrostatic force on particle 1 from particle 2.
Now you're not going to get direction necessarily out of equations in electromagnetism.
You have to think about it.
These two are both positively charged.
So they're going to repulse each other.
And that is where you're going to get the sign and the direction.
Don't try and work that into your problem.
As in here we have the magnitude.
So it's absolute value of charge 1 and 2.
Well they're both positive.
Here we've used the permittivity constant.
And if we replace all of these values.
There's our answer.
The force on particle 1 due to particle 2.
Now remember.
The force on particle 2 due to particle 1 will be exactly the same.
And when it comes to direction we know they repulse each other.
So the direction is opposite to the second particle.
The second part.
The third particle is now introduced between the first two.
It has a charge of negative 3.2 times 10 to the power negative 19 Coulomb.
And is at a distance of 0.15 meters from particle 1.
Calculate the net electrostatic force on particle 1.
So we're going to look at the superposition of forces here.
The presence of this third particle does not influence that original force on particle 1 due to particle 2.
So the net forces on particle 1 will be the sum of the force on particle 1 due to particle 2.
And the force on particle 1 due to particle 3.
Now we already know F12.
So if we just replace the values.
And look here.
It's the magnitude or absolute value.
We've got to think about the direction.
There will obviously be an attraction.
If we replace that.
There's our three significant digit answer.
So it's approximately 2.05 times 10 to the power negative 24 Newton.
To get the net now.
We just have to think clearly about the direction.
And if you draw this out on a piece of paper.
And you place for instance particle 1 on the origin of the x axis.
The repulsion due to particle 1 will be negative.
In the positive direction as it gets attracted by the second particle.
So we will have our net force between all the particles.
That is the force experienced by particle 1 due to the presence of particle 2 and 3.
And then obviously the direction will be towards particles 2 and 3.
Which is to the right of particle 1.
Part 3.
I'm not going to go through the whole of part 3.
But it's simple.
It is now moved upwards to position making a 60 degree angle with the x axis.
Still 0.015 meters from particle 1.
All we need to do.
As we did.
The simple motion is deconstruct.
This vector.
So if that's an angle there.
And the x axis will be the cosine of theta.
And the y will be at the sine of theta.
So just deconstruct.
And now you'll still have net forces on the x axis.
And you'll have this one force on the y axis.
And in the end.
You can just use the Pythagorean theorem.
To get the magnitude of the new force.
That is going to be applied to particle 1.
Due to the presence of particle 2 here.
And particle 3.
We'll carry on in the next video.
