In the same vein as the previous problem, let's look at this one. It says given a 7.4
pico-farad capacitor, construct a capacitor that can store 7.4, so it's potential energy
7.4 times 10 to the power of negative 6 joule, with a potential difference, with a maximum
potential difference of 652 volts. What is the dielectric constant? What is the dielectric
constant? Now we know that u equals a half CV squared. So we know then that u final, which
is what this is, is going to equal a half C final V squared, the V that we've got there.
How can we get C final? Well, again, it's a dielectric, it's a plate, a plate capacitor,
so we know that that is going to equal A divided by D. Area doesn't change, D doesn't change.
So C final again, divided by C initial is going to give us, C final is going to be kappa x
long 0 A divided by D times D over x long 0 times A. So these will all fill in some
up, so we let that C final equals kappa C initial, which I can substitute in here. Final equals a half,
kappa C initial V squared, and we're going to get that kappa equals 2 U final divided by C initial V squared.
I've got 2 obviously, I've got U final, I've got C initial, I've got V squared, there's got V squared.
So simple enough to get the dielectric constant. And let's look at another problem. Which one shall we do?
I've got a certain substance as a dielectric constant of 2.8. And a dielectric strength, I don't exactly know, let's just make it a S, equals 18 megavolts per meter.
If it is used as a dielectric material in a parallel plate capacitor, what maximum area should the plates of the capacitor have to obtain a capacitance of,
so we want the capacitance of 7.0 times 10 to the power negative 8. It looks like farad. And ensure that the capacitor will be able to a state of potential difference of 4 kilowatts.
4 kilowatts. So the question actually is, the minimum area. We know a parallel plate capacitor will have capacitance of kappa equals 0 A divided by D.
Now this is this D that bugs us because we're not given this. And there's two ways, minus 1, there's two ways to look at this.
This is the voltage we need. And this is the dielectric field strength. If you just look at unit analysis, it's actually easy to do this.
And as much as the distance, it's going to be V divided by the dielectric field strength.
Because we're going to get volts divided by volts per meter, which is going to give us, which is going to give us meters.
So area is actually going to be CD divided by kappa x10.
And A equals C, and we know D is going to be V divided by the field strength, kappa x10.
Forgive me for using this symbol for electric field strength. I can't quite remember what the correct symbol is to use there.
So this is a made up symbol on my own. And we have C, we have V, we have electric field strength.
We know what kappa is. And we know that x10 is easy for us, enough for us to solve for the area.
