In this chapter I want to look at electric current and resistance, and just a few things about current.
First of all I wanted to say that current is the flow of electrons, in reality the flow of electrons.
And those electrons flow in a conductor due to the presence of an electric field.
And obviously an electric field going from positive to negative, the electrons move in the opposite direction of the electric field.
But not all moving electrons constitute a current.
If I have a piece of metal wire, there are billions of electrons moving in all directions, very fast, at quite a substantial speed.
But if I draw a line there, just as many electrons will move across that way as across that way.
In other words, there is no net flow of electrons.
And therefore even though electrons are moving, there is no current in this wire in as much as there is no electric field in this wire.
Also if I have a hose full of water, and the water is squirting out, the water molecules move along.
The water molecules do consist of protons, neutrons and electrons.
So there is a massive amount of electrons that flow in this hose.
But each of those flow together with protons, an electron with protons with electrons.
So there is no net electrical flow of current through the cell.
Although there are charged particles moving through, in effect they are neutral.
So not all moving charges constitute for us a current.
The current has to be the flow of electrons.
For convention sake though, if you do have a battery, a resistor, even though it is the electrons that physically move,
we indicate the flow of current from the positive to the negative terminal.
Even though there is no such thing as protons actually moving.
We know that, or we define current as dq dt, and that means the amount of current that flows through a certain section.
So if I have a copper wire, the copper wire thickens, the copper wire narrows, and there is electrical current in this direction.
Any line that I draw, as long as it goes straight through, will let through the same amount of charge per second.
Same amount of charge per second.
So we can really write dq equals i dt, and the charge that has flowed through there will just be the integral of dq, which is the integral of i dt.
Not so important for us now, but just to think of it as a host pipe.
If this was a host pipe, for every drop that comes in this side, it's not a drop.
A drop must fall out on that side.
So through a certain amount of current will flow, so a certain amount of charge actually will flow through in a certain amount of time.
And that is the charge times, the current times time.
The last thing that I quickly wanted to mention is that current, even though we do indicate it as a direction, it flows from the positive to the negative side.
It is not a vector.
So, I equals dq dt, charge itself as a scalar, and time as a scalar, so current as well as a scalar.
So we don't add these currents vectorially.
We just do indicate the direction of flow, but this is not a vector.
And charge is conserved.
If I have an electrical wire and it splits, if I have I0 charge here, I1 and I2, I0 will equal I1 plus I2.
And it does not matter what the configuration of this is.
This can go loop, loop, loop, and this loop.
They are not touching there, obviously.
But still, if this was I0 and this was I1 and this is I2, still the charge will be conserved, depending on what resistors are in this.
We will see later that that will be different.
So in a nutshell, this is what we are going to deal with as far as currents are concerned.
In this video, I just want to look at charge density.
If I have a copper wire of length L, of length L, and let's say for instance first it is discharged.
It is not connected in a wire.
The conduction electrons flow in all directions at all times.
There is no net flow, so there is no current.
And these typically go at a million meters per second, the average velocity of these conduction electrons.
If current flows in here though, they are going to drift in a certain direction.
But these are very slow speeds.
10 to negative 5 meters per second.
That is the drift velocity.
So they all still move around, but they drift in a certain direction and that is what gives us current.
And we know that current equals dq dt, or that's simply q divided by t.
The charge that flows per time.
How do I know what that charge is that is actually flowing?
Well I can look at the charge density.
And charge density J is simply I divided by the area.
So if I have a copper wire and it suddenly broadens, this area will be larger, therefore the density is going to be lower.
But how do I know how much charge is actually flowing there?
Well if I know the number of charged particles per volume, I call that n, so that's the number of charged particles, let me write number, per cubic meter.
So I know that for the substance of which my wire is made.
And I know the volume, I can say length, area times length, the cross sectional area times the length gives me the volume of this wire.
And this is in cubic meters.
I'm going to have the number of charged particles.
And if I multiply that by the charge of a single charged particle, I'm going to know q.
Because this is in coulombs.
So I'll know how many coulombs of charge I have.
So q is going to equal n, al, e.
If we just remember normal mechanics, we know that velocity equals distance divided by time.
And the distance that our charge is going to go in a certain time is l divided by t.
In other words, t equals l divided by v.
And this v we call vd, the drift velocity of our charge.
Now, we remember that i equals q over t.
In other words, i equals q, we know, n, a, l, e, divided by t.
We know it's l over vd, so that's l times vd.
The l's cancel out, so charge is going to be n, a, e, v, d.
Or vd, our drift velocity, which is what we're interested in.
It's going to be charge divided by the number per cubic per unit volume times area times the charge.
We know i over a is actually j.
Where did we have that?
j equals i over a.
So we're going to have j divided by n.
i over a, is that right?
This j is going to be n, e.
Or j equals vd, n, e.
So we have two equations for drift velocity.
Charge divided by area, or drift velocity times the number of charged particles per unit volume times the charge of each of those units.
And this is our equation, our two equations for drift velocity.
Drift velocity equals the charge divided by n, e.
Or drift velocity equals charge density divided by n times e.
Let us look at our first problem for current density.
In this problem we are told we have a cylindrical wire with a radius of 0.0020 meters.
So we're dealing with two significant digits it seems in this problem.
And we are told that the current density is constant.
And it is at 2.0 times 10 to the power of 5 mps per square meter.
I think in the previous video I might have, oh no no, it is something different.
Area, mps per square meter.
And we are asked what is the current through the outer portion of the wire from distance or half times the radius to the radius.
Now certainly we do know an equation for current density.
And we know that current density equals charge divided by area.
And we are asked what the current is in that radius.
In other words, current equals j times the area.
Now the simplest way to solve this problem obviously is through calculus.
And what you'll note is that the differential charge equals j which is a constant.
It's constant there divided by r times the differential area.
We know an equation for the area of the cylindrical surface.
The cross-sectional area.
And that is area equals pi r squared.
So the dA dr or how would area change depending on the radius.
That's simply going to be 2 pi times r.
In other words, dA equals 2 pi r dr.
We can substitute that into our equation.
In other words, dI is going to equal j 2 pi r dr.
And if we want i, that will be the integral of dI.
In other words, the integral of this.
2 pi is a constant.
So 2 pi, the integral of going from half the radius to the radius.
So 0.001 to 0.002.
So it creates r dr.
r dr if we do this integral.
We'll note that that will equal 1 plus 1 is 2 divided by 2.
So we're left with pi there.
I forgot.
Remember, it's j.
We'll give that j.
And then we're going to have r going from 0.001 to 0.002 squared.
And if we get a bit more chalk, so that's going to be pi times j,
which is 2.0 times 10 to the power of negative 5 amperes per square meter.
And that is multiplied by 0.002 squared minus 0.001 squared.
And I think if we just look at the answer, if we do that on a calculator,
you're going to get to about 1.9 ampere.
So that's easy to do.
The second part of the problem states that the charge density, let's get some more chalk,
that the charge density is not a constant, but it varies.
And in the example given, in the problem example, is j equals 3.0 times 10 to the power 11 amperes per meter to the power negative 4 times r squared.
It's very easy to do inasmuch as we are now given a different value for j.
So what is going to happen here is that di is going to equal, we have di here,
is going to equal, not j, but 3.0 times 10 to the power 11, r squared times 2 pi r dr.
Again, i is just going to be the integral of di.
And we're going to bring all of these outside of the integral.
3 times 2 is 6, so that's going to be pi times 6.0 times 10 to the power 11.
That's correct.
And we're going to have the integral going from 0.001.
So the problem states that it's still the same half the radius to the outer radius, r cubed dr.
And that's quite easy to do inasmuch as i is going to be this divided by 4.
So pi times 6.0 times 10 to the power 11 divided by 4, r to the power 4,
going from 0.001 to 0.002.
And r to the power 4 will neatly sort out this meter to the power 4
and we'll have an answer in amperes.
So just through simple calculus and noting that this is the first equation we're dealing with.
Differential amount of charge equals charge density divided by the differential amount of area.
And we know what area is.
We get the dA dr.
And what this basically says is how will the area change as the radius changes?
And it's quite a simple differentiation.
And if you're given j as not a constant, it is just as simple to do.
Only that your exponent of the r will change.
And always make sure this is fun and wrong.
And what a normal parameters that you want.
If you haven't arrived, don't change.
And that'll make sure we turn around to yourself.
And I hope you've decided to make it easy.
But with
