Now we're going to start looking at circuits.
Just a few basic things about circuits.
A circuit most of the time is going to have an EMF device
of the very old term electromotor force.
What that actually meant was that it came in a battery
but it came in a solar cell, an electric generator
there's some process that provides energy to do work on charge carriers.
Okay, so that'll be an EMF.
And it's going to be connected to a circuit
and most likely that circuit is going to have a resistor in it.
End of story.
Let's make it more complicated.
Let's put more resistors in.
Call that resistor one and that resistor two.
A current is going to flow through our circuit.
Imagine it's a little man walking.
If the path does not split, the current everywhere will be the same.
Just remember that as a rule.
If there's no split in the path, if there's no fork in the road,
the current everywhere will be the same.
So independent of what the electric potential is,
independent of what the resistances are,
the charge through each point, through each resistor there,
is going to be the same.
And the charge through this point here will also be I.
The charge will always be the same.
The electromotor force was divided by a circle on the one side of an arrow
and it always goes from the lower to the higher potential in our battery or EMF device.
Current will always flow from an area of the higher potential to an area of lower potential.
So in this instance, current is going to flow like this.
And because there's no fork in the road, these resistors are in theory.
Now remember for capacitors in theory, we had 1 over C,
say 1 over 2 is going to be 1 over C1 plus 1 over C2.
But for resistors in theory, we're going to have that the resistance total here is going to be
the sum, my equals 1, of all the resistors.
Of all the resistors.
Now what we can do, usually in these problems,
we're just going to set up a Kirchhoff loop.
And there's a loop rule inasmuch as you start at any point,
and imagine you are on a hill and you start at a certain point marked with X,
you go down, you go up, you go down, you go up,
and when you come back, your total change in elevation was 0 if you return to the same spot.
The same is going to happen here.
So let's start at this spot, we call it spot A.
We move with the current, and later we'll see,
it doesn't matter if you make a mistake as far as the direction is concerned,
your sign is going to change, we'll get to that, we'll see what it means.
If you jump from a lower to a higher potential,
and this is just the sum of all the electric potentials,
and remember electric potential equals current times resistance.
So here we are going to go from lower to higher,
so we're going to have a positive electromotive force,
and we'll get to when it is potential difference when it is electromotive force.
Here we're going to drop down, our potential difference from here to here
is going to drop down because of the presence of this resistor.
And remember V is IR, so that is going to be I, which is the same everywhere, times R1.
Here we're going to drop it down again, IR2, and we're back to point A, so this must equal 0.
Okay, we can get that on its own, so we're going to have I, and we're going to have R1 plus R2,
equals electromotive force, so I is going to be the electromotive force divided by R1 plus R2.
And if R1, for instance, was 0, if it wasn't there, or say R2 was there, it wasn't there,
it was just going to be I equals electromotive force divided by resistance.
And that is how electromotive force is defined.
It is actually, it has the same units, volts.
Later on we'll see that every battery actually has a little internal resistance,
but we'll certainly get to that how to add that in getting the charge carriers to go against the electric field,
remember the electric field is from positive to negative, but the electric charge carriers are,
which by definition flies as positive charge, so we know realistically that doesn't happen,
but it goes against the electric force, electric field, so thereby, if it goes against that,
there's actually a bit of resistance in the flow there, but we'll get to that in later problems.
So this, in essence, is what we're going to deal with in electric circuits,
and we'll look at the various circuits and the various set-up of circuits,
but the Kirchhoff rule is most important.
It's just an algebraic sum of all the potential differences.
That is potential difference, that's potential difference, and that's potential difference,
and from the same spot to the same spot is zero, and if there's no fork in the road,
the current everywhere will be exactly the same.
Let's have a quick look at the potential difference between two points,
and then it's also going to give us the potential difference of a real battery,
as opposed to an imaginary battery, which is just an EMF.
If I have a circuit with a resistor and our battery there,
and if it is completed, so there's another resistor there,
if I want to know what the potential difference is between point A and point B,
say this is my point A, and this is my point B,
what we'll have is a potential difference at A,
we don't know what that is.
Now we go from a low to a high EMF, so that is going to be plus E,
and we're going to there go through a negative IR,
remember V equals IR, all of these are just potential differences,
and then we're going to, that is going to equal the V at B.
We stop there at the V of B.
So the V of B minus the V of A,
so the potential difference between these two is going to be
electromotor force minus IR.
And what we're actually looking at here is a real battery.
Inasmuch as a real battery, as I said in a previous video,
has some internal resistance.
And let's call that internal resistance lowercase r,
so that the potential difference for a real battery
is actually going to be electromotor force minus the current times the internal resistance.
So if I have a large resistance in my resistor here,
the current through this is going to be different,
so the real potential difference that my battery is going to deliver to this
is actually going to be a bit lower,
as much as I is now,
are going to be smaller.
So depending on the current that actually flows through,
your real potential difference across your battery
is going to be smaller than the EMF,
given just by the chemical energy that gets converted,
so that work can be done transferring the force carriers.
Okay, so here we go.
We've just seen that the actual potential difference of a battery
is actually the EMF minus the internal resistance
times the current that is set up in the circuit.
What we learned in the previous chapter,
I just want to revisit,
and that is that the power in the circuit equals IV.
because IV.
Now we can replace this V,
the potential difference,
with what we have there,
which is the electromotor force minus IR.
Oh, this chalk is terrible.
And if we multiply that out,
we see that it is IP minus I squared R.
Now these two parts have separate meanings,
inasmuch as that the P of the EMF equals this IP or PI,
and that is the power that our battery has to do two things.
First of all, to do work on the charge carriers,
to have them go from lower to higher,
area of lower to higher potential,
and for dissipation of heat due to their internal resistance.
And that is exactly what this factor is,
PR equals I squared R.
Or in our case, it actually should be the lowercase R,
remember that's the little internal resistance.
Let's do that properly.
Lowercase R, lowercase R.
So, subtracting the internal,
the power for internal thermal dissipation,
from the total power that our battery has.
So this is total power,
so that's for two things,
for work done on the charge carriers,
and for internal thermal dissipation.
And then this is for the internal thermal dissipation itself.
