Lastly, I just want to look at an isolated sphere. What would be the capacitance of an isolated sphere?
In essence, sphere. In essence, what I'm doing, I'm making B go to infinity. Go to infinity, so I'm just left with A.
First, I've just got to rewrite this equation. And I'm going to rewrite it as such.
4 pi epsilon 0. And A times B divided by B minus A, I just want to write as A over 1.
A over 1 divided by B minus A. Oops, that's incorrect. I wanted to write it as A over 1 and then B over B minus A.
If I multiply those two together, I'm going to get AB over B minus A. That is correct.
Let's see. Yes. So C is going to equal 4 pi epsilon 0. Now let's just divide these two.
So if I divide it, it's going to be A over 1 divided by the reciprocal of that. B minus A over B.
I can rewrite it. I can rewrite it still. C equals 4 pi epsilon 0. A over B into each one. B minus B is 1 minus A over B.
Now, if I let B go to infinity, this term will be 0. So I'm left with 4 pi epsilon 0. 1 minus 0 is 0.
A divided by 1 is just A. Is that correct? Yes. And instead of writing A, it's as much needed as to write C, to write R.
So the C capacitance for an isolated sphere is going to be 4 pi epsilon 0 times the radius of that sphere.
So just simple algebraic manipulation. So that we can use the fact that when B goes to infinity, we can get rid of this term.
In actual fact, all B's because my B is now at infinity. And we're left with an equation for the capacitance of an isolated sphere.
In this video, I want to look at capacitors placed in parallel and in serie. Here we can see an example of two capacitors, C1, C2.
Yes, C1 and C2. These are parallel with our potential difference by battery on this side and on this side.
The first thing that we need to do is just replace these two capacitors and those two capacitors with an equivalent capacitor in parallel.
It's quite easy. We can replace that by a capacitor that will have the capacitance of C1 plus C2.
A bit more involved with capacitors in serie and that will be our equivalent capacitor will equal 1 over that will equal 1 over C1 plus 1 over C2.
Another important thing to note on this side is that the voltage, let's call it voltage, the potential difference across each one stays the same.
So that V1 equals V2.
On this side, it is the charge that remains constant.
So the charge is going to be Q1 equals Q2.
So what we left with here, if we remember that Q equals CV, V remains constant.
In other words, Q1 is going to equal C1 of V and Q2 is going to equal C2 of V.
That is the most important thing to remember for parallel capacitors.
On the other side, with Q remaining constant, so we are going to have V equals Q over C.
So we are going to have that V1 is going to be Q which is constant divided by C1 and we are going to have V2 equals Q which remains constant divided by C2.
And this is the most important thing to remember about capacitors in serie.
Next, we will look at a few examples to make this clearer.
So to our first example, we have our calculator ready.
We are given this circuit, one to three capacitors.
Clearly we can see that these two are in parallel and those two plus this one, they are in serie.
We are just asked to replace all three with an equivalent capacitor.
First of all, with the two in parallel, let's do that equivalence.
So C12, that is going to be simply C1 plus C2.
And that equals, well we were given there, 12 microfarad and 5.3, so that is going to be 17.3 microfarad.
We are far up.
In C12, we are going to replace it with an equivalent now.
In C3, they are in serie, so it is 1 over C123, which is going to be 1 over C12, which we have just replaced with an equivalent, plus C1 over C3.
Let's do that, 1 over 17.3 times 10 to the power negative 6, plus 1 over C3, which was 4.5 times 10 to the power negative 6.
And that gives us so much, and that will leave us with C123 equal to 3.57, 3.57 microfarad.
So that is quite a simple first question.
