Let us quickly look at the concept of a dielectric.
And a dielectric is something that is put in between the plates of a capacitor.
For a vacuum, there is actually a constant for this and we denote it by the grid letter kappa.
And for a vacuum, kappa actually has unity, in other words one.
What kappa does, just to note quickly, you attach that to x long zero and you attach it to the capacitance.
Now if vacuum is one, any material that you put in there will have a kappa value of more than one.
So for instance, if we look at the, let's look at a problem.
We are told that a pedal plate capacitor, whose capacitance is 13.5,
13.5 pico times 10 to the power negative 12 farad,
and is attached to a battery which delivers an electric potential of 12.5 volts.
And it says that the battery is then connected, so charge builds up and the battery is then disconnected.
And then the porcelain slab with a constant of 6.50 is inserted inside here.
And we are asked, what is the potential energy of the capacitor before the slab is inserted?
Now we know that electric potential energy equals a half times cv squared.
And that is also equal to q squared over 2c.
Now we know what kappa is, we know what c is, and we know what v is, so we can very easily work out the electric potential.
But that is, let's say, first of all, before the slab is put in, we can work out k would be 1, because it's a vacuum,
and we would know what, we would certainly know what u is.
Now we're going to insert, remove, first of all, the battery, in other words, q will remain constant.
We've charged it, and q is now a constant.
If we, and this is important to remember, so this is important to always add these to any of your equations.
So if we look at the electric field, for instance, being, say for point charge, q over r squared,
this is going to be e, if it is in a dielectric, say a point charge is in a dielectric,
it's going to be 1 over 4 pi kappa epsilon 0 q over r squared.
So putting in a dielectric will reduce the electric field, for instance.
So these are the two important things to remember with a dielectric.
The other important thing is to remember is whether the battery remains attached,
or whether the battery is just simply removed.
If it is charged, and the battery gets removed, and then the dielectric remains in there,
q remains constant. There's nothing else to put in charge there.
If the battery remains in, q will actually increase because of the dielectric being there.
And the electric field will actually increase because we're maintaining an electric potential due to the battery, q is going to increase.
But if we take the battery away and then put the dielectric in, q remains the same.
That means v must decrease.
So I can't use this equation now after I've inserted, removed the battery and I've inserted the dielectric,
I can't use this anymore.
But we know what it was before.
We've used this calculation before the dielectric was put in.
And if I have u, I can work out q.
So q is going to be the square root of 2cu.
So I can work out, using this equation first of all, what q is going to be.
I've removed the battery so q cannot change.
So I can set this equal now, 2.
So I don't know what q is.
If I know what the value of q is, I can now use this equation for u final.
q squared, 2, kappa c.
This kappa c actually means that the capacitance also changes.
Placing a dielectric increases the capacitance.
Anything with a kappa value more than one, more than zero, I should say actually.
Apologies for that.
Which is zero being vacuum, will increase the capacitance.
That's what this means.
So a few things to remember.
With a dielectric, change all your equations of epsilon zero to kappa epsilon zero.
Change all your capacitance to kappa times the capacitance.
So we saw what happened there.
And the second important thing, or the third important thing.
Remember, see if a battery remains or gets removed.
If it gets removed before the dielectric gets put in, use this equation before the dielectric is there.
Once I know u, I can work out through this equation, with u and there, what q is going to be.
q would remain constant because the battery has been removed.
Now I can work out, now that I know what q is, now I can work out you final with this equation.
Now inserting the kappa.
And I get to this answer.
So just remember these important things to do.
And to note whether the battery remains or not, where the q remains or not.
And which of the equations to use.
And then when to put in your kappa.
If you remember those things, these problems are quite easy.
Now what if, in a previous example, the battery remains intact when this gets increased?
We are asked, if the battery in this problem remains connected, do the following increase, decrease, or remain the same when the slab is inserted?
First, the potential difference between the capacitor plates.
So first of all, we want to know what happens to the potential difference.
And that has got to remain the same.
Whether there is a dielectric or not.
Inasmuch as the potential difference across the plate is maintained by, now by this battery.
What about the charge?
Secondly, the capacitance with the dielectric.
Remember that is going to be kc, so we will have an increase.
Because the kappa is always going to be more than zero.
Thirdly, the charge on the capacitor.
The charge on the capacitor.
Now that's one thing that we said, if the battery is taken away, the charge remains constant.
But with the battery there, it is actually going to, remember this, it's going to increase.
The potential energy.
What's going to happen to the potential energy?
Well, that's also going to increase.
Remember that equals half cv squared.
And c is going to increase.
So the electric potential energy inside there is going to increase.
What about the electric field though?
Now remember this is going to be one over epsilon.
There's going to be an epsilon there in the denominator.
We've got to add that.
So we're going to have, let's say, proportional to the cube.
And there's going to be a kappa epsilon zero.
This kappa is going to increase the denominator.
Meaning you might think that the electric field will decrease.
But remember that the battery remains connected.
The charge with the dielectric will increase over here.
So this will increase as well.
Which actually means if you do the equation, it is going to remain constant.
So just remember these things we had without the battery in the previous video.
And now we have with the battery remaining.
So the potential difference of c is going to remain the same.
C is going to increase.
The charge is going to increase.
The electric potential energy is going to increase because c increases.
And the electric field will remain constant.
Just another interesting little problem.
If we are told that the initial capacitance of a plate capacitor
equals c.
And what we do with the plate capacitor now is we insert the dielectric
with the dielectric constant of kappa.
And we increase the distance.
So the distance final equals twice the distance initial.
And let's say that the initial distance equals d.
So I'm going to insert the dielectric.
I'm going to increase the distance.
I'm going to double the distance.
And I see that my final capacitance equals two times c.
What is k?
What is the dielectric constant?
Now what we have to do is to remember for a plate capacitor what c is.
For a plate capacitor equals epsilon zero a divided by distance.
So for my final I'm going to have, remember our first video on the dielectric.
E zero a divided by.
Now final I have 2d.
And for c initial I'm just going to have epsilon zero a divided by d.
So let's divide c final, c final sorry, by c initial.
So I'm going to get kappa epsilon zero a divided by 2d times d over epsilon zero a.
I'm just getting the inverse of this, the reciprocal of that thing.
So c final divided by c initial.
We're going to get epsilon zero, epsilon zero a, a, d, d.
It's going to equal kappa divided by 2.
And kappa is going to be 2 times c final.
It was 2c.
And initial was to c.
So that cancels out and that means kappa equals 4.0.
Good problem.
Good problem.
Good problem.
