In this chapter, we're going to have a look at capacitance.
The first thing we're going to look at is what we generally mean by a capacitor.
It can have various different shapes, but what we really look at is just two plates,
two conductive plates.
We usually put them in a circuit then.
We can just quickly draw our circuit.
In the circuit, we'll usually have a switch.
Then we'll have a battery.
This is how we denote a battery, just with a positive, a longer line, and shorter positive and negative.
A battery uses electrochemical energy to maintain a potential difference between its two terminals.
This is one example of how to charge a capacitor.
When we close the switch, this battery drives an electric field through the wires.
So much show that electrons are driven from this plate towards the terminal, towards the positive terminal.
And electrons are driven by this electric field created by the battery in the wires to drive electrons to this side.
This thing will become positively charged and this will become negatively charged.
Once equilibrium is reached, there is no electric field in the wires and electrons are not driven so a current doesn't flow.
And the same potential is now maintained over the plates as over the battery.
Capacitors is then a property of these two plates.
And it depends really only on the geometry of this and not of the charge or the electric potential difference across those plates.
And we say actually that across the capacitor, across the capacitor we have that the charge is proportional to the electric potential.
Just mind how we use electric potential difference and electric potential.
In the previous chapters we were looking at electric potential in a field set up by a point charge or a line charge or a charged disk.
So that is in space around a charged object.
But here we just use V as actually potential difference across either terminals or a capacitor.
And that constant of proportionality is actually capacitance times velocity then.
So the units for capacitance is coulomb per volt.
And that is actually given a name after Faraday I suppose.
And that is the farad, one farad equals one coulomb per volt.
Now this is independent of what Q and V is going to be.
If I give a, if we are given a problem and say that the potential difference across this is say for instance 12 volt.
Or let's make it an easy sum, say it's 12, let's make it 10 volt.
And the charge over there is say 100 coulomb.
I'm just using a very unrealistic example.
100 coulomb is a massive amount of charge anyway.
Just to make the sums come out.
C is then charge divided by electric potential.
So here we are going to have a charge of 100 coulomb.
And we are going to divide that by 10 volt.
Coulomb, 10 volt.
And that is going to give us 10 faraday.
Now in reality we are usually dealing with microfarads which is times 10 to the power negative 6.
Or we are dealing with picopharads which would be more realistic which is 10 to the power negative 12.
Negative 12 faraday.
So this capacitor has a capacitance of 10 faraday.
If I change this battery, if I am now told that the potential difference now across this is 100 volt.
So our new potential difference is 100 volt.
C is not going to change.
We can now figure out or calculate what charge.
So Q will be C, V.
So that is going to equal still this very same 10 faraday.
That doesn't change.
It's just the geometry of these plates.
So once we have calculated what capacitance is, it stays the same irrespective of what potential difference or charge we do put on these plates.
So that is going to be 10 faraday times our new 100 volt.
Our new 100 volt.
So that is going to be 1000 coulomb actually.
Which is ridiculous but just to illustrate the point with easy values.
So the capacitance is then just the amount of charge that is required on the two plates to create a certain potential difference.
But for this setup, this will remain a constant.
And if I then put different charge on there, I will get a different voltage.
Or if I have a different potential difference, it will mean there is a certain charge on there with C staying a constant.
In the previous video I said that capacitance just depends on the geometry of the capacitor.
Not on the charge on the electric potential.
Let's look at why that would be.
If we look firstly at a parallel plate capacitor.
Positively charged on one side.
Negatively charged on the other plate.
The distance d between them is an electric field will be from positive to negative.
So it's infinitely large.
So we take our electric field to be constantly.
From Gauss's law we know that if we draw a Gaussian surface completely encasing with n caps the inner positive charge.
We know that that will equal the permittivity constant times flux.
And we certainly know what flux is.
That is the surface integral.
In other words through the n caps there will be nothing.
Because the cosine between the electric field, the angle between the electric field and this area field will be 90 degrees.
So that will be zero.
So we are only looking through this surface.
If I substitute the flux in there.
I get that the charge will be the permittivity constant times the integral over the whole surface of E dot dA.
Now we have already said that the electric field is going to be constant.
So Q is going to equal E epsilon zero times E.
Just then the surface area which is now going to just be the surface area of our parallel plates.
So that's quite simple.
If we look at the potential difference between these.
We remember that that is negative.
Times the integral of going from some initial to some final position of E dot dS.
Or then cosine theta as the angle between the electric field and the distance d.
Now if we go from the negative field to the positive field.
And that is our displacement through the distance d.
The angle between them is 180 degrees.
If my displacement vector is in that direction.
So the cosine of 180 degrees is going to be negative one.
So my potential difference.
Will be going from the negative plate to the positive plate.
Is this going to be E dS.
Now the electric field we said is a constant.
So I am just going to write my electric potential difference there.
Is going to be E times.
Well I am going from negative to positive.
So that's a distance d.
So this dS is going to be just d.
I remember what my equation is.
Q equals Cv.
In other words C equals Q divided by V.
Q we have is epsilon zero.
Times the electric field.
Times the area.
Divided by V is the electric field.
Divided by the distance.
We see that the electric field cancels.
So C for a parallel plate capacitor.
Is going to be epsilon zero times A divided by V.
And this shows that the capacitance is only dependent on the geometry.
In other words the square.
The surface area of the two parallel plates.
And the distance.
And the distance between them.
Let's walk through a distance.
4 million.
We'll ask in a minute.
If you look through the fluid.
So.
What do you do?
The water breath.
The water breath.
Heם standing there.
So I was looking through just two minutes obviously.
