What we have to look at now is Gauss's law in the dielectric. We remember Gauss's law as the enclosed charge being equal to epsilon zero times the flux.
And we know that flux equals the integral over the whole Gaussian surface of the dot product of the electric field times an area vector.
Now in most textbooks there is a derivative, a derivation where you have two plates. So it's a plate capacitor, charge is built up and you place the dielectric in there.
And what you're going to do is take a Gaussian surface there. Because of induction this will be slightly negatively charged. This side will be slightly positive charged as there are negative charges here.
And your enclosed Q will be this Q without the dielectric minus the charge there.
And it's just a bit of algebra to get to the problem but it might be a bit confusing. What this boils down to is the fact that you're going to end up with Q.
Let's put that in E zero integral over the whole surface of E dot dA and that will certainly be Q zero without the dielectric.
That with the dielectric the charge is going to equal the integral of the dielectric constant times the electric field dot dA.
And this Q does not refer to the charge inclusive of the induced charge on the dielectric but only of the charge, the absolute charge in your capacitor.
So without doing the whole derivation this is the complete form of Gauss's law inclusive then of not only a vacuum but with any dielectric inside of the capacitor.
A good way to look at dielectric and Gauss's law is to do an example. Let's do a long example.
We are given a capacitor with an area of 115 square centimeters and we can get that to SI units of meters.
One square meter equals 100 square centimeters squared.
And we told it has a distance between the two plates of 0.0124 centimeters.
And initially we put an electric potential over the plates of 85.5 volts.
And we then put in a dielectric. But that dielectric does not fill this whole gap.
It is only, let's see, 0.00780 meters. And it has a dielectric constant of 2.61.
So there is certainly going to be a small gap. You are going to have your dielectric plate and you are going to have your dielectric here.
But there is going to be a gap there and there. So it doesn't fill up the complete space.
Question 1 asks, what is the capacitors before the dielectric slab is inserted?
What is mentioned in the problem is that the capacitor is there, it is charged with the battery, and then the battery is removed.
Certainly we know that for a parallel plate capacitor, we know that C equals epsilon 0 area divided by the distance between them.
So in our example it is going to be the area divided by distance. That is correct.
And the answer is going to come out to about 8.21 picofarad. That is going to be C0 without the dielectric being there.
What is the free charge that appears on the plates? What is the free charge that appears on the plates?
Well, we know that charge equals C times V. So in our instance here, we don't have Q0 being C0 times V0, the initial voltage.
And if you are plugging your values there, the answer is going to be 702 picocoulomb. About 702.
Now we ask, what is the electric field in the gap between the plates?
And this is where these problems become interesting because what we want to do now is just to create, I hope you can see on the side here,
is just to create a gauss surface inclusive of, I'm going to have other colours here now, inclusive of the gap and the positively charged side there.
So it does not include anything of the dielectric.
And what we are going to get is just what we are used to with Gauss' law, that that is going to be E0, the integral of E dot dA.
We are dealing with a vacuum, so Kappa is going to be unity Kappa of 1. So if I did include Kappa there, it's going to be 1. So we can leave it there.
The electric field from positive to the negative side, the area vector from the enclosed surface output. So the cosine of the angle between them is 0 degrees.
Cosine of 0 is 1. So we are going to end up here with E0, Y0, sorry. The electric field times A. And for our equation, we are going to use C0.
Because it only encloses the charge that was put onto our plate. So we can have that electric field, just in that, in the gaps, is going to be Q0 divided by,
X0 divided by area. And if we replace those, let's see if we replace those, we are going to get to about 6.90 kV per meter.
Can that be correct? Let me just see. That is correct. Now we are asked what is the electric field inside the dielectric. Now the dielectric is going to be negatively charged on this side, positively charged on this side.
And if we create a Gaussian surface, inclusive, just out of the dielectric, remember we said that, we said that, and this is where the previous video, what I did not mention in the previous video, is once you put a dielectric, once you put a dielectric, a dielectric in a capacitor,
what is going to happen to your electric field, what is going to happen to your electric field with the capacitor, is going to be the electric field without, divided by kappa.
Now, you can do it with a full equation and look at it, but this is a good equation to remember, just to note what happens to an electric field once a dielectric is put in.
And what this boils down to, the electric field inside this dielectric, is going to end up being this equation.
So we are going to have the electric field of 6.90 kV per meter. We are going to divide now by a dielectric constant, which is 2.61.
And that is going to equal, I think the answer is 2.64 kV per meter. That is the electric field inside the dielectric.
So, this is a good equation to remember, just as what happens to the electric field inside the dielectric, or if it filled the whole gap, what the electric field was going to be versus the electric field without the dielectric.
Now we are asked, let me just make some space, now we are going to be asked what the electric potential is across those plates once the dielectric is in place.
Without the dielectric, it was charged at 85.5 V.
So certainly that, once the battery is removed, that is going to be the electric potential over the plates of the dielectric, parallel plate dielectric.
But now, something different happens. We place the dielectric there, and we have already seen what the electric field and the gaps are going to be.
We know what the electric field in the dielectric is. And remember that our electric potential equals negative, the integral we made from the minus to the positive of the electric field dot ds.
Now there are two areas here. We've got this full area d, and we've got this little area b. So the two caps in total is going to be d, is going to be d minus b.
So we're going to end up with e0 times d minus b. And we're going to add to that the electric field in the dielectric, which was e1, and it has a length there of only b.
Now, what is important to remember about this problem is just the signs and what you have to do.
The electric field certainly is from in this direction, without the dielectric, and in the dielectric, the electric field is in that direction.
What you do, though, in just looking at the potential difference here, remember that our electric field is in this direction, and we're going in the direction from negative to positive, so it's going to be the cosine of 180 degrees, so this negative disappears.
And the same happens here. We're going from positive to negative, that is the direction of our electric field, but the integral goes from negative to positive, so the ds, that vector there is in the opposite direction, so they both end up as positive signs.
So our electric potential with the dielectric, if you just plug in these values that we got from the previous part, we're going to end up as 52.3 volts.
So that's a simple way to answer these questions of a dielectric inside of a parallel plate capacitor.
