Now things are going to get a lot more involved.
We are told that the potential difference across our battery is 12.5 volts.
And our question is, what is the charge on capacitor number one?
The best place to start with these problems is to work in reverse.
So we know what the equivalent capacitor is, and we know what the voltage is,
the potential difference, the electric potential over that equivalent capacitor.
And if we use the fact that Q equals CV, for our purposes, Q in 1, 2, 3,
our equivalent one will now be C, 1, 2, 3, and our voltage there, 12.5.
Let's see what that is.
3.57 times 10 to the power negative 6 times 12.5.
And that's going to leave us with a charge of 4.4625 times 10 to the power negative 5 coulombs,
if we had one equivalent.
Now let's break them up into the equivalents C1, 2, which is there, and C3.
They are in theory.
And remember what we said in theory, the charge will remain constant.
The charge will remain constant.
Now the charge is 123, so that is going to equal C over 3, and that's going to equal Q over 3, I mean, and Q over 1, the equivalents 1, 2.
They will not change.
That will remain the same.
V, on the other hand, is not going to remain the same because of the circuit being in theory.
So let's look at that.
So V over 3 is going to be Q, 3, which we know what it is, divided by C3.
And V1, 2, remember, we're working backwards, so this is still an equivalent capacitor.
V1, 2 is going to remain this Q value of ours, so Q1, 2, 3, divided by C1, 2, divided by C1, 2.
So it's easy for us to see what V will be, V1, 2 will be across here.
It will be very simple for us to do.
Once we have that, let's do that.
So that's Q1, 2, 3, which is 4.4625.
I'm not going to round things off now.
Divide it by C1, 2, which we have 17.3 times 10 to the power negative 6.
That is going to be about 2.579, let's make it 4.8.
Just check on your calculator.
V. V1, 2.
Now, this is in parallel.
If we just looked at this circuit, just this circuit, these are in parallel.
So we can see that V remains the same.
V is a constant.
That means V1 equals V2 equals V12 equals V12.
But we want Q1 that is going to be C1 V, V that remains constant.
So if we just look at V, which we have just gotten, 2.579 times C1, and we were given C1 V12 microfarad times 10 to the power negative 6.
So that's going to leave us with Q1 equal to 30.1 microfarad.
So we work backwards.
And remember in the first video I said these are the two important things to remember for parallel and serie capacitors.
to know when V remains constant and when C remains constant.
And by constant I mean that you can keep the individual charges here for the equivalent charge
and you can keep the voltages here, the potential differences here for the potential difference that was initially across there.
All the examples are going to be the variance on the previous example and the most important equations to remember are those.
There is one trick that might come in, a trick question that might come in.
And that is where capacitor 1 and 2 are neither in serie nor in parallel as far as there is no battery to keep electric potential over the capacitor's place.
So this problem will usually be stated that C1 is charged by battery to a potential difference of 3.0 removed and then C2 is placed in there so the battery is removed.
What you have to remember here is there is no battery to keep on supplying electrons to keep on supplying a potential difference.
So the Q0 that you are going to start off with, that is the only three electrons that you have, the only ones that have been charged negative on the one side, that's all you have.
It cannot be added to. So that in the end has got to remain plus Q2. Nothing can be removed.
If we remember though that Q equals Cv, we can certainly look at each of these individually.
So this is going to be C, let me just remember here, this is going to be Cv0 equals, let's see this is going to be C1v plus C2v.
What's important to remember here is that, as I've just mentioned, that is the only charge that you have.
And on the right hand side, there's nothing to change with this v either.
So if we just look at what that is going to be, C1v0 equals, we can bring out v, that's C1 plus C2.
And we can get v on its own, that is going to be C1v0 divided by C1 plus C2.
And that is now going to be the new voltage across each of these two.
So the important thing there to remember is that we've got nothing extra to do, either this is not parallel or C.
Whatever charge you started with is what you're going to have.
And depending on what C is, C1 and C2, what the values are, you're going to get different Q1 and Q2 values.
And remember that Q equals Cv.
Now there's no new potential difference being placed in here, so what you're going to end up with is just the splitting of what you originally had.
And through simple algebra we can get that on its own.
And we can then calculate the C1 would be the value that you're given.
V0 is the initial battery that was used.
And C2 was also given.
So this is the important step.
And just replacing, and this is the important step.
These v's will be the same because there's no battery added there.
Whatever v was there initially, it now gets distributed equally amongst these two.
Let's look now at the energy stored in an electric field in a capacitor.
If we have a capacitor from the two plates, and via the chemical energy in a battery,
we actually do work in transferring say electrons from one plate to the other.
Imagine that.
You take an electron, you move it.
You take an electron, you move it.
This plate becomes negatively charged.
This plate becomes positively charged.
But work has to be done in moving that.
Now obviously they go through the circuit.
The electric energy in the battery does that for you in the circuit.
But work is done to create all of this.
And we think of that work, the energy of that work stored in the electric field of the capacitor.
And you can get back that stored potential electric energy by discharging it say through a resistor in a flash.
But let's remember what work is.
Work equals electric potential times charge.
So if we look at the differential work done, there will be the charge times the change in the electric potential times the change in charge.
And the charge changes as electrons are moved, as one plate becomes oppositely charged to the other.
But we also know that q equals v times c, electric potential times capacitance.
So we can write v equals q over c.
So if we rewrite this now, we'll have the differential amount of work will be q over c, q over c, vq.
Now we can look at what work is.
That will be the integral of dw.
C is a constant.
So 1 over c can come out times the integral of q dq.
And that is simply going to be plus 2.
So that is going to be q squared divided by 2c.
And that is the work done.
And we say that that work done is stored as electric potential energy.
Electric potential energy stored in a capacitor.
Now, we can also rewrite this.
But let's do that in the next video.
Next video.
Next segment.
