Let's have another example. This time we're going to look at a bit of drift velocity.
We are told that we have a copper wire with a radius of 900 times 10 to the power of negative 6 meters.
And we say that the uniform current of 17 times 10 to the power of negative 3 amperes flows through it.
And we want to know, they want to know, or they say assume that each copper atom contributes one conduction electron to the current and that the current density is uniform across the wire.
What is the drift speed? Now for us to do that we need an equation for drift velocity.
And velocity times drift speed is going to be current density divided by Ne.
We know what current density is. That's density divided by area. In other words, or consider it like this.
In other words, our drift velocity is going to be current divided by area times Ne.
Now the most important thing that we haven't discussed in this equation, easy enough for us to get Vd, is how to get this n.
Now n, let's write an equation for n. n is going to be the number of charged particles per unit volume.
So it's going to be per unit volume, and for SI units, per cubic meter.
And that simply is Avogadro's number times the density, in our instance it's copper, divided by the molar mass.
Let's look at its units. That is going to be number per mole, per mole.
Density is kilograms per cubic meter. And molar mass is kilograms per mole.
And that looks like it will work out quite well for us. Per mole per mole, kilogram per kilogram.
So we are left with, we are left with, we are left with per cubic meter.
So remember this equation, for n.
We have a Gapos number times the density, and this is mass density.
So kilograms per cubic meter divided by molar mass. That is kilograms per mole.
And if we work that out for copper, I'm just going to use it here.
That just means n equals, do we have the answer here?
n is going to equal 8.49 times 10 to the power 28, and then per cubic meter.
So if we substitute all the values, we know what i is, we know pi, we know what the radius is, we know what n is,
and e is 1.69 times 10 to the power negative 19, that is the unit charge, the unit of charge, which is positive,
which is 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 coulombs, and then we'll get to a drift velocity of about 4.9 times 10 to the power negative 17 meters per second,
which is very, very slow.
What we've got to remember though, that in a wire, with the freely moving electrons all over,
once the electric current is set in motion on one side, that electric current spreads through the wire at nearly the speed of light.
In other words, the electrons that start drifting at this very slow speed, negative 7,
negative 7, that starts moving here immediately, near immediately starts moving on that side as well.
So if we have a resistor like a light on this side, it will instantly, the light will instantly turn on,
as the electric field is near instantly set up in the whole wire, so as these electrons start drifting,
these electrons will also start drifting.
So that's an easy problem, and the one thing we must take from this problem is an equation for n.
hits to a few problems, as far as energy density and drift velocity are concerned.
We are told that a beam contains 2.0 times 10 to the power 8, doubly charged positive ions per cubic centimeter.
First of all, we've got to convert this to SI units, and look carefully, so that will be, we need to go to 1 cubic meter, so that will be 100 cubed centimeter.
So, just look carefully at what we're trying to do, we want in the end per cubic, so that it's got to go in the denominator, so that these two cancel out.
So that those two cancel out.
And, moving with a speed, so the velocity equals 1.0 times 10 to the power 5 meters per second.
So they are moving at the moment, so they are moving at quite a rate.
What are the magnitude and direction of the current density J?
So we need current density J, and we know that if we use vectors, that will be n times e times vd.
So, the current density as a vector will be always in the same direction as the velocity or the speed drift, velocity drift.
So, these are simple to do.
N, we have our answer there.
E, now when they're doubly charged, remember that is now going to be 2e, so that should be going to be 2nevd.
So, that's quite a simple one to do.
They are doubly charged, and this is the charge per particle, but they are doubly charged, so it's going to be 2 times that.
2 times 1.6 to the power negative 19.
So, that's an easy one to do.
Ah, let's see.
A small but measurable current of, so we're given current, and that equals 1.2 times 10 to the power negative 10 amperes.
Exists in a copper wire with a diameter, so 2r equals a diameter of 2.5 millimeters, so 0.00250 meters.
And that is 2 times the radius because we're given the diameter.
The number of charged carriers per unit volume, so we're given N.
8.49 times 10 to the power 20.
10 to the power 28 per cubic meter.
Assuming that the current is uniform, calculate the current density J.
Remember, we have therefore J.
Divided by N.E.
So, let's see.
Small but measurable current exists in a copper wire with a diameter of 2.5 millimeters.
And so, we're going to use I divided by A.
And I divided by pi R squared.
And remember, you just have to do this.
And remember, you just have to do this.
So, that's quite easy.
And the current density and electron drift speed.
So, no electron drift speed.
This is going to be, we have up there, J divided by N.E.
So, if we just substitute this J.E.
It's going to be J is, J is X.
So, that's 1 over, I over pi R squared times N.E.
So, that's quite a simple one to do as well.
Let's see if we can just slip in one or two more.
A fuse, here we go.
A fuse in an electric circuit is a wire that's designed to melt.
And thereby, open the circuit with the current that seems to have a value.
Suppose that the material to be used is a fuse melts when the current density is 440.
So, we are given J as, I've got the weirdest chalk today.
Suppose that whatever uses a fuse melts can is 440.
440 NPS per given per square centimeter.
And now to convert this, remember, we want the units to be collected.
So, it's going to be 1 meter in the denominator and 100 square centimeters squared.
So, the dose duplicates out and we have NPS per square meter.
What diameter of the centimeter Y should be used to make a fuse that will limit the current to...
So, we can ensure the current of 0.50 NPS.
So, what is the diameter?
So, we're looking for 2 times R.
This one's quite easy.
And as much as J equals I divided by pi R squared.
And R squared is going to be I over J pi.
And is that correct?
I over J pi.
Yeah.
We have to get new chalk.
And so, R is going to equal R is going to equal the square root of I divided by J pi.
Let's see if that's correct.
Because I over A, A is pi R squared.
And we have all we were given I, we were given pi.
Oh, we know what pi is and we were given I.
So, it's easy for us to work out the radius.
But we need 2 times that because we want the diameter.
So, that's an easy one to do as well.
Let's have a couple of look.
We can do one more.
Near Earth the density of protons in the solar wind is given us 8.7.
So, again we're given N as 8.70 per cubic centimeter.
So, remember again we're going to multiply that by 100 cubed centimeter cubed.
So, that we can get rid of those per 1 cubic meter.
So, that is where the mistakes usually come in just for this conversion.
And the speed is 470 kilometers per hour.
So, that's 470 000 meters per second.
Easy to do, find the current density of these protons.
We know that from there is that J equals NE times VD.
That's not correct.
Just the velocity, VD.
We know what N is.
If we did our conversion correctly we know what VD is.
So, we've got them currently and we may indeed ask find the electric density of these protons.
So, we can easily do that.
And if Earth had no magnetic field to deflect these protons, what would the total current be?
Remember J equals I over A.
In other words, I equals J times A.
Pi radius of the Earth squared.
So, again another simple problem.
So, these don't present us with too much difficulty I think.
In this short video, two concepts.
Resistance and resistivity.
Resistance is a property of a certain object.
I can make a resistor.
And resistance equals potential difference divided by I.
So, if I have a wire and there is a potential difference over this resistor.
I can rewrite this as V over R.
So, the current that is going to flow there for the same potential difference and then for two different resistors will lead to a different current.
The higher the resistance, the lower the current is that's going to flow through there.
Resistivity is a property though of a material itself.
So, copper wire will have a certain resistivity but it will depend on the temperature but we might get to that later.
Resistivity equals the electric field divided by the charge density.
Now, we can rewrite this as far as electric field is concerned.
Electric field is the potential difference divided by D.
But let's make it a copper wire of length L.
So, that will be V divided by L and that is I divided by A.
So, the jumble of a fraction, the algebraic fraction there.
V over I, we have R.
So, that's going to be R.
So, we are left with 1 over L divided by 1 over A.
So, that is R.
Let's not make a mistake.
1 over L times A over 1.
So, that is going to leave us as R A divided by L.
And that equals P.
So, how is resistance and resistivity related?
Well, then R equals L resistivity divided by A.
Or resistance is going to be proportional to the length divided by the area.
And our constant of proportionality is going to be the resistivity.
As I said, the resistivity is a property of a material.
In engineering problems, they talk about conductivity.
And the conductivity is just 1 over the resistivity.
So, that's easy enough to do.
Anything else I wanted to mention quickly?
No, that is about it.
I just want to write the equation for temperature.
Inasmuch as the resistivity minus the resistivity zero equals P zero alpha T minus T zero.
So, that is the equation for the relationship between temperature and resistivity.
But for a metal, usually a metal conductor of a broad range of temperatures, the resistivity will be fairly linear.
So, the important ones to remember here is the relationship between resistance and resistivity.
And how we actually define the resistivity.
And obviously these two for the system's current system.
