Now that we know the electric potential away from a point charge and from an electric
type, well let's look at the electric potential away from a line charge, a distance d away
from a line charge of length L, and this is the electric potential of point Z, Z away
from the charged disk with radius R. You can also set up two integrals to do this, but
the integration is a bit difficult, so I've just put V2 equations here. What I want to
look at is the potential difference away from a line charge, but now the line charge is not
a straight line as we can use for this equation, but it's on a semicircle, part of a full circle
with the radius R. What is the electric potential there? Well we certainly can again just look
at a small differential arc length there, which will have a differential charge, say this is
uniformly charged. So if we look at dV, that's certainly going to be 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0 dQ over
R, dQ over R. Now if we integrate this, we're going to get, we're certainly going to get the
electric potential here. If we do look at arc length here, we know that an angle in the radians is going to be the arc length
divided by the radius. 1 over R is going to be the angle divided by the radius. 1 over R is going to be the angle divided by the arc length.
And if we're just looking at a small differential area there, so that it's going to be d theta and then d, the arc length, that little length there.
So let's replace that in our integral here. It's 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0. The integral over, it's going to be d theta, d arc length.
Sorry for that, sorry for that, it's not correct to write it like this, but let's do that, times dQ.
But what is dQ over dr length? Well that's just our linear charge density, dQ over dS.
And the density is going to be constant, linear charge density over this wire, so we can bring that out.
d equals 1, let's bring that out. dQ over dArc is going to be the linear charge density divided by 4 pi epsilon 0, the integral of d theta.
But remember we're dealing with calculus here, this is an angle in radians. So if you were given that this one is 120 degrees, change that to radians.
Because V is going to be pi times our angle, 4 pi epsilon 0, 4 pi epsilon 0, and you can work out what this length is.
If you're given the radius and you're given this angle, you can work out what this arc length is.
And if you're given what the charge is on this arc, you can certainly get for that.
If we do, if you do an example of this, what you'll notice right in the end, if you do, if you do substitute everything,
is that V equals 1 over 4 pi epsilon 0 q over r.
So if you're given not the charge density but the charge and you're given this radius, it is the same as seeing this whole semicircle as a point charge.
So we're looking at the electric potential at distance r away from the point charge.
Do an example like this and you'll see that these two are equivalent.
Let's look at another example of a line charge.
We've got a uniformly charged wire here and we're asked to calculate the electric potential at point p.
This is 10 meters, 1 meter away from the one end.
We can set up our Cartesian system like this and we can certainly set up an equation as we normally do.
dq over dr. Why can we do that? Because we're looking at a small differential area here in our wire.
So small and in fact that it's a point charge.
So we've got a differential electric potential set up here because of that differential point charge.
What is the distance r for us here between the point that we're interested in and our point charge r?
Well that's going to be x. This is on the x axis we set to 0 so that's going to be x plus 1.
So r is going to be x plus 1.
This is uniformly charged so we can certainly set up a linear charge density for dx for our little point charge ray.
In other words dq is going to be x plus 1. In other words dq is going to be linear charge density dx.
And let's substitute that into our equation.
So certainly v is going to be the integral of dv.
Now dq we're going to substitute. This will be a constant.
We can bring that outside of the integral. The integral of 1 over r.
Let's see. That should not be dr. That should just be r of course.
Strange. 1 over r. dq. So that will be 1 over x plus 1.
And then we'll have dx. That's an easy integral to do at least for us.
So d equals. This is going to be linear charge density 4 pi x plus 1 0.
And that is going to be the natural log of x plus 1.
And we're going to integrate that from 0 to the length.
From 0 to the length of our. So just to show that clearly.
4 pi x plus 0. So this is going to be the natural log of x plus l.
Minus the natural log of 1.
And not x plus l. Wow.
L plus 1. Minus the natural log of 1.
Minus the natural log of 1.
