And so we're finally going to solve for x. So in this video lecture we're going to talk about
isolating x, our single unknown, our variable, on one side of an equation. So this lecture is
going to be all about equations and solving equations. Such an important skill and task
in data science. So let's then talk about solving equations. One of the most useful skills that you
can have in algebra. So first of all we have to define what we mean by an equation. What do we
mean by an equation? When is something equation? Well we're going to say that it is a statement
and a statement is, you know, we can use symbols and numbers and we can write something down
mathematically and that's a statement. In more advanced statistics you will learn about
statements being something that can be true or false. But for us we're just going to write a
statement that equals or equates, let's say, that equates two expressions.
So I'm going to have two expressions and I'm going to equate them with an equal symbol such that I have
a left-hand side and I'm going to say that equals some right-hand side where both of these sides are
going to be an expression. So there we go. There's our first definition for this lecture. We're going to
have a left-hand side. We equate that by the equal symbol, the right-hand side. Please take note if you are
learning how to use a computer language. In a computer language, this is an assignment operator
which is very different from using it in mathematics where we use a single equal sign.
And we're going to have an aim and the aim is to find values for a variable that makes the statement
true. That the left-hand side is indeed equal to the right-hand side. And so what we will have to do,
and you might have heard this before, is we want to isolate the variable on one of the sides and
usually we isolate that on the left-hand side. So let's have a look at a little example just to make
these things concrete. And here is my first equation. I have a left-hand side which is a variable and a
right-hand side which is just a number, a constant. And when would this be true? Well, it's true. Let's say
it's true if x is indeed equal to 2 because then we have 2 equals 2 and that is something that is true.
And so we can make the statement true by letting x equals 2 and that is the very simplest form because
the solution is already written in the equation. So let's make things slightly more difficult and
let's write something like x plus 1 equals 2. Now we have a left-hand side and we have a right-hand side
but our aim here is to find the value for the variable that makes this statement true. And an easy
way to do that, as we could see up here, if we isolate the variable here on the one side, usually the
left-hand side. And then it's easy if the right-hand side is just a number that we can read off the
value of the variable that makes this equation true. Now to maintain equality, we can consider doing
something to the left-hand side and to the right-hand side as long as we do the same thing on each side.
If we do the same thing, the equality stays. So I want you to imagine a scale, an old-fashioned scale,
and you put weights on the one side and weights on the other side, and it goes up and down.
And for you to maintain that equilibrium, you have to put weights of equal sizes or equal weights.
Say I put 10 pounds here and 10 pounds there. As long as I do the same on both sides, the scale
stays in equilibrium. And that's exactly what we're going to do here. So let's just put parentheses here
on our left-hand side. And let's put a parentheses on our right-hand side. So we have complete isolation
of the left-hand side and the right-hand side. And let's do something to both sides. And what I'm
going to do is I'm going to subtract 1. So that's like taking my scales and taking 1 pound off. But I
also have to take it off on the other side to maintain the equilibrium of those scales. And now we
can just read this out. It's x plus 1 minus 1. And on the other side, the right-hand side, I have 2
minus 1. Well, plus 1 minus 1 is just 0. So I have x plus 0 on the side. 2 minus 1 is 1. But x plus 0,
anything plus 0 is just that one thing. And I have solved for x. I have isolated x on my one side,
which happens to be the left-hand side. And now that I've isolated it, it's like the first example,
I can just read off the value so that when x equals 1, this equation holds true. If I substitute,
so we have to talk about substitution. So if I now substitute this x equals 1 into that original
equation here, I would have 1 to substitute for x. I substitute 1 because x is equal to 1 plus 1 equals
2. And indeed, 1 plus 1 is 2. And 2 equals 2. And that is true. By doing what I do on the left-hand
side, what I do to the right-hand side, if I exactly, if I do exactly the same thing, I maintain that
equality. And I can use that to my advantage to isolate or solve for that unknown, to solve for that
variable. And later on, when you do these often enough, what we'll usually talk about is just say
that we take this to the other side. And if you take it to the other side, we swap the sign. And
look, that's exactly what happens. As if I took this plus 1 away and I made it a negative 1 on the other
side. But behind the scenes, the actual truth of the matter is that I do something on the left-hand
side. And I do something on the right-hand side. It so happens that this plus 1 now disappears. This
plus 1 will disappear from the left-hand side. I've turned it into a 0. And that's what we mean by
taking it over to the other side and swapping the sign. So from a positive, I'm going to go to a
negative. But hopefully you can see what we are actually doing to solve this equation.
Let's do another example. In this example, I'm going to have 2x equals 4. And there are various
ways that we can solve this by doing something to the left-hand side and to the right-hand side.
What we can do, let's have our left-hand side and we have our right-hand side and do exactly the same
on each side. And what I'm going to do on each side, I'm going to divide each side by 2. Now I've done
what I've done on the left-hand side to what I've done on the right-hand side. Nothing has changed.
I do note that I have 2 divided by 2. There's a multiplication there, not addition or subtraction,
which allows me to cancel out those 2s. Because 2 divided by 2 times x, that's exactly what I have
there. 2 divided by 2 is 1. And that's equal to 1 times x, which is just equal to x. And that means
canceling those 2 out. And 4 divided by 2, well, that's just 2. So all that's left behind on this
side is x. And all that's left behind on this side is 2. So the solution is 2. And again, if I
substitute, substitute this value into this, I'm going to have 2. And in the place of the x, I substitute
2 equals 4. And indeed, 4 equals 4. My statement is correct. And x equals 2 is a solution to that
equation. Now let's have a look if we could solve this in a different way. Let's have again 2x equals
4. And what about if I took the left-hand side, there's my left-hand side and right-hand side, and I
multiply both sides by a half. So I'm multiplying this side by a half, and I'm multiplying that side by a
half. And 2 times a half, or half times 2, that's just 1 times x. That's just x equals, and a half times
4 is just 2. So dividing by 2, multiplying by half, that's exactly the same thing. Now we can make this
more complicated. Look at this example. Now are we really having some fun? x squared equals 4. How do we
solve for that? What number do we take such that we square it, we get 4? Well, you might just be able
to work that out in your head. 2. If I take 2 and I square it, 2 times 2, that equals 4. But hey, hang on
a minute. If I take negative 2 times negative 2, negative times the negatives are positive, 2 times
2 is 4. So there's actually two numbers that solve for this equation. And again, there's something we can
do. We can say we take the square root of both sides. I'm taking the square root of x squared, and I'm
taking the square root of 4. Now I just have to remember that there's a positive and a negative
involved here. And some people will write positive and negative there. On the left-hand side, I do
remember that what I'm doing here is just using a fraction as my power. Those two things, the square root
there. Remember, I have my index is 2. There's my index, my radicand, and here I have a whole radical.
And on this side, well, that's just going to be equal to 2 squared, and I'm taking that to the power
one-half. But it's easier to remember to do this. It's actually plus or minus the square root of 4. I
have to think about both the positive and the negative. Now 2 times a half is just 1. x to the power 1 is just
x. And on this side, 2 times a half is just 1 to the power 1 is just 2. That's a 2. But what happens
here is I do forget the positive and negative. So definitely I have to think about, if I take the
square root, that I do have to think about the positive and negative, because both positive 2 and
negative 2 are solutions to this equation. 2 squared is 4. 4 equals 4. That's correct. Negative 2 times
negative 2 is also 4, and 4 equals 4, and that's also correct. So both 2 and negative 2 are solutions
to this problem. Now let's have some more fun. Let's do a very difficult one. Let's have x divided by
11, and that's going to equal 33. How am I going to solve what value if I divide it by 11 gives me 33?
Once again, what I do on the left-hand side, I have to do on the right-hand side. And my aim is to isolate x.
How can I get rid of this 11? Well, if I multiply both sides by 11, there's x over 11, my left-hand side,
and I multiply the right-hand side also by 11, I'm going to get the following. If I look at this,
this is just 11 divided by 1 times x over 11. That's a multiplication, which means these two
cancel out. It might as well be 11 over 11 times x, and this is 1 times x. Exactly the same thing.
So my 11s are going to cancel, and I'm just left with x on the side. And now I just have to think
11 times 3. Check on your calculator. That's 363. And again, now I can substitute 363 divided by 11.
Use your calculator or Python. You get 33, a solution to that equation. Now let's do it this
way around. Let's have something like 11 over x equals 33. Now immediately I know x is not equal
to 0 because I cannot divide by 0. But what if I multiply both sides by x? I'm multiplying by x on
the left-hand side, and I'm multiplying by x on the right-hand side. I have changed nothing. Now again,
if I just look at this, this is x divided by 1 times 11 divided by x. There's a multiplication there,
which means x divided by x. Those two x cancel, and I'm left with 11 on this side. And this side I'm
left with 33x. I have commutativity, so x times 33 is the same as 33 times x. And I have this. Now I have
my verbal on the right-hand side. It's customary to have it on the left-hand side, but I have an
equation here so I can just rewrite this the other way around. I can say 33x equals 11. There's no
difference between these two statements. Now once again, I can get rid of the 33 by multiplying both
sides by 1 over 33. If I multiply this, remember this is just over 1. And on this side I also divide
or multiply by, let's have that as, that is 33. And on the right-hand side I have 11. And so that 33 and
that 33 is going to cancel out. So I'm left with x on its own on this side. And on this side I'm left
with 11 and 33. Now can I simplify this? Yes, of course I can. Let's look at the greatest common
divisor. So let's do 11. Just break it up and I'm going to take 33 and I'm going to break that up into
its, and by breaking up I mean factorizing as far as its prime constituents are concerned.
Now here at 33, I can divide 33 not by 2, the smallest prime. I'm going to have remainder.
I can divide it by 3 without a remainder. Then I'm left with 11. And 11 is prime on its own,
so there's an 11. If I look at 11, well that's just a prime number. I can only divide it by 11.
And so let's look at what is common between these two. What is common between these two
is of course the 11 is a common factor between both of them. So the greatest common divisor
between 11 and 33 is 11. And then 11 divided by 11, well that's just equal to 1.
And 33 divided by 11, well that's just equal to 3. So if I divide both the numerator and denominator
by my greatest common divisor, which is 11, in actual fact what we're saying here is I'm taking
my numerator and I'm dividing it by 11. And I'm taking my denominator and I'm dividing it by 11.
I have not changed anything. So 11 divided by 11 is just 1. 33 divided by 11 is 3. So x equals a third.
I have simplified 11 over 33 to a third by considering what is the greatest common divisor
between 11 and 33. What is the largest number that I can divide into 11 and into 33 without a remainder?
And indeed that number is 11 by considering this technique of prime factorization.
Let's go for one more example. Let's use in this example, let's make use of reciprocals.
Now for reciprocals, if I have something like a over b and b is not equal to 0, it's reciprocal.
It's reciprocal is b over a, such that when I multiply those two I get 1. And now a can also not be 0.
So let's make use of an example. Let's have 4 over 5x. If I have 4 over 5x and I'm going to let that equal 12.
Now there's different ways that I can go about this, but let's use the reciprocal.
How can I get rid of this 4 fifths so that I have x all on its own?
Well, let me take 4 fifths and multiply it by its reciprocal.
So on the left-hand side I'm going to multiply by 5 over 4 and I still have 4 over 5 and I still have x
as long as I also do that to this right-hand side 5 over 4 times 12.
So on both sides I've multiplied by 5 over 4.
Now I have 5 over 4 times 4 over 5.
Now if I just look at those two fractions, multiply those by each other, it's a multiplication.
So I can cancel the two 4s and I can cancel the two 5s, which leaves me x on the side.
Let's have a look at this.
If I have 5 over 4, I'm going to multiply that by 12 over 1, but I can write this as 5 over 4 times 12
can be written as 3 over 1 times 4 over 1.
3 times 4 is 12, divided by 1 is just 12, so that's all the same.
And I notice that I can cancel out the 4 in the numerator, the 4 in the denominator, leaving me with 15.
So x equals 15.
And that's making use of reciprocals to get rid of this coefficient as far as the x is concerned.
Now let's do a much more difficult example.
And I love these difficult examples because once you can do these, you can really solve for x.
And let's have 3 times.
Now I'm going to make use of square brackets.
Remember I told you in an earlier lecture I don't really care about PEMDAS.
I want to put things inside of parentheses, brackets, and braces to make clear what the order of
arithmetical operation is that I'm interested in.
So let's have 4x.
Let's have plus 5 times x minus 2.
And then add another 6 to that.
And that is going to equal 1 minus 2 times, let's have 9 minus 2 times x minus 4.
Let's see if we can solve this.
Immediately we see that we can do distribution.
And we can do distribution.
So let's do that.
Now if I do this distribution, I'm getting rid of these parentheses.
I'll have 5x minus 2.
So these brackets are the only parentheses on this side.
And as I say, I like to use parentheses, brackets, and braces in that order.
So if I get rid of these, now those become my lowest order, which for me is parentheses.
But you can use the notation that you're comfortable with.
So 3 times, there's my 4x.
And I'm going to have positive 5x.
And I'm going to have negative 10.
And I still have my positive 6 there.
Same is going to happen on this side.
If I get rid of these, now those are going to become my parentheses.
And I'm going to have 9.
And then negative 2x, negative 2 times x is negative 2x.
And negative 2 times negative 4, well, that gives me a positive 8.
Now let's simplify.
On this side, I've got 4x plus 5x.
That gives me a 9x.
I've still got negative 10 there, plus 6.
And on this side, I'm going to have 1 minus 2 times 9, plus 8 is 17, minus 2x.
Now I can distribute the 3, and I can distribute this negative 2.
9 times 3 is 27 times that x.
3 times negative 30 is negative 30.
And I still have my positive 6.
And on this side, I'm going to distribute the negative 2.
Negative 2 times 17 is negative 34.
Negative 2 times negative 2x gives me a positive 4x.
Let's simplify.
I've got 27x on this side.
Negative 30 plus 6 gives me a negative 24.
And on the right-hand side, I have 1 minus 33, leaving me with negative 33 plus 4x.
Now I want to get all my x's on one side.
So what can I do?
Well, I can take 27x minus 24.
And let's subtract 4x on this side.
And on the right-hand side, I've got negative 33 plus 4x, as long as I also subtract it on the other side.
So positive 4x minus 4x, nothing gets left behind here.
27x minus 4x leaves me with 23x minus 24 equals negative 33 on this side.
So how do I get the negative 24 to that side?
Well, I can just take the negative 24 and make it positive 24 on the other side.
But let's do it the proper way.
23x minus 24.
I'm going to add 24 to this side.
And then I've got to add 24 to this side.
So I've got negative 24 plus 24, nothing left behind.
I've got 23x.
And that equals negative 33 plus 24.
Well, that's a negative 9.
How do I get rid of the 23?
Well, I'm going to multiply both sides by 1 over 23.
And I still have my 23 times x there.
And that's going to equal 1 over 23 times my negative 9.
So the 23s are going to cancel.
So I'm left with x on this side equals negative 9 over 23.
Quite a difficult example.
But once you can do this, you understand so much algebra.
So try that one for me.
Let's do another one of these difficult examples.
They are really so much fun.
And as I say, if you can do them, you can do everything as far as solving for x is concerned
with this kind of problem.
So let's have 3 times x minus 2.
Let's have all of that over 4.
Let's have all of this over 4.
plus 1 half times 5x plus 2.
And I'm going to equal that to 14x.
Let's do plus 12.
I'm going to divide that all by 8.
And I'm going to add to that 7.
Can you isolate x on one side?
Now, this is really a difficult, difficult problem.
So what I want to do is to rewrite my problem.
First of all, here I can do distribution.
So in the numerator, I'm going to get 3x minus 6.
Let's make that a clear 6.
And I'm going to still divide that by 4.
And I'm going to just rewrite this in the following way.
That's going to be 5x plus 2 all divided by 2.
Hopefully, you can see that this and this is exactly the same thing.
I'm taking a half and multiplying it by 5x and a half multiplied by 2.
That would be the exact same thing as taking 5x plus 2 and dividing it by 2.
I'm just rewriting this in a different way.
Let's do the same with the right-hand side.
I've got 14x.
That'll be 14x plus 12.
And I'm dividing that by 8.
But I cannot add to that something that has different denominators.
So if I want this 7 over 1 to have a denominator of 8,
I've got to multiply it by 1.
But I'm not going to write 1.
I'm going to say 8 over 8.
That's still 1.
I'm still taking 7 and I'm multiplying it by 1.
And so nothing changes.
Now 7 times 8 in the numerator gives me 56.
And 1 times 8 is 8.
So I have something that is the same as far as both denominators are concerned,
meaning I can add the two numerators.
Now here I've got a similar problem.
I have to multiply it by 2 over 2 so that I can get a 4 in the denominator here.
So let's see what this would look like.
This is still 3x minus 6.
And I'm still dividing by 4.
And now I'm adding, I've got to distribute this 2.
So 2 times 5x is going to give me 10x plus 2 times 2 is 4.
And that's the numerator.
And then in the denominator I have 2 times 2 which is 4.
And on the right hand side I can write everything over the same denominator.
So everything over the same denominator.
So I've got 14x plus 12 plus 56.
Now on this side I've got a common denominator as well which is 4.
Let's do this.
This is still going to be 3x minus 6.
And there's a positive there so that's no problem.
So I'm adding 10x plus 4.
And on this side I have to simplify things a little bit.
I've still got 14x.
And now I just have to do 12 plus 56.
And that gives me 72.
So I should say 6 plus 2 is an 8.
And 5 plus 1 is 6.
So 12 plus 56 gives me 68.
There we go.
That's better.
And I'm dividing that by 8.
Now I've got two different denominators here.
It would be great if they are both the same.
And I can do that by multiplying the left hand side by 1.
And I'm going to rewrite 1 as 2 over 2.
Now I don't have to do that on the right hand side.
Because if I multiply anything by 1 I'm just left with that 1.
So I've really changed nothing on the left hand side.
So I don't have to change anything on the right hand side.
But now I've got to distribute this 2 into all of these.
But I see I can simplify things on the left hand side a little bit.
So before we do that let's simplify things.
I've got a 3x plus a 10x.
And of course that is going to leave me with something else.
That leaves me with a 13x.
And I've got negative 6 plus 4.
That leaves me with a negative 2.
So that's slightly simplified over 4.
And on the right hand side I still have 14x plus 68.
And I'm going to divide that by 8.
So let's have a look at this.
I've got to distribute this 2 now.
And that leaves me with 26x minus 4.
And 2 times 4 is 8.
And that's equal to 14x plus 68 over 8.
And now have a look at this.
I can go about looking at this as far as these 8's are concerned.
I can multiply both sides by 8.
If I multiply both sides by 8.
Multiply by 8.
I can cancel out these 8's.
I can cancel out these 8's.
So I have 26x minus 4 equals 14x plus 68.
And so let's subtract 14x from both sides.
26x minus 4 minus 14x equals 14x plus 68 minus 14x.
And so 26x minus 14x leaves me with 12x minus 4.
And on the right hand side 14x minus 14x.
Those disappear and I've only got 68.
So on this side I'm going to have 12x minus 4.
I'm going to add 4 here.
Such that I have 68 plus 4 on this side.
Negative 4.
Positive 4.
That leaves me with 12x.
Equals 72.
And now I'm just going to divide both sides by 12.
I can multiply by 1 over 12.
Or I can just divide both sides by 12.
That's exactly the same thing.
And 12, 12.
Those will cancel.
So that I have x on one side.
And then I have 72 over 12.
And 72 divided by 12.
Check up on that.
That's equal to 6.
So look at this beautiful problem.
Play along with this problem.
See if you can do it.
There are more.
I can do this in a different way.
See if you can solve for x.
Then go ahead and substitute 6 into there.
And make sure that your left hand side equals your right hand side.
Now here I want to show you a couple of.
Let's put that in inverted commas and call them a little.
Some tricks.
Let's have something like.
AB.
Let's say a divided by b.
And that's going to equal c divided by d.
How can I rewrite this?
Well I've got different denominators on both sides.
And I can rewrite this by doing the following.
Let's multiply both sides by the product of the two denominators.
So that means I'm going to multiply the left side by bd.
I still have a over b on this side.
And on the right hand side I multiply by bd.
And I still have c over d on this side.
Now I can immediately see if this is over 1 and this is over 1.
That the two b's will cancel out.
And I'm left with d times a.
I'm making use of the commutative property on addition.
So a d times a is just the same as a times d.
And on this side I see the d cancels.
And I have b times c.
b c.
And now look at that.
If I have something like a over b is equal to c over d.
That's exactly the same as a d equals b c.
So what I did is I multiplied both sides by d.
So if I multiply this by d the d's would cancel.
And I have a d up there.
And then I multiply both sides by b.
And so the b's would cancel out.
And I'm left with b c on that side.
So it's actually those two.
If I do that multiplication and I do this multiplication.
That's exactly where I ended up.
So remember that little trick.
If you see this.
I can just do this one multiplied by this one.
Equals that one multiplied by that one.
Is exactly the same thing.
And you can see where this comes from.
Let's have something else that we can eliminate.
Let's have something like e times f.
And I'm going to divide that by say b.
And that's equal to e times g.
I'm going to divide that by d.
Now we've had this before.
If we have something that's common in the denominator.
Denominator we can cancel.
But also for the numerator.
And immediately you can see here.
Well if I multiply both sides by 1 over e.
I multiply this by 1 over e.
It's not in the same order.
But the order doesn't matter.
I have the commutative property on multiplication.
When it comes to real numbers.
And now the e's are going to cancel.
The e's are going to cancel.
And I'm left with f over b.
Equals g over d.
And I can remember this little trick that I have.
That if I have f of d.
That is going to equal bg.
As simple as that.
So these are just nice neat little things.
That you can just remember.
It's quite easy to use.
Let's have an example of this.
Let's have 3x minus 5.
And I'm going to have.
Let's do x plus 3.
And I'm going to equal that to 24 over 15.
And now you can think of the a, b, c, d.
A, b, c, d.
So I'm going to multiply those two.
And I'm going to multiply these two.
So I'm going to be left with 15.
3x minus 5.
Equals 24.
And x plus 3.
And 15.
And 15 and 15.
That's 45x minus 15 times 5.
Well, 5 times 5 is 25.
I'm going to carry the 2.
That leaves me with a 7.
And on this side I have 24x.
And plus 4 times 3 is 12.
Carry the 1.
6.
And that leaves me with a 7.
Plus 72.
And now I can have 45x.
I can subtract 24x from both sides.
Which leaves me with no x's on this side.
And it does remember that I have to do the 24x on this side.
And the same is going to go for these.
I'm going to add 75 to both sides.
And that's 72 plus 75.
And now I can just have 45x.
Which I'm going to subtract from that 24x.
That leaves me with 21x on this side.
And on the right hand side I have 72 and 75.
That's 147.
Now I can just divide both sides by 21.
Which leaves me an x on this side.
And on this side 147 divided by 21.
And if you do that with a calculator you'll see x equals 7.
So you see how I can just speed things up by not doing every single step.
Now please only do this when you are comfortable with doing things step by step.
And you can start bringing in these little tricks.
It just shortens the number of steps that you have to do.
So I really want you to get to this stage where you can quickly mentally in your mind do this algebraic manipulation.
So why would I want to do this?
Let's talk about solving formulas.
Now that would just be one use case.
So let's remember the area of a circle as pi times the radius squared.
The radius being half of the diameter.
What if I wanted to solve for r?
What if I give you the area of a circle and I want to know what is the radius?
Well that will be very simple.
I can take both sides and I can divide by pi.
So on this side I divide by pi and on this side I have pi r squared and I divide it by pi.
So my pi's are going to cancel and I'm left with I'm just going to rewrite that on the other side.
r squared equals a divided by pi.
And now to get rid of that 2 I can just take, you know, do this to the power half and do this to the power one half.
But that would be exactly the same as taking the square root of r squared equals the square root of the area divided by pi.
And 2 times a half is just 1 so I'm left with the radius all on its own equals the square root of the area divided by pi.
In this instance I'm only interested in the positive version of this because the radius of a circle we're always going to think of that as a positive radius.
So that was a very simple and neat example.
But let's talk about something in data science.
In data science, if we talk about a numerical variable, that is something that is a number.
And imagine I knew for a whole population what the, you know, the age of every person was.
Let's make that age in years.
And such that I can calculate the mean age.
And the mean age or the mean of a numerical variable in a population, we usually use the Greek symbol mu for that.
And that is a population mean.
Population mean.
And the way that I'm going to do that is I'm just going to add up all the ages and divide by how many people I have.
Now usually we don't know that.
We cannot know the age of everyone.
So what we would do is we take a representative sample from the population.
Maybe I have a thousand people.
I can add a thousand numbers and divide by a thousand.
And then I get a sample mean, which we usually denote as this.
But we usually want a sample mean to give us some clue as to what the value is in the population.
That's very useful.
That means I can go and do a study.
I can take a representative, unbiased, randomly selected sample of people from the population and only work on that small little sample.
If I could calculate something like a mean of a numerical variable, I can use this to be what we call a point estimate of what that should be.
It's very clear, though, that this is not going to equal that because I'm not measuring that variable in each and every member of my population.
I'm only doing that for a sample.
So we're going to call this the sample mean.
So what we want from this is that I have some lower bound and some upper bound.
And we're going to put that upper bound.
So we're going to have that x is less than the upper bound, but it is more than the lower bound.
And so if we have these two bounds, we're going to say we think, and usually we're going to express that as a confidence level.
And this is then going to be my confidence interval.
How confident are we that, you know, this value is representative of that?
And we say we are, for instance, 95% confident that this value is between these two bounds.
And there is a calculation for this.
We have x bar minus c times s over square root of n.
In a simple case, and we have x bar plus c times s divided by, so there's multiplication, multiplication, square root of n.
n is my sample standard deviation.
n is the sample size, the number of subjects that I have.
And this is going to be my lower bound.
And this is going to be my upper bound.
And so that's how we would calculate these bounds.
If I knew what c was and what s and what n is, I can calculate these bounds.
Then in some textbooks, we talk about the width.
And the width is just very simply going to be the upper bound minus the lower bound.
And so we're going to have x bar plus c times s over the square root of n minus x bar minus c s over the square root of n.
So you don't have to know anything about this to just follow along.
So let's distribute this negative there.
So I'll have x bar plus c s over the square root of n minus x bar.
Now I'm going to have a positive c s divided by the square root of n.
This x bar minus x bar cancels out.
And I have c s over n, c s over square root of n.
And if I add two of them, I'm going to have that the width, the width here,
well, that's equal to twice c s divided by the square root of n.
And when I have this, I can solve for anything.
So imagine I knew the width.
I knew s and I knew n.
I can definitely solve for c.
Let's do that up here.
I'm just going to use w for width.
Let's say that's two c s divided by the square root of n.
Let's solve, for instance, for c.
Now, how would I solve for c?
Well, I can immediately rewrite this on the other side.
Let's get this on the left-hand side.
s divided by the square root of n equals w.
Now I can multiply both sides by a half.
And a half times two is just one.
So I'm going to have to see s divided by the square root of n equals w width divided by two.
And now I can make use of that reciprocal rule.
I'm just going to multiply by the reciprocal,
which means everything here would cancel out and I'm left with c on its own.
And on the right-hand side, I have that reciprocal.
So I'm going to have the square root of n over s
and then multiply by the width over two.
And you can rewrite this, but now I can solve for c.
See, we call the confidence coefficient.
And so I could solve for any one of these values if I knew the other.
So if you tell me the width, the sample standard deviation,
and the number of subjects, I can calculate c.
Now usually that's not something that we would do,
but I might ask this in an exam question,
just to show that you understand some algebraic manipulation.
And now, of course, you do understand algebraic manipulation.
So, I'm going to get it.
Let me ask you what you can use.
I'll get it.
Let's take a break.
Wait.
That's nice.
Few time though you go.
You want to take a break.
So here, you can tell us that you're using the right number to try,
and you can change sa
and see what you do.
There's nothing but if you 파�oud nature,
there's a hectare and mouldature in condition.
