Now in this tutorial I want to talk to you about the exact test, the exact goodness of fit test.
Exact meaning we're going to calculate a p-value directly not first a test statistic that then
falls on a distribution in an area under the curve. We're going to do that directly calculate this
p-value directly. Now we're going to stick to a binomial categorical variable. In other words
the sample space only contains two elements yes or no value one or value two and we're going to
see one of them as a success. So we're going to follow this binomial distribution where we expect
one of the values to occur at a certain probability and then we can work out a p-value for that. Let's
have a look. So let's look at the exact test of goodness of fit. So we've really seen already
you can look at those online. Remember all these files are on github and on rpubs.
We see the rpub html rendered file here. You can download the actual rmd file for our studio
on github. But we've looked at the g-test of goodness of fit and we've looked at the chi-square
test of goodness of fit. So we have a single variable and we have categorical nominal. It can
be discrete as well but let's stick to nominal categorical to make things easy. We have a sample
space in there and we count the occurrence the frequency of each of these elements in a set. We
do a test an experiment. We have the single variable and we count those unique values in the sample space
and we just want to know the proportions that we get back. Are they different from what we would expect
and that is a goodness of fit test. Now the g-test is a log likelihood test and this exact test is a
binomial. Now we're going to stick to binomial but you can have multinomial as well but it's not a log
likelihood test. And it's exact because we are calculating a p-value directly. We're not calculating
a statistic that forms a distribution and then calculating an area under the curve for that specific
value and more extreme. No, no, no. We are just calculating a p-value directly. So that's what the
exact means. It doesn't mean it's better or more accurate. So there we see the binomial distribution
there. So imagine then we have a categorical nominal categorical variable and we are sticking to binomial.
In other words the sample space contains two elements and in this instance I'm going to call
them value one and value two just to be very generic. Now because this is a binomial distribution
one of them we've got to see one of the two as a success. So remember success is just a generic term.
Success might in a dichotomous outcome such as alive and dead, the dead might be the success that you're
after that you want to investigate. So one of those two elements in the sample space of this
nominal categorical variable is your success and that has a probability of occurring and that's the p
we're looking at. The one minus p would be the other variable. So let's have a look at that. So imagine
that we have 10 trials and we have two successes. So we handed out a questionnaire to 10 people
and the success was them choosing value one but only two chose value one and in the end
we suspected a 50-50 split. So we expected the probability of a success or someone choosing value
one at 50 percent. So hence our p of 0.5. So right inside of r we can use the binomial.test.
k there is our number of successes, n is our sample size, p is our probability of a success,
so of that value one being chosen and we want a two-sided p value at a confidence level of 0.95.
And then we're going to get back this nice value, number of successes 2, number of trials 10,
and we see a p value there of 0.1094. Now very very easy. Now let's have a look at what I've done down here.
Because this is a binomial distribution, we can actually look at, we can create a bar plot,
and we can look at what the probability was. If it was a, if there was a probability of 50 percent
of choosing value one, what was the likelihood then of getting only one success? So one value one and
nine value twos or two value as we did here, two value ones and eight or three and seven or four and
six. But I'm interested in that if there were zero value ones or one value one or two value ones or
three value ones, I can plot all of those probabilities. So again, n is 10, k is 2, p is 0.5.
I'm going to create this sequence, a sequence vector of zero to n. So that's going to be zero to 10,
because I might do that sample and no people select value one. And on the other extreme,
all 10 people select value one. And then a y is just going to then be the probability that we work
out. And we for that, we're going to use the d binom function. And I pass that x. So that's zero,
one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10. The size is n, they were 10 and the probability
is p. So I'm just running through all of those. And now we create this bar plot, the height is going to be
y, as we pass those 11 values in. The names dot arg argument there is just going to be x. So zero,
one, two, three, four, five, six, eight, nine, 10. Again, I'm going to use a color of deep sky blue.
I have a title, I have an x axis label, a y axis label, and I want the values here to be printed
upright. And there we go. So the probability of successes is a very low probability. If I handed this
out and I expected 50% of people to choose value one, and I got it back and no one chose value one,
there's a very low probability of that happening. There's a higher probability that one would,
and given that we expected a 50-50, there was a very high likelihood that there would be five
successes in that 10. And that's why that's the most. But it's also very high likelihood that
there would have been four successes or six successes or choices of value one. So how do we get from
this to this p-value of 0.1094? Well, we have to look at a value of two or more extreme. So we're going
to have to look at this probability of choosing of only getting one or two, I should say, value ones back
and the one and the zero. We've got to add all of those three probabilities. So it's from this point
to the extreme. And if we do that, let's just look at the sequence zero, one and two, we pass that
through the binum function. So we get this probability. So the probability of the zero was
0.00097 of the one was 0.009 and for two was 0.43. So we've got to add all of those together. And if we sum
that up, those three up, we get to 0.05. Well, that's still not 0.1094. But what we have to remember,
we chose a two tailed hypothesis test. So what we do on this side of the curve, we also have to do on
that side. So we actually have to add the eight, nine and 10 probabilities too. And if so, with a
symmetric distribution like this, we can just multiply that by two. Or I could then specifically ask for zero,
one, two, eight, nine, and 10. And if we work that out, we get to the 0.109. So very simple to see.
That's it though, if we have this 50-50 split in our binomial choice that we have there. But what
if that is not so? What if it's not a 50-50 split? So what we're going to do here is we're going to make
the probability of them choosing value one, we expect that to be 0.75. And let's run 15 trials now. And I'm
again going to go all the way from 0 to 15 and plot all of these. And if we plot them,
this is what it looks like. It's not symmetric anymore. It's definitely left tailed here.
So how would we now go about doing a two tailed test? Now there isn't really,
not all statisticians agree as to how you would do this. I think the most common way probably
is this idea that we're discussing here, the method of small p-values or the small
p-value method. So what we're going to do is in this instance here, I'm interested in seven. So what
was, what was the, we did our test and we send it out, we send out 15 and we expected 75% of them to
have, of those 15, to have chosen value one. And we only got seven of them chose value one. Is that
statistically significant or not? Now it's very difficult here to see how am I going to reflect
that on the other side for two tailed hypothesis test. Well, what we do is we calculate here the
seven, what the probability was for seven. And then we calculate each of the probabilities
separately. So from 0 to 15, what was the likelihood of that number of successes? And we sum up all the
ones that have that probability that seven had or less than that. So what we do here is I'm going to
create this vector called it SUC for success. And I'm going to do all of them from 0 to 15, size n,
probability p, so 15 and 0.75. So run all of them. So I'm going to have these 16 values now.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to sum up those ones. So in SUC, where SUC is less than or
equal to the specific one, that's seven. So it's just going to look at all the probabilities. So that
height there, and it's only going to add those that are actually the exact same probability or less.
And if it adds all of them up, it's going to give us a p value. And that's how we would use this
method of small p values to work out the probability of having found those seven. And we see it's 0.017.
And that's statistically significant for an alpha value of 0.05. So we could now suggest that if we
expected 75% of people to choose value one, and we handed it out to 15 people, and only seven of them
chose value one. So the other eight chose value two, that that would have been a statistically significant
finding. So there we go, the exact test of goodness of fit. Remember that for these tutorials on R,
that the actual HTML rendered files are on rpubs. And that's what you might see on the screen.
But these files are also available in their raw form on GitHub. And all the links will be in the
description below. So you can either go to the website and look at the rpubs files as they're
already rendered. Or you can go to GitHub and download those files into your system so that you can use them
in RStudio yourself. So if you like these videos on R, please let me know so that I can make more of
these or the subjects that you want me to cover as far as biostatistics is concerned and the use of R,
please let me know. Otherwise, please always remember to subscribe and hit the notification bell
so that when new videos come out, you will know about it. You can also follow me on Twitter
because that's where you'll also see that new videos are out.
