Now before we carry on and do something a bit more serious, I suppose, I love these
puzzles and let's just do a few more of them. In this instance let's just
concentrate on a couple of inverses. They'll come in, you'll have a look. So a
few more puzzles just to have fun, just to get ourselves used to how to deal
with these elements of a group. So I have given that AB equals E, so my
operation there, for some AB elements of this group and this group under
multiplication. I want to show that if AB equals E that implies BA equals E. So
how do we prove that? Well we say it's given factor that AB equals E. Now let's
just do this, we'll say B, let's just do BA, B, and so the B goes in the front, the B goes in the front,
B times the identity element is just B, and let's just say BA, B, and then do a B
inverse. That is going to be B and B inverse, and BB inverse is just E, so on
this side I have BA, and B and B inverse is just E. B and B inverse is E, B and B inverse is E.
So I have, if I have those two elements, the group operation, on those two elements, if
that gives me the identity element then if they commute then I would also get the, I would
also get the identity element. Okay let's have a look at this little one. I have now
the group operation A on A, B, and C that equals identity element for some A, B, and C
elements of my group show that CAB equals E. Well that's quite easy, given that ABC
C equals E, I suppose then that we could say that C, A, B, C equals C, with a C there, then
I put the C inverse at the end and I have CAB and CC inverse, which is this E, equals C,
C, C inverse, which is this E, and I have the fact that CAB is then the inverse element.
So that one is quite simple. I suppose I could also just do, do the following one.
Then this proof ABC, CAB, let's have a look. BCA, show that BCA, BCA equals E. Well given
that, given that ABC equals E, I can have that ABCA equals A, and then I can have A inverse,
ABCA equals A inverse A, and I have the fact that BCA, BCA equals this E. Well I should just
put QED. So another simple one. Okay, how about that one? Show that if X, A, Y equals A inverse,
that Y, A, X is also A inverse for some A, X, and Y, all elements of this group of mine
under this operation. So, how shall we go about proving that? Given, let's just say that given
X, A, Y equals A inverse, I suppose that means A, Y equals X inverse A inverse, X inverse in
the front, X inverse in the front, and that A is just going to be Y inverse at the end.
So that's X inverse, A inverse, Y inverse, right at the end there. So I'm that far, but I need
to have a look at this. I suppose that we can just say that A equals X inverse, and I'll group
those two with associativity, and I'll use the fact that I have Y A inverse. I could also do
then the same with these two. That'll be equal Y A X, Y A X inverse, Y A together with X.
We remember our properties, some of our properties of these. But now have a look at this. Remember
that the inverse of the inverse, we've shown that that is just the same. So, if I take
the inverse of this, it's the inverse of that. In other words, A inverse is just Y A X. And
that's exactly what we wanted to show there. Q, A, D. Another fun puzzle solved.
OK, here we go. We have quite a few givens here. A is A inverse, B is B inverse, C inverse
inverse, for all, for these A, B's and C's element of my group under the set operation. And
I also let A, B equals C. And I've got to show that B, C equals A, and C A equals B. Both
of those. So given that, given that A, B, what is it? A, B equals C. Let's C begin to have
that C, A, B. C, A, B equals, put a C in the front. That's C, C. But that's also C inverse
C, which is also E. So I have the fact that C, A, B equals E. And what do I need? I need,
well, let's do this one. I need a C, A. So I'm going to say C, A, B, B inverse. That equals
B inverse at the end here. That's just an E. And B inverse is equal to B. So C A equals
B. I've shown that. And suppose these are not, these are proves given that, so I can
put Q, A, D. And then we also have the other one that we have to show, A, B equals, A, B
equals C. So what did we do there? So we put a C in the front. Let's put, we need a B,
C. So let's say A, B, C equals C, C. So I put a C at the end, but that's also C, C inverse.
Given that little fact, and that equals E. And I need B, what do I need? B, C. So I can
put an A inverse in the front. A, B, C equals A inverse E. Nothing there. This goes away.
B, C equals A inverse, but A inverse is also A. So B, C equals A. These are so much fun
to do if I say fun one more time, but they really are. Okay, let's show this one. Let's
make it our last one. These are fun to do. You construct your own, see, play with them,
see if you get different solutions than what I, or different ways to go about it than what
I do. If A, B, C equals its own inverse for these elements, A, B, C elements of this group,
show that B, C, A is its inverse. So how might we go about that? So given A, B, C equals A, B, C
inverse. Now remember with all of these, I mean there is this group operation. By this I'm saying A, B, C
A, B, C for this A, B, C, A, B, C elements of this group under this operation. And if we put nothing
there, we just assume that this operation for our, is multiplication under this instance. That works best, but you
can set it up for addition as well. Anyway, so we need to show that. So what can we do? Let's put an A inverse, what
shall we put? An A inverse there and an A and a B, C, A. That equals, I have, what do we have? We have an A inverse
in the front and we have a B, A, B, C. It's inverse and we have an A there. So that would equal, these two would
equal A, B, C, A, I suppose, inverse and then A. That doesn't help. Let's see if we can think of something else.
It's the C. So this would be C inverse, B inverse, A inverse by our laws. And I put an A inverse in the
front and I put an A in the back. That's going to work because now I have A inverse, C inverse, B inverse.
And that's an E. And I can put those two together. So this is going to be C, A inverse, B inverse.
And I can put those together with B, C, A inverse. And there we have A, B, C. Oops. Those two, those two
go. So it's B, C, A equals its own inverse. Q, E, D. Almost didn't get there. But quite easy to do in the end.
You like that one.
You know what? Why? Why is it saying this?
And everything you do? And this one. You have to say this.
And if you think of the C, A saying that you use, letting you work there, like this one.
Maybe it's going to bless you. Evan will make it work better.
Either. Maybe it's going to ruin and you're doing it.
Maybe it has to start a half and a half and a half.
B is a After a half.
Sondesion Pode – after a half and a half and a half and a half.
But typically oh, you know what, why is it happening?
B starts to be taking it,如果 everywhere, it starts for a half and a half and a half at eight.
And to be saying, if you're having an Sondes,ит led, how I do ch aka it needs to blow up in the
