We've looked at points and vectors and you've seen it's really easy to do and
especially if you use computer language like the Wolfram language. But now it's
time for some exercises. So the plan really is to do these exercises after
each set of lectures. So easy enough now we're going to look at points and vectors
and some example problems. But we're going to start off with a very special
type of problem and this problem is going to be different from what you've
seen before. You see a bunch of problems in the example, you get taught these
different steps to solve these problems but this one is slightly different.
It's just going to show you this tiny little step towards high mathematics.
Tiny, tiny, tiny little step but just how to start thinking slightly differently.
How to view things as part of something bigger. Example problems.
Number one. Prove that for all vectors u and v in Rn,
so they're both vectors in the same space, which is the only way that we can add
vectors. Remember that the commutative property holds.
U plus v equals v plus u. So why on earth do we start example problems with a proof?
Well in some courses you will be required to do proofs and you'll have one or two
proofs in your exam. And I want you to think clearly about these.
Now not everyone likes proofs and some of them are difficult.
But just doing some proofs here in linear algebra I think is a very nice way to do it.
By the way in abstract algebra which I'm going to veer into slightly.
We have algebraic structures or mathematical structures that allow us to look closely at
proofs and it's a very nice way to be introduced to proofs. I think a very very nice way or better
at least than getting introduced to proofs in something like real analysis.
So let's have a look at how we construct a proof like this because it should seem self-evident.
But there's a few things that we have to discuss and talk about
and it really is a tiny little step in the direction of higher mathematics.
How do you start thinking in higher mathematics?
And the tiny little step into higher mathematics that we're going to take is this idea of abstraction.
We're just going to abstract to something more general than the very specific
examples that we grow up with. We can all add 3 plus 5 and that equals 8.
That addition is just a very specific type of addition. There are other types of addition.
And we've seen that with vectors. Certainly we use the term addition in both of them,
but that's a very different type of addition. 3 plus 5 and vector u plus vector v, those are different.
You physically have to do different things and they mean different things.
So you've already started this idea that there is more than one way, more than one type of addition at least.
So what we have to start with in thinking about all of this is with a definition.
How did we define vector addition? So let's just have a look. Define vector addition.
Well, we define that if we have vector u and that vector. Let me grab my ruler here that I'll put on the screen.
I like to do that for some bizarre reason. And vector u, remember that was an R in space.
So it's going to be u1, u2, all the way to un. And since I do have the ruler, let's put
these square brackets around this column vector. And we had vector v and vector v was v1, v2,
all the way to vn. And that was in Rn. R specifies for us that each of these elements are real numbers.
So let's put that here as well, where let's say u sub i and v sub i are elements of the real numbers.
So let me give myself some more space here. So we defined u plus v, u plus v,
that was going to be u sub 1 plus v sub 1 and u sub 2 plus v sub 2 all the way down to u sub n plus v sub n.
That is how we defined vector addition. And the second thing we have to define is,
and I'm going to write it out here, is how did we define that two vectors are the same vector.
So let's say two vectors are the same vector
if and only if, so those double f's, u sub i equals v sub i. So we have this idea that u sub 1 equals v sub 1
and u sub 2 equals v sub 2 all the way down to u sub n equals v sub n and they've got to be in that Rn space.
And that's the exact same vector. So we're not in the same, we don't think about these things
in linear algebra as we do in physics. So in physics we'll have this two dimensional space
and I'll have a vector there and I'll have a vector there and let's say for instance I drew them in the
exact same direction and with the exact same magnitude. They can physically be applied in different
areas on a plane or in three space but for us we're talking about positional vectors here so
we bring them back down with their tails to the origin
and then they are coincident. Same direction, same length and they are the same vector.
And so for us where we use vectors or where we express vectors as this ordered tuple of numbers
these are exactly the same things. And now you can say well if they're all real numbers of course
if u plus v that must be the same as v plus u. 3 plus 5 is 5 plus 3. So of course that is so.
But we're taking for granted some of the properties of real numbers that we just grew up with.
And somehow we have to formalize those and there's a good reason to formalize these or to generalize
them. So I'm going to scroll all the way up here and we're going to have a look at this.
So in abstract algebra we have this idea of algebraic structures or mathematical structures
and there are the common ones. Groups. You might have heard of those in group theory. We have rings. We have fields.
That didn't come out well. Fields. And why do this? The idea is that if we just concentrate
on fields for a moment there are an infinite number of infinite fields. There are finite fields.
fields. And the beauty about them is if I have an example or member of a field and another member
one of them might be very difficult to study but because they're both fields they're going to share
some commonalities and I might gain new insights into this new field. I might understand this new
field better or be able to deal with it in an easier way or different way because it is also a field.
So let's have a look at this idea, this notion of an algebraic structure. And as I say we're veering off
a little bit from linear algebra but I think it's such a nice way to be introduced to this more
generalized thinking. So we have this notion of a set and we're not going to quibble about how we
define a set. We're just going to use the Melle-Frankel set theory. Everything is nice and neat.
So let's just do that. So we have the set of elements and again there of course we're going
to deal with numbers but we want to get away from this idea that numbers are just there to quantify
things. For us in many cases they are just a quantification. We just use numbers as a quantification
in as much as they can enumerate something for us. But numbers exist differently than that.
They, we have a symbol for one, the number one. We write down one but naturally it just quantifies
something for us. But that symbol that we write down it has a more general meaning.
And so we have this set and I suppose in terms that we're familiar with we can think of
the rational numbers. We can think of the real numbers. Those are sets of elements.
And then we're also going to be dealing with binary operations. So let's do the binary operations there.
Binary operations between ordered pairs of a set. So ordered pairs as I take any two. So if I think
of the real numbers I take three and five. That's different from five and three. There's some order to
those. And I apply a binary operation to them. And a binary operation means I combine them in some way.
So if I bake a cake I would add some ingredients and we bake the cake. So that's some way of combining
these things. And we're going to think only of two operations. And that's all we really need to do.
And that's the binary operations of addition there and of multiplication. And again I urge you to get
away from this notion of addition and multiplication in the very specific instance we did with real
numbers or or integers that we grow up with. It is much more general than that. Again you've already
seen that with vector addition. If we add two vectors that's a very different way from adding two
real numbers. It's a different process. So it's a much more general thing. So much so that we're going
to use different symbols. So for addition we're going to use this symbol with plus with a circle
around it. And for multiplication a dot with a circle. Just to signify the fact that we're talking
about some general way of adding things and some general way of multiplying things. Not the same as we
did with scalars with just real numbers. So we're going to have this idea of closure. You see closure there
and you can see closure there again. And the 11 steps that you see here are the axioms of fields.
Axioms or properties are something that we decided on. We said these are the things that we put down
and if you bring me a set of elements and you define two binary operations on them called addition and
multiplication. And they obey these axioms then they are a member of this algebraic structure.
Now there's a better way to define that we define fields in and that's by using groups in the
definition. But I wanted to write all these out just so that we can get familiar with this.
And you see the two closures there. Not all textbooks will have that in because
some would say that the binary operation of addition and multiplication they are operations
that map the set to itself. So what we're going to do with fields we're going to call our set F.
I think most people would use F. And these two binary operations map F to F. In other words if I combine
this ordered pair, this arbitrary pair of elements, then the result that I do get is also an element of
that set. So some define it that way or if we write it out explicitly they'll be closure. So closure
under addition would mean the following. So I would say for all elements of F.
So I'm taking any two arbitrary elements in F. This field.
And because it's two arbitrary ones it means all of them. It doesn't matter which two ones I take.
So for all A and being an element of F it follows that. And I'm going to use this right arrow for
follows that. A and this idea of combining them under addition is also going to be an element of F.
I don't get outside of it. I don't get a result that's not in F.
And as I say you can clearly see there if we define initially the two binary operations as
a mapping of F to F I wouldn't have to put this closure. But here for closure under multiplication
it's the same thing. For all elements of F it follows that A in this binary operation of
multiplication B is also going to be an element of F. So don't get out of the element of F.
Then we have this commutativity. So that would be simple for all elements of F.
It has to follow that A in this binary operation with B that must be equal to B
binary operation of addition with A. Any two elements that I take. And the same here with
the commutative property under multiplication or axiom of commutativity under multiplication. And seven
here we're going to say for all A comma B elements in F it's going to follow that A and this binary
operation of multiplication with B is the same as B with A. Exactly the same thing. We're also going
to have the associative axiom that we have if we have three elements A, B and C elements of this field.
It's going to be exactly the same as doing B and C first. Same here with multiplication. So if I have A,
B and C elements of a field it is going to follow that A and B. If I then do C it's going to be the
same as doing A and then B with C. And then we have this idea of an additive identity. So we're going
to say not for all we're going to say there exists. So this backwards E there exists. I'm going to say E
element of F. And so that's a very specific one. There exists an E element of F such that. I'm going
to use this straight vertical line for such that for all A element of F it follows that E this binary
operation of addition with A is going to equal A. And if you think about the real numbers that would
just be zero for instance but in vectors that would be the zero vector and those are two different things
and that's why we use this plus with a circle around because it's this general idea of addition.
So there exists this E element of F such that for all A element of F it follows that E plus
this binary operation of addition A equals A. So it doesn't change that element in any way.
And I could also suppose right here that we have A and E but we don't usually write that because we
already have commutativity right there. We already defined this. We already have this axiom of commutativity.
So I don't have to really do that there. But you can if you want. And then there's this unique
multiplicative identity. So we're going to say there exists. Let's write it this way around. There exists
and let's make it Z element of F such that for all A element of F it follows that Z and then binary
operation of multiplication of multiplication with A that is just going to leave me with A. So in the case
of real numbers that's going to be one of course. We multiply one by any number any real number we're
going to get one. And then we have this idea of an additive inverse here number five and additive
inverse for every element. So we're going to say for all A element of F there exists a minus A element
of F. Now I hesitate to put that minus because that immediately just leads us back to real numbers and
it's not what this additive inverse means because the additive inverse of a vector is going to be
something different than the additive inverse of real number. But anyway for all A elements of F there
exists an A inverse this inverse additive inverse of F such that if I do this with the additive inverse
I'm just going to get the additive identity. Then we also have this idea of the unique multiplicative
inverse inverse for every element. So we're going to say there exists there exists this and we're going
to call it A like that element of F such that for all A element of F it's going to follow that if I
have this A and multiply by its inverse I'm going to get Z back the multiplicative identity and again I
hesitate to use this A with a power to the power negative one because it just reminds us just of
real numbers but other types of sets with these binding operations will also have their own unique
inverse and the inverse of a matrix is not the same as we can talk about matrices of course it's not the
same as the inverse of a real number. But we have this notion that if we do this binding operation of
multiplication that we get back the multiplicative identity which is one and in some cases if we look
say just at the real numbers of course we've got to exclude one of the elements we've got to exclude
zero in as much as we cannot divide by zero. So zero doesn't have a multiplicative inverse and then we have
this distributive property of multiplication over addition and this says for all A, B and C
elements of F we have it follows that if we have this notion of A and then B plus C so this will be
the left distributive property and that is just going to equal that's A multiplied by B and then A
plus A multiplied by C and you can also have it on the right side. So we're going to say that these are
the axioms. These are the axioms of fields and now we can have a look and say well can you give me a set
and you please define how you add and multiply these things and let's see if that's a field. So the one
obvious one that we're going to start off with is the real numbers. The real numbers are a set of elements.
They're all unique infinite number of them and we have to we have to find the binary operations of addition
on them and of multiplication on them. That's something we naturally learn even before school
how to add and multiply numbers. So would they do they obey these properties and by the way that we've set
them up. If you set them up as something that enumerates something. If you've defined them in
that way of course there are some people who feel there is a problem with that because if you have
an infinite decimal point can you really define how addition is going to work because you might have to
carry over two of the elements. If you have elements right towards infinity there that's going to affect
all sorts of numbers as you work your way from addition from right to left as we do addition. But
let's just not think of that for the moment. We have this idea of adding real numbers and we have
this idea of multiplying the real numbers. We've defined them and if you run through all the properties
here you see that they obey all of these 11 axioms. So we can say that the reals they really are
a field. So we can show that they obey all these 11 properties and they are a field. Now after all of
that thinking and you can think can you find other common sets and how we define addition and multiplication
on them if they are a field as well. The rational number sure would be a field but the integers
definitely are not a field. We don't have multiplicative inverses for those. So the
integers are not a field. So now we get back to our first example problem here. We want to prove that
for all vectors u and v and rn that u plus v equals v plus u. So these are vectors over the field of real
numbers. So let me write that down because that's important. That's important way to talk about this.
These are vectors over the field of real numbers. That means the elements of which they are made up
inherit the properties of the specific field called the real numbers. And now we can say that
that's how we define that. How do we define v plus u. So v plus u. Well that's going to be v1 plus u1
v2 plus u2 all the way down to vn plus un. That's how we define them. And because
we've defined oh that was loud because we've defined how two vectors are similar we have to have this
notion of u1 plus v1 let's make it ui plus vi just to generalize over all of them must be equal to vi
plus ui. But because this is a vector over the field of real numbers we inherit all the properties of a
field and commutativity is one of them. In other words these two things are equal to each other.
And finally our thought processes have allowed us to prove the fact that there's commutativity
with the vectors over a field of real numbers. It's really as simple as that. So if you have to do
any of the things the vector arithmetic that we've done if you have if in your exam you have to prove
that that those properties hold. Think to yourself these are vectors over a field of real numbers.
We might be dealing with complex numbers in your course. But this whole notion of they are part of
a mathematical structure of a algebraic structure and that means they have certain properties and
now we can make use of those properties in our proof. And it really is as simple as that.
Problem number two. We are asked to find x y and z if the following two vectors are equal to each other.
We've already seen now how we define when vectors are equal to each other. So we have the factor that
for these two vectors if they were u and v that ui must equal vi. For all the i's one two three in this
instance it's an r3. So we're going to have the fact that x must equal four. Two must equal y plus one.
And if two equals y plus one from that follows that y equals one. Simple algebra there. And then z
equals x minus one. And if z equals x minus one that means z equals when we already know what x is it's
four. That's four minus one which is three. So we have our solutions there x equals four y equals one
and z equals three. Purely because of the way that we define equality between two vectors.
Let's do the following problem. We asked to add these two vectors. Vector one four with elements
one four oh seven and minus one oh four eight. And how we define vector addition. This is going to be
adding the specific elements. We have one plus minus one that equals zero. Four plus zero is four. Zero plus
four is also four. And seven plus eight is fifteen. So we see the result there.
So what I want to do here is just bring this. I've got a second monitor here. I just want to bring in
the Warframe language for us there. Let's just increase the size of it a bit. And there's our problem
there. This was problem the five at these two vectors. And what we can do in the Warframe language
just to check. Remember we represent vectors as lists. Lists go inside of curly braces. And each element
is separated by a comma. And then I'm just adding these two. And the result I wanted displayed as a
column vector. And this is what this function does. It has nothing to do with how the arithmetic is taking
place. That's a function that will just determine how things are displayed to the screen. And because
it is a function it has a set of opening and closing square brackets. And the arguments go inside
there. And if we run this we see the result that we saw before. Zero four four fifteen. So it's easy
in the Warframe language just to check whether we are doing the right thing. We see question six here.
Add these two vectors. Of course that answer is not defined. Because this vector is the first vector
is in four space. And the second vector is in three space. And we cannot add. We don't have a
definition for the addition of those. And we can't do that. Let's look here at this problem. Calculate
the scalar vector multiplication in seven. Plot and explain what the scalar multiplication does to the
vector. So I'm just going to move it away. There we have problem number four. This is scalar vector
multiplication. So we know how we defined scalar vector multiplication. The way that we defined it is
if we have some scalar C and we multiply it by u sub one, u sub two all the way down to u sub n.
Trying to keep these square brackets going with my ruler here. The way that we defined that was
C times u sub u one, C u sub two all the way down to C u sub n. And this is again over the field of
real numbers. So we inherited the property of the multiplication of real numbers. So that makes
this a very easy problem. We're going to have three, negative three and three. And we asked in the
Wolfram language problem. Let me just bring that up for you. So what does that mean for the physicality
of vectors? If I just bring this in from the left hand side, we've got this three times. And in the
Wolfram language, if I leave a space in between there, that's the same as multiplication. I could
also do a star. It's also multiplication, but it's easy just to put a little space and that means
multiplication. And then we're just going to draw that. So we're going to use the graphics 3D. We've
got the arrow going from zero zero zero, the origin to one negative one and one. And then from the
origin to three negative three, three. And if we run that again, we're using the matrix form function
there just to print this to the screen. We can check our result. Of course, it's correct. And then
if we were to just plot this, we see the difference there. What does vector scalar multiplication,
scalar vector multiplication do? The little red one there in the beginning, that's our first one.
And then this one is just three times as long. This is three times as long as the original was. And that
is what the scalar multiplication is going to do. It's just going to increase the magnitude
of our vector. Let's do number five. Next, we asked to find three times U minus two times V
plus two times W as vectors. And we see the vectors there in three space. And this problem,
it is vector. We're just going to do a scalar vector multiplication. And then we're going to use
a vector addition. So three times U is just going to be three times one, two, three.
This ruler, as I said before, this is a physical ruler. And to that, we're going to add,
we're going to add this idea of negative two. We're going to add that to four, two, two.
And then we're going to add twice one, negative one, two. And doing this the long way around,
that's going to be three, that's going to be six, that's going to be nine.
And to that, we're going to add negative eight, negative four, negative four.
And to that, we're going to add two minus two and four, as I just multiply this out by each other.
Remember, that's how we define that. Scalar vector multiplication. And then it's just going to be
component wise addition. So three plus minus six minus five or negative five plus two, that's going
to be a negative three. And we're going to have six minus four is two, minus another two is zero,
and nine minus four is five, plus another four is a nine. And the only problem with these things,
of course, is making very simple little arithmetical errors. And that creeps in all the time. So if you
do these, check yourself to do it a second time. Better yet, let's drag in the Warframe language.
Remember, you can do all of this free of charge. If you just open the Warframe cloud account online,
just start a new notebook. And there we go. Three times one, two, three minus two times four,
two, two plus two times one, negative one and two. And we're going to wrap that inside the matrix form.
So we see our result and we see and check ourselves negative three, zero, nine, negative three, zero,
nine. Absolutely correct. So here's our next problem. We asked to write W as a linear
combination of u and v. The linear combination is exactly what we saw up here. Let's just do this
in green. Let's define this as a linear combination. So we're combining a couple of vectors and we're
doing it in such a way that it's linear. In other words, each of them are just multiplied by a scalar.
So we need this idea of something times u. So let's write this down. Let's back to blue. We're going to
have some scalar x, element of the real numbers, times one and two. And that is going to be to that
we're going to add a scalar multiple of one and three. And that is going to have to give us five and
12. So let's just do this. And this is going to become so critical in the section where we start
talking about matrices, this idea of linear combination. Now, what you see here are actually,
it's actually a way to write two equations, because what we have here is x and two x,
and we add to that y and three y, and that's going to equal five and 12. So it's this idea of these
vectors. But remember, this is how we defined addition that was just component wise. So we
have to have the fact that x plus y equals five and two x plus three y is going to equal 12. So we have,
it's a way to represent a linear system, a system of linear equations. I have two equations and I can
look at that, I can write them as the addition of vectors. That is a very interesting thing. So from
this, it follows that y, I can write y as five minus x. And from this, it then follows that I can write
this as two x plus three times five, three times five minus x. And that's going to equal 12. So two x
plus 15 minus three x is going to equal 12. In other words, minus x is going to equal negative three.
So x equals three. And that means y equals five minus three. And that is two. So I have this linear
combination. I can say x is three. So three times u plus two times y equals w. I can write w as a linear
combination of two other vectors. But the beauty of all of this is that I can use vectors as we've done
here to solve linear systems. And we're going to have quite a good look at that. Problem number
seven. Compute the dot product of these two vectors. There are two vectors in three space.
And remember how we do this. The dot product. Let's call this one u. And let's call this one v.
And if we have the dot product of u and v, that is just going to be the sum. In this instance,
i equals one to three. That's three of ui vi. So I just have to multiply each of them and do that addition.
So we're going to have two multiplied by negative one. So that leaves us with a negative two. To
that we add the following. Four times two. That's eight. To that we add the following. Four times two
is eight. Eight and eight is sixteen. Sixteen minus two is fourteen. And there we go. We've gone from the
definition. I like to have definitions here in green. So we went from the definition of the dot product or
inner product or scalar product. And we can just easily do this multiplication. So it's element wise
multiplication. And then we just add all of those elements to each other. So there's my first element,
my second and my third. And we just add those and we get to the result of fourteen. So let's bring in
the Wolfram language again. We like to check that we've done our example problems correctly.
So there was our problem. Compute the dot product between the vectors and eleven. Two, four, four,
negative one, two and two. So let's squish this up a little bit. So it's two, four, four, negative one,
two, two. Yes, we've got the same problem there. And I'm going to use the dot function. And it's a
function so it goes inside of a set of square brackets. And I list my two vectors there. Remember
vectors are lists of elements. Lists go inside of curly braces. So I've got those two there. And I
pass all of this, the dot product function with its two, with its opening and closing square
brackets. I pass that to the matrix form function as an argument. So the matrix form function also
has its set of, you see the green there, the open and closing, its open and closing set of square
brackets. And let's execute that. And lo and behold, the answer is 14. Easy enough for us to check our
results. It's a good problem. Find U and V, U plus V multiplied by W as vectors. And we ask,
is this the same as U multiplied by W plus V multiplied by W? Well, we've seen the distributive
property. We know that it holds. Let's just use it as an example, just to get some exercises
under our belt. So these things just become second nature. So U plus V, we're going to do that first.
That's component wise. So the one plus the two, that equals three. And two plus a negative one,
the two disappeared there. Me, two plus negative one, that's just one. And then three plus negative
two, that's also a one. So I have my first vector there as my addition. And then we're going to do
the dot product of that with one, one, two. So what are we going to get? We're going to get a scalar.
So this becomes component wise multiplication. So those two are multiplied by each other. Three times one,
that is the three. And then one times one, that's just one. So we add the one. And the last one,
we have one times two, you multiply that, that's two. So we get your three plus one is four plus two is
six. So we get a solution of six. Let's do it the other way around. Let's do U multiplied by W.
So in this instance, we're going to get one, two and three as our first vector here. And we're going
to do the dot product with W and W is one, one, two. So let's do that one on the side here.
So that's going to be one times one is one plus two times one is two and three times two is six.
So I have that on the side. Let's add to that V and W. So that's two minus one minus two and one,
one, two. Those are my vectors that say the only way to make a mistake is this silly
arithmetical errors. And they happen all the time and don't obviously feel bad about those.
So again, it's two times one and that's two. We're going to have here and another one,
we have negative one times one. So that's minus one there. And we have negative two times two.
So we're going to add to that a negative four. So two minus one is one, one minus three is negative
three. So on this side, I have a negative three. And on this side, I have still the one plus two
plus six. So one plus two is three plus six is nine. And nine minus three is six. And lo and behold,
the two are exactly the same because we know that this distributive property is going to hold by the
way that we've defined these things. We can go back to say that this is over the field of reals.
And if you had to prove this, it would be quite simple. You're going to write out the definition
of how we define addition and then multiplication, vector addition, vector multiplication. We're going to
say it's over the field of reals. So we inherit all the properties of the field of real numbers.
And lo and behold, the proof would be quite easy. In the next problem, we ask to calculate the norm
of u being one, two, three, the vector one, two, column vector one, two, three. And we also have
to calculate the square root of u dot u. So let's do the norm of that vector. Remember how we define that?
Let's just write it out in green. We have this definition of the norm of a vector. That's going to be the
going to be the square root of this sum of i equals one to n, how many there are. And it's just going to
be u i squared. So I just square all of those values. And you can clearly see why they asked us to do this
one on this side, because these two things are exactly the same. The dot product squares. If it's the same
thing, it's just going to square all those values. And here we're going to square because the norm,
the norm of vector u is going to be the square root of, we just square all these things, one squared
plus two squared plus three squared. So if we do that, that's just the square root of one plus four
plus nine. And that's the square root of, let's put it here, the square root of 14.
But what happens if we do u dot u, u dot u with itself? So that's going to be one, two, three,
and one, two, three. Let's make some noise with the ruler. The dot product of that.
And it's one times one is one. One times one is one. And two times two is four. And three times
three is nine. And that's 14. But we're not asked to do that. We asked to get the square root of u dot
u. So that's going to be the square root of 14. These two things are exactly the same, because that is
another way to calculate the norm. There's another definition for the norm of a vector. So let's write
that in green here. So we have this vector u. And we're taking its norm. We're taking its norm.
That's exactly, that's that. So that's exactly the same as this. It's the, it's the square root
of u dot u, the cross product of the vector with itself. The dot, listen to me, cross product,
the dot product of the vector with itself. Next problem, we have to normalize u or express it as
a unit vector. This would be the same as, let's say, express u as u hat. So what do we have to do?
How do we define? Let's have it in green. So we remember that u hat is this u divided by the norm
of u. So we're just going to divide each component by the length, the magnitude. So let's do that.
What is the norm of u? Well, we've just done that just now. We saw that u, the norm of u was the
square root of 14. So u hat is just going to be 1 divided by square root 14 and then 2 divided by
square root 14 and 3 divided by square root 14. Remember the way that we set that up, the norm
of this unit vector is going to be just 1. If I square all of those added, take the square root,
I'm just going to get 1. In some cases, remember, you asked just to express it in a different way.
So this is going to be square root 14 over 14. And so you just multiply the numerator and denominator
by the denominator. So this is going to be 2 square root 14. Oh, that's ugly, over square root,
over 14 itself, over 14. And then 3 square root of 14 divided by 14. And we can just clean that up.
It's the square root of 14 over 14. And this is going to be the square root of 14 over,
over. We can divide 14 by 2 and that gives us 7. And then this is going to remain exactly the same
14 over there. So you might just be asked just to clean things up and not to have square roots
in your denominator. But those things are exactly the same. You can just leave it as the first one.
Let's bring in the Wolfram language. And we can see the matrix form of this vector divided by its norm.
And we can see the results there are exactly the same, except that the second one is expressed
as the square root of 2 over 7. And if I just take that away, remember, if we have 2 square root of 14,
that will be exactly the same as the square root of 2 over the square root of 14. That's the square
root of 4 over 14. And that's the square root of 2 over 7. So there's various ways that we can express
each one of these real numbers. No problem.
