Now in this tutorial I want to show you two alternatives to the chi-square test for categorical
variables and those are the g-test. So we're going to have a g-test for goodness of fit and we're
going to have a g-test of independence. So the goodness of fit test just like the chi-square
goodness of fit test we're going to have a single categorical variable and we count how many of each
of the sample space values occur and we compare that to what we expect and then in the independence
test we're just going to take two categorical variables and we're going to compare them to each
other and see if they are independent of each other. So not a lot of difference there's a difference of
course in the equation that we use to calculate the g-statistic. So let's have a look at the g-test
for goodness of fit and the g-test for independence. So in this short video let's have a look at these
g-tests for categorical variables. So what we're going to have to do is just import a library
desk tools. If you haven't installed it please install that package and then we import it with
the library desk tools. So the g-tests they are as I mentioned they are well we could replace the
chi-square test of goodness of fit and the chi-square test of independence with these. So let's just
first have a look at the g-test of the goodness of fit and I just want to go down when we look at the
g-test of independence just to show you what the equation looks like. So we're going to have this
g-statistic so again we're going to calculate the statistic that's going to give us a probability
density function it forms a curve and we can work out the area under the curve to give us a p-value.
So it's two times the sum of this each observed value times the natural log of this ratio of observed
to expected and we calculate that for each value we sum all of them up and we multiply by two. So let's
first have a look at the g-test of goodness of fit. So as with the chi-square test of goodness of fit
we have a single variable categorical or if we just use discrete values discrete numerical and we're
just interested in the counts not the actual values we can use this as well. So imagine that we have
observed 175 values so just a simple example for one of two unique sample space data point values for
variable and 190 for for another just we'll just have this imaginary little experiment and we collect
the data the the sample space for this categorical variable has two values in it and we count 175 of
190 of the other but what we expect let's imagine we expected a 50-50 split how can we use the g-test of
goodness of fit to see if this distribution we found 175 versus 90 is that statistically significant
from a 50-50 split. So observed I'm just going to create a vector there of 175 and 90 and the desk
tools has a nice little function g-test as you can see here x equals just your observed table p is what
you expected a vector of 0.5 and 0.05 we're not interested in any corrections here and that's going to give us
this log likelihood ratio goodness of fit test we see the g-statistic there of 0.6 chi-squared
degrees of freedom of one and we see a p-value of 0.4 so that's not statistically significant from
what we expected a 50-50 split. Now with the test of independence that's the exact same as the chi-squared
test of independence except that we use the g-statistic instead of a chi-square statistic
and if you watch that video you can just have a quick look we're using exactly the same scenario
where we have the patients in group one and two and those that worsen stayed the same or improved
so exactly the same the same just to show you we only have to create this little matrix with the r
bind function and then just to show you the g-test is in the desk tools library don't have to put that
you can only put g-tests the observed table there and no corrections and again we get back our log
likelihood ratio ratio g-test of independence without correction we see a g-statistic there
a chi-squared degrees of freedom being two and a p-value of 0.01 so again a significant difference so
not that different from the chi-squared distribution so there's your alternative using the g-distribution
the g-tests for categorical variables remember that for these tutorials on r that the actual html
rendered files are on rpubs and that's what you might see on the screen but these files are also
available in their raw form on github and all the links will be in the description below so you can
either go to the website and look at rpubs files as they're already rendered or you can go to github and
download those files into your system so that you can use them in r studio yourself so if you like
these videos on r please let me know so that i can make more of these or the subjects that you want
me to cover as far as buy statistics is concerned and the use of r please let me know otherwise please
always remember to subscribe and hit the notification bell so that when new videos come out you will know
about it you can also follow me on twitter because that's where you'll also see that new videos are out
about it.
I just thought so
now
all
all
