Music
Okay, good morning everybody.
Today's talk is about gastroesophageal reflux disease and the current controversies around
the topic.
Accompanying this talk, there's a 20-page document with all the details and references to all
the relevant articles that you can get from me.
I can email it to you or we can print it out and I can distribute some copies for you guys.
Okay, it is quite a lengthy topic, but I think once we've covered this, you will know everything
you have to know about gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Just as a starting point, what are we going to look at?
What do I think is important?
First of all, looking at the definition, what exactly is gastroesophageal reflux disease?
Going a little bit into the relevant anatomy and pathophysiology because it's one of those
things that if you understand the anatomy and the physiology, really the management and the
whole disease process just makes so much more sense.
We're going to have a brief look at the etiology and the risk factors.
Then also just a quick peek at current controversies surrounding H. pylori eradication, the clinical
presentation of the patients.
Under diagnostics, we're going to have a look at diagnostic aid questionnaires, the use of
empiric acid suppression as a diagnostic aid, the role of esophageal manometry and pH monitoring,
the role of endoscopy, and endoscopic disease classifications.
Then finally, coming to the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease, we're just going to look at what
your broad approach should be, what specific medical management and surgical management we are
looking at at the moment, the role of lifestyle modification, and then just a quick conclusion.
Okay, so one of the big problems with gastroesophageal reflux disease is that, as funny as it sounds,
there has for many years now been a lack of a so-called gold standard definition of what the disease is.
Patients find it very hard to describe.
Doctors find it even more difficult to identify and to diagnose.
And the current definition that is used most widely is called the Montreal definition of gastroesophageal
reflux disease as a condition which develops when the reflux of stomach contents causes troublesome
symptoms and or complications.
Now, although this is the most widely used definition, in my book it's still extremely vague.
It does not specify how and why reflux occurs, which organs are affected by reflux,
or what symptoms and complications may be troublesome to the patient.
Once this definition has been accepted, it has been elaborated on.
And troublesome symptoms have now been further classified as mild symptoms,
which is symptoms that hinders the patient's quality of life for at least one day a week
and moderate to severe for more than one day a week, which still leaves us really nowhere.
So a further explanation of this definition basically goes for me more into the complications of the disease.
So the definition has now further been developed and divided into esophageal syndromes
and extra esophageal syndromes caused by these troublesome symptoms,
which is often described as a burning sensation in the epigastric area.
Your esophageal syndromes, symptomatic syndromes, syndromes with esophageal injury,
and then extra esophageal syndromes, established associations and proposed associations.
We'll go back to this because this will come in with a clinical presentation.
So that just being the definition.
Okay, if we look at the relevant anatomy of the esophagus,
so the anatomy of the esophagus, I think, and the gastroesophageal junction
is really critical in the understanding of the disease process.
So if we just quickly remind ourselves, the esophagus is basically divided in three parts.
You've got a cervical part, thoracic part, and an abdominal part.
The body of the esophagus is made up out of inner circular and outer longitudinal muscle layers.
The proximal third of the esophagus, you're looking at striated muscle,
and then the distal two-thirds, you're looking at smooth muscle.
So the proximal esophagus contains the upper esophageal sphincter,
which basically is the cricopharyngeus and thyropharyngeus muscles.
And then the distal thoracic esophagus contains the lower esophageal sphincter,
which is really critical in the understanding of this disease process.
So the actual contribution of the diaphragm provides the maintaining of the adequate length
of the intra-abdominal esophagus is very important in the pathophysiology
of gastroesophageal reflux disease.
The role of the crura, where almost the esophagus almost swings around it,
the crura acting as a sort of external sphincter is very important to understand.
And then what exactly is this zone that we call the lower esophageal sphincter?
It's not really an anatomically defined area, but more a distal esophageal high-pressure zone,
which we can only really identify with manometry.
In adults, usually it is the last three to five centimeters of the esophagus.
And maintenance of an adequate intra-abdominal high-pressure zone is crucial
in preventing gastroesophageal reflux disease.
So usually the disease is caused by malfunction of one or more of these anatomic features.
And proper surgical treatment requires a complete preoperative
and intraoperative evaluation and correction of all the defective features.
In terms of blood supply and nerve supply, I'm not really going to go into it.
It's discussed very extensively in the document.
But the most important thing to remember is that it is the stomach's very rich blood supply
that makes it possible for the surgeon to ligate much of the short gastric arteries
when doing a fundoplication without causing ischemia or necrosis.
Looking at the pathophysiology of GERD, systematically Stein and his coworkers described the esophagus
and the lower esophageal sphincter and the stomach basically as a plumbing circuit.
The esophagus is the anti-grade pump, the lower esophageal sphincter is the valve,
and then the stomach is the reservoir.
And things can go wrong at any one of these levels.
So, poor esophageal motility decreases the clearance of acidic material,
a dysfunctional less allows for the reflux of large amount of gastric juice,
and then delayed gastric emptying can increase the volume and the pressure of the reservoir
to such an extent that the valve mechanism fail, leading to refluxing.
So, once again, from a medical and a surgical point of view,
really important to distinguish and to determine where is your dysfunction
in order to plan appropriate management.
Okay, we're quickly going to look under the pathophysiology.
I think there's a few important things to discuss.
First of all is the natural esophageal defense mechanisms that's in place.
Broadly, it can be divided into esophageal clearance or mucosal resistance.
Esophageal clearance can be achieved either mechanically, which is the peristalsis of the esophagus,
or chemically, which is the saliva, and then mucosal resistance,
which can be divided into pre-epithelial, epithelial, and post-epithelial defense mechanisms.
So, let's go down the plumbing system and just quickly look at basically what can the pathology be.
So, first of all, starting at the esophagus, we're looking at impaired esophageal clearance.
So, you're looking at a disorder of esophageal body motility, impaired delivery secretion, or the presence of a hiatus hernia.
Then, looking at your reduced lower esophageal strength of pressure,
there's basically three mechanisms how a reduced basal pressure can lead to gastroesophageal reflux disease.
You've got transient relaxation of the les, which is the most common mechanism.
You've got permanent les relaxation.
And then, you've got a transient increase of the intra-abdominal pressure that overcomes the les pressure,
and therefore causes reflux.
Then, looking at a hiatus hernia, how does this cause gastroesophageal reflux disease?
Basically, if you just look at the picture, it's quite easy to understand it.
Once again, it actually has everything to do with the lower esophageal sphincter.
So, with a hiatus hernia, the lower esophageal sphincter may migrate proximally into the chest,
and therefore lose its abdominal high-pressure zone, or at the very least the length of the high-pressure zone decreases.
So, when it migrates up into the chest, it loses the function of the crura as a sort of external sphincter, helping with the pressure.
And finally, if you look at the sac that can form, especially with a rolling hiatus hernia,
gastric content obviously gets trapped there, and reflux proximally into the esophagus is really easy.
Okay, then looking at luminal agents.
This, I have to say, there's a lot written about it, but quite varied results in the studies as to how important this is.
There is a suggestion, though, that acidic foods, alcohol, and certain medications can definitely precipitate gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Looking at excessive esophageal sensitivity, you get functional esophageal disease, esophageal hyperalgesia,
central hyperalgesia, depression, irritable bowel syndrome, concurrent inflammation, and eucinophilic esophagitis
have all been suggested as possible causes of GERD.
Then moving down into the reservoir, looking at increased gastric acid secretion.
So various conditions causing it.
Quite important to note, because is that our treatment can also actually precipitate this event,
rebound hypersecretion after the withdrawal of acid suppression therapy.
And then a little bit later, we're coming back to the second point,
the helicobacter pylori status to suppress or not to suppress,
and how that actually, in some patients, worsens symptoms.
And then, as a last point of call, delayed gastric entering with retention of gastric content.
And I have to say, in all the literature, it is always mentioned in association with reflux disease.
But nobody really understands exactly how it contributes.
The only logical in my mind is that, as we said, the capacity of the reservoirs overcomes the function of the valve and causes reflux.
So gastroparesis, gastric outlet obstruction, and small bowel dysmotility.
Even though it makes sense on a logical level, improvement of these conditions doesn't seem to show much of an improvement in symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease.
So, quickly looking at etiology, suggestion of advanced age, male sex to be more prone, definite studies showing obesity playing a role,
the presence of H. pylori, and then the suggestion of environmental factors, which is diet,
and also suggestion there's been quite a few twin studies done that genetics might also play a role.
So, the controversy surrounding the H. pylori eradication.
So, there's three concerns at the moment.
The most important one is that there's currently sort of controversial evidence against long-term and clinical benefits of eradication.
There's also increased antibiotic resistance for eradication.
And then there's also quite a bit of debate around the role of PPIs in eradication.
Some people feeling that PPIs actually assist in eradication and can even achieve eradication without necessarily using antibiotics.
The controversial evidence against the long-term clinical benefits of eradication has come from studies that have shown that since the 1970s,
when the PPIs have been introduced in the USA, there has been a rapid increase in especially Barrett's esophagus and esophageal carcinoma.
And then there are no consensus that eradication of H. pylori results in the improvement of symptoms of your non-ulcer dyspepsias.
I've explained all the studies in quite a bit of detail in the document.
But given what I've read, I think my suggestion would be that only patients with endoscopically proven peptic ulcer disease and symptomatic reflux esophagitis should be eradicated.
So, a patient that you do a scope on and the patient is asymptomatic but you note esophagitis should not be eradicated.
Looking at your clinical presentations, basically your symptoms can be divided into typical esophageal symptoms and atypical extraesophageal symptoms.
Your esophageal symptoms is esophagitis, esophageal ulcers, peptic strictures, Barrett's esophagus, and then the furthest down in the disease progression, adenocarcinomas.
Extraesophageal presentation of the disease is often hoarseness, laryngitis, even laryngeal cancer, asthma or a chronic cough, pulmonary fibrosis, chronic bronchitis, pneumonitis, chest pain, and dental erosions.
Okay, looking at the diagnostics of gastroesophageal reflux disease, we're going to look quickly at the use of questionnaires to aid as a diagnostic tool.
Empiric acid suppression, esophageal manometry, ambulatory, pH monitoring, and then finally scopes.
Questionnaires, various questionnaires have been developed and tested.
It is basically about symptom description and symptom relief described by patients.
It has been shown to be a very poor diagnostic tool.
Language barriers, patient's understanding of the disease, the doctor's understanding of the disease, all seems to be very variable and didn't give any good results.
In my opinion, questionnaires would be of little diagnostic value in South Africa, especially due to our language and cultural diversity, but it might be a helpful tool to obtain a more complete history from our patients.
Again, if we look at empiric acid suppression, which is also known as the omeprazole test, the response to a proton pump inhibitor is now very widely used as a therapeutic trial as evidence of the presence or the absence of gastroesophageal reflux disease.
The definition of a so-called positive test, again, is very reliant on the patient's experience of symptoms and to report improvement of symptoms.
So if the symptom assessment score for heartburn, chest pain, or other symptoms improved by more than 50% to 75% relative to a baseline set by the patient, the test is considered positive.
So once again, quite difficult to interpret, but I do feel that this is quite a safe, simple, and non-invasive diagnostic tool.
It can be quite cost effective.
The problem, though, is that we in South Africa, we use H2 receptor antagonists, which has been shown definitely not to be as effective.
And there's quite a few problems in terms of tolerance and tachyphylaxis and all sorts of other things with H2 receptor blockers.
So if you are going to use an acid suppression test as a diagnostic tool, strongly advise that you use a PPI.
Okay.
Then the role of esophageal manometry and pH monitoring.
Now, esophageal manometry is used commonly during the evaluation of patients with dysphagia, chest pain, and reflux disease.
Basically, it assesses peristalsis and the contractile pressures in the body of the esophagus.
And then, in addition, measuring the resting tone and the relaxation of both the lower and the upper esophageal sphincters.
So, it is clinically indicated to diagnose achalasia to assist in the placement of the pH probes, which we use in the ambulatory pH monitoring,
to evaluate patients with symptoms of dysphagia, and to evaluate patients with chest pain after sufficient empiric treatment for gastroesophageal reflux disease has suggested the presence of the disease.
So, evidence suggests that esophageal manometry alone should not be used to make or confirm a diagnosis of GERD for the simple reason that it does not measure acid reflux.
So, you kind of, if that's going to be your diagnostic tool, you have to use it in combination with pH monitoring.
However, if you use some of your other diagnostic tools, you can deduct that manometry gives important information regarding your LESS function,
and need not necessarily be paired with pH monitoring.
All very confusing.
Okay.
Right.
That's just an example of pH monitoring.
Okay.
Moving on to endoscopy.
Although endoscopy is frequently performed to help diagnose gastroesophageal reflux disease, it is not the most cost-effective diagnostic study,
because esophagitis is present in only 50% of patients that report symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease.
So, empiric acid suppression has been proven to be far more cost-effective and less invasive.
However, once you've used the empiric acid suppression test, and you go and do a scope then,
you greatly limit your sensitivity of what you will find on the scope.
Important in terms of endoscopy is that although endoscopic determination of the grade of esophagitis can predict the expected healing response to treatment,
and the treatment of esophageal reflux disease is guided by symptoms and very rarely by what we find on G-scope.
Only when there is presence of metaplasia or dysplasia and proven disease progression does endoscopy really become important.
There's various endoscopic classification systems.
The one mostly used and considered the most objective at the moment is the modified Los Angeles classification.
Very specific description of what the endoscopist sees, so that it's easy to compare results even if your scope operators are not the same.
I'm not really going to go into that now. You can read it on your own.
So, if we say that endoscopy is not a good diagnostic tool, it's not cost-effective, what is absolute indication to send a patient for endoscopy?
It's the so-called danger symptoms, and that would be gastroesophageal reflux disease symptoms that are persistent or progressive despite appropriate medical therapy.
The presence of dysphagia or adenophagia.
Involuntary weight loss of more than 5% of the patient's body weight, and that would be within a month.
Evidence of a GI bleed or anemia.
Finding of a mass, a stricture or an ulcer on imaging studies.
Evaluation of patients with a suspected extraesophageal manifestation.
So, a patient that presents with chest pain, atypical chest pain, non-cardiac chest pain, chronic bronchitis, adult onset asthma, things like that.
Screening for baris esophagus in selected patients.
Persistent vomiting, and the evaluation of patients with recurrent symptoms after endoscopic or surgical anti-reflux procedures.
Okay, so, if we look at the approach to treatment, you have to ask yourself, you know, what is the goal of treatment?
Simply stated, it should be approached in a stepwise manner in order to control the symptoms, to heal esophagitis if present,
and to prevent recurrent esophagitis or disease progression.
Okay.
Unfortunately, if we look at treatment, current treatment trends are based on, you know, lifestyle modification
and control of gastric acid secretion through medical therapy with antacids or PPIs, or corrective anti-reflux surgery.
It is important to keep in mind, though, that gastroesophageal reflux disease is not primarily a disorder of acid secretion.
It is, ideally, treatment should thus be focused on targeting the pathophysiological basis of gastroesophageal reflux disease.
So, if we remind ourselves, so, to increase the basal lower esophageal swinter pressure, to reduce the frequency and the duration
of inappropriate transient lower esophageal swinter relaxations, to improve esophageal clearance, and to accelerate gastric emptying.
Of course, pharmaceutical companies have looked into addressing all these issues.
But, unfortunately, so far, medications targeting these issues have yielded very, very poor results.
And, often, medications have had very bad side effect profiles.
So, we are stuck with acid control, PPIs, both in terms of medical management and surgical management for the moment.
Medical management, the two big things that we need to look at is the use of H2 receptor antagonists and PPIs.
In summary, I think we can say that H2 receptor antagonists has now been proven really to be less effective than PPIs.
There's no debate about that anymore.
However, in our setting, in very specific patients with very mild symptoms, it is still acceptable as a first line of treatment.
However, if treatment fails, the patient should be upped to a PPI.
So, the protein pump inhibitors have proved significantly more effective than the antacids or the H2 receptor antagonists for healing and maintaining the remission of esophageal erosive esophagitis.
And, for maintaining symptoms relief, symptom relief.
In the document, I've went into quite a bit of detail as to where we stand with our current available PPIs.
Most commonly known to all of us is Omeprazole.
There is quite a few other available at the moment.
And, there's also quite a bit of controversy around PPI treatment.
There's questions around, should we up our dosages?
Is there any use in using more than one dosage per day?
Looking at some of the side effects of PPIs, and I think it's quite important to read through that and get a good grip on that.
In essence, though, if we quickly want to summarize all of that, in terms of medication,
we should look at optimizing once-daily PPI therapy as a first port of call.
Ensure adherence.
The patient should take the tablets before breakfast.
If the current PPI does not work, there is other PPI options with a slower metabolism that the patient should be switched to.
And the patient, of course, should modify their diet.
Okay, then should your first-line PPI not work, you shouldn't hesitate to supplement your PPI with antacids or with an H2 receptor antagonist,
which has been shown to be very helpful, especially in your patients with nocturnal symptoms.
Drinking a PPI in the morning and the H2 receptor antagonist at night, shown very good symptom relief.
Then intermittent additions to your PPI therapy.
This is medication that your patient preferably should not be on chronically, but can assist in symptom relief from time to time.
It's prokinetic therapy, so metroclawpromide, I think being most commonly used by us.
Reflux inhibitor therapy and epithelial protection.
Should all of this fail, you can always look at increasing the dose of your PPI.
Look at maybe twice daily therapy or multiple daily dose therapy.
There's a lot written about it.
I don't think there's any conclusive evidence at the moment to show benefit.
Then you can also use sensory modulators with or without acid suppression.
And then you're actually looking at your antidepressants and antispasmodics to assist you with treatment.
And finally, we're getting to our surgical management.
I think, yeah, one of the most important things to get clear is what exactly are the indications for surgical treatment of reflux.
We are looking basically, if we just quickly summarize what is available in terms of, okay, let's first look at the indications.
Basically, it's patients with uncontrolled symptoms, very poor compliance.
If you're sitting with a really young patient with severe disease, any patient that presents to you with extra esophageal manifestations are very unlikely to be managed with medical therapy.
Postmenopausal women, there's a big debate around cost, and there's quite a few studies that have actually shown that in the long run, surgery is more cost effective than long-term PPI therapy.
And then the presence of Barrett's esophagus.
Okay.
I just quickly want to talk about, okay, what is your surgical options available?
Today, both transthoracic, very, very rarely, and transabdominal fund applications are performed, including partial wraps and posterior wraps.
Your posterior circumferential wrap being your Nissen, and it's the most commonly used, which can perform either open or laparoscopically.
Of course, laparoscopically is performed most commonly now.
I had such nice pictures for you guys about the surgery.
I don't know what happened to it.
Sorry.
It's much easier to understand it with pictures.
So I think if you just look at the document, there's very nice pictures of both the Nissen and the laparoscopic and open procedures.
Maybe we can just quickly go through the essential elements of the operation.
You have complete mobilization of the fundus of the stomach with the vision of the short gastric vessels.
Then you have reduction of the hiatal hernia, narrowing of the esophageal hiatus,
then the curation of a 360 fund application, which would be a Nissen, or a 270 degree fund application, which is the Tupai.
You can use over a large intra-esophageal dilator.
However, the use of the dilator is very controversial.
The idea behind the full wrap is to do a so-called floppiness, and this can be assessed without a need for a dilator,
which may lead to perforation and a false sense of security.
Various prospective trials have been performed to compare PPIs to fund applications.
And I'll just quickly summarize the conclusions to you.
PPIs, although effective in controlling the acid component of the refluxiae, do not eliminate the reflux of bowel,
which some believe to be a major contributor to the pathogenesis of Barrett's epithelial.
Only surgery will provide solution to that.
Patients with Barrett's esophagus tend to have lower, less pressures,
and worse esophageal peristalsis in patients without Barrett's esophagus.
And patients with Barrett's esophagus are also exposed to larger amount of reflux.
Therefore, definite advantage in correcting any abnormalities surgically.
A fund application offers the only possibility of stopping any kind of reflux by creating a competent less.
However, until the definitive answer is known,
it is recommended that patients with Barrett's esophagus continue to undergo periodic endoscopic surveillance,
even after laparoscopic fund application.
In terms of comparing the different surgical techniques,
it has now been shown that the Nissen and the DuPay procedures are equally effective in restoring the lower esophageal swing to function
and provide similar long-term control of gastroesophageal reflux disease with no difference in dysphagia.
Esophageal dysmotility has had no influence in the outcome of either of the operations.
In essence, then, that floppy Nissen will suffice in the vast majority of patients.
It is widely accepted that these posterior wraps are superior to the anterior wraps,
and in patients with a short esophagus, esophageal lengthening procedures should first be done,
for example, the Coles-Nissen.
Okay. Mouthful.
All right.
Then, just quickly looking at lifestyle modification.
A lot has been written about lifestyle modification.
Unfortunately, very poor evidence.
The only two things that have shown to be of any benefit of the patient is head elevation during sleep time and weight loss.
A lot of investigations have been done on various food sorts, coffee, mint, spice, you name it,
but none has really shown to make a difference, really, in either symptom relief or disease progression.
And, for once, drinking and smoking apparently is not proven perpetrators in this disease, which is a new one.
Okay. So, in conclusion,
Dysal esophagitis is one of the most common problems a clinician will deal with.
Its diagnosis and management still poses many challenges, but massive progress have been made with the introduction of PPIs and laparoscopic surgery especially.
I think by understanding the pathogenesis of the disease and the awareness of the disease progression,
one can simplify your management approach in a fairly stepwise manner, always allowing yourself to be guided by the patient sitting in front of you.
Having a shotgun approach is unnecessary and can be very, very costly.
And what is true for one patient will not necessarily be true for the next.
In patients with mild symptoms, without obvious complications, don't hesitate to utilize a trial of PPIs to aid in your diagnosis.
Be very selective in using diagnostic endoscopy.
And if endoscopy is done, be diligent in identifying disease progression.
Use H. pylori eradication only in symptomatic patients with proven erosive esophagitis.
And with regards to medical management, PPIs are still our best option available.
It can, however, be combined with other drugs and given in higher or twice-daily dosages in selected patients.
There's quite clear indications that it exists for surgery.
And in the long run, surgery is still considered superior and more cost-effective than medical management.
And in terms of lifestyle modification, losing weight seems to be the only real factor to provide benefit to our patients.
I'm sure Dr. Tilpa has a few comments to make.
Thank you.
Thank you.
