In this video I will discuss the etiology and clinical presentation of non-toxic thyroidal
enlargement or goiter.
I prefer to group all non-toxic forms of thyroid enlargement into one group.
This includes both diffuse, uninodular and multinodular enlargement.
If the prevalence of goiter is more than 5% in the children of a population it is said
to be endemic to that population.
Many iodine deficient areas suffer from endemic goiter.
It is important to note that many textbooks still refer to older data concerning prevalence
and cause.
Historically population based studies relied on clinical evaluation and ignored many risk
factors and the usual prevalence of about 3-5% is often quoted.
Screening an otherwise healthy population by ultrasonographically measured volume shows
a prevalence of diffuse goiter as high as 30-50% which is even higher in iodine deficient
areas and in the elderly and the prevalence of nodules as high as 60%.
Autopsy studies for causes of death other than thyroid disease also confirm the incidence
of thyroid nodules as being more than 50%.
Managing these patients especially deciding between benign and malignant nodular disease
was difficult in the past but now with an added workload provided by accidental sonographic
diagnosis it is even more important to have specific guidelines to work with.
Traditionally thyroid growth has been seen to be due to increased TSH and respond to mild
under activity.
Problems with this simple explanation arise when considering the fact that not all patients
with an iodine deficient diet develop a goiter and that there are endemic goiter areas within
an area with an iodine sufficient diet.
Other environmental and especially genetic factors must play a role TSH and TSH receptor
stimulation do indeed play a central role but other intrathyroidal and cellular factors
are just as important when you consider the fact that TSH levels are normal in most individuals
with a diffuse goiter.
Nodularity follows on the fact that some areas in the thyroid become more sensitive to these
TSH dependent and independent pathways.
In the case of the development of a single nodule there are clearly two types, monoclonal
and polyclonal.
Monoclonal solitary nodules probably represent the earliest stages of the development of a
neoplastic lesion, either an adenoma or carcinoma.
Non-toxic goiter is much more common in women.
There is no physiological adolescent thyroid enlargement and therefore any goiter in a young patient
is pathologic.
Monoclonal deficiency on the other hand is goitrogenic.
Patients may present with a self or sonographically diagnosed enlarged, diffuse, unilodular or multinodular
thyroid, cosmetic concerns, neck discomfort, difficulty in swallowing or breathing, a choking sensation
and a fear of cancer.
In the next video we will look at the investigations and management of these patients.
The Blackstack will produce an illness.
Let's wait for you for a minute next to see the review of someone earlier.
Ça c'était sana.
