I continue the discussion on graph sketching with another example.
The f of x equals x plus 1 over x plus 2.
I will go through the same steps mentioned in the previous video, but you will note two changes.
Starting with step 1a, you need to plot all discontinuities, especially infinite ones.
In this example, it is clear that x cannot be negative 2, as this will leave the denominator 0.
Viewing the graph on a Cartesian plane, you can draw a line at x equals negative 2, where the discontinuity appears.
In step 1b, you need to plot the endpoints.
Seeing that x cannot be negative 2, there are two ranges in this equation, from negative infinity to negative 2,
and from negative 2 to positive infinity.
Looking at the first range from negative infinity to negative 2, you first need to evaluate the function at negative infinity.
This shows that at this end of the x-axis, the y value tends to just over 1.
The negatives cancel, and that leaves the numerator larger than the denominator.
Confirm this for yourself, with a large negative x value, for instance negative 1 million.
At a point very very close to negative 2, in the first range, it is clear that the y value tends to positive infinity.
In the second range, choosing a point very very close to negative 2, leaves a y value of negative infinity.
At x equals positive infinity, the graph of the function nears just under 1, the numerator always being slightly smaller than the denominator.
Viewing the graph, you now know what happens at the ends of the two ranges.
In step 1c, you need to identify the x and y-intercepts.
The x-intercepts occur when y equals 0.
Therefore, you will note that there is only one x-intercept, and that is at negative 1.
The y-intercept occurs where x equals 0, and you will note that the f of 0 is a half, and there is therefore only one y-intercept, at y equals a half.
Plotting these intercepts now leaves you closer to the final version of the graph.
Step 2 is where this example differs from the previous example.
Step 2 is used to determine where in the graph of the function turning points occur.
Remember that these are x values where the slope is 0, in other words, where the first derivative equals 0.
The first derivative of this example function is 1 over x plus 2 squared.
Be careful when considering this first derivative equation. It can never equal 0.
If you consider it for a moment, you will realize that there is no number with which 1 can be divided that will leave you with 0.
The graph of this example function has no turning points.
There is important information in this for you. It means that the two parts of this graph, in the two ranges, can never wiggle or turn on itself.
Because that infers that there are turning points, for which there are none in this example.
In the second part of step 2, you are supposed to set up new ranges, based on the turning points, and then substitute a representative value in these ranges into the original function to consider the slope.
Here you have no turning points. This is fortunate, as you can keep the ranges you found in step 1.
There are no turning points, and therefore the slope, or direction in which the graph moves, going from left to right, does not change in these two ranges.
Substituting a representative value into the first range of negative infinity to negative 2, say negative 3, leaves a positive slope.
In this range, the graph is sloping upwards. In fact, the denominator is squared, and will therefore always be positive.
In the second range, from negative 2 to positive infinity, the graph also slopes upwards.
Considering your graph now, adding the slopes gets you even closer to the final version.
All you need now is to determine the inflection points to determine where the curves are concave and convex up.
As I have mentioned in step 3, you need to determine the inflection points by calculating the second derivative and setting it equal to 0.
The second derivative of the example function is the f' prime of x equals negative 2 over x plus 2 cubed.
Look carefully at this equation. There is no number that can be divided into negative 2 that will leave a 0.
The graph of this functioning, therefore, has no inflection point.
In the second part of this step 3, you need to use this inflection point x value where the f' prime prime of x equals 0
to divide the graph into new ranges to determine the concave-convex shape of the curve.
Since there is no inflection point, you are fortunate again, and the ranges remain as in step 1.
This is the second change from our first example.
Substituting a representative number in the first range of negative infinity to negative 2, say negative 3, leaves a positive number,
which means the graph is concave up in this range.
Again, since there is no inflection point and no turning point anywhere in the two ranges,
you know that there is no wiggle or turning back in either of the two ranges.
Note you must view these two ranges separately.
There is a big change on either side of x equals negative 2, but the function has no value at x equals negative 2.
Substituting a representative value in the second range from negative 2 to positive infinity, say negative 1, leaves a negative value, which means convex up.
This is all the information you need and the graph is now complete.
To draw a more accurate graph, you can also make a table of x and y values and plot these.
It makes for a neater and more accurate final version.
The idea behind your graph sketching though is not to draw neat sketches, but for you to understand your function and the meaning of first and second derivatives better.
Another important factor in successfully sketching graphs is getting comfortable with arithmetic involving infinite values.
