In this video series I will discuss the sketching of a graph, using knowledge of first and second derivatives.
I will do this by the way of an example.
Here we have the f of x equals 3x minus x cubed.
In order to sketch the graph of this function you need a strategy.
Step 1a. Plot all discontinuities, especially infinite ones.
There are no values of x that will make this function illegal, such as dividing by zero or the square root or the logarithm of a negative number.
Therefore you have no discontinuities.
Step 1b. Plot end points if the range is given or set by the equation or positive and negative infinity.
Now no range was given and all values of x are allowed, so you are left with negative and positive infinity as the end points of the range.
If you substitute x equals negative infinity, you get 3 times negative infinity minus negative infinity cubed.
Next to infinity cubed, 3 times infinity is negligible.
So at negative infinity our y value is positive infinity.
At x equals positive infinity, y equals negative infinity.
So you know what happens at the ends of the x axis.
Now step 1c. Plot x and y intercepts.
x intercepts are where y equals zero.
Solving for 3x minus x cubed equals zero leaves x intercepts at negative the square root of three, zero and positive the square root of three.
Substituting x equals zero gives the only y intercept of zero.
Step 2.
This refers to calculating turning points.
This is done by determining the first derivative and setting it to zero.
Think about it.
A first derivative of zero means the slope is zero here.
Or the graph is horizontal.
In a graph flowing from left to right, that means at these x values the graph is going to turn.
In other words, if the graph was going down, meaning the slope was negative, then past this point it will turn up or the slope will become positive and vice versa.
These turning points are x values because you set f prime equal to zero.
Substituting these values into the original f of x gives the y value at these points, called the turning values.
Now you have coordinates for these turning points.
So in this example, f prime of x equals three minus three x cubed.
Setting this to zero and solving leaves x equal to negative one and one, our turning points.
Substituting into the original function leaves y values or turning values at negative two and two.
The coordinates where the slope is zero or where the graph will turn.
Negative one comma negative two and one comma two.
Step three.
Now you have to divide the graph up into pieces as determined by the turning point x values you have just evaluated.
And determine what happens to the left and to the right and between them.
Remember I said that at these points the sign of the slope turns, so you need to know what the slope is in between these areas.
To do this you substitute a value in the range of the between areas into the f prime of x.
If the value is positive then the function is increasing in this range and if negative it is decreasing in this range.
In this example the x axis is divided into three sections by the two turning points, negative one and one.
So choose a value smaller than negative one, say negative two and substitute it into the f prime of x.
That leaves negative nine for the slope to the left of x equals negative one.
And that means the graph is going downwards here.
Because x equals negative one is a turning point you know the graph must turn up to the right of this.
To be sure check on this.
Substitute a value between the turning points, say x equals zero.
That leaves three which is positive and indeed with a positive slope that means between x equals negative one and one the curve slopes upwards.
Again with a turning point at x equals one the graph to the right of this must slope downward.
Substituting x equals three for instance leaves the slope at negative 24 which is negative.
Step four.
Now you need to decide whether the graph is concave or convex up as it flows between these turning points in the direction that you have just evaluated.
To do this you must take the second derivative.
If you set the second derivative to zero you will get what is called an inflection point.
A point where concavity or convexity of the graph changes.
Think about it.
If a section of a graph is concave up it means that the difference in slope values as you move from left to right increases all the time.
If a section of the graph is convex up the difference in the slope value if you move from left to right decreases.
The second derivative of this function is minus six x.
So setting this example second derivative to zero leaves x equals zero.
This is the inflection point.
Substituting x equals zero into the original equation and solving for y leaves the inflection value.
In this example zero.
The coordinates for the inflection point is thus zero comma zero.
This again divides our x axis into two parts.
To the left and to the right of x equals zero.
Substituting a representative x value for these two ranges, say negative one and positive one,
will leave the f prime prime of x positive to the left of zero, which means the graph is concave up.
And to the right it is negative, which means convex up.
From negative infinity to zero the graph starts with a negative slope.
But the slope itself gets larger all the time.
At first less and less negative.
The zero at the turning point and then steeper and steeper.
Until the inflection point at zero comma zero.
Where it starts positive but becomes less and less positive.
Until the turning point where it is zero and then more and more negative.
The graph is now complete.
