In this video I will briefly discuss the use of radioactive iodine.
Radioactive iodine comprising the 131 mass number isotope of iodine became available
in the 1940s and is the most widely used definitive treatment of Graves disease.
Radioactive transformation is in the form of beta and gamma decay and iodine 131 has
an 8 day half life.
The effect of beta decay causes tissue destruction and gamma decay is used for its imaging
properties in scintigraphy.
In beta decay a neutron in the 131 mass number iodine nucleus is converted to a proton by
the weak nuclear force changing the iodine into xenon 131, a high energy electron also
called a beta particle and an electron antineutrinos released in the process.
This sometimes leaves the resultant nucleus in a higher energy state which it can decrease
by giving off a high energy photon called a gamma ray as mentioned used in scintigraphy.
Thyrotoxic patients are emotionally labile and this may interfere with their decision making
abilities.
Rendering them euthyroid with antithyroid drugs may improve their ability to make a proper
decision on definitive therapy.
Pre-treatment with thionomides can render radioactive iodine therapy less effective.
This continuing treatment 3-5 days prior though will have very little effect on radioactive iodine
therapy outcome.
Most patients can commence treatment as soon as Graves disease is diagnosed but in those
with severe thyrotoxicosis, thionomide should initially be used to affect euthyroidism.
It is concentrated in the thyroid just as non-radioactive iodine and destroys surrounding tissue as well
as causing some gastritis and syal adenitis.
It crosses the placenta and into breast milk and its use is prohibited in pregnancy and breastfeeding.
The fetal thyroid only starts to concentrate iodine at week 12 though so inadvertent use before
this period may lead to a normal pregnancy.
Doctors extrapolated from nuclear disasters predominate and advise us against the use of radioactive
iodine therapy in children.
The long term effect on the risk of future malignancies elsewhere in the body, on the
future reproductive capacity of females given radioactive iodine therapy and especially
the effect on the young have been studied to various degrees without any level 1 evidence
being available.
Of note there is an increased risk of thyroid malignancies.
This is purely because of incomplete treatment leaving some remnant damaged thyroid tissue.
Dose calculation and its effect on eventual outcome has been debated for a long time.
Eventually though all patients develop hypothyroidism.
The second problem is that of worsening ophthalmopathy especially when subsequent doses are required.
Higher doses tend to be given to younger patients, those with larger thyroids, those with severe
thyrotoxicosis, those with prior exposure to thyronomides and those with higher iodine-131 uptake
on scintigraphy.
Some radiotherapists also suggest higher doses in those with recurrent Graves disease after
initial remission with thyronomides and in those in whom treatment failure should be
absolutely avoided such as in the elderly and those with cardiac disease.
After radioactive iodine therapy most patients show a steady decline in hypothyroidism over
6-8 weeks with a marked reduction in thyroid size.
During this period symptoms can be controlled with propranol and thionamides.
There is a small subset of patients whose thyrotoxicosis worsens directly after treatment and they
should be managed with antithyroid drugs, beta blockers and other medication just as any
thyrotoxic patient.
Radioactive iodine works slowly so if a second dose is required it should not be given before
6 months have passed since the initial treatment.
Finally there are many rules and regulations regarding the use of radioactive substances
in all countries and the use of radioactive iodine is best left to the local policy of your
radiotherapist.
They should recommend their policy on concomitant thionamide use, dose, isolation of patients
from others post administration and follow up.
In the next video I will discuss surgical resection in Graves disease.
