In the previous video I discussed antithyroid drugs for the use in Graves disease and in
this video I will consider the use of beta blockers, glucocortico steroids, inorganic
iodides and iodine containing compounds and lastly potassium perchlorate.
Together with the use of antithyroid drugs the patient must be commenced on a beta blocker
to ameliorate the sympathetic symptoms of hyperthyroidism.
Propranolol is the most researched beta blocker and together with its sympathetic blocking
properties it also blocks peripheral conversion of T4 to T3.
Care must be taken in patients with contraindications such as asthma and for these calcium channel
blockers with rate limiting properties should be prescribed instead.
The next group of drugs that are of use in Graves disease is the corticosteroids.
Because of their side effect profile though they are not advised for first line management
of Graves.
Their use should be considered though in those with Graves ophthalmopathy.
Prednisone at 60 to 100 mg per day for several months have shown to control orbital symptoms
in 60% of patients.
IV use is more effective but with an increase in side effect profile and liver function should
be monitored closely.
With the use of radioactive iodine therapy there is a risk of worsening of eye symptoms and
commencing prednisone therapy three days after radioactive iodine administration is advised.
This is continued for a month and then tapered over the next month.
Patients who smoke have a higher incidence of eye disease and a higher incidence of worsening
eye problems when radioactive iodine therapy is used and should be motivated to quit.
The inhibition of iodide oxidation and organification by an excess dose of inorganic iodide is called
the Wolf-Chaikov effect.
Iodide not only decreases T3 and T4 production in this way but also inhibits thyroglobulin proteolysis
blocking T3 and T4 release.
After taking oral iodide these effects are rapid and pronounced but only last for few weeks
after which escape is said to occur referring to the fact that increased hormone production
returns.
From a surgical perspective there is a concomitant decrease in vascularity of the thyroid with
iodide use.
It has not been shown to decrease blood loss during surgery but from a subjective point
of view it may improve the technical difficulties inherent in surgical resection for Graves disease.
Lugol solution must be given at 3 to 5 drops 3 times a day or saturated solution of potassium
iodide at 1 drop 3 times a day for a period of 10 days prior to surgery.
Agents used for oral cholecystography such as sodium iopanoate and sodium ipadate are potent
inhibitors of T4 diodonase and their use in hyperthyroidism results in a rapid decrease in T3 levels.
They also inhibit hormone release.
Their longer term use does lead to escape phenomenon though and currently they are only used in cases
of thyroid storm and thyroxin overdose.
Potassium perchlorate has been used in a combination with thionamides in amiodarone induced thyrotoxicosis.
Its long term use is not advocated due to the rare risk of aplastic anemia.
It is a competitive inhibitor for iodide transport.
In the next video I will have a look at lithium carbonate, cholesteramin and rituximab.
a
