In this first video on Graves' disease, I will discuss the underlying pathophysiology.
Graves' disease is an autoimmune disease described by Graves in 1835.
It is characterized by hyperthyroidism, an enlarged thyroid, infiltrative ophthalmopathy, and other ocular problems, and an infiltrative demopathy.
Of course, not all patients suffer from all of these symptoms and signs.
At first diagnosis, most patients are between 20 and 40 years of age, and as for most autoimmune diseases, women outrank men.
The autoimmune basis of Graves' disease is a loss of self-tolerance to thyroid antigens, most notably the TSH receptor.
As I have discussed in the video series on thyroid antibodies, the TSH receptor antibody is not a single immunoglobulin,
but a group of antibodies with receptor-stimulating, thyroid growth-stimulating, and even thyroid-inhibiting properties.
The last property explains why some patients may confusingly present with episodes of hypothyroidism in Graves' disease.
It seems that orbital pre-adipocyte fibroblasts express TSH receptors, and are therefore susceptible to TSH receptor antibodies.
Most of our knowledge of the pathogenesis comes from animal studies.
For many decades, mice have been injected with TSH receptor antigens, resulting in the production of antibodies,
with resultant thyroid growth, hormone overproduction, lymphocytic infiltration, and even the development of oculus signs in some mice.
These models are for obvious reasons not ideal, and do not fully explain pathophysiology in man,
who is the only animal who naturally develops Graves' disease.
To better resemble the human disease, gene delivery methods using plasmid C-DNA or adenovirus vectors in coding for the receptor have been developed.
Mice have also been engineered to better resemble human disease.
More modern methods have included the passive transfer of monoclonal antibodies to cause chronic thyroid stimulation.
Currently, chronic stimulation by preceding T-cell depletion followed by adenoviral vector immunization
are coming very close to human models.
The point of this research is to better understand the complex and seemingly varied effects of this disease.
In the next video, we'll look at the clinical symptoms and signs of Graves' disease.
