In this video I will discuss the symptoms and signs of Graves disease.
Clinically the patient presents with an enlarged thyroid.
Due to the increased vascularity of the organ, a bruy might even be audible.
There is a general sympathetic overactivity with a tachycardia, even arrhythmias,
as well as tremors with a patient expressing symptoms of anxiety.
The symptomatic overactivity also causes the wide staring gaze and lit lag.
Weight loss is common due to the hypermetabolic state that the patient is in.
Most patients will develop overt eye problems due to a marked infiltration of the retroorbital space by mononuclear T-cells,
inflammatory edema and swelling of the extraocular muscles,
accumulation of extracellular matrix components and fatty infiltration.
The resulting protrusion of the eye eventually leads to corneal changes.
The majority of patients with eye problems will have mild symptoms and signs.
Only about 3-5% will develop intense pain, double vision or even loss of vision.
Unlike the majority that need no active management of their eye complaints,
these severe cases might require glucocorticoid therapy, orbital radiotherapy and even orbital decompressive surgery.
About 10% of patients with Graves eye problems won't have any hyperthyroidism.
They will have circulating TSH receptor antibodies though.
The minority of patients will develop scaly thickening of the skin, most commonly overlying the anterior tibial region,
and some will develop hair loss.
This demopathy develops in less than 5% of cases, almost all of them will have eye problems.
This mixed edema appears as asymmetric purple-brown raised skin lesions together with non-pitting edema.
There are classifications of demopathy from edema only to edema with nodularity to severe rare forms of elephantiasis-like lesions.
Milder forms require no therapy, but more severe lesions can be managed with topical steroids covered with an occlusive dressing,
which is done for about 4-6 weeks.
More severe cases are caused by the lymphatic obstruction leading from extracellular matrix protein accumulation.
Compressive dressings of the extremities are of use in these cases.
A very rare form includes clubbing of the fingers and toes with local edema and periosteal bone formation.
On laboratory analysis there is an increase in T3 and T4 with suppressed levels of TSH.
I discuss laboratory analysis in more detail in another video series.
Scintigraphy shows a diffuse increased uptake of tracer element.
If you would like to know more about scintigraphy please watch the video on hyperthyroidism.
In the next video I discuss the management of Graves disease and will start with antithyroid drugs.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
