So in the previous video I gave you some intuition about this idea of group action
which I said can be slightly difficult. So that was the intuition
and I glanced over a few proofs but I think there's one we really should just
spend a little bit more time before I get to the promised
non-faithful group actions and some examples there.
Remember in the previous lecture and if you haven't watched it this is not going to make sense
so I'll put a link up there. So I had my set with three elements
and I had Gs, I'm going to write G set, that's the set that is part of the group G
and that was this E tau 1, 2, 3 or tau 1, 2, 1, 3, 2, 3, sigma and sigma squared
and the idea is how do we, the idea here behind group actions is that these are represented
by permutations of that set. So group actions is to have the elements of a set
that makes up a group onto another set and those are permutations
and what we mentioned quickly was this sigma G function that maps A to A.
Now think about what happens when I map a set
to itself. So I have a set of
objects and I map it to itself. That is the definition
of a permutation. I'm just going to scramble the order of those
of those elements. That is a permutation
and we define sigma G as mapping A to the action of an element in G
onto A. So remember this symbol, that doesn't mean this A and this A is the same thing
it just means I'm running through all the A's for every G.
So if we think about what sigma was, what the mapping of the sigma was, it mapped sigma there,
it mapped 2, there's the 2 and that is the 1 there and then the 3 and the 2. So see these
two A's, it doesn't mean they're the same thing when I use the symbol. It's not equal to each other,
but it's something different. So 2 was equal to then sigma dot 1 and 3 was equal to sigma dot 2
and 1 was equal to sigma dot 3. So it's an action of the group set, one of the elements in the group
on one of the elements in the set. The action of that same element G, so this G is the same G, G, G
and one of the G's I picked here was sigma. So it's this action of sigma on 1, the action of sigma on 2,
the action of sigma on 3 and that's what it did to this side. But I'm showing the sigma the other way around now.
And what we could see here is that really this was a bijection. This was a bijection because
I have all the elements there and I have all the elements there, they are not repeated. This is a 1 to 1
and on 2 mapping. And really, so for our example here at work, but it would be much more powerful
if I can show in general that this is a bijection. Because if it is a bijection, I'm really dealing
here with a permutation. Because every time I take a different one of these, one of these, and it acts on
there, you know, I'm going to get this. Or this is equal to this action on this side. So really, if this is,
if this is a bijection, this is a biject function, then I am really, you know, representing each of
these with a permutation. And that is the power of group actions here. And I mentioned to you very
quickly, we use proofs from set theory, we're going to just show that this is actually a two-sided inverse.
This function is a two-sided inverse. And I just want to give you some intuition behind
those proofs as well. So to show that it's a, if it is a two-sided inverse, it is a bijection.
So I'm going to use that form of a proof to show that this is a bijection. And what you do is you
say that if I have sigma of the inverse of one of the elements, or whatever the inverse of that was,
with that on a, that I get back to a. If I have this composition of two of these, and such that
one time I use the inverse in g and an element in g and it's inverse, that I get back a. So what I'm
saying is I'm mapping the whole set a finally through the whole composite of two actions back to the whole a.
So I must get all of the elements a here, take it through a composition of these actions, and I
must land up with all those elements once again. And the other way around as well. So there must be
an inverse there. So if I have this, then the inverse, I land up back with a again, equal sign. So
I land up with a as well. Now I can show you that this one is an injective mapping. So imagine here,
I start with all the a's. I start with all the a's. And then so my first map is this one, that's the sigma
of g. And then finally, I have this one, this one is the sigma of g inverse. So there's my first map,
I do this one first, and then the outside bit there. And then this is the composite. Now the composite must be
an injective, must be injective, because that's what it's saying there. If it's, can I prove that this is
injective? Well, let's assume to the contrary that it is not. Now remember what injective is. Injective means if I
have lots of elements on this side, each one of these on this side maps to something, there's nothing
left out here. And they will just map to one, to a single element. Maybe I shouldn't put that in it,
let's put it in here. So that would mean by, to the contrary, that I would have two elements mapping
to exactly to the same element. And even if this part is then one to one, so each one of these would
map to a unique one there. In, so that's assuming to the contrary that this composition is not injective.
That means I cannot have, by the composite, all of the elements in here being represented in here,
because certainly it's only one of the two of these that is going to be represented there, not both of
them. So there's going to be a's in here. Remember, each of these represents a. There's going to be
some a's in here. So, you know, to the contrary, then I'm going to have these. Only that one is mapped
and that one is mapped. This one's not mapped at all. So these two can definitely not equal each other.
This says that it should be equal. The composite means that all the elements in here should
eventually appear here. But if I let this first step not be, to the contrary, not be injective.
So two would go to the same one. All of these will not eventually make it to there. So by assumption to
the contrary proves that, that this is injective. That doesn't make it so injective, specifically if
you think about if my set here is infinite in size. Now let's do it this way.
So again, I have the whole a, the whole a, the whole a, and my first mapping here is now
the sigma g inverse. My second mapping here is sigma of g. And I'm suggesting that this,
the whole thing must be, that all of a is all of there. But let's assume to the contrary that it is,
so this way around, you'd look at, to, to show that it is surjective. That this is surjective.
Now if I, if I say to the contrary, let's not make it surjective. Now it not being surjective means
that there's elements here on the second side which don't get mapped to. So there's a whole bunch here.
So there's a whole bunch here that I can just take away. They are not being mapped to. So to the
contrary, I assume that this bit is not surjective. So there's some that are not mapped to.
Well then you can think of the fact that if there's this one mapped to, this one mapped to there,
through the composite here, going through, first through this one, then through that one,
there are some here that are not going to land up over there. In other words, not all of these,
not all of these make it into there. So it's not the whole A that I'm talking about. So if I assume
that it's not surjective, then the composite doesn't work. Because there are going to be some
in here which, you know, don't end up there. So it has to be surjective. So this thing, a composition
of this thing must be injective. It must be surjective. Therefore it is a bijection. So if we have a two-sided
inverse, and that's a two-sided inverse, this must be, and we saw a beautiful example here,
of course it is a bijection. Because it is a bijection. And that links, that is the real link
between each one of these being represented by a permutation of the set on which it is acting.
It's a permutation of the set. You can see the beautiful example there. You can get the intuition
to the proof, this two-sided inverse effect, why it makes this thing a bijection. So there's a one-to-one
and onto mapping between these two. So all of them are there. All of them are there in that set.
And that just means it's just a scrambling of them all the time. This just acts to scramble
these up. Each one of these, that one doesn't scramble it up. That one scrambles those two,
and that one scrambles those two, and that one scrambles these two, etc. They are just a permutation.
They represent permutations because this is a bijection. So you can understand what we mean by
the action of one of these on. It is a, it just scrambles them up. That is the action of the elements
in a group that make up a set on another set. Group actions, permutations. It's as simple as that.
