Great stuff. Let's do some exercises just to remind ourselves that we are not dealing
here with algebra. You might be asked just to solve for x there. I have ax and b equals
c. And then for all abcx elements of this group. And I'm going to write a group like
this with these little brackets. The group, so that's all the elements, all the elements
in the seji and the operation on those. Now, I just want to remind you, I mean, if we look
at a, x, b, we could say, well, we could just say, in normal algebra, I was just going to
say that c equals a, c equals, x equals c as a over b, or x equals, I mean, I could write
this as c, or, you know, bring it up the other side so that c, a inverse, b inverse. But
that would just suggest that these are numbers. And they're not, this is not representative.
The elements here are not representative of numbers. If these were, for instance, square
matrices, I won't have that. We do not have this commutative properties. Remember, we have
closure. So if this group operation, if I apply that to any two elements in the set, the solution
must also be there. I have associativity, associativity. I have identity, identity element. And then
for every element I have, it's inverse. Inverse also in that set. Nowhere does it say commutativity
there. So just beware when you do this. So what I'm going to do here is say, a inverse,
a, x, b equals a inverse, c. A inverse, I'm going to use my associative property, that just
gives me the identity element. So that disappears. I can have x, b, and b inverse, meaning I have
a inverse, c, b inverse. That associativity, that gives me the identity element. So I have
x equals a inverse, c, b inverse. And if these were anything, these can now be any elements,
for instance, square matrices. If I did them in this order, I'm going to get a solution to
x. Otherwise, I would not have gotten a solution to x if I just saw this as normal algebra.
So please, please, please remember those. Let's do some more so we can, so we can get used
to, to this idea. So let's have a look at this problem. Now, try and get some of these
online or in your textbook. They really are fun to do, just to get your mind around working
with groups. When I write x squared there, remember, I have my group and I have multiplication
is my operation here. So when I have x squared, I actually mean x and x. So I have this fact
that if I do that, the group operation on two of the same element, that gives me b, and if
I do it five times, I get e. In other words, what I'm suggesting here is x and x equals b.
And what I have here is x times x times x times x times x equals the identity element e. So for
two of those x's, I could put a b. For two of those x's, I could put a b, and then I have
an x and that equals e. So I have this b. I suppose I could do this in two ways. I could
say b inverse b, x equals b inverse e. So that goes away. I can do it again. This b, x equals,
now I have b inverse, another b, b inverse there. From this here, b inverse, and I have the
fact that I now have this b inverse squared, and that's actually just the b squared, it's
inverse. But just to remind yourself that we are not dealing with just placeholders. These
are not mathematical variables, and they are not placeholders just for numbers. Let's have
a look at another one. Now let's have a look then at this one. I have x squared a equals b,
x, c inverse, and a, c, x equals x, a, c. I've got to solve them simultaneously. Not
through normal algebra. Let's see what we can do here. Let's see. I can do a b, x there,
and you just have to look at these and start playing. Quite a bit of fun to do. So let's
put a c there. So I'm going to have x squared a, c equals b, x. Because if I put a c at there,
c inverse c, that gives me the identity element. And what I could do here is I could have an
x, I could have an a, c inverse. Because I could put an a, c inverse in the front, put
an a, c inverse in the front. Associativity. x, a, c. I could put a b there, and I could
put a b there. So I have b, x, and I have b, x. At least we have that. So we have at the
moment x squared a, c. And b, x, and b, x. That's the same. So that's going to be b,
a, c inverse x, a, c. Immediately I see I have the a, c here and a, c here. So I could
do this a, c associativity and a, c inverse, which is just going to give me an e. And if
I do exact same thing there, of course, I'm just going to be left with a, c inverse x on
that side. So what I have here essentially is x and an x. And that equals b. Let me make
some more space because you can clearly see where this is going. That it's going to be
b, a, c inverse x. And what I can do here is an x inverse on both sides, x inverse on
both sides. And that's identity element, identity element. So I'm left with x equals, that's
b. And I have a, c inverse. Done and dusted. These are really a lot of fun. Really look them
up. As I said, try to get some online in your textbook and try to do some of them.
Just to remind yourself that this is not simple algebra anymore. We are talking about a group,
set of elements, and then the, the operation on those elements. And it is a group, so we
are dealing with those properties.
