So we get a chance to get back to some group theory. I want to talk to you about group
isomorphisms. So that's a group automorphism. So what a group automorphism is, is really just
this mapping. We're going to take a mapping and from a group onto itself, from a group onto itself.
So that, in some essence, makes it very easy. And in some instances, it makes it a bit more
difficult to understand or to at least do the proof. So we have a group G, and that's going to
be a set and some group operations. So just a group onto itself. One of the easiest mappings
that you can think of is just the identity mapping. And that is just the way we map every
element onto itself. And we'll call that, we'll call that FE. So that's just identity mapping.
So everything onto itself. Now, if we have this definition of it, what we're really saying
is that this group automorphism, and let's call it, well, if you can think of a group, you
can think perhaps that there'd be more than one, that there really will be more than one
automorphism. And you can actually put all of them together in a set. And we call that
set the automorphisms of the group G. So not as any AUT. That's the way it's written in
most textbooks. So we have the set of the automorphisms. And that is going to be a set
of all these mappings that are elements of the symmetric group on G. So why is it an element
of the symmetric group of G? Because if you think about what a group is, really, we've
shown that we can construct a group as just the set and all the possible permutations on
a set. And if we give all of those permutations a symbol, those symbols make up the elements
that go inside of that group. And if we look at the symmetric group, that refers to all the
possible permutations of a set. So it's got to be the element of this such that we obey something.
So if we take for all G1 and G2 elements of the set there. So if I take my set there and
I take any two of the elements, I have this property of isomorphisms, this property of
isomorphism applying here. So the fact that we have, if we have this mapping of this composition
of these two, so you take any two, you compose them, your binary operation between them, and
that is going to equal, must equal this mapping on one of them composed with the same mapping
on the second one. And that is the set of all the automorphisms of this group. And what
we are saying here is that it's a, it's all these mappings that we can do of the set onto
itself. So don't look at that, that's very, that's one of them, but there can be more of
them. And we're saying that it's an, it's an element, it, all these mappings are element
of one of the symmetric, of, of, of the symmetric group, which is this huge thing. It's all the
possible permutations. Now, what we actually want to show is that this set here is actually
a group. The fact that the set of all automorphisms of G is this group, is a subgroup, at least,
of the symmetric group on G. So it makes up a group. And for it to make up a group, it really
has to obey all the properties of a group. And what we need to show, of course, is closure
and we need to show that the identity element exists. So can we show closure? So we have
the fact that F1 and F2 are elements of the automorphisms of G. So that is what they look
like. And I then need to show that if they are so, then we have this fact that the composition
of them must also be an automorphism. So if I compose the two of them, what I really have
is the F1 of the F2 of G1 composed with G2. And that is really for all G1 and G2, two elements
of G set. So that's really what I have, what I have there. And what I want to show is if
I compose them, now that that composition of these two, that this must also obey this definition
of what, this isomorphism criterion that it must obey. So if I have F1 composed with F2,
what I really have is this F1 of G1 composed with G2. And what I have there by this property
of isomorphisms is I have the F1 of G1 composed with the F1 of G2, composed with the F2 of G1,
composed with the F2 of G2. That's really what I'm saying. If I'm composing these two and all
I'm using is this definition of the isomorphisms. But if I look at this composition that I really
have there, this, because it is an element of that, would be the F1 of the F2 of G1 composed
with the F2 of G2. And really what I have here is nothing other than what I have, what I have there.
I have the F1 of, of this would be the F1 of G1 composed of the F2 of G2 composed with the F1 of G,
which one have I got, no, I haven't got, etc. You can see that these two things are going to be
exactly the same. So by this definition, if I have F1 and I have two and they're part of this
automorphism of G, so they obey this isomorphism property here, that composing them is going to
leave me with exactly the same thing. If one of, if two of this, if one of, if two of that,
write them out and I land exactly there. And I land exactly there. The, the, because it is a subset,
of course, I don't have to worry about associativity. The identity is, is definitely, it obeys this
property. So it, I definitely is there. So this identity mapping, identity group isomorphism is there.
And all I'm concerned about now is to show, is to show this idea of the inverse being there. And the
way that we're going to show, go about this, is just to show that it obeys this property of the
isomorphisms. So what we can really show is the fact that if I have the group and the, onto the group,
I can really find, if I have G1 on the second part, remember, so if I, if I can find, if I, if I have G1
there, what we have here, remember, is a bijective mapping. And it's very nice that it's bijective
because I can find G1 prime and I can make that G1 and I can find G2 prime such that that is G2.
So I can really, I can really have that. By this, I really need to show that the F inverse of G1
composed of G2 equals the F inverse of G1 composed of the F inverse of G2. If I can show that, that means
this inverse, you know, does obey this. And if it obeys this, it really is one of the automorphisms.
So if we have the F of G1 composed of G2, I can write that as, or at least the inverse of that, I can write that as the F inverse of G1. I can just have this F of G1 star. And for G2, I can write the F of G2 star.
Because, because this is a bijective mapping, I can find in this, I can find G1 and G2 here and it will have a corresponding F. There's a corresponding element in here that should I take the F of that, I'm going to end up with that.

And if we look at this right-hand side here, if we have this combined here, the F inverse, we have F inverse of G1 and we have composed of the F inverse of G2.
And once again, it's the same issue that I have here. This is the F inverse of G1 is the F of G star 1. And this is the F inverse of the F of G2 star. And the F inverse and the F, that is just G1 star composed of G2 star.
And these two things are exactly the same. So if I really, if I have F1 and F2 in there, and I look at the inverse, the inverse does obey this, so it must be one of the automorphisms of G.
So it obeys this property of the automorphisms of G. These two things are exactly the same.
So really this group of automorphisms, a set of automorphisms is a group of itself and it's a subgroup of the symmetric group.
It's some of the elements of this symmetric group on G, all the possible permutations of G.
So they've been short is a group automorphism. I think in the next video, I'll just show you a short example of one of an easy, at least to put this into perspective, an easy example of, of, of these group automorphisms.
Jah Josh Josh Josh Josh Josh Josh Josh Josh Josh Josh Josh Josh Josh emphas
