Now that I've introduced you to Euler's walk, let's look at a Hamilton walk.
William Rhone Hamilton.
Now, I think the story goes about 1859, there about, 1850s.
He needed some drinking money and he developed this puzzle game.
It's just a map with cities and he said, could you travel to all the cities?
You say you have to visit all the cities, but you can only visit every city once.
So you can't go past that city again.
So where the Euler's walk was about the edges, as far as the Hamilton walks are concerned,
we are concerned just with visiting all of, so it's all of the nodes, all of the nodes,
and I can use them just once, just once.
Again, we have this concept of an open walk and we have this concept of a closed walk.
So you've got to look at that.
So let's look at these two and just have a look.
Let's just look at the first graph here, an open walk.
Well, we can see as long as, well, let's start at one.
I can do one, two, three, four, five.
I visited all of them, and I visited all of them only once.
One, two, five, four, three.
And I can't go three, two, one, two.
Five, two, one.
Because as far as getting to one, and I haven't done all of the, or if I start here, I can't go back to two.
But I could do five, four, three, two, one.
That I could do as well.
These are just open ones.
But if I wanted to do a closed one, how would I do a closed one here?
Is it possible to do a closed one?
In other words, I start and I stop at the same.
If I go to two, you know, I can go all the way.
I've got to get back to one.
So that's very difficult.
If I go four, three, any other way.
Five, four, three, two, one, two.
I can't come back to two.
So this two seems to be problematic in that I can't get out of there.
What if I look at the second one?
Can I do a closed, can I do a closed Hamilton walk here?
If I start one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, one.
So that seems to be, you know, this seems to be, seems difficult when you just look at it.
But if there's really many, or there's really more than one closed walk, you can, you can really take there.
And I can start at, you know, with it going that way around, I can really start anywhere.
And I can still get to, so I can go nine, one, and I end at nine.
So there's many closed walks.
There's many closed walks there.
So this is, based on this, if you remember this puzzle game, you have a map of cities and you want to visit all the cities.
You have to get to all the cities, but you can only visit a city once.
So you can't come, you can't come back to that city.
You can't visit it twice.
So just once.
So in short, that is a Hamilton walk.
So yesterday we looked at these Eulerian walks and cycles.
Let's just today look at the Hamilton walk.
So let's create a graph that we had on the board.
And what I'm going to do is I'm just going to copy and paste it from my other screen on the left hand side here.
Let's go there.
There we go.
And I'm going to hit shift enter, shift return.
So slightly different orientation, but that's exactly the one we've just had on the board.
And I can ask, I can ask whether this is a Hamiltonian graph.
Once again, remember, it's going to look for closed.
It's going to find a closed Hamiltonian cycle.
So I can just say Hamiltonian graph Q.
Is this a Hamiltonian graph?
And it's going to say, yes, it is.
Let's find a Hamiltonian cycle.
Hamiltonian cycle in G.
And it's going to find the first one.
And it says 1 to 2, 2 to 3, 3 to 4, 4 to 5, 5 to 6, 6 to 7, 7 to 8, 8 to 9, and 9 back to 1.
And I can actually do a highlight graph of this.
Let's have a look at this.
Highlight, a highlight graph of G.
And what I want there is a path graph.
A path graph.
Show me the first one.
So that's the one that it's found now of this, which we just did, which was a find Hamiltonian cycle in G.
Now I just have to close all my square brackets.
There we go.
And there beautifully you'll see here, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, back to 1.
We see this Hamiltonian cycle.
So create some of your own.
Very nice to play with all of these inside of Mathematica.
And what you can also do, if you're here on the desktop version, I'm going to hover there, for instance, and I'm going to click on that.
And there we have the documentation open up for us.
You can read all about and play around with this one, the dodecahedron.
And you can find its Hamiltonian cycle, or the first Hamiltonian cycle.
And if you just looked at this dodecahedron, you might not think that it would be, that there would be a closed Hamiltonian, a closed Hamilton walk in there.
But lo and behold, there it is.
So let's just increase the screen size a bit if we can.
There we go.
So click on that.
Remember, there's such excellent documentation when it comes to Mathematica.
Have a look around.
Thank you.
