Now that we've seen a couple of groups, very interesting groups, let's just add some stuff
to our bag a little bit again, our box in which we put stuff, and I once talked about
homomorphisms and all the fisms, now we've, I think we spoke about isomorphism a little
bit but let's put this in a bigger context. So I'm going to create this function f and
it's going to be a function that maps, you know, one group to another and if it preserves
or it looks at the structural similarity between the two, I call that a homomorphism.
So hands up, who understood that? So let's just look at something. Let's construct two
groups, G and G consists of some set A and under some binary operation and B, H is another group,
B and some totally different binary operation. So I don't need the same sets, I don't need
that for A to be equal to B and I certainly don't need for the binary operations to be together.
But is there a function that I could do that will map G to H such that this function is a homomorphism.
So it preserves the structure between these two sets. If I can, if I can create such a function,
I have a homomorphism. So let's look at an example of some homomorphism. Let's have G and let's have
that the set of all real numbers. Let's have that a set of all real numbers and I have this under,
let's make this under addition and H is going to be the set of real numbers made with positive real
numbers under multiplication. So it's not the same set, it's definitely not the same binary operation
and I have this F and my F maps every x to e to the power x. Every x to e to the power x.
So let's see if F is indeed a homomorphism on this group's G and H. So let's take two arbitrary
elements, let's take three arbitrary elements x, y and z and they are all elements of G and if I write
G it means they're an element of my set under that. So what I will have here, it is a group,
so there is going to be closure. So x plus y equals z and my f of x, what will f of x then be? Well f of x
e to the power x, f of y equals e to the power y and what I'm suggesting here is that I have a
multiplication of these two so that I would have this e to the power x times e to the power of y.
Where does that come from?
E to the power x times e to the power of y, that's going to be e to the power z.
That's what I have because my function takes every x and maps it to e to the power x.
So I better have that. And on the left hand side what I have here is e to the power x plus y
equals e to the power, well z is this x plus y. So those two are indeed equal to each other.
So this function is a homomorphism between these two very different groups. On this side I had my
multiplication and on this side I had my addition. So that was under addition, this was under multiplication,
under this function and the function is this mapping. So I think that's a beautiful example
illustrating this concept of a homomorphism. Let's clean the board.
Okay lastly, I've put some definitions on the board just to show you this fits into this
isomorphism at least into this broader concept of these homomorphisms. So if I have a homomorphism,
it does not need to be one-on-one. When it is one-on-one, one-to-one, we call it a monomorphism.
If it's onto, we call it an epimorphism. And if it's both, we call it an isomorphism.
So that's where we get our isomorphism. And if this function is a mapping of a function of a group to
itself and it turns out to be one-to-one, we call it an endomorphism. And if it's then both one-to-one
and onto, we call it an automorphism. So if you come across these terms,
just remember this page. It'll tell you what a monomorphism, epimorphism, isomorphism,
endomorphism, automorphism is based all on this concept of homomorphisms. Hopefully we get a
chance to look at some of the examples at least of just this monomorphism or at least epimorphisms
as far as homomorphisms are concerned.
