In this tutorial I want to talk to you about using Plotly inside of Google's
Colaboratory. So I went to my Google Drive and I've opened a new Jupyter
notebook as a Colaboratory file here. I've given it a name and imported my
research group's image. So let's talk about importing or using Plotly inside
of Colaboratory. Now it is one of the libraries that has already been loaded.
So it is no problem just to use Plotly. You can just import it as you would
usually do. So we're going to import numpy as np. From scipy I'm going to import
stats just so that we can simulate some data. And then from plotly.offline I'm
going to import iPlot and init notebook mode. And I'm also going to import plotly.graph
objects as Geo. Now notice carefully I'm not initializing the notebook mode right
now. So to run this we click on the little arrow to the left hand side and that cell
executes. You'll notice on the top right hand corner it has connected and it is
connected to the Google engine as far as Python is concerned. Now you can pause the
video here and copy this function. You've got to create a function that you
then call in every cell that you want to use Plotly in. So I've called it
configure underscore plotly underscore browser underscore state and we're going
to import ipython and we're going to write this display script. As I said you can
just copy and paste it. Let's run. And now let's get to simulating some data. So I'm
just going to seat the pseudo random number generator there with the number
one. And I'm going to create a computer variable called WCC for instance white
cell count. And I'm going to take that from a normal distribution with a mean of
15 standard deviation of 3 and I want 1000 of these data point values. And now we
can plot. Now as I mentioned here it's required in every cell that you want to run
a Plotly graph in. So you've got to use these two lines of code. So we're going to
call this function and then we're going to initialize the notebook mode with
connected equal false. So you can copy and paste that as well. That has got to go in
every cell. And now it's just normal Plotly. I'm going to use trace 0 as is the
norm. Go dot histogram. My xx is going to be the white cell count. My data object is
going to hold the trace as its single list element. And I'm just going to make the
plot look a bit better by introducing some layout. And then I can call iPlot and
I use as always the dictionary format. So data being data and layout being layout.
Let's run that. And there you go. We have a Plotly graph right inside of a
co-laboratory Python notebook. Beautiful. So copy and paste the definition and
remember to call that the function and to call that function in every cell that
you are going to use to create a Plotly graph.
