As I have mentioned elsewhere in this video series, thyroid disease can be taught from
the point of view of discussing the various diseases themselves and certainly you will
find most of these discussed in this series.
It is also of use though to look at the discussion from the point of view of thyroid function
itself.
In this series I will discuss hyperthyroidism.
Various terms and definitions are used and some refer the term hyperthyroidism only for
cases of primary thyroid overproduction of hormone, whereas the term thyrotoxicosis is
used for any source of the excess hormone level.
The causes for thyrotoxicosis are Graves disease, which is the most common, toxic multinodular
goiter, solitary toxic adenoma, thyrotoxic episodes of Hashimoto thyroiditis and also subacute
lymphocytic and postpartum thyroiditis, amiodarone and other drug induced thyrotoxicosis, exogenous
intake of hormone, TSH secreting pituitary adenomas, hydatiform moles and choriocarcinoma,
struma ovari, metastatic functioning differentiated thyroid carcinomas and metastases in the thyroid
that cause damage to thyroidal tissue.
The majority of these are discussed in various video series and for further information I
refer you to those.
Some of the causes will be discussed here though.
The clinical picture is varied and results from the hypermetabolic state caused by an excess
of thyroid hormone.
Patients lose weight and they feel fatigued due to myopathy.
They have neuropsychiatric symptoms and develop restlessness, agitation, anxiety and psychosis.
Powers of concentration and memory decrease.
There is an increased motor contraction of the small bowel leading to an increase in bowel
frequency.
An increase in sex hormone binding globulin leads to retention in estrogen with resulting
oligo and amenorrhea in women.
Men develop loss of libido and can develop gynecomastia and spider angiomas.
There is peripheral vasodilatation that causes a tachycardia and increased inotropy.
Patients may develop cardiac arrhythmias and ischemia especially in the elderly or in those
with pre-existing coronary artery disease.
In the next video I will discuss laboratory investigations for thytotoxicosis, antibodies, scintigraphy
and ultrasonography.
