In this video I will discuss amiodarone induced thyrotoxicosis, thyroid hormone resistance,
familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia, thyrotoxicosis factitia, struma ovari and
metastatic thyroid cancer.
Amiodarone is a commonly used antiarrhythmia drug and contains 75mg of iodide per 200mg
tablet.
The use of amiodarone can cause both hyper and hypothyroidism and it seems that this is
dependent upon whether the population under investigation is in an iodine rich or iodine
poor area.
In iodine deficient areas there is a tendency towards hyperthyroidism and in areas with an
adequate iodine intake there is a tendency towards hypothyroidism.
Amiodarone induced thyrotoxicosis is sometimes divided into two types.
In type 1 amiodarone induced thyrotoxicosis there is an underlying subclinical thyroid
disease that is exacerbated by the iodine in the amiodarone tablets.
The most common causes are toxic multinodular goita and Graves disease.
In type 2 amiodarone induced thyrotoxicosis amiodarone causes a destructive thyroiditis with
the release of stored hormone.
The thyrotoxicosis of type 2 disease is self-limiting and lasts for about 1-3 months.
It generally resolves without treatment but in those with severe symptoms management is
required especially because these patients were taking amiodarone for cardiac disease and
they will not tolerate severe thyrotoxic symptoms.
Most steroids effectively control their hyperthyroidism.
Very few cases of thyroid hormone resistance have been described.
The condition is caused by mutations in the gene encoding for these receptors and testing
for these mutations is diagnostic.
Two types of resistance have been identified.
In the first there is a general receptor resistance to T3 in all cells with hormone receptors.
This includes cells in the pituitary.
Not sensing adequate hormone levels TSH is produced and the thyroid stimulated.
Because of peripheral cellular resistance to T3 no thyrotoxic symptoms develop.
In the second type only cells of the pituitary are resistant leading to hormone overproduction
and thyrotoxicosis.
The next form of thyrotoxicosis is familial disalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia.
It is a cause of euthyroid hyperthyroxinemia.
The TSH and T3 levels are normal but total T4 levels are increased.
Free T4 may be normal or slightly elevated.
The patient is absolutely euthyroid.
The same biochemical pattern is seen in women taking estrogen or other drugs that increase
thyroid binding globulin.
The diagnosis is confirmed if you can show increased binding of T4 to serum albumin.
Next up is thyrotoxicosis factitia.
In this case there is an exogenous source of thyroid hormone such as medication or animal
thyroid tissue in food presenting as a local epidemic.
Patients may take medication in an effort to lose weight or even in a suicide attempt.
More commonly it is due to taking a dose that is too high for its intended use such as in
replacement therapy for legitimate causes.
Laboratory investigation shows increased T3 and T4 with suppressed TSH.
Syntigraphy shows reduced uptake and the whole clinical picture is that of a thyroiditis.
The deciding factor is thyroid globulin levels which show low levels in exogenous intake and
high levels in thyroiditis.
A simple decrease in dose or discontinuation is the treatment of choice but if massive amounts
have been taken, gastric lavage and activated charcoal may be used.
Cholestytamine binds thyroid hormone in the enteropatic circulation and increases fecal
excretion.
Next up is tumor ovari.
This term refers to any ovarian tumor that differentiates to produce thyroid hormone.
It is usually a teratoma and benign.
Patients present with thyrotoxicosis and elevated levels of hormones and reduced TSH levels.
Thyroglobulin levels are increased.
If syntigraphy included the pelvis increased uptake is seen there.
Patients are prepared for surgery as any hypothyroid patient and treatment is in the form of resection
of the tumor.
Diagnosing metastatic thyroid cancer is especially problematic post resection as the patient is
given thyroxine therapy.
Follow up after ablative surgery must include the use of thyroglobulin which will correctly
identify metastatic disease.
해주cias STACיי üçガk
healthy
pretty
治癡
healthy
healthy
慈 egent
healthy
healthy
そして
cordagel
