In this video, I will discuss laboratory investigations for thytotoxicosis, antibodies, scintigraphy, and ultrasonography.
Thytotoxicosis is confirmed by decreased TSH level with a rise in T3 and T4 levels.
It is advisable to use free T4 levels during the initial diagnostic phases,
as protein abnormalities, if present, will interfere with total levels.
This is possible in pregnancy, in those taking estrogen, those with infectious hepatitis,
those on opiates, heparin, phenytoin, diazepam, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, furosemide, carbamazepine, and salicylates.
The ratio of T3 to T4 can also be of value, and in Graves' disease and toxic multinodular goiter,
it is usually more than 20 to 1, and in thyroiditis, iodine exposure, or an exogenous T4 intake,
the ratio is usually less than 20 to 1.
Other common laboratory findings include hyperglycemia, due to the catecholamine-induced inhibition of insulin release,
and patients may also have hypercalcemia, and an increase in alkaline phosphatase,
due to direct TSH stimulation of osteoblastic bone resorption.
As mentioned in the video series on Graves' disease, there is also a slight increase in liver enzymes.
Thyroid antibodies are neither sensitive nor specific enough as sole diagnostic criteria.
I urge you to watch the video series on thyroidal antibodies.
Both radioactive iodine and technetium are concentrated in the thyroid,
and can be used for imaging of the gamma decay that they undergo.
Both the 1-2-3 and 1-3-1 forms of radioactive iodine can be used.
Iodine-1-2-3 causes less damage to the thyroid because of lower radiation levels.
Iodine is more accurate than technetium, especially when it comes to the diagnosis of warm and hot nodules.
Scanning, though, is done at 6 and 24 hours after oral administration,
whereas technetium allows for rapid studies within 30 minutes.
Technetium cannot be used to calculate the dose of iodine-131 treatment.
Increased uptake is seen with Graves' disease, toxic multinodular goiter, and toxic solitary nodules.
With Graves' disease, there is a uniformly increased uptake in an enlarged gland.
In cases of severe hyperthyroidism, there is a rapid turnover of iodine in the thyroid,
and the 24-hour scan using radioactive iodine will not show as high levels as uptake at 6 hours.
With toxic multinodular goiter, there is an inhomogenous uptake with areas of high and areas of lower uptake.
Lastly, in the case of solitary toxic nodule, there is an increased uptake in the nodule,
with almost no or less uptake in the surrounding thyroid tissue.
In the case of minimal surrounding uptake, the nodule is classified as hot,
and if there is some uptake in the surrounding tissue, the nodule is termed warm.
Increased uptake is also seen in cases other than thyroid toxicosis.
In patients suffering from severe iodine deficiency, defined as a 24-hour urinary iodine excretion
of less than 100 micrograms per day, uptake is increased.
In the early stages of Hashimoto's disease, the TSH stimulation of a relatively intact gland
will lead to increased uptake.
This is even before hyperthyroidism occurs in the patients that do undergo this stage
before becoming hypothyroid.
Once hypothyroid, the TSH is elevated, but increased uptake is lost.
Lastly, uptake will be increased in cases of increased loss of hormone and binding proteins,
such as nephritic syndrome, chronic diarrhea, and the ingestion of bile acid resins.
The first cause for lowered uptake is the hyperthyroid stages of thyroiditis.
During this period, thyroid tissue is being destroyed and hormone released with suppression
of TSH and therefore lowered uptake.
In the recovery phase, hormone productions rebound with increased uptake.
It is therefore important to follow the patient's biochemistry before jumping to a syntigraphic diagnosis.
Taking iodide, iodine-containing contrast agents, seaweed, or kelp will lead to a temporary effect
called the Wolf-Tchaikov effect, and if a syntigram is done in this period, it will show decreased uptake.
Ultrasonography is useful to delineate masses, measure size, and differentiate solid from cystic lesions.
Colour flow Doppler is also useful to distinguish type 1 and type 2 amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis.
In type 1, there is an increased flow because of the hypermetabolic state,
and in type 2, there is a decreased flow due to the destructive nature of the thyroiditis.
In the next video, I will discuss amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis,
thyroid hormone resistance,
familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxenemia,
thyrotoxicosis factitia,
struma ovari,
and metastatic thyroid cancer.
So, what do you see that?
How dare you save the harvest?
How dare you save the harvest?
Pale research,
what do you see that?
How dare you save the harvest?
How dare you save the harvest?
Let's go save the harvest.
I saw a spoonful of the harvest ofающimusunk income 就 from showing light,
4.5% conditions,
where your past life.
Which is key to the harvest?
I saw this question by showing that the Harajani disease,
we find it the moisture in other parts and the hair that you see.
It's a way to do forward your harvest yettvishvisibleIt's time.
You can't remember how much food will be satisfied with fils.
There are some more and some ways to buy the farmers outfield.
