In this video I will discuss the diagnosis of hypothyroidism and its general management.
Again I urge you to watch the video series on the individual diseases for more information
on them.
The diagnosis of hypothyroidism is based on a combination of the clinical picture and
laboratory tests.
Sintigraphy and sonography do not play as large a role as they do in hyperthyroidism.
The mainstay of diagnosis is in evaluating levels of thyroxine, T3 and TSH.
Many conditions and drugs can alter the levels of thyroxine binding proteins and it is better
to insist on free T4 when dealing with a workup of a hypothyroid patient.
Patients with primary hypothyroidism will have elevated TSH levels and decreased thyroid hormone
levels.
Patients with central hypothyroidism from pituitary and hypothalamic disease will have an inappropriately
low level of TSH for their lower thyroid hormone levels.
They require a full workup of the hypothalamic pituitary axis and an MRI scan.
Two clinical situations need specific mentioning.
In the first the patient is on thyroxine replacement therapy but is non-compliant and takes their
medications sporadically.
This may lead to false laboratory values and it is important to insist that the patient is
forthright if this happens.
Secondly, any patient that is suffering from or is recovering from severe illness will have
abnormal TFTs and as a rule no medication is usually required.
A follow up of their thyroid functions will normalize as time goes by.
For discussion on the use of thyroid antibodies in the diagnostic workup I urge you to watch
the video series on thyroid antibodies.
The majority of patients with hypothyroidism will require lifelong thyroid hormone replacement
therapy and monitoring.
The only exceptions are those with transient hypothyroidism due to subacute thyroiditis and
those with drug induced hypothyroidism.
The main aim of thyroxine therapy is to achieve a u-thyroid state by laboratory and clinical evaluation.
The clinical evaluation is very subjective and patient dependent.
On the other hand laboratory follow up is quite simple and requires dose adjustment to keep
the TSH level at the lower end of normal but not below normal.
TSH levels should be checked every 4-6 weeks after initializing treatment or altering the
dose until normal levels have been reached.
Bar any intervening factors the levels can then be checked yearly.
The starting dose is about 6 mcg per kg per day but in the elderly and those with coronary
artery disease it is safer to start with 25-50 mcg per day.
Thyroxine is absorbed in the jejunum and it is best to take it on an empty stomach as food
will decrease absorption by about 40%.
A variety of medications including calcium and iron supplements, antacids, PPIs and anticonvulsants
interfere in some way with absorption or blood levels and the dosage of thyroxine may have
to be altered because of this.
There are various formulations of thyroxine and if the patient changes between various manufacturers'
stimulation, TSH levels should be monitored closely.
The most serious side effect comes from over replacement and TSH levels should not drop
below normal.
Rare side effects include allergy to chemical compounds in the manufacturing process.
A last note deals with concomitant use of T3 with thyroxine.
T3 allows for more rapid response but a meta-analysis looking at subjective symptoms and various parameters
including cholesterol levels has found no difference between combination and monotherapy.
Newer slow-release formulations of T3 might change these findings but for now more research
is required.
In the next video I will discuss hypothyroid coma.
