Hypovolemic shock results from fluid loss. Now there are two main causes for hypovolemic shock,
hemorrhage and plasma depletion. Now the latter occurs because of extravascular fluid sequestration
or gastrointestinal or urinary fluid losses. Extravascular fluid sequestration may be difficult
to recognize and it follows infection and inflammation from diseases such as pancreatitis
or from trauma or surgery. This leads to increased capillary permeability and loss of intravascular
fluid to the interstitium. Physiological changes take place to compensate for hypovolemia irrespective
of the type of hypovolemia. This is done in order to protect cerebral and coronary blood flow.
These changes are driven by sympathetic activity, the release of stress hormones,
the resorption of interstitial fluid, mobilization of intracellular fluid, and renal fluid conservation.
Hemorrhage as an example of hypovolemic shock is easier to quantify than plasma losses. So we talk
about class 1 hemorrhage which occurs when 10 to 15 percent of the total blood volume is lost.
In a 70 kilogram human being this equates to about 500 to 750 milliliters. This is usually well tolerated
especially in the supine position and mild tachycardia may be the only finding. In class 2 hemorrhage
we have a 15 to 30 percent loss that equates to about 750 to one and a half liters. That's 750
milliliters to one and a half liters. These patients present with anxiety, tachycardia
and a drop in their pulse pressure. Now the central perfusion is maintained through peripheral
vasoconstriction which leaves the peripheries cold and pale with diminished capillary refill. A mild
oliguria develops from elevated levels of vasopressin, aldosterone and adrenergic mediated renal
arteriolar constriction. Now class 1 and class 2 shock are termed compensated forms of shock. It is
important to recognize and manage these classes before decompensation sets in. Now class 3 hemorrhage
represents a 30 to 40 percent loss. That's about 1500 to 2000 mills one and a half to two liters.
These patients have a pronounced tachycardia. They have tachypnea, a depressed mental state and they become
hypotensive. Class 4 hemorrhage represents a total loss in excess of 40 percent. That's
more than two liters. Severe hypotension is noted and the mental state deteriorates through restlessness,
agitation and obtundation. Finally a loss of consciousness sets in as the cerebral perfusion becomes
totally inadequate. If the hypovolemic state is not recognized and managed, decompensation leads to
cellular damage with the release of inflammatory mediators that may set up a self-propagating cascade
leading to multi-organ dysfunction. While external hemorrhage is easy to recognize, internal bleeding
and plasma losses may remain hidden. There's a few points I want you to note. Never rely solely on supine
vital signs. Patients with early stages that's compensated hemorrhage develop dizziness when sitting
upright and their heart rates might increase. Remember also that capillary refill time has a very low
sensitivity. Don't rely on it. Hematocrit and hemoglobin levels are maintained early in hemorrhage and only
start to drop when fluid shifts into the vascular space by means of compensation or when crystalloids
patients are administered. Lastly, plasma losses difficult to diagnose may lead to hemoconcentration.
