In this lecture I want to talk to you about the very important topic of hypotheses.
First of all, let's just start by importing what we need.
So from ipython.core.display, so it's the sub-modules of the ipython module.
I'm going to import HTML, that is what I require for my CSS file.
But I'm also going to import the image command there.
Just so that I can display images to the web page here.
So, hypothesis.
How do you do good research?
Best research comes from, I think, having a burning question.
You might be dealing with some tests in the laboratory.
You might be dealing with patients.
And something starts nagging at you.
You wonder, why does this turn out to be this way?
You might be treating hypertensive patients.
And there's some question you have because there seems to be a difference in something,
some variable, between those that smoke and don't smoke.
You might be dealing with some intervention that you do and you wonder, is this really successful?
And for that you would do a randomized trial.
So you have to have this burning question.
Something nags at you and you want the answer.
That forms a good basis for research.
Now where do we go from there?
The first thing that you're going to do is set two hypotheses.
Once you've got this burning question and you know what variables and what groups you want to compare to each other to solve your burning question,
you've got to set your hypotheses.
It might seem such a trivial thing, but it is absolutely important.
I'll show you at the end that based on how you set your hypothesis, you can get different p-values.
And you might make a mistake, which might be an innocent mistake, but it might be more serious than that.
So what are these hypotheses?
Now that's a lot of sentences there, lots of boring words.
Let me tell you what they are.
You set two hypotheses.
One is going to be called your null hypothesis.
And your second one is going to be your test or alternate hypothesis.
So I reiterate, you're going to have this burning question.
You're going to decide what variables you want to collect.
Then you're going to set your hypothesis.
Then you're going to do your data collection.
Then you're going to do your statistical analysis.
That is the steps, the order of the steps.
So the null hypothesis.
The null hypothesis is you're not moving from the center.
In other words, you're going to say, I'm not going to find any difference between the groups.
Statement of no departure.
I'm not going to find any difference.
Your alternate hypothesis or your test hypothesis is going to say,
I am going to find a difference.
That sounds very trivial.
And it is.
But it is so important.
Now that test hypothesis, there is a difference.
There's actually slightly more to that.
Let's use an example.
Say for instance, for some test or some disease, there's a test and it has a mean value of 18.
And you take 30 samples at random.
You do analysis and you get a mean of 21.
Can you now state that that 18 was a lie?
It was incorrect.
Well, you've only got a few samples here.
You didn't do millions of people with that disease and did the test and found 18.
You've only got that sample.
So can you say, can you say that that 18 was a false statement?
Well, you're going to state your null hypothesis.
You're going to say, I'm not going to find any difference.
18 is what the answer is out there and 18 is what I'm going to get.
My null hypothesis, that's my null hypothesis.
My test alternate hypothesis is going to say, I'm not going to find 18.
Not finding 18 can come in three varieties.
It's either going to be not 18 at all, so either higher or lower.
Or it's going to be, my test hypothesis says, it is going to be more than 18.
Or it can say, it is going to be less than 18.
The first one where you just state it's going to be different.
That is called a two tail test.
And where your test alternate hypothesis says, I'm either going to find a value higher
or I'm going to find a value lower.
Those are one tail tests.
Very important.
As I say, it works out, the calculations work out a different p-value,
whether you do a one tail test or a two tail test.
So what does the computer do behind the scenes?
Before I move on to that, remember, it's very important that your decision between one tail and two tail
logically follows from the problem that you are dealing with, the research question that you are trying to ask.
You can't be unscrupulous about this.
It will be clear that you chose the wrong form of test alternate hypothesis just to get a different p-value,
which might bring you into statistical significance.
Whereas if you chose the two tail, it wouldn't.
It's easier to get a lower value with a one tail test than a two tail.
You cannot do that before your data collection or your statistical analysis.
You make that based on the scenario that you are dealing with.
With that, you set the type of test hypothesis.
Then you do your analysis and you do not change after you've done your analysis.
That would just be cheating. End of story.
So what does the computer do behind the screen?
Remember the central limit theorem?
It said that if you could repeatedly do this countless times, take a sample,
either get a mean value or the difference between the means of two groups,
you start counting in those millions that you do over and over again,
you start counting how many of each value you get.
Some differences or some means or whatever the case is are going to occur more commonly than others.
And you just start counting how many of each of those occur.
And you start stacking them up.
Obviously, some will occur much more commonly.
They'll fall there.
And some will occur less and less and less and less and less and less and less commonly.
And if yours is one of the less common ones, we're going to go for statistically significant results.
How does the computer do that?
It can through the t-distribution.
Now remember the t-distribution is if we don't know what the true population standard deviation is.
We can only infer it from our standard deviation that we get in our trial or study.
It's going to draw this curve for us.
And now you've got to tell it what you want your level of significance to be.
What area under the curve would be?
Remember the central limit theorem?
The area under this curve is 1.
So constructed by design is significant.
And usually we choose 0.05.
That's called the alpha value.
So for a two-tailed test, it's going to divide that into two equal bits.
0.025.
2.5%.
And draw a line where that area would be.
This is not to scale.
Would be 0.025.
0.025.
And have a cut of value on the x-axis there or there.
It will then take your difference in means or your mean converted to a value, a t-statistic
that falls somewhere on the x-axis.
It will then draw the lines and colour in.
If the area of your colouring in's are more than 0.05, you're going to say it is not statistically significant.
If it is, we would say then the p-value is less than 0.05, there's a statistical significant difference here.
Or I found a statistically significant value.
It's actually wrong to say.
You must actually say to have found a value as extreme as this was less than 0.05.
But in clinical research we usually say statistically significant.
There's something else about this alpha value.
It actually signifies the risk that you are willing to take to falsely reject the null hypothesis.
And that is what is known as a type 2 error.
It means that there actually wasn't a difference in truth.
If you could investigate all 6 billion people, it wasn't really.
But you falsely rejected that null hypothesis that there was no difference.
You take a 5% risk.
That's the alpha value.
From there it will do this area under the curve.
That's a type 1 error.
Now as far as that goes, remember, you can either then reject or not reject the null hypothesis.
Statistics doesn't work in a way that you can ever prove the null hypothesis.
You cannot accept the null hypothesis.
You can either reject it, thereby accepting the alternate hypothesis,
or you do not reject the null hypothesis.
So p-value more than 0.05, you do not reject the null hypothesis.
You can never accept it.
You can never prove it.
P of less than 0.05, you reject the null hypothesis, thereby accepting the alternate hypothesis.
Now just for clarity sake, here's the other little figure.
This would be one tail in my test hypothesis.
Alternate hypothesis stated that I think the value would have been more than.
Then you lump all your 5%.
Here's an example where we found a value out here.
The computer will color that in.
It will say this green area under the curve is larger than 0.05.
Again, this is not to scale.
Therefore, we do not reject for this one tail test the null hypothesis.
Therefore, no statistically significant difference or a statistically significant value was found.
So in essence, that is hypothesis setting.
After you develop your research question and decide what variables you want to collect to answer that question,
you set your two hypotheses based on the scenario that you are dealing with.
Then you start collecting the data.
Then you do the data analysis.
Excellent.
You do the data analysis.
Excellent.
