Now we've had our very nice gentle introduction to matrices and vectors and we started off even
looking at these systems of linear equations. Now let's just go one level deeper. I think you are
quite familiar with it now. You're comfortable with what a matrix is, what a vector is,
how some matrices and augmented matrices represent systems of linear equations. Let's go deeper.
And the topic for today is this concept of an identity matrix. Now you are quite familiar
with what it is because you know what an identity element is. If I were to look at the set of all
integers, if I were to look at the set of all integers and I would look at the binary operation
of addition, now don't worry about those terms. If you've taken a course on group theory or abstract
algebra and there is a playlist, I'll link to it there, then you will know what this is all about.
What it is just saying though, if I take all the, if I take all the integers, so that would be the
set, say minus three, minus two, minus one, zero, one, two, three, all the way to infinity, negative
infinity, positive infinity. And my binary operation is positive. Binary just means I'm taking two
elements and I'm adding them together. So I'm going to take one plus two, one plus three, negative
one plus three. So take two of them and add them to each other. It's as simple as that. Don't let
these, don't let the jargon in mathematics ever, ever, ever get you down. It's just simple stuff.
I'm just adding two of these. There is an identity element for addition and that is zero because it
works like this. If I take any element here, three plus zero, that equals zero plus three and that's
a three. Identity means if I do something to two elements in the set, I'm just left with the, if I
do something of what, with one of the elements with the identity element, I'm just left with that
element. If I look at the integers and I look at multiplication, the identity element is one
because one times any of these elements. So one times three, that equals three times one and that is
just going to be equal to three again. So that is just the identity element leaving something the way
that it is supposed to be or the way that it originally was. And there is this concept of the identity
matrix. Now let's just very quickly think of the identity matrix as far as addition is concerned. So I have
this matrix 2, 1, 3, 4 and I wanted to add some matrix to it so that I'm left with this original
matrix. Well, what is the identity element for addition going to be? 0, 0, 0, 0. We've looked
at matrix addition. It's element wise 2 plus 0, 1 plus 0, 3 plus 0, 4 plus 0 and I have it right there
2, 1, 3, 4. That's the identity element. It's nothing other than this identity element. So no problem
there. What is the identity element though for multiplication? What is the identity element
for multiplication? And that's very simple and we are restricting ourselves here by the way to square
matrices. Number of rows equals number of columns. Only those. An identity element is very simple. 1 and
0 and 0 and 1. It is as simple as that. If you take any matrix and you do this multiplication. Let's do
that. 2 and 1 and 3 and 4. Let's do 1 and 0 and 0 and 1 as far as my multiplication is concerned.
So for this one, it will be this row, this column and this row. So 2 times, 2 times 1 is 2 plus 0,
that's 2. For this one, 0, 1. For this one, 3 is 3. And for this one, 3, 4. And lo and behold,
I'm left with exactly the same thing. What you would notice, well just by the way, we call this identity,
we call this identity matrix I. And you know, we can scale up as long as there's ones here and zeros
everywhere else. So that would be the identity element that's 3 by 3. By the way, this is called the main
diagonal, the main diagonal of a square matrix, top left to bottom right. If they all ones,
ones, everything else is zero, that is an identity element. And if this was my matrix A,
and this is my matrix I, one special property about this is that it does commute. So 1 times A,
and both of them are just going to equal A. So the identity element as far as addition
of square matrices, with extra zeros as the thing goes, and the identity element as far as
multiplication of square matrices are concerned. We have the identity element.
Now this is going to be very quick and easy. I want to show you the identity matrix here in the
Wolfram language here in Mathematica. And it's simply identity matrix. You see it there,
identity matrix. And I can just tell Mathematica what I want the size to be, the n by n, the rows
and columns, which will be exactly the same. There's one that is 3. Let's do that in matrix form.
Matrix form. And so I'm using the proper notation here, not the postfix notation. Identity,
identity matrix with three elements. There we go. And we see very beautifully there. Now let me just
increase the screen size for you here. That was so tiny. Apologies for that. So it's identity matrix
with three elements and the matrix form of that identity matrix. And you see, you see it there on
the screen. So very easy to do the identity matrix of any size here on Mathematica. Let's just do one
more. And let's do a nice big one. Identity matrix. And I'm going to do it with seven. So it's a seven
by seven, seven rows, seven columns. It's printed out a matrix form. And there's a big seven by seven
matrix matrices. Look, the main diagonal down here, all ones, everything else being a zero.
