Now that you've seen me deal with inequalities in pencil and paper, let's use Python and we're
going to make our lives a lot easier. I've opened my new notebook. I've called it Lecture 9. As you
can see on the top left, let's go to the top right and hit connect so we can connect to the
Google servers and they can spin up an instance of Python on their side. Now as per usual, I'm
going to start with all the functionality that I want to import from the SymPy package. I'm going
to specify them. Here are the ones that we've seen before. Functions like init underscore printing
symbols, EQ and solve. But for inequalities, I've got a few more that I want to import. I've done it
on two lines. You don't have to do that. You can just keep on adding commas and adding all the
functionality that you require. So I've got ABS, reduce underscore inequalities, reduce underscore
abs underscore inequalities, poly and solve poly inequality. So let's import all of those. And
first of all, of course, we're going to call the init underscore printing function because we want
nice mathematical typesetting when we execute SymPy code. First, I want to talk to you about
comparison operators in Python. Look at that first one. It's an equality. It says, is three equal to
three? That might seem slightly silly, but it is very valid code. And you see the double equal symbols
that asks the question in Python, is the left hand side equal to the right hand side? So what you would
see in mathematics with a single equal symbol, but remember in a computer language, a single equal
symbol is an assignment operator. So we use double equal symbols here. Let's execute that line of
code. And we can see the result is true. It says the left hand side is indeed equal to the right hand
side. These are what we call Boolean questions, statements that can either be true or false.
There's nothing else is possible. So have a look at the second one. I'm asking is three less than or
equal to three? Well, it's certainly not less than, but it is equal to. So that's definitely going to
return a true as well. Next one is just a simple less than. Is three less than four? Yes, indeed,
it is. We'll see true. Is three greater than or equal to three? Yes, that is so. So we see another
true. Now just a simple greater than. Is four greater than three? Yes, that'll be so. And then
this final one is three not equal to. So we see the exclamation mark equal. You combine those two.
It says it's three not equal to four. Well, it isn't. So we have true as well. So I'm going to task
you with setting up some of these that you might return a false value for your statement. Now,
though, let's carry on and talk about inequalities. There's our first inequality. We have a left hand
side and the right hand side, but we're saying that the left hand side is less than the right
hand side. So calculate or solve at least four X, three X minus four is less than five. Now,
first of all, we've got to create a mathematical variable X using the symbol X. You can see it there
and I'm assigning it to the computer variable named X. Let's execute that. Now here we see a function
that we've never seen before reduce underscore inequality. So I've got three times X minus four
less than five comma my second argument X. I want to solve for X. So we're not using the solve function
here. And we see the result there. We see negative infinity is less than X. And there's this little
funny symbol. That's the and symbol. Looks like a little tent. It looks looks like a little a for and
there's just no little line second line there. So and X is less than three. So you can clearly see
X is between negative infinity all the way up to three, but it's not including that three. Now what
you can do is just call the simplify method, which is what I've done here. So I've just had the previous
line of code and I've said dot simplify. And let's see what happens. Now we see it's much simpler. It just
says it's less than three. And of course, that means it goes off to negative infinity. So it's just a
little, you know, simplification. I just want to show you if you create your mathematical variable
X using the symbol X and assigning it to the computer variable X. But you specify X now to
be a real number here. We didn't do that. Here we are going to specify X to be a real number.
If I now use this exact same line of code, I'm using it right here. Now we are going to see the
simplified result X is less than three. So it just depends. Remember how we specified our mathematical
variable X. I want to show you another function solve underscore poly underscore inequality. So as long
as you have a polynomial, you can also use this function. It's constructed very differently. Look
at this. I have a first argument, which is a function, a poly with an uppercase P that actually
creates an object. So that's going to be poly. I've got three times X minus four minus five. Now what
happened there? Well, if I go back to the original problem, I had to make sure that the right hand side
was a zero. So I had to subtract five from both sides. And then I'm only entering the left hand side.
The second argument of this poly function is X. I want a polynomial in X. So all of that becomes
the first argument to the solve underscore poly underscore inequality function. The second
argument, so comma inside of quotation marks, I have got the less than symbol because that's what
my problem was originally. Let's have a look at this result. And now it's going to do this. It puts
inside of square brackets. Now those square brackets is just telling us that Python is creating a list of
values. So that's got nothing to do with a mathematic. What we have to look at is inside,
I see parentheses. So it's open intervals from negative infinity all the way up to three,
not including three. Something else I want to show you with these inequalities. Look at this.
I've got my original problem there. Three times X minus four is less than five. I'm putting that
inside of a set of parentheses to create one object. And then I'm calling the subs method. Now the subs
method, remember method is just a function, takes two arguments. The first one is X, comma, what do I
want to substitute X for? Well, I want to substitute X equals two. Why have I chosen two? Well, if I look
at my interval, it says, well, take any value as long as it's less than three. Well, two is less
than three. So let's check it out. So I'm substituting into this inequality, the value for
X, and that's the value that I'm substituting is two. And if we execute that, we see indeed that
is true. Now let's substitute a value that's not in our interval of our solution. So three is not
included. Remember, this is an open interval. So if I substitute three into that equation,
I see, or I should say into that inequality, let's be sure about that. It's an inequality,
I get the result, which is false. So let's solve this inequality minus two times X minus four is less
than five. Now I'm going to just use the reduce underscore inequalities. Remember, I can just write
out my problem as is comma, and I want this to be solved for X. And now I see that negative three
over two is less than X. Or if I read it from the right hand side, it's X is larger than three over
two. Now once again, I can use simplify, you know, just add the simplify method. And all it's going to
do now is just going to swap those around. So we read it properly the way that we would expect it,
X is larger than one and a half or three over two. Here's my solve underscore poly underscore
inequality. Again, I can do this because we have a polynomial here. There's my poly function again.
So you've got to look at what we had to do. We had to bring that five over to the other side.
So we had to subtract five from both sides. And I'm only putting the left hand side there,
then comma X. And then there's my less than symbol as the second argument to the solve
underscore poly underscore inequality function. So you really have to pay attention when you want
to use this function. And look at that, we see this open interval from three over two up to positive
infinity. Again, please ignore these square brackets. Python is just using that to tell me this is a list
of possible solutions. There's only one interval of solution. And that's this open interval from
three over two all the way to infinity. Once again, we can use the subs method. Look at that.
I'm substituting X equals two into my problem. So there's my problem inside of parentheses using the
subs method. And I want to substitute two as far as X is concerned. And again, two is in my interval,
my solution interval, because this goes from one and a half to infinity. And so certainly two is in that
interval and I get a result that is true. Now let's use a value for X that's not inside of this
interval of solutions. One certainly is not in there. So let's use that substitute that and I'm
going to get back a false. So you can always verify your results. Now let's do this example show the
inequality or at least solve the inequality x squared minus four x is larger than negative three. Let's
just do that poly. Remember, we use poly as an argument. Let's just see what it does. Now yet you
can see it once again, I've taken that negative three, I've added three to both sides so that I only have
the left hand side of the inequality. I want this to be an X and I have to set a domain and the domain
I'm setting is uppercase RR inside of quotation marks. So that's a string and you see this, it's a
poly, it's x squared minus four x plus three in the variable x and the domain is the real numbers. That's
all that that poly is going to do for us. So let's pass that as first argument to the solve
underscore poly underscore inequality function. My second argument is the greater than symbol, which is what I
wanted for this problem. And if we solve this, we see that we have two solutions. And that's what I
mean. Python is going to use these square brackets to denote this as a list of possible values, possible
solutions. And the first one is this open interval. And the second one is that open interval. So it's
all the way from negative infinity to one, not including and then from three all the way to
infinity. Let's use subs. Now here I'm going to use negative four because certainly negative four is
within this lower interval. And if I do that, I'm going to get a true. Let's substitute a value which is in
this open interval from three to infinity. Let's use four there. That's going to give me a true as
well. But now let's use one that's not in the solution. So certainly from one to three, that's
not nothing there is included. So let's just use two as an example. If I substitute x equals two, I get a
false. So let's do this inequality x squared minus one divided by x plus three is less than or equal to
zero. Now what I'm going to do, I'm going to use the reduce inequalities, reduce underscore
inequalities function. I've got x squared minus one in the numerator divided by x plus three in
denominator. And I'm using parentheses here, I have to, otherwise I'm going to run into problems
because I've got division and I've got subtraction and addition there. So I just want to make sure that
my order of arithmetical operations are understood. So I'm saying that's less than or equal to zero.
And then I want to solve this or reduce this for x. And I'm using the simplify method. So you can have a
look at that code and we can see this result. Now this is fairly complicated. Look at this. It says
that x is larger than equal to negative one and x is less than or equal to one. So it's on that
interval from negative one to one. And then we see this symbol. It's a little upside down symbol. And
that's the or symbol. And that says or x is less than negative three. So it's got to be between negative
one and one inclusive or it's got to be less than negative three. So let's have a look at a couple of
these. Certainly zero is in this first interval. So let's run that as a substitute. So that works out for
us. Let's have something that's less than negative three. Let's make it negative four. And we substitute
that. That's also true. And now let's use something that's not in our intervals. So it's only something
like negative two is not between negative one and one. And it's not less than negative three. So that
should return a false. So once again, we're just verifying our results. Let's talk about solving
absolute value problems. Now this can be a little tricky in Simpi. So let's have a look at it. I've got
the absolute value of x minus three equals five. And I want to solve that for x. Now if I want to print
it to the screen, I'm going to use the ABS. That's an uppercase A. I imported that from Simpi so I can
use it as is. And there we see it's printed to the screen. Absolute value of x minus three minus five.
So what did I do? I bought this five from the right hand side across to the left hand side. What I did
was subtract five from both sides. And now what I'm going to do, I'm going to pass that as first argument
to the reduce underscore abs underscore inequality function. Now that's not an inequality. I can certainly
still use this function and I'm just going to say equal equal as my second argument. So making this an
equality and then I want to reduce as far as x is concerned. And we can see our two results. x equals
negative two. And we can see this symbol there. That's an or symbol or x equals eight. I can plug in
either of those two values. I will get the solution. Now look at this. Now I've used the solve function.
We're much more familiar with that one because this is not an inequality. So this might be more
appropriate to use. So let's have a look at it. There's my equation function. First argument is
the left hand side. That's the absolute value of x minus three comma my right hand side is five. And
I want to solve for x. And now I see negative two comma eight. Now I just want you to be careful here
those square brackets there. Again, that's just part of a Python list. And it's telling me there's two
possible solutions that does not indicate a closed interval from negative two to eight. So we just got
to be careful when we look at these results. Now if you want to verify these, I'm just going to do
it the old fashioned way. I think this is the only way you can do it. Let's put in negative
two. That's one of my solutions. So the absolute value of negative two minus three, is that equal
to five? So I'm asking equal, equal five. Is the left hand side equal to the right hand
side when I substitute one of my solutions? Yes, that's correct. Let's substitute the other
solution, which is eight. And indeed, that's correct as well. Now let's have this as an
inequality, the absolute value of x minus three less than five. So now certainly I've got
to use the reduce underscore abs underscore inequality. So there's an absolute value in
there. Now there's my absolute value, the left hand side, and I've bought that five over
to the left hand side so that I only have the left hand side. Unfortunately, you have to do
that. My second argument is the inequality. It's a less than symbol. As far as a string is
concerned, I've got to put that as a string comma. This is all solved for x. And I'm adding
the simplify method to all of that. And now I get this result. x is larger than negative
two. And that little tent, it looks like a that's and if it's upside down, then it's
an or, or an end, you've got to get those two correct. So this says x is larger than
negative two, and it's less than eight. So it's certainly in that open interval from
negative two to eight. So let's choose a value there, such as zero, that's certainly
between negative two and eight. And that should return a true. And then very lastly, let's
substitute something that's not in that interval, something like nine. And if I execute
that now, I'm going to get a false. And so actually, it is a lot of fun, rather easy,
I would say to use some pie for your inequality problems with or without absolute values in
them as well.
