For many lectures now, we've been dealing with equations, but what if the left-hand side is not equal to the right-hand side?
In this video lecture, I want to talk to you about inequalities.
So we start to talk about inequalities.
We've always had a left-hand side equal to the right-hand side, or the right-hand side equal to the left-hand side,
but now we're going to have an inequality. The left and the right are not equal to each other.
Before we get there, though, I really want to talk about intervals.
So let's start talking about intervals.
Intervals, if we think of the real number line, so let's have a real number line right here,
that goes off to positive infinity on this side, and on this side it goes off to negative infinity.
We're talking about some interval of values, that we would find x, if these are all the values x,
horizontal axis, that we have some part of this line in which we find the solution x.
Now, that can take various forms.
We can have a lower bound and an upper bound, and we would write it with square brackets,
denoting that a is included in that possible set of solutions, and so is b.
So if we have something like the solution is between 3 and 4, the solution can absolutely be 3,
and it can absolutely be 4, and anything in between.
So these we're going to call closed. That's a closed interval.
Closed interval.
We can also have this scenario, a comma b, but we put parentheses there, so if that is any solution
between 3 and 4, that is an open interval, and what we do now, we exclude 3 and 4.
We can have 3.0000001, and we can go 3.99999, but 3 and 4 are excluded.
Anything in between 3 and 4 is possible, but certainly not 3 and not 4.
Then we also get this idea of half-open intervals, so we can have something like from a to b,
and now, say for instance, that would be 3 to 4, it is still possible for 4 to be a solution,
but not 3. Something just bigger than 3, but 4 is definitely included.
So we can call this semi-open, semi-closed, depending on the textbook that you read.
So let's say it's semi-closed or semi-open, and we can also get this situation, a comma b.
Now, 3 is definitely possible, and then anything bigger than 3, up to 4, but 4 is definitely not
included. You can call that semi-open, semi-closed, etc.
We can have other ways that we can write this. We can say a is less than or equal to x, which is
less than or equal to b. Yeah, we'd have a is less than x is less than b, so this x at least is
between a and b, but there's no equality there. a and b are not included there. There is an
equality there, so a and b are definitely included. Here we would have a is less than x is less than
or equal to b. It is possible to be b, and here we have a is less than or equal to x, which is less
than b. b now is not included, up to b, but not with b, and then on the left-hand side a, and a can be
included in that solution. So this is something that we have to consider when we look at inequalities.
We're thinking about these possible solutions that we can have. So now there are a couple of rules
that we really have to pay attention to, and as you know, if you know these, then these inequalities
are no problem. So in order to do this, let's create some constants a, b, c, and d. We're going to say
they can be any real number, so they are members of the set of real numbers, but we're going to
subtract from that real number one of the elements of the real numbers, and that's zero. Let's just
remove zero because we want to divide, and we don't want to divide by zero. So let's have these rules.
Now the first one that I want to do, I'm going to say, let's do this first one. If a is less than b,
so we're going to have a is less than b. Now c can be, you know, anything there. We're going to say then
a plus c is still less than b plus c. So I've got a is less than b. I'm adding c to both sides.
But it's still going to be, a plus c is still going to be less than equal to b plus c. So let's say,
for instance, three is definitely less than four. Then we could say, say for instance, three plus
five, that is still going to be less than four plus five. Because what do we have here? We have
eight is less than nine. So that one checks out for us.
Let's do the following. If a is larger, if a is larger than b, then if I take a plus some value
c, that is still going to be larger than b plus c. So an instance here, let's say four is larger than
three. And if I set something like four plus four, it's still going to be larger than three plus four
because eight is larger than seven. So that one checks out as well. Now these needn't be positive
numbers. Let's just have a look at this. Let's still have four is larger than three. We would all
agree with that. But let's add to four. Let's add to that a negative four. We are saying that's still
going to be larger. There's our three on the right hand side. Plus we add a negative four. That's still
going to hold whether that's a positive number or a negative number because four minus four,
that's going to be zero. And that's still going to be bigger than three minus four, which is negative
one. So it doesn't matter what you add on both sides. Nothing is going to happen to this inequality.
If it was less than, it's going to stay less than. If it was greater than, it's going to stay greater than.
So let's have the following rule. If a is larger than b, but now we're going to say and c is larger
than zero. So we're going to constrain c now. Then we're going to have the following. We're going to
say that a plus b, let's have it there then. Let's do a times c is still going to be bigger than
b times c. So those were additions. Now we're going to do multiplication. There we had addition,
addition, even though that addition can be a negative number. Now we're constraining c to be a
positive number. So let's have four is larger than three. And then let's multiply both sides by
anything that's larger than zero. Let's make it five. Let's then it's four times five. It's still
going to be greater than three times five. We have that 20 is larger than 50. Nothing happens there.
Let's have the following rule. If let's do a, let's stick with it, larger than b. And now we're going
to make c less than zero. It's going to be negative. What's going to happen then? Then a times c for the
first time, we're going to swap around that inequality. It's now going to be less than b times c. So in this
instance, a was larger than b now suddenly becomes less than if we multiply both sides by a negative
number. So let's have four is larger than three. And let's say then we multiply both sides by negative
five. So now we're going to have four times negative five. And on this side, we have three times negative
five. And so what do we have here? We have negative 20. And here we have negative 15. And now suddenly,
this is smaller than that. It is smaller than it is smaller than. So we went from a greater than
to a less than. Now let's have the next rule. Let's have if a is less than b, that was greater than
now we're going to make it less than and we have c is greater than zero. Then nothing's going to change
then we're going to have the following a times c is going to remain less than b times c. Let's have
an example. We're going to say three is definitely less than four. We're going to multiply both sides
by a positive number. Let's make it five again, three times five. And on this side, four times five,
it's still going to be less than. We have that 15 is less than 20. So that works out. But now,
for instance, a is less than b, and c is now negative is less than zero, then we're going to
have a swap around again. Then ac is going to be bigger than bc. So let's have three is definitely
less than four. Let's multiply both sides by a negative five. And we have four on the side and a
negative five. So we have negative 15. And we have negative 20. Now, negative 15 is larger than
this is larger than, and we can see this sign, this inequality has changed. Let's have the following
if, now let's stick with this, a is going to be larger than b. And we're going to make c is also
positive. Then if I take a divided by c, now remember, we said these cannot be zero. What
happens now if we do b divided by c, given a was larger than b, c was positive, this remains exactly
the same. So let's have some, let's have some example. Let's say, for instance, eight is larger
than four. And I'm going to divide both of them by two, two is certainly larger than zero.
Then we have eight divided by two, and we have four divided by two. And that gives us four. And
that gives us two. And it's still larger than it's still larger than it's still larger than
now, though, if a is larger than b, and c is now suddenly less than zero, then if I have
a divided by c, and I have b divided by c, then we're going to swap around. Now, a divided
by c is going to be less than, whereas before a was larger than b. So let's have the following,
we have eight is larger than four. And let's divide both of them by negative two, negative
two is certainly smaller than zero. So we're going to have eight divided by a negative two,
I'm going to have a four divided by negative two. On this side, I'm going to have a negative
four. On this side, I'm going to have a negative two. Now this one is smaller than it's smaller
than and now that sign has swapped. So let's have now if a was less than b, and we have that c is
positive, then we're going to have the following. If I take a divided by c, and I take b divided by
c, this is positive, that was less than that's going to stay less than. So let's say four is less
than eight, we agree with that. Let's divide both of them by some positive value. Let's make it two.
We take eight divided by two, four divided by two is two, a divided by two is four, it's still less
than, it's still less than, it's still less than. And then if I have that a is less than b,
and c is now negative. Well, then we're going to have if we take a divided by c, and we take b
divided by c, we're going to have that that sign now swaps, and it's going to be like that. So let's
have four is less than eight. And let's divide both sides by a negative two. Once again, negative
two is less than zero. I have eight, and I'm dividing that by negative two, four divided by
negative two, well, there's negative two, eight divided by negative two is negative four. Well, now
the sign swaps because negative two is larger than negative four. It's larger than and that sign has
swapped. Let's have our very last rule, we're going to say if a divided by c is less than, let's make
it b divided by d. If I take the reciprocal of that, instead of a divided by c, I have c divided by a,
is do c divided by a. And on this side, we have d divided by b. If I swap those around, then the sign
is also going to swap around. So there's the sign. So a divided by c less than b divided by b means
c divided by a is going to be greater than the d divided by b. So let's have a little example of
that. Let's have two divided by seven. That is less than, for instance, five divided by eight.
Why do I know that? Well, I can do common denominators, seven and eight. Seven times eight is
56. So let's make both sides 56 as the denominator. Let's have the two numerators. So I divided this
denominator, multiplied it by eight. I've also got to multiply the numerator by eight. This would be
the same as multiplying by eight over eight, which is this multiplying by one. Nothing changes. Eight
times two is 16. This side, I'm going to multiply by seven over seven. Taking any number, multiplying by
one, nothing changes. Seven times five is 35. And clearly, 35 is larger than 16. So that's it. But
let's swap that around. Let's make it seven over two. And let's make this eight over five.
Now, common denominators. Now, let's make that 10. So I've got 10 as a common number, 10 to get from
two to 10. That's multiplied by five. So I'm going to take seven times five. That's 35. Five to get to
10. That's multiplied by two. Eight times two is 16. Now, clearly, 35 over 10 is larger than 16 over 10.
So seven over two is larger than eight over five. So that sign has swapped. So let's solve some
inequalities now that we know these rules. Let's start with an example. So our example is going to be
the following. Let's do three X minus four. And let's have that being less than five. So what
interval of values for X would solve this? It's not a equality anymore. So I'm not going to get a
specific value for X. I'm going to get some interval. So what I can do, of course, I can add four to both
sides. And if I add some C that's larger than zero, nothing's going to happen to the sign. So I could say
three X minus four plus four is less than five plus four. So I've done the plus four to both sides.
So I haven't changed anything. Of course, negative four, positive four, that's the zero. So I've got
three X is less than nine. Now what I'm going to do, I'm going to divide both sides by three. And
remember, three is larger than zero. So nothing is going to happen to this sign. I can cancel out the
threes. And nine divided by nine divided by three. Well, that's just three. So X is less than three.
Any value less than three. So three is not included. I plug any value in less than three.
I should get this. And let's do that. Let's choose the value two. Let's have three times two minus four.
Four. Well, that should be less than five. Three times two is six. Six minus four is less than five.
And d2 is less than five. So that's absolutely correct. Now there's other ways that we can write
this. We can, for instance, say that X is on this interval. We can say from negative infinity
all the way to three, but three is not included. So it's open interval. Negative infinity, remember
infinity and negative infinity, they are not numbers. They're not some exact number. So you can
never have that that's included. So we'll always have this open interval as far as negative and on
the other side, positive infinity is concerned. So we can say that X is in this interval. Maybe it's
an, I can say it's an element of that interval or it's equal to that interval. We can also write
negative infinity. That's going to be less than X and X is going to be less than three. Three is,
it's on, it's on that interval. So we think of a real number line and perhaps that is zero and that is
one and that is two and that is three and it goes off to positive infinity. This side goes off to
negative infinity. We're going to say that this interval is something like this, you know, three is not
included. And then all the values here, you can plug in any value there and you're going to get that
inequality holds. Let's have another example. Let's have the fact that negative two, let's make that
X minus four. Let's say that that is less than, let's make it five. Let's make it five. Now what I
want to do is I want to get rid of this negative two. So let's divide both sides by negative two.
So I'm going to have negative two, X minus four. And on the side, I have five. I want to divide both
sides by a negative two, negative two and negative two. Now I have divided by a negative number, a value
where C is less than zero. So that sign has got to swap around. Now those two would cancel and I'm left
with the fact that X minus four. Let's have that X minus four. Let's have that X minus four. Well,
that's going to be, let's try and rescue this. It's going to be larger than five over negative two. So
let's make it negative five over two. I can add four to both sides. So X minus minus four, let's add four
to the side, that's going to do nothing to that sign. I have negative five over two. And I'm going to add
another four to that. So on this side, negative four plus four, nothing remains there. So that's going to be
larger than, and let's have negative five over two. I'm going to add to that. And I'll have eight over two.
Eight divided by two is four. I have a common denominator there. So I can say X is larger than
negative five plus eight, negative five plus eight over a common denominator, two. That is, X is larger
than three over two. And again, you know, we can write something like if X is indeed larger than that
number. It means that we have three over two is not included, and it goes up to infinity. Or I could
say three over two is smaller than X. If I read it from this side, it's X is larger than three over two,
X is larger than three over two, and it's going to be less than positive infinity. Now let's do this
very complicated example. Let's have X squared minus one. Let's divide this by X plus three.
And I want this to be larger than or equal to, both possibilities, zero. So let's deal with the
two cases. It can be equal, or it can be less than. So let's deal with case number one. In case number
one, we're going to have X squared minus one, we're going to divide that by X plus three. And we set that
equal to zero. It's certainly possible to be equal to zero. What can we do? Well, we can multiply both
sides by the denominator. So we'll have X squared minus one divided by X plus three. Let's multiply that
by X plus three over one. And so we just have to do that on the right hand side as well. X plus three
divided by one. Now, of course, zero times anything is just zero on the right hand side. I'm just left
with a zero. On the left hand side, remember, this is one single value. That's one single value. There's a
multiplication, which means I can cancel those two. On the left hand side, I'm left with X squared minus
one. I can bring that across to the other side or add one to both sides. So on the left hand side,
negative one plus one, nothing there. On the right hand side, I have equal to one. So in other words,
I take the square root of both sides and I have that X is equal to plus or minus one. So X can be
positive one, X can be negative one. By the way, let's have a look at this denominator. Remember one
thing that X definitely cannot be, it cannot be negative three, negative three plus three is zero.
I can't divide by zero. So at least I know that. And now that now we have X can be one or X can be
negative one. And if we plug those in there, I get either one of those two, I get zero in the numerator,
some number in the denominator. And that is definitely equal to zero. This is the case that we have here.
So let's have the second case. I now want X squared minus one divided by X plus three. I want that now
strictly to be less than zero. So I've dealt with an equal and now I want to deal with a less than
because I have less than or equal to. So how can I have a numerator divided by denominator and it's
negative? Well, I can have a negative divided by a positive or I can have a positive divided by a
negative. So I have to look at either of these. Now remember between this set of this case and this
case, it's less than or equal to. So there's definitely a or between these two. There's going
to be a or between these two, but definitely I have to have this and this or I have to have this and that.
So let's start with this. I've got to have the numerator is less than zero. It's negative. And
both of these things must be true. I have to have that X plus three is got to be positive. So both of
these. Yeah, I would have X squared is less than one. I just added one to both sides and I can have,
I have to think this through. What values can I square that it's still less than one? Well,
it turns out if I go negative one is less than X is less than one. If I have this value on this open
interval from negative one to positive one, if I square anything there, I'm going to get a value
less than one. As soon as I get beyond that, say negative two or one plus 1.1, I will no longer
have the case that the value is less than that on this side. And I've got to have that X is larger
than negative three. Now, how can I have the fact that X is in this interval and X is larger than
negative three? So what can I, what can I have so that both these three things are true? So certainly
I can't have negative two or negative two and a half or negative one and a half, and I can't go
beyond one anyway. So if I look at X being, you know, both of these things have to be true,
then certainly this is the part that remains. Because if this is true, then by necessity,
this is also true. But if I have a value, say negative 2.5, which is certainly there, it's not
in there. But all the values in there are definitely within that. So this one has got to win out.
Because remember, I have to have that both of these things are true. Now let's have the other case.
I'm going to have that X squared minus one, that is larger than zero, or I have X plus three is less
than so and remember, is less than zero. So it's a positive in numerator and negative in the
denominator. So I'm in this case. And between these cases, remember, there's an or between. So I really
have to keep track of the ands and ors. So here we're going to have that X squared is larger than one.
And the only way that that's going to happen is if I have that X is less than one, or X is larger
than, so I've got to put that actually negative one, or X is larger than positive one. If I have,
again, this scenario, I'm going to land up with a value that's less than one. I've got to be beyond
these values, if I square them to get something that's larger than that. And on this side, on the
denominator side, I'm going to have that X is less than negative three. Now again, I've got to think
that or that, and that. And certainly, what is going to win out is going to be this one, because
this X is less than negative one. So let's make that negative two. Well, that's certainly not here.
And definitely, if it's beyond one, it's certainly not there. So certainly, this is the one that's
going to win out here. So now have a look at this. It can definitely not be negative three.
It can be plus or minus one. So let's have that. Those must exist as well. And I've got this
and this. So it's this, or this, or this. And now, if I have one and negative one there,
that's less than, but it can be equal. It's less than, but it can be equal. So that's going to
change to negative one is less than or equal to X is less than or equal to one. So that's the one part.
Or I have to have the fact that X is less than negative three. So what I'm going to leave for you
is to plug in values there, into there, and see that it's less than or equal to zero. Or plug in
a value less than negative three, plug that into X there, and you'll see that's also less than negative
three. If you plug in any value outside of these, so any value that's larger than one, or value that's
here between negative one and negative three, that's not going to hold. Now, the last thing I want to deal
with is absolute values. Absolute values. So let's deal with that. We're going to say that the absolute
value of X. Now, yeah, let me just be sure that X is a member of the set of real numbers.
The absolute value of X is the following.
Now, this is a piecewise defined function. I'm going to say the absolute value of X is X if
X is larger than or equal to zero. And it's going to be negative X if X is less than zero.
Now, that might seem a bit strange. So let's look at a couple of numbers. Let's look at anything that's
equal to larger than zero. So let's say X is equal to positive three. Well, the absolute value of
three, well, we say if that is so, then X is just what it is. It's just itself. So in this instance, well,
that's just going to equal to three. Let's have a value where X is less than zero. Let's say X is negative
two. Well, we say that the absolute value of negative two, that's going to be negative X. That's negative
negative two. And that's also positive two. So we're just saying that we take any number and we
turn it into something that's non-negative, because if we plug in zero, it's just going to be zero.
But any negative, negative times a negative gives me a positive. So we're turning anything into a
non-negative number. So let's look at an example problem. Let's have that the absolute value of X
minus three is equal to five. How can we solve for that? How can we solve for that? Well, let's think
of this definition. So we're definitely going to have a couple of things. We're going to have that
X minus three equals five. That is if X is larger than equal to zero. And we're going to have minus
X minus three is equal to five, if X is less than zero. So I'm just looking at the definition.
I'm taking this. Now it's not just X, it's X minus three. I'm leaving in that as is when X is positive.
I'm just putting a negative in front when X is negative. So if we carry on with that, we're going
to have that X equals eight. If X is larger than equal to zero, well, now we have a specific value,
it is eight. Well, we're going to have on this side, we're going to have negative X plus three
equals five. And if we just carry that on, we'll have that negative X is equal to, I'm going to take
negative three on both sides, that leaves me with two. Or we're going to have the fact that X equals
negative two. So we have two solutions, X equals eight, or X equals negative two for this absolute
value problem to hold. Now let's do one more. Let's have that X minus three must now be less than
five. How are we going to do that? Well, these are actually quite a bit of fun to do. So let's
going to, we're going to say X minus three is less than five. That is if X is non-negative. And we're
going to have negative X minus three is less than five, if X is less than zero. So we've got to have
both of those cases, case number one, case number one and case number three. This one is easy. I'm
just going to take this across to the other side. So I'm going to have that X is less than positive
three on both sides. That's eight, if X is larger than or equal to zero. So now I just got to be careful,
it's less than eight, but it's got to be there. So I'm going to say zero is less than or equal to X
is less than eight. That's my one solution here. Let's multiply both sides by negative one. But do
remember that means that sign has to swap. So I'm going to have X minus three is larger than negative
five. And that is if X is less than zero. So what we're going to have here, we're going to add three
on both sides. So that's going to be X is larger than negative two. But remember, X is less than
zero. So we're going to have this negative two, we're going to have X, and it's going to go up to
zero. Now X is less than zero, but it's larger than negative two. So there are my two solutions. So
it's between zero. So let's have it, let's put it down here. It's going to be between zero.
Oh, let's put it out here. Zero to eight, but eight is not included. And we've got to have this union
here. And that goes from negative two to zero. And these are open intervals on both sides. There's
no equality there. And I want the union of those two. Remember, with a union of those two, I can also
say that that must be all, which is the symbol instead of the symbol. So if I have on this open
interval, the semi-open, semi-closed interval, either of those two, this is an or a union,
then this inequality is going to hold.
