Good morning everyone. This morning we'll be discussing groin hernias. It's quite a
lengthy topic so brace yourselves and my apologies to the orthopods. As always this talk comes
accompanied by a paper that goes into a lot of the work in a lot more detail. If you're
like that paper you can just ask me and I'll email it to you. So we'll be discussing groin
hernias under a couple of headings. We'll be looking at some statistics, sort of a brief
overview of the anatomy of the area and how we diagnose the condition, some classifications
systems, indications to treat groin hernia and then we'll have a look at some treatment
options and the complications thereof. Okay so just looking at some numbers. The true incidence
of groin hernia is not clear but the repair of these hernias forms a large bulk of modern
day surgical practice. Ingrinal herniorephiae is probably the most commonly performed procedure
by general surgeons with about three quarters of a million hernias being repaired in the
United States each year alone. Patterns of repair are not the same worldwide as you can see by
graph. About three times more hernias are prepared per million members of population in the United
States compared to the United Kingdom. So some anatomy. All medical students will spend many hours
studying the anatomy of the inguinal canal and many will never remember all the finer details of the
complex three-dimensional area. Moreover even those of you who have very good work knowledge of the
area and can name all the structures of our heart will probably find yourselves quite stumped when
you open an actual groin of an actual person. You'll realize that no diagram or picture can truly
convey what the surgeon encounters. So in this talk I'm not going to go into a detailed discussion of
all the groin structures because that's just something you have to sit down and study but we'll
rather discuss some of the concepts you need to grasp about the groin in order to understand hernia.
So inguinal canal. This here is an iasis diagram of the inguinal canal which is like which is about
four centimeters long and located about two to four centimeters above the inguinal ligament
and carries the spermatic cord of the round ligament. So like any passage it has two walls a floor and a
roof and it starts at the deep ring which is a defect in the transversalis fascia and which forms the
posterior wall and then it ends at the superficial ring which is a triangular opening in the aponeurosis of the
external oblique which forms the anterior wall. And I only read about Fruchard's myopectinial
orifice for the first time when preparing for this talk but understanding of this area is useful in the
understanding of the anatomic location of various groin hernias. So Fruchard advocated that all groin
hernias originate in a single weakened area of the abdominal wall and he described the MPO in the 1950s.
It's bound inferiorly by the Cooper's ligament which is on the bony margin of the pelvis.
Its superior margin is formed by the inguinal scythe which is in turn formed by the internal
oblique and transverses abdominal muscles. Then its medial border is rectus abdominal and its lateral border is
agliopsoas. It's divided into a superior and inferior orifice by the inguinal ligament. So inguinal hernias occur
through the superior orifice and femoral hernias occur through the inferior femoral orifice. So superiorly
passes your inguinal canal and inferiorly passes your femoral vessels. Okay so I'm not going to go
bore you all to tears with detail about the various nerves and vessels because once again you just need
to sit down and study it. But there are important structures to remember and when you're doing a groin
hernia repair is actually quite important to dissect out and to try and preserve nerves. If you damage
them inadvertently you can cause chronic groin pain and if you accidentally damage vessels you'll cause
bleeding which can be anything from irritating to catastrophic. So when you're diagnosing a hernia
it's actually quite a simple affair. A bulge in the groin is the most common complaint and common
presenting sign and there may be pain or associated paresthesia but they're not usually extremely
painful until they become incarcerated. So clinical examination is the most important part of the
diagnosis of inguinal hernia and it's usually all that is required in simple and complicated hernias.
So you should examine your patient supine and erect and a finger should be placed into the internal ring
and the patient should be asked to perform a valsalva to feel if there's a bulge coming through the ring.
A bulge above the inguinal ligament is usually an inguinal hernia and below the inguinal ligament is
usually a femoral hernia. You can do some special investigations. So ultrasound is very sensitive and
specific for groin hernias and it's good at differentiating between inguinal and femoral hernias.
Then ultrasound CT and MRI are good for eliminating other causes of an inguinal mess or of pain.
So there is a differential diagnosis to an inguinal swelling which you guys can have a look at.
And then herniography, not something we use here or that has been encountered,
I've encountered ever and not something that's really discussed much in the literature
is injection of the contrast medium into the peritoneal cavity followed by a plain film
which shows your peritoneal folds and reflections and shows a bulge. So in very tricky cases where you're
really not sure if you've got a hernia or something else, laparoscopy can be diagnostic
and has the advantage of being therapeutic as well. And then how accurate are we when we're
diagnosing hernias? We're very good at diagnosing a groin hernia and we're not so bad at differentiating
between inguinal and femoral hernias. But the studies have shown that we're pretty bad at
differentiating between a direct and indirect hernia. And in most centres according, you know,
even specialist versus intern, our accuracy rate is probably less than 50%. And the question is,
does it really matter? Probably not, because we repair the hernias the same way.
Okay, so classification systems. We do still refer to groin hernias as being either direct,
indirect or femoral. But these descriptions are quite simplistic and don't adequately describe
what is actually happening within a particular hernia. So there are several more complicated
classification systems that have been proposed. And although they are seldom used in day-to-day
practice, their true value is, in theory, supposed to lie in the fact that it gives us a standardised
way of comparing groin hernias, which is useful when we're doing studies to compare different
repair techniques to each other. You know, classification, you know, they give more detailed
descriptions of the hernia size, of the state of the internal ring or the posterior wall, and make
allowances for things such as pantaloon hernias, which is a hernia that has a direct and an indirect
component and recurrent hernias. So the classification systems are described in quite a lot of detail
in the paper, but we'll just go over it quickly. The NIAS classification was proposed by Chicago
surgeon Lloyd NIAS in 1991. And it's based on anatomic criteria and focuses on the functional
stage for the internal ring and the posterior wall. And he proposed specific hernia repairs for different
hernia types. And then the Gilbert classification with additions by Ratko and Robbins is based on
anatomical and functional defects found intraoperatively and requires some variables such
as recurrence to be noted separately. And then Ratko and Robbins use mesh plugs for all of their
repairs, which we will discuss more about that later. Okay, the Ben David classification, Dr. Ben David works
the shoulder ice clinic and it's a fairly complicated classification and each hernia is given a TSD score.
T standing for type, referring to anatomic location, S referring to the stack and how large it is and
where it is, and D referring to the diameter of the defect. And then the Grepa, the Ashen and the European
Hernia Society are also good scores. But they all sort of, when you really look into them, modifications of each other.
Okay. So traditional teaching has it that all inguinal hernias must be repaired, as they will
enlarge over time and become more difficult to operate. And they're associated with serious complications.
But numerous recent studies have brought this thinking into question, as surgeons begin to
question the true natural history of groin hernia. Yeah, there are absolute indications to repair a hernia,
such as incarceration or strangulation or bile obstruction. And pain is also an indication to repair.
However, not all hernias are painful and in asymptomatic hernias is it acceptable to watch and wait.
If you look at hernias, if you look at the life-threatening complications, which are things like
bile obstruction and strangulation, they're actually quite rare. The chance that a hernia will become
irreducible increases with time. But over 12 months, the probability that it's going to happen is
only about 6.5 percent. And over 10 years, it's only 30 percent. Okay. And then data obtained for Paul
Berger's Trust Clinic, which is a 19th century hernia clinic in Paris. And from some population
studies done in Colombia in the 1970s, show that the lifetime risk of bile obstruction or strangulation,
which is the most life-threatening complication, is only around 0.3 percent for an 18-year-old male,
and as little as 0.03 percent in a 75-year-old male. And then also with improved post-operative
care, mortality from these complications has plummeted. In Colombia in the 1970s, the mortality
following obstruction was around 47 deaths per thousand. But Hare and his colleagues had a series
in 2000 that showed almost no deaths, which I think is probably in keeping with what we are finding
even in our institution where patients present quite late. In the large studies, which we'll get to now,
the causes of death following hernia operation included things like cerebrovascular
accidents and myocardial infarctions. And it's debatable whether or not the hernia was truly
the cause of these complications. Okay. So these are the two large studies that looked at whether or
not we can act in a more conservative fashion when it comes to hernia. And both of these studies
randomized males with inguinal hernia into an operative and watchful waiting group. So O'Dwani's
colleagues, two-thirds of the observational group recorded rest pain at involvement,
but this dropped to around a quarter or 25 percent after about a year without intervention.
And then just over a quarter of the observational group crossed over to surgery because of increase
in hernia size or pain. And then of note is that at six and 12 months, there was no significant
difference in pain scores between the observational and the operational group.
There were three serious adverse events in the observational group. So one was an incarceration
which was reduced and then repaired electively. Whether or not that's a serious event is debatable.
And then one patient died of a cerebrovascular accident and the other one of a myocardial infarct.
Their argument for saying that this was a serious complication of waiting,
was that if the patient had been operated earlier, their metabolic disease wouldn't have been as
far advanced, so they wouldn't have died from their operation. But a side argument is that they were
given a six-month reprieve from their ultimate fate. Okay. And Fitzgibbons and colleagues also found
that at two years, there was no significant difference between the quality of life and pain
scores between their observational and their operational groups.
So that leads us to conclude that watchful waiting is a safe option for patients who are not troubled
by these symptoms. If a patient does have pain, an operation will probably improve it. But if a
patient doesn't have pain, you must remember that post-chronic post-operative groin pain is a
complication of a repair. And you might end up having a patient who had more symptoms than what they did in
the beginning. There is one exception, of course, which is femoral hernias, which are far more likely
to strangulate than inguinal hernias because of the nature of the anatomy in that canal. And those
should be repaired as soon as possible after discovery. So when you're looking at repair techniques,
because there are many, the ideal repair should have low recurrence, few complications. It should be
easy for all surgeons to perform. It should not be too expensive. There should be a short hospital
stay and condolences period. And your patient should be able to return to work quickly.
There's no single correct technique. And as a surgeon, you need to acquaint yourself with the
literature, which you need to read with some cynicism. As many authors, you'll see when you read
the papers, many authors will advocate to single repair as being the best repair in the world.
But many of these authors have vested interests. For example, as an example, Rathco and Robbins
have written a paper, a very nice paper about the mesh repair. But you must remember that they helped
develop the perfect mesh plug, which they advocate using. So you get to, repairs can be broadly divided
into a couple of categories. So there's more detail in the document describing the repairs and also
some recommended reading. We're just going to discuss the broad principles here. There's tissue
repairs. There's tissue and there's mesh. And then in mesh, there's open and there's laparoscopic.
In your open repairs, you get anterior repairs, you get plug repairs, preperitoneal repairs and
combination repairs. And then the laparoscopic, they're all preperitoneal repairs. It just,
there's a difference between if you enter the peritoneum first or if you cleave a space
before starting your repair. So the Scholdeis repair, those of you who are in medicine for the
money, you should take a look at the Scholdeis business model because it's quite fascinating.
So this is a tissue repair that was pioneered in the 1930s by Mr. E. E. Scholdeis, or Dr. E. E. Scholdeis,
sorry, as part of his war effort. He noticed that quite a few recruits were being turned away from the
army because of their groin hernia and not being allowed to go to war. So as part of his war effort,
he repaired their hernias for them so that they could go off and serve their country.
This clinic is based in Thornhill, near Toronto. And at their clinic, their recurrence rate is only
0.6%. However, this is a complicated repair and surgeons at the Scholdeis clinic are supervised for
their first 200 repairs. So it's not very surprising that surgeons outside of the Scholdeis clinic do not
have the same results. Nevertheless, it still has a lower recurrence rate than other tissue repairs,
such as the Piscini or the McVe. Then the Lichtenstein. In my experience,
this is the most commonly used repair in this part of the world. Most of the registrars rotating
through that use this. And it's also what I've always used up until now. It's an anterior repair
where mesh is placed over the posterior wall deep to the external oblique aponeurosis. It seems to be
considered as a kind of a gold standard. And in most of the literature is comparing the efficacy of
repairs. Sorry. Comparing the efficacy of repairs, they use the Lichtenstein as a control.
Okay. So the plug and patch repair, not something I've ever really seen being used here. The idea
of inserting a plug was first described by Arthur Gilbert, who used to hand roll a cigar-shaped
mesh or an umbrella, sort of reduce his sack, push his plug through the internal ring, and then sort
of allow it to deploy in the extra peritoneal space. Then Rutko and Robbins also use a plug technique.
It's slightly different in that they don't deploy a mesh into the extra peritoneal space, but rather
insert a preformed umbrella-shaped mesh into the ring. And then they also put a patch over that.
And they go to great lengths to explain why this is not an anterior or Lichtenstein repair. It's a
plug repair. And the patch, they say, only serves to prevent the formation of other hernias.
So your plug repairs the hernia you've got now. Your patch stops you from getting another direct or
indirect hernia later. Okay. And then the mesh repair, the preperitoneal operation.
So I couldn't find a good picture of what this looks like when it's done. This is a picture of Lloyd
Nyas, who we've mentioned a couple of times in this talk so far, in the anatomy and in the classification
systems. So he described the Nyas preperitoneal operation. He was head of the surgical department at
the University of Illinois on the Chicago campus. He died in 2008 after making numerous contributions
to different aspects of surgery. So basically, this involves an incision slightly higher than
your traditional incision for your Lichtenstein repair. And you enter the preperitoneal space
through the transversalis fascia, and then deploy a large mesh between the peritoneum and the transversalis
after dissecting out all the hernias. Okay. And then the proline hernia system. This is a preformed
mesh system that sort of covers all of your bases. It's got a component for the preperitoneal space,
a plug, and then an anterior flap. I've never personally seen this myself, but John tells me that
this is what he used all the time when he was in private. Okay. And then just a very quick note on
laparoscopic procedures. There are two kinds. The tip is the total extraperitoneal repair,
where you enter, you take your first port under the umbilicus, you insert it, and then you usually use
a balloon to cleave a space between the peritoneum and the transversalis fascia before inserting your
other two ports and deploying a mesh into the space. In a transabdominal preperitoneal repair,
or a tap, you enter the peritoneum, then you open a flap of that, and go into the extraperitoneal
space, insert your mesh, and then close your flap again afterwards. Okay. So which repair is best?
And we can look at a couple of complications. And mostly we look at recurrence and pain.
Yeah. So we'll start with recurrence. So basically mesh always wins when it comes to recurrence.
And they have less recurrence in tissue repairs unless you have your repair done at the Shoulders
Clinic, in which case they compare fairly evenly. Recurrence is low in both open and laparoscopic
techniques. Although there is some evidence that the incidence of chronic pain is lower in laparoscopic
repairs. Then we can look at time and money. If it's important to you how quick your operation is.
A plug will renew a couple of extra cups of coffee a day. Although as you become more experienced at
the Shoulders or the open or the laparoscopic repair, the differences become less.
Laparoscopic surgery is more expensive at the time of surgery. But in theory, the costs even out as
patients who've undergone a laparoscopic repair can possibly return to work slightly earlier than other
ones. And then we look at sort of complications of the repair other than pain. So, sorry, pain is in
the slide as well. So intraoperative events include things like visceral or vascular damage. And these
are slightly, they are very rare, but slightly more common in laparoscopic techniques. And usually it's
the bladder that's injured. Then other complications like infections, seromas, hematomas and so forth
seem to be evenly distributed across the different kinds. Recurrence is the most common in tissue
repairs and equal in laparoscopic and open repairs. Only a few studies have compared different open
repairs to each other. And it seems recurrence is evenly distributed across the kinds of open repair.
Although there is some evidence to show that the proline hernia system has a slightly lower incidence of
recurrence. But once again, the literature needs to be read with some cynicism to look at, you know,
what your author's interests are. And then, like I said, chronic groin pain seems to be less in
patients undergoing laparoscopic repairs. Then I'm looking at infection rates. Wound infection is
extremely rare in elective repairs and increases to about 12% in emergency repairs. And most of these
infections occur when they were strangulated bowel requiring resection. And there's no evidence
that any kind of antibiotic prophylaxis, be that enteral, parenteral or soaking the mesh in some kind
of a solution, makes any difference to your post-op either tissue or mesh sepsis rate.
Okay, then chronic groin pain. As hernia recurrence sort of becomes more negligible and we become better at
doing hernias and our recurrence rate drops to almost zero. The new hot topic is chronic
inguinal dyneia. So some studies suggest that chronic groin pain after hernia pain may be as high
as 53%. And this may be caused by neuroma formation after damage during surgery or by entrapment of a
nerve by suture or attack. Mesh has not been shown to make any difference to groin pain. And
there are various treatment options. I'll go into a little bit more detail in the paper. Starting
with simple analgesia, you can send the patient to a pain clinic for a regional block. And then some
people actually advocate a new rectomy where they cut off all the nerves and bury their stumps. And
then you should also exclude other causes of chronic groin pain. And a big risk factor for chronic post-operative
groin pain is pre-operative groin pain. And Rutko and Robbins actually claim that there is no such thing as
post-operative groin pain, that it was all patients who had another problem beforehand.
Okay, then which repair should you choose? You should familiarize yourself with multiple repairs.
But you should try to be a master of one. And the chosen repair should be relevant to your setting.
So for example, it's no use becoming a master of the proline hernia system at Joerster.
If your chosen repair is an anti-repair, it's useful to have a backup extraperitoneal repair
for treating recurrences and vice versa. And you should always have a tissue repair in your
repertoire for those cases where it's unsafe to insert a mesh because you've had to resect bowel,
for example. Okay, so basically a final word. There are lots of groin hernias out there.
They don't all need to be fixed. The techniques available work well, and there are many of them.
And then complications are few and far between. Any questions?
you
being
going
you
you
you
you
