So, I am running an anaconda version of Python and the IPython notebook on this Mac computer of mine.
And I've always wanted to include the lifelines package or library that is available to do Kaplan-Meier survival curves.
And it's always been a bit of a problem in as much as there seems to be an outstanding Fortran libraries when you try and install this.
So, this is how to go about correcting that.
First of all, you have to have Xcode installed.
So, on the App Store, just install Xcode.
A good page to visit then is the following.
We see the hpc.sourceforge.net and that's high performance computing for Mac OS.
And there's your little recipe as to how to do this.
First thing to do though is at the bottom here we can see Xcode select install.
Run that first from a terminal window and you can go ahead and do that command line install just of this command line tool for Xcode which will have to happen.
The next thing to do is to download one of these.
Now, if the G4 GCC includes the G4 trend so you don't have to do that.
Although Xcode would have this.
Just do this though.
Download the newest version here.
Download.
Click it and it will download.
Once you've done that.
Open up terminal.
Open up your terminal.
Which I've done.
And then cd download.
So, cd space capital D download.
Because by default that is where this file would have been downloaded.
And this is what you type in.
Gunzip GCC and then there you would put in the name of this file.
With the tarball.gz extension there.
So, exactly what was downloaded you would type in there.
Once that is done you type the following.
Now, I see note there the GC is gone.
So, be very careful what you type there.
And that is space hyphen c forward slash.
You have to include that forward slash.
That is then going to install this G4 trend compiler for you.
The only thing you need now to do is include it in your system path.
To do that, this is the easiest way.
You see the address up here.
www.geo.brown.edu forward slash computing forward slash mac forward slash mac fortran.
And this is what you are going to type in.
So, wherever you are in the terminal.
You are going to type in super user do space vi, the vi editor forward slash etc forward slash bash rc.
And just click around a bit because it is a bit difficult when this opens in the browser.
But somewhere along the line you can start to start typing export path equals dollar path colon forward slash.
Just type that in.
So, that will add this G4 trend.
Now, to get out of that is a bit tricky.
Hit the escape key.
That should save.
And then you can close the command line terminal.
Once you open terminal again, you can type in which G4 trend.
And it will actually show that it is where it is downloaded.
So, now you have the Fortran libraries installed.
You can now actually install lifelines.
So, even though on GitHub lifelines, the developers would say that you only need NumPy, SciPy, etc.
That is not true.
You actually do need the G4 trend.
That is easy enough to do on Linux, but more cumbersome here on the Mac.
So, it is not, lifelines is not part of the Anaconda list of packages.
So, first of all, you are going to have to say super user do easy install or whatever installation
you want to do python hyphen python hyphen pip or just look on the website how to install
on your version of Mac how to install pip and python packages manager there.
And then you can say pip install lifelines.
Now the installation will happen.
You won't get any errors that there is some missing G4 trend libraries.
And you can use lifelines which is a beautiful software library package for python.
And really a nice piece of software to use to do your Kaplan-Meyer survival curves.
...
...
...
...
...
