In this lecture, we're going to make use of Seaborn, which is a module in Python that works together with a matplotlib, and it changes the look and feel of the plotting and graphing that you do, and actually looks quite good, and produces plots and graphs that are really ready for publication.
I'm using, as you can see here, Linux Mint 17.1, so this is how you would do it on the Linux system, which is exactly the same way as you would go about it if you're using macOS.
Of course, if you're using Windows, you'll have to use the Command Prompt, so if you go to the Start menu, or on Windows 8, that's a little bit different, just go to Search, and search for Command Prompt.
Now, here we have the terminal. It's hidden down here for me, on the toolbar down here. You might have to dig into the menu. You might have to search for it.
There's another little picture of it there. Whichever way I do, I get into my terminal.
So, in a Unix-based system, that's Linux and macOS, you're going to go for the Terminal Program, and in Windows, you're going to go for Command Prompt.
Now, if you installed, and this is crucial, if you installed the Anaconda version of Python, which comes with version 3.4, you're going to have a lot of modules already installed.
Seaborn is not one of them, and you have to install it this way.
Now, saying that, again, with the Anaconda, with version 3.4, you get this Python package manager called PIP, PIP.
So, that's what you're going to say, PIP, install.
Now, if you did not use Anaconda, and specifically this version 3.4 of Python, this PIP is not installed by default,
and you'll have to search Google on how to install PIP.
If you've done it as a, I've advised at the beginning of this course, with Anaconda 3.4, PIP is installed.
So, PIP installs Seaborn.
That's how you spell it, and let's hit Enter, and it's going to download it for me.
It might ask you your password first for your system.
In my instance, I've just used the terminal to install something else just before this lecture,
so it didn't re-ask me to, or ask me to re-enter at least my password there.
So, that is how you install Seaborn.
