In this example we asked to get the indefinite integral of x times the sine of x with respect
to x. It is two functions and they have been multiplied so we had better use the product
rule of integration. To remind ourselves let's rewrite that. It stated that the indefinite
integral of the f of x times g prime of x with respect to x equals the f of x times the
g of x minus the indefinite integral of the f prime of x g of x with respect to x. What
we have to decide is which of these two functions, which of these two functions will be the f of
x or the g prime of x. Remember there is f of x and g prime of x. We need to decide which
one to use as which function. Let's try them both out. Let's have the f of x be x and that
means the g prime of x must be the sine of x. That means f prime of x is going to be 1 and
g of x is going to be, what is the anti-derivative of the sine of x? Well that's negative the cosine
of x. Because of g of x equals negative the cosine of x, the first derivative of that or
g prime of x is the sine of x. Let's look at the alternative. We'll write it on this side.
What if we made f of x equal to the sine of x? We decided the other way around now. That
means the f prime of x is going to be the cosine of x. That means the g prime of x is going
to be x. And what would the anti-derivative of that be? Well that would be a half x squared.
Certainly this second decision of ours is more complicated than the first. So let's scrap that.
Let's go for our first decision. If we substitute we are now going to get, let's see, this is
the part that we are now going to substitute our values into, our decision into. So the f
of x we've decided is x. The g of x we have decided is minus the cosine of x minus the indefinite
integral of the f prime of x. We've made 1. And the g of x we know is negative the cosine
of x. All with respect to x. So all we've done is we've made our decision. Do that in green.
We've made our decisions here. The f of x is going to be x and the g prime of x is going
to be sine of x. So our decisions were made here. And we've gotten the first order derivative
of the f of x and the anti-derivative of the g prime of x. And now these values, and if
you write them out like this in a little square as I've done here, it's easy now just to substitute
into into our formula for the integration of of the product of two functions. So where does
that leave us? That still leaves us with x and minus the cosine of x minus. Now 1 times
negative cosine of x is just the negative cosine of x. Let me write this out. So that is simply
going to be negative the cosine of x with respect to x. That equals still x, still negative the
cosine of x minus. What is the anti-derivative of negative the cosine of x? Well, that is just
negative the sine of x. And for the first time now, because we're using anti-derivatives,
we'll just add a plus c. That leaves us with x negative the cosine of x plus the sine of
x plus c.
