In this short video, we're just going to look at what we've learned before.
If we look at the degree of the numerator, it is 11.
If we look at the degree of the polynomial in the denominator, that is going to be 12.
So the degree of the polynomial in the numerator is smaller than the degree of the polynomial in the denominator.
But how do we expand this just so that we can remember all our rules?
So the x plus 2 is to the power of 4.
So what we're going to have to do there is have an a1 over x plus 2.
We're going to have an a2 over x plus 2 squared.
We're going to have an a3 over x plus 2 cubed.
And we're going to have an a4 over x plus 2 to the power of 4.
That is what we're going to have to do to factorize this first factor.
If we look at the second factor here, that contains...
I'm just going to make more space.
That is going to contain...
Has to contain a first order polynomial on the top.
Let's make this b.
Let's make this b0x plus c0.
And that is going to be over x squared plus 2x plus 3.
And lastly we see we do have again an x squared.
But that is all of that plus 4 to the power of 3.
So that will have to be done 3 times.
But because we have an x squared in the denominator.
We'll have to have a first order polynomial in the numerator.
So that will be b1x plus c1.
over x squared plus 4 to the power of 3.
And lastly we're going to have a b3x plus c3 over x squared plus 4 to the power of 3.
And that is the expansion by which we now have to go through all our steps.
To try and solve this.
The idea behind this video is just to make sure that we understand...
how to expand this polynomial that is expressed in the form of a fraction.
So now we're going to put it as a chip-plate synceler туда to the power of be h i s x va wearing h i and ever use the momentum inspector.
I'm going to show you what I can par the naszym informer.
And that I'm the worst way that I find this bulwavarraya.
So that's to make sure, as a chip-plate synceler.
So I'm going to try and solve the result debt csillinger here all of this in my students.
And that are your pets.
So that's what we can do here to be a p3x.
