Here we consider some rules for definite integration that you must familiarize yourself with.
The first considers the order of integration.
If we swap the interval around, we get the negative of the integral.
Next is the zero width interval.
It is easy to imagine why it would be zero.
The width of the base of the area is zero, from A to A.
Next up the constant multiple.
A constant value can simply be removed from the integral and placed before it.
Number 4 is the sum and difference rule, which is easy enough to understand.
Number 5 is the additivity rule.
Note that for the same function, we have moved from A to B and then from B to C.
We can combine these two areas under the curve to include the interval from A to C.
Next up is domination.
If one function is equal to or larger than another, which simply states that if we graph those two functions on an interval, one would be higher up than the other.
If that is so, then the same would apply to the integral, which is obvious really, since the first will have a larger area than the other.
Note very carefully, though, that the interval stays the same.
It is from A to B.
Lastly, we have the maximum and minimum inequalities.
It states that for a given interval, the area under the curve on that interval will be larger than or equal to the minimum of that function in the interval times the upper value minus the lower value.
And the area will be less than or equal to the maximum value of the function on that interval times the difference between the interval values.
What a mouthful!
It is always easier with an example.
Say our function is the square root of 1 plus the cosine of x on the interval from 0 to 1.
Let us substitute 0 into the equation.
That leaves the square root of 2.
And substituting 1 leaves approximately the square root of 1.5.
If you drew two rectangles, each with the base width of 1 minus 0, which is the interval, and the height of the two values here, and you compare the sizes of these two areas,
then clearly the area under the curve on the same interval will fall between these two bounds, called the upper bound and the lower bound.
