This is the second video on numerical integration.
I have discussed Riemann sums and trapezoidal sums.
Now I will have a look at Simpson sums.
In the Simpson sum method, the area under the curve is divided into an equal number of bases,
again with the base delta x being b-a divided by n.
The number of bases needs to be equal because in this method they are paired.
Consider the first two bases.
Instead of making rectangles from them, the top is reconstructed as a parabola.
Redraw this shape inclusive of its two times delta x bases,
two sides and parabolic top as centred on the y-axis.
The area under the curve will still be the same no matter where the shape is moved on the x-axis.
Looking at the reconstruction, note that x0 is now at minus h, x1 at 0 and x2 at positive h.
The parabola goes through three points, negative h comma y0, 0 comma y1 and positive h comma y2.
The equation for the parabola is the f of x equals ax squared plus bx plus c.
Integrating on an interval from negative h to positive h eventually leaves you here.
Pause the video and make sure you understand each step.
Now consider the values y0, y1 and y2 but replacing x with negative h, 0 and positive h.
Here I rewrite y0 by replacing c with y1 and taking it to the other side.
Here y2 is rewritten.
Simply add these two equations.
Now replace 2a h squared and c with the new values just calculated.
This leaves the area under the parabola as h, which is delta x, over 3 times y0 plus 4 times y1 plus y2.
Note the first and last coefficients of 1 and then alternating 4's and 2's.
The next pair of bases will have y values of y2, y3 and y4.
Adding these leaves the Simpson sum for the estimation of the area under a curve on an interval from a to b as delta x over 3 times the sum of y0 plus 4 times y1 plus 2 times y2 etc.
Note the first and last coefficients of 1 and then alternating 4's and 2's.
sorta that one point ths.
The next pair of bases and the next pair of bases will be realized,
Note each tworir成 pus and arterios and aggi captions.
Then the second pair of bases will be Conference 2 2
above 2 to b asieliets and increments.
Either vaccinated check, Cruz Mandrios anduden at otras 真的 audiovisual.
Here are the students who coincide with this in advance or as Louisiana,
Withansia which presents discipline to the Qualcomm to Bild and known asAA51 yet.
