We've just looked at substituting an integration. Here we have a problem. We ask to get the indefinite integral of the square root of 5x minus 1 with respect to x. How do we solve this problem? Well, if we think back to the explanation that we just had in part 1, there were two functions and the variable in the one was the derivative of the variable in the other function.
Sounds more difficult than what it is. Here we have 5x. What would be the derivative of 5x? That would be 5. It's a constant 5. So if we can somehow bring in a 5 into this equation of ours without changing it, we might be able to use substitution. And how can we do that?
5x minus 1 to the power half. That's the same as 5x minus 1 squared times 5. Still with respect to x. 5 times a fifth is just 1. So I haven't changed anything.
Now let's use substitution. Before I get there, this is what I meant. We have 5x in one of our functions and its derivative, which is this 5, in another function.
Which is, which is, which is, which is, which is there. There's our 5x and there's our 5. So let u equals 5x minus 1.
And now we can go substitute. We have 5x and we have 5x. We have 5x minus 1 and 5x minus 1 here. So let's substitute.
So that is going to be the indefinite integral. So that is going to be the indefinite integral of a fifth. Now that would be u we're going to substitute with u to the power half and 5x dx here we said equals du du.
Now we can use the constant multiple rule and we bring out the fifth indefinite integral of u to the power half du.
It's quite easy for us to do by now. That would be, let me do it on the side here so we're all quite clear about it. We're going to take a half which is the power and we're going to raise it by 1.
That leaves us with 3 over 2 and we're going to divide. Remember there's a 1 there. That coefficient will divide by our new power 3 over 2 and that leaves us with 2 over 3.
u to the power 3 over 2. Remember it's an indefinite integral so plus c.
If we just substitute back our value of u. If we just substitute back our value of u we're going to get 1 over 5 times 2 over 3 times u was 5x minus 1 to the power 3 over 2 plus c.
So keeping our eyes open for the possibility of using substitution even if we have to create a second function.
Now look we've actually had 3 function. Now look we've actually had 3 functions. Now we had y equals, say for instance y. Let's call that the g of x.
The g of x there was a fifth. The h of x was 5x minus 1 and the i of x was 5. So we had 3 functions.
But 1 contained the derivative, the first derivative of one element in the other. 5 is the derivative of, first order derivative of 5x.
Then we can use substitution to solve our problem.
