Time for an example to use the knowledge that we have gained in the previous example.
Let's look at the indefinite integral of the secant to the power 4x dx.
Now we're going to have to use at least one of our trig identities here
and the easiest one to use is going to be that the secant squared of x equals one plus the tangent squared of x.
If we substitute that we are going to get the indefinite integral of one plus the tangent squared of x times the secant squared of x.
We still have one square left because it's to the power of 4 dx.
Why did I use this?
Because I want to get rid of the secant squared of x dx
and I have the anti-derivative of the secant in the problem as well
and there it is, the tangent.
So if I let u equal the tangent of x
then I have the fact that the du dx is going to be secant squared of x
and that leaves du to equal secant squared of x dx.
If I now substitute back
I'm going to get the indefinite integral of one plus u squared
because tan of x equals u.
So tan squared is going to be u squared
and the secant squared of x dx is du.
Through the properties of integration this becomes two integrals.
So that is going to be u to the power zero.
One can be written as u to the power zero du
plus the indefinite integral of u squared du.
This is quite easy to do.
Zero plus one is one.
The coefficient of u is one.
One divided by one is one.
U to the power one.
So that just leaves us u there.
Plus two plus one is three.
One divided by three.
U to the power three.
It's an indefinite integral so that's plus c.
And we just substitute back.
That is going to be the tangent of x
plus a third tangent cubed of x
plus c.
So if we look at this problem again.
I used a trigonometric substitution.
And I used one where the anti-derivative of the secant
is in my problem and that is the tangent.
So I could get rid of both the tangent
by setting that equal to u
and taking the derivative of that which would be the secant squared of x
dx as in there.
So I could fully substitute into my original problem
and I'm only left with u.
Remember how to do this.
First of all the power is zero.
So we're going to...
This is one u to the power zero.
What are we going to do first?
Well we're going to add one there.
And that gives us a one.
And that one we are going to divide by the coefficient
which is in front of the u anyway.
Which is there.
And this leaves me with one over one which is one.
u to the power one.
Remember same here.
That would be u to the power three.
And what are we going to do?
Well we're going to add a one there which gives us four.
Sorry.
What am I doing?
That was a two.
So two.
And plus one.
That's going to give me three.
And there's a one there.
So we're going to have one over three.
u to the power three.
And all we did was just substitute back our values of u.
That's going to give me three.
And there's a one there.
So we're going to have one over three.
u to the power three.
And all we did was just substitute back our values of u.
We can use this same size as we can use it.
And add it, and add a beautiful flower on these.
In theument you have the kind of character size.
Suggest your hand first tells you,
what's the 작은 flower size site?
And turn the flower size as you can use it.
Now I've already grown up to mount that they Hall of Home.
It is type 2 ihrer selection size.
