In this video we will consider the anti-derivative.
It is merely a review of simple differentiation and how we might use that knowledge to work our way back from a derivative to the original equation.
This last step is called calculating the anti-derivative and it forms the basis of integration.
In essence, integration is the reverse of differentiation.
Here's an example.
y equals x squared.
Let's view it in this form.
y equals a times x to the power n where a is the coefficient, x the variable and n the power.
In order to take the first derivative we multiply the power with a coefficient and then decrease the power by 1.
That leaves us with d dx of y equals n times a times x to the power n minus 1.
In our example that leaves us with d dx of y equals 2x.
Now let us take a look at working back from the derivative equation to the original equation.
As mentioned this is called taking the anti-derivative.
Consider our new equation 2x in the form p equals b times x to the power q.
With p as our d dx of y, the 2 as b and the power 1 as q.
Let us do exactly what we did in taking the first derivative but in reverse.
First we need to add back the 1 we deducted originally.
And secondly, as we multiplied the power with a coefficient, we now need to divide the coefficient by our new power.
That leaves us with this equation.
First you will note a new symbol.
It is called the integral.
And as we will learn later, this form is called taking the indefinite integral.
b divided by q plus 1 times x to the power q plus 1 plus c.
We will get to the plus c shortly.
Let us go back to our example.
We have d dx of y equals 2x.
The power of x is 1 and we add 1 to get 2.
Divide the coefficient which is 2 by 2 and that leaves us with 1.
So we have x squared plus c.
Basically right back where we started.
We have taken an anti-derivative.
Now for the c, which is quite easy to understand.
If we changed our original example to y equals x squared plus 45,
what will the first derivative now be?
Well also 2x, since the first derivative of a constant, in our case 45, is 0.
No matter what our constant is, our first derivative would still be the same.
And therefore, when we work our way back, or we take the anti-derivative,
we add the plus c and that stands for any constant.
Finally, just as we had new notation to learn for differentiation,
we have new notation for integration.
Here you see the correct notation for finding the indefinite integral of a function.
It reads, the indefinite integral of the f of x with respect to x,
or the indefinite integral of f of x dx.
