Let's see if we can tackle this problem. We are asked to get the indefinite integral of the sine squared of theta times the cosine squared of theta with respect to theta.
Here we have both of the trigonometric functions are raised to the power 2 which are even powers.
That makes life a bit more difficult to solve this problem.
What we do know though is some trigonometric identities both for the sine squared of theta and the cosine squared of theta.
Let's just remind ourselves of those.
We know that the sine squared of theta equals 1 minus the cosine of 2 times theta.
Let's get something to draw a line with over 2.
And we also know that the cosine squared of theta equals 1 plus the cosine of 2 times the angle divided by 2.
And these are sometimes referred to as the half angle equations.
Let us substitute that into our problem and see where that gets us.
That will be the indefinite integral of 1 minus the cosine of 2 times the angle over 2 on the one side.
And we have 1 plus the cosine of 2 times the angle over 2.
And all of this is still with respect to that angle.
Now if you look carefully here we have a perfect square in that we have a minus b and we have a plus b.
If we multiply that out we are going to get a squared plus 2ab minus 2ab minus b squared and that equals a squared minus b squared.
We are just going to simplify.
And let's do that.
That gives us still the indefinite integral of.
So 1 is going to be 1 squared which is just 1 minus.
We are going to have cosine squared of twice the angle.
And that is going to be over 4.
And all of this is still with respect to that angle.
We can simplify that because we now have two parts to this.
So that will be the indefinite integral of a quarter minus.
Now let's do that now just so that we remember.
Just so that we remember where that brings us.
It will be theta to the power 0 which is just 1.
So a quarter times 1 is a quarter.
Minus a quarter of cosine squared of twice the angle.
Both of these with respect to theta.
Let's just give ourselves a bit more space again.
So that is one of the properties of integration.
Now we just have two terms that are subtracted and we can make two integrals out of these.
If we take the indefinite integral of a quarter theta to the power 0 with respect to theta.
That is going to leave us with a quarter times the angle.
We raise 0.
The power 0 by 1.
So 0 plus 1 is 1.
And we divide the coefficient which is a quarter by this new power which is 1 quarter.
Divided by 1 remains a quarter.
And theta raised to the power 1.
Now from this we are going to subtract.
And again with the properties of integration we know we can bring the constant out which is a quarter.
Indefinite integral of cosine squared of twice the angle with respect to that angle.
Now we have already done one integration and it is indefinite.
So remember the plus C.
Now we can do something.
Let's go on to the next page.
We have to now integrate the cosine squared of twice the angle.
We do know how to do that.
And we have to use another identity.
Seeing that we are dealing with an even powered trigonometric function in our integral.
And we know that the cosine squared cosine of twice an angle.
Let's write that.
We know that cosine squared of an angle equals 1 plus cosine of twice that angle.
Twice that angle divided by 2.
Now just notice that we are not dealing with that angle but we are dealing with twice that angle.
So if we do substitute.
It is going to be a quarter of the angle.
Minus a quarter.
Minus a quarter.
And we are going to still have the indefinite integral.
But now we are going to have 1 plus cosine of 4 times that angle.
Divided by 2.
With the substitution.
We are not changing much except just the value or the size of that angle.
So nothing sinister there.
Still with respect to the angle.
And plus C.
This leaves us with a quarter of that angle.
Minus a quarter.
Now again with the properties of integration we are going to have two separate integrals.
So that is going to be a half.
Theta to the power zero.
Plus a half of cosine of 4 times that angle.
All of this still with respect to that angle.
Plus C.
And to leave us with a quarter times the angle.
Let's not forget that integration sign there.
Oh no sorry.
Minus a quarter.
This is going to be a quarter.
This is going to be a half times the angle.
Now plus bringing out the half.
Of cosine times 4 times the angle.
With respect to that angle.
Plus C.
And this is going to leave us with a quarter times the angle.
Minus.
Let's leave this for a while.
A half times that angle.
Plus a half.
Now we need to integrate the cosine of 4 times an angle.
Let's do that on the side.
Let's make a U substitution.
U equals 4 times the angle.
So du d theta is going to be 4.
And d theta is going to be a quarter du.
If we substitute all of that.
We're going to get the cosine of U times a quarter du plus C.
That leaves us with a quarter of the angle minus a quarter times a half of the angle.
Plus.
We're going to bring out the quarter.
So that will give us an eighth.
And the cosine of u du is going to leave us with the sine of u.
The sine and u being 4 times the angle.
All of that plus C.
This leaves us with a quarter of the angle minus an eighth of the angle.
Minus 1 over 32.
Times the sine of 4 times that angle.
Plus C.
A quarter minus an eighth leaves us with an eighth of that angle.
Minus 1 over 32.
Times the sine of 4 times that angle.
Plus C.
31 elas sh artıkla ends.
Multipl就會 kend ув backup.
Minus 1 over 32.
Minus 1 over 33.
Minus 1 over 33.
Terminal dingus.
Differentila solchen.
Minus 1 over 32.
Minus 1 over 33.
Minus 1 over 33.
Minus 1 over 33.
Minus 1 over 33.
Minus 1 over 32.
Minus 1 over 33.
Minus 2 over 33.
Minus 1 over 34.
Minus 1 over 36.
Minus 1 over 34.
Minus 1 over 33.
Minus 2 over 33.
Minus 1 over 34.
Minus 1 over 38.
Minus 1 over impressive.
Minus 1 over 33.
Minus 1 over 34.
Minus 1 over 38.
