In this example we need to find the area between y equals the square root of x and the x axis and y equals x minus 2.
Clearly we'll have to break this problem into more than one integration parts.
We'll have to find out, I think it's clear that we can see that one of our intervals is going to start here at 0, but we need to make sure that that is so.
We need to find out where y equals 0 on this curve of y equals the square root of x.
We will then have to figure out what this y intercept is here.
Because if I can get something to draw a straight line, we'll have to figure out the area under the curve of y equals the square root of x there.
And then we'll have to get the difference between these two equations.
And the interval there is going to be from here to where they intersect.
First let's get the intervals of these two areas.
The first one is going to be where the square root of x equals 0.
It'll be at 0 squared and that simply is 0.
So we were correct.
So we're going to start at 0.
And our interval is going to go to a point where this line, y equals x minus 2, has its x intercept.
So that will be at x minus 2 equals 0 and that's x equals 2.
So this point is going to be 2.
So the first part of our problem is going to have to get this area under the curve.
It's going to go on an interval from 0 to 2.
The second interval that we're going to work from, from 2 to 2, let me try and draw a straight line again.
We've got to figure out that x value.
And that is where these two equations are going to be equal to each other.
x minus 2.
We'll square both sides.
That'll be x minus 2 squared.
x equals x squared minus 4x plus 4.
That'll be x squared minus 5x plus 4 equals 0.
Let's get the roots of that.
That'll be x minus 4 and x minus 1 equals 0.
And so that'll be at x equals 4 and x equals 1.
Now clearly they only, in this quadrant, first Cartesian quadrant, they only intersect at one point.
And the problem here is that we've introduced, shall we say, an error when we squared.
In that if we substitute x equals 4 and x equals 1 into our original equation, which is that, we clearly see that 1 cannot be an answer because the square root of 1 is 1 and x minus 2 is minus 1.
In other words, we will have a 4 here.
So the second part of our problem is going to be the area between the two curves going on an interval from 2 to 4.
So let's do these two problems.
So the first part is just going to be the area under the curve of the square root of x, which is x to the power half dx.
And our intervals we set is going to go from 0 to 2.
And that will be, let's do it on the side here so you can clearly see how we do it.
We're going to add 1 to this.
That leaves 3 over 2.
And we're going to divide 1, which is our coefficient, by this new power.
And that gives us 2 thirds x to the power 3 over 2.
Ok?
So that is going to be 2 thirds x to the power 3 over 2 on an interval going from 0 to 2 according to the fundamental theorem of calculus.
If you think about it, this was our small f of x and this is now our capital F of x.
And we're going to have the f of 2 minus the f of 0.
Ok?
So let's substitute.
That's 2 over 3.
I'm going to substitute a 2 to the power 3 over 2 minus 2 over 3 and a 0 to the power 3 over 2.
This will just be 0.
So what are we going to have?
We're going to have 2 thirds.
We're going to have 8 to the power half or 2 thirds square root of 8.
That is 2 thirds square root of 2 times 2.
That equals 4 over 3.
We've just brought out that 1 square root.
The square root of 2 squared is 2.
2 times 2 is 4.
Square root of 4.
So that's our first area.
Let's look at the second one.
Let's just remember that.
4 over 3 square root of 2.
The second one is where we're going to have, well let's just go back up.
There we go.
The area between these two curves on an interval going from 2 to 4.
Clearly, y equals the square root of x is the top function.
And y equals x minus 2 is the bottom one.
So we're going to have the square root of x, subtract from that, subtract from that, what
was it?
x minus 2.
x plus 2.
Was it x plus 2 or minus 2?
x minus 2.
x minus 2.
So we're going to have the square root of x minus x plus 2.
And we need to get the definite integral going from 2 to 4 of x to the power half minus
x plus 2 with respect to x.
Let's do that.
That'll be 2 thirds x to the power 3 over 2.
I think you know how to do that by now.
A negative there.
A half x squared.
And that's 2x to the power 0.
So that becomes plus 2x.
And we're going to do this on an interval from 2 to 4.
Good.
Here's where the mistakes start.
So we're going to have, according to the fundamental theorem of calculus, 2 over 3.
We're going to substitute a 4 to the power 3 over 2.
Negative a half.
4 squared plus 2.
Substitute 4.
Take away from that.
We're going to have 2 thirds.
Substitute a 2 to the power 3 over 2.
Minus a half.
Substitute 2 to the squared.
Plus 2.
Substitute 2.
Where does that leave us?
That leaves us with 2 thirds.
What is 4 to the power 3 and the square root thereof?
Looking on a calculator, that will give us 8.
Minus 4 squared is 16.
Divided by 2 is 8.
Plus 2 times 4 is 8.
So those will cancel.
Minus.
That will be 2 thirds.
That would be, just like we had before, that will be times 2 square root of 2.
Minus 2 square is 4.
Divided by 2 is 2.
Plus 4.
It certainly looks like we are going to have a common denominator of 3.
If I can get something again to draw a straight line.
That will be, that's not a straight line, but it will suffice.
That would be 16.
Take away.
That would be 4 square root of 2.
And that will be plus 2.
And that equals 18.
Is that right?
No, 10.
Let's just see where, if I made a mistake anywhere.
Yeah, those need to be plus 2, but it's over 3.
So that is 6.
Yeah, 6.
So that will give us 10 minus 4 square root of 2 divided by 3.
And we need to add the two areas to each other.
Remember, the first one was 4 over 3 square root of 2.
And we're going to add to that 10 minus 4 square root of 2 divided by 3.
Our common denominator is 3.
So that will be 4 square root of 2 plus 10 minus 4 square root of 2.
And that equals 10 over 3.
The total area between those curves and the x-axis.
