And here we take our first look at integration.
We still have our irregular shape and we need to calculate the area under the graph.
Just to remind ourselves, the shaded area is bound on the left by the y-axis, in other words where x equals 0.
At the bottom it is bound by the x-axis itself, where y equals 0.
The top is formed by the graph of the function y equals 1 minus x squared in the first Cartesian quadrant.
And the right limit is the x-intercept of the graph at x equals 1.
Now what we see here is what was promised in the first video.
We have divided the shaded area up into two rectangles, each with the same width and a determined height.
We will calculate the area of each rectangle and simply add the two parts.
It is clear that we are going to overestimate the actual size of the shaded area.
Solving this problem comes later.
Remember, in differentiation we started with the concept of limits and here we start with the concept of summation of parts.
First, let us look at the size of the widths of our rectangles.
They are equal and there are two of them.
Calculating the size is easy.
If our interval is from a equals 0 to b equals 1 and the number of rectangles is n equals 2, our formula is simply b minus a divided by n.
And in this example it is 1 minus 0 divided by 2 which is a half.
Now let us determine the height of the first rectangle.
As can clearly be seen from the graph, the height is taken where x equals 0.
In other words, the f of 0 is 1 minus 0 squared and that is 1.
The height of the second rectangle is taken where x equals a half.
The f of a half is 1 minus half squared and that is 3 quarters.
The area of the first rectangle is thus height times width which is 1 times a half which is a half.
The area of the second rectangle is 3 quarters times a half and that is 3 eighths.
Now we simply add the area of the two rectangles and that gives us 7 eighths.
I think most of you will see where this is going.
If we add more and more rectangles by making the width of each smaller and smaller, we will get to a more accurate answer.
But before we get there though, we need to name and define the technique that we used here.
It is called upper sums or left hand Riemann sums.
We have taken the height of the rectangles at the left side of each base giving us an upper limit for the area of our rectangle.
You will see another example of upper sums in the next video.
.
