In this example we ask to calculate the area under the curve from 0 to 2pi in essence
or the definite integral in going from 0 to 2pi of the sine squared of x.
Going from 0 to 2pi does not have a negative area so we don't have to use absolute values
and we don't have to break the area up, our interval up into two parts to get the area under the curve.
We can simply do the integral problem.
Let's create a bit more space for ourselves.
We'll cancel and delete this.
And there we go.
Now this is the same problem as we had before so we should use our trigonometric identities.
Let's write it out here for the sine squared of x.
That is actually a half minus a half cosine of 2x.
You would normally see it as sine squared of x equals 1 minus the cosine of 2x over 2.
So if we rewrite our problem now, if we do substitute we can see immediately we can use the subtraction rule.
And we will write from 0, definite integral going from 0 to 2pi of a half.
Remember that would be x to the power 0 with respect to x minus the indefinite integral going from 0 to 2pi of a half.
Remember we can bring out the half as a constant multiple rule.
Cosine of 2x with respect to x.
So all I did here was substitute sine squared of x for our expression there.
I immediately used the subtraction rule for integration.
It's making it two different integrals.
And the half was a constant and I brought that out immediately.
So that's all I've done.
Now our first part of our problem here is what would be the antiderivative of half x to the power 0.
Well let's see a half x to the power 0.
We're going to add 1 to our power there.
That will leave us 1 and we'll take the coefficient and we'll divide it by the new power.
So we'll just have a half x.
We won't.
We won't.
This is now become a definite integral.
But let's leave that for now.
We can do it in the end.
Let's add it now.
So that will have to be from 0 to 2pi.
Minus a half.
Minus a half.
Now we are going to.
Let's clean up.
Give ourselves a bit more space.
We'll let u be 2x.
We'll have to use substitution there because it's not a straightforward expression.
du dx.
That's going to be 2.
And we need to get rid of the dx.
So dx is going to be a half du.
So that will be the indefinite integral.
The definite integral going from 0 to 2pi of the cosine of u.
And we'll have a half du.
So that is going to be a half x over the interval from 2 to pi.
From 0 to 2pi.
Minus.
We're going to bring out the half as a constant.
That half as a constant multiple rule.
Half times a half is a quarter.
What is the anti-derivative of the cosine of u?
That is the sine of u.
That is the sine of u.
And we are going to do this on an interval of 0 to 2pi.
Let's have a look.
We just have to substitute back our value for u.
But let's have a look.
We have a half x.
And we're going from an interval from 0 to 2pi.
So that will be a half times 2pi.
Minus a half times 0.
So that will just be a half times 2pi.
Minus a quarter.
And here we have the sine of 2x.
And we are going to go on an interval from 0 to 2pi.
So there we would have pi.
Minus.
Now on this side a quarter.
And what are we going to have?
The sine of 2 times 0.
Oh, and before that we'll have the sine of 2 times 2pi.
Minus.
What is the sine of 2 times 0?
Well, that will be just a minus.
So we're looking at the sine of 4pi.
The sine of 4pi.
And the sine of 4pi is just going to be.
Let's have a quick look.
Well, just a 0.
So that is going to leave us with pi.
Minus a quarter times 0.
And that leaves us with pi.
