Now let's look at this rather difficult problem. We asked to evaluate the area
shown here by red. Now we can obviously do it in two ways. If I draw, if I were
to draw a line down here it is divided in a square which is easy enough to get.
We can get the x value here and it'll be base times height, x times b and then we
are left with the shape here and that we can go from whatever the x value is
here to this value here which will be a and get an integral of this equation.
But that might be quite difficult. Let's look at another way of
doing this and that is just to look at this problem and taking our expression
remember the equation for circle is going to be x squared plus y squared equals a.
We can express this in terms of x. So that is going to be the square root of a
squared minus y squared and then get the integral of that going from 0 to b of a
squared minus y squared with respect to y. So we are integrating with respect to y
so we can view the whole red area here as one single area. Remember to the power
half there sorry. Now we need to change this expression to try and solve this and we
can certainly do that by just making use of another value say of y but using the
problem that we were given. If we were to look at this and call this theta we will
note that the cosine of theta is going to be adjacent which is a. The cosine of theta is
going to be adjacent sorry which is x divided by the hypotenuse which is the
radius which is a. So we can express x as a times the cosine of theta and we know
that the sine of the angle is going to be opposite which is b divided by hypotenuse
which is a. So we're going to have b which is also y in our instance equals a
times the sine of theta. So we can actually say we can actually say that the
coordinate of this point here would be a cosine theta commas a sine of theta. Now
that would be another a better way to express to express y then for instance to
say that we can also use this and say that y equals the square root of a squared
minus x squared which is not really going to bring us anywhere in this in this
problem. So let's rewrite this we're going to have thus the integral and going from
0 to b of a squared minus and for y we're going to have a squared sine squared of theta. We're just
using that substitution for y. This is to the power half and this is with respect to y. We can rewrite this
by bringing out the common factor which is going to be a squared that leaves us with
1 minus sine squared of theta. All of this is still to the power half with respect to y.
This leaves us with a squared to the power half just leaves us leaves us with an a. Now 1 minus sine squared of theta we
know that to be cosine squared of theta and this is going to still be to the
power half d y by the properties of integration. We can bring out the constant a because it is a
constant and we are integrating with respect to y so that is a constant that we can bring out. 0 to b
cosine squared of theta to the power half is going to leave us with a cosine of theta dy. Now
how are we going to integrate the cosine of theta with respect to y? Well we can get rid of
the y. We know that y equals a sine theta. I mean we need to make, we need to get the same
variables in here but we know that y equals, remember from the top, y equals a sine theta.
We can differentiate y with respect to theta and we are going to get
a times the cosine of theta. In other words dy is going to be a cosine theta d theta and we can
substitute that back into our problem. That will leave us with a definite integral going from 0 to b,
cosine of theta and we now going to have an a, another cosine of theta and we're going to have
d theta and certainly we can integrate that. First of all by the properties of integration
we can we can bring out we can bring out our a that leave us with a squared going from 0 to b of the cosine
squared of theta d theta. We know a trigonometric identity for this. The power of our trigonometric
function here is even so we have to use trigonometric identities
and we can use the cosine squared of an angle equals 1 plus the cosine of twice that angle divided by 2,
the half angle one of the two half angle equations. If we replace that, if we replace that we are left with a
squared indefinite integral going from 0 to b of
1 plus the cosine of 1 plus the cosine of twice the angle divided by 2 with respect to that angle.
That equals a squared. We're going to have, let's rewrite that 0 to b, we're going to have a half theta to the power 0 plus a half cosine of twice the angle
all of that with respect to the angle. This is going to leave us with a squared, that is going to leave us with a half theta
plus we can bring out the half definite integral going from 0 to b of cosine of twice the angle with respect to that angle.
with respect to that angle. Now we don't need to write plus c because we are dealing with a definite, we are dealing with a definite integral.
In other words, we should actually put here from 0 to b. That is going to leave us with a squared, half theta going from 0 to b.
Now we need to do u substitution. For this 2 theta we can do u equals 2 theta, du with respect to d theta, du d theta is going to be 2.
In other words, d theta is going to be a half du. If we substitute that we are going to be left with a half
going from 0 to b, going from 0 to b of cosine of u, cosine of u, cosine of u and then d theta is going to be a half, that is going to be a half
and we must just remember, I must just not forget that I left out a half there, a half du.
It's going to leave me with a squared. I'm going to still have the half theta going from 0 to b.
Plus, bring out the other half, so this is a quarter. Cosine of u is the sine of u.
The antiderivate of the cosine of u is the sine of u, but u equals 2 theta.
And that also goes from 0 to b.
If we just write this neater, so that is going to be a half theta plus a quarter sine of 2 theta.
And all of that going from 0 to b.
going from 0 to b. But we need to express, we need to express our answer not in two times the angle,
but just one times the angle. It will make us make it easier for us to get back to expressing it in
terms of a and y. Because remember, if we look back up here, our original problem
was expressed in terms of a and y with respect to y. And that is what we need to get,
that is what we need to get to. So let's go back down here. And we do know that the sine
of 2 times an angle equals 2 times the sine of that angle times the cosine of that angle.
So let's replace that. That is going to leave us with a squared, a half of theta plus a quarter.
A quarter
sine of theta
sine of theta
cosine of theta
All of this going from 0 to b.
And that will
equals a squared, a half
theta plus a half
sine of theta cosine of theta
theta going from 0 going from 0 to b. Now we need to, we need to work our way back
to a's and y's. We certainly know though that, let's look at that, we certainly know that the sine of theta
equals y over a from our unit circle. Thus theta is going to be the arc sine of y over a.
We also know that, we also know that the cosine of theta equals x over a and we know that x equals the
square root of a squared minus y squared. Now let's replace our values in our problem here.
a squared we can have a half theta. We're now going to replace with arc sine
of y over a
plus a half
and sine of theta
the sine of theta is just y over a
a. We have that there sine of theta and cosine of theta is x over a. But we have a value for x as well, which is
square root of a minus, the square root of a squared minus y squared. So that is our value for x there
over a. And all of this is from 0 to b.
So that is going to leave us with a squared. Here we're going to have
a half, well let's rewrite that. Let's rewrite that as the arc
sine of y over a divided by 2 plus
We are going to have y times the square root of a squared minus y squared
divided by 2a squared. All of this is still from 0 to b. Now I've carried this
interval from 0 to b all along, but I've made substitutions so my interval should actually have
changed. But because I'm substituting back into my original a and y values, I have kept
my interval and going from 0 to b. If I distribute this a squared, I'm going to have a squared
times the arc sine of y over a, all of that over 2, plus
I'm going to distribute the a squared into the second term, but there's an a squared in the denominator.
So that is going to leave me with y square root of a squared minus y squared divided by 2
going from 0 to b. And I have a common denominator of 2, so I'm going to have a squared
arc sine of y over a plus y times the square root of a squared minus y squared
all going from 0 to b.
Is it quite a bit slower?
so
You
