Here we have the same equation as we had in the previous example, y equals the sine of x on an interval from 0 to 2 pi.
But instead of asking what the area under the curve is, or just the definite integral of going from 0 to 2 pi,
we asked to get the total area between the curve and the x-axis on that interval.
The reason why we calculated a 0 in the previous example is because these two areas cancelled out.
These two areas are of equal size. One is positive, one is negative, and they cancelled out.
If you want the total, you'll have to get the absolute value of the second part.
You'll have to break this definite integral up into two parts.
In other words, for the first interval, which is from 0 to pi,
we're going to have the definite integral of going from 0 to pi of the sine of x with respect to x.
And if we carry on down here, that is going to give us the antiderivative of the sine of x is negative the cosine of x.
And that goes on an interval from 0 to pi.
In other words, let's just bring the 0 out.
So we're going to get the cosine of pi minus the cosine of 0.
That equals minus, what is the cosine of pi?
Well, that's negative 1.
Minus, what is the cosine of 0?
That's 1.
That equals negative 2.
And that equals 2.
On the second area between the curve and the x-axis,
we're going to have the definite integral of going from pi to 2 pi of the sine of x with respect to x.
The antiderivative of the sine of x is negative the cosine of x.
And now we're going to go on an interval from pi to 2 pi.
If we bring the negative out, we're going to have the cosine of 2 pi minus the cosine of pi.
That is going to be equal to negative.
What is the cosine of 2 pi?
That's 1 minus, what is the cosine of pi?
That's negative 1.
And that's negative 1 plus 1.
That equals negative 2.
But we have to take the absolute value of this second part.
So the absolute value of negative 2, which is 2.
We now have 2 for that area, 2 for that area, and 2 plus 2 equals 4.
So the total area between the curve and the x-axis on an interval from 0 to 2 pi would be 4.
