Here's our next example. We're asked to get the indefinite integral of x squared times the cosine of x with respect to x.
We have two functions here, x squared and the cosine of x.
And we'll have to use the product rule for integration to solve this problem.
Let us remind ourselves again what that formula is for the product rule of integration.
That states that the indefinite integral of the f of x times the g prime of x with respect to x equals the f of x times the g of x minus the indefinite integral of f prime of x g of x with respect to x.
The first part of our equation is the form that our question is already in.
There are two functions f of x and g prime of x.
We just have to decide whether we'll use x squared as the f of x or the cosine of x as f of x or the other way around.
Let's make, let's have a look at these two choices.
Let's have the f of x be x squared.
That means the f prime of x is going to be 2x.
And if we have the g prime of x, and if we have the g prime of x be cosine of x, the anti-derivative of that is going to be negative.
That'll just be positive.
That'll just be positive the sine of x.
If we choose the other way around, we'll make the f of x the cosine of x.
Then the first derivative of that f prime of x is going to be negative the sine of x.
And if we choose g prime of x to be x squared, the anti-derivative of that is a bit more hairy.
It will be a third x to the power of 3.
Certainly our first choice was going to be a lot, make things a lot easier for ourselves down the line.
And let's go for that.
Let's substitute then.
We have the f of x times the g of x.
So we have x squared times the sine of x minus the indefinite integral of f prime of x, which is now 2 of x,
times the g of x, which is the sine of x, with respect to x.
And look what we have now in our second term.
Again, the product of two functions.
Now we have 2x times the sine of x.
That's a problem.
We have to view this part separately as a separate problem and use the product rule for integration all over again.
Let's go for making our decisions again.
Going to use a different color.
What we can do before we get to that stage, though, is let's just write things and make things a little bit easier for ourselves.
x squared times the sine of x minus, and there's a 2x sine x.
We can use the constant multiple rule of integration and just bring that 2 out.
And that will be the indefinite integral now of x times the sine of x with respect to x.
Change of color as I promised.
And I think we can already see which one, the x or the sine of x, we're going to use as the f of x.
I think we're going to have the f of x be x because f prime of x is going to be 1.
And if we then use the f prime of x as the sine of x, well, the antiderivative of that is negative the cosine of x.
So that is what we're going to go for.
So here we'll have, now remember, we're only looking at this part.
This is a brand new problem that we are trying to solve.
So again, we're going to use, right up here, our formula for the product rule for integration.
So the f of x is going to be x.
The g of x is negative the cosine of x minus, that's our f of x, that's our g of x, minus the indefinite integral of f prime of x was 1.
That's exactly what we want.
Times the g of x, which we said is negative the cosine of x with respect to x.
That leaves us with x, that leaves us with minus cosine x still, minus, and what is the antiderivative of minus the cosine of x?
That's minus the sine of x.
And the plus c will end, will add to the end.
So that leaves us with x minus the cosine of x plus the sine of x.
So we've solved, so we've solved that part.
Now we have to carry on with our original problem.
Let's create a bit more space there.
There we go.
So in our original problem, we still had x squared, sine of x, minus 2, which we brought out.
And now we have our x minus cosine of x, plus sine of x, plus c.
Eventually we can bring in our plus c.
If we tidy things up a little bit, we'll get x squared, sine of x.
We'll have a plus 2x cosine of x minus 2 times the sine of x, plus c.
So we had to go through, using the product rule for integration, twice.
And as you can see, what we're trying to get to is in the second term where we need to get the indefinite integral.
We're trying to get the f of x, f of prime of x to be 1.
Because 1 times the other factor will just be the other factor.
And we can certainly get the anti-derivative of that or the indefinite integral of that without resorting to other rules.
