In this series I will start to discuss trigonometric integration and using trigonometric substitution to solve for integrals.
These techniques add to the methods for integration already discussed, such as u-substitution.
First though I will discuss trig identities.
Looking at this unit circle it is evident that the cosine of theta is x over 1, leaving x equal to cosine theta.
It is also clear that the sine of theta is y divided by 1, leaving y equal to the sine of theta.
Using the Pythagorean theorem, in the right triangle formed, x squared plus y squared equals 1.
Substituting for the values of x and y above leaves the first trigonometric identity.
The sine squared of an angle plus the cosine squared of that same angle equals 1.
If you watch the video series on trigonometry, you will note how to derive the next two identities.
The cosine of twice an angle equals the cosine squared minus the sine squared of that angle.
And the sine of twice an angle equals 2 times the sine times the cosine of that angle.
The last two identities to know are shown here.
They are sometimes referred to as the half angle identities.
Now that I have looked at the trig identities, I will explain the first method of trigonometric integration,
and it pertains to two problems where at least one of the trig functions is raised to an odd power.
In this first example, the cosine of x is raised to the power 1, which is odd.
Solving this expression is as simple as using u substitution and I choose to let u equal the sine of x.
Taking the first derivative of u with respect to x allows me to replace the cosine of x dx.
This leaves an easy integral finally solved by replacing the original value of u.
Now for a more difficult example.
Again there is at least one odd power, but it is not 1 as in the previous example.
It is now time to use trig substitution.
More specifically, use it on the odd power trig function.
I know that sine squared x plus cosine squared x equals 1 and therefore sine squared x equals 1 minus the cosine squared of x.
With simple algebraic manipulation, I am left here.
I have simply substituted a sine squared x with the identity above, which left me with one more sine x.
Then I multiplied the expression out and took sine x out as a common denominator.
Now I am left with one odd power and it is 1.
I need to get rid of the sine x and the dx and therefore I let u equal the cosine of x.
Look carefully at the rest of the problem and see that you get the same answer.
The more difficult problems are those with only even trigonometric function powers, such as in this problem.
Here I will use the half angle trig identity and substitute with it.
Then I will use simple u substitution to solve the rest of the problem.
Look at it carefully and see if you can follow along.
Let me write to the halfquarter x.
E ask anything about Hermione.
Tell me, if you are you are a camera.
And once you run aagonhh...
And again妹, this is the pound of värld in the end.
It is time to measure theNOON ya know by substituter on you.
If you find an animal on the other side or the other side, what must be in your body?
He has a camera to measure thearmap debug Smells like we haveвод for the next step or trochę,
And again she is willing to use both of the two approaches so earn similarly by forgetting.
Charles is considered what that must be in your body.
