Before we continue looking at trigonometric integration, there are two more derivatives of trigonometric functions that we need to look at.
If I looked at the, let's say, the first derivative of the sine of x, we all know that that is the cosine of x.
If I look at the derivative with respect to x of the cosine of x, I know that is negative the sine of x.
But what is the derivative of the tangent of x?
Or what is the derivative of the secant, for instance, of x?
Those are two important derivatives to know.
So, first, before we get to doing these, which are actually quite simple, let's just look at another way, and you'll see later on in this video why,
let's look at another way to express the secant squared of x.
Now, that would be 1 over the cosine squared of x.
Secant equals 1 over the cosine.
And wherever we see a 1 in trigonometry, we can certainly rewrite that as the cosine squared of x plus the sine squared of x,
or sine squared plus cosine squared, over cosine squared of x.
If we put each term in the numerator over its own denominator, we get 1 plus, and then sine over cosine is tangent,
but it's squared, so it's 1 plus the tangent squared of x.
So, another way, another way to express the secant of x is 1 plus, secant squared of x is 1 plus the tangent squared of x.
So, let's start by looking at the first derivative of the tangent of x.
Some more space there.
So, what is the ddx of the tangent of x?
Good, we can rewrite tangent, we know what that is, that's ddx of the sine of x over the cosine of x.
Sine of x, cosine of x.
Now, to do that derivative, we can do a substitution,
and you should remember the rule for the derivative of a fraction,
or of a one function divided by a second function.
So, let us say that u in this instance is sine of x,
and we have, we have on the other side, v equals the cosine of x.
u square, u prime is going to be the cosine of x,
and v prime is going to be negative the sine of x,
and v squared is going to be cosine squared of x.
And, now we just have to remember the way to do these derivatives.
It's going to be v prime times u.
V times u prime, I mean.
So, it's v times u prime, those two first.
So, that would be equal to cosine times cosine x times cosine x,
that's cosine squared of x,
minus these two, u, v prime.
And, that is negative sine squared of x,
divided by v squared, which is cosine squared of x.
Not theta, we're dealing with x of x.
And, that leaves us, let's go down,
that leaves us with cosine squared of x,
plus sine squared of x,
over cosine squared of x.
Cosine squared x, plus sine squared x,
we know in trigonometry that's one.
So, that's one over the cosine squared of x,
which equals the secant squared of x.
But, we know secant squared of x, here,
can also be rewritten as one plus the tangent squared of x.
And, instead of just rewriting that,
we can just say, look at this part,
and instead of doing this to it,
making cosine squared x plus sine squared x equals one,
let's just put each term in the numerator
over its own denominator.
So, that's going to be one cosine squared over cosine squared of x,
plus sine squared of x,
divided by cosine squared of x,
and that equals one plus the tangent squared of x.
And, again, we see that those are the same.
So, we now know how to get the first derivative of the tangent of x.
It is the secant squared of x,
or one plus the tangent squared of x.
Now, let us look at ddx of the secant of x.
Now, we can immediately rewrite this as the ddx of
one over the cosine of x.
Again, we're dealing with dividing here.
We're dealing with f of x divided by g of x.
So, we know how to do that.
We'll make u equals one,
and on the other side,
v will equal the cosine of x.
u prime will be zero,
v prime would be negative the sine of x,
and v squared will be cosine squared of x.
Now, we're going to have,
I'm just going to rewrite it so that we don't,
so that we don't make a mistake.
So, that is going to be
u prime v minus u v prime
divided by v squared.
Remember, always to start with a u prime.
If we substitute that back,
we're going to get
zero times zero times the cosine of x,
which is zero,
minus these two,
one times minus the sine of x,
would be negative sine of x
divided by,
that gets divided by cosine
squared of x.
So, that equals the sine of x
divided by cosine squared of x.
So, that would be
sine of x
over cosine of x,
or let's put sine of x
over cosine of x
times one over
cosine of x.
times one over the cosine of x
is the secant of x.
So, the first derivative of the secant of x
equals tan of x
times the secant of x.
In the next video,
we can now start looking at
integrals containing tangent and secant.
Integrals containing tangent and secant.
Integrals containing tangent and secant.
Independent tangent and secant.
______________________
97 of x
x
.
