Consider this graph carefully. It represents our initial example and we have divided the area under the curve up into small rectangles.
Imagine that there are an infinite number of them. Call that n number of rectangles.
Each will then have a base width of delta x, where delta x is b minus a divided by n.
In other words, 1 minus 0 divided by n and that is 1 over n.
If we use right sums, the height of the first rectangle will be the f of 1 over n.
The height of the second will be the f of 2 over n.
The area of each rectangle will then be represented by the f of ck times delta x.
Remember, the f of ck simply means substituting an x value into the equation and that gives the y value at that x value.
Simple algebra.
If we use lower sums, that will leave the first rectangle's height, or y value, as the f of 1 over n.
The base of the first rectangle will go from 0 to 1 over n.
The height of the second rectangle will be the f of 2 over n.
Remember that each base has a width of 1 over n.
If we move from x equals 1 over n to the right side of the next base,
that will be 1 over n plus 1 over n and that is 2 over n.
The height of the third rectangle will be the f of 3 over n.
Notice something.
The numerator started at 1 and increments by 1 each time.
The right side of the last rectangle will be at the n over n.
So the value of our last numerator will be n and the height will be at the f of n over n.
We can now write sigma notation because to get the sum of all the areas, we will add all the heights times widths.
That is the f of 1 over n times 1 over n.
Remember that delta x is 1 over n.
Plus the f of 2 over n times 1 over n.
Plus until we get to the f of n over n times 1 over n.
That leaves the sigma notation looking like this.
K starts at 1 and increments by 1 until it gets to n.
Substituting k over n into our original formula, y equals 1 minus x squared, gives us this formula.
Simplifying leaves us here.
It is simple algebra.
Now we use the difference rule.
And now, first the constant value rule since 1 over n is a constant.
And then the constant multiple rule, again because 1 over n cubed is a constant.
We are left with a sigma notation for the sum of the first n squares and we can expand this.
Expanding the numerator leaves us here.
Remember, we wanted to calculate the area by making infinitely many rectangles.
Thus, we take the limit of our equation as n approaches infinity.
This is easy to solve.
Since n is infinity and the largest power of infinity is 3,
we can negate the last two elements in the numerator.
That leaves us with 1 minus 2 over 6 and that is 2 thirds,
the true value for the area under the curve.
