Here's a very interesting example. We are asked to get the indefinite integral of the cosine squared of x with respect to x.
First of all, we might think just use u substitution, but we are going to run into a problem.
Let's say, well we know this is the same as the cosine of x squared.
And, this is a different way of writing. So let u be the cosine of x.
du dx would thus be negative the sine of x.
And dx would be, if we wanted to get rid of the dx, we would have negative 1 over the sine of x du.
And there's our problem, because if we substitute now, we'll get u squared, and instead of dx, we'll have negative 1 over the sine of x du.
We still have an x, and we can't get rid of that.
So, what we might need to use, is our trigonometric identities.
And the one that you might remember, would be for the cosine squared of x, which would be 1 plus the cosine of 2x over 2.
So, let's rewrite our problem as the indefinite integral of 1 plus the cosine of 2x over 2 with respect to x.
Now, we can use our addition rule for integration, so that would be the indefinite integral of a half, with respect to x, plus the indefinite integral of a half, cosine 2x, dx.
What is the indefinite integral of a half, dx?
Well, remember that half is actually a half x to the power 0.
Anything to the power 0 is 1.
If we raise the constant by 1, we'll get x to the power 1.
And if we divide half by that new power, we'll get a half.
So, this is actually a half x.
Plus, we can use our constant multiple rule and bring out that half, indefinite integral of cosine 2x dx.
Again, that 2x makes our function a bit more complicated and we have to use substitution.
Let's call u 2x du dx would thus be just 2.
We need to get rid of the dx.
So, dx would be a half du.
If we rewrite this, we have a half x.
We have a half and the indefinite integral of the cosine now of u times a half with respect to u.
We can rewrite this again by using our constant multiple rule and bring out that half.
A half times a half would thus be a quarter, indefinite integral of the cosine of u with respect to u.
That would be a half x plus a quarter.
What is the anti-derivative of the cosine of u?
Well, that's just the sine of u.
And u was 2x.
And because this is indefinite, plus c.
