So welcome to this exam preparation program for the intermediate exam in surgery.
So what I thought I would want to just mention to you, this is the goals of this program
to start off with. So what I want from the next couple of weeks, because we do this right
until the start of the Aros, you've got quite a bit of time and we can get through quite a bit of stuff,
is to have you fully prepared when you walk in there.
What does an athlete do before he goes to partake in some event?
I mean even if you were jogging for yourself or doing some cycling and you want to go do an event, you practice.
You're not just going to rock up on that day and try and do a big event and the intermediate exam is a big event.
You're going to practice and practice and practice.
So the vast majority of candidates who come to the exam have had no preparation.
They sat there with their books and their articles and they studied, studied, studied
and crammed all the knowledge in and they get there and they want to show off,
because that's what you've got to do in the exam, show off your knowledge,
but they never practiced how to show off that.
And to walk in there for me is tantamount and you can see those candidates very easily as an examiner.
It's tantamount to someone pitching up and wanting to do the two options and he's never gotten out of the house.
He's not going to do well. There's no ways for him to do well.
And the same for this exam. There's a whole technique behind doing well in this exam.
And that's what you're going to learn here.
So the whole idea behind this, I'm not going to give you any knowledge.
This is not a tutorial and if any of you walk around and I hear you say,
are you coming to the tact on Thursday, I'm going to slap you.
Okay, it's as simple as that.
If you think how old you are, and I'm not going to go around the table asking what everyone's age is.
Okay.
So imagine you went to go study some scientific thing, you know, become a physicist.
Four years BSc, Masters degree, PhD by the time you're 25, 26.
After that you're a postdoc student and by your age you've contributed massively to your field
because you've had a PhD for quite a while now.
Yet here you are at your age, you know, tiny little students trying to pass an exam
and just feeling so sorry for yourself, you know, so inferior.
You know, is this wrong?
See yourself in perspective.
You are very senior students when it comes to university, extremely.
Okay, you've got to realize that and act like that.
Okay, so we are not here for me to give you knowledge.
This is not a tutorial.
Now I know sometimes, you know, we do put emphasis on you coming and jotting down.
That's how a lot of your time here does work.
I'm against that completely.
This is not a tutorial.
You are old enough to go study and eat up yourself.
Okay.
I'm going to prepare you to be fit to walk into the exam.
So you walk in there, nothing is unknown, nothing is unexpected.
You know what questions you're going to get and you know how to answer them.
Okay.
You're going to be walking in there fully prepared.
And you know how well we've done with this program.
Okay.
For the last two we've had 100% and for the majority of these we've had 100% pass rate.
Here and there we've had one, one slip up.
But the pressure is really on you now.
You know, everyone just passes.
Okay.
And it's because they walk in there prepared.
They're all good candidates.
It's not all up to this program.
You know, they've all put in the hard effort.
But they walked in there and they knew what to expect.
Nothing was foreign to them.
You know, it was easy for them to do in retrospect.
You know, ask them about it.
So there's a whole science behind doing the oral exam.
I can't prepare you for the MCQ.
And I'll say something about the MCQ because there's always lots of questions about the MCQ.
I can't prepare you for that one.
That's just sitting on your behind and studying.
But I can't prepare you how to attack the oral exam.
There's a whole science behind answering or handling the situation.
It's not just go sit there and let things just happen and let me go through this.
There's a way to do this.
There's a whole science and a philosophy behind approaching answering those questions.
It's not just your knowledge that comes out your mouth.
There's a lot more to that.
And as an examiner, I experience the way that you respond in that situation.
And that response tells me a hell of a lot about you.
But I'm going to tell you about that so that you know.
I'll tell you what goes on inside the examiner's mind.
Which gives you a hell of an advantage over someone who doesn't.
Because you're going to presume a lot of things.
And as with most things in life, your presumptions are going to be wrong.
So that's what I mean.
You will be prepared after this so that you can walk in there and know exactly what the situation is.
So, one of the big things about this.
You're going to come in and I'm going to ask you question after question after question.
The whole idea, one of the big ideas is so that you hear your own voice.
Going into the exam should not be the first time that you hear your own voice.
Because there's a lot of knowledge in here, but it's never come out here.
That neuronal pathway has never been exercised.
You can think about the answer in your mind and you can recite that 16 causes or whatever.
But that's a whole bunch of different neurons and the neurons that actually activate your larynx.
And those neurons have to be exercised as well.
They have to grow a few Schwann cells around them so that they are well sort of oiled.
And that is not the time to hear your own voice.
And sometimes it's good to go sit in front of a mirror and answer questions to yourself.
You laugh, it's a good idea to do.
Just to see what you look like.
I'm going to say something about what you look like when you sit there very shortly.
You know, be familiar with what the examiner sees and what he hears.
Record yourself and see how you hear, what you sound like.
Okay.
Right.
In broad terms, what is the goal of the examiner?
Because I think many people have a misunderstanding of what the goal is.
So the examiners get there usually the night before and we get put up in a hotel.
And you know, sometimes it's old colleagues that you haven't seen for a while.
So there's usually one or two handshakes, maybe one or two beers or whatever.
And it's, you know, little groups form and you can eat something.
And you go to bed because tomorrow morning you've got to be out of bed early.
Depending on where the exam is, you have to get into a little bus and be taken there.
And it's getting up early and it's usually cold and, you know, it's not the nicest stuff.
I mean, it's not as nice an experience for the examiner as you might think it is.
Okay.
So now you get there.
Then we get together in a little group as everyone gets there and we get horrible coffee.
We haven't had good coffee yet.
And then tiny little sandwiches or something as the supposed breakfast and that has never been a success either.
But anyway, the exam commissioner stands up and he, you know, he gives a little speech.
And he reminds us what this exam is for.
And the first words that are always said is,
This exam is to identify the candidate who is safe to carry on with further training in preparing for the final exam.
Safe.
So you just want to identify the guy or girl, I'm going to say guy a lot,
and by that I have used it as a genetic term for human beings,
is the one who paid attention.
And you can see he's actually done this before.
And then the commissioner goes on to say,
So try and keep your questions situation based.
Because all I want to see, is this a safe person to carry on?
Or could he or she just use six more months just to get a bit more experience
and be aware of what's going on around him?
It is not a test of knowledge.
This is a massively broad exam.
There's no defined limits to what really can be asked.
Okay, so we can make it very difficult.
I can ask very esoteric stuff.
And by the way, once you get those questions, relax,
because by then you've already done well, you know, when you get the real difficult questions.
But it's about the principles of surgery.
So, you know, we want to know, have you been paying attention?
Have you done this before?
Do you understand what this is all about?
Not specifically the nitty-gritty of the knowledge.
And as an examiner, when we start asking these things,
we're all human beings.
We actually, we are then making mistakes as examiners.
I am, I canvass for the fact that these exams should be recorded.
But we can listen to them again afterwards.
Okay, of course it's not, it's not done.
But I'm a great believer that these exams should be.
Because the examiner has a big responsibility during these exams.
To stick to the rules.
And the rules are just to see, have you been paying attention?
Do you understand what this is about?
Can you manage the broad principles of this?
And your final exams will get to the nitty-gritty.
Okay.
So really it's not a test of raw knowledge.
Because if you can tell me there's 16 causes of something,
I'm going to be very worried.
Because you just memorize that to forget by next week.
And that doesn't make you a good surgeon by any stretch of the imagination.
Probably the safer guy is the guy who goes to look it up again.
And he's not going to miss anything.
Versus you who memorized it and then can verbalize those, you know, 16 causes.
You know, there's something in that for me.
So, there's one big philosophy about this whole examination process
to sign you off as a specialist one day.
And that is a big misunderstanding that I feel that is on a registrar's side
because I experienced the same thing so long ago.
Is that you think that forcing you to do three exams,
to become a specialist and sitting here studying,
is to force you to gain the knowledge.
That's not what this is about.
Remember, knowledge is empowerment.
It empowers you to actually go do your job.
So this is not a test, do you know your job?
You should know this work because you've got a job to do.
It is gaining knowledge for yourself, not for an exam.
You're not reading up this so that you can pass in a couple of months' time.
You're reading this up for yourself because this is what you're going to do on a daily basis.
You need this.
You need to empower yourself to go treat the patient.
That's why you're doing this.
The exam is just this thing that human beings thought up a long time ago
as some measure of do you actually know.
An exam is the worst possible design.
Exams are just silly in my estimation but we have nothing better
and we've been carrying it for ages.
Since when was the first exam?
Hundreds and hundreds of years ago.
It's just what human beings have and we think that's good.
It's not good.
You're not doing this for an exam.
You're doing this because you've got to treat the actual patients.
And when you see it that way it becomes much easier to go up and read the stuff.
If you don't see it as something that should just be done for the exam.
You need to know this to be able to do your job.
It's as simple as that.
Okay.
So two parts to the exam.
You all know it's MCQ.
A couple of years ago now it's changed to MCQ.
I'm very vocal in the fact that I don't agree with MCQ.
And as soon as you say that people will refer you to the fact that there's a lot of literature that states that it's a good tester of knowledge.
My counter argument to that is it's extrapolated from data on MCQs as tests for non-surgical disciplines.
In other words man-made things like law, commerce, you know that sort of thing.
Or undergraduate students where we teach them black and white.
As a faculty, any medical faculty in the world, we've decided this is how we treat things and this is what we want our undergraduate students to know.
Black and white.
You see this, you do that.
You're a postgraduate.
It's different for you.
You've got to understand levels of evidence.
You've got to understand controversies.
And you've got to understand the situation around which there's so many factors that you have to deal with.
You're not an undergraduate student.
You know when we're in the ward.
It's not black and white.
And MCQ for me is not designed for that sort of artful, experienceful form of knowledge.
For me it's a poor thing and I want proper research, someone to show me proper research done on this type of topic.
For instance, the broad principles of surgical care.
I do not, there's no way that I can believe that this is a good, but that's what we have.
You're stuck with it and you've got to deal with it.
I have seen people not pass it and I thought they were good candidates and I've seen people who I thought had a little bit more to learn and they just pass.
For me it's really not always an indicator of your actual knowledge.
And that's what I'm fearful of.
I want an exam that reflects the effort that you put in and the knowledge that you have and the innate ability that you have.
Now, you've got into med school, so presumably the mental capacity is there, although I reserve judgement on that one.
Okay.
But you got into med school, you know, you need something to get in, to start off with.
So the mental capacity is there, but I'm not sure it's a fair reflection on the effort that you put in and the knowledge that you have.
That's my fear of the MCQ. And I know that, I make no, I don't keep it a secret, that is my fear, but that's what we have, the MCQ, and you've got to deal with it.
It does require you to have a bit more, a bit finer level of knowledge.
You've got to sit there and study, there's no two ways about it.
For that matter, there are a lot of British, I think, books out there that have examples of MCQs.
I would advise against those.
All the MCQ questions that you get are South African made for the South African context, for the local context.
Local people setting those questions with a local perspective.
So you might run into difficulties if you look at the British ones.
Okay, they are not sourced from outside the country or from some repository or some other textbook or online somewhere they are.
Homemade, homebrewed by the people that are your examiners, as simple as that.
So be very careful when you look at other MCQs.
There are some, I think, on the college's website.
They are not representative of the questions you're going to get.
I think some work needs to be done there.
Unless, from the last time I saw it on there, some work has been done on that, then I apologise for that.
Have a look at them.
But speak to the people before.
The vast majority will tell you that those on the website are not representative of the exam questions at all.
Remember the exam questions, we add to them all the time, so that repository grows.
And so we move on all the time and it gets bigger and bigger for us to choose better ones from.
It is kind of a new thing.
So the repository is not that big and we still have to learn which are good questions and which are bad ones.
And the college does go through that process.
So with time I suppose it will get better.
But it's still fairly new, so there are still some issues about it.
And then there's the oral exam.
And that's what this is all about.
You're going to walk in there, fit, fit athletes, and you're all going to pass.
If I think you're not going, I'm going to stop you from going.
And I'm serious.
This is years where you're going to find out that I'm not a nice guy.
At all.
Okay.
So I'll tell you if you're not ready, I will.
And last time we sent people in and they all passed.
The time before I sent everyone in and they all passed.
And so it goes.
Okay.
If you don't attend this, I will not have any judgement on you and I'll just let you go.
And that's when we have the one or two failures that we've had over this long period that we've been doing this.
That also reminds me of the fact that if you can't be here, you let me know.
This is professional.
I need that from you.
If you can't be here, no problem.
But you let me know beforehand.
It's common professional courtesy.
And there's a, I use it because I want to teach you something.
Okay.
And I won't talk about it.
So if you can't be here, you let me know.
Simple as that.
You do not just stay away.
I will not accept it.
Okay.
So what to study.
That's a big question people want to know.
Because this is a very big exam.
There are, the topics are listed on there.
Ask any candidate who's passed this exam.
People ask way beyond those topics that are on there.
Okay.
There's an ill-defined exam.
So my suggestion to you, pay attention every day that you are in the ward.
The same people who are your examiners are the guys that you do ward rounds with.
And just pay attention what's happening, how you treat stuff.
It's not that difficult.
Most of the questions I say again, we are told beforehand, try and keep them situational.
Doctor, have you treated a patient with a gunshot to the abdomen before?
Yes.
We handle quite a few of them.
Now tell me, when a patient like that comes in with this and this specific scenario, what
have you done?
I can listen to you and I can decide, have you done this before?
Did you pay attention?
Did you understand where the problems lie?
Okay.
That's a situational question.
I do not ask you what are the 12 causes of this or that.
That's wrong.
Because it's situational.
So, it being the broad principles of general surgery, the first few chapters of all the
big famous surgical textbooks, Greenfield, Sabaston, you know all of them.
Those first few chapters are all about these broad, how to resuscitate, how to feed, how
to, you know, those first few chapters in all of these famous textbooks are excellent.
Please, please do not do the mini Menon thing.
I've got the greatest respect for those old guys.
They did enormous jobs but those textbooks are too old.
Please, you know, go beyond them.
So, the first chapter in any of the good textbooks is a good thing to do.
The most important thing though are review articles.
People put a lot of effort.
These review articles, you know, are the in thing in literature.
People try and publish these things.
Okay.
And there's a lot of effort that goes into a review article.
It already puts together everything.
You don't have to go search for it.
You just have to find the review article.
Don't use Google.
Don't use Google Scholar.
And for the life of me, don't use Wikipedia.
Okay.
Use PubMed or the Cochrane database, any specific formal medical deposit.
Now, if you go onto PubMed, there's a little, there's YouTube videos you can do to teach you how to use PubMed properly.
And the best thing to use are the mesh headings.
And we'll have a session where I actually, I'll just show you the shortcuts.
Because you're going to type in a search code and what you get?
1,152 results.
Of which the best article is not on page one or two.
Okay.
You use, who knows how to use mesh headings to narrow down your search on PubMed.
Okay.
That is just a base knowledge that you should have.
Everyone should know how to use mesh headings to narrow down your search.
Okay.
There's videos on PubMed of how to do this or otherwise we'll have a session where I show you.
You've all got university numbers, you must all be registered so that you can get the full text articles.
There's PubMed and there's PMC.
PMC is a part of PubMed that only has the, that will only hand you back full text article references.
It won't have the ones that just have abstracts.
Never ever just read an abstract.
Then you might, you're just wasting your time.
Chuck it away.
So PMC comes from the fact that many, a lot of research I've done with public money.
So in the United States if your research done with public money within a certain set time period you've got to have the full text available.
So if you search not under PubMed but PMC it will only give you the full text.
But you're all university registered students.
The university has most of the surgical journals that you're looking for, you know, as part of the university so you can get the full text anyway.
So you can use PubMed just to make your little list and then you'll go onto the UCT website and you'll get the full text articles.
Don't try and over read.
Don't get five review articles on the same topic.
You know, it's just, it's just useless.
For trauma, you all know there's the EAST guidelines.
They very well and they try and keep them up to date.
So that's an easy website to get to and it'll list the guidelines for blood trauma, penetrating trauma, head injury, spinal cord injury.
They have all the guidelines.
Those are easy to read and to use.
That being said, you've all been to trauma.
You should be before you get to the intermediate exam and you all know how to deal with trauma.
Trauma is a large part of this exam.
When it comes to critical care, I mean, they have their prescribed text and I'm sure they tell you exactly what to read.
But a good textbook read, I think a good modern textbook is a good thing to have.
And most of you should have been through there before the exam.
You also, I think they put in a tremendous effort in teaching you stuff.
You just have to pay attention and memorize a little bit.
I do advise you to pay specific attention to recent controversies.
We all know there's a big thing about saline versus other crystalloids, colloids versus crystalloids.
The controversies in resuscitation, sepsis.
These are the common big things.
A lot has been written about many of these things recently and basically everything in critical care.
So just see what is in vogue at the moment.
Fluid resuscitation has just been this big thing about saline and colloids.
Blood transfusions, massive blood transfusions, these things are all in vogue.
So just watch out what the newest, hottest thing is.
Make a little list for yourself as a surgeon for the rest of your career.
So you go online.
You search for a list of surgical journals by, what's the term I'm looking for?
Suddenly the index of, okay I'll remember the word shortly.
Journals are ranked according to how well they do out there.
There's a term for it, as I say I'll get to it shortly.
I hope my brain is still functional.
Anyway, and so it lists the journals of, in an order of how important they are out there.
So make a little list of five or six journals for yourself.
And those are the ones whose index you'll watch out for.
You can subscribe to many of these things and come soon in your emails.
This tells you the table of content for the newest edition.
And you quickly read through them and just try and keep up to date with what people are publishing.
So there is the Journal of Trauma and Critical Care, for instance.
That will give you the newest stuff that is happening in trauma.
The British Journal of Surgery.
The New England Journal of Surgery.
The American, American, all of those.
So just, even if you don't read all of them, just see the table of contents, what is going on.
Most common errors is what I've got listed next that I just want to tell you about.
And that is from having seen a lot of candidates sit in front of me over the exam.
And the first one is to give in to your anxiety.
And once you've given in to your anxiety, you'll do the craziest things.
Suddenly you'll have all these weird arguments in your head as suddenly things that come out your mouth or you will see it in a good light.
You'll do the silliest things and see them in a good light.
And let us think that politeness and the pseudo humility and laughing about your answer suddenly somehow improves your standing.
You know, you don't know the answer and you make a little joke about it or laugh about it or, you know.
Your anxiety just takes over and you can clearly see what happens.
And you think making a little joke about it, smiling about it or doing some weird thing suddenly makes you appear better in the eyes of the examiner.
And that's just wrong.
Don't give in to that anxiety.
Never ever appear pathetic.
Because what the examiner, what I see is, I don't see you sitting in front of me.
I'm seeing you standing in front of a patient and being all pathetic.
Then go to internal medicine.
Off you go.
You know, you're doing surgery.
You cannot stand next to a patient's bed and appear all pathetic.
You know, that's what I see when I see a candidate completely give in to that anxiety.
That guy, a girl's got to do six more months before I think they should go through.
Okay, so once you show that, I'm going to be very unkind to you in the exam.
And I think most examiners are.
So don't.
The one thing, if you forget everything else about this whole program, this is the one thing you have to remember.
You can forget everything else.
Never ever guess.
You will never fail this exam from not having the best knowledge.
You will fail.
And the only reason why you will fail is if you guess and you guess wrong.
Invariably you are going to guess wrong because you didn't know the answer.
Because that tells the examiner, you are prepared to take a chance with a patient and his disease.
That you pull out a red flag and you say, I'm a chancer.
I don't know.
And I'll just guess and I'll just do some whatever I want.
So we're going to do that so many times in this prep where you're going to have a maximum of five seconds.
And then you are going to say, I don't know.
And I'm going to force you to become so used to saying, I don't know.
And be okay with it.
You're just going to be okay with it.
I'm going to teach you how to be okay with it.
And move the topic, move the questioning forward.
How to get the examiner then off of that topic so he can ask you something else.
You will say, I don't know.
Because as soon as the wrong answer comes out your mouth, you are going to fail.
You will not fail for saying, I don't know.
And that is very counterintuitive.
Anxiety takes over and suddenly you have this massive pressure.
There's some part of your behind brain kicks in and you want an answer to come out your mouth.
Because you've got this fear of appearing that you don't know anything.
You will not fail because you say, I don't know.
You will fail because you say the wrong answer.
And you're only going to say the wrong answer when you don't know and then you start guessing.
So that is the most important thing of this.
You will not guess at an answer.
The furthest that you will go is say, this is what I know about it.
I don't know anything else.
I don't know.
They're going to push you.
Pressurize you.
And you're going to learn to say, I don't know.
But say, I don't know in a very effective way.
Don't be afraid of saying that.
Tiny little things.
Don't come in and put out your hand and try and shake my hand.
You all know I shake no one's hand anyway.
Okay.
But I'm not there for you to, you're not improving your standing by putting out your hand and
appearing all polite and formal and all of that.
That's not giving you any points.
Okay.
And that's also forcing your will.
You want to shake hands.
Now you're forcing me to.
And I'm not saying me.
I'm saying me as an examiner.
I don't want to shake your hand.
And I don't want for you to dictate the process at all.
So if you put out your hand, I'm not even going to take it.
Other people might take it.
But you know who you irritate.
You're going to come in.
You're going to stand by your chair.
You politely greet everyone.
There are going to be two or three examiners.
And you just stand by your chair.
You will get a polite nod and then you pull out the chair and sit down.
I will show you how to sit.
How to hold your hands.
How to position your body forward and backwards.
What not to do with your body.
We'll go through all of those things.
Never ever say, my prof says at my institution this or that.
It tells the examiner two things.
Number one, you're a lazy bugger.
You didn't go read up yourself.
You didn't form your own opinion.
You don't know that there are controversies about this.
You just do what someone else did.
You just gave over your critical thinking.
You surrendered your critical thinking to someone else.
Now that's not bad enough.
The second part of it is, we surgeons.
We don't all like each other.
Surgeons are not inherently likable people.
And they don't like each other.
It's just the way it is.
There's something about your personality that makes you choose this.
Some of us are better.
Some of us are worse.
But I don't like that guy.
And now I sit and I ask you and you tell me what he does and he says.
That's going to count against you.
That's human nature.
Okay.
If no other examiner does that, then I'm the only guilty one.
Okay.
But I tell you now, I am not.
Okay.
So you're going to either piss someone off, which is on a human level, beware, but the
most important thing is, it just shows me, you might answer the right thing and you're
still going to get marks for that.
You know, you won't be penalized, but it just tells me something about you.
If you just say, well, we do this.
It's not wrong.
And I think many people try for their registrars to answer that, but then you might as well
be undergraduate students.
What's the difference?
I can give you a textbook, you can study that and you can say on page 45 at the bottom
the paragraph says this and this and this.
You're not a good doctor.
And I'm never going to trust you as a surgeon.
I want to know that you actually read up and performed your own opinion and can understand
the literature, why this is a controversy, what other opinions are and why you choose
this opinion.
When you tell me all of that and then you say, I'm familiar with this because that's
what we do every day, fair enough.
But I want to know that you know the whole spectrum of this stuff.
Your answer is not, I do this because that's what we do.
That's not an answer.
That is called a logical fallacy.
Let's lead up on this of logical fallacy.
This one is called an argument from authority.
And that argument is a false, is a fallacy.
Never ever say, I just forgot, I know this but I just can't remember.
Well, if you're standing by the patient's bedside, what the hell does that help you that
you used to know or you just forgot just now?
You know, you're not getting bonus points for that.
Oh okay, you do know it, even though if you don't know it, now I'll score at this if
you know it.
That's the giving in to anxiety and doing stupid things, that's a good example of it.
Don't do that.
You know, you're not getting bonus points for that.
It looks silly.
You feel slightly, some part of your brain that feels better because you said that.
That doesn't count for anything, it counts against you actually.
You know, you are admitting to the fact that you forgot some knowledge.
That's bad.
Okay, it's a very natural reaction.
Very natural reaction.
It just wants to jump out because you've given in to your anxiety.
You are not going to do that.
Okay, one thing I forgot, we're going to talk about how to sit, how to wear.
I'm also going to tell you what to wear.
You know there's a great tradition of everyone wearing black and you're going to continue
with that tradition in this.
I'll tell women what to wear, I'll tell men what to wear.
People from UCT pitch up there in uniform and you're going to wear what I tell you to
wear.
There's no negotiation.
Okay.
There's a reason for that.
I'll keep it a secret.
But you're all going to appear in the clothes that I tell you to appear.
There's a subconscious effect on the examiner that I really believe in and you're all going
to pass that little one.
Okay.
So from a week to week basis we're going to prepare a topic because it's easier that way
and we can try and get through most of the topics that are listed there.
And then you're going to be questioned.
We start on this side, next time we start on that side.
I do prefer sugar free Red Bull, so whoever brings me sugar free Red Bull amongst yourselves,
organize that out.
Okay?
As simple as that.
Red Bull is the spice of life.
It makes everything better.
Okay?
Not the sugary one.
Sugar free.
I'm joking.
No, I'm not.
Okay, so by the end of it my energies are just as low as yours.
It's very difficult to come up with questions.
It's not that easy.
You've got to think about it.
And by the end of the day it's also bad being the last or second last or third last candidate.
You know, you get tired.
Your neurons can't work that long.
So what I try to do is for you to sit in the same order because I start from this side,
next time, start from that side, next time, start in the middle.
Because by the end you'll see my questions tend to deteriorate.
That's just, you know, you can only ask them any questions.
And I don't want for the same candidate to be the last one on the list every time you're
going to get the bad questions.
Okay?
I want a nice mix.
So we're going to start off by teaching you how to construct an answer.
That's why I say there's a whole science behind attacking this thing.
And the science behind it is how to construct the answer in your head before it comes out.
Because you've got 20 minutes to fill.
And you've got to create an impression in those 20 minutes.
And the best way to do that is not to walk in and answer questions.
You're all prepared.
You're all professional people.
You're sitting across from someone who's in the same profession as you.
One is not better than the other.
But one has slightly more experience than the other.
You actually should have more knowledge than the examiner when you're walking.
Especially on these topics.
Because most of us, the examiners, haven't recently read up on this.
One guy is an HPV guy.
One is a vascular guy.
He's read up on his own stuff.
He hasn't read up on all of this.
You know much more.
You should know much more than the examiner when you walk in there.
Okay?
So walk in there with a mindset of,
we are going to have a professional discussion.
If you can,
if you can trigger that in your mind,
the battle is won.
You are not going in there to answer questions.
You are walking in there to have a professional discussion.
There are going to be some topics on the table.
And we might as well sit at the cafeteria with a cup of coffee,
or Red Bull in my instance, sugar free,
and have a discussion about,
that's what we talk about.
You know,
when you go home and your spouse is a surgeon as well,
you are going to talk shop.
And you are going to meet a colleague in the cafeteria,
you are going to talk shop.
It's just normal.
And you are going to talk shop in that exam.
That's what,
then you have won.
And that's the candidate I am always looking for.
That's the candidate that is going to win the prize.
There is no prize.
No one is going to hang something.
But of course,
we get to see the marks afterwards.
And I like it if the UCT candidate is top of the line.
It just works that way.
Okay?
And that's usually the candidate that has walked in
and has had a good discussion about topics,
colleague to colleague.
not examiner to some pathetic 19 year old student.
Okay?
So,
there is a way that you can appear as if you are there to have this discussion.
And that's by structuring,
structuring your answer.
So I said I am not going to embarrass someone.
Here comes the embarrassment.
Unfortunately,
you sat right in front of me,
you are going to get the embarrassment.
So I am going to ask you a question,
you can answer.
Just tell me about your use of prophylactic antibiotics.
Prophylactic antibiotics should be carefully considered.
They should not be the antibiotics usually used to treat the specific infection
because that might be disposed to overuse of those antibiotics
and therefore they will not be successful in treating the specific infection.
And there is a specific timing involved in giving prophylactic antibiotics
depending for example on when you expect the infection to be set free in the person.
What I mean by that is if you are going into doing an abdominal surgery,
abdominal operation,
then there would be a specific timing in which the skin flora would be exposed to
the person's tissues or the abdominal contents.
And you want the antibiotics to reach peak levels at that specific stage.
And then also continue them for the period that this person would be exposed to the organisms
at peak levels.
We use a number of specific types of antibiotics.
For example, first generation kyplosporins like Kefzol in orthopaedic operations
that cover mostly skin flora.
And then for abdominal operations,
you want to add something that would cover gram-negatives as well,
sometimes anaerobes.
So you might want to use clentamycin and metronidazole.
Depending on the part of the body you are accessing,
it would also have a big impact on the antibiotics you are choosing.
Chest cavities obviously don't have the same type of organisms as abdominal cavities.
So there are specific antibiotics for each region of the body
and we have to consider the timing and delivery of those.
Okay, so let's just critique this.
Let's get to the good points first.
She used up a lot of time.
You have to fill up 20 minutes.
You take control over those 20 minutes.
The more you talk, the less questions you can get.
Job done.
Goal number one.
Okay?
The more you talk, the less chance you give that examiner to have a few words.
The less questions you are going to get.
With all the added benefits of appearing that you know everything,
you can talk, you look relaxed, you look professional.
You have all the positive signs.
The more you talk, the better.
Let's get to the negative points.
She laughed and smiled.
That's pathetic.
It shows.
Can you see what it showed?
Can you see it from my side?
Is it possible to see?
It looks pathetic.
It does not help at all.
Doctor, I'm sick.
I'm dying.
Are we going to do this for you?
You know?
That's ridiculous.
Okay, don't do that smiley thing.
Number two, and probably more important, you fell from topic to topic.
Whatever came in your head was what you said there.
She had no structure to the way she answered.
She said a lot of correct things.
But it came across as if she was grabbing at a lot of loose little pieces of knowledge
that she had.
In between she said the wrong things.
Okay?
We usually don't cover for gram negatives and prophylaxis.
Okay?
That's not, that's, that's usually not the case.
Again, positives and anaerobes.
That's what we cover for in prophylactic antibiotics.
Okay?
So, we're going to learn here things that I call recipes.
Okay?
And there's no one recipe correct over another recipe.
And it's not always appropriate to use one of these recipes.
But the vast majority it is.
And a recipe, as an example for this question, would go something like this.
The examiner sets a situation or asks you a direct question.
The first thing that you're going to show the examiner, I understand what you're talking about.
And the best way to do that is to define the topic at hand.
So, this is prophylactic antibiotics.
First of all, define the topic.
Prophylactic antibiotics is the use of antibiotics to prevent infection in a setting before all
those things you said.
Just define prophylactic antibiotics.
Just have a nice short summation of the definition of it.
And then you're going to tell the examiner what you are going to say about these things.
You could say something like, now we're going to build a pyramid.
Top of the pyramid, I'm defining the problem.
First of all, it's used up time.
And secondly, it tells the examiner you know what this is all about.
And you're going to tell him what you're going to say.
You could say something for instance, there are various considerations in the use of prophylactic antibiotics.
Number one is indication.
Number two is timing.
Don't say I'm going to say five things because then you'll only get to four.
So, try not to use numbering.
We're going to talk about timing, indication, timing, specific types of antibiotics.
What else can we add to this?
How about?
Okay, it's day number one.
I won't push it.
But then you're going to tell him what you're going to talk about.
That has structured your mind.
You've used up time, but more importantly, it has structured your mind.
Now you're not going to grab for loose things.
Because the big thing about grabbing for loose things, obviously you seem slightly incompetent,
but you're going to miss stuff.
You know so much about it, and now there's a few things that are not going to be said.
And I don't know that you knew it.
You lost that opportunity to show me everything you knew.
And by structuring your answer, all the positives of it, but you also get the opportunity to bring everything out.
So, now we've defined it.
We're going to, some things to consider is indication.
Now we can talk about indication.
Even that you can then break down.
I'm going to now, under indication, going to discuss this, this, this and this.
So everything is just this pyramid that keeps on being broken down.
And the more you can do that, the less chance that you're going to forget anything,
the more time you're going to use up, the more professional you're going to look,
the whole thing is just beautiful.
And that's what we're going to do over and over and over and over again.
So I'm not going to get to, once or twice we're going to talk about the topic,
and you know, there's going to be some dictatorial thing going on.
But the vast majority of this is going to be how to structure your answer.
So the day you're going to come, you're going to come sit down there,
speak to the guys who've had this before.
To come in there and know, I'm going to get this question,
and then I'm going to have this whole structure in my head as to how to do that.
That is really empowering.
And you can see the difference in a candidate who comes to sit and answer like you did.
That guy in the room was never prepared at all.
Versus this person who can sit and just structure this whole answer
and can talk for 10 minutes without stopping.
It's the most beautiful thing to see.
And it only comes from practicing that.
