Let's look at this problem quickly. It's regarding the reversal of trigonometric substitution.
And we are asked to simplify the tangent of theta if x equals the cosecant of theta.
Let's do a graphical representation of our problem in trigonometry with a right angle triangle.
Let's do that.
Here we have our right triangle.
There we go.
And we call this angle theta.
So this would be the adjacent angle, this would be the opposite angle, and this would be the hypotenuse.
Now we are told that the cosecant of theta equals x over 1.
And cosecant we know is 1 over the sine.
We know that sine is opposite over hypotenuse.
So cosecant is going to be hypotenuse over opposite.
So that must equal x over 1.
So we know that the hypotenuse is x.
And we know that the opposite must be 1.
Now how to get through the Pythagorean theorem, how to get the adjacent?
Well let's just call the adjacent, let's call it p.
Doesn't matter.
And through the Pythagorean theorem we know that p squared plus 1 squared must equal the hypotenuse squared.
Let's just solve for p now.
p squared will be x squared minus 1.
And p would be the square root of x squared minus 1.
So we can substitute this with the square root of x squared minus 1.
And certainly if we take the square, if we look, let's just make sure through the Pythagorean theorem.
So if we have the x squared minus 1.
And we have that squared plus 1 squared.
That must equal x squared.
So that will be x squared minus 1 plus 1.
And that equals x squared.
And indeed x squared equals x squared.
So that is correct there.
But now we are asked to get the tangent of theta.
Which is now very simple because we've got values for all three sides of our triangle.
And tangent.
We know that tangent equals opposite over adjacent.
So that is going to be.
Opposite is 1.
divided by the square root of x squared minus 1.
So that's quite simple.
We could also have looked at it in a different fashion in that way.
And that is through here.
And that means that theta equals.
Theta equals.
Theta equals.
The arc.
Cosecant.
Of x.
So the tangent of theta.
The tangent of theta would have been.
Well that would have been the tangent.
Of.
The arc.
Cosecant.
Of x.
Not as elegant as saying that it is 1 over the square root of x squared minus 1.
So this is reversal of trigonometric substitution.
1 oveross st evaporate.
Simple Therefore statement.
.
The graph.
Cosecant.
Cosecant.
Or why .
