Good afternoon, Joan. You've been willing to share your teaching online and open up your classroom space to others.
Can you please tell us more about your philosophy of teaching and sharing?
That's a pleasure, thanks. I really do believe that knowledge belongs to the whole human race.
I think we've gone through so many ages when knowledge was locked up and under the domain of ownership of certain people.
But the whole technology revolution has done something wonderful and that's given everyone the ability to learn something.
And the ownership of that knowledge has really been let free into the public domain.
And it's so easy to get that information. It's not locked away in a book. It's so much easier to get.
And that means the duplication of it is so much easier.
If you had to reprint a book, you could only do so many copies of it.
To redo a video or to put a video on another platform is so easy.
It's an electronic file that just gets transferred.
So the duplication is so much easier and that means we can spread it to so many more people.
Now, unfortunately, if we could just give every human being broadband access and unkept limits on the internet connection,
that would obviously be wonderful and I think that is a bit of a problem that we deal with in the world
in that there is a divide between those who have a lot of bandwidth and those that don't.
That's the only little problem I see. But we've got to go beyond that one.
It's certainly not something that we can't fix. It must be fixed.
And we've got to look at the big companies and big governments to fix this for us.
But it still means that knowledge is there and everyone can have access to it.
And knowledge is power as far as I'm concerned.
It empowers you to have knowledge and just to have that ability to give it to someone
without holding on to it. It means nothing if it's just locked away in my mind.
It becomes so much more powerful if I can share that when someone else has that.
And that just gives me a great sense of accomplishment and really satisfies me as an academic,
just to have my knowledge just given to other people.
Thank you, Jean. And as a surgeon, how has this influenced your practice?
How has it influenced my practice? Of course, I'm in academic practice,
which is a bit different from private practice. So it is part of my job to put knowledge out there,
but it's given such a wide spectrum of my ability to teach.
In the old days, you might have come just to a classroom, given your lecture and walked out.
But video material, online material makes it so much different. You can ask the students to do all
that beforehand at their own time when it suits them. Go through that material, come to class fully
prepared and almost used to you now. You're not a stranger to them. They've already seen you.
That also makes a difference. And you can then engage with them as far as the knowledge is concerned.
And it's not, I tell you something now and we all walk out. They've come there, they've prepared,
and we can discuss the topic at hand versus me just dictating to them what I want them to know.
And they try and keep up by jotting down. It's a whole different dynamic that you can bring because
of this. But the biggest beauty of it probably is the fact that they can now learn as and when
they want, as it suits their lifestyle. It might not be, they might not be in the best frame of mind
at 10 o'clock this morning for a variety of factors. And they will only hear me say these words once
when they come to the lecture. And who knows what they missed at 10 o'clock that morning. But if they
can re-watch this at a time that suits them, I think it brings so much more to that learning experience.
I also do believe in this dictum of, at first you are unconsciously incompetent. You don't know what you
don't know. The first time you read something or hear something you become consciously incompetent.
In other words, well, at least now I know this thing exists. I didn't even know that there was
this disease before. Now you know. But a couple of days down the line you're going to forget this.
You've got to repeat that to become consciously competent. So you know the word, but you actually
have to think about it to recall it. And eventually if you've gone through it enough, we all know the
10,000 hour sort of rule to become expert at something. If you've done enough you become
unconsciously competent. But that's the only repetition that does that. And coming to listen
to my lecture just once does not do it. But if you have the ability to watch it over again
and the way that it suits you and the time it suits you, I don't think it gets better than that.
And lastly, Joanne, you've spent a lot of time creating these videos.
What has facilitated your production and what has been challenging for you?
Challenging probably is the time. Time constraints. There's service delivery is always
the thing that we are concerned about in medicine and that has to be done. So you've got to find the
time to do these things. Fortunately, it's obviously not the same for everyone who tries to do this.
It's got to be your hobby. It's got to be something that makes you happy to do. If it's a chore,
it's not going to get done. Now, fortunately, it involves toys, cameras, videos, software, computers,
and that's a nice hobby to have for me. I enjoy those things. So bringing that all together is a
form of relaxation for me. It is my hobby, or at least one of my hobbies. So it's never ever a chore.
And because of that, there's always time for it. Time is always found for it. And you've got to go
through a learning phase. I'm not a creative person myself. I have no idea how to interpret
an expensive museum piece or a nice painting. So I've got no design
abilities. But I see what other people do. I try and recreate that in my own way. So that is a bit
of a learning curve. And new software that comes out all the time. Every time you want your videos
to be better, so you go for a higher level of software. And you've got to continuously learn
all the new versions of that that comes out. So there's a bit of that. But once again, if that's
something you're interested in, you will make time for it. Thank you, Joanne. Wonderful when your
interest and your work combine. And thank you for being a leader in the field and being so willing
to share your knowledge. It's wonderful to be part of a team and a university that actually has
some interest in this arena. And it surely is the future of teaching. Thank you. Thank you.
