Let us look at this example of trigonometric integration.
We are asked to get the indefinite integral of the sine cubed of x with respect to x.
Now the power of our trigonometric function is odd, which makes it one of the easier cases.
It is not, as in the formal explanation in the previous video, to the power 1.
And certainly we need to get it into a power of 1 as opposed to cube.
And for this we would need a trigonometric identity.
That is easy enough to do since we know that the sine squared of x equals 1 minus the cosine squared of x.
We can thus rewrite our original problem as the sine squared of x sine of x dx.
Multiplying that out will leave us with our original sine cubed of x.
For the sine squared of x we can use the trigonometric identity which we have just looked at.
So that will be the indefinite integral of 1 minus the cosine squared of x times the sine of x dx.
Now I need to get rid of the sine of x dx and I can do that through u substitution.
I can say that u equals the cosine of x.
If I then take the first derivative of u with respect to x, I get minus the sine of x.
In other words, minus du is going to be sine of x dx.
So I can get rid of all my x's in the problem set here by substituting u as cosine of x.
Because if I rewrite this, it will be the indefinite integral of 1 minus u squared.
And sine of x dx is minus 1 du.
That leaves me with a constant which I can bring out which is negative 1.
And then I have the indefinite integral of 1 minus u squared du.
And that is easy enough.
That will be u minus a third u cubed.
And this will all be plus c because it is an indefinite integral.
If I substitute my value of u, which I have there,
back into my problem now and multiply out by negative 1 all in one step,
I am going to have a third cosine cubed of x minus cosine of x plus c.
tu is a отвis from acum.
ichi4 x 4
With regard to u with pinky.
You'll see that R1 is going to be something like a round one step in the castle
You'll see your rate, which you should see.
You'll see one thing like a round one did.
But this is fallen a third at 8 o'clock.
