In this video we will add the concept of an interval to integration and call that the
bounds of the integral.
It is easy if we consider a graph of a function.
Here we have our old example of y equals x squared in the first Cartesian quadrant.
We are familiar with the concept of an interval.
We can calculate the area under the curve on the interval from a to b or from c to d
for that matter.
And that is what a definite integral is.
It represents the area under a curve on an interval.
To apply this to our notation for the indefinite integral, we simply add our interval bounds
in this form.
It reads, the integral from a to b of the function y with respect to x.
Note where we place the a and the b.
If we move from left to right on the x axis, we place the lower bound, the one that comes
first, below, and the higher bound, which we reach as we move along the x axis at the
top.
We can move the a and b around, but with consequences, which we will learn about later.
Think back to when we used the limit of the Wright-Riemann sum to calculate the area under
the curve for the equation y equals 1 minus x squared from 0 to 1.
Our answer was 2 thirds.
Now let us take a step up and use integration to determine the area under the curve from
x equals 0 to x equals 1.
Our integration equation will look like this.
The integral from 0 to 1 of 1 minus x squared with respect to x.
Let us apply what we learned by taking the anti-derivative.
1 is the same as 1x to the power 0.
Adding 1 to the power 0 leaves 1.
Divide the coefficient 1 by this 1 and that leaves 1 over 1 x to the power 1.
The power of the minus x squared is 2.
Add 1 to this and we have 3.
Divide the coefficient, which is minus 1, by 3 and we have minus a third x cubed.
Our equation would thus read, area equals x minus a third x cubed between 0 and 1.
Note that there is no plus c.
Here we have the 0 and the 1 at the end.
Our integral is no longer indefinite, but definite.
We simply substitute the upper value into the equation and then the bottom value and
subtract these two equations.
And if you try that yourself, this is what you will get.
Precisely the answer that we calculated using the limit of the Riemann sum.
The exact value for the area under the curve from 0 to 1.
