It is important to learn the methods and steps of integration and the proof of the fundamental theorem of calculus by heart,
but it is much more important to understand what is at the heart of it.
If you understand how it works, the methods and steps follow with a lot more ease.
But what does the fundamental theorem of calculus actually mean?
Well, it relates differentiation and integration and actually states that one is the reverse of the other.
If I have some functions, say the upper case of f , and I take the first derivative of it,
I get a second function, that is called this new derived function lower case f .
They are two completely separate functions, but for ease of understanding that they are related,
we use upper and lower case f to denote them.
If I take the integral of the lower case f , I get back to the upper case f ,
while technically it is the upper case of f plus c because it is an indefinite integral.
The fundamental theorem of calculus actually relates to the definite integral,
and states that if I take the definite integral over an interval from a to b,
that that would be the original upper case f ,
but substituting x equals b minus substituting x equals a,
in other words, the upper case f minus the upper case f .
But why is this so?
As I mentioned before, understanding the reasoning behind it is much more important than copying down the proof.
The example that I will use to explain it relates to classical mechanics and physics.
Most of you will have done some rudimentary physics and will know something about distance, velocity and acceleration.
Let us just use distance and velocity.
If we are given any equation for distance travelled over time, say the s of t equals 2t, we can graph it like this.
Distance on the y-axis and time on the x-axis.
If we divide distance with time, we get velocity, distance per time interval.
If you travel from a to b in t seconds, your average velocity will be b minus a divided by the time t.
In our graph, this will be the s of b minus the s of a divided by b minus a, or rise over run, delta y divided by delta x.
If we made our delta x infinitely small, we calculate the instantaneous velocity at that time.
We use differentiation. Given, in our example, as it stands, it is not important.
It is a straight line and the instantaneous rate of change will be the same as the average rate of change.
So the important thing is we divided distance by time and that gave us velocity.
In our example, that would be s prime of t equals 2.
We have gone from uppercase f to lowercase f .
From physics, we also know that s prime of t is v .
What if we plotted velocity over time now? We would get this graph.
Now we ask a question. How far did you travel from time a to time b?
We can derive that answer from the equation velocity times time equals distance.
We multiply velocity and time.
If you look closely and think about it for a minute, you will notice that velocity times time will be the height times the width of the rectangle.
That forms the area under the curve between x equals a and x equals b.
And that is why the area under a curve on an interval represents the definite integral of a function on that interval.
So we want to know how far we traveled from second 2 to second 6.
The width of our rectangle is now 6 minus 2 and that is 4.
The height of our rectangle is 2, whether we use a left or right or midpoint sum.
And the area under the curve is 4 times 2 and that is 8. You have thus traveled 8 meters.
But how do we know that it is allowable to substitute first the top limit and then the bottom and subtract after performing the integration and getting back to uppercase f .
Well remember, 2t represents our initial equation. Let us look at that graph again.
At 2 seconds you are at 4 meters and at 6 seconds you are at 12 meters. How far have you traveled?
Well first you were at 4 meters and then at 12 meters. So you have traveled 8 meters.
You can also do this by substituting first 6 and then 2 into your equation. Subtract and you get 8 meters.
If the s represents our initial uppercase f , and s' or v represents lowercase f , it is clear that the area under the curve on an interval from a to b for lowercase f is represented by the definite integral of lowercase f on that interval.
And that equals the uppercase f minus the uppercase f .
Now we used a simple example here. If our original uppercase f had a t cubed, our first derivative would have had a t squared in it and would not have represented a straight line and we would have had to explain this concept with infinite Riemann sums.
The concept stays the same though. The area under the curve on an interval from a to b represented by infinitely many rectangles.
It would be the uppercase f minus the uppercase f . And that is why we can integrate and substitute the top and the bottom values and subtract.
This concept, as I have explained it now, represents the fundamental theorem of calculus and relates the definite integral to the derivative.
One more concept for this video is notation. Why did we write the integral of a function with respect to that function's variable, say the f dx?
Well, look at our original velocity of a time graph. If you wanted to calculate the area under the curve for a very small change in time, say that time is dt for delta t or differential t.
The height of the skinny rectangle will be the v . Height times width would thus be vt dt. And that is where we get f dx.
How do we write?
How do you wish?
Havehec 1361
