Here's an interesting example for us. We're asked to get the definite integral in going
from 1 to negative 1 of x plus 2 squared with respect to x. It might look slightly daunting
to start with, but we'll take things one step at a time and see that it's actually probably
not that bad. Now, we're used to going from left to right on our interval on the x-axis
when we take our integral and we know from one of our rules of integration that we can
swap those around to make things more of what we're used to. So if we swap that around,
we know we're just going to get the negative. So going from negative 1 to 1 would be negative
x plus 2 squared with respect to x. We can use the constant multiple rule because this
will be a negative 1 out front, which we can bring out. There'll be a negative 1 going
from negative 1 to 1. And what is x plus 2 squared? Well, that is x squared plus 4x plus 4 with
respect to x. And this seems quite easy for us to do. Negative 1. What are we going to have?
What is the antiderivative of x squared? Well, first of all, we're going to add 1 to the power.
That gives us 3. So we know that's going to be x to the power 3. And we're going to take
the coefficient, which is 1, and divide it by this new power. What would be the antiderivative
of 4x? Well, once again, we're going to have x. The power is 1. 1 plus 2 is 2. And we're
going to have the coefficient 4 divided by this new power. Just going to raise that and write
2 for now. 4 divided by 2 is 2. And in red again, because I want to stress the point,
that'll be 4x to the power 0. If we add 1 to that 0, that'll be 1. And we can take the
coefficient and divide it by that new power. So that will leave us with 4x. Okay, so we're
going to have plus 4x. And all of this is going to go on an interval from negative 1. All of
this is going to go from an interval of negative 1 to 1. Let's substitute. Still have the minus
1, the negative 1 outside. We're going to have a third. Now the upper limit is going to be
1 cubed plus 2 substituting. Just substituting this 1 squared plus 4, 1. And we're going to
have a negative there. Still a third. Now we're going to substitute the minus 1. Minus 1. We are
going to cube. Minus 1 we're going to cube. We have a 2 minus 1 squared and a plus a 4 with
a negative 1. Now we've got to try and concentrate so that we don't make a small mistake. So that
is still going to be a negative 1 outside. 1 to the power 3 is this 1. So that'll be a
third. Plus 2. Plus 4. Minus. What are we going to do here? Negative 1 cubed. So that'll
be negative 1. So that is negative a third. That'll be minus 1 times minus 1 is 1. That'll
be plus 2. And that'll be a negative 4. So we'll have negative 1. A third plus 2 plus 4 plus
another third. Minus 2 plus 4. That's minus 1. What's a third plus a third? That's going
to be two thirds. 2 plus 4 is 6. Take away 2 is 4. Plus 4 is 8. Plus 8. That is going
to be negative 1. A common denominator will be a 3. That'll be 2 plus 24. Was that right?
Yeah. And that equals negative 1. 26 over 3. I think we'll go until that step.
