Now we've got to consider an example where the degree of the polynomial in the numerator is equal to or larger than the degree of the polynomial in the denominator.
And certainly here we have x cubed in the numerator and x squared.
If you multiply out the two expressions in the denominator you'll get x squared as the largest power and thus the degree of the denominator is 2.
And what we're going to do here is follow another recipe and first of all we're going to multiply out our denominator.
So that is going to leave us with x squared that will leave us with plus x minus 2.
And yeah now we can clearly see the degree of the numerator is larger than the degree of the polynomial in the denominator.
Let's just use a quick example. Let's say what we have here is 5 over 3.
Just for argument's sake. This is an improper fraction.
And what do we do? Well we do long division. We're going to say 5 divided by 3.
So that goes in 1, so 1 times 3 is 3 and what is left over is a 2.
Now this is called, if we just look at this, this is called the quotient.
Quotient and this is called the remainder.
If I write this out now, that means 5 over 3 can be rewritten as, that can be rewritten as 1, which is the quotient, plus the remainder over what you divided by.
So it's 1 over 2 plus 3, so it's 1 plus 2 thirds and that equals 1 and 2 thirds or 5 over 3.
Now let's do long division because we want to change from an improper fraction, which is this, to a proper fraction, which is that.
Now let's do that.
So we're going to have, look where the 5 goes, the 5 goes inside the box.
Real grade school stuff here.
So we're going to have x cubed and we're going to divide that by x squared plus x minus 2.
Well first of all, let's make it look a bit better.
First of all that's going to go into that x times.
So we'll have here x cubed plus 2x, sorry, plus x squared.
x times x is x squared.
x squared minus 2x.
Let us subtract.
What are we going to get?
Minus x squared and 0 minus, so that is plus 2x.
Now that goes in the minus ones.
So this will leave us with minus x squared minus x plus 2.
If we subtract that we are left with 2x minus negative x, so that is 3x.
And 0 minus 2 is minus 2.
So once again, what do we have here?
We have the quotient and we have the remainder.
So what are we left with now?
Remember where the 1 comes from there, that's the quotient.
So we are left with, let's just give ourselves a bit more space.
We are left with the quotient which is x minus 1 plus 2.
Remember 2 was the remainder.
Here the remainder is, the remainder is 3x minus 2.
And what we divided with, remember we multiplied it out, that was x minus 1 and x plus 2.
And there we have a proper fraction now in the degree.
Well we have three terms now.
We have, as I said, we have x, we have minus 1 and we have this term.
And if we look at this as the p of x here, and this is the q of x, we note that the degree of the polynomial in the numerator is now smaller than the degree of the polynomial in the denominator.
And the one thing you have to watch out for in advance, remember this is 1 plus 2 thirds.
There's our plus, it is not, it is not 1 times 2 thirds, which equals 2 thirds.
1 and 2 thirds is 1 plus 2 thirds.
And there we have it.
A method to manage factoring of a polynomial which is in fraction form, but which is an improper fraction.
In other words, the degree of the polynomial is larger than or equal to the degree of the polynomial in the denominator.
So that's how many reasons.
Add 2 of
