In this section we're going to look at polynomial fractions and how to integrate fractions.
What we'll start off with and how I will explain this section is with an example.
If for instance we have x squared plus 2 divided by, let us have x minus 1 squared and x plus 2.
How to integrate this?
What we are looking at here though is something like the p of x divided by the q of x.
Divided by the q of x.
So it's a fraction of different polynomials.
The denominator, the polynomial q of x in the denominator has already been fractioned out for us.
But we can simplify this polynomial fraction even further.
We can break it down into or get it back to its original fractions before we start integrating.
Now the first method that we are going to learn has two conditions that must be met.
And the first one here is that the degree of the denominator, degree of the numerator sorry, must be smaller than the degree of the denominator.
Now we look at the degree of the polynomial and the numerator is 2 x squared.
And if we multiply out the denominator it's going to be x cubed.
So the degree of our numerator is smaller than the degree of our denominator.
The second section or part that has to be true for us to use this method that I'm going to show here
is that the x's in the denominator must have a highest power of 1 after it has been fractioned out.
So here we have x to the power 1 minus 1.
That's squared.
So there's two of them.
x minus 1 times x minus 1 times x plus 2.
But all those separate x's are only to the power 1.
And thus we can use this method.
So first of all we need the degree of the numerator to be smaller than the degree of the denominator.
And all the powers of x in the denominator have to be 1.
Certainly not squared or bigger than that.
So the first step that we do is we rewrite our problem.
x squared plus 2 divided by x minus 1 squared x plus 2.
And we're going to rewrite this.
We're going to have an a over one of the factors in the denominator.
And that will be x minus 1 will be the first one.
Remember there are two of them though.
But the second one is not just going to be x minus 1.
We'll have to write x minus 1 squared.
It'll have to be x minus 1 squared plus c.
And our third factor would be x plus 2.
So remember very carefully this is to the power 2.
So we have one of them.
We have a second one but that one has to be to the power 2.
So if this was x minus 1 cubed that would be plus c over x minus 1 cubed.
And an easy way quickly for us to look at that is let's look at an example of a fraction say 7 over 16.
7 over 16.
Now that is 7 over 2 to the power 4.
And if we break that up that will be a problem that has been shown to me so I can just rewrite this.
There will be 1 over 2 squared plus 1 over 2 to the power 3 plus 1 over 2 to the power 4.
And if you add those fractions you get to 7 over 16.
But note because this goes to the power of 4 in the end we go to the power of 4.
And here we're going to go to the power of 2.
Because of this 2 we have here.
Now let's move down.
Now the first thing to do is let us solve for c.
We're going to solve for c.
And the way that we can solve for c is to get rid of the denominator in the fraction that contains c.
That is x plus 2.
So let's multiply out our equation here by x plus 2.
So this is clear here.
So we're going to have x squared plus 2.
We're going to multiply out by x plus 2.
Divided by on the left hand side we had x minus 1 squared.
We had x plus 2.
That is going to be a times.
We're multiplying out by x plus 2 throughout.
x minus 1 plus b.
We're multiplying by x plus 2.
So x minus 1 squared plus c.
We're going to multiply by x.
Well let me write that.
It wastes a bit of time.
So be it.
x plus 2.
Now those 2 x plus 2's.
Those 2 will cancel out.
And of course on this side will cancel out as well.
So we're just left with c.
Now let us randomly decide to let x equals negative 2.
Let us make x equal to negative 2.
And the reason why I do that is if I substitute negative 2 in here it will be negative 2 plus 2.
And that will be a 0.
So this factor will become 0.
And this factor will become 0.
And then we're just left with an answer for c.
So let's do that.
So if I substitute x equals negative 2 in here.
We get negative 2 times negative 2 is 4.
4 plus 2 is 6.
So we're going to have 6 over negative 2 plus negative 1 is negative 3.
Negative 3 squared is 9.
And that is equal to c.
So we know what the value of c is.
It's 6 over 9.
So let us restate our problem.
So we're going to have x squared plus 2 divided by x minus 1 squared and x plus 2.
That is going to equal a over x minus 1 plus b over x minus 1 squared plus...
Now we know what c is.
It's 6 over 9.
So that's 6 over 9 times x plus 2.
So we have a value there.
Now let's go for b.
To get b on its own we can multiply both sides out by its denominator x minus 2 squared.
So we are going to have x squared plus 2.
We are going to multiply by x minus 1 squared.
And we are going to have x minus 1 squared and x plus 2.
Multiply the right hand side by x minus 1 squared.
So we are going to have a x minus 1 squared over x minus 1 plus b.
It's now going to be on its own because the numerator is now going to cancel out of the denominator.
Plus we have 6 over 9 x plus 2.
Again, of course, x minus 1 squared.
We are multiplying out with.
Now we can be very clever again.
In this instance we can let x equal 1.
Because if we let x equal 1 we are going to get rid of a lot of our x values here.
And we are going to be able to solve for b.
So let x equal 1.
First of all, we are going to have a cancellation there and there.
And if we substitute 1 in here, this is going to be 0.
And if we substitute 1 here, that is going to be 0 as well.
So we will be left with an answer for b.
So 1, if we look there, 1 squared, that would be 3.
That would be 3.
Is that correct?
x is going to be equal to 1.
x squared, 1 is 3.
That's correct.
So we are going to have 3 there.
And in the denominator we are going to have 1.
We are going to have 3 there.
And that is going to be equal to b.
In other words, b equals 1.
So we can simplify our problem even further.
So now we are going to have
x squared plus 2 over
x minus 1 squared, x plus 2.
Now we are going to be a over x minus 1.
b we now know is 1.
So that will be 1 over x minus 1 squared.
plus we know this is 6 over 9, x plus 2.
Now it's very easy now
if we give x any value
other than the 2 that we've had before.
So we've had a negative, what did we have?
We had x equals to, x equal to negative 2 and x equal to 1.
So let's use anything but those two.
Let's just use 0.
Let x equal 0.
So we can just solve for a.
If we do that, 0 plus 2 is 2.
And 0 minus 1 squared is 1.
That's 2.
So that's 2 over 2.
Equals a over negative 1.
Plus 1 over,
so that's 0 minus 1.
And that's squared, that's 1.
Plus 6 over 9 times 2,
which is 18.
So we'll have a on this side
equals negative 1 plus 1
plus 6 over 18.
And that means a equals, is that a third?
That is a third.
So if we restate our problem,
we're going to have the fact that
x squared plus 2
divided by x minus 1
times a squared
plus x plus 2.
If this is all factored out,
we're going to have 1 over.
a is now a third,
so that's going to be 1 over
3 times x minus 1.
b was also 1,
so that's going to be 1 over
x minus 1 squared
plus c was 6 over 9,
so that's 9x plus 2.
We have now completely factored
this polynomial fraction,
we've completely factored it out.
And this factored out expression
can now be integrated.
link to the p
so that we can identify
and check via email.
