So yesterday we looked at this identity element and we looked at the identity element on addition,
the identity element on the multiplication, and now we're looking for the inverse.
Now again you know this from school what an inverse is.
All I'm going to have is this for addition, say my set this time is the real numbers,
if I have an addition 3, all I have to do is to get its inverse, I multiply it by negative 1,
so that gives me negative 3, and what I might get with 0, so what I'm trying to get to is the identity element of that operation.
If it was multiplication was my operation, then it is a third, you know, 3 to the power negative 1,
and that's going to give me 1, the identity element for this operation, so that's what we're trying to do.
So the same with matrices, if I have a, I'm looking for, it's to the power negative 1,
but this is not really to the power negative 1, well, anyway, it's the way that we write the inverse,
and it's multiplication, so we're trying to get to multiplication's identity element for matrices, which is I,
and there's a special property here that it does commute.
So remember we said the matrix multiplication, it doesn't commute, but this is a special property that these do commute,
a matrix and it's inverse.
So we're talking square matrices, and it's not all square matrices have inverses, by the way,
and we'll look at when that doesn't happen.
So let's look at these two.
Would it be that A and A inverse give me the identity element?
So let's multiply them, remember this is the way that we write it,
1 and 2, 2 and minus 1, and we have here a fifth, and we have two fifths,
and we have two fifths, and we have negative a fifth.
So the result has got to be a two by two matrix, because it's two by two and two by two.
So one fifth plus four fifths is five fifths, that's one,
two fifths minus two fifths, lo and behold is zero,
two fifths minus two fifths is zero, guess what's coming, it's a one.
So that's four fifths plus minus and minus one, so that's five fifths and that's a one.
So I get to the identity element, so there's this A, it has an inverse,
and that is the inverse, and you can do it the other way around,
do it in pen and paper if you just swap these two around,
so this was A, A inverse, this was A, A inverse, try A inverse A,
this you're going to see you're going to get exactly the same,
and that's the identity element, and you're going to see you get the identity element there as well.
So two questions, the first obvious one is,
how do I get from here to there, if only given this, how do I get there?
That's a simple task, if it's the bigger the matrix, it just takes longer,
but it's a simple task, and in many classes, in many textbooks,
you're going to be shown two ways, of course in Mathematica, it's nothing to do,
this is easy, and that's question number one,
and question number two, where are we going to use this?
And that's a special lecture coming,
because that is where we get to deal with these things in a proper way,
and that is the proper way to look at systems of linear equations,
and that is up next.
Well, first up next is going to be, how to find this,
and then its application,
in finding the solution to a set of linear equations,
a proper way of doing that.
So there you go, let's go to Mathematica,
and let's just have a look at this,
very simple to do,
but very deep concepts,
and a concept that you have to get your,
you know, into your head,
it's just going to, we've got to be part of the normal knowledge in your head,
but it's exciting stuff,
and it leads to very exciting places.
So here we are in the Wolfram language,
we see Mathematica,
with the Wolfram language,
inverse matrices,
there are the two matrices that we had on the board,
I've already entered them there,
so I'm just going to print out A in matrix form,
let's have a look at that,
my 1, 2, 2, and negative 1,
and I've just called it A, I, and V,
for A inverse,
and let's do that in matrix form as well,
and you see there,
it is a fifth, two fifths,
and then two fifths,
and negative 1 over 5.
So let's do matrix multiplication,
and the way that we're going to do that,
remember, is with a period,
so let's do A period,
A inverse,
and let's have a look at that in matrix form,
the solution,
and lo and behold,
I find the two by two identity matrix,
just to show you,
that we do have commutivity here,
let's do A inverse,
A inverse dot A,
and let's print that out in matrix form as well,
and lo and behold,
also the identity,
the identity matrix,
as far as multiplication is concerned.
So,
very easy to do,
and it's this matrix multiplication here,
just to show you,
that this thing does exist,
and we didn't make a mistake on the board.
From here,
we'll go on to,
the questions that I mentioned,
how do you calculate this inverse,
and then,
how do you use it,
to solve systems of linear equations.
