So in this video I want to show you just how easy it is to get the inverse of a matrix.
Let's change this first code cell into a markdown cell. Remember I'm just going to do the keyboard
shortcut escape and you notice that this bar turned blue. I'm going to hit M for markdown
and you see this drop down change to markdown and I'm going to hit enter on a PC or Linux machine
or return on a Mac and it turns green so I can just type in there. I'm going to use a single pound
sign or hashtag for an h1 sized title and let's say matrix inverse. Shift enter shift return and
beautifully there I have my title for my notebook. You'd also notice that I changed the name here to
to just inverse. Now I'm going to use the from import. I'm going to say from simpi import the
following. All I want here is the matrix function and the init printing function. Init printing.
There we go. I'm just going to hold shift enter shift return and those two only those two functions
are going to be imported. I'm going to use init printing. I just typed init and underscore and
hit the tab key for auto completion. I'm using it as a function so open close parentheses shift enter
shift return and now we'll have the pretty large tick printing to the screen. So what am I trying to
to solve here? Let me show you something. I'm going to change this code cell again into a markdown cell so
escape m enter escape m return and I'm going to hit the double a double dollar sign so that's
shift for my keyboard and that enters this markdown cell for latech. In case you know a bit of latech
or tech you can just type that in directly here. Let me show you. It's not part of this of this video
series but let me just show you. If I say a and then I want an x with an underline I'm going to say
backslash underline and then in curly braces x and so there's a x equals and then I want an
underline B underline B close that and then two dollar signs. The two dollar signs will center
this latech on the on the screen. If it was just a single dollar sign on each side it would be to the
left. I'm going to hold down shift and enter shift return and you see beautiful latech there to print
it to the screen. So this is not code this is just me writing in a normal text cell a normal markdown cell
and I can write something like that. The matrix a times the column vector x equals the column vector
b. We're trying to solve for that and if I have a being an n by n matrix of coefficients so I have
the same number of of unknowns and the same number of equations that's a square matrix and it's easy to
solve and what we are after is the following. Let me do that again escape m enter. I'm going to do
two dollar signs again so I'm after A inverse. The way that you would do that is the following so I'm
going to solve for underline x so that's going to place an underline over the x and then to have an
A I'm going to have A and then shift 6 on my keyboard which is the caret sign and then negative 1 inside of
its curly braces so that says A to the power negative 1 and then I have underline and then I have underline
b again so latex quite easy if you if you look at that and there we go x equals A inverse b so I'm
after that inverse. Now there's two ways in which you can get the inverses here using Simpy. The first
one is to create this matrix of coefficients so let's do that and and add the element at the identity
matrix let me show you so escape m return enter let's do two pound signs there because I want an h2
heading let's say inverse by elementary row operations okay let's do that one by elementary
row operations let's create a matrix I'm going to call mine A1 that's my computer variable it's going
to hold a Simpy matrix object I've already imported matrix as a function from Simpy so I can simply type
matrix it's a function so arguments go inside of parentheses square brackets and for the whole matrix
and then each row has to go in in its own set of square brackets so another set of square brackets
so let's make the matrix three and four and I add to that the one and the zero from the identity matrix
go outside my square brackets another a comma for the next row another set of square brackets for that
row let's make it four comma five and I'm adding to that a zero and a one so let's just hit enter return
and then a one again to print that to the screen so you see I actually have this two by two matrix
three and four and four and five but I add to that on the right hand side the identity matrix of size two
by two since my matrix three four four five the two by two matrix I'm adding the identity matrix two by
two identity matrix on the right hand side and now if I use my row reduced function here our row reduced
echelon form and I do that it is going to give to me the identity matrix on the left hand side the
one zero zero one and on the right hand side what I have left here is the inverse of three four four
five so it's negative five four four and three so you can do that to get the inverse let me show you
the more convenient way escape m enter and two pound signs because we're going to do inverse
through using just the dot inv function I'm going to make this little apostrophe which is way up on
the left top of my keyboard under the escape key and I'm going to type inv open close parentheses and
that little sign again so what that does is if you have markdown and you want it to appear as as you
have written code inside of a code cell hide them in those little and those little little signs there
shift enter and you can see it's sort of colored that in and it looks different the text looks
different that's just to show that I you know it's it's just one way to show that that's actual code
and that's what the section is going to be about so let's just create matrix a two again that's just
going to be a matrix a matrix and my parentheses my square brackets my set of square brackets three
comma four and my second row was four comma five all the way to the end enter return a two print to
the screen by shift enter shift return and that was my initial matrix that that I had to solve still get
the inverse four at least matrix of coefficients square matrix a two and a very easy way to do that
just refer to a two and then the dot notation and just inv and open and close parentheses and that
immediately is just going to give me the inverse of that matrix should one exist and I see there the
negative five four and the four negative three just as I could have read from the reduced echelon form
there so the way that Simpi does this is just through Gaussian elimination but you can specify a different
way so if you're really dealing with large matrices you can ask Simpi to use a different algorithm I
just want to make you aware of that it's not of particular interest here with these small matrices
I could say inv and then I'm going to pass an argument to this function and I'm going to call it method
equals and then in quotation marks lu so it's going to use lu decomposition to get the the inverse of
this matrix exact same inverse that we're going to see but under circumstances that might be a better
method to use than the default which is the Gaussian elimination so you see there really how easy it is
to do to get an inverse using Simpi if you have some some work to do that you have to check your own
hard work which you do in pencil and paper or pen and paper then use Simpi just to check whether
whether your solutions are correct very very easy to do
that will allow your jousting side levels to treat for yourself but if I can directly
see some work that alone follow along on and do that they understand which
you can even tend to specify a lot over there only two instances
but the form these inches by checking out area of it should be
this as partек decently
it's actually a little run and narrowing one unit of the possibility it impacts
better with the listeners
i guess I think it's very it easier too
I actually wanted to look past two times on guess so that is the same problem
ь and the big times球 left these things I actually want to look for
