If you've ever coded in Python before, you know we make extensive use of environments.
So whether you use virtual environments or Conda or Miniconda, that's Anaconda or Miniconda,
you create these environments and you install your packages specifically for that environment.
And you don't want to mix and match those because you might get package dependencies
or you're just installing a bunch of packages that you really don't need.
And I think that happens a lot in Julia, where we just install Julia and then in our base
environment, we're just going to add all our packages. And one day when it comes to updating
the packages, which in the REPL is very easy, you just hit the right square bracket and you just
say update, you're going to find a lot of your packages upgrade, but some of them are going to
downgrade to earlier versions and that might be totally unusable. So don't put all your packages
just in your base Julia installation. Rather create different environments or create a different
environment for each of your projects. And it is very simple to do. Once you've done it, you can just
add your packages specifically to that project in that environment and keep the versions
that you're interested in and is working for you in that project. So we're going to go to a terminal.
I'm going to show you how to do it on a Mac, but it's the same for other operating systems. And we're
going to create an environment into which we will install just a single package. It's very simple to do.
I've opened a terminal here on my Mac OS system. And you see the term base there. This is indeed a
bash shell. So I installed Miniconda for my Python coding and development. And I selected this bash
terminal for Mac OS. So what we want to do is just change directory to where we want our environment,
a Julia environment to be. So I'm going to go to documents, documents, I have a Julia folder there.
So let's go there. So we see we are in the Julia folder. We're going to use the package, the PKG package
in Julia to do to create our environment for us. So we're going to type Julia and then E and then we're
going to have an opening and closing single quotation mark. So we're going to say using PKG
and then a semi colon space because we want some other code as well. So PKG dot generate. And what
we want to generate, we're going to pass as a string the name of this environment. So I'm going to call
this my YouTube environment. So something silly, which I will delete later. And then we close that
and we have to close that single quotation mark. So Julia dash E that's going to open up Julia.
It's going to load the PKG package and it's going to use PKG dot generate. And it's going to generate
this environment for us. What is what this is going to do is it's going to create a folder inside of
where we are at the moment. And remember for me, I'm in documents forward slash Julia. So let's run that.
And there we go. We see generating project YouTube and there's a YouTube forward slash project dot
t o ml file and then YouTube forward slash s r c for source and then YouTube dot jail. So it's created
a default jail file for us. We can create many more dot jail files inside of that source that src subfolder.
And we can even change what is in that default at the moment. So let's go into this newly created
subfolder. Then it's newly created folder inside of our documents forward slash Julia folder. So
wherever you want to create this. So let's just change directory into that. And if we now do ls or if you
in windows, it's going to be dir for directory and you see there's a project dot t o ml file and a source
file src. Now what you want to do when you inside of this folder now where you can see that project
dot t o ml file is you want to say Julia dash dash project
equals full stop. So Julia dash dash project equals full stop that's going to activate this environment
for us. And remember, you must change directory into your directory that we've created that holds this
environment. So let's do that. And now we can see Julia has started and if I now go to the package
system, remember, that's the right square bracket. Notice, I'm in the YouTube environment. Now,
that's no longer the 1.4 or whatever version of Julia you're running, we are not in that in that
environment anymore. We are now in an environment where we are only dealing with what is inside of
this project. So let's hit the backspace, I'm going to say using PKG.
There we go. And then PKG dot add, and let's add a package. So let's make just the data frames package,
data frames, and close. But now I'm going to use a another keyword argument preserve.
And I'm going to set that preserve direct. So if you look at the website for the package PKG package,
you'll notice that there are a couple of these values for the preserve keyword. So what this is
going to do for us, it is just going to keep this version that we have now. So if we add other packages,
we're not going to change this version of the data frames package. So let's do that.
And it's now going to install this package for us. Now, if you've installed other packages inside of
the base environment, just your standard Julia environment, you're going to see that if you run
status on this environment now, let's do that. Just right click to get into the package to say
ST. You see, it's only data frames that we have there now. And that is written to your toml files
specific to this project. So let's escape from there. And now we can just say exit, open close parentheses,
and we are outside of our environment now. So make use of this. Remember those
two lines of code, you're really just going to use the dash E setting, Julia dash E and then inside of
your sets of quotation marks, you're going to create that. And then remember just to activate
with a dash dash project keyword or that we that we use. I hope you found that helpful. Please create
different environments so that you don't have these problems of their dependencies, upgrading or
downgrading, at least other packages that you use. So create these environments. If you've used Python
before, of course, you're used to creating these different environments, specifically if you use a
virtual environment or you use Condor's environments.
So my heart works really well because that you're breathing in a lot of storage for very quickly.
So I will clear that this is what he gives you.
So that when I take the last three weeks, I'm the person you haven't used to do everything in
your Uno inbiragesta, you're going to keep what you are doing.
Because one of the other things would be working together as well, you'll be placed on your
