In this video we will discuss the recurrent and the superior laryngeal nerves.
The larynx is involved in swallowing, breathing, coughing and phonation.
These functions depend on intact motor and sensory fibers in the laryngeal nerves.
The recurrent laryngeal nerve fibers are myelinated and they run anterior in the vagus nerve as
it exits the medulla oblongata.
As the vagus nerve descends into the neck, these fibers rotate medially and then separate.
On the left hand side the vagus follows the common carotid artery into the mediastinum.
It crosses anterior to the aortic arch and then loops medially under the aorta and ascends
between the trachea and esophagus.
It is approximately 12 cm long on the left side.
On the right side the vagus follows the common carotid artery.
At the innominate bifurcation the right nerve loops around the subclavian artery and ascends
over the pleura.
It approaches the trachea esophageal groove from behind the common carotid artery.
It does not enter this groove until it approaches the cricothyroid joint.
It is approximately 5-6 cm long on the right hand side.
Approximately 1% of people will have a non-recurrent right recurrent laryngeal nerve and it does
not hook around the subclavian artery.
It is always associated with an anomalous right subclavian artery running in a retroesophageal
location.
On both sides the recurrent laryngeal nerve enters the larynx deep to the inferior constrictor
muscle and posterior to the cricothyroid joint.
Feel for this joint during surgery, that is where the nerve enters.
It divides into two branches, sensory and motor and this can happen before or after entering
the larynx.
The anterior motor branch innervates the posterior aretenoid muscle and is therefore involved
in vocal cord abduction.
There are various mechanisms of nerve injury and vocal cord impairment follows injury to
the recurrent laryngeal nerves and the proximal vagus nerve.
Surgical injury can be due to thermal damage, stretching, cutting, compression and vascular compromise.
It is important to identify the type of injury.
If it is cut, the primary anastomosis has to be done, otherwise you can consider watchful
waiting.
Patient surgery has a higher incidence of nerve injury than other cervical, skull base or
mediastinal surgery.
There are certain risk factors that increase the likelihood of nerve injury during thyroidectomy.
The first is in the older patient, but this is by virtue of the fact that there is a higher
incidence of thyroid malignancy.
Second is thyroid malignancy surgery itself.
Non-identification of the nerve.
Any factors that influence local scarring such as thyroiditis, previous surgery or radiation.
And then lastly increasing the extent of surgery, for instance adding a lymphadenectomy.
There are some problematic facts that we have to keep in mind.
First of all, at presentation, up to 1% of patients with benign thyroid disease will already
have nerve paralysis.
Up to 50% of patients with paralysis are asymptomatic.
That's for all types.
The incidence of permanent paralysis after surgery is only 1.5% to 2.5%.
And the incidence of temporary paralysis after surgery is 2.5% to 6%.
And up to 90% of post-operative paralysis will recover.
Therefore there are certain controversies that we have to keep in mind.
First of all, always identify the nerve.
You have to consider though, whether this extra dissection will lead to increased thermal
and stretch injuries.
Secondly, there is intraoperative monitoring.
A laryngoscope can be passed to visualize the vocal cords while the nerves are stimulated
intraoperatively.
There is an increased risk though of nemothoraces and airway obstruction by hematoma formation due
to the placement of these stimulators.
Currently, it is accepted that it might be a good idea to place them for recurrent surgery
and for large malignancies.
Consider preoperative evaluation of vocal cord function.
There is a cost involved though.
Most importantly is informed consent.
Explain to the patients what can and will go wrong.
Lastly, involve the ENT colleagues, either in management or direct repair.
There are non-surgical causes of nerve paralysis.
First of all, non-laryngeal tumors cause 20-30% of nerve paralysis.
Of these, 40% are thyroid malignancies.
Endotracheal intubation makes up 7-10% of all nerve paralysis.
This can be due to anterior branch compression, a retinoid dislocation, posterior commissure
compression during prolonged intubation, and secondary viral infection triggered after
local trauma such as herpes zoster.
Let's consider the superior laryngeal nerve.
It separates from the vagus nerve at the base of the skull.
It descends along the internal carotid artery to the superior pole of the thyroid.
It divides into two branches at the level of the high weight bone.
The larger internal sensory branch innervates the larynx and enters the thyroid high weight
membrane.
The smaller external branch descends with the superior thyroid artery.
Usually within 1 cm of entrance of the superior thyroid artery into the thyroid itself, the
nerve branch turns medially and enters the cricothyroid muscle.
Damage to the nerve occurs when the superior thyroid artery is ligated too far away from the
superior thyroid pole.
And this is the important motor branch.
Damage will lead to loss of voice quality and strength.
Damage will lead to loss of voice quality and strength.
