Have you ever wondered just how to calculate that beta sub zero and beta sub one, the intercept and
the slope in simple linear regression? In this video I'm going to show you just how easy that
derivation is. Here we have a typical data set where for every x value we have a y value. We
need to predict a y value, that is our outcome, for every x value which is our feature. In order
to do this we can create a linear function. But which function will best represent the data point
values? Is it this one? Or this one? Or this one? Perhaps this one is best. Note that it is a simple
linear function in the form y equals the slope times x plus the y-intercept. But our data point
values do not lie on this line. For every x value the y value is some distance away from the predicted
y value at that point. Now these distances are called errors. To find the real y value we have to add the
error value, epsilon, which may be positive or negative, above or below the line. Now through
simple algebra we can create the function for the error. This equation shows the function for every
error and to stick to statistical notation we replace the y-intercept with beta sub 0 and the slope with
beta sub 1. Now since some errors are positive and some are negative we simply square each of them,
makes them positive. Now the sum of all the squared errors is written like this. Note that it is a
multi-variable function in two variables beta sub 0 and beta sub 1. The x sub i and y sub i values are
constants, our data points. We need to minimize the error. Remember that as a two variable function it is
simply a shape in 3d space. It will have a minimum somewhere on the z-axis. This is easily done by
taking the partial derivative of beta sub 0 and beta sub 1 and setting these derivatives to 0. Let's take a
look at how to take these partial derivatives. So now we have this equation for the sum of squared errors.
Let's just have a look at it. I said we'll call it s and remember that this is a function of two variables
beta sub 1 and beta sub 2 and that is purely the sum of yi minus beta 0 minus beta 1 x sub i all squared.
So I've just distributed the negative sign in there. And it is a three-dimensional shape somewhere. It has
got to have a minimum and that is what we want. We want the minimum. What line can we draw? We want
these two coefficients so that we can minimize those little errors because that will give us the best
line. So this is a multi-variable function. We're going to take the gradient. We're going to do the
partial derivative and we're going to take the partial derivative first with respect to beta 0.
Now that would just be the same as having a function in x and y and we can take the partial
derivative with respect to x and respect to y. What is confusing of course that we have x and y here so
we're just not used to these terms. That is our two variables yi and x, y sub i and x sub i are just
constants. They are two values in your data column for every x there's a y, for every x there's a y,
for every x there's a y. So those are actually constant values. So these are constants and those
are my coefficients. We're just not used to seeing like that. But how do we take the partial derivative
of something inside of a sum? Well let me show you how easy that is. Or at least for me the easiest way
is just to expand the sum. So what are we saying by this summation sign? Remember this is going to go
from i equals 1 to n. How many of these data points or pairs of data points do I have? But let's just
expand this. It's quite easy to expand. The first one is just going to be or let's just write s. That
is just going to be y1 the first one minus b0 minus b sub 1 x1 all squared plus the next one is going to be
y2, sorry y2 minus b sub 0 minus b sub 1 x sub 2 squared plus and it just carries on. Next one will be
3, next one will be 4, next one will be 5 and that's just a simple polynomial and we know how to use the
chain rule to get that derivative. So let's get let's do this. Let's take the partial derivative of s with
respect to beta sub 0. So I'm going to have that ds d beta sub 0 it is going to equal well I can do I
can differentiate this this is easy to do that this is going to be 2 y1 minus b sub 0 minus b sub 1 x1
so derive that now I've got to do the derivative of the inside that's a constant that's the derivative
with which respect to which we want to take so that's just going to be negative 1 and we're
doing the differentiation with respect to beta sub 0 not beta sub 1 that's a constant so nothing happens
there plus let's do this one again I'm going to bring a 2 in front it's going to be y sub 2 minus
beta sub 0 minus beta sub 1 x2 and I've just got to do that derivative which is negative 1 again plus
and we carry on and what we want to do is we want to set this equal to zero remember when we wanted to
get a minimum or a maximum we take the derivative wherever our derivative our slope is zero that is
where we get a minimum or maximum so we're just going to set that equal to zero so if we set this equal to
zero we can take the two out we can take the negative ones out as common factors so there's a negative
two here and I'm going to divide it by this side but it's zero divided by negative two so I have nothing
left there so all I have left is basically this y sub 1 minus beta sub 0 minus beta sub 1 x1
and I'm going to have plus y sub 2 minus beta sub 1 x sub 2 plus etc and let's go to equal zero
and all I do now is I see I have y sub 1 plus y sub 2 plus y sub 2 plus y sub 4 well that's just the
sum of all the y sub i's if I write that out it's going to be y sub 1 plus y sub 2 plus y sub 3 and I
see I have negative b sub 0 negative b sub 0 negative b sub 0 there's going to be n remember there
there's going to be n of them so that's minus n b sub 0 and what do we have left here I can take
this negative b sub 1 out negative b sub 1 out and I'm just left with then x sub 1 plus x sub 2 plus x sub 3
that is just the sum of the x sub i's and that equals zero and all I have to do now is solve for
this if I take that over to the other side that's going to be n b sub 0 and that's going to be the
sum of y sub i minus beta sub 1 sum of x sub i's and I'm left to the fact that beta sub 0 equals the sum
of y sub i of y sub i minus beta 1 the sum of x sub i's divided by n
so I have an equation now for beta sub 0 it unfortunately has beta sub 1 in it but what
I can do is take the partial derivative with respect to beta sub 1 and I'm going to get another equation
which also contains both of these and I can take my beta sub 0 and I can put that in place of the
beta sub 1 I'm going to clean the board and I'll show you how to do the derivative partial derivative
with respect to beta sub 1 so we've cleaned the board and I've just put the equation for beta sub 0
on this side now let's take the partial derivative with respect to beta sub 1 let's just do an expansion
here so I still have my function s which is a function of beta sub 1 beta sub 0 and beta sub 1
and let's just expand this so I'm going to have y sub 1 minus beta sub 0 minus beta sub 1 x sub 1
and that is squared plus I'm going to have y sub 2 minus beta sub 0 minus beta sub 1 x sub 2
and that is squared plus and it carries on n times very simple to take the partial derivative
using the chain rule remembering this is a constant that's a constant and that is a constant
this is used the chain rule so I'm going to be left with 2 times y sub 1 minus beta sub 0 minus beta sub 1
x sub 1 and I've just got to take the derivative of the inside as well that's a constant that's a constant
that is a constant so I'm just going to be left with negative x sub 1 there plus I'm going to take
a 2 out y sub 2 minus beta sub 0 minus beta sub 1 x sub 2 and I'm negative x sub 2 out there plus that
carries on and I'm going to set that equal to simply set that equal to 0 so very easy to do very easy chain
rule now let's just take some constants out as common factors I can certainly take a 2 out every time
I can take this negative 1 out but I can't take the x sub 1 out because x sub 1 x sub 2 those are totally
different constants so I can't take those out but I certainly can take the negative 2 out divide both
sides by negative 2 0 divided by negative 2 that's still going to give me a 0 and I'm just going to
put this distribute that in here so that's x sub 1 y sub 1 minus b sub 0 x sub 1 minus beta sub 1 x sub 1
x sub 1 squared plus what do I have here I have x sub 2 sorry y sub 2 multiplying that throughout minus
beta sub 0 x sub 2 minus beta sub 1 x sub 2 squared plus goes on for n times and that equals 0. All we
have to do is simplify using summation notation I see I have an x sub 1 y sub 1 plus x sub 2 y sub 2 all the
way to x sub n n sub n they will add it to each other so I can use summation notation x sub i y sub i
very easy to do there I see I have negative beta sub 0 negative beta sub 0 each time times a different
constant there so I can take negative beta 0 out as a common factor and I'm just left with the x sub i's
there as a summation if I were to expand this x sub 1 plus x sub 2 sub x sub 3 until x sub n inside of
parentheses multiplied out by negative b sub 0 I get exactly what I get all along and I'm going to do
the exact same thing with beta sub 1 and take beta sub 1 out and I'm left with the summation of x sub i
squared and it's each of those squared squared there and that should equal and that should equal 0.
A very simple notation that I have now here with my summation notation I have an equation with a beta sub 1
and a beta sub 0 but I know what beta sub 0 is which I can just place inside of here with substitution so
let's have the sum of x sub i and y sub i and negative let's put this in here that is the sum of the
y sub i's minus beta sub 1 times the sum of x sub i's divided by n I still have this sum of x sub i's
that I have there minus beta sub 1 and I have this sum of x sub i squares and that equals 0.
We can multiply throughout by n over n just to get this common denominator so there can be an n and
there can be an n and there can be a little n there and there can be an n and on that side as well I can
take 1 over n out as a common factor multiply both sides by n n times 0 still stays 0. So what do I have
now so in essence I've just gotten rid of my common denominator there. So I have n times the sum of
x sub i y sub i now I've got to be very careful what I do here I've got this negative here and that
so don't make a mistake so that is going to be negative the sum of x sub i sum of y sub i so I've
multiplied that in there I have negative times a negative which is a positive no problem there
negative times the negatives of positive I have my beta sub 1 there and now I have this x sub i
squared I have two of them so the whole thing squared which is different from that because now
here I'm left with negative n times beta sub 1 and I have the sum of x sub i squared and that equals 0.
All I have to do now is just get my beta sub ones on the one side let's do that so I'm left with n times
x sub i y sub i the sum of that minus I have the sum of x sub i sum of y sub i so those are remember
two different things and I take these over to the other side so that is going to leave me with n
that is going to leave me with n beta sub 1 I have the sum of x sub i squared this over to the other
side minus beta sub 1 and I have this summation which is squared now let's just swap left and
right hand out with each other so on this side I'm just going to take beta sub 1 out as a common
denominator as a common factor I should say if I have that as a common factor what do I have left here I
I have n times x sub i squared minus I have this summation x sub i squared and that equals this
left hand side which is n times the sum of x sub i y sub i minus the sum of x sub i sum of y sub i and
all I need to do is divide and all I need to do is divide both sides divide both sides by this value here
so I'm left with beta sub 1 beta sub 1 and equals that is going to be n times the sum of x sub i y sub i
minus the sum of x sub i sum of y sub i and I divide that all by this which is n times the sum
of x sub i squared minus this summation squared and there you have it quite easy to do once you
remember that you can just expand the summation that's normal polynomials there just remember
what is what are constants and what are variables you're taking a partial derivative so most things
are just use your chain rule and just bring it back to summation notation substitute what you know for
beta sub 0 because we've already done that that's easy and just don't make a mistake with
multiplying out the negatives keep things like these two separate the sum of x sub i y sub i
is different from that and keep these two quite different as well and I brought those two over
to that side if I kept them on this side and took these to the other side I would have had to multiply
up by negative one over negative one on the other side not an issue at all I brought it over to that
side just swapped left hand side and right hand side no issues and I'm left with those beautiful two
equations for the y-intercept and for the slope of my linear regression line for a single variable
