So let's get to obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Now these patients are really at
a risk for developing episodes of apnea and desaturation post-operatively and
they definitely have an increased risk of pneumonia and respiratory failure.
You've really got to be careful with these patients. They've got to be
assessed by the person who's going to administer the anesthesia and post
operatively best to put them in some place like a high-care facility where
you could monitor their breathing and at least monitor the saturation. So what
can you do for them preoperatively? Now there's some evidence that you could
trial them on some preoperative spirometry, incentive spirometry, in other words a
little device that they get from the physiotherapy department. If you don't
have those facilities you can just try and create a little device. They just have
to blow into it against resistance to improve all the lung parameters. Other
things that you can consider really improving their exercise status and ask
them to lose some weight. Now these two things are usually very difficult. There's
perhaps not the time or the opportunity for them to do so. Fancier things that you
can consider is just some continuous positive airway pressure device that they can
sleep with the weeks prior to surgery and also mandibular advancement devices. So how
do we identify these patients? Well there is a Berlin questionnaire and you see the
shortened URL. Visit that you'll see a PDF of that questionnaire and that will
identify for you the patients at risk of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. The
gold standard though is an overnight sleep test. Now not all units have that test.
It's not easy to send a patient for that test but that certainly is the gold
standard. So be aware of the patient with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome and take
particular care of them. So overall how can we improve the patient's chances not
only the sleep apnea patient but all patients? Well first of all really think
about this incentive spirometry preoperatively. There's a study that
looked at patients with laparoscopic cholecystectomies. Some were
randomized to nothing and some were randomized to weeks worth of preoperative
incentive spirometry blowing against resistance for a week a couple of times a
day just to improve the lung capacity and various lung indices. And there was a
difference in outcome when it came to post risk for postoperative complications.
Other things is improving the nutritional status. That makes logical sense I
suppose but just really looking at the evidence outside of cardiac surgery hasn't
really been shown to make a difference but of course if there are problems with
your patient you can try and improve that. Cessation of smoking is the important
one and it's the period that's involved with it. A patient really has to stop
smoking for six to eight weeks at least prior to the surgery for there to be a
lessening of the risk for postoperative complications.
Finally these risk calculators. Gupta et al did a lot of work. They looked at all the VA
databases in the United States and then more recent complication databases and they
tried to look at the risk factors that were predictive of an increased risk of
postoperative pneumonia and respiratory failure. And you'll see some of the
the factors that they found. Type of procedure, the ASA class, the age, the
existence of COPD, functional status, one we haven't mentioned before preoperative
sepsis and then of course smoking. So visit www.surgicalriskcalculator.com
You can download some of those calculators as apps or you can just use it online. You fill in that data and it gives you a risk of a patient
developing for the one calculator pneumonia for the other respiratory failure.
There's not we're not quite sure what to do with those but at least it identifies
for you the patient that is at risk so that you can monitor them better
preoperatively or perhaps think about those things that I mentioned. Do the
incentive spirometry for instance but definitely take better care of them. It's
risk management in these patients. In the next lecture series we're going to
start looking at the diabetic patient.
talking Prow handed
3
shoots
3
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
7
7
8
7
8
7
8
8
9
11
10
9
11
