I want to take a minute or two and just look at the evidence for glucose control in the
perioperative period. We're going to give these patients insulin in the perioperative period.
Why do we do so? What is the history of the research into this? Now the history is a bit
checkered. First of all we thought it's a normal response to have an increased glucose level
post-operatively and indeed that is so. Glucose levels do go up post-operatively and there's
physiological reasons for this. It cannot always just be left to chance though. A patient who's
diabetic cannot just be left to have their glucose be totally uncontrolled. You are going to run into
cases of morbidity even mortality if that is so. Then research came along and looked at very tight
control of glucose levels. We really tried to keep it below 110 milligrams per deciliter.
Now multiply by 0.0555 that gives you about 6.1 millimoles per liter. Very tight control and big
research was done and it really showed a decrease in morbidity and mortality. Then randomized trials
started coming out to show that perhaps is not really the truth and you can actually increase
morbidity and mortality by such very tight control. And why was that so? Why there is discrepancy in the
research? Well the first research really was not randomized and it really involved putting together
very good resources and taking care of these patients. So nurses are well trained and they
really put effort into treating and monitoring those patients to keep that glucose levels very tightly
controlled as I said below 110 but also avoiding hypoglycemia. But that doesn't work in just normal
circumstances. When trials when patients were randomized under normal settings it was shown
that there are a lot of incidences of hypoglycemia and that is just as important and there's actually
a trend towards increased morbidity and mortality specifically due to other facts as well but
specifically due to the episodes of hypoglycemia. So today we stand in a situation where we really
just try to control the glucose we really try to keep it below 180 milligrams per deciliter that's
about 10 millimoles per liter as long as we can keep it below that you will have better outcomes than
either just leaving it be which really is not on or doing that very tight control of keeping it below 110.
