We move on to the care of the diabetic patient. Now in surgical practice you are
going to see a lot of diabetics or patients at risk for diabetes. They have
a higher rate of complications, even mortality. It's important to take care
of them well. Have a look at this lecture.
Now let's begin this talk on the diabetic patient by just defining the
problem. Now in a normal patient glucose control is very tight. Your body keeps
your normal glucose levels at between 60 and 90 milligrams per deciliter. That's
about 3.3 to 5 millimoles per liter. Just take milligrams per deciliter and
multiply it by 0.0555 you'll get millimoles per liter. So if you take someone and you
fast them at least 6 hours and they have a fasting blood glucose of between 100
and 125 that's 5.5 to 6.9 millimoles per liter. They would be termed pre-diabetic
and if that fasting patient has a blood glucose level of more than 125
milligrams per deciliter or 6.9 millimoles per liter they are
diabetic. They can be termed diabetic you can send them for glucose tolerance test.
Now these pre-diabetics are sometimes referred to as being glucose intolerant
and remember that can also be iatrogenic. In other words we can give them
catecholamines, we can give them corticosteroids or we can give them
parenteral glucose and it might also make a patient glucose intolerant. So that can
be iatrogenic. The true diabetic though we define two types of type 1. Now these
patients are insulin insufficient. They don't produce enough insulin. They've got
problems with their beta cells and then the type 2 which is the insulin resistant. They
might make enough appropriate insulin levels they are just resistant to that
and we see that usually in the obese population. Now American literature we
have good databases there and in most areas you can find that up to 1 in 10
patients are at least diabetic and about 50% of them are sometimes unaware of the fact. Up to a
quarter are even pre-diabetic and about 60 to 70% of them can go on to develop diabetes.
So it's a huge problem. Now usually you're going to go to a new unit. You don't have to
develop a diabetic protocol all on your own. There is usually an existing one
usually based on good evidence and good experience. Be familiar with that protocol.
It's the norm for people taking care of the surgical part of patients not to be so familiar with
the care of a diabetic patient. So always consult your medical colleagues and your anesthetic colleagues.
Look at what is done at your institution.
