Now we've seen that it is very common in surgical practice to see a diabetic patient but why is it
so important to identify them? Well many of them will have comorbid complications through vascular
effects. They have microvascular problems that affects their brains, their coronaries with
cardiac problems and especially their kidneys not to mention their peripheries. They also suffer
from fluid shifts. They have osmotic diuresis with the glucose. They also have electrolyte shifts. If
you give a patient insulin with glucose you will shift their potassium into cellular. So it's very
important. Risks for hypoglycemia. If they get too much insulin or not enough glucose they might suffer
perioperative bouts of hypoglycemia. Also hyperglycemia if their control is not tight with
acidosis, shock etc. These patients have immune deficits. They have polymorphonucleus cell
abnormalities. They don't attract these cells appropriately to areas where they are needed.
They have phagocytic problems as well and that will definitely lead to a high incidence of post-operative
septic complications, wound sepsis etc. They have poorer healing rates for instance and that might
be important when you do anastomosis. They definitely overall have a higher rate of morbidity
and mortality. So how do we know diagnose these patients? Well first of all they'll be the subset
that come in and tell you I have diabetes. It's important to find out what type they have, how long
they've had it, what medication they're on and what comorbid problems they do suffer from. Some won't know
that they have diabetes or at risk of developing diabetes. And for these you really have to take a
careful history and a physical examination as you do with all patients. Some institutions as patients
come in for the first time for first consultation they might get urinalysis and you might pick that
up on the dipsticks. It's important to listen out for the following things that polyuria, that's where
they urinate a lot, polydipsia where they're thirsty all the time and want to drink a lot,
and weight loss. These might be indicative of type 1 diabetes. And always be careful of course with
overweight patients they are at high risk for suffering type 2 diabetes. There are general
known risk factors such as age, sex, family history and problems with exercise levels and these have
even been built into an online calculator as we had with the cardiac situation and you can see it there
it's bit.ly forward slash that's a one, a lowercase zero, an uppercase jz, a zero, a g and an uppercase i and you can see online calculator that you can use.
Watch out for the patient who comes for vascular surgery, up to 20% of them will be diabetics.
Watch out for the patients on high dose corticosteroids, up to 50% of them will have post-operative
bouts of abnormal glucose levels. Now once these patients are suspected of being diabetic you can
send them for fasting glucose levels. If there's an abnormality they can have a proper glucose tolerance test.
It is not recommended to send diabetics for HbA1c levels. They're going to give you some estimate as
to how good the control has been but it's not really going to alter your surgical management of these patients.
Now once a diabetic has been diagnosed or you see a patient coming for surgery who is a diabetic there's
a suggestion that this is your chance to examine at least their hearts and their kidneys. So it's
not always feasible but consider sending these patients at least for stress ECG to look at their
coronaries and to do renal function tests on them. We want to know their blood urea nitrogen or
the urea and creatinine and especially the electrolytes.
