In this lecture we're going to look at very basic statistics.
Here we have in column B some value that I call value A.
And we have right down there we see 22 integer values.
Let's assume that they are the result of some medical test.
At the bottom here we see we want to know what the mean, the median and the mode is.
So this tells us something about how this data is combined.
It replaces all the values with a single value that represents all of them.
Now mean is one that we all know about.
The other word for that would be the average.
So all I'm going to do is to sum up all of those values and divide it by the actual number of values that they are.
So if I have the numbers 2, 4 and 6 I would add them and I divide by 3 and that would give me 4.
In other words 4 is the average or the mean and it represents, it's a fair representation of those numbers 2, 4 and 6.
So we're going to make use of functions for this to make life easier for ourselves.
So we'll start there and we'll type equals and we'll just start typing average.
Now here I am dealing with the Mac version.
So once I've done that I can simply, I can see it starts auto filling some possible functions for me that start with the letters AVE.
Note also that I just typed it in in lower case.
Doesn't matter.
I can now use my arrow keys in the right bottom of the keyboard.
And if I just scroll down you can see up and down, up and down there is average.
That's the one we're looking for.
And I hit the tab key.
And once I hit the tab key, it automatically fills those two normal brackets for me.
And it allows me to now refer to the values that I want.
Now I can either enter them as the tooltip shows there.
So I could type in 9, 16, 17, 16.
Or while my cursor is blinking in between those two brackets, I can move up.
Click and hold on the first value 9.
Hold that mouse button in and drag all the way down to that value 10 in cell B23 and let go.
Now see what has happened.
We have an auto fill there.
The cell address is B2 until B23.
And you can see these little marching ants going around that selection.
I simply now have to either enter or just hit this little green enter sign to say I am done.
Don't hit the arrow keys now because that will just move the cells and there will be new cells within this reference.
I'm just going to stop right there and hit enter or this little green check mark.
And there we go, 13.045455.
So that value is a fair representation of all of these values.
Let's move on.
Median would be a value taken for which half of the values would be less than and the other half would be more than.
It really depends whether you have an even or odd number of values.
Here we have, what do we say, 22 values.
So it's an even number so it's going to take the middle two and actually get the average between those middle two.
So let's do that.
Equals median.
I start typing and I can just move my arrow down.
There's median.
So it's selected.
I now hit tab.
And once again I'm going to go up.
Click and hold on the 9.
Drag all the way down to the 10.
And hit enter.
And I see that's 13.5.
So half of those values in my column B there would be, would have a value of less than 13.5.
So it really depends on them.
Why would we use such a value?
We would really use median instead of mean if we have one or two outliers.
In other words values that really skew the median or the average value.
So for instance I'm going to change this 16 to let's say 30.
Now look what happens now.
Well, it seems as if we'll have to do something a bit more drastic.
Let's use 50.
So it pushes my mean up to 14.6 about but my median stays here at 13.5.
Which in this case becomes slightly more representative of all of these values.
Because there's just this 150 value of 50 that really ups this mean.
And if we get really ridiculous and there's a value of 100 for instance.
We see things really get out of hand now.
16 is not representative really of all of these values.
The median of 13 might be better.
So let's just put that back to 16 where we were.
I hope it was 16.
Doesn't matter.
Now we're going to mode.
We'll type in equals mode.
Now you'll see there are different ones.
Multiple and single.
We really want the single one here.
And in older versions there weren't these.
There was just this bottom one.
That's why it says compatibility function.
If you were to send the spreadsheet to someone with an older, much older version.
Say of Microsoft Excel.
They won't have these newer functions.
They'll just have mode.
That mode though refers to this mode.single.
So it's just going to give us a single value.
And that single value is the value that occurs most often.
Hit enter and indeed that is the value 16.
It just occurs most often.
So here we have median.
Mean, median and mode.
And these are values that should be a fair representation.
A single value that fairly represents all the other values.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
