Now in the next two lectures we're going to look at preoperative pulmonary assessment.
Now we're talking about patients with known disease they have either asthma or more importantly
COPD or they're at risk of developing postoperative complications and what we're talking
about is pneumonia and respiratory failure but we really have to shift goals. Now remember in
the first set of lectures where we looked at the cardiac complications we had a beautiful
algorithm. In that algorithm we had nodes and we made decisions based on that and then we moved
along the algorithm. We don't really have that for pulmonary assessment. There really is a lack
of clear-cut research evidence to tell us what to do and how to properly examine these patients
beforehand. So what we've really got to do here is to think risk assessment and risk management.
So here's a long list of risk factors. Now not all have been shown conclusively to be independent
risk factors. Some of them have and they've been built into online calculators and those are
actually beautiful both for pneumonia and respiratory failure and we'll talk about them in the second
part. But here's a list. Age. Of course the older your patient is the higher incidence of having
underlying lung problems and the worse they are going to do with say prolonged anesthetic.
So age definitely. Pre-existing COPD. A patient with COPD is at higher risk of developing complications.
Cigarette use. Well that just goes for most complications. Then a patient with CCF definitely.
The functional status. That patient that has exercise intolerance that can't walk because of
oxygen and CO2 exchange. That patient is going to have post-operative problems. A higher ASA class.
A prolonged duration of the surgery. Certainly there's going to be a big difference between five,
six, seven hour procedure and a quick 20 minute procedure. And then also the type of surgery.
Now think about an appendectomy versus upper abdominal gastric resection say for gastric cancer.
Those two really are going to have different outcomes. Recent weight loss. Think about a patient
with muscle mass loss. They're not going to be able to breathe properly post-operatively. They might not
have the muscle strength to cough up their secretions post-operatively. Then long-term steroid use.
They're going to have the muscle mass problem but they're also going to have an immune problem. They're not going to be able to
fight infection and we might have post-operative complications. And the same really would go for
alcohol use. So a good history and clinical examination. Ask the patient about pre-existing disease.
Ask about specific symptoms. Coughing, dyspnea, orthopneia. Ask about these things. Ask about their
medication. Ask about smoking. And we'll get to this a bit later. Don't ask do you smoke. They say no I
don't because they just stopped yesterday. That of course doesn't count. Be careful. Do a thorough
examination and take a thorough history. So here's a little rule of thumb. It's not an algorithm at all.
But first of all, as with anything, if the surgery is of an emergency nature and it is life-saving,
you've got to go ahead with it. There's no need to waste time with tests. There's really no sense in
that. But if a patient has known pulmonary disease and they are not at baseline. In other words, they
say, Doc, I've got asthma but I'm on medication. These are the number of attacks I get. It hasn't
changed recently. I'm not coughing more. I haven't developed more dyspnea, say for instance, for the COPD
patient. They're at their baseline. There's no need for investigation of their patient
preoperatively. But if they're not at baseline or they have unexplained dyspnea or exercise
intolerance, those you have to investigate. So what investigations are we going to do? We're
going to consider two tests. And as I said, in part two, we're going to look at these beautiful
risk calculators. So there's your two tests, spirometry and a chest x-ray. Now spirometry is
really an excellent diagnostic tool. Make a diagnosis of many lung conditions. It's also
very useful in monitoring therapy. The patient's being diagnosed. They're on therapy. We want
to look at the success of that therapy. Do we need to change therapy so we can just follow
them up? But it's not really a good predictor of postoperative outcome. There is some sparse
evidence to suggest if there's an FEV1 of less than 61% that there might be an increase to
risk. But the evidence is really not that good. Chest x-ray. It's just a knee-jerk reaction
to order chest x-ray preoperatively, especially above a certain age. Many units have that.
And certainly if that is what your unit does, please stick with that. But there's some research
that looked into this, taking a whole bunch of patients who've had chest x-rays. And it
actually shows that only 3% of these people who had preoperative chest x-rays will actually
have their management altered. 97% were just going to go straight to theatre after all these
tests and have their anacillic. So it doesn't really lead to change in management. And there's
also some research to show that if you just compare patients who've had a chest x-ray versus
those that don't, there's no difference in outcome between these two. So it's not that
it really improves your patient's outcome. But it is on the tick list at most units after
a certain age or in certain circumstances to get a chest x-ray. And stick with that.
Just understand what the evidence for that is. Now, this is part 1. In part 2 we're going
to start looking at one specific condition that we don't always think about and that is obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome.
