In this lecture we're going to discuss the patient with cardiac conditions.
What I'm going to present to you is a management algorithm for these patients.
You are going to evaluate certain things and make a decision and move along the tree.
Before we get to the algorithm, we'll discuss each of these.
Let's have a look.
In this lecture, I will discuss the evaluation of a patient being considered for surgery,
but who has come to us with some form of cardiac disease.
Now it has been stated that between 1 and 3% of patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery
will experience cardiac complications.
Now that's quite a few patients and they include both those with and those without known disease.
And it is the duty of those of us who manage these patients,
whether they be surgical, medical, and aesthetic or nursing staff,
to consider the cardiac status of every patient booked for surgery.
The reasons for this are threefold.
We want a good outcome.
We want to streamline the process because we don't want to waste time and resources.
And then lastly, we have to consider some regulatory issues.
Let's start with our desire to have a good outcome for our patients.
Perioperative morbidity and mortality should be minimized.
It's obviously deleterious to the patient,
but also in the case of protracted morbidity, very costly and resource intensive.
My second point speaks to the need for a structured approach
so as to streamline the process and avoid unnecessary delays and costs.
Useless tests will only delay the surgery
and do not lead to any change in the patient's current treatment plan,
not to mention the psychological stress these patients might be put through.
And lastly, those regulatory considerations.
In most surgical units, protocols are in place that befit the local structures and resources
and these are often used to overrule any genetic guidelines in publications and in lectures such as these.
Always please be familiar with your local requirements and follow these.
Regulatory considerations also include patient consent.
The patient must be fully aware of the risks and dangers involved in her or his surgery.
And it's only by fully considering and comprehending preoperative cardiac evaluation
that you as a clinician can inform the patient about these.
With all this in mind, let's get back to the business at hand.
Perhaps a good way to remember the challenges facing the management of these patients
is to always consider the fact that the heart is a pump, a pump with some reserve capacity.
At rest, it just patters along, but if strained, either by exertion, by disease or by surgery,
it has to delve into that reserve capacity.
If the needs outstrip that reserve capacity, morbidity and mortality are sure to follow.
It is important to know what the size of that reserve capacity is
and by how much our intended surgery will dig into that reserve.
If the sums don't turn out well, we need to increase those reserves
or lessen, even cancel the intended demand, namely the surgery.
Let's take a look at how we'll go about this lecture.
The main section of this discussion will center on a slightly modified management algorithm
suggested by the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association,
which you may consider employing in your own setting.
In order to follow along with this algorithm, though, some prerequisite knowledge is required.
More specifically, the algorithm makes mention in order of the following
critical cardiac conditions,
the risk of different types of surgery,
the functional or exercise capacity of the patient,
and finally, clinical risk factors.
We'll take a look at all of these before embarking on the algorithm itself.
And after a look at this algorithm,
I'll briefly discuss how to manage the patient
that has prior coronary artery balloon angioplasty
or the placement of coronary stents.
Before all of this, and perhaps starting off the main discussion,
I will remind you of the American Society of Anesthesiologists
or ASA class system of general patient health.
It is not part of the algorithm per se,
but is a good starting point in the preoperative evaluation of all patients.
I will end off by looking at the use of ECGs,
statins and beta blockers,
antihypertensive medication,
and also the consultation with the physician or the cardiologist.
The ASA classification considers all underlying disease
and not simply cardiac status.
The ASA refers to classes 1 through 6.
An ASA class 1 patient is completely healthy
except for the disorder requiring surgery.
The class 2 patient has mild systemic disease that is well controlled.
The class 3 patient suffers from a systemic disease that is poorly controlled
or that has resulted in some form of organ dysfunction.
The class 4 patient has a disease that is a constant threat to life.
The class 5 patient is moribund
and not expected to survive without the surgery.
And finally, we have the class 6 patient
who is brain dead and needs to be considered for organ donation.
I reiterate, this class system is important to consider
in all patients going to theater
but is not specific to the cardiac patient.
In step 2 of the algorithm,
we consider active cardiac conditions.
Now, this is our long list
and they include unstable coronary syndromes
such as unstable or severe angina,
stable angina in the sedentary patient,
and myocardial infarctions in the last 30 days
prior to the planned surgery.
It also includes worsening or new-onset heart failure
at the time of the procedural evaluation,
significant arrhythmias such as high-grade AV block,
MOBITS type 2 AV block,
third-degree AV block,
symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias,
supraventricular arrhythmias with an uncontrolled rate,
symptomatic bradycardia,
and newly recognized ventricular tachycardia.
Finally, it also includes those
with severe stenotic valvular disease
such as severe aortic stenosis
and symptomatic mitral stenosis.
It is therefore important to examine your patients
and listen to their heart sounds
when you consider them for surgery.
Now, I mentioned in the section above
that surgery will dig into
the reserve capacity of the heart.
There are classification systems
that divide different surgeries
into their risk for cardiac complications.
The basic premise is to consider
the hemodynamic effect or fluid shift
that the surgery is likely to cause.
These are just guidelines
and it's important for you to take a minute
and consider the intended surgery
in each and every case.
Think about what fluid shifts,
including blood, will occur.
The reserve capacity is very sensitive
to both falls and rises in blood pressure.
Many factors influence this.
Blood loss, volume resuscitation,
the inflammatory effect of any surgery
and the drugs used.
Here's the table sorting the surgery
into lower, intermediate and high risk.
Low risk surgeries have an incidence
of less than 1% cardiac complications.
Typically, we'll consider things
such as breast, dental, endocrine, eye,
simple gynecological, reconstructive
and minor orthopedic,
minor urological procedures in this group.
The intermediate risk group of procedures
carries a 1% to 5% risk of cardiocomplication.
As the list indicates,
these include abdominal and carotid procedures,
peripheral arterial angioplasty,
endovascular aneurysm repair,
head and neck surgery,
major neurological and orthopedic surgery,
pulmonary, renal and liver transplants,
and major urological procedures.
The high risk group of surgeries
carries an excess of 5% risk
and include all aortic and major vascular surgeries,
as well as peripheral vascular surgery.
Not only are massive demands
placed on the heart during these procedures,
but patients requiring these
usually have concomitant cardiac disease.
Further down the algorithm,
we need to find out the functional capacity
of the patient,
and it is crucial in the decision-making process.
It is important to remember, though,
that the functional capacity
refers to the patient as a whole,
and cardiac disease is not the sole determinant
of how active a patient can be.
Consider, for instance,
the patient with musculoskeletal disorders,
such as advanced arthritis,
or those with lung capacity problems,
who may have a perfectly healthy heart.
With this in mind,
functional capacity is measured
in metabolic equivalents, METs,
with one metabolic equivalent
equal to the basal metabolic rate.
This occurs when lying down
or sitting at your desk doing some work.
This increases to four metabolic equivalents
when climbing two flights of stairs
and strenuous jogging or swimming,
which is up to ten metabolic equivalents.
A patient that can reach
four metabolic equivalents and higher
is in good shape to withstand surgery.
They have a reserve to dig into.
Too many factors influence those
with a low metabolic equivalent scores, though,
with a weak association
between score and outcome.
Be vigilant and thoughtful
when a patient has a low score.
Before we take a look
at the management algorithm itself,
we also need to consider
clinical risk factors.
Many predictive indices exist,
such as the Predictive Cardiac Risk Index of Lee.
Just as many individual risk factors exist,
but not all have been shown in research
to correlate with a worse outcome.
The Lee Index then lists five risk factors.
They are a history of ischemic heart disease,
a history of compensated or prior heart failure,
insulin-dependent diabetes,
renal insufficiency with a creatinine
of more than 180 millimoles per liter
or 2 milligrams per deciliter,
and cerebrovascular disease.
Factors that are important and need attention,
but have not been shown to be predictive
of cardiac complications
are things like obesity,
high cholesterol,
and a family history of cardiac disease.
And finally, we get to the management algorithm.
Your first step is to decide
whether the surgery is by nature
that of an emergency.
If so, go ahead and manage the cardiac status
both intra- and postoperatively.
This type of surgery is life-saving
and includes those procedures
with severe morbidity and even mortality
should a delay occur.
In step two, that is,
if the surgery can be delayed,
the question at hand is whether the patient
has any of the above-listed cardiac conditions.
Remember those?
The unstable coronary syndromes,
the cardiac failure,
the significant arrhythmias,
or the severe stenotic disease.
So if they have the one of these,
they need to be evaluated by a physician
or, if available, a cardiologist.
Considering those that do not have a condition
on this list,
the next step is to decide
what category of surgery
they are planned to undergo.
If the surgery is low-risk,
it can go forward as planned.
With the low-risk surgery out of the way,
in other words,
if the planned surgery is intermediate
or high-risk,
the next step is to consider
the functional capacity of the patient,
remembering that a low score
might not solely be due to cardiac problems.
If the patient can reach
four or more metabolic equivalents,
the surgery can go forward.
If the patient can reach
less than four metabolic equivalents
or their functional status is unknown,
we need to consider
the clinical risk factors
as described above.
If three or more are present,
consider consultation.
If one or two risk factors are present,
the surgery can proceed
unless it is felt that consultation
might lead to a change in management.
If no clinical risk factors are present,
it is safe to proceed.
And there you have it,
a simple management algorithm.
Now, the number of patients
with prior coronary artery balloon angioplasty
and those with coronary stents
are increasing in number.
And care should be taken in these patients
before embarking on non-cardiac surgery.
In most all of these cases,
dual antiplatelet drugs have been prescribed.
The current recommendation
is that all patients with bare metal stents
should receive clopidogrel
for at least a month after placement
together with aspirin.
And in those with drug eluting stents,
the recommendations are for one year.
The possible need for non-cardiac surgery
within a year
is an actual contraindication
for the placement of drug eluting stents.
We will take a closer look
at aspirin and clopidogrel
in a later lecture,
but I do want to take the time here
and discuss a proposed algorithm
for these patients.
And it also comes from the ACC AHA.
They divide patients
with prior percutaneous interventions
into those who've had
balloon angioplasty only,
those with bare metal stents,
and those with drug eluting stents.
For those who have
balloon angioplasty only,
and it has been less than two weeks
since the procedure,
the suggestion is to delay surgery.
For those beyond two weeks,
the patient can proceed to theater
on aspirin.
For those with bare metal stents,
the cutoff is 30 to 45 days.
Sooner than this
would require delay in surgery,
and those beyond the cutoff time
can proceed to theater again
only on the aspirin.
In the case of drug eluting stents,
the waiting period is one year.
Those beyond a year
since replacement
can proceed to theater
on the aspirin.
If the time period
is less than a year,
it is best to delay surgery
if at all possible.
The prognostic value
of routine preoperative ECGs
are unclear.
They are of great value
if a severe arrhythmia
is diagnosed,
but the literature is vague
on who requires this test.
Most units rely on age
as sole determinant
for routine testing
based on the fact
that the incidence
of cardiac disease
increases with age.
Many units include
all patients
with a history of cardiac disease
or those with any symptom
or sign suggestive
of cardiac disease
as well as those
who are to undergo
high-risk surgery.
Most certainly,
the group of abnormalities
to be on the watch out for
include major Q-wave changes,
ST segment changes,
major T-wave changes,
MOBITS type 2
or higher block,
left bundle branch block,
and AFib.
These should be referred
to a physician
or cardiologist.
The optimal dosage
and timing
of perioperative statin use
is unknown,
but the American College
of Cardiology
and American Heart Association
do list it
as good practice
to continue the use
of statins
during the perioperative period.
Beta blockade
now mention
has to be made
of this sensitive issue.
Many publications
and recommendations
still list
the protective effect
of the use
of beta blockers
in the at-risk patient.
Dosages and titrations
to certain heart rates
as well as mention
of time intervals
for treatment
were well described.
Unfortunately,
it has recently
come to light
that there were
major irregularities
with some of the research projects
and the recent literature
has suggested
that it increases
the risk of mortality
by about 27%.
Be aware of these
new findings
and question
the routine use
of beta blockers.
In general,
cardiovascular medication
should be continued
through the perioperative period.
Let's have a look
at some of these.
Abrupt discontinuation
of centrally acting
alpha-2 agonists
may lead to severe
rebound hypertension
and stopping
ACE inhibitors
in patients
with congestive cardiac failure
can lead to recurrence.
Be careful with patients
on diuretic therapy
which may cause
hypovolemia
and hyperkalemia.
These should be corrected
before the surgery.
In fact,
patients with hypertension
can have a contracted
intravascular space
and even a small amount
of blood and fluid loss
during surgery
requires monitoring
and replacement.
The aim of a consultation
with a physician
or cardiologist
is not merely
to clear the patient
for surgery.
Following the algorithm
that we have discussed,
referral for consultation
must end with
a change in cardiac management
so as to improve
the reserve capacity
of the patient
and lessen the risk
of surgical morbidity
or mortality.
The algorithm really aims
to identify those patients
in whom further investigation,
be that non-invasive
or invasive,
will lead to a change
in management.
The cardiologist
or physician needs
to decide on stress ECGs,
echocardiograms
or even angiograms.
In the next lecture,
we'll discuss pulmonary conditions.
Thank you.
Thank you.
