So we've seen how to do these simple calculations just using these operators, plus, minus, multiply,
divide and power, but we can also use functions to do that. So in this section I'm going to look
at the use of functions and we'll say something about fractions as well because we haven't
done that. Now we're going to have a future lecture all about the types of data that we
can use in Julia. But I want to show you just now, just a little sneak peek, type of. Type
of. If I write that and I open and close parentheses and I just put in the value 3. What is the
value 3? I'm going to hold down shift and hit the return or enter keys and I see int64. It's
a 64-bit integer. As I say we're going to have a whole lecture, a lesson, just about types.
So it's a 64-bit integer. If I say 3.0, so I just went into that cell, just changed the
line of code. I'm going to hold down shift, enter again, it'll execute again. Now we see
that's a 64-bit floating point value. But look at this. So we're going to look at all kinds
of types in future. But let's do this. Type of plus. In Julia, phenomenally so, this plus
operator is also a function. It can also perform a function. Now remember from mathematics the
f of x equals x squared. That's a function. f is a function of x. Same in computer programming
languages. There's this function. And it takes certain values. The f of x takes the argument
x. That x is called an argument in computer science, whereas it will just be called a variable
in mathematics. Now this is a function in its own right. So I can use it like this. I can
say, as I would say, the f of x, I'm going to say the plus of something. Now just let me
go back. See, once I open the parentheses, it automatically closes it for me, puts the cursor in between.
A bit of text completion there in the Jupyter Notebooks. It works really well. But I've got
to give it some argument now. Now arguments are separated by commas. And I want to add 2 plus 2.
So I'm going to say 2 comma 2. Not 2 plus 2. There's a function called plus. And I can actually just use
a little plus sign instead of writing something like add or whatever. In Julia, it was coded that way
you could use the actual mathematical sign as a function. So look at that. If I execute that line
of code, indeed, it is going to be 4. Now I can also add some more. 4 and 7. Let's carry on. I'm just
hitting keys on my keyboard there. It'll do all of those for me. Now, you see it goes up there to 28.
So it's just going to use all of these. And it's just going to pass these arguments to the add
function, the plus function. And it takes what that function does. It just adds all the arguments.
Let's look at minus. I can still say 3 comma 4. And again, I'm going to get my negative 1.
No problem there. Multiplication. No problem there. 3 times 4 is 12. Division. I can also use division
as a function. 12 comma 4. That's going to give me the 3.0. The power sign there. That's also 2 comma 4.
That is 16. So no problem. I can use all these simple operators in Julia as functions. Passing some
arguments to a function. Now, just one more thing. The fractions. If I say 3 divided by 4, I'm going to get
0.7. But if I want to maintain it as a fraction, I can just use these double divide by signs. So I'm
just putting in two forward slashes. And if I do that, it's going to maintain it as, instead of 0.75,
it's going to maintain it as a fraction 3 over 4. So I'm going to show that I can calculate the
numerator of 3 divided by 4. The numerator is 3. And the keyword there is num. Keyword for the
denominator is d in. For denominator. 3 over 4. And that's going to return the 4. Julia's
quite clever in that it will even simplify fractions for you. 6 over 9 can be simplified to 2 over 3.
Indeed, no problem. Look at this. Another line of markdown. So if I click in there, that was code.
If I click in this code cell, this cell, it is actually markdown. Let's just double click on it
to see how I constructed that. So you can see for markdown, I can use these little plus signs.
As long as there's a space afterwards before the line starts, that'll be seen as a little
bullet point. And here you can see what is called Lartec. You know, Lartec, it's spelled like
latex. So Lartec code just executes code in a PDF in certain office applications. If you have some
add-ons, it'll render mathematical notation for you. So that's something you can learn how to do
with time. And I hide them in between these little dollar signs, single dollar signs that will execute
them in line. And even this value 1 and this value 2 I'm rendering as Lartec images. Look also at
something else here. You see these little stars on either side of a word that changes that text
to italics. So you can just double click on that and you can very quickly learn something about
Lartec there and the use of some more markdown. That'll come with time. Beautiful bullet points
there. I'm rendering fractions there. So that's not what I want you to see. I want you to see the
fact that 5 divided by 3 is 1 and 2 thirds. So this 2 is the remainder. And indeed we can do that.
What is the remainder of 5 divided by 3? So that REM is a function. I'm passing arguments to that.
And it's going to work out the fact that that is indeed a 2. Now that is, I'm going to delete.
Let's go to this line of code. I can get both that solution to the division and the remainder by using
DIFFREM. DIFFREM. And we're going to have, let's do the 5 and 3 again. And you see 3 goes into 5 once
with a remainder of 2. Excellent. You've learned all about functions now, how to use mathematical
functions. And we've learned something about fractions as well and how to do divisions, calculating the
division and the remainder. In the next section, we'll take a quick look at associations.
