In this short section let's have a look at some sets. Now I can just use normal array and do a
bit of set theory. Here I'm going to do the union of two sets. Remember it's two sets here
a sub one and a sub two and I'm just going to get the union. So you see the two sets here they are
just normal arrays separated by commas all these values a1 and a2. We can execute this line of code
and we have our two arrays. Now I can use the union function that takes the argument of all these
arrays that I want the union of and that just means putting these two together but there you
see for instance there's a three there's also three so that would be only represented once
when we do the union of these two and there you can see the two of them together. Remember the
intersection those would be elements that are common to both common to both of these of these
arrays and you see the elements one there's a one in a sub one there's a one in a sub two there's a
three there are threes in both of them there are two threes here in a sub two and there's a four that
is mutual to the both of them. The difference it takes away all the elements that are in the second
set that are also represented in the first and it takes them out of the first. Remember the Venn diagrams
from school that's exactly what is going to happen. Subsets that is going to return a boolean value for us
it just asks is a one contained within a two so do we find that all of the values in a sub one are also
in a sub two and of course in this in this instance it is false because there are values let's go up
there are definitely values such as an eight here or the seven or the six or the five for that matter
that are not represented in a two so definitely a one is not a subset of a two. Now we've represented
these as we've represented these as as arrays but we also have this set notation the set function in
Julia so I can very specifically say that something is a set it still takes the square brackets so
there's still this array form inside of and and the what happens with this set is the following let's
look at the numbers as one two one two three two one so there's certainly repetitions of the twos and
the ones and when I use set it is just going to get rid of all the duplicates and that is why you would
use the set function here as opposed to just using a normal array that is really for just getting rid of
all of all of the duplicates and certainly in sets we are interested in these in in the values as they
are not as they are multi or used multiple times as we as we want them in an array so if that is
your requirement use the set function in the next video in the next section on this lesson we're going
to have a look at two poles and how two poles different how they are different from arrays
