In this section we're going to look at collections. Now collections are really
just groups of values like lists of values and those values could be numbers
and they can be strings. So they can be both numerical and take on some form of
category. So it's just lists of values. Now as per usual we're going to just see
that the kernel has loaded properly and we see 2 plus 2 equals 4. Another thing
that I want to introduce in this lesson is this very exciting section of code
here where we're going to load a cascading style sheet file just to
stylize our notebook a little bit. Some people like that it's quite easy to do
for instance using the IPython kernel for the Jupyter notebooks but you can also
do it right here in Julia. So I say file equals open and just it is in the current
or present working directory this file style.css. I'll post these on github and
other places as well so you can see what this cascading style sheet
looks like. It's going to load that. I'm going to create this computer
variable called style and I'm going to say read all files to read everything in
this open file and then I'm just going to call HTML and then in quotation marks here
the dollar style so that just means read this variable which is just going to
output this cascading style sheet to HTML. So if this doesn't make a lot of sense
don't worry about it you can copy and paste this and just keep it at the top of
all your files and as I say you've got to have this cascading style sheet. We're
going to use some Google fonts that are freely available in the style sheet and
as I said I'll give you a link to that. Let's just run that block of code and
voila look at this isn't this a thing of beauty. So I've rendered a specific font for
my writing my code here. I've also got a specific font just here for my markdown
output and if I double click on this you'll see it's still just I'm not using
markdown I'm using HTML tags here doesn't matter. Heading one just says
collections but it is rendered in a specific text as it is stated in this
cascading style sheet. This cascading style sheet also gives this white
background color this light gray background color you can change almost
everything about your notebook just in a cascading style sheet. So if you
know HTML and CSS you can really render some interesting notebooks. So apologies
if you don't like this font I just chose it just because it's quite different from
the default as you can see I've colorized it as well just a bit of contrast so you
can see what this all is all about. So this chapter this lesson on collections
lists of numerical or categorical values. The most common form of these are arrays as
you can see there so in this lesson we're going to look at these arrays we're
going to modify them we're going to take add another dimension to them to have
matrices we're going to do a bit of set notation we're going to look at tuples
and we'll circle back to arrays. We will bring it all together in the end. So without
further ado in the next section let's start off by looking at arrays.
