Let's have a look at how Julia deals with complex numbers.
Now the complex number in Julia is im.
So I can simply construct 2 plus 2im.
So that's 2 plus 2i.
And if we execute it, it's 2 plus 2i.
So that im is an imaginary number, the square root of negative 1.
I can also construct it with a function called complex.
So I can say complex 2, 2.
And that's going to give me the same complex number.
Now I can ask what the real part is of a complex number 2 plus 2im.
Of course, the real part of that is 2.
And the imaginary part, I can ask for that as well, plus 2im.
And I see the imaginary part is this 2, just to show you if I made that into a 4.
Of course, the imaginary part is 4.
I can ask for the complex conjugate.
C-O-N-J.
Complex conjugate of 2 plus 2im.
Now remember the complex conjugate, we just take the imaginary part and we multiply it by negative 1.
And that's going to become 2 minus 2im.
If this was a minus, of course, it's very simple.
Let's just do that as a minus, it's going to become 2 plus 2im.
So I take the imaginary part, I multiply it by negative 1, and that is called the complex conjugate.
Now the absolute value of a complex number, I can do that.
What's the absolute value of the complex number 2 plus 2im?
And there you see.
I'll give you a little clue if you don't know what the absolute value is.
Let's put, sneakily, a 3 and a 4.
And that's going to return a 5.
Because remember, we construct the complex numbers or we can represent it on what is called the Argand diagram.
That is just an x and a y axis where the y axis becomes the imaginary part.
So if I were to draw a line from 0.0 to the point 3,4, you can well imagine I can make a little triangle there.
And that would be the hypotenuse.
So it's the square root of the real part squared plus the square root of the real part squared plus the imaginary part squared.
So it's the square root of 3 squared plus 4 squared and indeed that is just going to be 5.
I can also just ask for it to be squared automatically.
That means it removes the square root sign of the hypotenuse by just using this.
This 2,3 plus 4im abs2 and that's going to return the square of that 25.
It can also do the angle for me in radians.
Now that's called the argument.
So once again, imagine it is on a plane, the point 3,4.
If I draw that line up from 0.0 up to 3,4, it's going to make an angle with the x axis.
And that's called the argument.
So I can say angle of 3 plus 4im and that's going to return in radians for me.
That angle between the x axis and this line.
We can calculate the square root of negative 1 doing this.
So let's do that the square root of, let's do that, the 1im.
1im.
So that is just i.
And remember what is i squared?
i squared is negative 1.
And if I take the square root of negative 1, I get i back.
0 plus 1i.
So that was just how to calculate the imaginary number.
You cannot say the square root of negative 1.
If I were to put in just negative 1 in there, you're going to return an error.
It won't work.
But if I cheat a little bit and I take the imaginary number squared, which is negative 1,
so I'm asking what is the square root of negative 1.
But I am classifying it as an imaginary number.
It's going to evaluate the square root of that for me and now give me back the fact that
the square root of negative 1 is just i, the imaginary number.
All right.
I have said mostly that I would already have a big board.
I'm going to take the opposite side of negative 1, why?
I'm going to take the opposite side of the圓 wanted the right servant.
I got a big board, 알 re am.
Open your hurry!
And the next time I make it easy to watch Skyrim이짆,
while you work the last minute, you know how the next day.
And the next time I receive a new one, I can 4 or 112.
