So let's get this section started off by doing some simple arithmetic. We're going to do addition,
subtraction, multiplication, division, and powers by arithmetic operators. Just plus, minus, multiply,
divide, and take a power. Now if I click in this little cell here, you can see that it is a code
cell. So I'm going to write code in there, but you can see I've got a bit of text there. As in Python
with Julia, we can write these comments, comment lines, starting them off with this pound sign.
I can even put a space there. Anything after that pound sign for that line, Julia is going to ignore.
It's not going to execute that code. So that's not markdown. That is just part of Julia itself. Same
as with Python. All languages have their own little comment keys there. This year in Julia,
we have the pound sign, the hashtag. It's just going to ignore that line of code. But let's
get going. Two plus two. I'm putting these spaces in just for visual effect. You don't have to put
them in there. To execute this line, the cell, I'm going to hold down shift and return or shift and
enter. Or I can hit this little play button. Off we go and we see this gets executed and two plus two
indeed is four. Three minus four. What's that going to give us? Negative one. As simple as that.
Multiplication. Three times four. Shift enter. That's 12. Multiplication is with most languages is
this little star sign. Shift eight on most keyboards. Division is the forward slash sign. So I can say 12
divided by four. And that's going to give me three. One thing I want you just to know to see that was
12. But this is 3.0. There's a difference between those. This is an integer. This is a floating point
value. We'll get to that in future. And just two to the power four. So in case you know Python and Python
those will be double stars. But here in Julia, we have this caret sign shift eight. And I'm not putting
in spaces there. Although you could just to remind myself visually that this is two to the power four.
And indeed we're going to get 16. So simple arithmetic just using simple arithmetical operators.
Next up we're going to look at the use of functions to do these simple calculations for us.
