In this section I just want to show you that you can actually combine different types of
loops inside of each other. Here I have a for loop and an if loop inside of it. So it's going
to iterate from 1 to 10, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 between this four name statements. And what it
finds is this this if evaluation. I have if I, this percentage sign 3, that means it's the remainder
once I divide 3 into whatever's held in I, if that equals 0, so if I have no remainder, in other
words is this a multiple of 3. I have this continue statement in here. So I'm showing you two things
here actually. I have an if statement, an if question really, inside of a for loop. So of course if I ask
if this number is divisible by 3, if I combine 3 into it with a 0 remainder, what should I do?
So if I get to i equals 3, 3 divided by 3 is 1 and there's a 0 reminder, of course this is 2,
but the first iteration where i is just 1, this is going to return a false. What's going to happen
if it is false? It has this continue in it and it doesn't make much sense when you look at it the
first time. Does it mean continue? So it is, it's a false. What is really continuing? And the only way
to really understand it is to execute this line. So we see that we're skipping everything that is
divisible by 3. 3 is skipped, 6 is skipped, and 9 is skipped, but the others are done. So what is
happening here? Let's run it line by line. So for i, i is a computer variable in this range indicator
from 1 to 10, so the first time we run through, let's have it equals 1. So if 1 divided by 3 equals
0 and it's not, because 3 goes into 1 0 times with the remainder of 3, so this returns a false.
It says continue though. What is continuing? It means it is skipping. Because it's false,
we're just continuing through this, and it prints that line out for us. If it returns a true here,
this continue means we're skipping these lines. Because once we get to 3, 3 divided by 3 is 1
with the remainder of 0, so this is true. This returns a true, allowing this continue to be executed,
and now this continue says, it actually, what you can see is there's almost, there's a jump outside
of all of this. It skips the rest of these lines now. This continue. Continue please with the next
iteration. Don't worry about going through the rest of the code and printing this line, printing 3 to
the screen. Continue the loop, skipping the rest. I'm actually jumping. I'm continuing the for loop,
jumping the rest of this. And you can see the beautiful execution there, skipping everything
that is, with which 3 can be divided. So two things, I've got this if statement inside of a for loop,
and you can clearly see what this continue does. It says continue with my for loop, basically. Skip the rest
when this is true. When it's not, it doesn't skip. It actually runs through the rest of the code,
and it prints that line out for me. In the next section, we're going to look at this weird term
called comprehension.
