Stabby functions and do blocks. So these are called stabby lambda functions or also just
lambda functions and they're really quick and dirty ones and they're part of or they're an
example at least of anonymous functions. Anonymous in that they don't really have a name so you can't
really call them and we can extend the use by these do blocks which are also really a
form of anonymous functions. What are stabby functions? Let's have a look. They use this
minus and greater than sign hence the I suppose the stabby and anyway here we have x and then this
stabby notation there's a minus and greater than sign 2x squared plus 3x minus 2. Now how do we use
that? Well quite easy we use it with this map function. Let's run that block of code. Now let's
use this map function so I'm saying map and then the map inbuilt function I'm passing an argument to
it. The first argument is this stabby function and I suppose we can read it as x such that x 2x squared
plus 3x minus 2 and I'm passing it an array here 1 2 3 4 5 so it's going to iterate through all of
these put it into these put it into x and calculate this little expression and there we go. So 2 times
1 is 2 2 squared is 4 well it's going to do that so sorry 1 squared 1 squared is 1 2 times 1 is 2 plus 3
is 5 minus 2 is 3 and there we get the 3. But we can also write it slightly differently so I'm going to map
again with our map function then the array and then do x and there is my little stabby function there
just a different notation you can see that it's going to do exactly the same thing. So we can do a
little bit more let's map I've got 3 6 9 10 11 here do x and instead of just using my stabby function
there I can use this do as a function all on its own in that I have an if else if else if else statement
in here so if mod x comma 3 so x means it's going to iterate through these 3 6 9 10 11 mod x comma 3
that means divide 3 into x and what is the remainder so if the remainder is 0 I want you to take whatever
value is an x at the moment multiplied by 100 else if if the mod is 3 so in other words say for instance
this is 11 11 goes into 3 3 times and what is left 2 is left so then we're going to do 200 times x
and if it is 3 so again 11 divided by 3 that's 3 with a remainder of 2 if it finds that to be true
it's going to execute that line of code so quite a simple do block do some do blocks there and once
again it's a map function so it gets called and indeed we get the 300 because that's the remainder
of dividing 3 into 3 is there's a 0 remainder so that's going to multiply the 3 by 100 and for instance
this last one 11 times 300 is going to give me 3300 down there so stabby functions if you really just
need to run i suppose to map very easy to map an array through a function and usually a mathematical
function as we had here good so in the next section we're going to have a look at functions as arguments
