Here we are back in my folder structure. We can see the home button there. I'm inside
of this folder. The new file we've just created is right there. But I'm going to show you
lesson one. Now you can just start a new folder, a new notebook there. But I've already created
one that we can use in lesson one. Let's open that up. There we go. Took some time to load.
Kernel starting. Please wait. Everything is installed. Let's go. And these are all the
things we're going to get up to. Now look at this. This is what a notebook looks like.
I'm writing code. But I'm also writing these little headers and subheaders. And what you
can see is even some text in between that have got bullet points in them. It all looks
very neat. Look at this. This is what a notebook is. A Jupyter notebook. And that is what makes
scientific computing so exciting these days. You can write a whole manuscript with your
code right in between. And these are all the things we're going to get up to when we look
at our first lesson. We're going to just use Julia, as you can see, as a giant calculator.
It is a scientific programming language, a technical computer language. And that is what we're going to
start off with as opposed to the normal hello world. So here's a line of a cell code. You can see
this faint line that appears. And if I move across to this, you see the faint line, that code cell.
And you can see here that it was a markdown cell as opposed to a code cell. So inside of a markdown,
I can write normal text, but I can also give it a size by using either markdown or HTML tags.
Let's double click on this. And there you see all I've done is used HTML tags. Open H1,
heading 1. That's the largest font it will render for me. Close H1. The alternative is,
let's take those away. I'm just going to go to the front there and use a markdown little shortcut
called the hashtag. See there, it jumped already to H1. That's the largest kind of text that would
be the same as H1, heading 1. Now, how do I execute that line of code? Because if I hit return or enter,
this is going to jump to the next line. Let's hit the backspace. I can do it in two ways. I can either
hit the play button there, or if I'm in the cell, I hold down the shift key on macOS keyboard. I hit return.
On Windows and Linux, I will just hit the enter key. So I'm holding down shift, hitting return,
and that line, that cell of code executes beautifully. Let's double click on this one.
You see there are two hashtags. That would be the same as H2, heading 2. So I can just go to the end
and just close, heading 2 there. These are HTML tags. Many people are familiar with HTML tags.
I can execute the cell there. There we go. Look at this. It's even smaller. And you guessed it.
It's three. That would be akin to an H3. So three little. You can go up to six. H6.
The smallest subheadings you can do. Let's just run that line of code.
So first off, we're going to look at simple arithmetic. Just doing simple basic additions and
subtractions. We're going to move on to doing this through the built-in functions. Next up,
we're going to look at associations. We can round off numbers. We're going to calculate the greatest
common divisor and the least common multiples. We'll have a look at absolute values,
some trigonometric functions, and they are all there, not just the ones I've listed here.
We can calculate the sign of a value, and there's a few caveats there, something I just should make
you aware of. We're going to use numeric comparisons, where we compare values to each other.
A lot about that. We're going to look at special powers. Those are your
square roots, your cube roots, and exponentials and logarithms we'll have a quick look at. I'll tell
you quickly about all these special functions, complex numbers if you're interested in those,
and we're going to talk a lot about plotting in future lectures, but I'm going to give you a
brief look at how to plot some of these mathematical functions.
