Now we're going to look at the concept of interference due to a thin film.
So what we in essence have would be a ray that comes in through air or vacuum.
It's a thin film and it'll usually be some gasoline, some form of oil or soap.
And below that will be air again, you can try and explain it that way or for instance water.
And it is incredible to see that if you have an oily or soapy thin layer and the white light shines on it,
very incredibly you might, your eye is here, very incredibly you might look at it and you'll see darkness.
Bright sunlight on it but it will appear black. How does that work?
And that's a very difficult concept. I think most textbooks try and explain it in a very difficult way
and as much as they're trying to use the concept of length, whereas we've looked before at waves that are out of or in phase
and as much as we said N2 minus N1 equals L divided by lambda refractive index 2 minus refractive index 1 and N2 larger than N1.
And we also said we can just look at N1 on its own and we said that would be L A divided by lambda A.
So we can certainly look at this N that is the number of wavelengths that fit in a length L.
We can certainly use this concept to explain, and as I said I haven't seen a textbook do that,
but that's certainly the way that I explain it to myself because I find that this way of using lengths is a bit difficult in the textbook.
Look at what your textbook says and then look at this explanation and decide which one is obviously as best for you.
Okay, now the whole thing is that these two light rays, now remember what happens, I have an incident light ray,
some of it will be refracted and some of it will be reflected, and that goes to your eye.
The refracted part, now look here N2 is higher than N1, so it's going to bend towards the normal.
Some of this refracted light is going to come to your second interface,
and at your second interface some of it will reflected, and the angle between that and the norm,
and the norm and the reflected ray will be exactly the same.
And remember again, some of it will be refracted on this side.
It comes back and some of this will again be reflected and some will be refracted.
And something very miraculous happens, it's not very miraculous, but they say it's miraculous at these surfaces of reflection.
Something happens to the phase of a wavelength in light that gets reflected.
We've never talked about, but certainly it does happen.
And various textbooks explain that in a different way.
If you have a tight rope tied on one side, and when it comes to the wall on the other side,
it actually, when it deflects back, whether this point is fixed or not,
you will change the phase by half a wavelength, or you won't.
Just read that in your textbook.
The same happens with electromagnetic waves at an interface.
When you go from a medium with a refractive index lower to higher,
you change the phase of that ray by half a wavelength.
I've said it slow enough, it's got to be imprinted in your mind.
When it does not work so for refracted light, the refracted light that goes through
has no change ever in the phase of that wave.
The second part is, so if I go from lower to a higher medium,
even though that ray doesn't go through, it reflects off.
That reflected ray is going to be out of phase by a half a wavelength.
Now, when a light wave, when an electromagnetic wave is reflected off of a surface,
going from higher to lower, from higher to lower medium,
it doesn't go into this medium because it is reflected, but it goes towards,
it does not change its, it does not change its phase.
So this internal reflection here again on this side, going back there,
will be because, won't be as well because I'm going from higher to lower.
So going from higher to lower, nothing happens.
Going from, and this is what is brand new, if you reflect only for reflection,
never for refraction, if you reflect an electromagnetic wave off of the surface,
and that was between a lower, which the ray is, reflected off a medium with a refractive index higher,
it will change the phase of that electromagnetic wave by half a wavelength.
Now, you might get a question, and this is where this explanation, I feel, works better,
at least for me, than what the textbooks do explain.
What would be, I am told that I shine white light on the sunlight, on the soil surface,
and I only see yellow.
And that means that the blue light, actually the bluer end of the spectrum,
undergoes total destructive interference when it gets to your eye,
it's only the red, orange, yellow end of the spectrum that does not get destructively interfered when it gets to your eye.
So I want to know if I have the wavelength of blue light in air,
that is going to give me 469, so it's 469 nanometers.
Okay, obviously the refractive index of air is going to be 1.00.
We are told that, let's make this oil, that is going to be 1.40.
And the N of water, it's lying on top of water, is going to be 1.33.
So look at this, if you make this N3, you see it goes from lower to higher to lower again.
So certainly when it reflects off of this side, it's going from higher to lower,
so there will be no phase difference there.
As I said, with the refraction, there's no phase difference.
But this ray here will be out of phase, the incoming and the outgoing ray will be out of phase by half a wavelength.
By half a wavelength.
I want to know what is the minimum width of this, that will give me of this blue light,
total destructive interference of these two waves.
And then look at it again.
So this one is going to be out of phase by half of this one.
There's no phase difference there.
There's no phase difference there because this is higher, like 1.4 is higher than 1.3, more than 1.33.
It goes back and undergoes refraction, so it's still nothing.
Still nothing.
So this incident ray, this reflected ray at the bottom here, this one, is going to have a phase shift.
The top one is also going to have a phase shift.
Not because of reflection, because it gets refracted, reflected when nothing happens, and refracted again.
But because there is a difference in the length of the parts.
If I hold my eye right there, this wave has traveled nothing.
My eye is right there.
But, I'm not saying right against, there's a tiny little gap, say negligible gap.
But there is a phase shift in that ray that does strike my eye.
The other wave had to travel twice this, let's call this Y, and to travel twice this distance Y.
And remember, a wave that travels a different length than another wave will have, or can have, depending on this, can have a phase change.
Okay.
We saw that when we had two, when we had two mediums and the light waves went through.
That was certainly one way for it to change.
And then we had, remember, we had our house with a seven kilometer and an 8.12 kilometer radius away from our house's antenna to radio stations.
And because one traveled a different length path than the other one, they could also be out of phase, even though they were coherent when it started.
So, that was one method.
This was two methods.
Now, this is our third method.
This is thin, full, and it's got to be reflected.
Okay.
You've got to go from lower to higher for it to change that half by that half.
Now, let's look at it.
Let's just look at this situation.
And let's look at what N is going to be for.
Look at what N is going to be for this reflected, reflected, reflected, reflected ray.
So, this ray on the top.
Let's make that then number two.
How many, remember now, it is traveling this distance and this distance again.
What I neglected to say, I'm going to stop here and then carry on in the next video, otherwise it becomes too long.
The recording becomes too long.
I'm saying that the angle here theta is so small that it's actually negligible that this is almost all perpendicular.
We've got to have a tiny little angle, so we can just work these things out and space them.
But, say for instance it's nearly perpendicular.
Then let's carry on in the next video where we left off there.
Okay, so we're talking about this refracted, reflected, reflected ray on the top.
It is going a distance too wide.
It's going to be its total length that it travels.
From there, back.
I'm going to say that it's nearly perpendicular.
Let's neglect that angle theta.
Theta, the angle between the incident ray and the norm.
I'd say that it's about zero degrees.
So, the angle theta is going to be lambda in the air.
Now, the angle is going to be lambda in the air.
Divided by lambda.
But this is now not lambda in air.
This wave is traveling inside of a medium.
And remember, lambda n equals lambda in air divided by n.
So, this certainly is going to be lambda in the oil.
So, you just have to do that little calculation.
Lambda in the oil is going to be lambda in the air divided by n of the oil.
Okay.
So, that's not this n.
You've got to convert it to the lambda in the oil.
Okay.
Now, what is n1?
Now, this is where my, obviously, my explanation differs from the textbook.
What we are saying in essence, okay, remember one thing before we get there.
We want total of the blue line, total destructive interference.
So, we want n2 minus n1 to be a half.
The difference is going to be a half.
Or, if you want for the second thinnest, 3 over 2, then 5 over 2.
Okay.
Not a half a wavelength, just a half.
Remember, there's no units here, no units here.
This was meters divided by meters.
There's no units.
So, it's not half a wavelength.
It's just half, or 3 over 2, or 5 over 2.
If that difference in wavelengths per length is a half between those two,
or multiples there are, remember this was m plus a half.
Okay.
That's how we write it.
So, 0 will give me a half.
1 will give me 1 and a half.
2 will give me 5 over 2.
Okay.
That has got to be a half.
But what is this n1?
What is this n1?
Now, it's certainly, if my pie is right there, because the difference in the traveling of,
this was our original wave, there's just one of them.
Now, there's these two that come out.
But the only difference in them in travel distance is right at this interface, where this
one goes 0 length, and this one goes 2y length.
Okay.
So, we certainly can't put 0.
We can't put 0 in here.
That is not 0.
So, this is where my explanation takes a bit of a leap in as much as you have to understand,
that this has to be a half.
This has to be a half.
Because, and remember I said something magical happens at that interface, suddenly the wave
changes by half a wavelength.
And that is why I put that half in there.
There is this half a wavelength that fits into nothingness.
As it reflects on that surface, suddenly the phase changes by half a wavelength.
Without there being any distance traveled there, it's right on that interface.
There is this half a wavelength change.
Okay.
So, for me, N2 minus N1 equals, where is my N2?
2y over lambda oil minus a half, and that's going to equal a half.
Take that to the other side.
So, I've got 2y over lambda oil equals 1, and 2y equals lambda oil, and y equals lambda
oil divided by 2, divided by 2.
And that's going to give me y the smallest, the smallest width of this film to give me
a little destructive interference, no matter where my eye is here.
These are now equal lengths.
So, it's just about what the difference is right there, where they both are outside of
my film of oil.
