Okay, just some quickfire concepts. What about the pupils of a cat that are elliptical in a vertical direction? What does that mean? Well, it means in vertical the diameter is more, so the resolving power, so the resolving power is a lot more in the vertical.
Remember theta minimum being 1.22 times lambda over d. If I make d a lot larger, theta minimum gets a lot smaller, and a smaller angle means greater resolving power is in whatever is being viewed can be much closer together for you to be able to distinguish them.
So the cat will have much better resolving power in the vertical than it has if two things are spaced vertically than when two things are spaced horizontally.
Let's do a few quick diffraction, easy diffraction problems. We're going to use high frequency sound, the highest that the human ear can hear. Let's make that about 20.0 kHz.
And it has an air temperature which gives me a velocity of about 343 meters per second. And I have a doorway which has a width of 0.910 meters.
And I just want to know what is the angle to the first minima. When it says angle to first minima, that means from the center of the central bright fringe, that angle to the first dark fringe.
And we can certainly do that. Inasmuch as we know that the equation for the sine of that angle is going to be m, and m is going to equal 1, because it's the first minima, times lambda divided by width.
Our only problem is that we don't know lambda, but we know that velocity equals frequency times lambda, and in other words lambda equals velocity divided by frequency.
So, we want to solve for lambda. So, we want to solve for lambda. We want to solve for, we want to know the angle. So, the angle is going to be the arc sine.
It's going to be the arc sine of m, which is this one, and for lambda we're going to have v over f, and we're going to have w there.
And my answer for that theta, and my answer for that theta is about 1.08 degrees.
Now I want to know what wavelength of light, if I use wavelength of light, and I use that of 580 nanometers, what is the width of my door?
Well, I can just state width here, is going to equal m, which is this one, times lambda divided by the sine of that angle.
And the angle which we've got was just there, and that gives me a hypothetical width of, I'll need a door of width 3.01 times 10 to the power of negative 5 meters.
So, it certainly is a very tiny door, to give me the same angle to the first minimum of my high frequency sound wave as it would for this light.
Okay, here we go, problem number 2. Also, a single slit diffraction problem. And I am told the following. I use the width, one of, got to get this all right, 2.3 micrometers.
I use monochromatic light at a wavelength of 510 nanometers. And I am told that I get a certain diameter of my central, my central maxima or my central bright fringe.
If I'm told I get a certain width, remember I can express that width as 2 times y, or I can express it as 2 times the angle, or just that angle. So, let's just call theta 1 that angle.
Now I'm told I move on, and I move on to a second experiment, where I now use, with the same L1 equals L2 equals L, I'm using the same distance to my microscope or whatever my board is where I view this diffraction pattern.
So, I move now to a width of unknown. Let's call that width 2. I now move to a wavelength monochromatic of 740 nanometers. And I'm told I get exactly the same width of my central bright fringe.
In other words, my theta 2 equals theta 1, and that is also theta. So, if I know, I want to know what the width of the second slit is. I know that the sine of that angle equals n plus lambda divided by the width.
In this instance, I know to the first one, so my n equals 1 to the first dark fringe, the first minimum. And if the two thetas are equal, that means the two sine of thetas are equal, that means m of lambda 1 over w1 must equal m of lambda 2 over w2, those will go, in other words, w2 is going to equal lambda 2 over lambda 1 times w1.
So, this is going to be this fraction of the wavelength times the other width. Do that for yourself. I get 3.3 micrometers. 3.3 micrometers.
Now, setting up again a single slit diffraction problem. And I'm told that the central bright fringe, you know, if we shine it that way, obviously, if we do the experiment this way, my bright fringe is going to be different.
My bright fringe is going to be there, dark, dark, and then lower intensity, bright, bright, and then dark, dark, etc.
I'm told that the central bright fringe has this half this length. In other words, if we drew it that way, it was going to be Y if we drew it from the top.
So, it's going to be 0.5 of 3.5 millimeters. And I'm told that the width of my slit is 0.56 millimeters. I'm told that the screen is 4.0 meters away.
Obviously, obviously, I'm dealing with M equals 1 for this value of Y there. And I want to know what the wavelength is. What the wavelength is.
There's one wavelength in this problem. Just the wavelength. Now, that's quite easy to do if we viewed it from the top.
Remember, if we viewed it from the top, we were going to get the central axis. We were going to get this angle theta to the first minima, the first dark pane.
And they told us this value Y. They told us this value L. And then it's easy to get theta. And as much as the tangent of theta equals Y over L,
making theta the arc tangent of Y over L. Okay, but we want not that angle. We want the wavelength. And we know that the sine of theta equals M times lambda divided by W.
We want lambda. We want lambda. We want lambda, which is just going to be M times Y times W.
Sine of theta. And theta is the arc tangent of Y over L. And that gives me a lambda of 490. Check for yourself. 490 nanometers.
Okay, now and again we get to a terrific problem. Look at this one. I'm using the same width. Same width, single slit diffraction problem. Same width, slit.
And I tell you that that is 7.15 times 10 to the power negative 5 meters. I'm using two types of monochromatic light. My first one has a wavelength of 632 nanometers. And my second one has a wavelength of 474 nanometers.
My screen is 1.2 meters away. I want to know what is the difference, how long is the following. The distance between the central point of both bright central fringes and the first time that two dark fringes of these two defected lights actually overlap.
What am I trying to say? What am I trying to say? What is the question trying to ask us? We are going to have a central line. We are going to have a first one. We are going to have a second one. We are going to have a third one.
We are going to have one of one light. We are going to have a third one. For the other one we are going to have one, two. Wherever the first time that these two coincide. In other words, imagine it is that one. Imagine it is that one where the first two fringes coincide.
can just go inside. So what has to be, just looking at the picture, what has to be exactly
the same for both? Well this y region, this y length must be the same or more importantly
or easier for us to calculate is that that theta angle must be the same for both. So
if I have the fact that the sine of theta equals, the sine of theta equals m times lambda divided
by the width, that means theta equals the arc sine, notice now, of m times lambda divided
by the width, and those two must be exactly the same. Those two must be exactly the same.
So let's do that. Let's do that. Let's say that the arc sine of, the first one is going
to be m1 lambda 1 over the width, because they both are the same, and that is going to equal
the arc sine of m2 lambda 2 divided by width. If both functions are arc sine, that means
the arguments must be exactly the same. Width with width will cancel, so I have m1 lambda
1 equals m2 lambda 2. And m1 over m2 is going to equal lambda 2 over lambda 1 that equals 474 divided
x32, and they're both, and if you simplify that you're going to get 3 over 4. 3 over 4. Don't
write it like this. Or you can do that. I mean you can now say that 4 m1s equals 3 m2s. So that doesn't
So that doesn't mean m1 is 4, that means m1 is 3.
Because look at this, m1 over m2 is 3 over 4. m1 is 3 and m2 is 4.
So, I want to know then the y value for an m1 of 3 or a y value for m2 of 4.
Remember that the tangent of that angle was going to be opposite which was y divided by hypotenuse which is l.
In other words, y was going to equal l times the tangent of theta.
And theta is the arcsign of m times lambda divided by width.
So I'm going to put m1 in here and lambda 1, that will give me y1.
And if I put those two in 3 and 632 or I put in 4, or I put in 4 and 474, I'm going to do exactly the same answer.
And that gives me a y value of see if yours is the same that I do it at 3.18 centimeters.
That's a beautiful problem.
Before we move on just to some problems with the resolving power, let's just look at, we know how to get the width of, if we look from the top, if we look for the width of the central band.
Now remember the central band is going to be twice this y distance, y, and we expressed y in terms of theta, inasmuch as theta was going to equal, or the tangent of theta at least was going to equal, this was the length, the distance to our screen was going to be y over l, so we expressed y in terms of theta, inasmuch as it's l tangent of theta.
And the central one was going to equal, and the central one was going to equal, and the central one was going to be twice this.
Okay, how do we get the next one?
Well, we're just going to the next band, we're just going to go to the next band, which is going to be there, the next dark band.
In other words, I'm just going to use m2 inasmuch as theta, to plug in theta there, was going to be the arc sine of m times lambda divided by the width.
Okay, now, that was for m1, I was going to get this angle. For m2, I get this angle, and if I plug it in there, I'm going to get the value for y2.
So, if this was 0, this is y1, this is going to be y2, so I'm just going to subtract y2 from y1.
Just going to subtract y2 from y1. Now, this band is going to be smaller than this whole band, because this whole band, we have to multiply by 2, because there's 2 of them.
On this side, there's just one of them. But what you will notice, if you go to 9 and 10, what you will notice is this, this keeps up ever so slightly, gets a bit wider, gets a bit wider, gets a bit wider as you work it through the arc sine and then through a tangent function.
But the center one, obviously, is going to be twice as much, so you get a larger, then you drop to smaller, because we're just comparing it now to y1, and then they get a bit larger, a bit larger, a bit larger as you go up.
