Let's run through three easy problems. In my first one, I am told that I have a mirror with a focal length of 12.0 centimeters.
If it's positive, by our convention, that will mean that this is a convex or converting lens, positive lens.
I am told that the object that I put in front of it stands above the central axis.
So it's foot at the central axis and it stands at 4.00 centimeters high.
And I'm told that it has put a distance away of 20.0 centimeters.
So what I can glean from this immediately is that the distance is further away than what the focal point is.
So we can immediately, through those three figures, so we have to estimate what is going to happen here.
Indeed, it's going to be a real image and it's going to be inverted.
We just have to look at the size.
So we need this i and we need yi.
That was awesome, the problem.
Now, I think what we should do, equations that you should probably just learn by heart,
is that if we have 1 over s0 plus 1 over si, equaling 1 over f,
and we need to express this as si, it's going to be 1 over f minus 1 over s0.
I'm going to give f s0 as a common factor, but we're going to give you a s0 minus f.
So it's 1 over si, which means si is always going to be f is 0 divided by s0 minus f.
So it's probably an equation just to know, so we're going to have to go through all of these steps again.
So let's do that.
We're going to have si is going to equal f s0 divided by s0 minus f.
So in this problem, we're going to have 12 times 20, so we're going to have 240 square centimeters
divided by 20 minus, that's 8 centimeters.
So that is going to leave us with 30.0 centimeters.
Indeed, the image is real, because that turns out to be positive.
And if we have m, if we have m equals negative si over s0 equals yi over y0,
indeed we're always going to have that yi is going to be negative si y0 divided by s0.
So we're going to have yi, remember we thought that it has to be a negative,
and indeed look at this, it's going to be as much as we're going to be negative 30 centimeters
times y0, which was 4 centimeters, 400 centimeters, we're going to divide that by s0, which was 20 centimeters.
And what are we going to do here, that's 0, we're going to have that 0, we have 12 divided by 2 is 6, 6.00 centimeters,
but there's a negative in front, negative, so indeed we're going to get a real image.
It is going to be enlarged, and it goes from 4 to 6 centimeters, and it's going to be inverted.
And that's exactly what we had from that first image that we drew, so this works out perfectly.
The next one that we can quickly look at, and most of these problems are just exactly the same.
These are easy ones to do, but let's just run through a few of them quickly.
In the next one we have a 5 centimeter, 5.00 centimeters, and we are taught that the focal distance is 7.50 centimeters.
So immediately what we gain from this, this is going to be a positive lens, a convex or converging lens,
replacing it at a distance that is closer to the focal point, and we already know what we can expect from that.
We are not given y0, and all they want is si, and what is the magnification going to be?
Now si, we know from our equation there, that's f is 0, minus a 0, minus f.
So what is f? It's 7.5. 7.5 times 5, divided by 5 minus 7.5.
So immediately this is going to be negative, and we know that this is going to be a virtual image.
This is the second figure was that we had drawn, and I get an answer of si of a 15.0 centimeters.
So indeed that is going to be a virtual image, and if I just look at m, if I just look at the magnification,
it's minus si divided by s0, so it's going to be minus negative 15, that's 15, divided by 5,
and that gives me, that gives me a positive 3.00 centimeters.
So indeed it's going to be virtual, it's going to be upright, and it's going to be enlarged,
just as we said before.
The last one quickly in this quickfire session here.
Now we are told we have a focal distance of negative 18 centimeters, negative 18 centimeters,
and replacing this at 27.0 centimeters, and we have, it is upright, standing upright at 9.00 centimeters.
So we want to know what si and yi is going to be.
Now it's negative, so we have a negative lens, and this is a diverging lens.
We're always going to have a virtual image that is going to be up, it's going to be upright.
Let's have a quick look, and if indeed if that works out, si is going to be 18 times 27,
divided by 27 minus negative 18, and that gives me, that gives me a negative 10.8, negative 10.8 centimeters.
So indeed I have a virtual image, and if I plug in the values that I know for yi,
I get 3.6 centimeters, so it is going to be a virtual image, it's going to be upright,
and then this is a positive, and it is going to be diminished in size,
and that was indeed, remember, always for our compare lens,
and that way you place it to the left of the central axis here,
we are going to get that virtual image, and it is going to be diminished,
and it's always going to be upright.
So there are immediately three examples,
using the three figures that we drew in the previous video.
We know in our mind, if we have, if we memorize that,
what the picture should look like, and that answers should then equate
to the signs and the sizes that we get for these simple problems.
Right, let's do some more problems.
This one, we hear the following.
A converging thin lens with a focal length of 20 centimeters
is placed 30 centimeters in front of a screen.
When should the object be placed if the image is to appear on the screen?
So if we are told that the image, that the lens is put in front of the screen
at a distance of 37 centimeters,
what we are in fact saying is that the distance to the image is 37.0 centimeters.
We are told that the mirror is placed in front of the screen,
and on the screen we're going to get the image,
and it's converging, so this all makes sense.
The focal length was 20 centimeters, 20.0 centimeters.
So in our equation of 1 over S0 plus 1 over SI equals 1 over F,
we now just need to get S0 on its own,
whereas before we are so used to getting SI on its own,
but this is still going to be F, but SI,
and that's going to be SI minus F.
So if you do that,
my answer was,
oh,
right, SI, SI, SI, SI, SI,
that's correct.
So my answer for F0 was 43.5,
43.5 centimeters.
So just plug in those,
so you just see,
and indeed that is further away from the lens
than the focal distance it's going to be,
so we are going to get a real image on the other side,
and remember that this is obviously going to be inverted.
So this was just a trick question,
and as you have to understand when they say
it's in front of the screen,
and that will give you the distance SI.
The next one is a bit more complex,
I want to read it to you.
Okay, so we want to get the position,
so in front or behind,
and the focal length,
so the position and focal length
of a converging thin lens,
which will project an image
of an object magnified four times
upon a screen 10 meters from the lens.
So we are told M is four,
it's magnified four times,
but we are not told whether that is magnification,
upright or inverted,
so we don't know if that's upright or inverted,
and furthermore,
we're told our object
plus the distance equals 10.0 meters.
Listen again,
okay,
calculate the position and focal length
of a thin converging lens,
which will project the image of an object
magnified four times upon a screen
10 meters from that object.
So the screen and the object
are actually 10 meters apart from each other,
and the magnification,
and the magnification is that.
I think first things first,
let's just express,
it's going to be 10 minus is zero,
I'm just going to leave out
the significant digits in the units,
and the units.
furthermore,
I know that M equals
negative SI over
S0.
So in my instance here,
I'm going to get negative this,
which will make it S0 minus 10,
divided by S0,
in other words,
I'm going to get 1 minus
10 over S0.
It's going to equal M.
It's going to equal M.
Let me just get some more chalk.
Think about this though.
I am getting a real image.
And it is a converging,
it is a converging lengthies.
The only way that that is going to happen
is, remember,
if the focal distance is there,
is that this is going to be further away,
and I'm going to get this,
I'm going to get this
sort of thing going on.
Four times more,
so it's not drawn in scale.
The only way that that's ever going to happen
is if this is an inverted image.
And so that magnification
is going to turn out to be a negative.
So in this instance,
I have negative four
equals one minus
10 over S0,
or
10 over S0
equals
five,
and that means
S0 equals
2.00
equals
meters of centimeters.
I can't remember.
S0 is going to be
two centimeters,
and if I plug that in there,
so I have S0
is going to equal
two centimeters,
and that makes
S0 is 8.00
centimeters.
8.00
centimeters,
because they've got to equal
10.
And now it's a simple fact that,
now it's a simple fact that
1 over
2
plus
1 over
8
has got to equal
1 over F.
So if I let this
say that it's going to be
4 plus 1
is 5
equals 1 over F,
so if it's going to equal
8 over 5
centimeters,
and D positive,
so we're dealing with this exact,
we're dealing with this exact.
So you've got to know
these three figures
that we drew,
and it's got to make sense
for the story,
the story that you are told.
In the end though,
it remains easy.
