Let's drop us problem 1. We're setting up a Young's double slit experiment. We make the distance between these two splits very small, that is going to be 0.12 millimeters, or just over a tenth of a millimeter, very small different distance between those.
I'm working with light of just about a red and as much as a 664 nanometers. And the distance between those two slits and the microscope, or let's say the wall, let's call it that, where I am viewing, my interference pattern is 2.75 meters, and I want to know from the central part of the bright patch, what is the distance to the third, to the third bright fringe.
Okay, so how am I going to do that? Well, first of all, well, let's, let's, let's look at that. In as much as there's going to be this center line, remember, as these two come in, and then we're going to have a line drawn to the third.
So say, for instance, that's the first one, the second one, the third bright. Okay, how are we going to do that? Well, from the center line, obviously, this is going to be 90 degree angle.
We want this. We want this. We know this is L, 2.75 meters. So either we've got to know this distance, which is going to be very difficult to do. We don't know an equation just right after that, but we do know an equation for this angle.
And as much as this angle is going to be the arc sine, the arc sine of M lambda divided by D. Okay, this line to itself is 0 degrees as much as M equals 0, but we're looking for, well, I shouldn't have done that now, 1, 2, 3.
So there's M equals 3. Okay, so I need to know that angle to an M value of 3. Now, if I have that, I can say that the tangent of this angle, the tangent of this angle is opposite divided by adjacent, and this opposite, let's call it capital D, is what I want.
So I know that the tangent of this angle is going to be D divided by L. D is what I want. So I'm looking at L tangent of theta, and theta is the arc tangent of arc sine of M lambda divided by D.
Okay, so that is my equation for D. L is 2.75. M is 3. Lambda is 664 nanometers. D is 0.12 millimeters. So I can solve this equation, and I get about my answer to three significant digits was 45.7 millimeters.
It's going to be this distance from that bright band. I know I promised some more exercises, but let's just do one more concept that I haven't spoken about. If you look at this bright, this bright, and then dark, and then bright fringe, and then dark fringe, and then bright fringe, and then dark fringe, and then dark fringe, and then dark fringe, what you'll notice is as far as you go out, these become lower in intensity.
These become lower in intensity. One is far out, and they're never going to be as bright as this. And I think, remember, the intensity was, I must have it somewhere on the board here, Cx10e squared.
The intensity of that electromagnetic wave is going to fall off. The reason being, or we won't go into the reason here, but it does fall off because of the relationship between the width of those little slits and, in actual fact, the wavelength.
So they're going to fall off. Now, the same is going to happen if you have two large, really large speakers, and they produce coherent sound, and you're at the other wall, and you walk, okay, from the middle, from the middle of those two speakers, in line, parallel, in line, particularly in line with them, and you walk, you're going to hear loud sound, softer sound, loud sound, softer sound.
So every time the intensity is going to drop off a bit. Okay, so just remember this. We might look at this later.
Two more concepts. I have here, one, two, three, four situations. Here I have a very small value for D, a large value for D. Here I have very short, smaller wavelengths, and here I have much larger wavelengths.
Which combination of these two sides is going to give me the smallest separation in my bright and dark bands?
Well, remember that theta equals the arc sine of M lambda over D. So for one theta to be small, I've got to have a smaller numerator and a larger denominator. Smaller numerator, larger, smaller numerator, the wavelength, larger denominator.
So this combination is going to give me the smallest angle, so that separation to light and dark bands. Okay, and if I have a larger numerator, smaller denominator, remember this fraction still has to be way, all of this, way less than one, because arc sine is only defined up to a value of one.
Okay, but this way around, okay, but this way around, I have a very small D compared to, now this is not drawn in comparison. Remember we said before that there's got to be a relationship between us, so this schematic, please don't look at it as an accurate drawing.
So this combination, so this combination, where D is relatively smaller, that gets relatively larger, that's going to give you a larger theta angle, which means the separation between light and dark bands from M equals zero to M equals one, and Y equals two is going to be so much larger.
And there was one more concept, and there was one more concept that I wanted to talk about, yeah, if I have my double slit experiment, and I would shift both of these, the waves that come out of that, I would shift both of those by doing this backwards, or whatever, by half a wavelength.
That means I will not interfere with these bands, I will not interfere with them as well, as well, because they both change, if I would just change one of them by half a wavelength, then I'm going to interchange light and dark bands, now we're going to have dark light, dark light, inasmuch as there's been one half wavelength shift in the phase, in other words, instead of there being total destruction, there will be total destruction, instead of total destruction, there will be total construction.
Okay, because I think of the last two concepts, let's concentrate on some more problem solving.
Okay, I'm doing a, I'm doing a Young's double slit experiment, I'm told that at a point corresponding to the eighth right fringe, same equals eight, the difference in the length which these two rays travel is,
is 4.57 micrometers, 4.57, yes, times 10 to the power of negative 6 meters, that difference in other words is delta L, so if I made this one, this is the same as that one, I'm going to get this triangle with this two same angles, so I'm talking about this delta L.
Now I want to know what is the wavelength, what is the wavelength, what is the wavelength?
Well I'm told that I made a bright fringe, I'm told that I made a bright fringe, delta L has just got to be N times lambda, not N plus a half times lambda, but just N times lambda.
It's going to be, it's going to be, it's going to be this, it's going to be this, because we have total constructive interference Z, this means this must be some multiple of the wavelength, otherwise you're not going to get interference Z, it's quite clear.
I'm telling you, it's going to be this, it's going to be this, this means this is 8, check on our calculator, I get around 571 nanometers.
It's going to be this in Evradius and Jelly a same norm, so you're not going to be this, you're going to be this, it's going to be this, you're going to be this, it's going to be the same, it's going to be this, it's going to come back.
It's going to be a니다, it's going to be a block obsession, it's going back to a RYAN crystal, because this is a bridge that is going to be interesting.
There's also a journey now and some people are going back and some people are going to be doing this cohesiveleş clar receptors in a video action.
When you're ready, it's going to continue that раз we are going to help it out the while, and all of the people are going to be happening all together ya.
