Okay, let's look at this problem. I've got a bi-convex lens, and it tells me that the one side has a radius of 18 centimeters,
and the other one are two also convex of 20.0 centimeters.
So what we're going to have, one is a circle of radius 18 centimeters, and on the other hand, we're going to have one of 20 centimeters.
As we draw a line on this side, it's going to be here, so that one will be positive. The second one will have its center point to the left of this longitudinal axis, so that is going to be a negative.
What are we also told? We place an object at 24 centimeters, and it throws us a real image of 32.0.
Well, and that's real because we were told that this is positive 32 centimeters. We want to know what is the focal distance, and what is the refractive index.
What is the focal distance and refractive index? Well, if I have a 0 of SI, I think I will use the fact that 1 over S0 plus 1 over SI is going to be equal 1 over F.
And if you just replace all of these, I get a focal distance of 13.7 centimeters.
Just plug in your values, and you get that.
Now we've got to use 1 over our 13.7 centimeters is going to equal N minus 1 times, now I have 1 over R1 is 18,
minus 1 over R2 is negative 20. So that becomes a 1 over 18 plus 1 over 20.
Simple algebra, I'm not even going to do it, so I, my value was 1.69, just plug into your calculator and make sure you get the same.
The important part of this problem is the fact that you have to decide which is positive and which is negative.
So we chose this is R1, we chose this is R2, we complete the circle, and if the center point of this circle is to the right, that's positive,
of this circle is going to be to the left, so that will be R2 is going to be negative.
Again, that's the same convention, so that the answers give you an immediate, tell immediately what type of events it's going to be.
If it's positive, in other words, this is going to be a, this is going to be a, turn out to be converging, and if it's bi-convex, obviously it's going to be converging.
Okay, let's do this problem. I have a lens, and I'm told it has a refractive index of 1.5, and it has a focal length of positive,
so it's a converging, convex, positive lens, 10.0 centimeters.
I now put it in water, water has a refractive index of 1.33, and I now want to know what happens to the focal distance of it now.
Because remember, there's a surface, look very closely, there's a norm, it comes in from lower to higher, it bends towards the norm,
from higher to lower, it bends away from the norm, there is a refraction at that surface.
Okay, so the focal distance is going to be different, because I'll go from, if this lens is distant A,
when it says the refractive index of the lens is 1.5, it usually means in a vacuum, we're going to take A.
So what happens, 1 over F equals an actual fact in 1 divided by N2, minus 1, and R1,
this is right, 1 over R1, minus 1 over R2.
So what's going to happen for us in A? Let me write this equation twice.
First of all, the focal distance in A, and now the focal distance in water, it's going to be still N1 divided by N2,
because we've got to decide what N1 and N2 is.
1 over R1, minus 1 over R2, it's the same lens as it needs, that is not going to change.
The numerator N1 is the refractive index of the lens, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5.
The denominator is what it is in. In this instance, it is in, in this instance, it is in A.
A has a refractive index of 1, 1.00.
This refractive index of water is 1.33.
So what can I do? I can divide these two.
So I divide the right-hand side as well.
So 1 over the F in A divided by 1 over the F in water becomes the F in water divided by the F in A.
And that is going to equal, well, this and this will cancel.
So I'm going to have 1.5 over 1 minus 1, that's a 0.5, that's a 0.5.
And on this side, I'm going to have 1.5 divided by 1.33 minus 1.
And I can just take the average of 10 centimeters over to that side.
And I can put the focal distance in water, and my answer is 39.1, 39.1 centimeters.
Just check your answer if you get the, if you get the same answer.
Now this problem is going to be very interesting.
I'm going to learn a new fact in this problem.
I have a lens that has a refractive index of 1.50.
It is bi-convex.
And the two radii are 20 centimeters each.
If they are bi-convex, if they are bi-convex, what is going to happen?
Well, this one, R1, is going to have a center point there,
and R2 is going to have a center point there.
So certainly 1 is going to be positive, and R2 is going to have been negative 20.0 centimeters.
Now I want to know what the focal distance of this lens is going to be,
and what type of lens it's going to be.
You would say that it's bi-convex.
Of course, it's going to be a converging lens in air.
So 1 over the focal distance in air.
This is going to be N1, which is 1.50 divided by 1, because it is now in air.
Air has a refractive index of 1, minus 1 over 1 over 20 centimeters,
minus 1 over negative 20 centimeters.
And that gives me, you can plug all of those values in for air.
It was positive, of course, 20.0 centimeters.
Converging lens, converging lens, positive lens.
Okay, now I put it in, not in air, but in carbon disulfide.
And carbon disulfide has a, which now is going to be immersed on that,
so that becomes N2 of 1.56, the factor index of 1.56.
Now, 1 over F of carbon disulfide.
Oh, I didn't do chemistry, I hope that's correct.
Anyway, 1.5 divided by 1.56, minus 1.
And still bi-convex, I'm just going to have 2 over 20 centimeters.
That's 1 over 10.
Now, this numerator is smaller than this delamometer.
In other words, this is going to be less than 1.
And we're going to get a negative answer.
In D, we get negative 125 centimeters.
And just look at that.
I have a bi-convex lens,
a metrically bi-convex lens,
nice, normal, positive focal distance in air.
If I submerge it into a medium,
which has a refractive index higher than the lens itself,
now we're going to go from a higher to a lower refractive index
across an angle with the normal.
Okay, so things will reverse completely.
And now suddenly, I have a diverging lens that is bi-convex.
Isn't that fantastic?
So the principle we've learned here is,
if the medium has a refractive index higher than the lens itself,
a bi-convex lens is going to diverge,
and a concave lens is going to converge,
and a convex lens is going to diverge.
So that is quite interesting, isn't it?
