Here's a fantastic problem, you might even recognize this setup.
Situation 1 and 2, I have wavelengths coming in the same phase as they come in 420 nanometers wavelength in a vacuum.
In the setup 1 I have at 45 degree angles 1, 2, 3, 4 meters, setup 2 only 1, 2 meters.
Now, the distance between where these points strike on the mirrors, from there to there, from there to there, they are all length L,
and from there to there is length L, from there to there is length L, from there to there is length L, from there to there also is length L.
I want to know what the minimum length of L must be to have these two waves here exactly out of phase.
What does out of phase mean? Well, I want the n value of 1 minus the n value of the other one,
so this change in L I need to be a half a wavelength, because a half a wavelength will be to the out of phase, the difference between the two,
and, because this is to tell me how many wavelengths fit into L.
So, if I have the difference between how many fit into here per L, to be a half, what comes out the other side will be completely out of phase.
Now, we also know the equation for end, and A is just going to be L divided by this lambda A.
So, let's look at what happens in situation 1. How many lengths does it travel?
Now, look at the set up. These mirrors here are in a line. So, up till this point they are the same, up till this point there and there, they are the same.
This one is going to change as soon as it strikes this mirror. So, we better start counting from this point.
Up until there, up until there, they are exactly the same. So, we need to have, and up until what point are we going to count?
Up until this point, because there is no further mirrors, so we are going to count until there. So, we are going to have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Ls.
So, we are just going to travel through that length 5 L and its wavelength is going to be lambda.
And in 2, it is just going to travel from there to there, because we just measured from this point to that point.
So, we are just measuring from there to there, which is just 1 L.
So, obviously, N1 with a larger numerator is larger than N2, so we need N1 minus N2 to be a half.
And that has got to equal 5 L over lambda minus 1 L over lambda. So, I have that a half equals 4 L over lambda.
And I have that L equals lambda divided by 8. And that gives me an L of lambda over 8, lambda is 120 nanometers divided by 8.
So, I think my answer was 52.5 nanometers. Just check that nanometers times 10 to the power negative 9. 52.5 would have to be the next one up.
Well, what is the next one up as far as L is concerned to still give me destructive?
Well, a half is totally, so I need to add a whole 1 to that. So, that will make it 3 over 2, which will put a 3 there, which makes this 3 times larger.
And then I have 158. If I have 3 significant digits, that brings me to 157.5, which is 158 nanometers.
So, these problems are, I think you can see now, become quite easy. But this is a fantastic setup if you realize how many L's to count.
Up until this point, here they come totally in phase, totally at the same time as this point, things start to change.
Things start to change. So, from there, it's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, till we get to the point where they go out.
Now, nothing changes because there's no difference between there and there. There's no mirror there.
There's no mirror there. This thing, this thing doesn't matter. It's only the difference, total difference in the length internally.
Okay, internally. But this one has to be counted there because at that point where these two are in line, at this point things start changing.
So, you have to count from there and I'm going to count from there till there. So, it's 1 L for this one and just, and 5 L for situation number 1.
Now, what to do about phase difference if the length through which two identical waves in phase, each in phase, each of the same amplitude, same wavelength, travel through to different materials of different effective indexes and of different lengths.
So, they're not traveling through the same length. So, imagine the effective index 1 equals 1.40 and the length of that one is 4.00 micrometers.
And in 2 equals 1.60 and the length through which that travels, length 2, length 1, is 3.50 micrometers.
Now, we want to know what multiple of the wavelength will they be out of phase. What multiple of the wavelength, multiple of the wavelength, wavelength, will they be out of phase?
Okay, let's have a look. We know that N A equals, well, now we're going to say that length A divided by lambda A. So, for N 1, we're going to have 4 times 10 to the power negative 6.
It's going to be meters. It's going to be meters divided by the wavelength. I didn't tell you. The wavelength is 600.
Wavelength equals 600 times 10 to the power negative 9 meters, nanometers, divided by 600 times 10 to the power negative 9, also meters, which cancel.
And that gives me 20 over 3, which you'll see now, I'll just write as 40 over 6. And N 2 is going to give me 3.5 divided by 600. And that gives me 35 over 6. 35 over 6.
Now, N 1 is larger than N 2. So, N 1 minus N 2. This is the number of wavelengths per length L. How many wavelengths fits into, not per L, but how many wavelengths fits into that L? How many wavelengths fits into this second L?
Well, that's going to be 40 over 6 minus 3 over 35 over 6. That equals 5 over 6. Wavelengths. Okay. It's not a unit. But 5, 6 of a wavelength. I was to say, what multiple of a wavelength will they be out of phase when they come out?
Come out. There'll be 5, 6 of a wavelength out of phase. 0.833. Now, the question asks, is that totally destructive, totally constructive or intermediate?
Well, it's intermediate. Is it closer to destructive or constructive? Well, 5 over 6 is closer to 1 wavelength. 0.83 is closer to 1 than it is to a half. Remember, a half.
So, 3 over 6 is closer to 6 over 6 than 3 over 6. So, this will be closer to being totally constructive.
