Before we get into problems with interference, just as a recap where we stand as far as equations are concerned, so we understand them.
The fundamental one is the reflective index, so it's the speed of light divided in a vacuum, C, which is the maximum,
divided by the speed of an electromagnetic wave through whatever medium that is.
Now, this will be, except for a vacuum, which these two will be equal, so I give a reflective index of 1,
and through a it's almost 1, because this is very slightly less than C.
But for mediums with a higher refractive index, for this to be higher, remember we said, like, diamond is 2.42,
obviously the denominator needs to get smaller as our numerate is fixed.
And that's why we always get n values larger than 1.
Remember that, and that's why we write V comes in the denominator.
Now, through the Wagen's Principle, the second equation, which just says the, the, if we have two mediums,
that the wavelength through medium 1 divided by wavelength of medium 2 would be equal to the velocity of the electromagnetic wave through the first medium divided by the speed in the second medium.
So that, we get it from Wagen's Principle, and we drew lovely, we drew that, um,
rates that were incident upon a medium, a high refractive index, and we showed the refraction there, and we derived, oh, it was, we could well understand where we get this from.
From that we derived Snell's Law, which says the refractive index times that angle of the incident day with the norm equals the 2,
so sine of theta 2.
And lastly, very importantly, we just looked at wavelength, and we said that the wavelength through a medium equals the wavelength through the wavelength of that same electromagnetic wave, that same array in a vacuum, and then we said V divided by C.
So what are we doing here? We're saying the fraction of the speed of light.
So the speed in that medium divided by the speed of light, that is nothing but, remember, so that's why I said this is important.
V comes in the denominator, here's in the numerator, inasmuch as we're just talking the fraction of the speed of light times, times the wavelength of that electromagnetic wave in a vacuum.
Okay, and this was also then obviously going to be in the number N, and this then again is the wavelength of that wave that you're dealing with, it's wavelength in a vacuum.
So these are the equations that we're going to need, now we understand, especially this part, it is the fraction of the speed of light, that fraction of the wavelength, the wavelength.
That's why this is always going to be less than 1, so we're always making this wavelength smaller, so the velocity through a medium of higher refractive index than a vacuum, which is this 1, is going to give you the wavelength there.
And lastly we show that the frequency of an electromagnetic wave in that medium is just going to be the exact same frequency as that electromagnetic wave had before it entered that second medium at that interface.
There's two more equations that we just need to look at before we start on problems in this section, and that is when we want to discuss the, remember, the difference in phase between two, between two mediums, if light goes through two mediums.
And the first one is, and the first one is what we do require is N, that is the number of wavelengths that fit into a certain length L, remember that it's just going to be L divided by that specific wavelength, so, and that specific length A.
So, we're going to have this, we're going to have this, so we have N1 and N2, if we look at, if we want to look at the phase angle, remember we said then that N2 equal, N2 minus N1, N2 minus N1 is going to equal that length divided by the wavelength, times N2 minus N1, and this is dependent on the fact that N2 is larger than N1.
N2 is larger than N2, remember these will just, these will just turn around, and we'll certainly encounter one or two problems that will help us better understand these two concepts.
Okay, so here we go with our first problem, we want to know the difference in speed of an electromagnetic wave in diamond and in sapphire, if diamond has an index of refraction of 2.42,
and the sapphire, and the index of refraction, I think of 1.77.
Okay, the fundamental, we just need to know what the difference in speed is, what, if we have a refractive index, how do we know what the velocity is, I think immediately is this fundamental equation of ours that jumps to mind, which will give us V equals C divided by N.
So V for our diamond is going to be C divided by 2.42 minus V2, and then V1, V1 is going to be C divided by 1.77.
And if 2 is the diamond, and 1 is the sapphire, so which one is bigger, let's just see which one is bigger, obviously this denominator is smaller, so V1 is bigger, so V1 minus V2, we're just going to get this minus that, and my answer works out to 4.55 times 10 to the power negative 7 meters per second is going to be the speed difference of light.
difference of light in a diamond, in a diamond, and in a sapphire, so which one will be, speed obviously in the sapphire is going to be higher, because its index of refraction is smaller, and that smaller is in the denominator.
Let's just look at the next problem, let's just look at the next problem, I think we are told that a wavelength of an air or a vacuum is 589, 589 times 10 to the power negative 9, so nanometers is a wavelength.
We are also told that this is an air or a vacuum, so we can write air there or vacuum there or just leave it as is.
We are also told that it then goes through glass, glass with a refractive index of 1.152, so that's just the average ground glass.
And we want to know what is the frequency, what is the frequency in air or the vacuum then of this electromagnetic wave of hours.
Then we want to know the wavelength in glass, and lastly we want to know velocity in glass.
So these are all outstanding.
If this is a vacuum and we know that velocity equals frequency count lambda, we are just going to get the fact that frequency equals velocity divided by lambda.
So for air we are going to get velocity in air, which is C, because we are taking air as a vacuum, divided by lambda in air there, by that lambda,
and C divided by lambda, where is my answer, I get a frequency of 5.09 times 10 to the power negative 14 hertz.
See in your calculator if you get the same answer.
Now we need to know in that glass now what is its wavelength going to be.
Remember that this is going to be the wavelength and then the fraction of the velocity, but we don't know the velocity in glass so we have to use this equation divided by n.
So that's going to be 589 nanometers divided by 1.52, and for that I get about 388 nanometers.
And look how that has changed from air to glass.
The wavelength there was 589, it becomes a lot smaller, which means our velocity is going to go down.
And because velocity, we can use different formulas now, different equations.
Remember the frequency is not going to change.
The frequency is not going to change.
So what we can use here is this frequency doesn't change in the lambda in the glass.
So that is just going to be this frequency times this, and I get 1.97.
1.97 times 10 to the power of 8 meters per second, and that is indeed a lot slower than C.
A lot slower than C, which is about 3 times 10 to the power of 8.
So indeed it's a lot slower and as much as the wavelength is a lot shorter.
Here we have a fantastic problem.
Now you have to use a bit of imagination.
I have a mirror here, and here in situation, let's make this 1.
In situation 1, I have an incident light beam, and it's an air of a wavelength of 620 nanometers.
It moves in, this is a plane mirror, and it moves out.
So the question will state that you can ignore these tiny little angles that it makes now,
for number 2, we have an incident light wave on the plane mirror, a second plane mirror,
a length L from this large plane mirror, back to there, back out.
And we want to know if these two incident rays are initially in phase, same amplitude, in phase, same wavelength.
What is the minimum length, what's the minimum distance between these two small mirrors that will make these reflected rays that come out in the end totally destructive?
So totally out of phase, that they would, to meet at a certain point that they are totally destructive.
What is the minimum length of L?
Now, you might think to yourself, well, in 2 minus N1, that is the number of waves that fit into L.
It's going to be that length divided by lambda, and we're going to have N2 minus N1.
Now, where's the different Ns? It's not going through different mediums. It's not going through different mediums at all.
So how can we have this minus this? Is this going to be zero?
So can there ever be a situation when these things are out of phase?
Yes, of course they can. You should not stay yourself blind at this.
Remember that NA, NA, as we had there, that is just the number of wavelengths that fit into a certain length L.
So let's do that. Let's call this 1. So let's do that for N1.
N1 is going to be, well, we're going to take this same, we're going to take this length.
Let's take this length. Let's decide because we're just interested in what's going to happen there and what's going to happen there on the reflected light.
So for N1, what is the length going to be that this light entails?
L and another L. That's going to be 2L divided by its wavelength, 620 nanometers.
This is called it lambda. What is going to be N2?
Well, N2 is going to travel 1L, 2L, 3L, 4Ls to get there.
We're going to travel 4Ls and we're going to have another lambda.
We're going to have another lambda there.
Now, we're asking total destruction, totally out of phase.
For that to be, we need a difference in N2 minus N1.
We need that difference to be, we need that difference to be a half a wavelength, wavelength.
Remember this wavelength, it's like radians. It's not really a unit, but we'll use that unit.
So we need that to be a half.
In other words, we're going to need 4L over lambda minus 2L over lambda to equal a half.
I'll just carry on if we just answer the goal.
We're left off where we just want the difference between these two to be a half.
Because half a wavelength will mean total destruction or totally out of phase.
So I'm going to have 2L over lambda equals a half.
Or L, L is going to be lambda divided by 4.
And I get for that lambda divided by 4 is 155 nanometers, 155 nanometers.
Now they want to know how far along should the mirror be until I get total destruction or total out of phase again.
So that will just be, add to this half, another full wavelength.
2 over 2 and that's going to be 3 over 2.
In other words, L now is going to be, L now is going to be 3 times lambda divided by 4.
And that is going to give you, that is going to give you, I don't know if I did it else.
465, 465 nanometers.
So the question I think really is how far I should have moved away from its initial position.
So it's going to be this minus that.
So look at this.
We're not moving through any difference in 2 and in 1.
But this equation here, this equation, did I write it somewhere?
Yeah, this equation here, you should remember as well as this one.
To give you this scenario.
We're just interested in how many wavelengths passed in each unit length L.
And there's going to be so many, again so many, again so many, again so many.
And that is going to bring you a difference in phase of this ray as it goes out there,
versus this ray as it reaches this point.
