Let's do another problem, so we cement our understanding of these two equations
and the concept of a wavelength as a unit, as a radiance as a unit, but which is not really a unit.
Now, we are going to have an incident, two incident light rays.
They are in phase, same amplitude, and they have a wavelength of 400 nanometers.
They move through these mediums and they come out the other side and they have a phase difference of 5.65.
Now, what is that phase difference of? Now, we say phase difference of 5.65 radiance.
What is the phase difference? Well, it's N2 minus N1.
Just look here, though, that N1 is larger than N2, so we're actually looking at what this problem is telling us
is that N1 minus N2 equals, I think it was 5.65, yeah, 5.65 radiance.
Now, we have to convert this to wavelength because this equation tells us about wavelength,
that it's meters divided by meters, so there's nothing left there, and we have something without units,
the refractive index minus refractive index, so we have no units here.
But this equation is set up because of these as a wavelength, which makes wavelength a unit.
So what do we have to do here? We have to remember that one wavelength is 2 pi radiance, 2 pi radiance.
If I multiply these, now I've converted radiance into wavelengths as one wavelength.
It doesn't matter how many meters or nanometers that wavelength is, that wavelength is one unit of wavelengths.
So I'm going to get 5.65 divided by 2 pi, which is about 0.8992 wavelengths.
Okay, so I've converted this difference into units of wavelengths from a radius.
Okay, so we now have, we want the minimum of L to have this, this, this difference.
So our N1 minus N2, okay, and I want this minimum of this.
So I'm going to multiply this by lambda, and I'm going to divide this by N1 minus N2, and that is going to give me L.
So I want this to be 0.8992 wavelengths, times my wavelength was initially 400 nanometers, 400 nanometers, divided by N2 minus N1.
So this is a fraction of a wavelength.
So in actual fact, it has no, it has no units.
And N1 minus N2, N1 minus N2 is 0.1, that is also without units.
So my units left for L, this is going to equal this nanometers.
And my distance there that I get is 5.6, or 3, I think 360 nanometers.
360 nanometers is the minimum, is going to be the minimum length of L, that will give me a phase difference between these two that were initially in phase of 5.65 irradiance.
Now in this problem, I have this block of plastic, and it's made up of this, units of the same length, the same length, the same length, the same length.
Well, this one is two times the length, that one, that one, and they each have a different refractive index.
N1 through N7, and these waves coming in are in phase, same amplitude, same wavelength, in air, and they come out there on the other side.
Which one will win? Which one will win?
And which one will come out the other side fastest?
What does that refer to? Which one will win? Which one will be fastest?
Well, that refers to time, so which one will have the smallest time?
So I have to, I have to look at what the time will be for, from there to there for this light shape, from there to there for that light shape.
What do I know about time? Well, this is classical mechanics.
Velocity equals distance divided by time. In other words, time equals distance divided by velocity.
Now for T1, T1 is going to be a distance of 4L, 4L divided by whatever the velocity is going to be there, and T2 is just going to be,
time 2 also takes 4L, 2, 3, 4L divided by whatever the velocity there is going to be.
So we need to look at these individual sections because the velocity is going to be different depending on the refractive index.
The higher the refractive index, the lower the velocity or the speed is going to be.
And if I know, if I know the refractive index, do I know the equation that will help me if I have the refractive index to see what the speed of an electromagnetic wave will be through there?
Of course I have, and that's the fundamental equation that we always start with, N equals, C divided by, V divided by C.
Look at that, look at that, look at that.
For our refractive index, which we have C over V, sorry, C over V, that's correct.
This is always going to be smaller, so that makes N larger. I have to remind myself of that every time as well, not to make a mistake.
In other words, V is going to equal C divided by N. So this one, T1 is going to be made up of this, all these velocities.
So I'm going to look at, T1 is going to be made up, let's make this easier on ourselves.
This is called this A and this is called this B. So let's call this A and let's call this one B.
So TA, TA is going to be made up of time one plus time two plus time three plus time four.
Okay, so time through A is going to be made up of time one.
And what is time one? Remember time equals distance divided by V and I know what V is.
So that is going to be distance, it's just L divided by V as C over N.
So that gives me a C there and an N there, which will be N1.
It's going to give me N2L over C plus N3L over C plus N4L over C.
Okay, where do I get this N over C? Well, I've just divided distance by velocity.
Velocity is C over N, so it's C and I bring the N up into the, this is basic algebra, we won't go there.
So TB is going to equal, now what's going to happen here, my distance is 2L, 2L, C and 5 plus we're going to have N6L over C plus N7L over C.
So what do we have here? We have L over C and this N1 plus N2 plus N3 plus N4.
And here we're going to have L over C and we're just going to have 2 times N5, 2N5 plus N6 plus N7.
So if you were given values for L or you were given, even if you weren't given any, you were just given all these Ns,
you can say that it is a certain fraction of L over C. And if you want to notice what the difference is going to be in terms of L over C,
it will just be the longest, the one that takes longest divided by the one that takes the shortest amount of time.
And that will give you X amount of L over C.
Okay, so this is actually quite a simple problem and we don't have to go to N minus N, N2 minus N1 equals L over lambda times N2 minus N1.
We don't have to do all of this. This is a pure and simple velocity with respect to distance and time,
as in velocity equals distance over time.
And you just needed an equation for velocity and we learned it's a very easy equation to express velocity in terms of refractive index.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for joining us.
Thank you.
Absolutely.
Thank you.
Thank you.
How are you doing?
