There's a good problem. I have a mirror in this position and I have a ruler straight down parallel to the mirror.
One meter away, I have an object A and it shines on the mirror. If it's perpendicular, obviously, one meter away I'm going to find my image, which is a virtual image.
Now, at that point of contact, I rotate this by 8 degrees. Now, I will have the ray comes in and now obviously will reflect down here.
How far down, how far down from A are we going to get this reflected ray? Well, first of all, what you have to do is draw a normal to this plane mirror.
I'm going to draw a normal to the plane mirror there. That will be the normal to the plane mirror.
Now, think about it. If it was there and it went 8 degrees, it was going to go from there to there will also be 8 degrees.
I don't think anyone will 0.8 degrees. No one will argue with that.
And remember, the normal vector perpendicular will always bisect the angle between the incident and the reflective rays.
Okay, now what do we know? We have an angle of 16 degrees altogether. We have a side. The side to the angle is the adjacent side. What we want is the opposite.
And the tangent of an angle equals opposite divided by adjacent. We are looking for opposite.
So, opposite equals A times the tangent, adjacent times the tangent of the angle.
So, opposite, which is what we want, is going to be adjacent, which is 1.0 meters times the tangent now of 16 degrees.
And I did it before, and it goes to this opposite side. It's not 0, I'm not writing 0, it's just the opposite side, which you put PP, PP, PP, PP, opposite, adjacent.
The opposite side is going to be about 29 centimeters. So, this reflected array will now have an image here of A down from there to there of 29 or 0.29 centimeters or 29 centimeters.
Good. Next problem, we have a concave mirror, and we told that it has a radius. So, it has a radius of 4 meters, but because it's concave, that means from C to the mirror,
that will give us an R of negative 4.0 meters by our convention that we decided on.
So, what will its focal length be? Remember, focal length equals negative 1.5 times R. So, that's going to give us 2.0 meters.
And, indeed, if we have a focal point there, if we have a focal point there, C there, it's going to be half of that, it's 4.
Now, we are told we put an object here standing 5 centimeters tall.
And, the way that we usually denote it, or way that you can denote it, is to say the Y length of our object that equals 5 centimeters, 0.050 meters.
We want to know how far away from the mirror, how far away from the mirror is the image, and what is its orientation and length.
So, what are we asking for? Now, I'm putting it, oh, there's one thing I forgot to tell you, it's not, sorry, it's not at C.
It's at 3 meters, at 3 meters. There's our object there, at 3 meters.
So, remember now, this image is not closer than the focal, so we know it's going to be a real image, it's going to be inverted.
Real and inverted, in other words, it's going to be on this side, it remains real, and it's going to be inverted.
Because, it's further away from the focal point.
Now, let's remember our equations.
We can have 1 over the distance to the object, plus 1 over the distance to the image.
It's going to equal negative 2 over R, and that's going to equal 1 over F.
Okay, which one shall we use?
Because, we actually have two equations here.
Let's use this first one.
So, we're going to have, we need this distance between the object and the mirror.
Between the object and the mirror.
So, we're going to have 1 over SI, that is going to be negative 2 over R, minus 1 over S0.
We've got a common denominator on this side, so this is going to be R, S0.
And on this side, we're going to have, on this side, we're going to have negative 2, negative 2, S0.
And on this side, we're going to have negative R.
Negative R.
Okay, now I've got a multiple, now I can just, I need to swap these around, so I can swap those around.
So, I'm going to be left with, let's see, SI equals R is to the object, and we're going to have a negative 2, S0, minus R.
So, the distance to the image, is going to be R, which is negative 4, times S of the object.
Remember, S of the object, I said it's 3.0 meters, it's in front, so it's positive.
So, it's going to be negative 4, that's going to be negative 12 meters squared, divided by,
that is, that is a negative 6, plus 4 is negative 2 meters.
That will go, that will go, that will go, that will go, so I'm just going to be left with equals 6.0 meters.
So, it's going to be 6 meters away, 4, 5, 6, it's going to be somewhere here,
and we know, because this is further away, that it is going to be inverted, that it is going to be inverted.
Okay, now we also want to know what is its length going to be.
Well, remember we said that magnification equals negative.
What was it again, negative, yeah, the distance to the image, divided by the distance to the object,
and that equals the length of the image, divided by the length of the object.
I'm interested in the length of the image, so that's going to be negative Si, Y0,
divided by S0, YI, to the image is going to be negative Si,
my Si, my Si was 6 meters, so that's negative 6 meters, times Y0, for me was an upright 0.05,
upright 0.05 meters, divided by S0 was 3 meters, 3.0 meters, and that is going to give me a YI,
let's see, it's about 0.1, I think 0.1 meters, just check on that.
So, if that was 0.05, if that was 0.05, it's now 0.1, so it's going to be twice that length,
and it's going to be a distance 3 meters away.
So, see what is happening here.
Remember, I said we can draw certain arrays, so from the bottom, it's on the central line,
so it was just going to go straight back, so we know the foot there was going to equal at the foot there.
I can draw a line parallel to that, it is going to reflect back through where?
Through the focal length.
It's going to reflect back through the focal length.
Okay, so those are at least two lines that I've drawn to be able to establish where my image is going to be.
So, indeed, there was magnification, but it was inverted, and it is real, it's on this side.
In other words, if I put a camera image sensor here, I am going to get the image.
It's not a virtual, it's not a virtual image.
Okay, if I, oh, there's all sorts of other lines, there's other lines that one can draw.
Maybe you can figure that out for yourself.
I remember the four lines that I said that one could do, that one could do for determining where your object is going to be.
Certainly, this is the algebraic way of solving this problem.
Six meters, travel in the mirror, and it stands at, oh, there's a negative here.
It's negative, negative times positive is negative, and so it's going to be inverted.
Why?
So I chose that as positive.
It's going to be negative 0.1 meters.
Okay, let's do that.
Let's look at some of the other lines we can draw.
So I can go from C up, and remember C up, that is just a radius, so that's going to come straight back down.
So now I have two lines crossing, so I can immediately see where that is going to be, and now I know where to draw my line up.
Whereas before I just had this line, that doesn't tell me if it's up there, or this line comes back if it's up there, so it doesn't give me this distance.
So here I've got, here I do have two lines.
I can also draw from the object through the focal point, and remember what that will do for me is straight back, straight back, and the line crosses at that point as well.
Now you have different, you have at least that measurement, you have that measurement, you can work out through trigonometry a few angles, and you can work out a few distances,
but at least now you will have this distance as well. You have two lines through there, here's a third line exactly through that point.
