Good.
Here's a very interesting problem.
I had this glass sphere and it had a radius of 5 centimetres and I cut a piece of it off
2 centimetres away from, so it's obviously not to scale, 2 centimetres away from the
centre.
So that leaves me this 3 centimetres there.
So I've cut it off and I put this as a paperweight on a desk.
And looking straight up from 8 centimetres away from the table, how far away do I view
the table?
So from wherever the image is, wherever the image forms, so from the top to the image,
how far away do I see the, if I look through this glass now, this dome of glass, how far
down do I perceive that table to be away from me?
Now as it stands in reality, it is 8 centimetres away from me.
Now we are not accustomed to viewing things like this, so let's draw in a fashion that
we are accustomed to.
In other words, this is our object.
Let's draw a central line, central axis.
Here's our object.
And it faces a concave surface, it faces a concave surface.
And we now know, let's do the following things.
And we tell the reflective index of this glass equals 1.6, and the air, which will make it,
which will make it N1, is 1.6 because the surface of this table is inside of the, it's not a gap of air before we get there.
So N2 is going to be 1.00.
Was it 1.6 in the problem?
I can't remember, I think it was 1.6.
Okay, now, we know the distance of S0, don't we?
Well, in reality, the object is 3 centimetres away, 3.00 centimetres.
Now, what is R?
Is that a positive or a negative?
Now, that object faces, although the surface is convex looking from the outside, the object
faces a concave surface, so this R becomes negative 5.
So let's see what we have.
N1 is 1.6 divided by S0 is 3.00 plus.
N2 is 1.00 divided by S0, you know what S0 is, and that's going to equal 1.00 minus 1.60 divided by R is negative 5, negative 5.00.
Okay, let me see if I've got that right, 1.6 over 3, 1 over SI, 1 minus 1.6 over minus 5, that gives me an SI, just check on your side as well, of negative 2.4 centimetres.
Negative 2.4 centimetres.
Okay, that's not the answer though.
Negative means it's going to be on the same side of the object, so this is a virtual image.
And this 3, this 3 centimetres is from the surface, the interface, to the object, so negative 2 means it's going to be on the same side.
So from there, whatever image is going to be about, the image is going to be about there, and this is 2, 2.4 centimetres.
The negative is just telling me that this is a virtual image, it's on the same side, so I'm not drawing it there, I'm drawing it on the same side.
So that whole bit is 8 and this is 3, this means this from the surface up is 5, plus another 2.4, so the real distance that I see the table at is 5 plus 2.4, that is 7.4 centimetres away from my viewpoint, my viewpoint up there.
Now here's a nice problem, I have a sphere, and it has a radius R. It has a radius R.
And I'm told that from a laser beam parallel, these are parallel light rays coming in, and it concentrates, it's reflective, reflective rays concentrated right on the edge of the opposite side.
And I want to know, and I want to know, under this circumstance, what is the reflective index? It's all I've told, nothing else.
Now what would be the object here? Well the object is the source here of this laser beam, and it must be in an N1 of 1.00, sorry, this A.
This must then be N2 equals N, let's call it still N2, so this is the one we're looking for.
Now, the object, obviously, and this image is on the opposite side of this contact interface between these two.
So that S in the image has got to be positive, because it's on the opposite side, there's our object, there's our image.
And how far is it from this contact surface? Well, anywhere from this contact surface, or from this contact surface, it's a distance 2R.
It's a distance 2 times this radius, this radius away. Now, is it positive or negative? Well, this object faces a convex surface.
So that must be positive. So let's see what we can get to. N1 is 1.00 over S0. Now, what do we put for S0?
And that is another key part of this problem. If these light rays come in parallel, you can take for granted that that source is infinitely far away.
Infinity. And 1 over infinity. And 1 over infinity is just zero. That is just zero. Plus N2 is what we want to know.
And 2 over infinity is just zero. That's going to equal N2, which we don't know, minus N1, divided by, divided by, divided by R.
And this is a positive R, because our source is facing a convex surface.
Let's multiply both sides. Let's multiply both sides by 2, so I'm going to get, multiplied by 2, 2 over 2 is nothing, so that's N2, divided by R, equals 2 times N2, minus 2, divided by R.
So I've just, I've just, I've just multiplied both sides by 2. Now, R equals R, I can get rid of the denominator, in other words, N2 equals 2 times N2, minus 2.
So take this to the other side, that's going to be N2 equals 2, 2.00.
So, imagine with this little information, I can tell you what the refractive index is of this material.
The second part of the question, I think, even asks, can I ever get a refractive index here to make these lines converge at C?
If they converge here at C, that means my image has just got to be one R, a single R.
So I'm going to get N2 over, N2 over Si, this is R. Remember, I'm still going to have one over infinity on this side.
And that's going to equal N2 minus 1 over R. And that's impossible, because I can't have N2 equals N2 minus 1.
That just doesn't work. Okay, so there's no value of N2.
There's no value for the refractive index of this material that will make these parallel light rays concentrate on the center of this sphere.
Good. Let's do this. Just two quick problems. There's N1, N2, S0, R, Si.
Is it real or virtual? Is it not the same on the opposite side?
And you're just given these with these blank areas, you just want to fill in the rest.
Let's do the first one. So I'm going to have 1 over S0, which is 10, plus N2 is going to be 1.5,
divided by Si. I'm not giving Si. And that is equal to, and that is equal to 1.5 minus 1 over R.
I'm giving R as a positive 30. And if you solve this, I've done it before, I get a negative 18.
Negative 18. What does that negative 18 mean? It's on the same side as my object, per our definition, making this virtual, and it means they're on the same side, the object and the image.
So let's look at this one. It's terrible noise. 1 over, we'll have 1 over S0. We're going to have a zero plus. We'll have 1.5 over Si.
Si, we are told a 600. And that's going to equal 1.5 minus 1, that's 0.5, divided by R. And I was given there to be plus 30.
So if that's positive, I know my object is facing a convex surface. And if I solve for S0, let me just see if I've got the right one, I get 70.6. I get 70.6.
Okay. And I've seen this Si being positive. That immediately told me, I didn't even have to get this, that immediately told me that this was the real image and it had to be on the opposite side.
And it had to be on the opposite side purely based on our initial definition of what is positive and what is negative.
So all these problems, if you stick to your convention, are quite easy.
