Good, the reason why I'm going to do this example is we've just done an example where we derived through differentiation an equation for the speed of the image if we have constant speed of the object.
And I do not want to get confused between when to use the sign of R and when not to use it, depending on whether it's a convex or concave mode.
So in that instance, it did not matter. In essence, the convention that we started this lecture series of, where for a concave mode we used R as a negative sign and convex R as a positive sign, that just helps you in your calculation for the answer as to whether the image is inverted or upright and whether it is real or virtual, that answer just jumps out at you.
And the reason why that happens is because we chose that convention. You don't need that convention. You can just use it without the sign.
But then you have to think about what is actually happening. You've got to either construct it on paper so you can see what's happening or you've got to think it out in your mind to give you those signs.
Okay. Think about it. When we had a concave mirror, that would be C. C, remember that's C. Some textbooks will use a low-case C there just to denote that we're halfway along this spherical surface, this arc of a circle.
And then C is the center point where the radius of the radius is completed. If we could complete this arc into a full circle. And then this distance is R, but we chose a negative number, which actually means that back there, but it's not.
Obviously R is here because C is here. But we use this convention so that if we then do these, the answers to these end questions just jump out at us. It's just a convention. You don't have to use it.
But let's use it because it does make life so much simpler. So here we have the distance between the object and the mirror, the type of mirror. We're given the focal point but without the signs. And we have to fill this in.
Now you need to do that. You don't have to have in your textbook might not use. I think as the main one that I use does not use this. Use this convention, but it does help.
And you just have to figure these things out for yourself when they want to know what R is, what SI is, what M is, what I is, is it inverse or upright, is it real or is it virtual. They want to know this.
Okay, now depending on if you use that convention or not, your R values are going to differ from the answer in the textbook. So if you don't use the convention, you might have different signs for it.
If you do use the convention though, those jump out at you. You don't have to think about it. But then your answer might be marked incorrectly because your sign is going to be different.
So depending on what class you take, please make sure of these things. In this exercise series, I'm going to use that convention so that I, so that it makes sense.
It's an easier for us to make sense what's happening here. So I'm told that the focal point is at 12 centimeters.
Now immediately if the focal point is at 12 centimeters, that means at least the absolute value of R has got to be 24 centimeters because the focal distance is halfway between C and the mirror.
So immediately I see I am between the focal point. So it's a concave mirror. That is C and that is F. So that's 12 centimeters.
Immediately that makes this 24 centimeters and I'm at 18 centimeters. So I'm between C and the focal point.
And now I know, I know, I know, I know, I know what's going to happen on this side. I know I'm going to have, I know I'm going to have an enlarged, upright, virtual, I know that.
It's not what I'm going to have, sorry. If I, if I suddenly just think about it that what I just said was wrong, please, please ignore.
Okay, let's just go for it though. So I am between, I am between the focal point, between the focal point and C. Focal point in C, I'm somewhere, I'm somewhere there, concave mirror.
So what is, what is F going to be? What is, what is the sign, what is the sign of F?
Well, if it's a concave mirror, the focal point is in front. The focal point, for I said, is going to be in front. So that is going to be a positive.
And we're going to use F equals negative 1 half R. In other words, R equals negative 2 times F.
So for us, this is going to be negative 2 times this side. Our R is going to be negative, negative 0.24 meters. Negative.
Now, as I said, be, be careful of that. It might be marked wrong because in some textbooks we'll give this answer as positive because they're not using the convention that, that we are using.
So certainly, that is one equation that we're interested in. That is one equation that we're interested in. The other one we're interested in is,
SI is going to be negative R is 0 divided by 2 times S0 plus R. And lastly, we're interested in N equals negative SI divided by S0.
Remember, we're not dealing with that here, but that's YI divided by Y0. Okay. So this is what we're interested in.
And indeed, we got a negative answer here because it is a concave mirror and by our convention that is negative.
Can we work out SI? Yes, because now we can use a negative number there. S0 we can use. S0 in R. Again, R we can use a negative value.
With this negative value, we're going to be an idea of SI of 0.36. 0.36 meters.
Sorry, let's, let's, let's, my simply, I just blurted it out but that was obviously wrong.
So if I'm in between there, I am going to have, I am going to have a real image.
Remember, from our, one of our first first vectors is going to be inverted and it's going to be real.
Okay. Now let's just work out. M is going to be negative SI, which is a positive value, divided by positive value, multiplied by this negative.
So then D immediately jumps out at me. And if I do that, I give negative 2. So it's going to be enlarged but it's going to be inverted.
Now these, because I use this convention, this just jumps out at me now. I didn't, and look what I did, I mean I made a mistake when I just blurted it out what was going to happen here.
I got confused in my mind then. But because I use this convention, I don't have to think, this all jumps out at me.
Is it inverted or upright? Now the magnification is negative, so immediately it is inverted. Is it real or is it virtual?
Well, this turns out to be positive, so it's going to be in front of the mirror, so this is going to be a real image.
So it's just because I use this convention that these answers jump out at me.
If you're going to follow a textbook that does not use that convention, you have to figure these things out.
Okay, it's a convex mirror. Now if it's a convex mirror, immediately we're going to have a positive R value.
We're going to have a positive R value. For this R to be positive, that means this F is going to be a negative.
So I can think it that way around, or I can say it's a convex mirror, the focal point is always behind the mirror, that is going to be negative.
I can do it that way around as well. So what is R going to be? Negative 2 times negative, so that's going to be a positive 0.20 meters.
Si, I can work out Si because now I have this positive R. I have S0 which is also positive. Positive is going to be negative there, and I get negative 0.044 meters.
So magnification, I'm going to do a negative times the negative of the positive. Positive divided by positive is going to be a positive, and I get 0.56.
So it's going to be diminished in size, but it is going to be upright. So immediately I know it's upright because this turned out to be positive.
And is it real or is it virtual? Well, the Si is behind, so immediately I know that this is virtual.
And once again, it's only because I used this convention of when to use power that's positive or negative, that these things can just be easily let off.
Okay.
