In this section we're going to look just quickly at the refracting surface, a spherical refracting surface.
So we've done the introduction to lenses and I'm going to get back to lenses.
Before I get back to lenses though, I just want to have a look at this.
There's an equation that says N1 over S0 plus N2 over Si equals N2 minus N1 divided by R.
And that is a refracting surface, just for refracting surfaces.
In other words, I am going to draw a line here.
Always on the left side I'm going to have my object, S0.
There's going to be some central axis and then it's going to encounter a surface.
Now there are a couple of situations.
First of all, we can have a concave surface.
That means that this whole area here, bar this surface here, is going to be another medium.
So this surface separates two mediums.
The object will always be in this medium, N1.
So whatever the refractive index is on this side, which contains our object, that will be N1.
The object on the other side then of the reflecting surface will be N2.
So look clearly, this is not a lens.
That is just a surface.
That is just a surface.
Now, for the conventions.
And that is the only, probably the only difficult thing about the reflection from a mirror.
Refraction is in the surface and thin lenses is just what your conventions are.
So look carefully at these conventions.
So whatever the medium, the object is in, that's N1.
The other medium is N2.
Then the sine of R.
If the object faces, if the object faces, and I've got it there, a concave surface like this.
A concave.
So a concave surface.
The object faces a concave surface, we make R equals negative.
If it faces a convex surface, convex surface, then R equals positive.
So look clearly at what that is.
This is the convention just for a surface.
In other words, I can have, so we're going to have this N as air, so that was 1, and we'll
make this 1.6.
So clearly this.
But what we can have, we can have an object, say for instance, the most common problem is
going to be, say, amber.
So I have a little object here, central axis.
So the object is always in N1.
S0 is this distance to that plane of intersection between the two meters.
So this will be 1.6.
This will be now 1.0.
That will be 1.0.
And it is facing a concave surface.
The object faces a concave surface, making R negative.
And the last convention we are going to have that is that if the image is on the opposite
side of the object as far as this plane of intersection is concerned, if it's on the opposite
side, we're going to have SI equals positive, and we're going to call that a real image.
If the image is on the same side as the object, with respect to the interface surface, we're
going to say SI equals negative, and it will be a virtual, and it will be a virtual image.
So write down for, for the reflection of a mirror, for reflection, as we have here, this is
the usual example here is the Jurassic Park, with a little mosquito in the amber kind of
example.
So this is the refractive surface, spherical refractive surface.
Then we have this convention, and then for thin lenses we have another convention.
Do not get confused between all of these conventions, because if you use conventions, your answer
gives you an immediate picture of where the image is going to be in relation to, and not
so much in this instance, but in instances of the thin lens and the mirrors, whether they
are upright, whether they are inverted, whether they're real, whether they're virtual, whether
they're enlarged or not.
Here we're not going to see, we're not going to have an equation for M, for enlargements.
We purely want to see, is this image real or virtual, virtual on the same side of the object,
real on the opposite side of the object, positive or negative.
If the object faces a concave surface, this is a concave surface with respect to this, with
respect to this object, that makes R negative.
If it faces a convex surface, it bulges out towards the object, convex R would be positive.
Let's do a few examples in the next video.
Let's do our first problem.
Here we have a piece of amber, and on the central axis, well, what you can see with this
one, we've denoted that it has a refractive index of 1.6, and it is in air, so otherwise,
in other words, the air is a refractive index of 1.00.
This is the amber, and one side of it has quite this convex, convex surface.
And we are told that this convex surface, as this radius, so the center point to there,
is three millimeters.
So we have to figure out the sign.
And we say that there's an insect in there, and its head lies on the central axis, and when
we view it from this side, we see the head to be about five millimeters deep, five millimeters
deep.
It's not drawn to scale.
Now we have to put a few signs in.
Now we want to know, the question asks, what is S0, how deep is that object really?
Now what we can see, obviously the object is inside of the amber, and its image is also
inside.
This means this is a virtual image, and we said by convention that is going to make this
a negative.
Now looking from the outside, this is a convex surface, it's a round surface, but from the
point of view of the object inside, it is facing a concave surface.
It is facing a concave surface, making this R negative as well.
Now let's use, the last thing we need to do is decide which is N1 and which is N2.
We said whatever medium the object is in, that becomes N1, the other object, the other
material becomes N2.
So what are we going to have?
So what are we going to have?
N1 is going to be 1.6, divided by S0 we get no, plus N2 is the other one, 1.0, divided by
SI, which we now know to be negative 5.00.
That equals N2, 1.00, minus 1.60, divided by R, and R is negative 3.
R is negative 3, and I've done this one, do it on, with your, oh no I didn't do it, let's
do it on our calculator, let's do it, it's 1.6, divided by S0 is going to equal 1 minus,
that is going to be negative, over negative or positive, so that's going to be 0.6 divided
by 3, and negative bringing the other side is going to be positive, 1 over 5, so S0 is
going to equal 1.6, divided by this 0.6 over 3, plus 1 over 5, let's see if we can do that
quickly, let's see, 1.6 over, 0.6 over 3, plus 1 over 5, and that's going to leave us exactly
4, so that's 4.00, and this was all in millimeters, so that'll be in millimeters.
So the object is going to be there between, that's 3, that's 5, so it's going to be, the
object is going to be there, at 4 millimeters, and it's going to work out to be positive because
we're taking the fact that from the, from the object to the surface that that, that distance
is positive, so this works out well for us.
