It might be a good time again just to look at what happens in a convex mirror
as we go from beyond the central point to the central point to the focal point beyond the focal point.
So we have for convex mirror that the center point is a meter away
and we have a little object that is 0.1 meters high convex mirror
so the focal point is going to be a half a meter.
We know where we are going to place our object.
We start at 4 meters well beyond the central point.
We bring it to 2 meters, we bring it to 1 meter which is the central point
and then we bring it just under and just over, just under and over the focal point.
So we know where the image will be.
We might, well that is the equation for the magnification.
But what we are more interested in is this, will it be inverted or will it be upright.
Now let's place it well beyond because we have our concave, now that should be concave.
Let me put that in purple so we know we are dealing with a concave, concave not convex.
Apologies for that, so we are dealing with concave.
And we know that we are well beyond the central point at 4 meters.
So if we plug into our equation, we get that the image is 0.57 meters but it's positive so it's a real image.
As we get closer, look what happens.
As we get closer to the central point at 1, this image gets further and further away.
So in essence, if that was C and that is F, we started far away and our image was here and it was real.
As we move closer, our image is moving in this direction as we get closer.
At S0 equals 1 meters, so we right there, we see that these two meet up.
We see that these two meet up.
As we get closer, this suddenly jumps out even further.
So as we bring our object closer, our image goes further out.
And as it gets closer and closer, what is going to happen, what you will realize is if you put exactly S equals,
the focal point 0.5 meters, you are going to divide by zero.
So what is happening in the limit as S0 approaches the focal point, Si is going to go to infinity.
It's going to go to infinity.
You can't have zero.
Right on the other side suddenly, we are going to jump out at a virtual image in this direction, also at infinity.
And as you grow this, it will get closer and closer and closer and closer and closer until we get there.
Let's look what happens at the sides.
As we are far away, we have an inverted very small image.
As we move closer, our inverted image gets larger until we get to C.
So here it's very small.
It gets larger, larger, larger, larger.
Until we get to C, they are going to be negative 0.1, 0.1.
In other words, they are equal as it gets to C.
As we move out, as we move out, it's still, remember it was still going in this direction, the image,
as the object was going in this direction.
It's just going to get larger and larger and larger.
And as we approach the focal point, it is just going to go to infinity.
As a real, because it's still positive, SI, as a real, inverted, but it's going to tend towards infinity.
Now, as we jump just over, remember we start infinitely far away and we move in,
but it's also going to be infinitely, but positive, so it is upright.
So it's upright, it's virtual, because it's on the negative side and it's infinitely far away.
And it's going to get smaller and smaller and smaller as we come in,
until we reach the point where it is close.
So you can see what happens as we move in to C, and then to the focal point,
and then beyond the focal point towards the mirror.
Do a few of these, plug in more numbers, and see what you get as you go to infinity,
and also see what happens as you get closer and closer and closer to the mirror itself.
Okay, let's look at this problem.
We want to know what kind of spherical mirror must we use,
and what must this radius be, if we want the magnification to be 1 over 5, a fifth,
so smaller, if it's placed a distance of 0.15 meters in front of it.
Well, we know M equals negative SI over S0.
So if we want this to be a positive number, that means SI must be negative,
and we are looking at a virtual image.
We're also looking at an upright image.
So let's write that down, we're looking at a virtual image.
Virtual image in as much as SI must be negative.
And the magnification is not negative a fifth, it's positive a fifth,
so we also know that it is upright.
So we also know that it must be upright.
Now let's have a look, let's just have a look at a convex mirror.
Convex mirror.
That means our R will be a positive, our R value will be a positive R.
Let's have a look at 1 over S0 plus 1 over SI equals negative 2 over R.
Now also from this, we know what S0 is, we know what that is,
so we can work out what SI has got to be.
So SI equals negative M times S0, that's going to be negative a fifth,
times S0 is 0.15 meters.
Let's do that, a fifth, a fifth times 0.15,
and I get zero point, that equals zero, and that's a negative.
Sorry, so let's say that equals negative 0.03 meters.
So we know where we have to, where the image is going to be.
We know where the image is going to be.
So we have on this side, 1 over 0.15 meters plus 1 over negative 0.03 meters is going to equal negative 2 over R.
Let's do that.
Let's do that.
1 over 0.15 minus 1 over 0.03 and we get negative 80 over 3 equals negative 2 over R.
Those can become positives and R is going to equal, R is going to go up.
In other words, I'm going to have 2 times 3 divided by 80.
That is 6 divided by 80.
Remember those are meters, those are meters.
And R, let's have a look.
6 divided by 80, that gives us 3 over 40.
That is 0.075 meters.
That's 0.075 meters and we see indeed this works out now.
So indeed we have a convex mirror as our R value has turned out to be positive.
We didn't know that.
So I should not have put that step in.
We can just do the equation.
We know what these two are so we can see what R is going to turn out to be.
And R turns out to be a convex mirror, seeing that it's positive.
And it's radius has got to be 7.5 centimeters.
