Now this equation that we dealt with in the previous example is often used as an indication of how broad the fraction pattern is.
And as much as we refer to this as the width of the right fringe in the center.
And if you just work through this equation very carefully then.
If I say for instance that I have a certain width if I use blue light, will that width become broader or narrower if I change from blue light to red light?
Red light is a larger wavelength.
The numerator gets larger, this fraction is larger, the arc sign of that is larger, the tangent of that is larger.
In other words if I switch from blue to red light I'm going to get a larger amount of the fraction.
What is going to happen if I widen, for instance, I still use blue and blue and I widen my slit.
The width is in the denominator, the width is certainly in the denominator.
So if I increase that, this fraction gets smaller, the arc sign of that fraction is smaller, the tangent of all of that is smaller.
And certainly the width of my right band will get less.
And that's why also you find a lot, for the first reason I mentioned, looking at lambda, is why we have sound that reflects through an open door so much.
It will be much more than light.
You can hear around a corner, you're certainly not going to see around a corner.
And as much as the wavelength of sound, there's a lot more than the wavelength of light.
So we're going to have an enormous number there, still giving us a much larger diffraction.
A much larger diffraction.
Once again, I just want to warn that we are dealing here with an arc sign function, which is just defined up to the maximum of one.
So this whole fraction cannot be more than one.
So you can see the ratio that we are dealing with as far as lambda and width is concerned.
As lambda and width is concerned.
Certainly, you can't have a second down fringe if your lambda and your width, if your wavelength and your width are equal.
It will be 2 over 1, which is 2, instead of the arc sign of 2 is not defined.
You're not going to get anything.
Just make sure, and I said in that first video, what you can see is you do have to have a fraction.
You do have to have something that is less than 1.
So you do need your wavelength to be smaller.
You do need your wavelength to be slightly smaller than your width.
Especially when you go out to 2 or 3, or third a dark band here.
In as much as you must maintain this ratio, this fraction to be less than 1.
So you can see here that you do need your wavelength to be, I might have drawn that a bit too wide.
That's something that would have been wrong.
You do need this to be smaller than the width.
But once again, there needs to be this ratio between them for you still to have a proper fraction.
So you can still do the arc sign function.
Now let's have a quick word about resolving power.
All played with cameras, you know about a microscope, you know about a telescope.
If things are very far away as in the stars in the telescope, or if they are very tiny.
For a microscope, they need to be separated by some distance before you can view them as two separate objects.
If they are closer to each other than a certain distance, or a certain angle then, and you view them, the distance from each other is an angle.
Then you will not be able to resolve.
If you think about, you've all seen pictures, if you look up very close, they're made of tiny dots, certainly that's how a printer works.
But if you view it far away, you can't dissolve those individual dots.
They blur into one, and that blurriness just gives you the image actually that you see.
And, now before we've worked with, as far as the friction and the single-slips concern, this little rectangular slip.
But you also find the slip with just a circle, and in the camera that would be the aperture of the lens.
So, what happens there is a concept named after valley, and that says that for you, now this is circular, this is not the bright bands now, the dark fringes, dark fringes.
So, with a round aperture, you are going to see a round slit, if I can call it that.
You're going to see circular, bright circular spot, and then a dark fringe around it, and then less intensity, brighter fringe, then dark, and right against it.
It's not drawn to scales, it's not drawn very well.
Anyway, what this boils down to, what Lord Ray said, is if the dark fringe of one is over the central bright fringe, first dark fringe of the one, over the, so the second way I had to do it actually a bit closer to each other, over the central bright fringe of the other one, then you can resolve them as two different objects.
If it gets any closer, so if this dark band went on the other side of this, you've lost your revolving power.
Now, through complex analysis, there is an equation that says that the sine of this angle equals 1.22 times lambda divided by the diameter.
So, this is not merely M, but this will certainly be M, but this will certainly be M for the very first dark fringe.
So, for the first dark fringe.
Because we're dealing with very small angles, so there's some 10 degrees that we take for granted that the sine of theta is almost theta.
This makes theta equal to 1.22 times lambda divided by the d.
And this theta we call theta minimum.
That is the minimum angle, so that we can still resolve two distinct objects.
And remember, there's my aperture, there's the two objects, the distance between them I am viewing as this angle theta.
So, the minimum angle at whatever distance will give me that separation.
Okay.
So, the minimum angle, and because of what I already said, it is when that first dark fringe is over the other object's central bright fringe.
The minimum angle for resolution is 1.22, that came from complex analysis, lambda over d.
So, if I want this angle to be as small as possible, because that's what I want.
I want to view things that are very close together, or if they're very far away.
Okay.
I want theta to be as small as possible.
To make that as small as possible, this, I'm going to make this fraction as small as possible.
How can I make that as small as possible?
I want the shortest possible wavelength, and I want the largest possible diameter.
That's why if you buy a telescope, it's more expensive, the larger the diameter of your lens is, and then because you need a bigger diameter.
Now, if we etch a mask onto a silicon plate to make silicon circuits for computer chips, I think at the moment they use ultraviolet light, because that's going to resolve for you a lot smaller, and your diffraction is actually going to be less if you use a smaller lambda there.
You don't lose this resolving power of your mask, okay?
I should say that.
You lose the resolving power of your mask, so if you could go to x-rays, and to etch out, you know, you're going to have an even smaller, you're going to have an even smaller minimum angle for resolving two separate objects.
Now, let's do a practical problem, you're going to hang glider, you're 120 meters up, you're 120 meters up, you're looking down, you're looking at something green, green light has a wavelength of, let's make it 555 nanometers.
Your pupil diameter is 2.5 millimeters, and we want to know what your resolution is, how far apart was two things on the ground be, for you to be able to distinguish them as two separate objects.
So, here's the pupil of your eye, straight down, so what we're looking for, is this minimum distance, here that these things can be apart, the minimum distance there, is this angle theta, theta minimum there.
And, the way to solve this problem is just to see these as two radii of this massive circle, with your eye as the center point, so we're talking about an arc length there.
Because it's so far away, because your radius is so large, we can see this arc length, we can see this arc length as a straight line.
We're going to approximate the arc, the straight line, to this arc length.
And what is the equation for arc length, arc length is going to equal, well let's put it this way, the central angle, and the radiiance is going to equal the arc length, divided by the radius.
In other words, the arc length, is going to equal theta minimum, times the radius, and what is that for us, theta minimum, and the radius, is this radius, which is our 120 meters, L equals 120 meters, that we are up in the air.
So, that's going to equal, so that's going to equal, so that's going to be times L.
We know the equation for theta minimum, and as much as that is going to be 1.22, times lambda, divided by diameter.
So, in our problem, we are dealing with theta minimum, let's make this, let's make this diameter 1, the human eye.
So, we are dealing with theta minimum, so we are going to sit with an arc length 1, that is going to be our resolving power, is going to equal, 1.22, times lambda, times L, divided by d1.
And that gives me an arc length, in other words, this distance, my answer is 32.5 millimeters.
Just check your answer there.
Now, for the second part, let's just look at d2, say for instance an eagle, 6.5 millimeter diameter.
So, we are going to plug in 6.5, times 10 to the power negative 3 in the denominator here, a much larger number, which is going to make my arc length a lot smaller.
So, I get arc 2, for this diameter, I get 12.5 millimeters.
Just over a centimeter.
So, where my human eye would require them to be 3 centimeters, so the eagle just needs them to be just over a centimeter.
Just over a centimeter versus my 3 centimeters that I can still resolve as two individual objects.
So, we said that the larger the d is, the better your resolving power is going to be.
for another millimeter to be.
For this liked玩, the floor we definitely want to be evenly out.
I did not mean that 85% of the 2nd, on the placing.
Now you can see the bullet pass.
This is not one of them.
But also, I'll show you how to stop the microscope.
Because you can see the
