Now a problem for people who like photography and this doesn't clearly make part of what are in the textbooks.
But just to, if you are interested in this, just quickly, if you have a camera and you put it on an f-stop of 12,
it has a certain sensitivity, ISO for digital cameras, so if you put it at an f-stop of 12,
you can see that you need to expose the photo that you're taking for a fifth of a second.
If you now stop down to an f-stop of 4, some will write this as f-12, some will write this as m-4.
If you stop down, as it's called, to an f-stop of 4, how many seconds do you have to expose?
And now you've got to know what f-stop means.
The f-stop means the diameter of the diaphragm between the lens, between the lens and the image sensor,
there is a diaphragm that can open and close, and if it's open, if it's open, a lot of light can come in,
and the smaller it gets, the less light can get in, the less light can get in.
So, and it's usually expressed as a fraction of the focal length, focal distance of that lens.
So, I'm obviously using the same lens, I haven't chosen lenses, so my lens, and so this is called one lens,
but really in a, in a, in a, in a lens of a, of a digital camera.
Um, uh, you know, there's, there's lots of lenses in, in that lens.
And, uh, um, but it has a certain focal distance, so an f-stop refers to the diameter, the diameter of the aperture.
It's, as it opens and closes to let more and less light in.
And this diameter, remember, is two times the radius, two times the radius, is a twelfth of,
and f-stop of twelve means it's a twelfth of the focal length.
So the focal length was two, that means a twelfth of two, which is one over six, the diameter of one over six,
and that will give me, uh, that is twice the radius.
That is twice the radius.
Now let's look at the amount of light that comes in.
It's called the amount of light that comes in the, beta, whatever you want to call it.
It's not, not the right thing to do, but let's call it beta.
And that's going to be proportional to the size of the aperture.
And the, and the aperture is round.
Well, some of them are not round, they contain little leaves, but let's call it round.
So that's going to be proportional to the square of the radius,
because area is proportional to the area of the aperture.
So, and the area is taken as pi r squared, so that is going to be proportional to r squared.
And since the diameter, since the diameter is twice the radius,
the radius equals half of the diameter.
And in our instance, it's going to be half of, half of a twelfth times the focal distance.
So the radius here, for 12, eta for 12 is going to be proportional to 1 over, 1 over 24 f squared.
And I think that is proportional to 1 over 576 f squared, for 12.
So instead of making a proportional, let's just put in a constant of proportionality.
Let's call it c, so that beta 12 is going to be that.
What is going to happen to beta for 4?
Well, at 4, we've got a quarter of f, so this becomes 4.
That's 1 over 8, that makes it proportional to c over, that will be 64 f squared.
Okay, this is the constant of proportionality again.
And it's 1 over 8 times f, or f over 8 squared, which gives me 1 over 64 f squared.
And that gives me c.
So let's call that the amount of light that it lets through.
Well, not jelly.
Let's call the amount of light that a jelly lets through that in a certain time period, let's call that alpha.
And alpha is going to be beta.
So the amount of light that it lets through times the time that it lets that light through.
Okay.
Times the time that it lets that light through.
And this alpha has got to remain constant.
When I have an s-top of 12 and 1 over 5 seconds, when I open it a lot more,
intuitively you must know that this must get less.
Because the total amount has got to be this amount of light that the hole,
the aperture lets through, times the time it lets that through.
Okay, so for beta 12 times a fifth of a second,
that is going to be how much?
We said that is going to be c over 576f squared times one-fifth of a second.
And how much is that going to be?
I get, what did I get?
I think I got c over 2880f squared seconds.
And that has got to equal c over 64f squared times time.
I want to know the time.
So I can immediately get rid of this and this and this and this.
So t is just going to be 64 divided by 2880.
And that gives me 1 over 45, 1 45th of a second.
So that's a long way of doing it.
The other way of doing it is just to look at the fact that if I just have area equals pi r squared,
pi r squared, so my area for this 12th, this is going to be pi.
What is the ratio between these two, the ratio between these two radii?
pi, so remember this one was going to be a half of 12, half of 12 squared.
Okay, so that was going to be 1 over, what was it?
12, half of 12, 24 squared, 576.
And if 4 is going to be pi 164, 576 divided by 64 is 9, I think.
Let's just see, 6, yeah, 576, so it's 9 times.
So if 4 is 9 times larger than the 4, than the 12, it's 9 times larger.
So if I let in 9 times more light, because the area is 9 times larger,
because the area is 9 times larger, I've just got to make this 9 times less.
And if I make this 9 times less, I also get 1 over 45.
So two ways to look at this problem.
In this problem, I have a simple converging lens with a focal distance of 8.00 centimeters.
And it says, for instance, it's used by an engraver,
so he holds it very close to his eye, and he's doing some work.
Now, I want to know what the magnification is going to be,
and also I think the other part of the problem was
how far away must the object be now from this magnifying glass,
which is right by the eye.
And there are two ways to look at this problem.
Now, if it's a normal sighted person,
he's going to have a near point of 25 centimeters.
So it would be ideal to place our image at 25 centimeters,
but that's going to be negative 25 centimeters,
because I have to have a virtual image.
And if I'm using a magnifying glass that flows,
in other words, it's a positive lens, a diverging lens,
for it to give me a virtual image,
I'd better place that object closer than the focal point.
Otherwise, it's not going to work.
So that has got to be a negative 25 centimeters.
So I'm now going to have 1 over S0 plus 1 over negative 25.
It's going to give me 1 over 8.
And that gives me an S0 of about, I think,
about 6.1 centimeters.
6.1 centimeters.
Let's make that two significant digits.
In these videos, I'm not being too strict about the significant digits,
but obviously you should.
So that gives me that,
and that's going to give me a magnification of negative Si,
which will be positive 25,
divided by 6.1,
and that's going to give me a magnification of about,
a magnification of about 4.1 times.
We're going to answer this,
and we're going to continue,
because there's another way to do this problem.
As promised, the other way of looking at it,
we've said that magnification equals dN over F,
and that is magnification under these circumstances
that we've mentioned here.
But remember, we're working at or near the focal point,
at the near point of the I,
so that's going to be plus 1.
So for us, it's going to be this 25 centimeters
divided by the focal point of the focal point of 8 centimeters plus 1,
and that's also going to give us about 4.1,
same magnification.
So for us,
