So let's solve a few problems. In the first one we are told that the speed of light in
water, so that's going to give us a V because it's not equal to C anymore. We're not looking
at the speed of light through vacuum. But that equals three quarters of C. Now we want
to know what is the effect on the frequency and the wavelength of this light as it passes
from a vacuum into water. That's the first part. And what is the refractive index? Now
first of all let's think about what happens to the frequency. Now frequency is just how
many wave peaks, let's call them wave peaks, if this is our wave, our sinusoidal wave, passes
through at each second. Well that's not going to change as far as the two mediums are concerned.
We can't suddenly have less waves or these wave peaks or whatever, a full wave, full wave,
pass through per second. That stays exactly the same. So in other words the frequency through
water has got to equal the frequency through the vacuum. Through the vacuum. Now we know
that the speed of an electromagnetic wave in a vacuum C equals frequency times lambda. Now
we were not given, we were only given the velocity as a expression of C. So we don't have absolute,
we weren't given the frequency so we don't have absolute values here. So the best that we can
do is look at the frequency in water divided, not the frequency, we said we're dealing with the
wavelength. The frequency is going to stay exactly the same. The wavelength through water divided by
the wavelength through a vacuum. Now from this equation we can see that lambda is going to equal
C over frequency. So for the water, for the water we're not dealing with C, we're dealing with that V.
So that will be V over the frequency divided by, in the vacuum it will be C divided by the frequency V.
This 3C divided by 4F and this will be C divided by F. So the C and the C and the F and the F we will go,
so we were left with 3 quarters. So the wavelength in water is going to be 3 quarters of the wavelength
in a vacuum. Okay, next we want to know, next we want to know what is the refractive index of water.
The refractive index of water. Now we know that N is going to equal
the speed in the vacuum divided by the velocity in that medium itself.
So in our instance we're going to have N equals C divided by V is 3 quarters C
or 3C divided by 4. We can bring that divided by 4 up into the numerator and that will be 4
over 3. So the refractive index of water is one and a third.
In the next problem we are told that we have a glass plate that has a thickness of 0.60 centimeters
centimeters there and it has a
refractive index
1.55 and we want to know how long does it take for a pulse of light
incident normally to pass through the plane. So our angle of incidence here is 0 degrees. It comes in
directly with the normal. So I think two equations here would help us in as much as N equals C divided by V
and the fact that velocity equals distance divided by time. So we're interested ultimately
ultimately we're interested in this time
Now time, in other words, it's going to be distance divided by velocity. We don't know velocity
but we do know from this equation that velocity
is going to equal C divided by N
In other words, T is going to be D divided by C over N which becomes C times N
So our distance is 0.60 times 10 to the power negative 2 meters
times N which is 1.55 divided by C which is 299, 792, 458 meters per second. Now we needn't do that
we are only dealing here with one 2 significant digits
but anyway we'll get an answer of my answer was 3.1 for two significant digits times 10 to the power
negative 11 seconds very small so that'll be about 31 picoseconds a very short time
Now if the if the refractive incidence there was equal to that of a vacuum this would have made this
1 instead of 1.55 in other words the numerator is smaller so through a vacuum it would have gone
less time even than that and if you divide this by 1.55 let's see divided by 1.55
so just through a vacuum it would have taken just 2.0 times 10 to the power negative
11 seconds or 12 picoseconds versus 31 picoseconds
In this example we are told that a ray of light in air now usually when we in these introductory notes
when we talk about air we're just going to take the refractive
refractive index of air to be that of a vacuum in other words n equals 1
and anyway a ray of light in air strikes a glass plate with a refractive index of n equals 1.50
at an incidence angle of 50 degrees remember that's between the in between the ray and the norm
the normal
determine the angle of the reflected and the transmitted rays
rays so let's just draw a little picture of maybe what is going on here so we're going to have
first of all a vacuum through which it comes but then it's going to strike
then it's going to strike the glass so it's going to have some incident angle theta i which we've denoted
there now it's part of the reflected light that is just the same as a plane mirror in other words theta
r the reflected light is going to be exactly the same now if this is the norm remember we said if it
goes from a lower to a higher index of refraction it is going to bend towards the norm okay something
else is going to happen it's going to go out again so then look at that mistake at the bottom so this
transmitted angle here is going to should be less than 50 degrees and let's do that
remember that the laws of reflection says that theta incident is going to equal theta reflective
so the first part of our answer there is just going to equal 50 degrees so theta r is going to equal
50 degrees the second equation we're going to deal with is snell's law so n of the the incident
index of refraction times the sine of that angle equals of the refracted array the material through
through which the refracted array now passes times the sine of that angle of this refracted
this refracted array we want we need obviously need this so it's through simple algebra we can have
that the sine of theta t is going to equal ni sine of theta i divided by nt so theta t is going to be
the arc sine the arc sine of ni sine theta i divided by nt and if we do that i get an answer of 31 degrees
and in fact that this must be so as we said it goes from lower to higher incidence index of refraction
so this angle indeed has to be smaller than that and 31 degrees is indeed smaller than 31 is smaller than
50 degrees
in this problem we just have to be ever so slightly careful we are told that the refractive index of a
diamond is 2.42 so n equals 2.42 now we don't know if that's incident or the the refractive
let's just say i mean we say the refractive index of that but we're not sure where the ray is going
from air to diamond or diamond to air now we want to know what is the critical angle for light passing
from and here comes the answer what is the critical angle for light passing from a diamond to air so it is
in the diamond going towards the um the the surface between the two so that is going to become our
incident and to air which is now going to be our refractive and air is we're going to take that as a
vacuum and we know the equation for the critical angle in as much as the sine of this critical angle
equals nt divided by ni now that's that now becomes critical which one you chose to be what
remember the incident is going inside
our medium towards whether that's the vacuum or the diamond in this case it says from diamond to air
so that'll be in the diamond towards this surface contact area in other words
theta c the critical angle is going to be the arc sine of
nt divided by n i and that is going to give us an answer so it's one over 2.42 and that gave me an
answer of 24.4 degrees now here's this very similar problem we told that light um we asked to to
calculate the critical angle for light passing from from a glass to water so the n for glass is given
as 1.54 and the n for water is given as 1.33 now which one is incident and which one is the
refracted so it moves from glass so this becomes ni to the water which becomes
n of nt again very simple we know that the sign of this critical angle has got to equal
nt divided by n i and indeed this much must be so in as much as the sine of an angle the absolute value
of the sign of any angle is one less than or equal to one i should say in as much if you draw that sine
wave negative one at the bottom positive one at the top so let's get that critical angle
which is now which is now just going to equal the arc sine sine inverse of nt divided by n i
in other words the arc sine of t is the 1.33 divided by the 1.54 and let's see what that is
the arc sine of 1.33 over 1.54 that is going to equal 59.7 59.7 degrees is going to be the critical angle
for intersectors let's just look at the other way around now first of all remember we said in the
previous problem the previous problem the critical angle was going to be this now the incident in this
incident as the problem was was from glass to water so in this this was going to be the arc sine of
now let's have a quick look well the incident was now going from glass so the glass was the incident
one point one point five four to water which is now transmitted one point three three and we
our answer was 59.7 degrees let's swap that around now as indicated by these larger
purple arrows now we now go from water to air so what is now going to happen what do you guess is
now going to happen well it goes from water now water is the water is the incident
incident it goes from water to into glass and glass is now the transmitted so water is the now the incident
and the glass is now the glass is now nt
one point five four divided by one point three three and this is undefined
this is undefined
there's no angle that i can reach if this angle gets larger this one will also slightly get larger but i
can bend it right the way to 90 degrees this will not touch the the line of contact it won't touch
that line of contact no matter how much how large i make this angle in other words going from water to
glass going from a lower to a higher we're not going to get this we're not going to get a critical angle
