Now we're going to start our discussion on thin lenses. Thin lenses, we have two types. We are just going to deal with converging. Converging and diverging. Diverging lenses. These are also called convex lenses. Convex. These are called concave.
And these are called positive lenses. These are called negative lenses. And what we're basically dealing with is this kind of lens. So these surfaces are arcs of circles. And then obviously for the concave mirror, something like this.
We're going to deal with some equations as well. The first one we're going to deal with is just again the difference of the relationship between the distance between the object and the lens.
The image and the lens and the focal distance. And as much as we're going to have 1 over S0 plus 1 over SI. Again distance to object, distance to image. And that is just going to be 1 over F. 1 over F.
We're also going to have magnification as well. Magnification. Some textbooks put a T there. And this can do be Y image divided by Y0. Which is again going to be negative SI divided by S0.
We just need some conventions. We're going to have a central axis. We're going to have a central axis here. First of all, we're going to have a focal point for the converging, convex, positive lens.
The focal point is going to be there. The focal point is going to be on this side. And then for, I shouldn't draw them so close to each other. It might get confused because of this line. Let's draw them further apart.
So there's our convex lens. Here's our concave lens. Here's our central axis. Here's our central axis. If I put an object here, if I put an object there, this central line is going to go straight through.
This one is going to bend through a focal point. This parallel is going to diverge. And if I draw a line back, I'm going to get a focal point.
So this is going to be a real focal point. And this is a virtual focal point. We don't talk in those terms. Both of these are focal points.
But this sets up for us our terminology. We get to decide what is positive and negative. And when we have those conventions, it's easier for us to draw conclusions based on our axis.
So this is slightly different from spherical mirrors. Inasmuch as, again, if it's on the left-hand side of the object, it's 0 as positive. We will later see virtual objects, which will be negative.
But anyway, we'll always have these problems to the left of the lens, which we'll take as a 0 being positive.
The SI distance to the image, now, is going to be positive if it's on the opposite side. And negative if it's on the same side. That's different.
And F, the focal point, is going to be positive for these lenses, and it's going to be negative for these lenses.
If we have those conventions, then we can make use of this equation, and we can also make use of the magnification.
And if we get negative values, we'll learn that the magnification is inverted. And if we get less than, or larger than, or less than 1, we'll see if there's magnification, or indeed, if the size minimizes.
Now, let's just quickly see, let's quickly see if we do place an object in various places. Let's have a look and see what happens.
Let's have, first of all, our positive lens, our central axis, we place an upright object there.
Please bear in mind, we are dealing with idealized situations here, so it's sun lenses, and we're dealing with all these rays, even though I've drawn them, you know, that it's almost halfway to the edge.
We're only dealing, actually, with idealized circumstances near the central axis, and imagine what happens.
We're going from a lower to a higher refractive index, so we're already going to get some bending there, and there we're going to get some more bending,
you know, based on the normal lines, but these are thin lenses, in other words, we idealize the situation as if the only bends take place on this central longitudinal axis,
which is not true, it's not what really happens, but that's why we're dealing with, like, thin lenses, okay, we only see bending at the center there,
which is, of course, not what happens in the reality, you get bending at that surface, bending at that surface, no, you're bending in the middle.
Okay, so these are idealized.
So look what happens.
If we draw a line parallel to, it is going to converge through the focal point, through the focal point.
So what I'm trying to draw here, I should have actually drawn it a bit better, is the first instance we are dealing with objects that are further away,
the object is further away from the lens than the focal point is, the distance between the middle of the lens and the focal point.
Okay, if I draw then a line straight through the central point there, it is going to carry on and we're going to meet up, we're going to meet up there.
So what are we going to have here?
In this instance, we are going to have, now depending on where we place this, how close and how far, you know, this is going to be larger and smaller,
but what we're dealing with is a real image, is a real image.
In other words, if I put an image sensor from a camera there, I'm going to get an image, and it is inverted.
It is inverted.
That's all we can say.
So this first situation of ours is the object is positive, it's zero, it's positive, and it's further away than the focal point.
For situation number two, if that's the central axis, this is the focal point, I'm putting my image closer to the mirror than the focal point is going to be.
So this is going to go through, and then it will go through the focal point, and then I can draw a line.
I can draw a line back, and then here, through the central axis will just be straight up, and I can draw a line straight back.
Whoa, that looks terrible.
This is supposed to be straight.
And anyway, they're going to meet there.
So what are we going to get for these?
They're going to be upright, right side up.
They're going to be virtual, they're going to be virtual, and they're always going to be enlarged, enlarged.
Always going to be enlarged.
Okay, so that's closer to the mirror than the distance between the, from the mirror to the, the middle mirror to the focal point.
And if we look at our third situation, just as a diverging lens, anywhere on the positive side here, anywhere on the positive side, this is going to go straight through.
This is going to diverge, and draw a line back, and it's supposed to be straight line.
I've got a line going straight through there.
I've got my line going straight through there.
And what I'm actually going to get is that tiny little, that tiny little image there.
So in this instance, this is going to be upright for all these concave millers.
It's going to be upright.
It is going to be virtual.
So virtual, so virtual, in as much as if I put some, if I, if I, if I put something there, a photographic, a sense I'm not going to get, and it's going to be diminished in size.
Diminished.
Diminished.
Right, there's a balance, a upright, virtual, and decreased in, in size.
Okay, so these are my three, these are my three situations, and you'll have to remember them.
The next thing I just want to have a quick look at is just what is called the lens maker's equation.
Lens maker's equation.
Lens maker's equation.
And that simply states for us that 1 over the focal distance is going to be n minus 1 which is the refractive index and then 1 over r1 plus 1 over r2.
So I hope you can see in the corner where n is the refractive index and r1 is the radius of the one side of the lens and r2 the radius of the other side.
If I have one type of material embedded than the other and the refractive index is different this n is going to become n1 divided by n2 where n1 is the inside material and n2 is the outside material.
I also just want to mention quickly the power of a lens also called the diopter and it is measured in inverse meters and that is just equal to 1 over the focal length.
That is the power. If I put two thin lenses in contact with each other what is going to happen?
The power total is going to be power of the 1 plus power of the second one and the focal distance 1 over the total focal distance will be 1 over the focal distance of the first one plus 1 over the focal distance of the second one.
So then in a nutshell is our introduction to thin lenses. These three images, these three figures are most important so that you can solve these equations and knowing that S0 is positive to the left.
We get SI is positive if it is to the right so that we can use this equation for magnification and no focal distance is positive for convex lenses and the focal point is negative for concave lenses with our, well depending on what textbook you read but certainly majority of textbooks will use this convention so that you can use the answers to interpret where the images are upright, upside down or inverted where they are.
whether they are enlarged or diminishing size and whether they are real on this side or virtual on this side.
