Now let's have a first look at the equations that we are going to deal with.
Here's our first long one and it says 1 over the distance between the mirror and the object
plus 1 over the distance between the image and the mirror equals negative 2 over R
or equals 1 over F.
And F equals negative 1 half times R.
Now R is the radius, in other words that's the distance between the mirror and C.
And F is of course negative 1 half of the radius between C and between C and the mirror itself.
We can use these equations if we use this convention only.
And so in different textbooks will be different.
So in these equations I'm taking the following.
If the distance between the object and the mirror, it is positive if that object is in front of the mirror.
If the object is in front of the mirror it's positive.
In actual fact, it will always be positive.
We always place the object in front of the mirror.
It's no use putting it behind.
The back of the mirror is not reflective.
We're not dealing with something like that.
If it was reflective, then it's a different type of mirror.
So concave will become convex.
It's always in front.
Okay.
The distance between the image form then, between the image form and the mirror is positive if the image is real.
And it is negative if the image is virtual.
Now remember, it's not to say convex, concave, because if I take a concave lens and I put an image between the focal point and the mirror,
we're going to get a virtual image.
So it's positive if the image is real and negative if the image is virtual.
If the distance between the focal point and the mirror is always positive for a concave mirror,
it's positive for a concave mirror and negative for a convex mirror.
And then the radius, now there's the logic, it's the other way around.
So if it's a convex mirror, it's positive and if it's a concave mirror, it is negative.
And remember, it's the distance between C, the center point of our completed circle, and the mirror itself.
So let's take, for instance, this concave mirror.
And so this mirror is concave, so I'm using a negative for this distance.
So this will be negative.
Negative 1⁄2 times a negative is going to give me a positive value for if, and indeed for a concave length, if is indeed positive.
So I've got to use that sign convention if I'm going to use these two equations.
Very quickly, before we get to some examples, some exercises in this introductory section on a reflection,
it says the transverse magnification, transverse magnification for spherical mirrors equals negative,
the distance between the mirror and the image, divided by the distance between the object and the mirror,
and that equals the length of the image, divided by the length of the object.
That's going to give you the transverse magnification for spherical mirrors.
Excellent with those introductory notes out of the way.
Here's our first problem.
I have two plane mirrors, so they're straight, my optical system is two plane mirrors,
and I have an object, a point object, they're A,
and I want to find the source of four images, four images.
Where can they possibly be?
The first thing to draw, remember I showed the rays, although those were for spherical mirrors,
same sort of thing applies.
The first thing will just be a ray perpendicular to this mirror,
and let's call that A'
and the rule is, let's call this point P,
that AP equals in length P A'
or A'P.
So that length equals that length.
The same is going to happen for you, perpendicular.
Perpendicular to this mirror.
I can draw a line up.
Let's call that point P'
So now I've called that A' and let's call that B'.
Let's call this point where there's an intersection between the ray and the mirror Q.
So I must also have the fact that the length of AQ is going to equal the length of QB'.
Now this image forms, almost forms, you can say, a new object.
And it as well can go through, it's already now perpendicular to this,
so it'll just be a back and forth, back to A.
But it can also do perpendicular, a ray perpendicular to this bottom mirror.
There's so much so that...
Let's call this point R.
So this will be B'
Just so long as B'
R
B'
R
equals
R
B'
prime.
A straight line there.
And the same goes for a line perpendicular from A'
As long as that distance, let's call that point S,
has got to equal this distance.
Let's call this now A'
prime.
So again, I want A'
prime S
to equal S
A'
prime.
So those lengths have just got to be the same.
So I've got one, two, three, four images for my object there at point A.
As to our second exercise problem, I did this one a while ago.
Let me, let's hope I remember what to do.
I have the ground level here, and I have a plane mirror,
and I have a person standing here who is 1.5 meters tall.
And let's say his eyes are 10 centimeters from the top, so his eyes are there.
We want to know what is the maximum length, or the minimum length,
that this, the minimum length that this mirror needs to be for him to see
in the image, his feet and his toes, and how high does this mirror have to be from the ground.
First things first, this is a plane mirror.
In other words, the image is going to be just as far behind the image,
which is now a virtual image, as it is in front.
So we immediately, we're talking three meters away on this side.
It's going to be a line three meters away.
The feet are going to be at the same spot for parallel, for parallel rays,
as well as the head is going to be there, as well as the head.
This is his eyes.
So his eyes have got to see his feet.
Let's see, let's see, let's see about there.
My ruler's not long enough, so he's got to at least see his feet.
For you to see his feet, the rays have got to come up from the feet, okay?
From the feet, and he's at least got to be able to see his eyes.
So we have to have rays coming from the image, going from the image.
There we go, so he's at least got to be able to see his eyes.
Okay, so what we have here, what we have here is, immediately, we'll have the elevation,
and we'll have the minimum length of this mirror that we do, that we do require.
But let's go the other way around to solve this problem, I think that's what I did initially.
The other way around, so let's just draw in the position of his eyes on this side.
We can draw in the position of his eyes on this side, so the same will go for this image.
And as much as we can draw a ray back up, we can draw a ray back up there, back up there.
We can draw a ray back up there.
And what we'll note is the following.
What we'll note is the following.
This is the sea.
This is going to be 3 meters.
This top area here.
And this, these two rays will bisect this distance of, will bisect this distance of 10 centimeters.
In other words, for him to be able to see his head, this is going to be that good thing we don't need.
And because that's 10 centimeters, this has got to be 5 centimeters, so that's 5 centimeters.
So here, we are going from 5 centimeters, from the top down will be 5 centimeters.
Now the same is going to happen for us at the bottom.
Let's look at what happens at the bottom.
So we can draw the line back.
We can draw the line back.
If that was 10 centimeters, this means this is 1.4.
That means this is 1.4 centimeters.
And 1.440 centimeters, half of that is 70.
So this bit here will be 70 centimeters.
And so the elevation from the floor has got to be 70 centimeters.
This mirror, and remember this mirror goes from there, not to there.
You've got to add the extra 5 centimeters because he's got to see his eye being the top of his head on the other side.
So that's going to be 75 centimeters for the length of the mirror and it's going to be elevated 70 centimeters from the floor.
And that will be the minimum for him to be able to see the top of his head and the bottom of his toes.
It's just 1.5 centimeters.
Thanks for that.
Here we go.
Let's move in.
Erm, yeah.
Remember that.
We mean.
All right now how much areroなので?
Awesome, no.
Oh, man.
Thank you very much, man.
You need to have honorable ones which aren't里 and we have.
