We have an absolute gem of a problem and I can see, you can already see that there's my problem at N3.
I'm going from lower to higher to still higher index of refraction.
So it's a lens and a camera, it has its thin little coating, so air is N equals 1, N2 of my thin film is 1.38,
but instead of going lower, I go even higher and in there lies life's little trick for this problem.
It's actually a fantastic problem. You just have to stay calm and work it out.
What is going to happen? Let's just stay clear on what is going to happen.
I have my incident ready. I'm going to higher, so my angle will be slightly less.
I get reflection there, but because I'm going from a lower to a higher index of refraction material,
I'm going to add, this N1 is going to add a half a wavelength inside of that N1.
Down here, what's going to happen down here?
Well, again, I'm going from lower to even higher, so I'm going to get a refraction in there as well,
but I get at the same angle, I'm going to get a reflection,
but there was another half added there as well because this is lower to higher.
Another half was added there, now a fraction. Refraction was nothing for me,
so this N2, oh boy, there's going to be something way interesting happening there.
Now, let's just see what the word problem tells us.
It asks us, for this incident light wave of this wavelength, I want no reflection.
What does no reflection mean? I want destructive interference.
Destructive interference says N2 minus N1 is going to equal M plus a half.
Okay, done and dusted. Says so in the problem.
The second problem, the problem also asks,
what is the thinnest that this film, this further up material can be to give me this destruction?
The thinnest means I'm looking for N equals 0, in other words, N2 minus N1 has got to be 0 plus a half is a half.
That's what the word problem tells me.
What is N1? I can see that for myself.
I'm going from a lower to a higher index of refraction, so that N1 better be a half.
And here comes the magic. What is N2?
Now, you'll have to break it down.
Remember N, let's put our equations here, N equals L divided by lambda, so that's the total distance.
But there are different amounts of lambda that fit in there, on the way down versus up,
because as it reflects up, I'm adding, just by magic, another half wavelength.
So let's take one part at a time.
The path down, and I'll just add the two parts.
The path down has a length L of Y, and I'm dividing it by lambda N.
Okay, that's the wavelength inside this material.
That equals lambda divided by N.
So if I divide this by that, that means lambda goes in the denominator, and N goes in the numerator.
Plus, what's going to happen on the other side?
Well, on the other side, I'm not changing the wavelength, so I still have a YN over lambda.
Nothing has changed there, but as if by magic, I just add this other half, a wavelength,
because I'm reflecting off of an interface going from a lower towards a higher index of refraction.
Okay, so I'm adding a half there, so my N2 is actually twice, YN over lambda plus a half.
So if I have N2 minus N1, it is this, minus a half, so plus a half, minus a half is zero.
So I made it 2YN lambda, see this, the plus a half, minus N1, which is negative a half,
so that all falls out, equals the half, because we wanted the thinnest one,
and we wanted total destruction, destructive interference.
So Y was going to equal 2, another 2, N lambda, and that lambda over N is just lambda N inside this.
I'm looking for a quarter.
Now look what we said before, man, there's a difference.
Because last we said if we wanted the thinnest one, with destruction, this had to be half of.
Now I'm saying it has got to be a quarter of, a quarter of a total destruction,
because I have a quarter of a wavelength, another quarter of a wavelength, which is a half,
but I add that extra half, because they reflect off of the bottom there.
So that gives me a one full added wavelength for that one, only a half of this one,
half a wavelength, another phase, total destructive interference.
Fantastic problem.
Okay, now fantastic problem.
You're going to kick yourself in the end, because without any calculation, you can see the answer.
But it's probably not that once you've been through it, you'll see why.
So I have a soap bubble, and remember we said the soap bubble is in the A because a white eye falls on it,
you get different thicknesses all over, and because the refractive index, at least in the door soap bubble,
is equal, it's only then the thickness of it that is going to cause, for different colors,
it's going to cause total destruction, meaning the other color, the opposite color of the primary color is out,
in your color wheel, if you do Photoshop, and so you'll see the opposite color as that color is destructed.
In other words, they want to know the white agenda divided by white, yellow.
That is what we need to figure out.
And they told us with a soap bubble, it's outside is A, inside is A, so N1 equals 1.00.
N2, we don't know what that soap bubble is, it's a soap bubble's refractive indexes, we just call it that.
And N3 is going to be that as well.
Now, they told us, we just want this for the thinnest Y for magenta, the thinnest Y for yellow.
Okay, what does that tell us?
We're looking for N equals 0.
And now they tell us the wavelength of magenta will be green.
So, if I totally destructively interfere with the green light, I'm going to see magenta.
So, for green is 555 nanometers.
And if I take blue, because if I totally destructively interfere with blue, I'm going to get yellow.
It's 469 nanometers.
469 nanometers.
And I want this relationship.
For destruction of these, I know that N2 minus N1 has got to be, what is it?
N plus a half, because I want destruction.
I know what N1 is, because remember the soap, it's always going to be higher than 1.
Because remember what N is, it's C divided by V.
And C is the maximum, V is always going to be less than that.
Okay, so it's always going to be more.
So, this leaves me with a half.
I'm adding a half wavelength to that reflective surface.
Okay.
Now, if you think clearly about it, this is the usual problem that we had.
And we said, for total destruction, we want the minimum to be half of the wavelength inside of that medium.
So, I get it immediately right.
Y has got to equal a half of that wavelength inside, and that was just going to be a half of that wavelength inside.
And that wavelength inside is this lambda over N.
So, I'm going to add lambda over 2N.
So, for Y for magenta, it's going to be this one for green.
And Y for yellow, it's just going to be this one for yellow.
It's going to be one for blue, divided by 2N.
And if I divide that by that, I'm just going to be left with lambda of green over lambda of blue.
It's as simple as that.
But if you want to run through the whole thing, you can just run through the whole thing again.
So, N2, what is N2 going to be for one of them?
Well, that's going to be the length, which is 2 times.
Let's start with green.
Let's call this the magenta one, then.
Let's call it 2 will be the magenta one, which is twice Y for magenta, divided by lambda for green, over N.
So, N goes there.
And then we're going to get minus a half.
That's going to equal a half.
That goes to the other side.
That's 1.
And where do we end up?
We end up right there.
And if I divide those, I'm going to be left with lambda of green, divided by lambda yellow.
So, why magenta over why yellow is lambda of, e divided by lambda of yellow.
It's as simple as that.
