Now that we've looked at electromagnetic waves and mechanical waves just before that we're going to move on to light and specifically optics.
And the first thing we're going to look at is just mirrors and reflection.
Now light is interesting, I mean the study of light is ongoing.
We all know that there's a dual nature to light.
Light that's intense shining at you is like a continuous wave and we know about the double slit experiment.
And we also know from the photoelectric effect on the other hand that on a subatomic level looking at the interaction of photons and electrons that you can view it as a particle.
But for us just to look at light and optics we don't really have to go down that deep.
So the first thing we're just going to look at is this reflection from different mirrors.
And usually textbooks will describe two types of mirrors.
Those are plane mirrors and spherical mirrors.
So a plane mirror is just, I think for optics I might be using this old plastic ruler quite a bit.
A plane mirror is just absolutely straight.
It's absolutely straight.
And if I use this lot of paper here and I have light ray coming in, the light ray will go away.
And these two rays from there to there, this forms a plane.
Okay, that's the plane of incidence.
Okay.
And we get incident light and we'll get the reflected light.
And this is all in the same plane.
Okay.
So it doesn't go in if it's a plane mirror.
The definition for plane mirror is it doesn't go in and then go off at another line.
Okay.
So it's in a straight line.
And what we'll also note is that in a plane mirror we can draw a normal vector.
A normal vector that is perpendicular to, exactly perpendicular to the plane mirror.
And if we have the light ray, the incident light ray on this side, we'll have the reflected light ray on this side.
And what we will notice is that the angle between this and the norm, that is our angle of incidence.
And this is our angle of reflection.
And we'll know that the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection.
So that for us is our first plane mirror.
In the next video, I'm going to go along to our spherical mirrors.
Now that we know about plane mirrors, we're going to go to two spherical mirrors.
And you call them according to the side from which your object, the light shines from your object.
So this will be called concave.
And this will be called convex.
So my object in my mirror is standing on this side.
If this mirror bends towards the object, it's concave.
And if it bends away from, it's called convex.
The first thing we want to note, and I've put them here.
Okay, so we've done the concavity or the shape.
So the second thing we want to look at is the center point.
And the center point is continuing the line of this mirror as a circle.
And we draw the center point of that circle.
So for the center point of this circle, this center point is actually behind the mirror.
Remember, my object is on this side.
So my center point is behind the mirror.
And this is the center point of the continuation of the curvature to form a complete circle.
And then we draw a line from the center point to the midpoint.
Exactly, this will be an arc.
And the midpoint of the arc, too, that is just the center line.
From the midpoint of this arc to the center point, this is our center line.
On that center line, we will find the focal point.
And you get two types of focal points, a real focal point and a virtual focal point.
And where we draw that focal point, the focal point will always be on the central line.
And it is halfway exactly between the center point and the mirror, we will find our focal point.
So halfway between the mirror and the center point, we will find the focal point on the central line.
In a concave mirror, we talk about a real focal point.
And in a convex mirror, we talk about a virtual focal point, a virtual focal point.
Inasmuch as the light rays don't go through the mirror, they won't go through the mirror and reflect.
So there's no light rays that focus on this point.
The light rays will move away and the light rays will come in incident light ray and reflected light rays.
So this is just a virtual focal point.
There's no light going through the mirror.
The last thing we want to talk, and that reminds me of something before I get to that though.
When I have a source, say for instance a torch, and I have my torch here, and it is shining light.
Light shines out in all directions.
And we know now from our series on waves, wave is an electromagnetic wave.
And we have these wave fronts.
Say for instance in our electric field going up and down.
So these will be the wave fronts that we can draw.
Obviously they are a lot closer together.
The wavelength of visible light is in the range of 500 nanometers, in that sort of range.
But these are the wave fronts.
And a light ray we draw as a line that is just always perpendicular to the wave fronts.
Okay, so that is an optical ray.
And these are the rays that you can see drawn here.
So this top ray will move in, and it will move out to the focal point.
This one will move in, out to the focal point.
This one moves in and out.
But we can extend this line back, and it will go back to the focal point.
But in and out.
Okay.
So this is a little bit of lateral movement there.
Let's get back to the topic and the discussion in this video.
The last part I want to mention is the image produced depending on where we place the object.
And I've marked three here.
One, two, three.
One is further away than the focal point.
Two will be between the focal point and the mirror for concave.
And convex three is anywhere here in front of the mirror.
When we place an object in position one, further away than the focal point,
we are going to get an inverted real image.
So if I had to, if I put my object there and I had to draw the image here,
it will be inverted, meaning upside down.
Okay, upside down.
And, but it is a real image.
So light, light is actually, if I put a sensor there, light is actually going to strike that sensor.
If I put it between the focal point and the mirror for a concave length,
I'm going to get a virtual.
In other words, it's going to be, actually be on this side.
But remember, light candles are not passing through the mirror, so it's virtual.
It will be erect.
It's not upside down.
It will be erect, and it will be enlarged.
And you've got to memorize these things.
If it's between the focal point and the mirror for a concave, it's going to be virtual, erect, and enlarged.
For a convex lens, any way where I put it here, it is going to be virtual.
In other words, behind the mirror, it's going to be erect, and it's going to be smaller in size.
The size will be diminished.
So this you might want to jot down, put it up, put it on paper, put it up somewhere in your wall, in your study room, or office, and have it handy all the time.
Just memorize it.
Those are the three circumstances for spherical, the two spherical mirrors.
Now, the whole point of our exercise initially is just going to be looking at the image.
You've got an object.
You've got either plane or spherical, and here we have concave.
From the object to the mirror curves towards the object is going to be concave.
And now, for you to be able to know something about the image, you have to draw at least two rays.
And these are the rays we are in the four situations, so you can choose one of these, two of these four rays for your object.
Once again, this is for concave.
That's right, concave.
And we'll do the convex in the next video.
So first of all, we have our center line with our center point.
And halfway between the center point and the mirror, we have our focal points.
So in the first instance, my incident light is parallel to my center line.
That means the reflected ray will go through the focal point.
In my second situation here, my incident ray is through the focal point.
The reflection will then be, the reflected ray will be parallel to the center line.
So that's situation number two.
Situation number three is from the center point, or through the center point.
Now, from the center point to the mirror, remember, is the radius of the circle.
So that will always be a line that is a normal to the lens, because it is the radius of the circle.
So that will just reflect straight back.
There's something else that we can mention about this ray.
So let's draw a radius of the circle here.
So again, this will be a normal vector, because it is the radius of a circle.
And then we'll always bisect this angle between the incident ray and the reflected ray.
Okay, but in itself, we'll just bounce straight back along the same line.
And then the third, the last, the final one, is just at an angle on towards the intersection of my mirror and my center line,
will bounce back out so that the incident angle equals the reflected angle.
So the incident angle and the reflected angle are exactly the same.
So these are the four choices you have.
You need at least two of these ray tracers to determine something about the image that you are going to do.
So we don't have to draw one that comes in here and hits there, off center there.
You don't have to draw rays like that when you shouldn't for us to be able to do the calculations that we need to do.
So these are one, two, three, four, the four instances for a concave lens.
Now let's look at the four options, and you have got to choose some of these when you do your calculations.
Don't draw anything but in the two systems of one of these four types of rays.
Don't draw anything else.
Now that just reminds me of something else.
We talk about light rays and an optical system.
And an optical system in this instance is a mirror, but an optical system can also be the surface of water.
It can be a lens, anything that's an optical system.
So the optical system that we're dealing with for now is a mirror.
So the first incident ray is parallel to the center line.
And for that you do from the focal point, you draw a line out, continue straight on, so that will be your incident ray and your reflected ray.
But if you continue that through, it will go to the focal point.
It will go through to the focal point.
In the second instance, we have a ray that comes in and strikes the mirror at any spot here.
But it can only be one that is directed straight at the focal point.
So you can't draw one there, okay?
Then things are not going to work out for you.
So it's got to go through to the virtual focal point.
And that will reflect parallel to the center line.
The third instance is exactly the same as we had here.
It goes through to the mirror but to the center point.
Not to the focal point, to the center point.
If a straight line continuation of that will be a normal to the surface because it's the radius of a circle.
So the reflected ray will be straight back along the same line.
And any line that I draw there will also bisect the angle between an incident ray and a reflected ray.
So if I did have to draw something like that, now I can work out where the reflected ray should be.
Because this normal line is going to bisect that angle between the incident and the reflected ray.
Okay, so that will help us.
The last one here is just an incident straight through making contact at the intersection between the mirror and the center line.
That is going to come out once again so that the angle of the incident angle is going to equal the reflected angle.
So those are your four choices for both types of spherical mirrors which are examples of an optical system.
We canunde v сказала from 가운데 and the standpoint of this that will benefit from it.
Thank you very much.
Again, this is one.
Thank you very much.
I will show you the next time.
Okay?
