Now we're going to come to the concept of diffraction.
You'll see all of these to some extent in your textbook.
What it is going to be about is this concept.
And it's a bit difficult, I'm sure it's a bit small.
Is that I have my parallel wave fronts coming in.
And this is a wall.
And that's the wall, and that's the wall, and there's an open door in the wall.
And sound, let's make the sound waves come in.
But you know if you stand on this side of the wall, you're still going to hear the sound.
The sound bends around this corner.
It's not going to come straight out.
And there's total silence here.
And that comes from the Wagens Principle, which we did before.
I suppose a better pronunciation in the Dutch tongue would be something more like Rufens.
Okay.
And as much as you can take points on that wave front, and each point is then a point source
of a spherical distribution of a new sound wave.
So, at that point there, right by the edge of the door, we'll have these beautiful, send
out these beautiful circular, because it's two dimension, but in reality, spherical sound
wave out from that.
And if you draw tangent lines then all along, this will be the real end of it, tangent lines
there, you're going to see that your wave front actually goes around the corner.
To a great extent, and under certain circumstances, you're also going to find that for an electromagnetic
wave.
So, this is the wave front coming along, it hits the opening, now called the width.
It's the width of my slit, W, the width of my slit.
And, at least some rays will pass straight through, but at the very edges there will be these
point sources again, and I think there's dispute.
I mean, I think many people would suggest that Wagen's principle gets you to the correct answer,
but in a false explanation.
There are no real point sources there, you'll have the energy concerns and all sorts of things
that fail scientifically, so that's not in reality what happens.
So, it is using a totally wrong concept to explain the correct answer, to get to the correct answer.
But certainly, I think at this level, all textbooks will explain it this way, and we'll accept
it as such, because we are going to get to the correct answers.
Now, if the wavelength, and let's make these waves this far apart.
So, there's a smaller width and a larger wavelength.
So, you've got to have, you can't have this massive wide split and these short little waves coming through.
There's got to be some proportionality between this width and the wavelength.
The wavelength, you know, have got to be more than the size of the wavelength than this width.
You are going to get some diffraction on the sides.
And that diffraction is going to lead to the diffraction pattern.
So, I've got one tiny little slip, and I see the diffraction pattern.
Certainly, I don't see this, I don't see just a bright mark there on my screen.
I'm going to see a diffraction pattern.
And we have to derive an equation for this diffraction pattern.
Certainly, you're going to see a bright fringe in the middle.
And we can work out how broad that's going to be, actually.
And that's going to be of high intensity, as these waves get there in phase.
And they will interfere in a constructive manner.
Then, somewhere from that, you're going to get another brighter fringe.
But the intensity will be a lot less, and it will rapidly fall off that intensity.
And then we can also look at these dark fringes on either side, in between.
Inasmuch as if we can calculate the distance from the midpoint,
and there will always be a midpoint.
Straight on, there will be another midpoint.
This will be our central line.
If we can work out this distance, by looking at this angle again.
You can see that's where we're going.
If we work out that distance, we multiply it by 2.
We certainly have how broad that central bright band is going to be.
Let's look though.
First of all, I drew this schematic just for us to see what this angle is that we are talking about.
It's the angle between the normal to this slit, and then the angle of the light rays.
Now we did something very similar.
We did something very similar with the double slit experiment.
But here we just have one slit.
Okay?
What we've done is, we made the screen appreciably further away, so that in effect, the rays that do come out there are perpendicular.
In reality they're not really, because we are going to go to a dark point where we are going to have a dark fringe and destructive interference.
But let's just initially close to the slit, these rays are perpendicular.
In other words, I can draw a line that is perpendicular to these rays, and I can make it so that the difference, that the top wave travels, compared to the distance that the bottom wave travels, is the bottom wave travels an extra wavelength.
And, if this angle is theta, if the angle there is theta, this is a 90 degree angle, this is a 90 degree angle, they share this common angle, so that's theta, that means that angle must also be theta.
This side here, this is a 90 degree angle, so this hypotenuse is the width, that we have there, so the sine of theta, so the sine of theta is going to be opposite, which is lambda, divided by hypotenuse, which is the width.
It's exactly the same as what we did with the double slit experiment.
And there we just had d, the distance between the two slits, here we have the full width of the slit w.
Now, look at this, the difference, from the central one, to the bottom one, the difference in the length that this hole travels, versus this one, is a half a wavelength.
Because this will be half of that, exactly half of that.
In other words, these two, are going to destructively interfere with each other there, inasmuch as they have, they are a half wavelength, out of failures.
So, and now we're talking about the first dark fringe, that we're going to see, the first dark fringe.
But if these two interfere, then those two will interfere, then those two will interfere, then those two will interfere, then those two will interfere.
So it's as if we're dividing this slit into two.
And each part just interferes with one exactly the same height up and we get this dark patch, the dark fringe there.
Now let's look at the second dark fringe.
Here we have two lambda for the bottom one, lambda again, then for that one.
And so that's one and this is going to be three over two lambda for this one and a half lambda for that one, half lambda for that one.
So for the sine of theta here, we're going to get two times lambda divided by the width.
And once again we're going to get destructive interference as far as that one and that one is concerned, that one and that one, that one and that one, that one and that one.
And as you move up again, you're going to destructively interfere.
So what comes out here is very clearly, so it's the first band, the first fringe, the second fringe, very clearly again that the sine of theta is going to equal m times lambda divided by the width.
Which is very similar when we did the double slit experiment where we just had d, now we have lambda over that width.
Once again I reiterate this width of the slit must be in relation to the size of the wavelength.
You can't have a wide, big old slit there and expect to see a diffraction pattern on the other side.
Let's do a problem pertaining to this and it might become slightly clearer, although this is basically the same explanation as we did with the double slit experiment.
So let's do our first problem. We're working with monochromatic light, a single slit of width 5 micrometers and our screen is 40 centimeters away from our single slit.
And we want to know the width of the central, we want to know the width of the central bright band.
So if we do that, the bright band is going to have, is obviously going to have a certain width.
And what we need to do, that's the central line and that is our top.
That is the top, so that is where the first dark fringe is, there's the first dark fringe on that side.
So if we just calculate the distance from there to the midline, multiply it by 2, we'll know what the, how, what, why the, uh, the central, uh, uh, light drive band is going to be.
Okay, we know that this angle here is going to be theta.
We know that this angle is going to be theta, we know this, and as far as this is the length.
And let's call that y, in other words we're just looking for 2y.
How do we solve for this problem?
Well, the tangent of theta, and then we can use as that is y over l.
In other words, y is going to equal l times the tangent of theta.
And I want twice y, so I'm going to have twice, 2 times l times the tangent of theta.
I know 2 is 2, I know l, I don't know theta.
Theta I certainly need to get, and we know the equation for that.
And as much as theta equals the arc sine, arc sine of m times lambda divided by the width.
So it was just the sine of theta equals that fraction.
And I'm just taking the, the arc sine, both sides leaving me with theta.
In other words, 2y, 2y is going to equal 2l times the tangent of the arc sine of m times lambda divided by w.
And there's my equation, and I can solve for that.
Now I'm talking about an m of 1.
There will certainly be an m of 1 for the first dark fringe.
So you've got to be very careful in all these problems, when m is 0 and when m is 1.
Okay.
Certainly here, as I showed in that explanation, a full m here, this is not m plus a half.
A full m there, where m equals, m equals 0, 1, 2, 3, etc.
It's going to give you the dark fringes.
So look very carefully at these videos, look very carefully at your textbooks and your problems
to know when you put m plus a half for the dark fringe and when you just put m.
This certainly is the full equation, that certainly is the full equation for the angle to the first,
or to whatever dark band.
And obviously for the dark ones, we actually start at 1.
1 will be our first dark band.
So look very carefully at those and don't get confused when you do homework or exams.
Now, for this 5 micrometer, my 2y answer, check that on your calculator, was 65.8 millimeters.
Now, what happens if we make, that was 1, what happens if we make W2 2.5 micrometers?
So half of, half of this width, half of this width.
That means I'm just going to put the W2 in there, and that will be 2 times y.
2 now for me is 153 millimeters, 153 millimeters.
Okay, so by halving this, I'm making my bright band a lot larger.
Now, it's not exactly 2, because we're using a sine function here.
So just be careful, you can't just double that.
It's not exactly double, because it goes through a fraction and then into an arc sine function.
So don't make that mistake.
But certainly, this is an easy way for us to calculate the distance to the first dark band.
Remember, our derivation of this equation came from the fact that we looked at the first dark band,
which was up here, and then the second dark band diagram, which was down there.
This, though, is probably the simplest type of problem that you'll get as far as this work is concerned.
