In this video I'll just show you that the frequency stays the same as I alluded to in the previous video
and I'm also just going to relate to you the wavelength in a medium with refractive index n
its relationship to a wavelength then of that same light in vacuum.
First of all we're going to start with where I showed you that lambda 1 over lambda 2 equals velocity 1 over velocity 2
inasmuch as the time period had to be exactly the same.
So if I just get lambda 1 on its own then it's going to be lambda 2 times v1 over v2.
Now let's make v2 the speed of light.
So if this v2 becomes the speed of light c then this is the wavelength we'll just denote it just by lambda
that will be the wavelength of the specific line at a specific frequency
and we'll call this lambda 1 and velocity 1 in some medium with refractive index n.
And vn we don't have to put vn with this light v for the velocity of that wave in that medium with refractive index n.
I just want to see on the board what I did.
Oh yes, we remember that n is also defined as c over v.
In other words, 1 over n equals v over c.
So I can use that vc and replace it by 1 over n and I have lambda n equals lambda divided by n.
So that's the relationship between my specific ray of light has a wavelength in a vacuum of lambda
and what will its wavelength be in a medium with refractive index n?
Well it will just be lambda, the wavelength in a vacuum, divided by n, the refractive index n there.
Okay, now let's just look, let's just look, velocity equals frequency divided by lambda.
In other words, frequency equals velocity divided by lambda.
That is equations that we had long ago.
So now, because this is not c, or let's not c at a c, let's just look in a specific, in a specific,
I'm going to put an n there and I'm going to put an n there, in a specific medium now,
with a refractive index, with a refractive index of n.
I can replace both of those with v and the lambda n, let's do that.
If n is going to be v, I'm going to replace with, v I'm going to replace with c over n, c over n,
and I'm going to replace lambda n with lambda over n.
Okay, so I'm going to have fn, it's going to equal c divided by lambda.
And if I'm purely looking at the speed of light, that's going to be the frequency times the wavelength in,
the wavelength in, so this is the speed of light, so this is going to be frequency times the wavelength in the vacuum.
So, I'm going to have that c over lambda is going to equal the frequency in the vacuum,
so that is going to be the frequency in the vacuum.
So the frequency in this medium with refractive index n equals the frequency of that same light value in a vacuum.
Okay, so you can see that as you go from a vacuum to any medium with refractive index n,
you're not changing the frequency.
It is the velocity that changes, and from velocity equals frequency times lambda.
This stays, always stays constant, so if this goes up, this goes up, if this goes down, this goes down.
Now, just a little tip, just to that when you do problems on this,
and you look at your answers so that they all do make sense,
probably not in this section, but for previous sections,
I've got my incident ray, and I've got my refractive ray, and I've got n1 here and n2 here.
Clearly now, n1 is smaller than n2.
n1 is smaller than n2, but here's my incident angle, and here is my refractive angle.
In other words, this angle is going to be larger than angle 2 there.
Okay, and the same is going to go for lambda.
1 is going to be larger than lambda 2, and for that reason, velocity 1 is also going to be larger than velocity 2.
So, see how the signs change, so when the refractive index is smaller,
and in the next one, it goes into a denser medium, or a medium, I should rather say, of lambda-reflective index,
just change the sign over for all the rest, the incident angle, the refractive angle for wavelength in n1
versus wavelength in n2, and velocity of the wave in n1, velocity of the wave in n2.
Okay, so just remember this little schema, just so that when you look at your answers,
they do make sense as far as that is concerned.
And when we started looking at interference, we drew the incident rays coming onto a surface at a certain angle.
Now, what if, or what that meant is, they were all in phase.
I could draw a perpendicular wave front.
Now, what if I have waves that are in phase, that they are in phase,
but they go through two different mediums.
They go through two different mediums, and these mediums have n2 and n1,
and let's make, for argument's sake, just n2 larger than n1.
So they're going to have,
they are going to have,
remember I said,
now, what is going to happen here?
If I have theta 2 and theta 1,
if I have lambda 2 and lambda 1,
if I have velocity 2 and velocity 1,
this is not, this is going to be less than,
less than, less than, less than.
So the velocity through two is going to be less than the velocity through one.
So they're going to come out the other side,
maybe out of phase.
Can I work out,
can I work out
what that phase angle is going to be,
what the difference is?
Because that might mean that in some instances,
this light can interfere with each other,
because they might be totally out of phase,
which means they totally,
they totally destruct,
or they can be totally in phase,
somewhere, and that means,
we'll get twice the energy.
Okay.
Let's have a look.
First of all,
say for instance,
I have one,
that's one,
that's two,
that's three.
Say in some distance L,
I have one,
two,
three wavelengths.
And I'm going to call this distance,
how long these two are,
we're going to call that L.
Say for instance there are three,
quite ridiculous,
I'm going to be very short,
it's very small L.
But anyway,
what is the wavelength?
The wavelength clearly is a third of L.
There's no denying that.
Now if I want to know the number of wavelengths,
per length L,
per length L,
there are clearly,
three,
per,
per L there.
So what am I going to do?
I'm going to take L,
and I'm going to divide it by lambda.
I'm going to get L,
divided by a third,
lambda,
a third L,
which is just going to be three.
So this is the number of wavelengths,
that fit inside of L.
That is L divided by lambda.
Okay,
so let's look at it here.
So for N1,
I'm going to have L,
this is L long,
divided by lambda,
divided by lambda one.
And in two,
it would be L divided by lambda two.
What do we know about this lambda one and lambda two?
Well,
lambda N,
we know,
previously,
was that it is lambda divided by N,
where this lambda is the wavelength in a vacuum,
so at the speed of light.
here I can write L divided by lambda one,
and you can write lambda divided by N1.
Lambda divided by N1,
so I can bring that N up,
and this one is going to be L divided by lambda N2.
So let's take somewhere here,
N2 minus N1,
N2 minus N1,
so that is going to be the difference in number of waves per,
per that length L,
I'm going to have this minus this,
I can take out a common factor of L over lambda,
and I'm going to have N2 minus N1.
And that is going to be
in length,
as far as lambda is concerned,
I have lengths here,
and these are without unit.
So I'm going to have length divided by length here,
and something without unit,
but this is going to give me
the phase difference.
And the phase difference can be expressed also in radians,
in as much as,
remember that these are sine or cosine waves,
and that a wavelength is,
a full wavelength is represented by 2 pi radians,
or 360,
360 degrees.
Okay, let's illustrate what we've just said with an example,
so I have my wavelength,
my waves traveling,
and this one continues through air,
and this one here continues through
this N2,
of 1.600,
and N1, yes,
it's going to be 1.
The wavelength on this side is the wavelength in the vacuum,
for N1,
550 nanometers,
and the width of this plastic is this,
2.6 micrometers.
So I'm just going to have
N2 minus N1,
and that is going to equal
L divided by lambda,
so this divided by that,
times N1 minus N2 minus N1,
which is going to be 0.6.
Now this is meters divided by meters,
so there's no units.
This has got no units,
and as much as N equals C over V meters per second
by N meters per second,
so there's nothing.
The answer that I get there
is about 2.836.
But there's 2.836 wave lengths.
Now certainly a wavelength does have a unit,
it's in so many meters,
but one wavelength is without a unit,
it's just a wavelength,
I'm going to have 2.836 wavelengths.
Okay,
now a wavelength repeats,
because it's sine or cosine wave,
every 360 degrees or 2 pi radians,
so I can express this as radians,
and as much as I can just multiply this
by say 360 degrees equals one wavelength,
and my wavelengths will cancel,
they're not really there,
so I'm going to get a certain degrees
as the phase difference,
or if I put 2 pi radians there,
it will be so many radians phase difference.
But the 2,
I mean,
it's an integer,
so that doesn't really take part
in what the phase difference is going to be.
One wavelength,
two wavelengths,
it's the 0.836,
the 0.836,
that is going to matter to me.
Okay,
so this is going to work out
about 300 degrees,
somewhere there is going to be
the phase difference
between the wavelengths.
Now as they come out there,
if indeed these were in phase,
they've got the same frequency,
we know they've got the same wavelength,
and they have the same amplitude.
Okay,
so exactly the same wave,
they can now have a phase difference
of 300 degrees.
