In this problem we have a layer of oil with a refractive index. So let's say the oil there is 1.45. Then there is a layer of water and we know the water is 1.33 as far as refractive index is concerned.
Now a light ray passes from air, let's put that air, we're going to let B equal to 1.00. Okay, from air onto the oil at an incident angle of 40.0 degrees.
40.0 degrees. Find the angle the ray makes in the water. Now from Snell's law we know that Ni, the sine of theta i, has got to equal N refracted times the sine of this refracted angle.
What we are interested in is this refracted angle and that has got to be the arc sine of Ni sine theta i divided by Nt. That has got to be our answer.
So now first of all let's go from, let's write that down, let's go from air through the oil. So what is going to happen theta there is going to equal the arc sine of, our incident is now air, it comes through air which is 1.00 times the sine of, it's 40.0 degrees, divided by Nt,
it is now transmitted, it is now transmitted through the oil, it's 1.45 and let's just do that on our calculator quickly, that would be the arc sine of the sine of 40 divided by 1.45 and that's going to give us about 26.3 degrees, 26.3 degrees.
Now we are going to go from oil. Now we are going to go from oil, it has this angle with the normal in the oil which is now our incident material to the water.
Now theta t becomes for the water. Now theta t becomes for the water, that is going to be the arc sine of, our incident is now the oil and that is 1.45 times the sine of our incident angle divided by, it is now refracted through the water which is 1.33.
And that is going to give us an answer of, that is going to give us an answer of, let's do the arc sine now, of 1.45 times the sine of the previous angle of ours divided by 1.33 and that gives an answer of 28.9 degrees.
28.9 degrees, 28.9 degrees is going to be our refracted angle of the ray towards the norm, that angle in the water.
Let's do a very interesting problem. We have a small luminous body at the bottom of a pool of water.
And we are told that the refractive index of this water equals 4 over 3. We are told the depth of the swimming pool is 2.00 meters.
Now this point light source, the small luminous body emits rays upwards in all directions.
But at the surface of the pool we will see a circular area of light forms at the surface.
So although if we have the body of water, the luminous body, it sends out light rays all over the surface, right to the end.
But we don't see, we just see a circular pattern of water on the surface.
And we want to determine the radius of that circle.
Now why does that happen? Just think for a moment why that happens.
If I have the luminous body at the bottom, and I have my surface there.
If it emits a ray there, what is going to happen if this is the norm?
So it goes from higher to lower, from higher to lower mediums refractive index.
So it's going to bend away.
And you can imagine, the further we go out, the norm, this angle is larger, so this is going to become even shallower.
This ray, until such time where we reach the critical angle.
So at the critical angle, anything larger than the critical angle, we get total internal reflection.
Total internal reflection, and nothing from that point onwards will go out.
So we'll have this radius, we'll have this radius of light on the surface.
So first of all, what we need to do is just to get the critical angle.
And since the sine of the critical angle equals nt divided by ni,
in this instance we're going to have, the critical angle is going to be the arc sine of the,
the refractive here is going to be 1.
because it's the air, the incident goes through the water, which is 4 over 3.
4 over 3, in other words the arc sine of 3 over 4,
which is going to give us a critical angle of, let's do that,
the arc sine of 3 over 4, or 1 divided by 4 over 3,
which is going to give us in the order of 48, 48.659037789.
That's not our answer, so I like to keep it as many decimal places as the calculator gives.
That's our critical, our critical angle.
Now, think about this, I know that this is 2.0.
I know that this angle, if that angle, will equal this angle here, just through Euclidean geometry.
So I know this theta, which is theta c.
Now, we'll know that the tangent, in this triangle of ours, is going to equal, if this is the radius we're interested in,
tangent is opposite, divided by adjacent, that is going to be the radius, divided by 2.0.
In other words, the radius is just going to be 2 times the tangent of this critical angle that we just had.
So if, say, 2 times the tangent of that critical angle is going to give me a radius in 3 significant digits of 2.27, 2.27 meters.
So this is a very interesting problem, if you think about this part first.
Inasmuch as you remember that the ray is going to be refracted away from the normal.
So if that's the incident, it's going to be further away, but eventually there's going to be this critical angle.
At that critical angle, no further light gets refracted through that surface.
There's internal reflection of all the waves, so we'll have this radius from there to there, or this diameter of a circular light pattern on the surface.
Quite interesting.
Here we go with another interesting problem where we want to know what the minimum value, the minimum value of the refractive index for a 45 degree prism must be,
which is used to turn a beam of light by a total internal reflection through a right angle.
So what we're trying to say here is we have a 45 degree prism.
45, 45, 90 degrees.
And through internal reflection through 90 degrees, so what's going to happen is our light beam has got to go there, like so.
In other words, this will be the norm.
In other words, this will be the norm.
That will be the norm.
And it does not reflect out its total internal reflection.
And the only way that that's going to happen, obviously, is if that's 45 degrees and that's 45 degrees.
To remind the skewness of my line here, that's obviously going to be 45 and that has got to be 45.
And now, and the outside is just a vacuum, so NT for us here, NT is going to be, NT is going to equal 1.00 and we want to know what NI is going to be.
What NI is going to be and we can clearly see that this incident angle has got to be, or the critical angle has got to be 45 degrees.
So if we look at the sine of the critical angle has got to equal NT over NI, and we are looking for NI, NI has got to equal NT, which is 1 divided by the sine of the critical angle.
So that's going to be 1 over the sine of 45 degrees, which is pi over 4, which is 1 over square root of 2 over 2.
So that's going to equal, let's just do that with a calculator so I don't make a silly mistake like that.
So 1 over the sine of 45 degrees and that's going to give us the square root of 2.
So that gives us a square root of 2 for an answer.
And as much as this will be 2 over the square root of 2 times the square root of 2, so I'm just multiplying this by 1.
So this, I've just taken this into the numerator.
So that will be 2 square root of 2 divided by square root of 2, 2, those cancel out, that's just the square root of 2.
If you realize through this sketch, or if you can draw it in your head, if we want to internally reflect, internal reflection by 90 degrees, in other words there's no refraction.
And if there's no refraction, we've got to be at the critical angle.
We've got to be at the critical angle.
And through symmetry, and this being a 45 degree angle, the norm there has got to make a 90 degree angle with this, which will divide this 90 degree angle into 2 equal parts.
45, so 45 will be our critical angle.
Another interesting problem, we have this very funny looking prism.
Inasmuch as this bottom angle is not 90 degrees, that doesn't matter, we are shown here that the prism has a refractive index of 1.55.
And this light ray enters perpendicular to this surface, so with the norm, so there will be no refraction there.
It then makes this refractive angle, and we can draw a 90 degree angle here, as far as this normal here is concerned.
One angle that we are given is the stop side, which is 30 degrees, which is actually the clue to this whole answer.
We want to know what this angle D is, which is the angle of deviation.
So the light ray passing straight through, which never happens, it comes out this way, so that's the angle of deviation.
What we've got to note though, then if this is the normal, and this is internally in here now, is the incident angle, then this whole thing here is the refractive angle.
Theta t, this whole thing is the refractive angle.
But just through Euclidean geometry, if this is a straight line, that's a straight line, and if this is theta i, then this top part has got to be theta i as well.
So we know, from this, that the refractive angle has got to be D plus the incident angle.
That is the incident angle, that means that's also the incident angle plus D, which is what we want, the angle of deviation has got to equal the refractive angle.
Another thing that we can notice is, if this line here, the incident line is at 90 degrees, and there's 30 degrees,
this is the right angle, so this has got to be 60 degrees, that angle there.
But because this is a straight line, and this is 90 degrees, that means this internal part is also going to be 90 degrees, and 90 minus the 60 means that this has got to be 30.
So we know that theta incident, so we know that theta incident equals 30 degrees.
Okay, from this also we know that the incident has got to be, the incident angle here has got to be theta t minus D.
But that's not, I think, what will necessarily help us in this, I think, let's have a look at our equation for Snell's law, which is that in i, sine of theta i is got to equal in t times the sine of theta t.
And theta t, and theta t is nothing other than d plus theta i, because we know what n i is, the incident is inside here is 1.55 times the sine of the incident i there, we've just seen as 30 degrees,
it's got to equal in t, and in t, sorry, we were given, in as much as, that is the refractive index of this light, through which it's refractive, which is just 1, times the sine of theta t, which we just said as d plus, and theta i was 30 degrees.
So we have an equation in which we just have the one unknown. The sine of 30 degrees is a half, is a half, so this will be a half times 1.55 equals the sine of d plus 30 degrees.
In other words, d plus 30 degrees has got to equal the sine of a half times 1.55. In other words, d is going to equal, let's do that, d is just going to be the arc sine of 0.5 times 1.55, and we are just going to subtract 30 from that, and we get an answer of 20.8 degrees.
And, yeah, I think we're dealing with, in this problem with, I think that was 30.0, so three significant digits, that is 20.8 degrees will be our angle of deviation.
