Ok, in this example we are told that the diameter of the Sun subtends an angle of approximately 32 arc minutes at any point on the Earth.
And we want to determine the position and diameter of the solar image formed by a concave spherical mirror of a radius of 400 centimeters.
Concave, so it's negative 4.00 meters.
Now what I've done here is I've written the distance to the Sun because there are different ways of doing this.
You can just work with the angles, you can approximate the 1 over S0 as 0 because it's 1 over 1.5 times 10 to the power 8.
And anyway, what this boils down to is the fact that if you have your mirror there and you have your central line and that is then the point C.
And if you have, this is now grossly out of proportion, if you have the top of the Sun and the bottom of the Sun and you draw straight lines through C,
that will be your angle theta which is half of this theta is then going to be half of this 32 arc minutes.
Now remember what an arc minute is, so that's just going to be half over 32 sixtieth of a degree.
And that's going to be 4 over 15, 4 over 15 degrees.
Now we can, we can get the height y0 and I've done it there.
This height y0 inasmuch as that will also be theta and through Euclidean geometry that will also be theta.
The tangent of theta is opposite which is y0 divided by adjacent which is S0.
I mean that compared to this little 2 meters that is left is really negligible.
So if you take the tangent of this times the adjacent which is that, you get y0 of that amount.
As I say that's not so important in this situation.
Let's just look at, let's just look at our equations.
1 over S0 plus 1 over SI equals negative 2 over R.
And we do now know from that that 1 over SI is going to be the negative.
That's 2 over R plus 1 over S0.
It's going to be negative.
We get R.
S0 is common denominator.
2S0 plus R.
And thus we know that SI, we've done this a lot, is R S0 divided by 2S0 plus R.
And if you plug that into your calculator, R being negative times S0 times S0, 2 times S0 plus R,
you're going to get the fact that the image is going to be at 2.0 meters.
And if you think if the radius is at 4 meters, 2 meters means it's exactly at the focal point.
So you're going to get an image at the focal point.
And what you're going to notice is it's going to make exactly the same angle as what the Sun makes.
So at the focal point you're going to have that and it's going to subtendent angle also of theta.
Just to prove that to you, let's have a look at the equation for that.
Let's look at the equation for that inasmuch as YI over Y0 equals negative SI over S0.
In other words, YI is going to equal negative SI, Y0 divided by S0, that's going to be negative 2 meters.
And Y0 was our answer there, 69, 81, 36.7 meters, divided by S0, which is 1.5 times 10 to the power 8 meters.
Now if you do that on your calculator, let's have a look.
2 times 6, 9, 81 was at 36, 36.7 divided by 1.5 times 10 to the power 8.
That is going to give you a height YI of about 9.3084, 9 times 10 to the power negative 3 meters.
And if you think that that is the height that you get there, remember, it has to be an inverse image.
And we know that this distance is 2 meters.
We now know that this is 9.3 times 10 to the power negative 3 meters.
We just want this angle.
So the tangent of that angle, although that's negative, we can just swap the thing around, it doesn't matter.
We're not interested in the fact that this is going to be a negative of an angle.
The tangent is just going to be opposite divided by adjacent.
So that will be this 9.3 times 10 to the power negative 3 meters divided by 2 meters.
And theta is then going to be the arctangent of this argument, this expression.
And if you get the arctangent, arctangent of that divided by 2, you get an angle of, you get back to this angle of 4 over 15, 15 degrees.
So it means it's exactly the same as the angle that the sun made.
At the focal point, we are going to remain with the same angle.
Let's do the last problem in this set.
We are told that a dentist uses a small mirror that gives a magnification of 4.0, so that's positive.
When it is held 0.6 centimeters from a tooth.
So 0.6 times 10 to the power negative 2 meters from a tooth.
0.6 centimeters, very close to the tooth, gives a magnification of 4 times.
What is the radius of curvature of the mirror?
What is the radius of curvature of the mirror?
Immediately we can work out what SI is going to be, because M equals negative SI over S0.
So we can see that the SI is going to be a negative number, and SI is going to equal negative M times S0.
So that's going to give us a negative 4.0 times S0, which is 0.6 times 10 to the power negative 2 meters.
And if we do that, we say negative 4 times 0.6 times 10 to the power negative 2.
That is going to give us negative 3 over 125 meters, and that equals negative 0.024 meters.
So we see that we have an imaginary image of that.
Now, let's use another equation.
1 over S0 plus 1 over SI is going to equal negative 2 over R.
And we need to solve for R.
And there are different ways algebraically to do this.
Let's just do one simple, big, easy step.
1 over S0 plus 1 over SI.
So in our instance, it's going to be a negative 2 divided by 1 over S0 was 0.6 times 10 to the power negative 2 minus,
because there's a negative there, 1 over 0.024, all of this is meters.
And that gives me an answer of negative 1.6 centimeters.
So indeed, this is a concave mirror.
This is its radius, negative 1.6, so its focal point will be 0.8, will be at 0.8 meters.
We are holding this object between the focal point, because it's 0.6 times 10 to the power negative 2 meters.
That is a lot less, this is centimeters, remember.
Sorry, centimeters.
And we're holding it at 0.6 centimeters.
So we're holding it between the focal point and the mirror.
Hence, we're going to get a virtual image.
And we can also probably note then that this is going to be upright.
Let's have a look.
It's not asked in the question, but let's have a look at that.
Again, as much as M is going to equal YI over Y0.
And that means that YI, the image height, is going to be the magnification times Y0.
So however high that tooth was, times a positive multiplication, is going to give you an upright image.
And indeed we know from a concave mirror, from a concave mirror, and the image is held between the focal point and the mirror itself,
is going to give you an upright, enlarged, virtual image.
And that's indeed what we have found.
And as much as it's concave, it is concave and it is virtual.
