Now, let's look at the expensive camera lens, expensive digital SLR lens.
Those lenses are coated with this, so magnesium fluoride,
Canon lenses, called fluoride lenses, because of this coating,
because what they want to get rid of is a reflection.
And they usually choose a thickness of that coating,
and if I just look at it closer, so for instance there,
this has a reflective index of about 1.38,
this is a reflective index of 1, because it's the air,
and then here for the glass, it's 1.33, so it's lower, higher, lower.
So they want to get rid of, the middle of the spectrum would be green light,
so they don't want the green light to be, you know, to reflect so much
and cause all sorts of light, reflected light within that lens.
You want nice, clear light to come through onto a sensor.
So what's going to happen here, light that is nearly,
so nearly perpendicular, is going from higher to, lower to higher.
In other words, it's going to, through Snell's law, that angle will be slightly smaller,
but there should also be this reflection.
And what you want, is for this light that comes through here,
some of it gets reflected, but it's from higher to lower,
so there's going to be no phase difference there,
and then you're going to get to a fraction again.
And what you want for these two, is to totally, is to totally,
have a half a wavelength phase difference,
so there's little destructive interference between those two.
And as I said, we use green.
And two problems ago, remember we said, I think I still have the equation there,
we had y equals lambda inside of this.
So let me call it lambda inside wavelength, divided by two.
That was the thinnest this had to be, for you to have total destructive there.
So look at this, half a wavelength.
So we make this, depending on the wavelength we're trying to interfere,
interfere with destructively, we've chosen that.
Then we're going to choose the, or make this coating,
be a half of this wavelength.
Because if you fit half a wavelength in, another half a wavelength in,
because you're traveling twice y, you're traveling twice y,
that means these two are now going to be totally out of phase.
So because you know which, which the wavelength is you want to deal with,
you can now, because you know the refractive index,
you're going to now just adjust the thickness.
And that thickness is going to give you that total destruction.
Now the question gets asked, what about light waves that come in at 45 degree angles,
will they still be out of phase?
Well through Snell's law, again remember there's still going to be this deflection,
and then out through that refractive, refractive property there.
But look at the total distance that gets traveled now.
It's certainly going to be more than two y.
So this light that is set here is not going to be totally out of phase.
Charles Snell's not going to be totally out of phase obviously with this,
because this distance travel is not just two y.
You know, now you have to write down the Pythagorean theorem to determine this total length now.
So it's only going to work for these perpendicular incident waves.
It's not going to work for these stray rays that come in at a 45 degree angle.
Purely because this distance traveled now is a lot more than just two y.
So we're not stuck. We don't have this sort of situation.
Let's do some more quickfire questions just to make sure that we do understand.
First one, let's do a piece of glass, two pieces of identical glass.
And I put two different films on them, and those films are without color.
They're colorless.
But I see different colors for this same piece of glass with incident,
perpendicular incident sunlight. Why can that be?
Well, it can be for two reasons.
Either they have the same refractive incidence, but they have different widths,
or they have the same width or thickness, and they have different refractive purposes.
So either of those situations can give you different colors.
Okay, next one.
Continuing on the theme of the thinnest that your coating can be
must be a half of the wavelength to have destructive interference.
And that is so simple.
If I'm going from lower to higher, that means my reflected layer is going to have
be half a wavelength out of phase with this incoming one.
This incoming one has the same phase as this refractive.
We don't change our phase.
And it goes out and out goes from higher to lower.
So these two.
Okay.
The thinnest that it can be obviously has to be a half a wavelength,
because it travels once, twice.
So half a wavelength and half a wavelength is one full wavelength.
So the incidence, the phase of this one and this one is exactly the same.
And as much as we've only added one extra wavelength to this one,
because there was a half going down and another half going up.
So we've added one.
And to this one we've added a half, because we're going from lower to higher index of refraction.
So this one would be advanced by a half a phase.
And this one is advanced by a full.
This one is advanced by a half wavelength.
It's phase.
And the phase of this one is advanced by one.
And the difference between a half and one is a half.
So there will be destruction.
If I now tell you this thickness is only a quarter of the wavelength inside of this.
And we're not talking about wavelength there.
We're talking about wavelength there.
So it has a quarter of the way, quarter down, another quarter, that's a half.
So I'm going to advance a half a phase, a half a wavelength phase from there to there.
That one to that one is also a half.
So both of them are half.
So nothing has changed this.
There is indeed, there is constructive interference between those two.
So if I make this a quarter of the wavelength, I am going to have a brighter, more intense light on this side in as much as the reflection is concerned.
Because, let me say this again.
So say for instance, the phase of this is zero.
This will be advanced by half a wavelength.
This one comes in at zero.
Now there's a half a wavelength in here, another half a wavelength.
So because the extra distance traveled, I've added a full wavelength to this one.
So it will be from this one, plus one for this one, plus a half for this one.
The difference is just a half.
If I make the supporter, constructive.
What if I make this two?
So I have one, two full ones in there.
And still only a half in advance there.
So I have one and a half difference between the two.
That's m plus a half.
And m is now one.
In other words, I'll have destructive again.
Okay, so the minimum that this can be is really is a half.
Because it's a half down, another half a wavelength up.
So I've added one full wavelength.
Here I've added half a wavelength.
So destructive.
So quarter, it's going to be constructive.
Next quick fire question is to cement our understanding.
If you have a real life soapy bubble that you've blown as a kid,
and there goes the bubbles, you'll see multicolored from that.
And the reason why there's multicolored is because there is difference in thickness of that soapy film.
Because air blows over it, there's gravity that pulls some of it down.
It wobbles around.
Okay, so there are different thicknesses.
And because of that thickness difference, you're going to get different colors being totally destructively interfered with as it reflects.
As it reflects from the top and then through the film and then from the bottom of the film.
So if I have, if I take away some of the blue, I'm just going to see more yellow.
If I take away some of the yellow, I'm going to see blue then, magenta and green.
There's all those combinations of what you take away from white light, what you see.
It's the theory of printing colors and RGB colors that you see on the screen.
All of those sort of things we won't talk about.
Okay, so it's the thickness.
So what happens as the bubble gets thinner and thinner and thinner right before it pops?
Are you going to see, is it going to become brighter and brighter and brighter as there is constructive interference?
Or is it going to get darker and darker and darker as you get destructive?
And the answer to that, remember, is the same as our air wedge where those two plates touch each other.
As it becomes thinner, your L, the thickness or width of that film becomes smaller and smaller.
You can negate that.
So all you're going to have is the half a change due to the reflection.
And nothing for the other one in as much as the L goes to nothing.
There's no extra length for the light that is in the film.
So you're going to get a half and zero.
The difference between a half and zero is a half.
So you're going to get destructive interference of your incident light.
And that cell bubble is going to get darker and darker just before it pops.
Similar concept.
I have a pool of water.
And on that pool of water, I have two different puddles of different films, different oils or soaps.
First one has a refractive index lower than that of water.
And the second one has a refractive index higher than that of water.
Okay.
As I make these films thinner and thinner and thinner, what is going to be the difference between that reflected light and this reflected light
if the incident light here is almost perpendicular?
Well, first of all, what happens to, as they get thinner and thinner and thinner, remember we can negate L.
We can negate L the thickness of that.
So that the parts that are refracted, the parts that are refracted and come back will be in phase with the incident.
Okay.
Because there's no length for it to travel through.
But now, this reflected going from lower, going from lower to higher, that means there's going to be half for the directly reflect.
Half versus that one nothing.
So there's destructive interference.
That one's going to be dark.
And this one, remember the part that does get reflected, nothing is going to happen to this as L goes to zero.
And because we're going from higher to lower, there's also not a half wavelength added to that phase.
So these two are going to be in phase.
And this one is going to be bright as it gets thinner and thinner.
And this one's going to get darker as it gets thinner and thinner.
