Now let's talk about the refraction of light.
Now light moves through as a wave moves through a vacuum at 2.998 times 10 to the power 8 meters per second.
That's 300,000 kilometers per second but in different materials it will go slower.
So for water for instance or through air it will be C divided by 1.0003.
And so through different materials it will be slower.
Now that is, if you see it as a wave, as a particle, as a photon, it always has to move at C.
And the reason why there is this apparent slowdown in a material is that it takes time to be absorbed and readmitted as it passes from atom to atom.
So you get that C is slower.
So if we look at the absolute, or the speed at least, is slower.
C is C.
If we look at the absolute index of refraction of any material, that is C divided by the actual velocity of light through that material.
And if we compare two materials to each other and we look at the relative index, we will note that that is the absolute index of refraction of the one divided by the other.
Or then the velocity of the second one divided by the velocity of the third, of the first, as you can see there.
Now certain things happen to a ray of light as it moves from a material of absolute index of refraction of one material to one with a different absolute index of refraction.
And let's have a look at these two situations here.
So for instance the absolute index of refraction of material one through which the light is incident is smaller than two.
So for instance it goes from air to some form of glass.
What will happen is this ray of light will bend towards the normal.
And the normal is a perpendicular line drawn through the line of interface between the two materials.
So it will bend towards.
So our incident angle, which is the angle between the incident ray of light, or electromagnetic wave, and the normal.
So these angles are always between the normal and the ray.
So it will be larger than the angle between this ray of light, which now transmits through this medium and the normal.
Now look at the reverse.
If we have, that it goes, say for instance, here is the glass now.
This absolute refractive index, or absolute index of refraction now is larger than this where the ray transmitted.
It bends, it bends away from the normal.
So this angle is larger.
And this brings us to Snell's law.
That if we take the absolute index of refraction of the incident light.
And that angle in I sine of theta I, so there, is going to equal N of this transmitted ray, this material, the absolute index of refraction of this transmitted material through which this ray transmits, divided by this angle here.
And that's called Snell's law.
So N I times theta I must equal N T times theta T on this side.
So it doesn't matter which way this ray comes.
If the ray of light is now in this direction, remember this now becomes N I, which is now smaller than N T.
So it doesn't matter in which direction it goes, you just need to know the absolute index of refraction of the two materials.
And that is what happens.
Now this process of the bending of the light ray is called refraction.
Now it's not always that simple.
You can also get a combination of which some of the light is indeed refracted, but some of it is reflected.
So not all gets refracted.
And that happens, well let's look at the critical, at this critical angle of internal refraction.
That is theta C, the sine of theta C is N T divided by N I.
So that's the transmitted materials absolute index of refraction and the incident materials absolute index of refraction there.
Let's see what happens where we, these two situations.
So we have that the incident material, it has a smaller index of refraction than the transmitted.
And if the ray light bends away now, it's called external reflection.
Purely because the index of refraction is smaller of this incident material.
If we look at the fact that the incident materials absolute index of refraction is larger than the transmitted, we get this which is now called internal reflection.
I should write it there, internal reflection.
Internal reflection.
And this is actually what happens, now let's look at this, the incident light goes from a material of, and the absolute index of refraction larger than the transmitted.
Now look what happens.
Remember we said that it's this situation, it's going to bend, it's going to bend away from the normal.
And as much as N I is larger than N T, N I is larger than N T, there.
So it bends away.
So this angle theta T has always got to be larger, will be larger if this argument, if this equation here is true.
Then there's an angle for which I can make theta I sufficiently large in which QT becomes 90 degrees.
And this is what we get, this is what we get here.
This is now called the critical angle.
It will be the critical angle.
So for, if you think about it, this absolute value on this side can never be larger than 1.
In other words, N I has got to be more than N T.
If you look at this equation, N I has got to be more, the denominator has got to be larger than the numerator.
So, unless they are both equal to each other, 1, because the sign of any angle, its maximum absolute value is 1.
But we are talking of situations where N I is larger than N T.
So this angle is always going to be less, slightly less than 90 degrees.
And you can see that as I move this, this angle gets larger and it will get to 90 degrees before this angle gets to 90 degrees.
And the second last thing I want to mention is if you just look at reflection, whether it be external reflection or internal reflection,
internal reflection, is that these reflected angles behave like a plain mirror.
So those, the incident angle and the reflected angle, so that becomes theta R, theta R, is equal to theta I, the incident angle.
So same there, those two angles will be the same because that is reflection.
And what kind of reflection will this be?
Well, this will be internal reflection inasmuch as N I is more than N T, N I is more than N T.
Sorry for the bad handwriting there.
N I is larger than N T, N I is larger than N T.
We call this internal reflection.
And we'll note that these, sorry that these two angles are then exactly the same.
The last thing that I do want to mention is this prism.
Now prism will, will reflect, refract I should say, sorry, will refract an incident ray of white light.
And remember that in most materials, nearly all of them, the blue is refracted more than red.
So first of all, don't get confused between the reflection and the refraction.
And the refraction, it goes through to the other material.
And these two pictures are probably the most important to solve, to solve most of the problems.
These two are most important.
If it goes from a material of lower to a material of higher absolute index of refraction, it bends towards normal.
And if it goes from a material of, a material of higher index of refraction to a lower, it will bend away, it will be away from the normal.
Now we'll have to do a few problems just to illustrate this point.
When is it called external or when is it called internal reflection?
Because this I doesn't really stand for, this I doesn't stand for internal and external.
It means incident.
So in actual fact, to be absolutely correct here, we should have written here, Ni is larger than N T.
So that would be wrong.
Now Ni is larger than N T.
The ray, as it comes towards that surface, that will always be the incident ray.
That will always be the incident ray.
And now we have the same situation as here.
N incident is larger than N transmitted.
In other words, this part will be internal.
This part will be internal reflection.
So don't get confused between those.
This does not mean internal.
It means incident.
That is material through which the light is moving towards the plane of interface.
Transmitted is going away from the plane of interface.
The ray of light goes away from the plane of interface.
Away from the plane of interface.
Away from the plane of interface.
Across the plane of interface.
