Let's then look at this very simple problem.
I use monochromatic light with a wavelength in a vacuum of 495 nanometers.
Through my spectroscope, I see an angle of the second order maxima.
So m equals 2 of 9.79 degrees.
I want to know how many lines per centimeter is there in that diffraction grating.
Very simple. We know our equation for the diffraction grating.
Inasmuch it's m, sine of theta equals m lambda divided by that distance d.
I can solve for d.
I can solve for d and that will be m lambda divided by the sine of theta.
And so that will equal 2 times lambda which is 495 times 10 to the power negative 9 meters
divided by the sine of 9.79 degrees.
And that will give me a certain answer in meters.
But I don't want meters. I want inverse meters.
I want lines per meter.
So for lines per meter, lines per, well let's just per meter first.
That is just going to be 1 over d which is going to be the sine of theta divided by m lambda.
And that's going to give me per meters which I just have to convert to centimeters.
And I know that 1 meter equals 100 centimeters which is now going to give me an answer in per centimeter.
And my answer was just check yours.
If we're using three significant digits would be 1.72 times 10 to the power 3 lines per centimeter.
Don't get too confused by what was done here.
You can get your answer and then know this is meter but I need to get to inverse meters, lines per meter.
So I just take 1 over d to get my answer and I just convert it to inverse centimeters as opposed to inverse meters.
This is an interesting problem in as much as we have a diffraction grating and we're told that the distance d, we're not given lines per centimeter, we're given d as we should use it.
1.25 times 10 to the power negative 5 meters.
We're using monochromatic light at 656.0 meters in wavelength.
And we look at the 7th higher order principle maximum.
And we find an angle for that.
And then we heat the diffraction grating by 100 degrees Celsius.
And we get a new angle.
If the coefficient of linear expansion of our diffraction grating is 1.30 times 10 to the power negative 4 per degree Celsius or per Kelvin, what is the change in the angle for m7, for m equals 7?
Okay, that's not very difficult to do at all.
We know our equation for diffraction grating, m lambda divided by d.
In other words, we're going to have angle of the arc sine of m lambda divided by d.
Let's do that for the initial one, which is just going to be the arc sine of m is 7, lambda is 656 times 10 to the power negative 9 meters.
And we have a d value of between the lines of 1.25 times 10 to the power negative 5 meters, which is going to give you an initial angle.
How does d change?
Now, you've got to think back to other courses in physics, but do remember that the change in length equals alpha L delta T.
So, alpha is our coefficient of linear expansion.
In other words, we're going to get a change in length of 1.30 times 10 to the power negative 4 per Kelvin.
We're changing by 100 Kelvin.
So, those will go and the initial length was 1.250 times 10 to the power negative 5 meters, which is going to give me a certain delta L.
That delta L I'm going to add to D, so D2 is going to be delta L plus the original D.
And I'm going to use that D2 in my equation there.
And now I'll get a value for the final angle.
And if I take delta F, the change in theta, the change in angle, the final line is initial.
And my answer to that, depending on how many significant digits you use, but it's going to be a negative 0.2901.
Somewhere around there you might get 28.
And then some higher, further digits.
But somewhere in that order, depending on how many significant digits you keep track of as you do your equation.
And that negative indicates that because D is increasing, the denominator is increasing, my angle is going to get smaller.
So the difference in angle from where it was, from where it was, heating makes D larger, which is going to make this angle final smaller versus theta initial, which was there.
Let's do one more problem.
We use a diffraction grating experiment.
And we are told we use a mixture of the light, and it ranges all the way from 410 to 660 nanometers.
Now diffraction grating has a lines per centimeter of 2850 there per centimeter.
And we note a bright fringe at 30 degrees.
And we want to know which of all of the wavelengths in this whole domain of 410 to 660 would give us this 30 degree bright fringe or principal maximum.
Now let's have a look.
We know that the sine of theta equals M times lambda divided by D.
Now this gives us two unknowns.
We don't know what M is, and we don't know what lambda is.
We just have to convert this to D.
D is thus going to be, I've got to go from inverse centimeter to a centimeter, so that will be 1 over 2850 centimeters.
That will be multiplied by 1 meter equals 100 centimeters, which means that will go, that will leave me 1 over 28500 meters.
That will be my distance D between the little slits.
Now as I say, I have two unknowns.
What I would like is lambda.
So one way to do this would be to say lambda equals D sine of theta divided by M.
Now we know M is an integer, and obviously it can't be 0.
You can't divide by 0.
So what we can do, we can just start at M equals 1 and see where that goes to.
So M equals 1, let's see what happens.
So our lambda is going to equal D, which is 1 over 285000 meters.
Sine of 30 degrees is just a half.
And we divide this by 1, and we get lambda equals 1754 micrometers.
And that definitely is not in our range here of 410 to 660.
So that can't be.
We can do M equals 2.
We're just going to put 2 in there, or M.
Then we're still outside.
Lambda then is 8, about 878 nanometers.
And nanometers, not micrometers, where am I?
Nanometers.
It's still way up.
We can do M equals 3.
That's going to equal 585 nanometers.
So certainly, that will give us a maximum length.
That certainly means M equals 4.
That's going to give us a lambda of 459 nanometers.
That's going to give us a lambda of 351 nanometers.
So certainly, these two are the ones we're looking for.
So that will be the third principal maxima.
Third to a fringe outside of the central bright one, at 535 nanometers,
and 439 because they still fit in this range of hours.
So out of all the light wavelengths in the light that we are using in this experiment,
these two are going to give us a bright fringe at 30 degrees.
