Okay, let's do a resolving power problem. I have two stars and if they are a distance apart 1.2, 1.2 times 10 to the power 12 meters apart, they are that distance apart, I'm observing in a wavelength of 515 nanometers and the diameter of my lens of my telescope is 1.02 meters.
What is the maximum distance that I can still resolve, how far away can they be for me still to resolve them as two separate stars?
Now again remember when you do this kind of problem you are going to see this distance between them as this arc length of a radius.
So we are going to approximate this distance between them with this arc length and certainly if this distance arc is a hell of a lot more than this distance between them then obviously those two lines are going to basically coincide.
So what we are talking about here is arc length.
Okay, if you see that then you can solve these problems.
Now, we know that theta equals arc length, arc length divided by the radius as far as this is concerned and we also know that theta minimum, theta minimum which is what we are dealing with here because we want the minimum, in other words the furthest away that it can be, equals 1.22 times lambda divided by the diameter.
So those two factors are exactly the same thing here.
So arc divided by the radius equals 1.22 times lambda divided by d and I can solve for arc which is what I want, the maximum distance that I am away from them.
So that is going to be the arc times d divided by, where am I, arc divided by 1.22 times lambda and I didn't do it in my calculator, you can settle this path in the values that you know in there and you will get to the correct answer.
Okay, let's run through this inkjet printer problem and I am told I want to view nothing closer than 0.4 meters and remember we are always going to see that as this radius and an arc length.
So the distance I am away from this paper is 0.4 meters, 0.400 meters, I am viewing it through a pupil size so the diameter of my aperture is going to be 2 millimeters, 3 meters.
And my printer prints red, green and blue dots, which are then the print same, but yellow, but anyway.
Let's say, so lambda for red, we are going to take this as 660 nanometers, lambda for green, let's take this as 550 nanometers, and lambda for blue is going to equal 470 nanometers.
Say for instance, those are the pigments in there that is the wavelength of the light that you see from there.
I want to know what is the maximum distance that my printer should trim so that I don't resolve them as individual dots.
So that the fraction from the circular aperture blurs them into one for me so I can see a pretty picture.
So, which one, if I want the absolute maximum they can't be further away from that.
Now, which one of these is going to give me the best resolving power?
Obviously the blue gives me the best resolving power.
Why?
It's simple, remember theta minimum equals 1.22 times lambda divided by the diameter.
And we also know that theta here equals the arc length divided by the radius.
I'm looking, these two are exactly the same.
So I am now looking for the arc length.
So arc length is going to equal 1.22 times lambda times r divided by d.
So the smaller, the smaller this is, the smaller the arc length is.
So the better my resolution power.
I'm that small, I can still resolve this too.
Red is going to give me slightly larger.
So what is the maximum that they can be?
Well, I have to do the arc for blue.
Arc for blue.
And if you put in blue there, for 70 I get 115 micrometers.
That is the maximum they can be apart.
Because if they are apart any distance larger than that, I'm going to start seeing the blue dots as separate dots.
And certainly if you plug in red and you get the answer for red and it's anything larger,
If they are any further apart, I'm going to see them as something apart.
So the maximum that they can be apart, I want them to be even less apart than that.
So that I don't resolve any of those dots would be 115 micrometers.
Now for a very interesting problem.
I am sending a laser beam to the moon.
The moon is a distance away of 3.77 times 10 to the power 8 meters.
I'm using laser light with a wavelength of 694.3, very precise nanometers.
And when it leaves my laser apparatus, it has a diameter, it has a diameter of 0.200 meters, 20 centimeters, by broad.
Now I want to know, it then reflects off of the moon because they snorts to land it on the moon,
which is the only real proof that they were there.
They placed a reflector there that bounces that light back.
I think we talked about those before.
And we can measure the time that our laser beam goes there and gets detected again from the time we start the laser until the time we detect it.
And we know what the speed of an electromagnetic wave is so we can work out the distance to the moon.
Now I want to know that beam, the central bright fringe that strikes the moon, how broad is it?
How broad is it?
Am I talking about resolution power?
Certainly not.
What happens is it's the fraction.
As my laser beam comes out of this aperture, it will undergo a bit of the fraction.
That's what I'm looking at.
So I'm looking at the distance.
I'm looking at this angle.
So this angle theta to the first dark fringe so I can work out twice this.
So I actually need twice theta because I want this whole distance.
And then I'm going to use the arc length as this estimation for this separation.
Let's see.
Let's see.
Let's see.
We know that the sine of theta equals m and this instance m equals 1 equals m times lambda divided by d.
So theta is going to be, that angle to the first fringe is going to be, looking at the angle, is going to be the arc sine of 1, which is 1 of lambda divided by d.
Theta.
Theta.
Theta.
And if I now use, I've got to do twice this.
Twice this.
I want this whole, this whole diameter of the whole spark.
The whole wide fringe.
I know, I know though that theta equals arc length divided by radius.
In other words, arc length equals theta times radius.
Two things that we have to worry about, just be concerned about now.
Remember the theta is now this whole angle so you can plug this whole value in there.
One thing you have to watch out if you use this equation.
Now we can't use degrees anymore.
We've got to set your calculator to do a radiance for you.
So this has to be in the radiance.
This has to be in radiance, not degrees.
And if you multiply this by the distance to the moon, so you may know the distance to the moon,
I get an answer of about 2.62 times 10 to the power of 1, 2, 3 times 10 to the power of 3.
Over 2.5 kilometers.
Over 2.5 kilometers radius that the central brain fridge is going to have when it strikes the moon.
