Okay, let's look at this idealized problem. I'm told that I have an antenna here at my house and exactly seven kilometers from me, any radius seven kilometers, it can be anywhere on this radius, seven kilometers away, there is an antenna that broadcasts this radio wave to me.
Now they build the second one, which is 8.12 kilometers away. Now, it's terrible. It doesn't matter where they are, they can be there, there, there, there, there, there, and the difference between them, delta L, delta L is always going to be the same because those are radii.
That's going to be 1.12 kilometers that equals 1,120 meters. 1,120 meters is going to be the difference between them. Now, just think about it. When is it going to be constructive? When is it going to be destructive?
If I can fit in multiple integers of wavelengths in this difference, it's going to be constructive. If I can only fit in plus a half multiples of the wavelength, then it's going to be destructive.
Now, let's have a look. What is the wavelength? We don't know the wavelength, but we're told that this is an electromagnetic wave that gets sent to my antenna, so immediately we can use C equals F times lambda. In other words, lambda equals C divided by F.
And if I take, if I take, if I take lambda, if I take C, which means C.00 times 10 to the power 8 meters per second, and I divided that by the frequency, which is 536,000 in the seconds, I'm going to get a wavelength of about, I think I got about 559.3, somewhere in the meters, 560-odd meters.
Okay, so I have 1120 meters to fit these wavelengths in, and I think you can see clearly that there's going to be about two wavelengths.
Two wavelengths are going to fit into this delta L. That is an integer amount of wavelengths, so they are going to be totally in phase when they get to me, so they'll be constructive.
They'll be constructive. They'll be constructive. How many wavelengths per meter if I, if I, how many wavelengths, this is one wavelength, will fit in there about two of these 560s, 560-560 is about 120.
So now two of these wavelengths. So now two of these wavelengths will fit in there. Don't do it the other way around. Don't say this divided by this gives you a half.
There's not a half of a wavelength that fits in there. Two wavelengths will fit into this delta L that makes it constructive.
In this problem, I've got a double slit experiment. I'm using a combination of two light. One is a red light, about 665 nanometers, other one is about yellow-greenish, 565 nanometers.
Sorry, my screen is 2.24 meters away from my double slit. And I want to know the distance on that screen, what is the distance between the third order red and this yellow-green bright fringe.
So let's just look at it. If I have my double slit, I have the center line. I am talking, and this, this is my distance L. So to the one, I'm going to have this to the third order.
That was one, two, one, two, three, third order. So I want this distance, let's call it, we called it capital D before, let's just call it Y for red.
And I need Y for this yellow-green. And I'm just going to subtract that from each other. So I know this distance L, but I certainly, again, know this distance here.
But I can't figure out what this angle, I can't figure out what that angle is going to be. Okay. And if I have that angle, I can solve for Y of R.
So R, and as much as the tangent of that angle, the tangent of that angle is going to be opposite divided by, opposite divided by adjacent. In other words, Y for red, and then the same for the other color.
It's going to be L times the tangent of theta. L times the tangent of theta. Now, what is that theta? Well, we do know that theta equals the arc sine.
It's going to be the arc sine of, we have M, we have lambda, and we have D. That equation then, well, it's not M plus a half because we're told that this is the third bright fringe for that color.
So what do I have? So what do I have? I have then Y for red is going to equal L times the tangent of the arc sine of M, which will be 3, lambda for red, divided by D.
So there I have those two. Now, which one is going to be large?
Okay. And Y for this yellow green color, Y for this yellow green color is also going to be L, also going to be the tangent of, this time we're going to have the arc sine of, also M is also going to be 3, Y now for the yellow, and lambda for the yellow, divided by D.
So there I have those two. Now, which one is going to be larger? Of course, this Y red is going to be larger, because this number, Y red, is larger than for yellow, for, lambda red is larger than lambda for yellow.
In other words, red is going to be further away. And if you then subtract these two, check your answer, I get a delta Y of about 4.25, 4.25 millimeters.
Please check your answer. You might have made a simple arithmetical error there, but certainly this will be the easy concept as to how to do that.
Here's a problem that just combines a bit of our previous knowledge. I'm told that I do Young's double slit experiments, slit 1, slit 2. I'm using monochromatic light of that wavelength in a vacuum.
But I put a thin piece of plastic over the one slit, and it has a refractive index of M1.60. What is the thinnest that that piece of plastic can be so that on my central axis I get total destructive interference instead of a bright fringe?
When I hear that, what does it tell me? I better have, for minimum, for the minimum value of that, remember we're using some knowledge that we had before, I better have this a half a wavelength, a half a wavelength apart.
And we'll remember that equation that sits N2 minus N1 equals L divided by lambda, refractive index 2 minus refractive index 1, taking for granted that N2 is larger than N1.
N1 certainly for us here is going to be vacuum 1.00. So this is using some old knowledge that we do have from previous videos.
And we've just got to see what this L, this L is then that thickness. Remember that we spoke about there. So I just need to know what this value is. I want to determine this value.
So for them, for there to be total destructive interference on the central axis there, a dark fringe, that means they've got to be multiples of N plus a half times the wavelength, separate or out of phase of each other.
So I get to have a half for this value. So I get to have a half for this value. And that's going to equal L divided by lambda and N2 is 1.6 minus 1 is 0.6.
In other words, in other words, L is going to be lambda divided by 1.2. And that gives me a value of about 488. 488. I can't see what I wrote there, nanometers.
Just check your answer to see whether that's correct. So that will be the minimum thickness of that. The next thickness will be a 3 then. And I multiply this by 3 which will be the next thickness that will then reverse my brightness and darkness fringes or bandings as far as the interference pattern is concerned.
