Let's do a rather long problem and let's say we have a tube here of a material and it is in air.
Right here I have an incident white light, incident white light and it is at an angle of the norm of 70 degrees.
And I'm told that in this tube I have an index of refraction for red light.
For red light I have 1.331 and for blue light I have 1.343.
Outside is air, so the n for air here, air equals 1.
Now this is going to reflect, some of it reflects but some of it refracts to a point A here.
Which then some refracts, some reflects to a point B here.
And we want to know what is the difference in angle between the light that is emitted here, the red and the blue light, and the red and the blue light that is emitted at B.
Okay, so we go from lower, from lower to higher, index of refraction, in other words, I should have drawn it a bit differently.
This is drawn across a bit.
This is going to be difficult.
Let's draw it there.
So the incidence angle there is 70, 70 degrees.
So it goes from lower to a higher index of refraction.
So the angle should get smaller.
So it's going to go there.
But there's going to be a difference between blue and red.
And the blue is going to have a smaller angle than the red.
So the blue is going to come down and the red is going to be slightly up.
But let's look at that.
Let's look at our equations.
From Snell's equation.
In incident, sine of the incident angle equals the refractive index through the refractive materials index times the sine of that refractive angle.
In other words, if we want that on its own, we're going to get that theta t is going to be the arc sine of Ni times the sine of Ni times the sine of Ni.
Theta i divided by Nt.
So that's the equations we're going to look at.
Now let's divide things between the red.
Red on this side and blue on this side.
And blue on this side.
Okay, so what is this angle going to be?
Theta t for red.
Theta t for red.
It's now going to be the arc sine of the incident is through air.
So that's 1 times the sine of the incident angle, which is 70 degrees divided by, for red light, we have a refractive index of 1.331.
And that gives me an angle. My first angle was 44.911. So this is 44.911 degrees. And if I do the same one for blue, which is now going to be the arctangent of the sign of the incident angle, but divided by 1.343, I get for that angle 44.403 degrees.
Okay, so that is this angle here. Now we draw a normal there. So if that is our angle theta t through Euclidean geometry, that has got to be theta t. And this one is 90 minus theta t. So the new incident angle, the new incident angle here, it's not that angle, not that angle, but this one 90 minus theta t.
So the new theta i for this one is going to be 90 minus this. And for that I get 45.089, 45.089 degrees. And my new incident angle here. And the blue side I get 45.597 degrees.
So they're going to have different incidence angles here. But say it's white light. That's going to be, so some of this is going to reflect. This is now my new theta i.
So that's going to be my theta i. And it goes from lower, from a higher to a lower. So this angle has got to increase. And this will now be, that's my, if this angle is now my incident angle, this is now going to be my refractive angle, theta t.
So I can do the exact same thing. So I can do the exact same thing. I can see here what theta t is going to be and what theta t is going to be for these new incident angles.
And again, I'm going to use 1.331 here. And I'm going to use 1.343 there. Then I get that the refractive angle. The refractive angles are going to be 70.
Let me see. Let me see what I get. So I'm going to use the exact same thing. But instead of 70 degrees, I now use this 45 degrees. Then I get 70.497 degrees.
And here I get 73.36 degrees. And at a, the difference in theta and a is equal to, I get 1.3 point, so it's just that minus that. This one minus this one. Blue minus that.
So I get 3.14. So if I go to 3 significant digits, 3.14 degrees is the difference between those two. Okay, and we're going to see a rainbow there.
Now that was my incident angle. And we have reflection, internal reflection. This is going to be my mu. This is also going to equal the incident angle.
And if I draw it out here. And if I draw it out here, this is going to be 90 minus, because this is 90. This is going to be 90 minus the incident.
So my new incident angle here, B, my new incident angle here, B, is 90 minus my previous. So 90 minus my previous one, 90 minus this one, which is just back at this one.
Just do it. Just do it. 90 minus this one, you'll see just back there. So my new incident angle is 44.9, what was that?
44.911. 111 degrees. And my new incident angle here at B, is this going to be back? Is this going to be back at 44,
24.403 degrees? That is just going to be back there. And if I do Qt now, according to this angle, and I use this old one,
I'm going to be back at a reflective angle here of 70 degrees.
And on this side, I'm going to be back at 70 degrees. So delta theta at point B is going to be 0.00 degrees.
No difference, so no angle there. Should not be going to strike at different spots, but the refractive angle of both of them
are going to be 0.00 degrees are going to be 0.00 degrees are going to be 0.00 degrees are going to be exactly 70 degrees as it was, as it was when it clicked in.
So there's going to be no difference, no difference between the two.
So the crux of the matter here is just do them separately, but see what happens in this plain common Euclidean geometry.
Nothing but Euclidean geometry. So just make sure that this one becomes 90 minus this one. These two are the same.
Those two are the same. Those two are the same. This one is 90, this one is 90 minus that one, which just brings you back,
which just brings you back there, which on the refractive side is just going to bring you back there.
So it's plain simple Euclidean geometry and not losing fact, not making a mistake as to which angles you are using there.
In this problem, I have an idealized fiber optic cable, and it has this sheath, and we are told that the absolute index of refraction of the fiber optic material itself is 1.58,
and then it has this layer with an absolute refractive index of 1.53, and we want total internal reflection so that none of our signal is lost.
And I want to know from air outside of an absolute refractive index of 1, what is the maximum angle that this light that enters the fiber can be so that I still have total internal reflection.
reflection. For me to have total internal reflection, this angle here, between the norm and this incident angle here, has got to now be the critical angle.
The critical angle, and we know that the sign of the critical angle is in T over in I. In our instance, the refractive would have been,
if it didn't, if it didn't go, if it didn't have total internal reflection, it was going to be that 1.53,
1.53 divided by the refractive index of this material through which the incidental array goes as 1.58,
1.58, so if I take the arc sign of that, of this expression, of this ratio, I'm going to get a critical angle of, I get 75, 75.547, for instance.
Degrees. Now remember, that is this angle. That is this angle. I am interested in, I am interested in this angle here, so if that is the, if this is the normal line here, this is now my incident angle, this is my reflective angle.
But this is 90 degrees to that. So this one is just 90 degrees minus that one. So my refractive there, my refractive angle there is going to be 90 degrees minus this critical angle there. So I am going to get 90 minus the 75, which gives me 14.453 degrees.
So if I write Snell's equation again, so if I write Snell's equation again, in incident, now my incident is air, which is 1, times the sine, now is this angle that I'm looking for, is going to be Nt, through the refractive is now this, 1.58, times the sine of this angle here, which is 90 minus that one, which is this, 14.453 degrees.
And this, this just becomes 1, so it's the arc sine of all of that. And that gives me an angle, I get 23.2 degrees.
So that's the maximum that this incident angle can be any more than that. That means this angle is going to be such that we won't get total internal reflection and we're going to get loss of signal.
In this problem, in this problem, we want to know at what angle will the reflected light off of water be totally polarized. So I have water, it's the normal, I have an incidence angle, and I have, so I'm going from N equals 1, and this N here equals 1.33, 1.00.
So this is going to be my incident, and this is going to be my refractive, and this is going to be my incidence angle.
So I want to know this reflected light, some of it's going to be reflected, going from lower to higher, and others is going to go towards the normal, so this is going to be my theta t.
I want to know at what angle will this light that comes out here be totally polarized, otherwise I'm looking for Brewster's angle, and I know that Brewster's angle is going to be the arc tangent of Nt divided by Ni.
So this is going to be the arc tangent of 1.33, and for that I get 53.1 degrees. So at 53.1 degrees, all of this light is going to be polarized.
What does Brewster's angle say? It says that the angle between this refractive and the reflected light is going to be 90 degrees.
If that's 90 degrees, remember this by law of reflection is also going to be the incident angle, and now I'm setting it to this Brewster's angle.
So let's just see if we use Brewster's angle, and we get to this, and we get to this, that this plus Brewster's angle does make 90 degrees, because this is 180 minus this 90, so these two together have got to make 90.
So let's say from Ni sine of theta i is going to equal Nt times the sine of theta t, so let's see, let's see what theta t is going to be.
So the sine of theta t is going to equal Ni sine of theta i divided by Nt, so theta t is just going to be the arc sine, the arc sine of this argument here.
And if I plug in incident, incident is now 1, the sine of incidents I'm making is Brewster's angle, and Nt I'm making 1.33, I get an angle of 36.9.
I plug all the values in there, I get 36.9, and if this is 36.9, and that is 53.1, you add those two together, what do you get?
9 and 1 is 0, 1 carried over 6, 9, 10, 1 carried over 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 90 degrees, indeed that is what I get.
