The next topic that we have to discuss is the fact that reflected light is totally or partially polarized.
Not the reflected, the reflected part is partially or totally polarized.
So what it boils down to is this fact.
If this is our incident light, it is unpolarized.
In other words, we can resolve it into perpendicular components and we do that by just illustrating it like this.
We have the component which is perpendicular or in the plane and then the component which will draw the dot which goes in and out,
which is perpendicular to the plane and this is with the plane and against the plane.
So we resolve the electric field into two components all along.
Okay. Now when it gets refracted, say for instance as we've got in this situation,
so from lower to a higher epsilon index of refraction, this is going to remain the same, unpolarized.
Unpolarized, unpolarized, unpolarized.
But something is going to happen, something is going to happen to the reflected portion.
Something is going to happen to the reflected portion.
And remember if we have a reflected portion, that is going to be our angle of incidence.
So this must also be an angle of incidence.
That must be exactly the same.
Okay, and this is our theta in the transmitted ray that is refracted.
Some textbooks call that theta 2 and then theta 1.
Some call this theta r, but theta r can also stand for reflected.
So let's make sure what your textbook calls these things.
But no, it doesn't know what it means.
Now there is a law called Brewster's Law.
Brewster, Sir David Brewster, 1812.
Brewster's Law.
And that stated that there is a certain angle, there is an angle of incidence,
now we're going to call that angle of incidence theta b, at which the reflected portion, the
reflected portion, is something maybe we haven't discussed before.
Even if there is a refraction, there is also a bit of reflection.
Those two always go together.
Unless, not in this instance, but if light is going the other way around, we go beyond
the critical angle in which we can toggle into a reflection.
So there's always going to be, if you're not beyond that critical angle, you're always
going to get a bit of refraction, a refraction and a bit of reflection.
Okay.
But there is going to be this angle that if, if the reflected and the refracted rays make
an angle of 90 degrees with each other, that is Brewster's angle.
If they make that, there's going to be total polarization.
And what happens to the polarization?
It becomes perpendicular to the incident plane.
Remember, the plane of incidence is the plane in which the normal and the incident ray is.
And remember, a reflected ray and a refracted ray is in the plane of incidence.
The plane of incidence is the plane made by, remember, in the video where I showed the incident ray,
the reflected ray, those are in the same plane.
But the plane is actually the normal and the incident ray, they make the plane, plane of incidence.
Okay.
So if these two make an angle of 90 degrees with each other, at that angle we're going to get total polarization.
And that polarization is perpendicular to.
So in our instance here, if there's water, there's air, it is going to be perpendicular, it's going to be horizontal.
These will be horizontal and therefore sunglasses that are polarized that you buy have got vertical polarization to cut away some of the glare that you're going to see from this reflection.
Okay.
So if this is Bruce's angle, that means the incident angle is also Bruce's angle.
So Bruce's angle in this instance equals the incident angle.
It equals the angle of incidence.
And now if we use, if we use Snell's law, let's see the absolute refractive index of the incident material times the sine of theta incident,
which is now the same as Bruce's angle.
And this is going to equal NT times the sine of the refractive angle.
Now that refractive angle is this angle here.
But if these two are now 90 degrees, that means these two, which is now theta Bruce's plus theta of this refractive, right, that's going to equal 90 degrees.
And it's clear to see that if this is 180 degrees, I've taken away 90.
So those two combined have to be 90.
In other words, theta T equals 90 minus theta B, Bruce's angle.
So here I'm going to have 90 minus, 90 degrees minus theta B.
So I'm going to have sine of theta B.
I can bring this to the other side.
The sine of 90 degrees minus angle equals just the cosine of that angle.
So that's divided by the cosine of theta B is going to be NT divided by NI.
In other words, the sine of the cosine is the tangent of theta B equals NT over NI.
And now I have an equation for Bruce's angle.
And as much as Bruce's angle equals the arctangent of the quotient of the absolute refractive incidence of the refractive material provided by the incident material's absolute refractive incidence.
It's the arctangent of this expression.
It's Bruce's angle.
So if my angle of incidence is away from that, it's not that Bruce's angle, I'm going to get partial polarization.
But if I make that incidence exactly equal to Bruce's angle, all the reflected light will be polarized and the electric field is going to be polarized perpendicular to the plane of incidence.
Good.
Let's do a few problems.
As is usual for these series.
I have a tank of some liquid and if I have my eye right there, right at the top level, I can just see this corner here.
I can just see the corner there.
So what is happening?
This is the surface.
It's full to the brim.
So I have an incident here and it gets refracted.
That would be my normal.
That would be my normal.
So this is going to be my incident angle and this is going to be my refractive angle, which is 90 degrees.
I am told that this length here is 1.10 meters and I'm told that this height here is 0.85 meters or 85 centimeters.
So that's quite easy to do.
When this happens, obviously we are at the critical angle.
So I can use Snell's law or I can just look at the critical angle.
And this is going to be my critical angle.
And what is that angle?
Well, the tangent of this angle is this divided by that.
Because remember that and that equals the same.
So it's opposite divided by hypotenuse.
So remember my critical angle, which is now my incident angle.
Which is my incident angle inasmuch as I do have 90 degrees there.
This is going to be the R tangent of opposite L over H.
L over H.
And if you do that before, I get about 50...
Oh, I can't see what I wrote there.
About 52.31 degrees.
Something telling me that this is going to be my critical angle.
And I know that the critical angle or the sine of the critical angle is going to be Nt divided by Ni.
And I am interested in the absolute refractive index of this liquid.
And in air, we know that's 1.
And that is my Nt there.
So if Ni is going to equal Nt, which is 1 divided by the sine of this angle.
And this angle equals the arc tangent.
Arc tangent of L over H.
And that's my equation.
This is 1.
This is 52.31 degrees.
The sine of 52.31 is 0.77.
Because I mean, 1 divided by that is me.
I get an answer on 1 point of 1.26.
Now, I needn't have done this.
I could just as well have used Snell's equation.
The equation from Snell's law.
And as far as Qt there is concerned, I could just have put in 90 degrees.
And that's how we do get the equation for the critical angle.
Because I'm going to start with Snell's equation.
And for Qt I could be 90 degrees.
And that will give me this incident angle, which then becomes the critical angle.
Because this happens.
And I can see this.
Because, look, I'm looking straight at this.
But I can actually see the bottom if I look straight there.
Because there is a refraction.
And because I'm going from N equals 1.26.
From higher to a lower index of refraction.
My refracted ray bends away from.
Further away from the normal.
So that angle is more than that angle.
So it all makes pretty good sense.
No.
No.
No.
No.
