Before we move on now to diffraction, I just want to get a clear picture of interference
and explain Young's double slit, which is actually three slits, double slit experiment.
And first let's just look at interference here.
I have, now you've got to sort of see this in three dimensions, there's one plane with
an electromagnetic wave, say just an electrical component, and not on the same sort of plane
but just moved out at an angle, there's another wave and there's this line where they intersect.
And now we have these two-point sources and they actually start the waves.
You can see it started at the bottom, at the bottom, at the bottom, at the bottom.
And we say that the amplitudes are the same, they are completely in phase when they start
and they are coherent light.
I have this one too.
We need to point up the term coherence, coherence.
So that's coherent light.
In other words, as this source emits the wave, this source for instance is not moving back and forth,
so that in this certain distance L, you can't have, you can't have the waves themselves move,
so that at this point there are various things moving.
Coherent light means the source is standing still, the wavelengths are not changing with respect
to these distances that they move through.
Let's call this length L2 and this length L1, we'll call this length L2, we'll call this length L1.
Now you can clearly see here in L2 we have one, two and a half wavelengths fit into L2.
In L1 we have one and a half wavelengths.
So if I take L2 minus L1, okay, I'm going to get two and a half minus one and a half,
which equals just one wavelength.
There's just one wavelength.
And then you can clearly see that there will be constructive interference at this plane where they intersect.
Here L2 minus L1 is going to give me two minus one and a half, and that's a half wavelength,
which is going to give me, that one's at the top, this one is at the bottom,
going to give me complete destructive interference.
Apologies for the telephonic interruption.
So what I can write is the following.
If L2 minus L1, assuming that L2 is larger than L1, we have this situation where n is just an integer
starting from 0, 1, 2, 3, positive integer there.
If that is the situation, then you're always going to get constructive interference.
Constructive interference.
But if L2 minus L1 equals n plus a half times lambda, where n is again 0 and then all the positive integers.
So I'm always going to end up with a half, 0 plus a half is a half, 1 plus a half, 1 and a half.
So that's 0 over 2, 3 over 2, 5 over 2, 7 over 2.
You're always going to get total destructive interference.
So these certainly are your two equations for total interference,
whether destructive or constructive interference.
And you can clearly see from this schematic why this would be so.
Okay, let's just see if we understand the concepts of these interference.
Constructive and destructive, I have a wavelength of an electromagnetic wave of 0.1 meters.
So two sources, coherent sources of electromagnetic waves and to a certain point from the one source of 3.2 meters
and it's 3.00 meters from the second source at that spot that I am.
And will I have constructive or destructive interference?
Well, in this instance, L2 minus L1 is going to be 0.2, 0 and 0 meters.
And look at that, that is an integer multiple of the wavelength.
Remember I said if L2 minus L1 equals some integer of the wavelength.
And this is 0.1, this is 0.2, so this is 2 times the wavelength.
This 2 is an integer.
Remember we said M being 0, 1, 2, 3, etc.
Okay, so this is going to be constructive.
If this was for instance 3.05 meters, that would have made it 15.
And 0.15 is going to be M plus a half.
M plus a half times the wavelength.
Okay, so that would have been destructive.
If I have four points on a square, square meaning all the sides are equal.
And I listen right at the center and I have speakers at two corners.
Whether they, they, they, they, they, they, they, they, they, it doesn't matter.
Will there always be constructive interference right at the center?
Yes, there will.
If the sound then is coherent, if the sound sources are coherent.
Because everything is equidistant and any L2 minus L1 will be 0.
So in other words, M equals 0 inasmuch as M lambda equals 0.
Certainly the waves do have wavelength.
In other words, M must be 0.
