In this section we're going to look at interference.
And that means we've got to move away from
geometric optics where we just deal with rays
and we'll have to look at the wave properties of light.
And first we're going to start with the Wagen's Principle.
We're going to jump back and forth a bit on this board
and do a few things.
In the end we're going to derive
we're going to derive Snell's Law.
As he spelt it with his one L.
And you'll remember what that is.
That's N1 sine of theta 1
equals N2 sine of that second angle.
And that is what we have here.
Surface, the normal, we have all this incident light
all in phase and we get refraction at that surface
as we go from N1 to N2.
From the lower to a higher index of refraction material.
So we're going to get there.
It looks very jumbled and unfortunately it's small
so you'll have to watch this video
at its maximum 720p resolution
so you can nearly see what's going on there.
But we'll get there.
Now it's because we're going to view light as a wave
that we can explain this.
We can explain refraction.
First is Wagen's principle.
If you have incident light, parallel light
and they're all in phase so their wavelengths
crests and troughs will all be in line.
In other words you get this wave front.
What Wagen's principle says is that if you take any point
in that wave front and it is then a source of a spherical wave
that goes out from it all at the same speed,
it's all in the same medium.
But at any time delta T, these just form complete circles.
And if you then draw a tangent line connecting these surfaces,
that'll be the new wave front.
That'll be the new wave front.
We know velocity equals distance over time.
Now this time equals distance over velocity.
So it's going to be this distance divided by the velocity
at which this wave goes.
Now let's get to this drawing again, the schematic of refraction.
Here are my, and they're not drawn terribly parallel,
but see what is drawn here.
Here are the incident rays.
Usually before we just drew one.
Let's look at this one.
Here is the normal to our surface,
from lower to higher index of refraction.
So the angle gets smaller and bends towards the normal.
Now we are, we used to look at this angle here,
between the normal and the incident ray.
Now we're not going to look at this angle,
we're looking at this one here,
between the wave front and the surface.
There's a wave front at 90 degree angle to these rays,
90 degree angle to these rays.
There's a little one left there, 90 degrees.
And you see that that is going to turn,
because it is refraction.
Now can I call this angle,
the same as the usual incident angle that I did?
Yes I can.
Just look at it this way.
It's just a bigger,
it's going to enlarge that area there.
There's a 90 degree, the normal to my surface.
So this makes a 90 degree angle.
And all I'm doing is I'm taking another coordinate system,
another 90 degree angle there,
and it was lying with that,
and I'm just moving it a bit.
So as this angle opens up,
so will that angle open up?
Yeah.
So I can draw extra lines in there,
make a triangle to prove to you.
But I think you can clearly see that this angle and that angle is the same.
So this angle between the 90 degree wave front,
and the surface is the same as my old incident angle.
And look, and I'm going to call that,
and I'm going to call that theta 1, that angle.
Now look carefully,
between these two,
between those two,
those are supposed to represent a distance called the wavelength.
So as this wave is straggling at a certain velocity in this medium,
this is going to be a wavelength.
That's going to be a wavelength.
Now there is refraction.
Now there's refraction.
Now look at it this way.
These two points here are the same point in time.
That point and that point,
as the wave comes down.
Now, in the same time,
in the same time t,
it's going to travel some distance,
divided by some velocity,
but, but,
this wave front must still be at the same time.
So this one goes a longer distance than this one,
but they should both be here at the same time.
So time from there to there equals time from there to there.
It can be no different.
So in other words,
we're going to have,
if that is distance divided by velocity,
this distance is one wavelength,
lambda one,
lambda one,
divided by the velocity that we have in here,
and that's going to equal,
now the wavelength is going to change in this new medium,
and we call this distance,
lambda two,
lambda two divided by,
then must be the velocity two,
because the two t's,
the time period from there to there,
and from there to there,
must be exactly the same.
That must be exactly the same.
Now, let's look in this triangle up here.
The sign of this,
the sign of this theta one,
is going to equal the opposite,
which is this distance, lambda one,
divided by this hypotenuse,
let's call it H.
And if I look in the second,
if I look at the sign of this little angle here,
it's going to be opposite,
which is lambda two,
divided by this very same hypotenuse.
Okay?
If I just divide these two,
that one divided by that one,
these are going to go,
it's lambda one,
and I'm going to get the sign of theta one,
over the sign of theta two,
is going to equal lambda one,
divided by lambda two.
Lambda one divided by lambda two.
But lambda one over lambda two,
let's look at this,
just rewrite this,
if I have lambda one divided by lambda two,
that equals V one divided by V two.
Just wrote this down and that one up.
So this equals V one divided by V two.
Velocity one divided by velocity two.
Now, you'll remember that the refractive index
equals the speed of wave in the vacuum
divided by the speed in that medium.
So we're going to have N one equals C divided by V one,
and we're going to have N two equals C divided by V two.
Or, V one is going to equal C divided by N one.
And V two is going to equal C divided by N two.
So let's put that in here.
V one is now C divided by N one.
And V two is C divided by N two.
In other words, let's look for some space.
Let's look for some space.
The sine of theta one divided by the sine of theta two equals,
the C's will cancel.
This will go into the numerator.
That's N two divided by N one.
And look at that.
Then we have Snell's law.
Sine of theta one times N one equals N two times the sine of theta two.
So we've derived Snell's law.
That's not the most important thing here though.
The most important thing here is to realize
Weyden's principle here.
That this light goes from a medium of lower
to a medium of higher refractive index of refraction
from lower to higher.
It bends towards the normal.
That means the velocity is going to go down.
And the wavelength is going to get smaller.
There was a longer wavelength.
Now I have a smaller wavelength.
And there is a little derivation that you can run through.
Maybe not that important.
The frequency.
Just to show that the frequency is going to be the same there as there.
And as much as velocity equals frequency times lambda.
As this goes down.
That must go down as well.
And frequency stays the same.
Frequency does not change.
Because a light wave goes to different mediums of refractive indexes.
There's a little derivation.
I might look at it later.
But it shows you just that velocity stays constant.
But it's just this Weyden's principle is each point on this wavefront.
Each point on this wavefront.
That point and that point.
Now is a source for spherical distribution of two dimensions here.
A circular distribution of a wavefront.
Which is going to give you a longer distance wave than the same time T.
