After that video announcing this course I want to take some time in this video to talk a little
bit about the logistics. As mentioned we're going to use R and RStudio and I want to show you how to
install that and how we're going to use all the various files during this course. Before we start
looking at all of that though I want to show you this application form. I'll put the link in the
description down below. This is the Stellenbosch University short course page specifically the
application form to sign up for this course. Of course we can use the R language for statistical
computing and I would really like for you to install R on your own computer. Now it cannot
be an easier task than doing the following. Here's the R Comprehensive or the Comprehensive R Archive
Network page. You can just search for RCRAN. Again the link will be in the description down below.
Just choose your operating system from Linux, Mac OS or Windows. Follow those links,
download the file. It's not a very big file. Double click it and install it. As simple as that.
Once that is done we need to install a program, an IDE, Integrated Development Environment. That is
the program into which you write your code. So if you think of Microsoft Word or Google Docs that really
is a program in which you type the words for your document. The same goes for the R language.
And the software that we're going to use is RStudio. So you can just do a search for RStudio.
Otherwise again the link down in the description down below. So this is the main page. If we go down
to products here a little drop down opens up and we're just going to choose RStudio. Once that loads
we have this page where you can choose between RStudio desktop and server. Of course we'll be
interested in the desktop version. And right at the bottom we can go to the download RStudio desktop.
And here we'll see all of the different tiers of use. Of course we're going for RStudio desktop,
the free version. You can download that, download the file specific to your operating system
and just run that file. You will now have R on your system and a coding environment. It really is as
simple as that. Just follow and accept all the defaults and you should have no problem whatsoever.
Of course alternatively there is RStudio cloud. That runs R in the cloud so you don't have to install
anything locally. And I've taken the time to upload all the files into RStudio cloud. If you sign up for
this course you're going to get a link and that will open up this course for you and your version of
RStudio cloud. So what you'll have to do is sign up. Of course it is good if you sign up for one of
the paid memberships. But you can do this absolutely free of charge as well and that
means you run RStudio in the cloud. Once you've signed up and you've logged in you can then click
on the link that we'll send you and that'll open a version of this course right inside of RStudio cloud.
So here we go. I've sent an email to this email address of mine and there'll be a link that you
can click on. Once you sign up for RStudio cloud you can just follow that link. And this is what you'll
be greeted with. First of all we'll see all the links to the 11 assignments that we have. Unfortunately you
can see it starts counting 1 and then 10, 11 and then goes to 2, 3, 4. Just follow the normal numerical
ascending order of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 until you end with 11 and those are the 11 assignments. Right at the
bottom there's also educational material and you'll see a red flash up here that says this is a temporary
copy and you have to click on this button right next to it which is save a permanent copy. That's going to
save a copy of this course right into your sign up of RStudio cloud. And what we can see here are the
15 notebooks that we're going to work our way through. We're going to start with a welcome session,
introduction to R and RStudio, study types, introducing statistical terms, working with the data table
library, working with data using the tidyverse, descriptive statistics, comparative statistics,
visualization etc etc. We're going to work our way through this course. And it's very simple you can
just click on one of these files and that file will open up for you and you can work on that file.
So during the course there'll be a full description of what is happening on this page so don't be too
concerned. As mentioned the alternative to this is just to download those two files from CRAN and from RStudio,
install the one from CRAN first. That's R and then once that is installed install RStudio. And inside
of the course there'll be a little download link. If you click on that link it'll download a file that
contains all of these files. It's a zip file so you'll have to unzip it but it'll give you access to all of
these on your local system and you can follow along step by step. During this course there is a well
documented page that says step number one, step number two, step number three so we couldn't make it any easier
for you to follow along on all the work that you'll have to do every day. This is what the zip file would
look like. This is a Mac system so if I right click on that I can just say open with archive utility. On a Windows
machine it is almost as easy. Right click and one of your menus here, one of your menu items here will
say unzip and let's do that. So let's do this unzip the file and there's the folder or directory. If you
right click on it there's all the files ready for you to use. Once you've installed R and RStudio you can
simply come over to this very last file medical statistics using r.rproj. That's the project file.
If you double click on that file RStudio will open up automatically and all these files will be
visible for you. So that's just a brief introduction about some of the logistics for the course. Please
install R for yourself on your own system. Alternatively once you inside the course on Monday
there'll be a link sent you that you can open your version of RStudio cloud. In the meantime though if you
do want to go that route please sign up for free RStudio cloud account. I look forward to seeing you in the
the course.
