So let's build on yesterday's lecture on elementary matrices by doing what is called
LU decomposition. LU decomposition. So we have a matrix A. In this instance it's a square
matrix. It doesn't really have to be square but when we are talking LU and if we want
to be pure about it and the definitions of what it is, we really are going to stick with
square matrices. They don't have to be invertible and we put that out right in front. There are
certain circumstances which you won't end up with. Now I'm telling you all sorts of things
without any context and that is a terrible thing to do. So first of all, what is LU decomposition?
It means we are going to take a matrix and we are going to decompose it into two separate
matrices. So if we multiply those two matrices they give us back A. And the L stands for
lower triangular and the U stands for upper triangular. So what is a lower triangular and what is
an upper triangular? Let's start off with what an upper triangular matrix is. Upper triangular.
That just means that I'm going to have a matrix. I'm going to say A sub 1 1, row 1 2, row 1 3.
Let's make it row 2 1, row 2 2, row 2 3, row 3 column 1, row 3 column 2, row 3 column 3.
It's a 3 by 3 matrix. In a 3 by 3 matrix, 4 by 4 matrix, square matrix, we have a main diagonal.
And those are all these values here on the main diagonal. On this main diagonal. And the upper
triangular means everything below that is a 0. So A 2 1 is 0. A 3 1 is 0. A 3 2 is 0.
These, along the diagonal, they can be anything inclusive of 0. And on the values on top can also be
anything. As long as the values below the main diagonal are all 0. That's going to be 0. That's
going to be 0. That's going to be 0. And in a bigger matrix, more of them have got to be 0. Then it's called
an upper triangular matrix. As opposed to that, we get the lower triangular matrix. Let's just define
these terms so we know. Lower triangular matrix. And with a lower triangular matrix, we want all of
these to be 1s on the main diagonal. 1s. And everything, you know, with different values here,
and everything above it has to be 0. So that's a 0, that's a 0, and that's a 0. So you see the subtle
difference. Listen to it again. Watch the video again. The difference between upper triangular and lower
triangular matrix. Now you've seen upper triangular matrices before. When we do elementary row operations,
we try to get this in row echelon form where all these values, these are some values, they are values,
and everything below that because that's a pivot and everything below it must be zeros. That's a pivot,
everything below it must be a zero. So we've gone to a stage, if you do elementary row operations,
where you do get to an upper triangular form. And the thing about these upper triangular matrices,
if you multiply them with each other, they stay upper triangular. If you multiply lower triangular
ones with each other, they stay lower triangular. There's something special about these. So why on
earth would we want to decompose this? Well, it has many applications. With yesterday's elementary
matrices, we talked about the fact that it can help with solving systems of linear equations,
specifically numerically. If you get into computer science, it can help with the
calculating the determinant and we'll get to those as well. So now you know we can decompose.
There's other decompositions which are also very important and we'll get to those. They're more
complex. This is the easiest form of lower of decomposition of a matrix into two other matrix
matrices that if I multiply them in this order. Remember, we're talking about associativity.
We're talking here the fact that they don't commute. So it's not U times L. It's L times U. And if you
do that other way around, remember matrix multiplication does not commute. So there's your definition of
upper and lower. And we're going to do that decomposition. And we're going to do it,
as you can imagine, if we get to that row echelon form, all we did was a series of multiplications
by elementary matrices. That's exactly how we're going to find this first one we're looking for,
upper. Because as we carry on with Gauss elimination, we get to upper triangular form in the end.
So why not do that? So what do we have to do? So first of all, this is a three by three matrix.
So we are going to do something to the three by three identity matrix. And remember, that's one,
zero, zero, zero, one, zero, zero, zero, one. So what do we have to do to this? To eliminate,
there's our one, we want to eliminate the leading one, we want to eliminate everything below it.
So we've got to eliminate that. So we're going to take minus two times row one, and we're going to add
that to row two. So what is minus two? So the one that we are trying to change is row two. So with,
to make an elementary matrix, we only want to do, we're changing one row. So this one is going to
stay the same. And this one here is going to stay the same. We're trying to change row two.
So minus two times row one, so that is actually minus two there, zero, zero. I'm just multiplying this
row out by minus two. And I'm adding that to row one. And remember, row one was zero,
I hope you can see here, one, zero. So I'm going to add these two, two, negative two plus zero is
negative two, zero plus one is one, zero plus zero is zero. You've got to make these little,
these little in between things for yourself. So that is the, an elementary matrix, we'll call this
elementary matrix one. And I want to multiply this with A. So I'm going to have E sub one times A.
Let's do that. So it's one, zero, zero, and then the negative two, one, zero, zero, zero, one,
and I'm going to multiply it by A, which is one, three, one, and I have two, five, one,
one, and I have two, one, two. And I'm going to end up with that. So remember, it is E1, elementary one,
times A, not the other way around. Don't make that mistake. Because I'm multiplying like this,
the first row stays exactly the same. Minus two, plus two, plus zero, zero. Minus six,
plus five, plus zero is minus one. Minus two, plus one is minus one. Plus zero, that stays minus one.
And this one is going to stay exactly two, one, two. Now you'll see shortcuts. Your lecturer might show
you shortcuts. Your textbook might show you shortcuts where you can combine all of these E1, E2, and E3
into one. But please in the beginning do it separately like this. So now we're left with,
now we're left with, let's clean the board. Now we're left with
this matrix. So now we have E1 times A and that is one, three, one. We have a zero minus one minus
one and we have two, one, two. That's what we have. So what do we have to do? We've got to get rid of
this. We've got a leading one there. We've got, we've gotten rid of that. We've got to make this.
And that again will be minus two times row one added to row three. So that's going to stay the
same. That's going to stay the same. We need to change row three. And it's minus two times row one.
Remember this row is zero, zero, one. Just put that very lightly in there. Minus two times row one.
So that's minus two is zero and zero. And we add the minus two and the zero is zero. Zero and zero.
If you just see, am I doing that right? Zero plus zero is
zero. And let's redo that. Let's redo that. So I need to do minus two times
row one plus row three. So this is negative two and a zero and a zero. And I need to add that to zero,
zero and a one. So that gives me minus two. That gives me zero and that gives me one. There we go.
There we go. So that is going to be our E2. Let's do that multiplication.
Let's take E2. Zero, one, zero, zero. Zero, one, zero. And then minus two, zero, one. And we're going to
multiply it by that. One, three, one, zero, negative one, negative one. And two and two to get this.
So that's going to stay the same. One, three, one. This is going to stay the same. Zero, minus one,
minus one. And now we have negative two, zero, two, zero as required. We have negative six,
zero, and one. That's negative five. And we have negative two, zero, two. That's a zero. So here we have
E2.E1.A. And it is now one, three, one, zero, negative one, negative one, and zero, negative five, zero.
That's what we have now. So we go on to the next leading non-zero number and that is this one. Now
you can change that. You can do an elementary row operation by getting rid of this and making it a
positive one. But remember I said upper triangular. This main diagonal can be anything as long as
everything below that is zero. So leave that negative one. It can be a million. Just leave it. That is not
required for upper triangular. All we have to get rid of is this. So we're going to have five times
negative five times row two added to row three. So if that is multiplied by negative five becomes
positive five and if I add that this is going to turn into zero. So again it's zero one zero zero and then
a row two which is zero one zero now needs to be multiplied by negative five. So that's going to be a zero
a minus five and a zero and I've got to add that to zero zero one zero and zero zero minus five
and zero is minus five and zero and one is one. So there's my E3. There's my E3. Let's do that.
One zero zero zero zero one zero and I have zero minus five and one and I'm going to multiply that
by that by that product which is one three one zero negative one negative one zero negative five zero
so that is one three one that is zero negative one negative one and now we have zero and where are we
zero zero zero and zero that's a zero we have zero we have plus five we have negative five which is zero
and we have zero we have five and zero so we have a five there is that right let me just check and let me
just check yes
so there we have E3 dot E2 dot E1 and together with A and that gives us this upper triangular form
one three one zero negative one negative one negative one zero zero five upper triangular because
that everything the main diagonal everything below that is a zero that's a zero that's a zero that's a zero
so
we now have the fact that we have E3 times E2 times E1 times A gives us and we're going to call this
this what we have here U for upper triangular and that is going to be an upper triangular form
so how do we get the L well look at this look at it this way if I have E3 inverse
on this side E3 E2 E1 A what I do on this side I must do on that side so it's E3 inverse U
that cancels these two out now if I do E2 inverse E2 E1 you see where this is going this is E2
E3 inverse U that's gone because that gives me the identity matrix and then lastly as you can see I'm
going to do E1 inverse so A equals E1 inverse E2 inverse E3 inverse U and the multiplication of these
we call L and it will be lower triangular
so A equals LU and you can do that multiplication do it in this order and if it was a larger
you know you would have E4 inverse E5 inverse etc and you have done your very own LU decomposition of
a matrix using this idea of elementary matrices let's go to Mathematica and just redo this so
you can see how it works and if you can do it in Mathematica you can obviously check your work that
you do on paper as you exercise to be able to do this for your exam you can check your work on
Mathematica see that you can do it right and later on after the exams if you do some real work just use
Mathematica so here we are in Mathematica let's look at LU decomposition so there is my matrix if
you want to just pause and copy all of this down because I have my matrix A that we had on the board
and then the one two three all three elementary matrices I do have here so you can pause and just
copy that I'll carry on so shift enter that gives me A let's just have a look A in matrix form
and we see it is the matrix that we had on the board there is E1 and all I want to do is E1 dot A
remember that period there full stop that means the matrix times a matrix and if we have a look at
that that was our first elementary matrix times A and then if we go on and we do E2 times this product
E1 and A that is where we were left and then that is where we were left after E3 times E2 times E1 times
A and we have this upper triangular matrix everything below the main diagonal is zero not everything on
the main diagonal has to be one if they were all ones that would be sometimes referred to as a strictly
triangular upper triangular matrix but we don't need that we only need that in this form that we have here
so let's create U remember U was then E3 dot E2 dot E1 dot A semicolon to suppress that and L
we're going to make the inverse of E1 and the inverse of E2
there we go we have both of those and we can ask is A equal to L dot U and we see indeed that it is true
so Mathematica has a function called LU decomposition it gives you back three answers so you have to
store it in three separate computer variables so I'm going to create three and because it's a list of
three it's got to go inside of a list I'm going to call the first one LU I'm going to call the second
one P and the last one I'm going to call C just by convention doesn't matter what I really what I call
it but I'm going to say LU decomposition of A and let's see what that looks like so I see these three
elements that I get the first one is a three by three matrix the second one and this third one the
first one LU let's look at LU in matrix form and I see it's a three by three matrix what that is
is a combination of L and U not the multiplication of it because that will just give me
back A this is not what we're looking at I'm just looking at a combination of them and I have to
extract L and U from that the second one is this one two three that's the rows that we use remember
this is not unique you can come up with different elementary matrices to get to LU decomposition and
last is a numerical for numerical analysis just the accuracy so we're not concerned about that so
let's extract L and U from this matrix form the first thing I want to just make you aware of
is this thing called the sparse array now a sparse matrix is a massive if I have a massive matrix and
most of the values are zero and here and there's a value that's not zero that'll take up a lot of
space in memory so we have these sparse arrays where we just store in memory the values that are not
one and where they are their own column value and that's much smaller than storing all these needless
zeros so let me just show you the sparse array I'm going to create that and I'm going to put two
placeholders for row and columns so i with an underscore and j with an underscore to indicate that these
are placeholders and then I'm going to use the shorthand notation forward slash semicolon so what I want
here is if j is larger than or equal to so I'm hitting escape larger than or equal to escape to
get that a I so I'm saying if the column value if the column number is larger than the row number
and then I'm going to say a little arrow remember that's minus forward slash one give it a one
everywhere else give it a zero and then lastly I've just got to tell it how large I want this
now have a look at this and I'm going to print this out in matrix form have a look at that see what it
did that is by this if the column value if the column number was larger than the row number it gave
it a one otherwise or equal to otherwise it gave it a zero and you can work that out that will give me
that exactly so I'm just going to create this that is upper triangular it's upper triangular because
everything below the main diagonal is zero it is strictly because all are ones and I'm going to
create this u my upper one from this is lu times this little thing that I created here copy that and
paste that times I just left a space so that's u if I want to print out u in upper mate in matrix form
there is a matrix form and that was indeed our upper triangular matrix it's not strictly upper because
it's not all ones but it is upper triangular because everything below the main diagonal is zeros
so that's how how we got our how mathematical got its upper and it seems as if it followed the
same steps of elementary matrix as we did because it got the same upper upper triangular matrix so let's do
the following let's do sparse array again but this time I'm going to say when the column number is
smaller than when it's smaller than i and let's print that out in matrix form just to show you then
I'm going to get this but what I actually want is for all of these to be ones as well so it's strictly
lower triangular so all I'm going to do is add to that to the identity matrix identity identity matrix
that is three by three and I get this strictly lower triangular because it's lower triangular
because everything above the main diagonal above it is zeros and it's strictly because on the main
diagonal I only have ones and this is how I'm going to do l I'm going to say l equals lu space which
means multiplication and this little thing that I've just created here that I've just created here and
that gives me l and if I put l in matrix form you see that it was our l as well the lower triangular
matrix strictly lower because on the main diagonal it's all ones so that's how you extract just make
sure that when it's four by four you put a four there and a four by four there if it's two by two
you put a two there and a two there and a two there and a two there and a two there etc but that is how
you extract from this lu that came out of the lu decomposition it's a combination of l and u and
you have to extract l and u from it and this is the way that you extract l u from it and we still get
to l u decomposition with a lower and upper triangular matrix there's one more thing I want to add to this
and you would have noticed that we only dealt with two elementary row operations we actually only did
one but you can multiply throughout by a a constant or you can take a constant multiple of one row and
add it to another row what we did not do is row interchanging rows when we do interchange rows
as an elementary matrix we are not going to end up with lower and upper we are going to end up with
two matrices that we can multiply with each other with to get back to a but they will not be upper and
lower triangular they will not be there are other words for these psychological upper and lower or
pseudo upper and lower there's the different terms from this so if you do an interchange of rows
then your elementary matrix is is going to lead you not to have upper and lower triangular matrices for
l u decomposition so you can still do it and in computer science that is done for a variety of
reasons but you won't end up with strictly so stick to those multiplying by constant you usually don't
have to do that because we don't have to leave it in strictly upper triangular form so that all the
main diagonals are one for the upper triangular matrix but this constant multiple of one plus another one
plus another row that's the row operation that is used very frequently you would also notice the
following that in the vast majority of cases i do these row operations so that i can add two rows and
many textbooks and many lecturers will do the opposite of that they will leave it so that you subtract one
row from another row exactly the same thing happens in the end you're still going to get to the same solution
obviously your elementary matrices are going to look different so i stick to the fact that i want to
keep it simple so i do addition of two rows to give me that zero under the previous leading value
i do addition so just note that difference
is
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
