All right, now that we know what to do with the magnetic field in a straight line and
a curve, let's combine those with the current running down and cross up.
It obtains an angle of 90 degrees at the center, and then this point is also the center of,
if we continue to circle here, that arc.
So we've got to combine those and see what the magnetic field at point P is.
From the straight line though, remember that we have the magnetic field equals mu zero pi divided by
if it's an infinitely long wire, remember it's two r.
But what happened to the rest, remember we said with this, it's always at an angle,
and it's always a point of particular to that straight wire.
So certainly four pi, two pi actually.
But that's not what we're dealing with here.
We can't use this because this was always an equation we had for a point perpendicular.
This point is straight in the direction or away from these two straight sections.
So don't get confused, don't use those equations there.
We're back to the law of Biot and Sabara which is mu zero i ds sine of phi divided by four pi r squared.
And what does this mean?
This angle here, remember it's the angle between i ds cross r.
It was that angle.
And the angle, if we draw this i ds vector, will be in this direction.
The radius vector between any point for any differential area of length of that straight wire,
that r is also going to point in that direction.
So the angle between those two is zero.
So the sine of zero, sine of zero degrees or zero radians,
we're dealing with calculus, so these are radians, is zero.
So the, if we, even if we do the integral here to see,
this is the point, at point p, the magnetic field going to the current,
and this y is going to be zero.
The same is for this point here, because the angle between our i ds here,
cross product r, is 180 degrees.
In as much as i ds points in that direction, but the radius vector in this direction,
so the sine of 180 degrees is also zero.
So there's going to be nothing left there.
So we're only dealing, actually, with the, with the arc.
So that we're only dealing with arc and we can curl our fingers around,
point in the direction, so we know that the magnetic field here is going to be in,
into the board there.
And through the previous section's equations,
we can certainly get the magnetic field due to that arc,
and that's just going to be the magnetic field,
it's going to be mu zero, i phi, divided by, what was it?
Was it 4 pi r, or 2 pi r, maybe?
Just have to check on that, just check on that.
I'm not 100% sure now.
That's only had the loss of some memory.
But this angle phi now, don't, don't confuse that.
This is now, this angle here, so that we can get to this.
Remember, we converted, we said, it's equal to the arc length divided by the radius.
So, the arc length there, ps, is going to be equal phi dr.
And, so this is the angle here.
So don't get confused when I write theta or phi, as I said.
Now what I mean here is the angle between those two vectors,
and here it means this angle, this angle here.
Just check on that for me, if I make a mistake there.
Let's look at this problem.
I don't know if this will come out right at the top.
As I said, I brought the wrong lens today, so things are a bit different.
And, so what we have here is two infinitely long wires, there and there.
In this one, the current goes into the board,
and in this one the current comes out of the board.
And, say for instance, I1, let's make I1 smaller than I2, doesn't it?
Now we want to know at point P what happens if we are given the distance D
and we're told that the angle there is 90 degrees away from the wires.
What is going to be the magnetic field at point P?
Now we, if we are given D, we are not given the radius,
so we don't know how far this point P is away from these two but through symmetry.
And because this is an angle of 90 degrees, we can certainly find out what,
what odd is that these two lengths are the same.
That means this angle is pi over 4.
And the cosine, the cosine of the number of pi over 4,
and our instance here, this angle here, is going to be adjacent,
which is R, divided by the hypotenuse, which is D,
because the angle of 90 degrees are there, don't get confused as D.
So we know R equals D times the cosine of pi over 4.
We could have also drawn a perpendicular line here,
which makes this angle and that angle 45 degrees.
So you're going to have half D over R.
So you're just going to have this turned around, but that half of D.
That can be confusing with that.
So it's a right angle triangle with a right angle there.
Cosine of this angle is adjacent, which is R divided by hypotenuse, R divided by D.
And that makes this R, so it's easy for us now to find this R.
Because these are infinitely long wires.
And if this wire points towards you now, this point P is perpendicular away.
Then look at this angle which is pi over 4.
This wire runs in this direction.
This point P is there.
This distance is a distance perpendicular away from this wire.
The same for that.
So don't get confused with the angles.
And we know from our previous videos that B equals mu zero I divided by 2 pi times R.
Is that right?
Yeah.
That's one infinitely long wire.
Remember for a shorter wire we have 4 there.
So we can work out, because we know what R is now.
So we can work out for B1 and B1 and we can work out for B2 as well.
But now we're going to come to the, we're going to come to the directions.
Because we'll need, actually we won't need this only in magnitude form.
But we'll also need it in vector form.
We'll need to know what B1 and B2 is in vector form.
So let's look at what the direction is going to be.
Remember that this wire runs now straight to you.
And the conventional current is in that direction.
So if I, if I do this classical wire thumb pointing in the direction of the current,
it's going to be in, always be in this direction.
But remember this is a radius.
From there to there is a radius.
So I can draw, I can draw a big circle around this, with this point as, as my center.
And the direction of the magnetic field is just going to be the tangent line, the tangent
line there.
In that direction.
You won't see the top.
So unfortunately, I think the video won't go up to there.
But it's going to be in that direction, the tangent line to the circle.
The same is going to happen on this one.
If I drew a circle with this point, now it's the center.
And the current runs into the board.
I grasp it's going to be in this direction.
So it's going to be there as well, this angle of 90 degrees there between them.
So if I can just bring that into the board, I'm going to have, say for instance, I, we
said I1 is smaller than I2.
Or let's make I1 larger than I2.
So my I1, let's keep that I1 smaller than I2.
Smaller than I2.
So remember I said I1 is going to point in this direction.
And I2 is now B2, sorry.
B2 to 1 and B2 to 2.
It's going to point in that direction.
But we've just got the magnitude of those two.
But certainly we can just complete for ourselves this vector addition.
So that is going to be B total.
At this point P, which is our plane, remember.
And if we want to know what this angle is going to be, for instance, it's easy because
we know that length, magnitude, we'll know that magnitude.
And the tangent of this angle would just be that divided by that J, opposite divided by
Hock-Pottenius.
So have I been confused, anything in this video.
But just think about it, that around a, around a wire, there's going to be, that if I is
in that direction, you grasp it and your thumb in the direction of I.
So everywhere, we're just going to have a line perpendicular.
Magnetic field will be perpendicular.
Magnetic field will be perpendicular.
So it's going to be this, this spiral.
So this is the center, this is point B.
This is our circle.
Certainly due to this one, it's going to curve in this direction.
In other words, there's going to be a line there, just tangent to the circle.
The same for this one, but the circle goes in this direction.
So this perpendicular, perpendicular there to the circle will be due to B2.
And then it's easy to add them victorially as it's just the angle between them is 90 degrees
through this symmetry that was set up in the beginning of the problem.
End of the problem.
End of the problem.
Thank you.
