Let's have a look at the simple problem. We have a block here, Q, metal block. Each phase
D equals 0.015 meters. It moves in the y direction at a constant velocity of 4 meters per second
and there is a magnetic field in the positive z or z direction of 0.050 tesla. We are asked
which of these phases will become negatively charged and what would that charge be? Well
for one of the sites to be charged means the electrons must experience a force due to the
magnetic field. In other words we are really going to look at QV plus B. There is a velocity,
there is electrons, there is a magnetic field and certainly we are going to get a force on
that. So let's look at what QV might be. If you look at what QV might be. So in the x
direction the velocity is straight up so all these electrons are moving up. So there will
be 0 in the i direction. I am going to leave the units out just for simplicity's sake. In
the y direction we will have negative 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 times 4 and I did
that I think. What was it? Negative 6.4. Negative 6.4 times 10 to the power negative 19 and that is
in the j roof. And in the z direction there is no movement so certainly that is going to be
0 in the z direction. Let's look at what B is. Let's look at what B is. That is all in the z direction. So we will have 0 in the i
z here. And we will have 0 in j roof. And we will have 0.050 tesla in the z roof direction. Let's do the cross product of those. And that will give us FB as a vector. First we will close column 1. We will have negative 6.4 times 10 to the power negative 19 times 0.05. I think I got that as negative 3.2. Negative 3.2.
So it is that times that minus 0 times 0.0 times 10 to the power negative 3.2 times 10 to the power negative 0.00, so it's negative 3.2 times 10 to the power negative 3.2 times 10 to the power negative 0.0.
So it's negative 3.2 times 10 to the power minus 0.03. So it is negative 3.2 times 10 to the power negative 10 to the power negative 0.00.
3.2 times 10 to the power of negative 20 newtons. I roof, negative 3.2. For this, we'll put
a negative. 0 times this, minus 0 times 0, so that'll be nothing. 0 in the J roof, plus
that'll be a negative, remember. But it's 0, so it doesn't matter. And then for Z, we'll
put these two, so it's 0 times 0 minus 0 times 6.4, so there's certainly also 0 in the K roof
direction. So it looks as the force due to the magnetic field, and we've put the charge
in. These are vector, this is vector algebra, negative in the I direction. So the left face,
the left face will become negatively charged, and the right face here will become positively
charged, and the force on those electrons is going to be negative 3.2 times 10 to the
power of negative 20 newtons in the negative x direction. Let's see if they ask further
questions. What is the potential difference between the faces of the higher and the lower
potential potential? Now, because there is a force in this direction, there's going to
be a potential difference with the lower potential on the left face and the higher potential on
the right face. And very quickly, there'll be equilibrium. So the two forces, now remember,
so if this is negative, this is positive, we're going to have the electric field in this direction,
and that means the force due to the electric field on the electrons is going to be in the
opposite direction, in that direction, in the positive, in the positive high roof direction.
And these will quickly cancel out. But there will be an equilibrium. In other words, that is going
to be positive 3.2 times 10 to the power negative 20 newtons by roof. Now we know that E equals F over Q,
electric field equals F divided by Q. And in other words, F equals QE. F equals QE. And now we know what the
question was, what is the potential difference? And we know that the electric field equals V over D. So that is going to equal Q.
V is equal Q. V divided by D. And since we know what the force is, we just need V. V is then going to equal F D divided by Q.
Let's see what that is.
Have I got my, have I got everything correct? V equals QE. E is then V over D. So V equals F D over Q. I think that's wrong.
F equals QE equals QE but E equals V over D. That equals F equals EV over D. That equals, no, that's quite correct.
So another part to this question. And yeah, what will the potential difference be? So if you just plug in the values, there's your answer.
So in this problem, in this problem, we have a metallic strip, so it's a conductor moving at velocity V up and we have a magnetic field going into the board.
We have the magnetic field there, 1.20 milli Tesla. We have the length and the width of the metallic plate and we need to find out what the velocity is of this plate.
What the, that will be, that will be the drift velocity. Now first of all, as the movement is up, we have velocity in that direction, we have the magnetic field going in.
In other words, our force for the magnetic field is in this direction, but, but, it's an electron, so our force due to the magnetic field on the electron is in that direction.
That means there's going to be a magnetic field. That means there's going to be an electric field. This side becomes negatively charged. This side will become positively charged, so there's electric potential.
And we're given that the electric potential between points x and y, there's 3.9 microvolts.
Now, equilibrium will be reached, and we're back to our, our equation of velocity, the velocity equals the electric field divided by the magnetic field.
And remember where we got that. And remember where we got that. We know that q, vb sin of theta is 1 because theta is 90 degrees. And that is going to equal q as e. In other words, b equals e over b.
So the velocity. So the velocity is going to equal the electric field, which we don't know. But we know that electric field, electric field equals v, electric potential divided by d.
So the e is going to equal v. So the e is going to equal v divided by d, capital V, still divided by b. And let's have a look.
And so we see, we do know what v is. We do know what d is. And we certainly know what b is. And it's now a simple substitution to get us to the, to get us to the alpha side.
Here again we have a metal strip. It has a thickness of 150 micrometers. It has a width of 4.5 millimeters. In a uniform magnetic field, 0.65 tesla.
And then a current of 23 amperes is placed through the metal plate. And it says such that a whole potential difference v appears across the width of the strip. Calculate this, calculate this, this potential difference.
Now we can draw a picture. We can look at what the directions are. We can detect that it is all perpendicular. And again we just need to start with v equals vd, which is the drift velocity equals the electric field divided by the magnetic field.
Now we were given n. Now we were given n as the number of charge carriers per unit volume. And we know an equation, well we've got two unknowns now. We don't know what vd is. And we don't know what e is. But we certainly know other, if we look at what we were given, we certainly know other equations for those that include the details that we have been given in as much as vd equals current divided by n e times v.
n e times the area. And that e is the charge of the electron. We also know that electric field equals potential difference divided by d, the width, divided by v. And that simply gives us v equals idv divided by n e.
And this area is simply going to be the area there, dh. And now let's have a look. Things are better now. We know i, we know d, we know b, we know n, we know the charge of an electron, we know d, and we know h.
If you just draw a picture of this problem, you'll note that the area that we are talking about is going to be the thin on edge, the thickness, and the height, which is what gives us the area there.
In this problem, we have a block of dimensions 5 meters, 3 meters by 2 meters in the x, y, z direction. We are told it moves at a drift velocity. If it moves, obviously the conduction electrons move with that same velocity of 20 meters per second.
i roof, i roof, and a constant magnetic field of 30 times 10 to the power negative 3 tesla in the j roof direction. We want to know what the electric field is inside the block and what the electric potential is across the block and obviously across which faces we are dealing with.
Now, once equilibrium is reached, I think it's safe to say that VB is going to equal negative F force due to the magnetic field minus the force due to the electric field inasmuch as combining the two should equal zero.
So, we certainly know what this is. This is going to be Q V cross B and this is simply going to equal negative Q E. If we look at vector rotation there, we can certainly cancel out Q on both sides and Q on both sides.
So, we're going to get negative. So, we're going to get negative for the electric field. It's going to equal the following. V, D is 20 meters per second in the i roof direction and it's zero in j roof and it's zero in green roof.
And then that's B and for B we're going to have zero in i roof. We're going to have 30 micro tesla j roof and we're going to have zero in k roof.
If we do that vector multiplication, we're going to close this column, zero times zero minus zero times that. So, we're going to have zero for i roof. Put the negative. Close the second column, 20 times zero minus zero times zero is still going to be zero.
I like to put the negative inside but it's zero so it doesn't make a difference. Plus, now we better get some in. 20 times, 20 times, 30 times 10, that'll be 60. That'll be, let me get a calculator.
I think, I think, minus 6. Let's see. My arithmetic brain is not working today. Times 30 times 10 is going to be negative 3. That is going to give us 0.60 volts per meter then. Volts per meter.
So, that is going to give us 0.60 volts per meter in the k roof direction. So, that is going to be the electric field. This is going to go from positive in the frontal, negative in the back.
And we know that v equals ed. And as much as e equals potential difference divided by d. We know what e is now. We know what d is. And because it's the k roof direction, we're dealing with dz. Done.
