In this video series we are going to start looking at magnetism.
Let's look at the magnetic field. We denote the magnetic field which is a vector by the symbol B.
But how do we define a magnetic field?
It was easy to define an electric field in as much as we could put a point charge and if it's positively charged it had an electric field we could put a test charge in that electric field and we could note what the force on that was and we said that the electric field equals the force divided by the test charge.
Because we had an electric, a particle, electrically charged particle that had a single charge.
Now we don't have a particle that has a single pole in it called a magnetic monopole.
We haven't discovered those. If we had those we can put another monopole in there and see what the force on it is and define it.
As such we can't.
First of all though, how is the magnetic field set up?
Well it's set up by two ways. Either by moving charges or it's also an intrinsic property of electrically charged particles.
This has masses and charge. It also has an electric field.
But we've got to define it and the way that it was defined is by moving a particle in a magnetic field in various directions and at various velocities.
And noting what the force on it was. It was clear that this was going to be a dot product and in the end it was noted that the force due to a magnetic field was equal to the charge of our test particle times the velocity with cross product with the magnetic field.
And if we were not dealing with vectors that means the force due to the magnetic field was going to be the absolute value of Q because this is just magnitude not direction.
V, V and the sign of the angle between them. And the sign of the angle between them.
So this is certainly, this is the first equation that we've got to know for magnetic fields.
The force due to a magnetic field on a test charge is going to be proportional to that test charge, the velocity at which that charge moves, the strength of the magnetic field and the angle between the velocity and the magnetic field.
The direction is always going to be perpendicular to the plane of the vectors V and V make and we're going to use the right hand rule.
First of all in the direction of our velocity, curve your hand in the direction then of the magnetic field of the velocity was there and the magnetic field was there.
The thumb is going to point in the direction of the force.
One thing to remember though is this charge. If it was, if we had velocity in that direction, magnetic field into the board, our force was going to be up.
But if there was an electron moving there, the force would be negative, in other words opposite to the direction of our thumb.
Let's start to look at a few examples. Our first example says we have a uniform magnetic field and it has a strength of, it has a strength of 1.2 times 10 to the power negative 3 tesla.
In the first video we did look at the unit. It is the tesla and I might just expand on that a bit later.
And it points vertically upwards. It's going to point in that direction vertically upwards.
And we're moving a proton with a kinetic energy of 5.3 mega electron volts.
So it has a kinetic energy of 5.3 times 10 to the power 6 electron volts.
And we know that 1 joule is 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 electron volts.
Those are going to cancel out so we know we're going to have SI units as far as the kinetic energy is concerned of a proton.
The mass of our proton equals what is 1.67 times 10 to the power negative 27 kilograms.
And we are told that it moves that kinetic energy from south to north.
Let's make this south, let's make that north. In other words east is towards you, west is into the board.
So it moves from south to north. So it's going in that direction.
Now it is asked what magnetic deflecting force acts on the proton, of course.
Now very easy we're going to have force due to the magnetic field.
We're going to just use a magnitude. We can use the right hand rule because this is very simple planes we're dealing with.
V, B and sine of the angle between them.
If the velocity is in this direction, the magnetic field is in this direction,
they have a 90 degree angle between them. So the sine of theta is just going to be 1.
So for our little proton we need V. We don't have V.
But we know that very simply K equals half mv squared.
So very simply V is going to be the square root of 2K divided by m.
And we can put that in there. So we're going to have...
That force is going to equal the electric charge, which is 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19.
We're going to have the square root of 2 times K, which we do have, divided by m, which we do have, times B.
And that will give us the answer to this problem.
Problems with the equation for the force due to electric field and its velocity through that field
is usually going to come in vector format in these problems.
So let's look at one. One thing I just want to do before we get to that problem.
Remember that F of B equals Q D cross B.
So we're going to have coulomb, we're going to have meters per second, as far as that is concerned.
But what we want to know is the units for B, the magnetic field.
So if that was in magnitude, we're going to just have B equals...
B was going to equal... this chalk is terrible.
F of B divided by Q V sine of phi.
And that is going to equal...
Newton over charge meter per second.
And that is going to give us Newton per coulomb per meter second.
And that equals the Tesla.
So that's just the units of Tesla.
I think let's stop it here, yeah?
And then we carry on with our first problem with vector rotation as far as...
Maybe one more thing before we get there, apologies, is that if we're dealing with a sign.
So if the velocity and the velocity and the magnetic field vectors are in the same direction or in opposite directions,
we're never going to have a force.
So we're never going to have a force if we have this scenario.
In other words, we're never going to be able to change the velocity in that direction of the magnetic field.
The component of V along V is never going to change.
The only thing that we'll be able to do is to change direction.
And that is the only acceleration that we're going to get is a change in direction.
Not a change in...
I would suggest then to call it straight line velocity.
Because we never...
We always tend to have 0 or 180 degrees, the component velocity, along the direction of the magnetic field.
And we might get to that a bit later.
Enough for this video.
Next video, we'll look at our first vector-based problem.
