In this video I want to explore whether if you have a thin wire with a current running
through the wire and it is in a magnetic field whether there will be any force acting on
movement of that wire and of course there is. Remember we saw that the electrons will
push to one side but they can't escape the wire so if they all bounce towards that side
obviously it will feel a force to that side. Can we quantify that?
Well here we have a piece of this wire and we have a distance L. The current goes in this
direction in other words our charge carriers will have a drift velocity. If I want to know
how much charge goes past a certain point, past that point. Well I know that charge equals,
current equals charge divided by time, in other words charge equals current times time. In
that certain time how much charge will actually flow through. Well if this is the length L,
we think that velocity equals length divided by time. That means time equals, that means time
equals length divided by velocity. Time equals length divided by velocity. So in that time we
we can tell the charge equals current times length divided by the drift velocity. So this amount of
current, if we just look at the charges in this, will move past, so all of this volume of charge
will move past in a certain time dependent upon this length and dependent upon the velocity. Now we know that the force
due to the magnetic field equals Q, V, V, B, sine of the angle between velocity and the magnetic field. In other words, the force due to the magnetic field is going to be Q, which we know as I L over V, times V, times the sine of phi, the
the
the
the
and these Vs cancel out, so we have that the force due to the magnetic field is going to equal
I L, and it's the sine of theta, so
sine of phi, so that's going to be cross B. If we want to make that in vector notation. Now what is this vector L, we define this vector L, and the
direction of the conventional current. So L will be in this direction. Let's have this magnetic field, let's have this magnetic field pointing at us. So we'll have L in this direction, cross B, in other words the force will be in this direction. If we just look at force. Now remember that this is the conventional current. And so the
this is the equation, this is the equation, this is the equation that we are interested in as far as the force that the current produces on a long thin flexible wire in a magnetic field. Let's continue with this
force that the wire will experience in this force that the wire will experience in a magnetic field. You might ask yourself if this is the
drift velocity, and with the right hand rule, this is the force is in this direction, so the electrons must actually go in that direction. Don't make a mistake though, remember that the electrons actually move in the opposite direction, so its drift velocity is down, and coming towards us with the magnetic field is down.
with the magnetic field out of the board, which means the force in this direction, but because it is electrons, remember they move to the opposite side, in other words they will hit against this side causing a curve to this side.
One problem that you might get is to say that there is a horizontal wire suspended in a magnetic field, and the magnetic field is now in or out of the board, in other words at an angle of 90 degrees.
Now we ask for a given linear density, and we ask for a given linear mass density, remember that equals mass divided by length, in other words mass equals a linear mass density times that length.
One magnetic field at a perpendicular angle will suspend this wire. Now obviously the wire must experience a force due to the magnetic field in an upward direction to be equal in magnitude but opposite in direction of the force due to gravity.
The force due to gravity equals ma, force due to gravity equals ma, so that will be g, and the force due to the magnetic field,
Pepin ос, and is and is. Now sine phi is 90 degrees, so we can just do the pi Lb, so we'll have the current times length times the magnetic field, strength equals, we'll have, on the down hand side the l's will, will cancel out and we'll have to have a magnetic field strength of,
that, to suspend the wire. Another way to present these problems is through unit vector
notation. Here we have two, two-meter wires and they make an angle of 60 degrees with
the horizontal here, so y-axis, x-axis and if it's a right-hand three-dimensional plane
from x to y, z, the carrier roof is out of the board and it has, each one has a current
fluid of two amperes and we told that the magnetic field is four tesla in this direction. So they
want to know what is the resulting force on these two wires combined due to this magnetic
field. Well we know that the force due to the magnetic field in vector notation equals I L
cross B. Now let's first look at writing L in vector notation and let's start, let's make
this wire 1 and this wire 2. So let's start with wire 1, L1 in unit vector notation. It
goes in that direction because it is with the conventional current, so our L goes in that
direction, so we need to break that down in components. If we look at its x component, which
will then be this section here, it goes in the positive direction, in other words, this
area, or this length. So that is just going to be L times the cosine of theta. L is two meters,
cosine of 60 degrees is one. So did I do that? Let's have a look, let's have a look. Let's
just do that separately. So that is going to be L cosine of 60 degrees. Cosine of 60 degrees,
so there's a half. A half times two is one. So that is going to be one meter high roof.
I'm going to leave out the units here just to say spacing time. The Y is going to be in this
direction, so that is going to be the sine. And so that is L times the sine of 60 degrees.
Sine of 60 degrees is square root of three divided by two times the length of two meters. This is going
to give us the square root of two, square root of three, sorry, in the J direction. And there's
no component in the K roof direction. Let's multiply this with I L1 in vector notation. I is 2 amperes. So this is going to be 2 pi roof plus 2 square root of 3 J.
plus still 0 in the K roof direction. Let's look at the vector B. This is 4 in K. So this is 0 I plus 0 J plus 4 in the K direction. That gives us FB for 1, for wire 1,
force due to the magnetic field and vector rotation for wire 1 is going to equal the vector multiplication of this times this. So for the first, for I, we close the first column. So that's 2 square root of 3 times 4. So that is going to be 8 square root of 3 minus 0 times 0. So that is the 0 I. Now we put a negative, remember. For the second
for the second one. And we're going to go ahead 2 times 4 is 8 minus 0. That leaves us with 8. But I like to put the negative inside, make this a positive. So that is going to be J. And then 2 times 0 minus 2 square root of 3 times 0 is 0. So obviously we're going to have 0 in the K roof direction.
Now if we look at 2, let's look at 2. Now if we look at 2, let's look at 2. Now through symmetry we're obviously going to lose something.
And what we notice with, what we notice with, what we notice with y and 2 with a cone turning in this direction, obviously we're going to have still a positive x value. So let's make this 2. So let's break up the components for 2.
In the x direction, it's still going to be positive. And it's still going to be length 2 times the cosine of 5. The cosine of 60 degrees is a half. Times 2 is 1. We're still going to have 1.
So L is now going to be in the negative direction. So we're going to have a negative there. We still have nothing in the K roof direction. Multiply by 2 for I. Let's make this 2 now. So that is going to be still 2. This now becomes negative 2 and still 0 there. Nothing has changed for B. So let's look at F due to the magnetic field of y2.
So this is where you easily see where we're going to lose something because of symmetry. So that's going to be negative 8. Negative 8 square root 3 in the I roof direction. We'll have a negative. This stays exactly the same. Still 2 times 4 is 8. I'd like to bring that inside and make this a plus for J. And still we're going to have 0 for K roof.
So now you can see why we're going to lose this I roof. We want F due to B net on both of them. So that is simply going to equal negative 16 Newton in the J roof direction.
