Now we want to start looking at what happens to a charged particle that moves in a magnetic field.
And we know that any force on a mass will cause acceleration of that mass.
We remember from classical mechanics that centripetal acceleration equals velocity squared over r.
So we're going to have that F equals mv squared divided by r.
If this force is a magnetic field force, this has got to equal q times the velocity times the magnetic field.
And let's say for instance that it is, we just take for granted that the phi equals 90 degrees.
So initially the particle moves at a velocity perpendicular to the magnetic field.
We're going to lose one v here, we're going to lose one v there, so we have mv over r is going to equal qb.
In other words, the radius is going to be mv divided by qb.
And we can make, my chalk is up, we can make this radius obviously, this absolute value inasmuch as you're not going to have a negative radius.
Just because it is an electron.
What is interesting to note, and you can work it out, if you look in the direction of the magnetic field.
In other words, say for instance the magnetic field is into the board.
And if it is an electron that certainly moves into this uniform magnetic field, it will move clockwise.
And if it's a positively charged particle, it will move counterclockwise.
And the radius is going to be proportional to the mass.
The larger the mass, the larger the radius, the larger the velocity, the larger the radius.
And the larger the charge, the smaller the radius, the larger the magnetic field.
So this is quite an important, and what we're dealing with here obviously is just philosophies that are substantially, a small fraction of the speed of height.
Apologies for the abrupt end in that video. I had a visitor to the office.
Now that we know what the radius is, and we know it's proportional to the mass and the speed, and inversely proportional to the charge and the magnetic field,
we can look at what the period is. How long does it take to go around the circumference?
And we know that from, again from test mechanics, velocity equals distance divided by time. In other words, time is going to be distance divided by velocity.
We know what the distance is. We certainly do know what the distance is. That's 2 pi r.
So t, well let's make it the period then, time that it's going to take to go around once, is going to equal 2 pi r divided by the velocity.
We know what the velocity is, and as much as we can get velocity from there, the velocity is going to be qv times r divided by the mass.
So let's put that in, so the period is going to equal 2 pi times the radius, divided by v, which is qvr, divided by m.
So m goes up, radius, radius can cancel out, so the period is going to equal 2 pi times the mass, divided by the charge,
because we actually believe the charge times the magnetic field. So certainly this is an equation to know, and this is another equation,
and this is another equation to know. Let me just carry on in my next video, as I have another visit.
Could we try again after yet another interruption? So we know what the period is, and if you like, clearly,
the period is independent of the radius, and it's independent of the velocity. We can also work out the frequency,
and as much as frequency equals 1 over the period, so that's going to equal the charge times the magnetic field, divided by 2 pi times the mass.
So that is how many times per second our charge particle will go around. We can also look at angular velocity.
Angular velocity, lowercase omega, which is this 2 pi times the frequency, or if you wanted to, 2 pi over the period, also from classical mechanics.
So if we put 2 pi in there, we can introduce the 2 pi in the denominator, so we can have that angular frequency,
and it's going to equal 2 pi times the integral of q, the charge times v, divided by the mass.
And that's the last of these equations that you should take note of.
Yeah.
It's
