Just so that we understand the equations we've just looked at, if this is a uniform magnetic
field in this direction and we have the magnetic dipole moments as indicated with the sign
of the angle that we asked to rank the magnitude, let's make this one, two, three, four. The
magnitude of the torque on the system due to each of these magnetic dipole moments. And
we know that the torque equals magnetic diode for a moment cross product with B. And if
we just look at the magnitude, that's going to be mu B sine of theta. And if we look at
the magnetic dipole moment points in this direction, B in that direction, so we're actually talking
about 180 degrees minus, minus. But as far as sine is concerned, sine of theta equals the
sine of 180 degrees minus theta. So actually all of these are going to be exactly the same.
And then if we look to rank the potential energy of the dipole greatest first, remember that
the potential equals negative negative electric dipole, magnetic dipole moment times the magnetic
field, and that equals actually if we just look at the, it is not a vector, and as much as that is a dot product, so we're looking at cosine of the angle. Now clearly if we look at the first angle, the cosine of anything in the second quadrant between
90 and 180 degrees is a negative, so it is actually going to be negative. So it is actually going to be negative. So it is actually going to be negative. So the
that is not a vector, and as much as that is a dot product, so we're looking at cosine
of the angle. Now clearly if we look at the first angle, the cosine of anything in the
second quadrant between 90 and 180 degrees is a negative, so it is actually going to
be, and that's negative, so the electric potential here, the magnetic potential here is actually
going to be larger than it is here, so this is going to be positive, and this will be
a negative value, and here same thing, the distance is 180 degrees minus theta, so that's
also going to be a negative value times negative is positive, and for this one, so if we rank
them, these two are going to be positive values and these two are going to be equal but negative
values.
Now let us look at our first problem, this is a circular, think of it as a big piece
of cheese, circular coil, and I think we are told that there are 250 turns in this coil, so
N equals 250 turns in this coil, it has an area of 2.52 times 10 to the power negative 4 square meters,
it runs a current of 100 micro amperes, and it rests in a uniform magnetic field, and the magnetic
field strength equals 0.85 tesla.
Now we are asked, with this magnetic dipole moment initially aligned with B, so this is what we have.
First question, what is the direction of the current in the coil? Now, remember this points in the direction of N, our normal vector, so that is the direction your thumb has got to go in, it means the
current has got the right loop in this direction, in other words at least in the front it is going to go from top to bottom, so the direction is easy because remember the magnetic dipole moment points in the direction of the normal vector, and you get the normal vector through the right hand rule.
Secondly, how much work would the torque applied by an external agent have to do on the coil to rotate it 90 degrees from its initial orientation so that the magnetic dipole moment is perpendicular to B and the coil is again at rest?
Now that's the most important part, at rest in the beginning and the end, so the kinetic energy initial equals kinetic energy final and then equals zero, which means the work done by the action equals negative the work done by the magnetic field, and we know the work done by the magnetic field equals negative the change in potential energy.
In other words, in other words, the work done by the action, or the work done by the action in other words, the work done by the action is going to equal a change in potential energy, which is potential energy final minus potential energy initial
Now let's look at what the initial potential energy is, well you remember potential energy uh, due to a magnetic field is going to be negative't we need
magnetic dipole moment, cross product with the magnetic field which is going to be negative
magnetic dipole moment times b times the cosine of the angle between them.
Initially, u initial is going to equal mu times b times the cosine of zero degrees which
is just going to be negative. Cosine of zero degrees is one, so negative mu b. And if we
just look at u final, that is going to be the cosine of it's now at a 90 degree angle.
In other words, 90 degree, cosine of 90 degree is zero, so potential energy here is going to be zero.
And u final minus u initial means that the work time by the action,
your final minus u is going to be zero minus negative mu b, so positive mu b.
Let's have a look at this problem. Coil hinged on this side in a constant magnetic field which
actually comes out of the board of half a Tesla. It makes an angle here of 30 degrees, current
in this direction of 0.1 mps, 10 cm, 5 cm, 20 coils. And we are asked, in unit vector notation,
what is the torque acting on the coil about the hinge line? So we need the torque. We know
an equation for torque that equals r cross f. R cross f. Now it is going to act. Can we get r? Certainly we can.
f is what we need, the force due to the magnetic field. And that is going to equal i times l cross b.
Let's quickly look at what il is in unit vector notation. Let's look at what il is in unit vector notation.
So clearly the torque or force is going to be over there, on this edge here, because it hinges here. And if we look at l, it's going to be this distance, which is a, which is 5 cm. And we've got to multiply that by 0.1. So in the x direction, we're going to be this distance, which is a, which is 5 cm.
5 cm. And we've got to multiply that by 0.1. So in the x direction, we're going to get 5 times 0.1, 5 times 10 to the power negative 2 times 0.1, which is going to be 5 times 10 to the power negative 3. In the i direction, it's going to be 0, 0 in the j direction, and 0 in the k direction.
If we look at b, the magnetic field. Now we've got to deconstruct this. We've got to deconstruct this because this is our magnetic field here. And if we look at this angle here, so in the x direction, if we decompose b, it's going to be b cosine of 30 degrees.
And the cosine of 30 degrees, cosine of 30 degrees equals square root of 3 divided by 2. And we've got to multiply that by b, which is 0.5. So that is going to be multiplied by another half.
Half. And there we go. So that is in the x direction. It's going to be square root of 3 divided by 4 in the i direction. And in the y direction, this comes out of the board, so there's nothing in the y direction.
That's j. And in the z direction, it's going to be this direction out of the board. The sine of 30 degrees is a half. The sine of 30 degrees equals a half times a half equals a quarter. A quarter in the k direction.
So if we do this, let's save some space. Let's write, let's just write r. So r is going to be just this distance, which is just a, which is 5 times 10 to the power negative 2.
So i is going to be 0, j, and 0, k, the roof. Let's find f, which is the dot program for these. So that's going to be 0, 0. So we're looking at f. It's going to be 0 in the i direction, i roof.
The negative, the negative, middle. It's going to be this times this, minus 0. So that is going to be, let's see, that times that, and that's going to be a negative.
So there will be a negative in there. 5 times 10 to the power negative 3, divided by 4 for the j. And for the last one, what are we doing? We're just looking at this.
So 0, 0, 0, this times this. And for the last one, the 0 is 0, so it will be nothing in the k direction.
And now we do have to do r cross f. And I'm not going to do that. I'm going to get a calculator here. But certainly that's going to be 0.
This is going to be 0. And then lastly, only in the k direction, which will be this times this, in the negative k direction,
which means it's going to go in the direction, let's see. And the last one, minus here, in the negative k direction there.
So all we have to do is this two cross products. Sample problem time. A circular wire loop.
So we know we are given n, and as much as that equals 1, has a radius of 15 centimetre.
So we were given the radius, meaning we can work out the area as well.
And it carries a current of 2.6, so we're given i. It is placed so that the normal to explain makes an angle of 41 degrees
with a uniform magnetic field. So we are given the angle, and we're given the magnetic field.
Calculate the magnitude of the magnetic dipole moment. Magnitude of the magnetic dipole moment,
this is going to equal n times i times a. Do we have n? Yes, it's 1. Do we have i? Yes, we were given i.
Do we know the area? Yes, we can because we were given the radius. In other words, it's going to be n, i, i, r squared.
What is the magnitude of the torque acting on the loop? Well, the magnitude of the torque is going to equal mu cross b, but magnitude, so mu b sine of the angle.
So we were given mu, we were given v, we know what theta is, so it's simple to answer that one.
