Let's have a look at a problem. We're told that on some spot on the Earth, there is a magnetic field
due to the Earth's molten core of 39 micro tesla. And it points, obviously, it points north.
And we are looking at a point directly above an infinitely long wire with a constant current in it.
I don't know if we were given the size of the current in the problem.
This was a constant current. A point directly eight centimeters above that, there is...
we put a...we measure a net zero magnetic field. Sorry about that. A net magnetic zero...zero net magnetic field.
So, if that wire causes eight centimeters above it, it means that the wire...the magnetic field due to the wire and this magnetic field due to the Earth have to cancel each other out.
So, if that points north, obviously, that has to point south. And they want to know what the current is, obviously, and in what direction that wire runs.
But let's first of all look at, if we have a long, infinite, long straight wire, we know that it's going to have a magnetic field equal to mu zero times the current divided by two pi times the radius.
So, if we get i on its own here, it is going to be the magnetic field times two pi...where are we...two pi r divided by mu zero.
So, what does that be equal to be? Well, it's just going to be opposite in direction, but same magnitude as this, so that there can be a net magnetic field of...of zero.
So, we know b, we know two pi, obviously, we know r, so it's eight centimeters, eight times 10 to pi, negative two meters above that, and we know what mu zero is.
So, we're certainly going to get i, easy to get, but what direction is this current? Is this y?
Now, let's just think this through. Let's just stop. Let me just stop that quickly.
If I'm standing here, I'm facing north. So, if I'm facing north, that means east is there, and west is to that side.
So, I'm standing, and that magnetic field of the earth goes north, so this magnetic field of mine has got to go south.
So, if I grab the wire, and I point in the direction, because now, remember, my fingers need to be...my fingers need to be out of the port, because north is now in the port.
My fingers have to go out, and if I have them in that direction, from west to east, this magnetic field, eight centimeters above, is going to be directly to you, my back now, which is south.
So, this current runs west to east. Let's look at this interesting problem. So, we have two straight sections and two curves. We're given r1 and r2.
So, from this point p, where we want to know what the magnetic field of magnitude is, and in what direction it is, we want to know, or we are given that i is constant throughout, so it flows down, across, up, this way, so that way around.
And we want to know what r1, we are given r1 and r2. And what would be the magnetic field of magnitude direction of point p?
Well, first of all, let's just consider the four sections, because I can see four sections to this wire. It's the outer curve, the inner curve, and this point p is at the center of those two, and there's two straight sections.
We know, by now, what happens to the straight sections, because the cross product of, or the angle between the two vectors, the i, d, s vector, and the r vector here is going to be zero degrees.
So, this will be zero. The magnetic field into this section of point p will be zero, and the angle there would be 180 degrees. So, the magnetic field at this point into the current network there would be zero.
So, we're only dealing with the two curved sections, and what is the magnetic field there, due to these curved sections at the center of those two arcs?
Well, it's going to be mu zero, i times phi, and phi is the angle, and so that we know, in gradients, so that we know what the arc length is divided by 4 by r.
So, first of all, first of all, let's look at the directions. Let's look at r1. So, if we look at, let's look at the two first. So, p due to one is going to be mu zero, i, phi, and in our instance here, phi, it's going to be pi radians.
180 degrees is pi radians, so let's make that pi immediately, divided by 4 pi, and we're going to have r1.
B2, on the other hand, is going to be mu zero, i is going to be the same. It's also 180 degrees, so it's also pi divided by 4 pi r2.
Those fives will cancel, they will cancel. Let's look at the direction, though. Let's look at r1. If I grab this wire, and my thumb points in this direction, it's going to go into the board.
So, b1, we know b1 is going to go into the board. Let's look at b2. So, I grab the wire, my thumb points in the direction of the conventional current, so it's certainly going to come out of the board.
So, this is going to come out of the board. Let's call going into the board, the direction of going into the board negative. So, I can put a negative there.
Let's make, I have to set that arbitrarily, because now I can just do vector addition of these two, because clearly they're going to be on this axis, at this point, either going into the board, or going into the board, or going, coming out of the board, sorry.
So, grab it, grab it, curl my fingers in the direction, it's going to come out of the board, grab, in the thumb of the r1, it's going to go into the board.
So, we can just add those two. So, b1 plus b2 is going to be negative mu0i divided by 4 times r1, plus we're going to give mu0 times i divided by 4 times r2.
So, I can bring out mu0 times i divided by 4, and I'm going to be led to negative 1 over r1, plus 1 over r2.
And depending on whether my answer comes out negative, negative means the net is going to be into the board, because I just set it arbitrarily, if this turns out to be positive, it means it's going to come out of the board.
So, I think the way that this problem was set up, this is going to end up obviously as a negative, because r1 is much smaller than r2, or smaller than r2 at least.
So, this is a larger number than this, so this is going to end up being negative for this direction that we have chosen, so that the net magnetic field is going to be into the board.
Good, here we have a fantastic problem. We have an infinitely long wire going in this direction, as far as the conventional current goes towards our right there.
So, at some instant in time, the distance d perpendicular above a wire is a proton moving down at a velocity v at that instant.
And we ask, what is the force on that proton at that instant, due to the magnetic field caused by the wire?
Now, we remember from our first series that b, that the force due to the magnetic field equals q times the velocity cross product with b.
So, we know what the charge of an electron is, of a proton, and that equals 1.6 times 10 to the power of 19 coulomb.
We are given v, and in the program I think it does state exactly what v is, but we don't know what v is.
Fortunately, we know an equation for b. Let's just look at setting up these vectors though. Qv vector, it's just a scalar times a vector, so we can certainly do that.
If that goes down, let's make that the y-axis. So, that is going to be 0 in the i roof direction, plus that is going to be a negative, therefore, negative qv, negative qv in the j roof direction, sorry, and we're going to have 0 in the k roof direction.
So, that's easy, but what is b going to be? Well, we know that b, around an infinite bit, otherwise, going to be mu 0 times i divided by 2 pi times the radius.
Now, we know what mu 0 is. We are given the current 2 pi, our constants, and we're given this radius d. We are given, so we know exactly what b is in that direction.
But what is its direction, so that we can write this in vector notation. Well, if the current one is in that direction, I grab the wire, and right at that point, it's going to point towards you.
Let's make this the z direction, so that it will be in the positive z direction for a right-handed coordinate system. So, that will be 0 in the i roof, that will be 0 in the j roof, and in that direction, it is going to put exactly this as a positive.
So, mu 0i divided by 2i times the distance d, and that is in the k roof direction. So, we've got our two vectors set up. Remember, if it's cross product, it's the first one on top, the second one at the bottom.
And how do we do this? Force b is going to equal to get the i roof, the first one. We cover up the first column, and we multiply that by that minus that times that.
So, this is going to end up as negative qv times mu 0i divided by 2 pi d, and that is going to be in the i roof direction. Let's dis for 2. Remember, we've got to put a minus sign for the second, for the j roof, and we're going to close this second column.
We're going to close the second column, so it's 0 times that, minus 0 times that, so 0 minus 0, which is the 0. I like to put my negative inside, but negative 0 is the 0, so I don't, this is something I like to do, not to have the 0 out, so j roof.
And we're going to have a 0 for the k roof as well. And as much as for k roof, we close the last. Remember, this is a row, this is a column, so 1, 2, 3 columns, 1, 2 rows, so we close the last column for k roof.
And again, we multiply those two minus, multiplying those two, so 0 minus 0, which is still going to be 0. So, we can see what the magnetic force on that proton is going to be, the instance that it is a different d away by that equation.
