In this short video I just want to look at the working of a cyclotron and what it consisted
of was two copper containers so they looked like if you viewed them from the side they
would just be like a big piece of cheese with these straight edges, so it's two separate
parts and they are open. They are open on the inside. Now let's imagine there's a strong
magnetic field that you can see here going from outside of the blackboard and we have
a source say for instance of protons and across these two open edges we can place a potential
difference across those two. So imagine the potential, the electric potential is in this
direction so from positive to negative so the proton is going to first accelerate in this
direction because of the force on it and remember the force on it is going to equal QE, charge
times the electric field. And with the electric field in this direction this proton accelerates
so its velocity is in this direction, the magnetic field points towards us so at first it's going
going to then feel a magnetic force as it enters and as soon as it enters it cannot, it does not experience
the force due to the electric field. This just exists in the gaps. It is shielded from the electric field once it enters
inside of these copper d's. So it just feels a force due to the magnetic field up as we said. As soon as it then turns up, say for instance it's there, the tangent of its velocity is in that direction, the magnetic field in this direction, so it moves in that direction. So we know what's going to happen, it's going to start forming a circle. Once it gets to the gap again, this system is set to the
up that the electric field up, the electric field here flips around, so the electric potential here flips around at a certain frequency and that is called the frequency of this oscillator. It can oscillate the charge across these two sides. So now it's going to feel an electric force in this direction and be accelerated again. Once it enters on this side, remember now that it's now shielded again,
from the electric field, so its velocity is in that direction, its magnetic field is in this direction, so it's going to experience a force in this direction. And so it will, and that is why it carries on and on. So what is going to happen, it's going to spiral out and eventually somewhere here there's a detector that can detect it.
Now we know that frequency is independent from the previous videos. We know that frequency is independent of the velocity. And frequency equals the value of the charge times the magnetic field divided by 2 times pi times the max.
Now we can set, the system is set up that it can oscillate, that it can oscillate at a certain frequency as far as swapping around the electric field here is concerned. So all we need to do is just to solve for B actually, inasmuch as B equals then the frequency of the oscillator, because what is going to happen, it's going to go around at a certain frequency in the system.
And we need that frequency to equal the frequency of the oscillator. And we need that frequency to equal the frequency of the oscillator. And we can just do that by varying the magnetic field. So that is going to be the frequency of the oscillator times 2 pi times the mass divided by the charge.
So that just, if we know what the machine is set up to oscillate as far as the electric field is concerned, and we use this equation, we can see what the magnetic field strength is going to be so that the system of the cyclotron actually works.
Now why does the, as far as the cyclotron was concerned, does it spiral further and further out? Remember that its frequency stays the same, the period stays the same, but every time it goes through a gap it gets accelerated, so its velocity actually increases.
If the velocity increases, but you want to keep the same, that means if we have velocity equals distance divided by time, in other words, time equals distance divided by velocity, as the velocity increases, so the distance must increase, and distance is 2 pi times the radius.
And that's why the radius. And that's why the radius gets ever faster and ever faster. Now the one assumption we make with the cyclotron is that this period stays the same. The period, the period doesn't actually change.
And, in actual fact, that is not true as we get to higher and higher velocities. With higher and higher velocities we need to start looking at, well, if it's appreciable fractions of the speed of light, we need to employ relativistic equations.
And what will, in essence, what will happen, of course, the mass increases. And what you'll find is that your fixed oscillator now becomes out of step and you won't get further acceleration.
So that can be fixed by a system called the proton synchrotron, where the oscillation is actually synchronized with this circular motion of the proton. So it actually also varies as the velocity increases and the relativistic mass increases due to the energy increase.
And the other problem is, if you are really dealing with high enough velocities, you really need a very large radius. Inasmuch as, remember, radius equals mass times velocity divided by charge times the magnetic field.
So as the relativistic mass increases, the velocity increases, the radius gets quite large. And if you want massive d's like that and high enough kinetic energies, your radius is going to be enormous.
And to make a magnet with those kind of surface areas would be terribly expensive. So we fixed two problems. And as much as we now can maintain the radius at a constant value, so it's only inside of the circular rings as at CERN or at the old Fermilab, which is now decommission, and we can keep it moving in a circle as much as it won't spiral out.
And we change the oscillation to be in sync with the periods that the electric field causes acceleration of protons that are in this synchrotron.
Let us look at a problem pertaining to a cyclotron. We told that it has a fixed frequency of oscillation of 12 megahertz, a radius of 53 centimeters. It accelerates a deuteron, which remember is a proton and a neutron, with a mass of 3.34 times 10 to the power of 27 kilograms.
And because it is a deuteron, obviously it has a charge just of the proton, which is there. The first question, what must the magnetic field be to accelerate that deuteron at that fixed oscillation?
So it spirals out at a constant, at a constant, at a constant, at a constant period. We know that F of the oscillator has got to be, if I remember, yeah, it's QB over 2 pi times the mass.
2 pi times the mass, yeah, that was correct. So we know what B is. B is going to be F of the oscillator times 2 times pi times the mass divided by Q. So that's easy to do.
Second question was, what must the velocity be? What will the velocity be? Or the kinetic energy, actually, I think that was the question.
Now, to get the kinetic energy, just think of it as it spirals out. Its final velocity is going to be the very last radius that it takes, right at the edge.
So let's assume that of the cyclotron before it goes out and hits the detector. In other words, if we use R equals MP divided by charge times magnetic field, we can get from that the velocity.
We can get from that the velocity, which is going to equal R, Q, B divided by the mass.
And we know where B is, so the velocity is going to equal the radius, Q divided by M, and B, and B equals F of the oscillator 2 pi times the mass divided by Q.
So we can use Q, and we can use mass. In other words, velocity is going to equal R, F of the oscillator 2 times pi.
2 times pi, what is kinetic energy? Kinetic energy is half MB squared.
So we're going to have kinetic energy. So we're going to have kinetic energy. It's going to be a half times the mass times the radius squared, the frequency of the oscillator squared, 4 pi squared.
In other words, kinetic energy is going to equal 4 divided by 2 is 2 times the mass times the radius squared times the frequency of the oscillator squared times pi squared.
And that's going to give us some joules, and remember that one electron volt equals 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 joule.
So we can express this value in kilo or mega electron volts, whatever the answer is going to be.
Mmm.
Mmm.
Mmm.
Mmm.
