Apologies for the small writing today. I've bought the wrong lens.
Wide aperture, shallow depth of field. So basically, if I come closer I'll be completely out of focus anyway.
What we're going to do in this chapter is just look at calculating the magnetic field due to a current.
A moving charged particle causes a magnetic field.
So if you have a whole current flowing through a wire, obviously there will be a magnetic field around the wire.
And we want to calculate that.
The way that it was done actually I think is quite experimentally.
The mathematics involved those. You can prove the equation that we are going to get to.
And this equation is actually called the law of Bjor and Savard.
So what we have here is a current carrying wire. The conventional current is in this direction.
And we take a small section of the wire.
And we give it a vector called ds, differential area of length.
And we actually multiply that with a scalar which is the current.
So we have this vector I ds pointing, pointing here in the direction of the current.
That is this actually the slope of that line right there.
So it's tangent to the line there.
And we have our point P.
And we have a vector going from this small differential length of wire to point P.
So we have two vectors.
This current distance vector.
And this is a scalar times a vector.
So this is a vector.
And we have a vector there.
And there is an angle between them called phi.
And I am going to jump right to the equation.
Which then says there will be a differential magnetic field at point P.
At point P, which is the following.
Micro zero.
Mu zero, I should say.
Which is the permeability constant.
And let me just cite it here.
It is equal to, I think it's 4 pi times 10 to the power negative 7 tesla meters per ampere.
So that's a constant, the permeability constant.
Times the current, times our differential length of our current there.
Of our current there.
Times the sine of phi.
So it's the sine of the angle between them.
Divided by 4 pi times the radius squared.
So we can see that this magnetic field is going to fall off as 1 over the square of the distance
between the differential current carrying wire and the point P.
Now this is a vector multiplication.
So we actually need the right-hand rule for this.
And the way that it is actually written.
Is that dB at point P equals mu zero times I times dS cross R divided by 4 pi.
Then absolute value actually of R cubed.
Just so that we can have R squared again.
And now we can have dS going to P so the magnetic field is going to go into the board at that point.
So this is called the law of Bjorn and Savard.
And in magnitude form.
And then also in vector form.
From this then, we can sum up the magnetic field by taking an integral by summing up all the differential lengths and then the vector from those to the point that we are interested in.
As far as what the magnetic field at that point is going to be.
Let's see if we can use the law of Bjorn and Savard to look at the magnetic field at a point C due to a current in a curved wire.
Now this can become very complicated due to the shape of the wire and also the point where we need this.
If I have a point which is not at the center, if we completed the circle, the point that we are interested in is right at the center of the circle.
But if I was interested in another point, our radius vector would change all the time.
So this is a simplified case.
And let's see if we can do the integral to see if we can get the answer there.
The law there, the differential magnetic field equals the permeability constant times the current times our arc, our small little differential arc times the sign of the angle between this vector that we made as far as the length of our differential piece of Y's concern in the direction of the current.
That's conventional current.
So that's the movement of positive charge, which we now have to divide by 4 pi radius squared.
So as I said, this is a simplified case.
We're always interested in these calculations for magnetic field at point C there.
So if we have the radius vector, it's going to be the same as far as magnitude is concerned, at least through this whole arc.
And the arcs obtains an angle of phi.
So when we deal with calculus, remember, always do your angles in radians.
We're not interested in degrees here.
So the angle between ds, and we can multiply those two, so it's actually our vector that we're interested in is i ds, is 90 degrees.
So the sign of theta is going to be 90 degrees, so we can basically rewrite this as mu zero i ds divided by 4 pi r squared.
Now, we need to integrate this over this whole, over the length of this arc.
And how are we going to do that?
Well, we know that the angle, we know that the angle equals the arc length, arc length divided by the radius.
So the arc length, which in our instance is ds, is going to be the angle times the radius.
So I can rewrite this ds as phi times dr, because I need to integrate this over this whole length, this whole length.
And that length is going to be the angle times the radius gives me in a radians, this angle in a radians gives me this length.
So I can rewrite this as db equals mu zero pi, and then for ds I'm going to have phi dr divided by 4 pi r squared.
And if I take the integral of db, I'm going to get the magnetic field at point c, we're only interested in that.
And that is going to equal the integral, now let's take out all the constants, mu zero is going to be a constant, i is a constant,
the angle of phi is a constant, 4 pi are constants, and so that will be the integral of 1 over r squared dr.
And if we do that integral, that's r to the power negative 2, so that is going to be negative.
So if we rewrite that as r to the power negative 2 dr, we're going to add one there, that's negative 1 over r.
So we're going to have that the magnetic field at a point which makes the circle of this semicircle is going to equal mu zero times i times that angle in the center divided by 4 pi r.
Divided by 4 pi r. So if we go, for instance, if we have a complete circle, this is going to equal 2 pi, that will be 2 pi, which will be, will make a full circle.
And so we'll be left with mu zero, i, and we're going to have 2 pi and 4 pi, so divided by 2 r.
So that's easy to see, but what we have a problem with though is this negative that we brought out.
Now what we're dealing with here is this magnitude, remember we just started with magnitude, so we've got to put in our own direction.
And this is very easy, in as much as you take, put your hand and you grasp the wire with your thumb pointing in the direction of the conventional current.
And the direction of your fingers, so if we're looking at the point C here, will come out of the board.
And no matter where I grasp it, even if it's a full circle, if my thumb is in the direction of the conventional circle, we see that C, at point C, the magnetic field is always going to come out.
So you need this right hand rule where your thumb points in the direction of the current and you grasp the wire.
And that shows you that, at least at the back there, it will always come, it will always come forward.
So we've got the direction of this vector.
So this is for magnitude and the right hand thumb rule for the direction.
