Just a quick note to note what happens if the velocity initially is not at a 90 degree
angle with the magnetic field. It is going to then cause a spiral movement. Again with
radius r, if this is the velocity vector and this is our magnetic field, so we draw the
magnetic field vector here, the angle between them is phi there, phi, which leaves the velocity
parallel to the magnetic field. Parallel to the magnetic field in this direction, so that
is going to be v cosine of theta, v times to the cosine of phi, sorry. And that is just
going to give us our vertical velocity here. And that's also going to just cause this pitch
here. Pitch means the distance between these loops. But that is v is parallel to the component
parallel to v. In other words, this component now, this component now of velocity, a lot
of noise today. This velocity parallel is not going to, has a zero degree angle with, so
if we look at the force of the magnetic field in this parallel direction, which is going to
be q v cross v. In other words, the sine of the angle between them, just the component
of the velocity here and the magnetic field, the angle between them now zero, so there's
no component along v. So there's not going to be any acceleration in this vertical, in this
vertical direction. So don't confuse this for the actual, the actual velocity. The, the vertical
component, the vertical component, not vertical, the perpendicular component, so it's going
to be v sine of phi. v sine of phi, which is here the sinker versus three dimensional, so this
is v, and this is actually at a 90 degree angle now, to the magnetic field, and this is
what is going to cause your f of b. This is then going to equal q of b, the sine of phi, and cross,
well, what v name, which is the absolute value. So it's this component that will cause the spinal motion,
and it is this component that will just cause the vertical movement, and based on that, the pitch. The pitch
will be dependent on the period that it takes then, and then that time period it has moved up, and that's
going to give you this distance. A very interesting problem. We have a source that accelerates a charge
for a potential difference of, I think it's 1000 volt, so it's going to accelerate. Now there's no further
acceleration, so constant velocity moves in here, into a constant magnetic field, into the board of
80 times 10 to the power angle of 3 tesla. It's then obviously going to curve around. The radio, hit the
detector here so we can measure this distance, half of that distance will be the radius at 0.8127 meters, and we know
that this is the charge of that ion, and we need to know the mass of that ion. The mass of that ion.
Now certainly, we first have to look at perhaps what the velocity is in which it enters there, because we
know equations for the radius, but it does include mass and velocity. We want the mass, we don't know the velocity.
So let's just first see what the acceleration will be, over 1000 volt. So if it gets accelerated, it has
1 times the charge of an electron, so that it'd be 1000 electron volts, and 0 electron volt. Remember, that is the
number of unit charges. The unit charge is 1.6 times 10 to the power angle of 19, and it gets accelerated through that. We need to change this always into, we need to change this into joules. So one electron bulb is 1.6022 times 10 to the power
negative 19 joules, times 1000. So we need to get kinetic energy, which by the way is half mv squared. It's going to equal times 1000, 1 to 3, so that's 1.6022 times 10 to the power negative 16 joules now.
We can certainly get V on its own, because that's what we want. So the velocity is going to be the square root of 2 times the kinetic energy divided by max.
We have a problem in that we don't know, we have a problem in that we don't know what the mass is, and we don't know what the velocity is.
What we do remember from our equations there, that we looked in the videos before, that we looked in the videos before, of f equals mv squared.
The velocity is going to be the square root of 2 times the kinetic energy divided by max.
We have a problem in that we don't know what the mass is, and we don't know what the velocity is.
What we do remember from our equations there, that we looked in the videos before, of f equals mv squared.
mv squared divided by r, which is equal to qv times b, and we lose that, we lose that, and we know that mv over r, mv over r, that's an m, v, velocity over r equals qv, equals qv.
We can certainly put v in here, because we'll have a mass, and we'll have a mass, so certainly that will cancel out for us, and we'll lose our velocity, which we don't know.
So let's have m, and then we're going to have the square root of 2k divided by m, divided by r equals qv.
We can divide that, so we're going to have mv squared, we're going to have mv squared, we're going to have 2k divided by r equals qv.
And now it's easy to solve for m, m is going to be r, the radius, charge, magnetic field, divided by 2 times the kinetic energy, and we know what the kinetic energy is.
So easy then to solve for the mass of this ion.
Good, let's, let us slog through a problem where we actually need to look at the pitch.
So we're going to fire an electron at an angle with a magnetic field.
We don't know what the velocity is, but we're told that it equals, it has a kinetic energy of 22.5 electron volt.
To convert that I need to multiply by 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19, and I think I did it, which was,
and then 3.6 times 10 to the power negative 18 joules.
And we know that kinetic energy equals half mv squared, so the velocity is going to be the square root of 2 times k divided by m.
And we know what 2 is, we know what the kinetic energy is, we know what the mass of an electron is,
so we can certainly see what the initial velocity is going to be.
The initial velocity, though, is at an angle, and we know that the v parallel is going to give us the vertical,
if we think about just the helix I drew in the previous video, so that is certainly going to give us the vertical velocity,
or the velocity in the direction of the magnetic field.
Now, we know that, we know what v is, and we know what phi is, so we certainly know what v parallel is going to be.
The distance that it travels in a certain time t, remember v equals d divided by t, so we're interested in that v equals vt.
Now, the t we need to look at, what is the time that it has before it gets to the exact same spot?
That is going to be the period, and this is going to be v parallel, so that is going to give us the pitch.
Do we know what t is? Do we know what t is? From our previous videos, remember t equals, it's going to be 2pi times the radius,
divided by the velocity, and in our instances it's going to be velocity parallel, remember, not the initial full velocity.
Now, we certainly know what v parallel is, we know what 2 is, we know what pi is, but do we know the radius?
Do we know the radius? Well, we do know an equation for radius, that equals mb divided by qb.
We know m, now remember that is not caused by the full velocity, that is by the perpendicular velocity.
So, we can say for t equals 2pi m v parallel, which is v cosine v sine of phi, and divided by v parallel, which is v.
We got this right, let's just think about it again.
The period is caused by the perpendicular, the period is caused by the perpendicular velocity.
Okay, so not, not the parallel velocity, the period.
And so that's sine theta, 2pi r, and so this is qb, we're not confusing now.
And that parallel is v, perpendicular is v sine of phi.
Sine of phi, sine of phi, v and v, so the period is equal to 2pi times the mass,
divided by the absolute value of the charge, times the magnetic field.
So, now we have everything we need, and as much as d the pitch, is going to equal v parallel, which is v cosine of phi,
times 2pi times the mass, divided by q, times b.
But we got that right, v cosine of phi, and q over b, and d.
And that is how you solve a problem.
Just don't get confused.
Which one causes the spiral, or the, the, the, uh, the, uh, the, uh, uh, motion.
And which one causes the vertical, or the parallel to the magnetic field.
Which is this.
And v, the ventricular, which is v sine of phi, is the one that causes the radius,
is the one that causes the period.
Slice it in v, so you might find it.
With the frente and the direction of phi.
And you might be in the direction of phi.
Same as thenoldеру, other's Blue moving along to the line of phi.
and I try to jump into the left corner of theragon,
and you might be in the direction of the p contain of the orthodoxunta.
For this idea, you might be the most dominant and flexible in John ali completely.
It's an ambassador for respect for certain other aspects.
Now this idea of cheesecake IN3
