As promised, let's talk about the problems. An electric field of 1.5 kilovolts per meter.
So we have an electric field of 1,500 volts per meter and a magnetic field of 0.400 tesla act on a moving electron.
So a charge of minus 1.6 times 10 to the power of negative 19 coulomb.
The acton that produces no net force. If the fields are perpendicular to each other, so we don't know the direction, we just know they are perpendicular to each other.
What is the electron speed? So what we in essence have here is that F of the electric field plus F of the magnetic field has gone to equal 0.
So we know what F is, or B. Now imagine that the magnetic field is into the blackboard, the electric field is up, the velocity in that direction.
In other words, the V cross B, the angle between those will be, let's take that as 90 degrees so we don't have to worry about the sine of phi which will just be 1.
So we can have Q of the velocity times the electron plus the field, that is VB plus VE as QE forced you to the electric field and that is going to equal 0.
So don't get too confused about the signs here at this moment for this simple problem.
If we take that to the other side, if we take that to the other side, again we are going to have this V equals B divided by E which we have seen in the previous video.
And that means, let's see is that correct, VB equals, something is wrong there, it just looked very weird.
So V is going to equal E divided by B, that looks better, so we will have 1500 divided by 0.4 and that will give us the velocity, as I said there is a negative in there, but this is because it is an electron so don't be too confused about it, we are just worried about the magnitude of the velocity that we want to get.
This next problem I think is quite a bit of fun, I think it is a bit long, it says an electron is accelerated from rest through a potential difference of 1000 volt.
So we have an electron, minus 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 Coulomb, it has an initial velocity of 0 but it gets accelerated through a potential difference of 1000 volt.
What does that mean? Well it means it will have a certain kinetic energy, and the kinetic energy is going to be the number of unit charges, and in this instance we just have the fact that we have one electron,
one electron, so that's going to equal just one, the number one, times the voltage. So that is going to be 1000 electron volts. And we know how to change that into joules, inasmuch as one electron volt equals 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 joules.
Now that we have joules, we know that the mass of the electron equals 9.1 times 10 to the power negative 51 kilograms. We know that k equals half mv squared, therefore v equals the square root of 2 times k divided by m.
We now know what k is in joules. We know what k is in joules. We know what k is in joules. And we can therefore figure out what the velocity is going to be. So it gets accelerated through this potential difference so we know what v final is going to be. We can do that.
We can do that. It's going to be 2k divided by m square root of that. It enters the gap between two parallel plates separated by a distance d of 20 millimeters. So d equals 0.020 meters.
And the potential difference across those plates are 100 volts. So what's the electric field going to be between those plates? The electric field is going to be v2 divided by d.
So we know what the electric field is across those two plates. The lower plate is at the lower potential. So the electric field is going to be in the upward direction.
Neglect fringing. Neglect fringing and assume that the electron's velocity vector is perpendicular to the electric field vector between the plates. So if we have the two plates, then the velocity vector is going to be in that direction or perpendicular.
In unit vector notation, what uniform magnetic field allows the electron to travel in a straight line through the gap. So once again we're going to have that the f, the force due to the magnetic field plus the force due to the electric field is going to equal 0.
We want to know what uniform magnetic field. What uniform magnetic field? How are we going to get the magnetic field? Well we know what the value here is, that it's going to be cube vb sine of phi.
We're taking for granted that this magnetic field is also going to be perpendicular to the velocity vector, so we don't have to worry about that.
Plus Fe, we know that that equals, we know that that equals q times e, q times e, and that has got to equal 0.
So it's going to be easy to do. So it's going to be easy to do inasmuch as the q's are going to cancel out.
And once again we're going to have b equals, that's going to be a length of e on that side divided by the velocity.
So we know what e is, that is going to be v squared divided by d. We know what the velocity is, so it's the square root of 2 times k divided by m.
We know what k is, so that will give us the answer to our magnetic field strength.
Don't worry about the sign too much now, we just want to know the magnitude of the magnetic field.
Now the question was asked, does a magnetic field, and here we have a magnetic field going into the board, have an effect on the drift velocity of conduction electrons?
So we have a metal plate here conducting in a magnetic field going into the board with current i in that direction and the width d of this metal plate.
So if the current is from top to bottom, we know that the drift electrons actually goes from the bottom to the top.
And if we use the right hand rule that the velocity is in this direction, the magnetic field in that direction, the force due to the magnetic field in this direction,
but remember it's negative q inasmuch as it's an electron, so the force on the electron due to the magnetic field is certainly in that direction.
In other words, electrons are going to move to the one side, and this will quickly become negatively charged, meaning this side will become positively charged.
If this side becomes positively charged, there will be an electric field in this direction, and if there's an electric field in that direction,
that is going to cause a force on the electrons on this side to go in the opposite direction.
So the force on the electrons due to the electric field is definitely in this direction.
So the two forces will very quickly go into equilibrium and actually will cancel out.
If we know the magnetic field, we can simply see what the electric field is.
If we put a voltmeter across these two, we know that the electric field equals v times d.
So v equals ed.
And we know what d is.
Now if they are in equilibrium, let's just quickly look at f of e equals ee.
It's actually qe, but we are dealing with the electron here.
And on this side, we're going to have ebb inasmuch as the sine of 5.
5 is going to be 90 degrees, velocity in this direction, perpendicular to the magnetic field into the board.
In other words, v, which is the diff velocity, is going to be e divided by b.
We can also have a look at what is termed the number density of charge carriers.
Inasmuch as we do know the equation for vd from previous chapters,
and that equals j divided by ne.
But we also know that j equals i divided by a.
In other words, vd here is going to equal i divided by ne times the area.
Ne times the area.
Now we can look at this.
n is going to equal i divided by e.
And area is d times l.
Area.
So n is going to equal i divided by e.
Let's just get that right, vd.
Is that correct?
So n is going to equal i over eavd.
eavd.
eavd.
And we know that vd, so n equals, we know that vd equals e over b.
So that's going to be i, that's going to be b, that's going to be e, dl.
And we're going to have e there.
But e equals v over d.
So n is going to equal i, b, e, d, l.
And e equals v over d, v over d.
But these are going to cancel.
So in the end we'll see that n equals i, b divided by e, l, v.
The length.
So certainly these are all things that can be measured.
So we can know exactly what the number density of charge carriers are.
So many charge carriers per unit volume.
And that is the current, the magnetic field, the charge of the electron, the length there
of your metal plate and the potential buildings.
So many charge carriers.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
