Let us look at this very interesting problem which will actually bring together all the
equations. We told that an electron has this kinetic energy. Immediately it's an electron,
so we know the charge is going to be minus 1.60 times 10 to the power of negative 19 Coulomb.
It seems we're dealing with two significant figures at this minute.
And we know the mass of an electron, which we know is 9.11 times 10 to the power of negative
51 kilogram. If it's got that kinetic energy, we can immediately multiply that and see what
would be in joules. I think I did that before, so in joules that's 1.92. That's 1.92 times
10 to the power of negative 16. Let's check on that joule. The first part of the question
is find the electron speed. Find the electron speed. Well, we know it's mass, we know it's
kinetic energy, then it becomes very simple inasmuch as velocity is going to be two times
the kinetic energy divided by the mass. We know the kinetic energy, we know the mass,
so it's very easy for us to get the velocity from that initial energy of 1.2 kilo electron
volts. Part two asks, the magnetic field of magnitude, the magnitude of the magnetic field.
Well, we certainly know the radius there, so I think the best equation to use is going to
be the radius which equals mass times the speed divided by the natural value of the charge
times b. Now, in other words, b, magnetic field is going to equal nb divided by, b is going
nb divided by the radius times the absolute value of the charge times the absolute value
of the charge. We know what the mass is, we now know what the velocity is, we know the radius
that was given and we certainly know the charge times the value of the charge of the electron.
So that's simple enough. Magnetic field, now we want to know the circulating frequency
and then the period. Well, we know the period, we know the period equals distance divided by velocity.
Once around would be two pi times the radius, it would be the circumference, we know that the radius is divided by the velocity.
And then we certainly know what velocity is now, that's the square root of two times the kinetic energy divided by the mass.
And if we want to know the frequency, the frequency, well, that's the radius of that.
So that's the square root of two k divided by n divided by two pi times the radius.
So all the equations that we've seen thus far we use in this problem and I hope there's no algebraic mistake but I think that's how you get to the answers.
Let's look at another example where we can bring together these equations.
We told that a positron has a kinetic energy of two kilo electron volts.
It's a positron, which means we know what the mass is immediately, mass which is the same as an electron and we actually also know q,
which is positive 1.60 times 10 to the power negative 19 Coulomb.
And we are asked, let's find the problem, so it moves through a uniform magnetic field with its velocity vector making an angle of 89 degrees with the magnetic field.
So it fires 89 degrees.
First question, the period.
Now we know period equals the distance, which in our instance is the circumference, divided by velocity.
But which velocity causes the, which velocity causes the circular motion?
And certainly it's the perpendicular, not the parallel, but perpendicular.
Unfortunately we're not given the radius, so we have to look at the radius as well.
The radius equals mass times V, also perpendicular, also the perpendicular velocity,
divided by velocity, divided by charge times the magnetic field.
So we can substitute it in there, it's going to be 2 pi,
where are we? 2 pi radius, which is Mv perpendicular divided by qv times V perpendicular.
So those two cancel out.
And we see that the period is simply going to be 2 pi times the mass, divided by q times V.
So that's simple enough.
Second part, the pitch P.
Now we know that the pitch P, or the distance, when the velocity equals distance divided by time,
so the distance, which is now pitch, is going to be velocity,
but this time it's parallel velocity times the period T.
We know what parallel velocity is.
Let's make some space, so we know that answer.
We know the parallel velocity, so the pitch is going to be V, which we know.
Do we know V? No, but we can certainly get V.
V parallel, which is V cosine of phi, velocity times T, which is our period day.
We know what V is, because we were given the initial kinetic energy of 2 kilo electron volts.
So V is going to be 2 times the kinetic energy divided by the mass, times the cosine of phi, times T, which is all of that.
Times all of that.
All of that divided by charge of a positron, times the magnetic field.
So, a nice equation for the pitch.
Here we have an enjoyable problem.
We have an unknown fundamental particle stationary in a magnetic field.
And we are told that this particle decays into an electron and a positron.
Into an electron and a positron, and that they will have then initial velocities
perpendicular to this 3.53 micro tesla magnetic field.
How long before they collide?
Well, it's simple to do.
I mean, if it does decay, the electron and the positron are oppositely charged,
so they are going to move off in that circle in opposite directions.
And if that's the circle and one goes this way, the other one goes that way, obviously they are going to be dead.
For each of them, that's going to be half a period.
And we know the equation for the period in as much as, we know the equation for the period in as much as it is 2pi.
Let's just work it out.
If you can't remember it, remember T equals 2pi radius divided by velocity.
And we know the radius equals mv divided by qb.
In other words, T is going to be 2pi over v and the radius is mv divided by qb.
And so that's only for each of them for full circumference.
But we only need half of that, so we're going to multiply both sides by half.
So we divide this by 2 as well.
So we're just going to lose those.
And I think from doing the problem, I think it's about 5.007 seconds.
Something in that order.
