Let us now consider a coil with a current in a magnetic field.
And I've drawn some sketches.
I was trying not to get confused with this problem because it's easy to do so.
If we have a coil, the current is in this direction, down, this way, up, that way,
and the magnetic field obviously is in the board.
And let's assume that it actually runs on the center.
So this coil can pivot on the center, so we actually have the current running in,
the current running this way out, current again in.
So it's a coil that can turn around this axis.
Let's look at what happens to the coil up there.
So in the direction of L, so we make this length A.
So in that direction with magnetic field in this direction.
So we're going to experience F force 1 in that direction.
Force 1.
2, the current is going down into the board.
So we'll have F2 in that direction.
F3, we have the current running in this direction, board into the board B.
So we have F3 down.
So we have F3 going down.
And then obviously F4 is going to be in this direction.
Clearly, no matter what happens, let's look at these two sides.
If this starts spinning, for instance, current is always going to be, say current is down into the board,
that side.
Say it's now turning, so current is there, velocity is there, still into the board, always out.
This is always going to remain towards the outside.
So there's going to be no net force on these two.
That's not the same for here though.
As this turns, it does not go, the two forces are not going to act through a central point as it does here.
So there's always going to be a torque on the system.
Now, in this second part here, what I've just tried to draw is, we have what is called the normal vector to this coil surface.
It means empty here, but we call it the surface.
And if you just run your right hand along with the current, your thumb points in the direction,
so this will be for us a vector N that goes into the board there, vector N.
Now, what I've done here is I've drawn this picture looking at this from the side.
So we're looking in like this.
Remember, the magnetic field was going into the board, so if I swing this this way and look at it,
our magnetic field runs this way now, and I'm looking at B.
So this is the length B, and if I'm looking at this side, the current is going down.
The current is going down.
Let's see what happens.
Now, here's what I said, that is our normal vector there,
and it makes an angle of theta with the magnetic field.
With the magnetic field, you'll see force one and force three there,
and you'll see why the directions remain like that shortly.
I hope I still remember what happens here and how to get there.
And that leaves this angle.
This is a 90 degree angle with our length here, which is B.
This length is B, so the whole one is B.
So each part is a half B.
So that's 90 degrees.
This is 90 degrees, meaning that the angle phi between our length vector here and the B direction there is going to be 90 minus theta,
theta, which previously we just called phi.
If that is 90 degrees minus theta, this is also 90 degrees.
I'm just decomposing this L vector here.
And this L vector now, remember, is B divided by 2.
If the whole thing is B, the current is in this direction, so that's going to be B divided by 2.
But that whole thing is 90 degrees.
And that part is 90 minus theta.
That leaves this small angle here as 90 degrees, also as theta.
Now let's see what happens as far as these forces F1 and F2.
Now this thing is not standing upright anymore.
It is now at an angle.
But I have to say what happens with this is that the magnetic field will always try to make N turn straight in the direction of B.
So that's going to be the torque on the system.
And what is torque?
Remember from classical mechanics, torque equals R cross F.
R cross F.
Now let's try and remember what happens at the bottom.
At the bottom, the current is running away from us.
So right here, remember this now goes into the board and connects on the other side.
So right here we're going to have V, or L, sorry, remember that we're talking of I L cross B.
For the force due to the magnetic field.
So right down here, L is running into the board and B is in that direction.
So F3 is straight up.
Here the current is towards us, straight towards us, B in this direction.
So F is straight up.
Now what is R cross F?
We're looking for this small, we're looking at this angle.
Because our R here is here.
And if we just showed it's in this direction, you can clearly see there's going to be a torque on the system.
And that's going to bring N down to B in the direction of the magnetic field.
So if that is theta, which is the angle between the normal here and the magnetic field.
And this is 90 degrees.
We're just composing.
So this is 90 minus, this is 90 degrees minus theta again.
plus another 90 degrees.
So this angle here between R cross F is 180 degrees minus theta.
So here we're going to have R, F, and then the sine of the angle between them.
The first and the second quadrant in the normal Cartesian coordinate system.
As far as sine is concerned, the sine of 180 degrees minus theta equals the sine of theta.
Now, what is R?
Well, R is just B over 2.
R is just B over 2.
So it's B over 2 F sine of theta.
That is going to be the torque in that direction.
And we can work out what F3 is going to be just through our equation there.
And remember, we're going to have two of them now.
We're going to have two of them as, as, there's two torques, two R cross Fs on this system.
In the next video, I just want to expand a bit more on this.
Let me quickly just expand on this F.
Remember, we're dealing with 1 and 3.
And I times L.
My L is in this direction, which is just A.
So what I'm going to have here, and the angle between them is 90 degrees.
As far as I, L, and B is concerned, so the sine of that angle.
So I'm talking here, we're talking I, A, B for this one here.
So we're going to have B over 2.
And then we're going to have I, A, B over 2 sine of theta.
And I have two of them.
If I combine, if I combine them, let's see what I've done here.
I've already put that.
It's I, A, B, the belly right there.
It was just silly.
All right, chalk is up.
So that's going to be D over 2.
My F is I, A, B.
I, A, B.
And then sine of, sine of phi.
And I have two of them.
So this times 2.
2's are going to cancel.
I have two of them, so torques times 2.
So we have I, A, B.
And that's the whole torque.
It's going to be I, A, B, B sine of this angle.
Because remember, it's going to move.
The torque's going to make it move.
So this is a variable angle.
And what we can also do is we can build a coil of many loops of wire.
And if there are N loops of wire, it's just going to be N, A times B.
A times B is just the surface area created by, by my coil, times the magnetic field times the sine of theta.
In this video, I just wanted to have a look at the magnetic dipole moment.
Just as we had an electric dipole moment, we have a magnetic dipole moment.
And if we remember, I just want to get the previous, I just want to get this equation so I don't make a mistake.
And that we had that the torque was equal to N, I, area, magnetic field times the sine of the angle.
And we defined the magnetic dipole moment.
And it is in the same direction as N was.
Just look at the previous video.
As N, I, A.
As N, I times the number of coils current and the area that your coil makes.
So that leaves the torque equal to mu times B sine theta.
And that, in vector form, is obviously just going to be mu cross theta.
Actually, cross B, the magnetic field.
And that looks very much like the torque we had with the, with an electric field, which is the electric dipole moment times the electric field.
And we'll remember that the potential energy was negative P dot E.
So for the, that was for electric fields and for magnetic fields, it would be minus micro dot B.
Which means the cosine of that angle.
Just to follow on to this, remember that work equals, that is now going to be by the magnetic field, minus the change in U.
That is going to be minus U final, minus U initial.
And that is the work done by the magnetic field.
If you do the work in as much as the coil was standing still before you change it,
until after you change it, so the kinetic energy is zero initially and finally,
we know that the work done by the action equals negative the work done by the magnetic field then,
which is just going to be, which is just going to be U final minus U initial.
