We know exactly now what the magnetic field is around a force, a current carrying wire,
but let's imagine we have two of them running in parallel, semi three-dimensional here,
and they have currents via and ib through these two, and they are separated at distance d,
so they don't parallel. Does the one wire experience a force due to the magnetic field in its vicinity
due to the other wire? Can we work that out? Well, let's remind ourselves from the previous chapter
what the force is, magnetic field force due to current in a finite length L of wire,
and where we will remember that force due to the magnetic field is going to equal I L,
which is the vector cross product with vector B, the magnetic field vector.
Now, if we know the length of the section, we know that, we are given the currents Ia and Ib,
we just need to find out what the magnetic field is, say at B due to A.
it's a wire, so we're going to have the fact that the magnetic field is going to equal mu zero times I,
divided by two pi, divided by two pi for this wire, times d, the distance d, or r, then away.
So we know that because of the presence of the current in wire A, there's going to be a magnetic field here,
in the spot that wire B runs, and we can get that, we can get that. But in what direction is the magnetic field going to be,
if we look at this? Well, if I grab this wire, my thumb is in the direction of the conventional current,
so this one is obviously going to be three-dimensionally in a downward direction. This is what B is going to be.
Now, my L points in the direction of the current, and this is an angle of 90 degrees now. And if I go L cross B,
my thumb is pointing inwards, so the force is going to be in the direction straight towards, straight towards,
and inasmuch as this is 90 degrees, and this is 90 degrees as well. Straight towards the other one. And the same is going to happen if,
because of the magnetic field here, because of the current carrying wire on this side. And we're actually going to find that you can do that on this side,
and you'll see actually that these two come towards each other. So it's easy to show that if two currents run in the same direction,
parallel, parallel, there will be a force that attracts these two wires to each other. And if we have it in the reverse direction,
so they run wires in parallel, but the current runs in opposite directions, we'll note that these two wires will push each other away.
We can then do this cross product, which we'll just put in B for that, and we know what the direction of that is,
in case we need then to do a vector multiplication in a problem that they want vector notation on.
I just want to be quite clear about the direction of force in a wire due to the presence of current in a parallel wire,
a distance away from it. So here we have in a straight line, equally spaced, same current but in different directions.
So the current in this wire runs straight towards you, current in this one straight towards you, current in the last one into the board.
So what will be, let's just first look at what will be the force on this wire due to the current running in this parallel wire.
In the same direction, so we know already by previous discussions that those two are going to attract each other,
so this one will feel a force in that direction. But let's just make sure that we understand why that is so.
And we know that the force due to a magnetic field is going to equal in vector form I L cross B.
But this B, remember if we just look at the vector notation of B, remember that's I divided by 2 pi times that distance between them.
But this, first of all we need the direction of B as well because we want to use the right-hand rule here of L cross B and finger pointing in the direction of B.
We need to know in what direction that B is. And remember B, if we remember from the law of Bio and Savard,
B is that it is that it is I dS cross R. So let's look at the magnetic field that is going to be here due to this.
So dI dS is going to point in this direction and dR, so let's see. So dS points in this direction towards us.
dR is in that direction. So if I'm going like this and then like this my thumb points down so the magnetic field here is going to be in this direction.
Right, so we are clear about that. It's the right-hand rule so I'm not grabbing anything.
It is I dS which points directly towards you and then I can do that and then R which is in that direction.
So that points, my finger point, my thumb points down so B is going to be downwards here.
I can also do that by grabbing the wire, my finger pointing in this direction so it's also easy to see that at this point B is going to be down.
But now L again points towards you, points towards you. Now I'm going to cross product with B so A cross product B, my thumb points in that direction so indeed the force is going to be in that direction.
Let's just look at what is going to happen due to the presence of this here. Remember dS now runs into the board.
Runs into the board. dR is in this direction so B is going to be here but it's actually better just to do it, grab it, your thumb pointing in the direction of the wire.
So obviously if this is a circle around the tangent line to the circle here with it going in this direction is up.
So if I now have L which points towards you and cross B which points up, that means the force is going to be in this direction due to,
but because actually because R is going to be bigger this makes B smaller so this vector is going to be smaller than that vector.
Ok so we understand fully now how we get to the direction of the force by this vector multiplication but we remember either by using the law for the straight segment,
grabbing the wire pointing in the direction and then getting the direction or remembering the law of Bill and Savard to tell us what the direction is going to be of the magnetic field.
Which is actually one of Maxwell's equations.
And it states that the integral over a closed surface equals the dot product of the magnetic field and some differential error S and that equals mu zero times the enclosed current.
So since we had Gauss's law, just as we could create an imaginary surface, we can also create an imaginary surface around this current carrying wire.
And if it's a straight wire, through symmetry this will be in a circle.
But I could actually have many wires, say these, and I can choose my surface to be that.
So it only encloses those two.
But to integrate over this whole surface can be quite difficult because to find the length of that surface might be complex.
So here we have an idealized case of a straight wire with a conventional current coming straight towards you.
So we can draw a circle and we know what the length of this circle is.
It's just going to be two pi times the radius.
Now because this is a dot product, we can write this as b times the cosine of the angle between these two vectors are enclosed.
And as much as if we take a small differential area of our imaginary surface, ds, and we give it the direction,
and we know that the direction of the magnetic field is going to be tangent to that circle,
the angle between them is zero, and the cosine of zero is one.
So we can leave that out anywhere around the circle.
So we'll just say b, ds.
We also know that if r stays constant throughout, because this is how we chose it, so that r is constant throughout,
that means the magnitude at least of b is going to be the same all the way around.
So let me write it here in case we can't see down here.
So we're going to have b as a constant.
We can bring that outside.
ds equals mu zero i enclosed.
And we're going over that whole surface.
That's what we mean by the circle through the integral sign there.
And the whole surface is two pi times the radius.
So that is going to be bs.
That was s to the power of zero.
We just do normal integral s, but we know s is two pi times the radius.
And that is going to be equal mu zero times i enclosed,
and that encloses that charge in there.
In other words, b equals mu zero i divided by two pi r,
which is just where we started from the law of Buen-Savar.
There's a very difficult derivation as I said to get to this,
but if we use Ampere's law, which is stated here,
it's easy for us to derive the magnitude of the magnetic field
anywhere a distance r away from a current carrying wire.
to be a nug Maria's Seen Music and the genomicroraeli.
Here's four questions from the esquer charges.
Here's four minutes.
You're welcome, guys.
