Okay, let's talk about matrices. Now we've seen the augmented matrix where we take the coefficients of our system of linear equations
And we augment that by the solution on the right hand side and that's a matrix
But matrices are so much more than that. It's such a brilliant thing. Let's write a matrix
Let's create a matrix
I'm just going to call my matrix A and this is the way that you would see it in many textbooks
Maybe in your in your lecture a 1 1 a 1 2 a 1 3 to indicate that these are coefficients
And they have an address just like you have an address where you stay. So these little things a
21 a 2 2 a 2 3 and a 3 1 a
3 2 and a 3 3
Suppose we should put little commas in between there just to show that these things
That it does not say 33. It says 3 and 3 the reason why
How we address this is that they are columns. So there's a column. It's a column. That's a column
That's a column column 1 column 2 column 3 and here are rows
This would be row number 3. So we have row 1 row 2 row 3
So the address of this value right there would be row
3 and column
2 always row then column that's just a convention row column and later on we'll see we can talk about column spaces
And we can talk about the row spaces. There's so many other things
and I want you to see the
matrix
Just as you would see something like the set of natural numbers
So there are sets of specific matrices just as we have integers just as we have
Rational numbers just as we have real numbers just as we have
Complex numbers just as we have the set of all polynomials
Say polynomials of order 2
So your x square a x square plus b x plus c equals d or whatever the case may be
Each of these things place an element inside of a set and the same goes for matrix
So a matrix is just the same thing in some sense as a single number or as an equation or something
And what can I do with these things?
Well, first of all I can note that I can do
operations between two of them
So just as I can say of the natural numbers 1 plus 1 is 2 1 plus 3
1 plus 3 is 4
I can do addition and remember subtraction is just a form of addition so we don't do subtraction it's just addition
We can do multiplication
Multiplication and
So as we can do with two
Integers so we can multiply and the certain circumstances two matrices specific matrices
We have associativity
Associativity of these
Elementary of these operations
If I were to have two matrices I can say a plus b can add them certain ones if I had a c as well
And I had another a plus b plus c
Associativity would it be the same if I do this with those two be the same if I multiply them with those be the same
What about what about commutivity?
What about the distributive laws?
And we you know we will have to look if we multiply two matrices is a b equals b a is that the same thing?
Is that the same thing are the identity elements?
Identity elements if we take addition the identity element is
Is I say of the integers is zero because if I add take something and I add zero to it
I'm just left with that something the identity matrices the identity element and the multiplication
This is one if I multiply negative three by one. I still get negative three
Do we do we have matrices that do the have the exact same property?
So these are these are exciting things this this matrix here
matrices with a certain number of rows and certain number of columns they exist as this abstract idea
Other than just part of being a system of linear equations
equations and the first thing we obviously we are going to look at is this notion of
Matrix addition when can I add two matrices so that's going to be the first thing that we look at
And I'm going to tell you now the way that you add two matrices is element by element
So the same address element in the one with the same address element than the two
So if I had to have this matrix a 1 2 a 1 1 a 1 1 a 1 2 and I had a 2 1 a 2 2 and a 3 1 and a 3 2
So that's one column two column the column is the second name rows are the first number
So row 1 row 2 row 3 and I had that's my matrix a and I had another matrix
I add the addresses together
It's these people who live in the same address they get added together and that means I must have
a matrix with the same number of rows
and the same number of columns
Otherwise there are people going to be with one address that don't that that don't exist in the in the second one
So yeah, I better have b 1 1 b 1 2 b 2 1 b 2 2 and b 3 1 and b
3 3 2
There we go
So this b and that a they they have the exact same address
And I can add them
So if I don't have the number of rows and columns
So this would be three rows and two columns
So we would write something like this. This is a three by two matrix
This is also a three by two matrix three rows by two columns
Three rows by two columns
Same address same address so I can add them and if I were to add them together
Then I'm going to get something like this
I'm going to have a 1 1 plus b 1 1 for that one
a row 1 column 2 plus b row 1 column 2
And I'm going to have a 2 1 plus b 2 1 and I'm going to have a 2 2 plus b 2 2
And I'm going to have a row 3 column 1 plus b row 3 column 1
and a row 3 column 2 plus b row 3 column 2
And that is going to be my matrix
And this is going to be a plus b and you can well imagine that these things do commute because
That'll be exactly the same as doing b plus a
So first first thing to learn these things have got to have the same
dimensions we call them. Let's go to Mathematica and let's go have a look how to do this
Just addition of matrices
Okay, here we are in Mathematica
Now let's do something i'm going to hold down command or control or alt I should say i'm going to hold the
This key or the option key and i'm going to hit one this changes the cell to this title
In this title format. So let's write matrices
Whoa
Matrices
There we go
Down arrow key i'm automatically
Inside of a new cell i'm going to hold down option or alt and i'm going to have four
That gives me a little subtitle. Let's call this addition addition
So we're going to look at matrix addition done arrow key. I'm back to where I am. Let's create a matrix
I'm going to create a matrix. I'm going to call it a
Because I want to uppercase just the convention
I'm going to call it a and remember how we do matrices
We do each row inside of its own set of square brackets. So let's have one
three one
That's my first row and my second row would be three comma negative two
Comma one i'm going to close that row and close that row if I put a
Semicolon after that and hold down shift and hit enter or return
It won't be it won't be printed to the screen
It's just a suppression of the output to the screen
So let's have a look at a but we're going to look at a in matrix form
So let's do matrix form and let's do that and we see the beautiful
One three one in the first row three negative one and one in the second
Or if I looked at the column it would be one and three in column one three negative two in column two one and one in column three
How big is this matrix? Well, it's laughable. It's two rows and three columns, but
There is a function for that dimensions of a
Let's have a look at the dimensions of a we see two rows three columns as I said, that's easy
But if you have a very large matrix that you're importing
It might not just be a you might just not be able to look at it
You quickly want to see what the dimensions of this matrix is you get back this list with two elements
First one being the row second one being the columns two rows three columns. That's how you know
So let's let me create a column matrix b
And matrix b is going to be let's make this just symbolic. I'm going to make it
a d and
R and s I don't know
Let's make it an s and an f energy
This is the beauty of mathematics. It's a computer language for mathematics
So it is going to see these things as it's going to see these things just as mathematical symbols
Okay, I'm going to hit shift and enter
So to suppress that output to the screen, let's have b in matrix form and there we see
beautiful and now we can say a plus b
A plus b as simple as that shift enter shift return and there we go
We see the the two rows there. Let's make it pretty let's make it matrix form
So this time around i'm going to put matrix form in the front as it's supposed to be proper
So this is a proper notation instead of doing the post fix
And there we go and indeed we see that it was addition it was element wise addition
I take the first element which was one row one column one and I added to d which was in row one column
column one of the second matrix, so they have to be of the same dimension
So if I looked at the dimensions of my matrix b
I'd see that's exactly the same we can even we can even ask that question we can say is the dimensions
of a
Equal to and that's two equal signs two equal signs asks a boolean question a boolean question is going to return true or false
And is that equal to the dimensions of b?
And of course, it's going to be true
So very simply true and that is how matrix addition works. You've got to have
Someone in living in the same address in both of the matrices or in the three matrices. Let's just have a quick look at this
I'm going to just do the following i'm going to say b plus a
And i'm going to ask is that equal to and you can see i'm just putting these in parentheses just just to have clarity
You don't have to do that. It's b plus a equal to a plus b. Well in this instance it is
Doesn't matter what these values take. It's exactly the same thing. So we do have commutivity here
We really do have commutivity
now
let's look at a
matrix
That might be the identity matrix under addition
And i'm going to call that matrix i and i can show you what it is
0 comma 0 comma 0 because this one has three
columns
And then the second row 0 comma 0 comma 0
And i'm going to do that
Let's suppress that to the screen. Oh, I can't use i now. That's a very good thing. I is a protected symbol
It is the imaginary number i so I can't use i so i'm going to just call it id id for identity
Let's do that and if I now say the matrix
Form of id
There we go. I see
I see
The exact same thing so if I now have a plus id
I'm going to get and let's do that in matrix form
Matrix form and I see I get exactly a back and I can even ask is a
Plus id is that equal to a and it's true. It's exactly the same and I can do
Id time plus a and
That is going to be exactly the same as a as a as well
True, so
We do have an identity element as long as the dimensions of that identity element is exactly the same as the dimensions of
of
The the matrix to which you're doing the addition so you can well imagine that there are many identity
matrices
Under addition as long as they are the same size as what you are trying to achieve
Let's have c in this instance
And let's just create another matrix
So we're just going to have four and three and one
Two I should say there and just three and three and one
That's my second one
So we have c there
C is a protected symbol so just remember that let's just call it cc
So these protected symbols means it's one of the six thousand plus
functions that you have or or symbols that you have
So just watch out you can't use that as a computer variable name to store something in
So just by the by this is a computer variable name something that you choose as long as it's within the rules of what you can choose
You you do it creates a little space in memory and it holds an object in this instance
It holds a list object and we've constructed the list such that it can be viewed as a matrix
Now let's have a look at this. I have a let's do this a
plus b
plus c
I'm going to ask the question is that the same as having a plus
And b plus c is that the exact same thing and it is true
So we know we have associativity so under the binary operation here of addition
We do have an identity element
And we do we do have associativity a special kind of
Binary operation here because we also have commutivity
But just as we had different things three quarters is not a natural number
Just as if I look at the set of these matrices that I can add to each other
They all have to have the same dimension
They then make a set under which I can have this thing called addition
And under those circumstances we'll have associativity we'll have commutivity we'll have this
Special identity element for everyone if i'm talking five by four
matrices those are different sets of matrices as long as they're all five by four you get it addition of matrices quite simple
So
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
