We now understand enough about the deeper levels of statistics so that we can start getting some stuff done.
In this lecture, I want to talk about measures of central tendency and measures of dispersion.
Let's get going.
We're going to, as always, import our style sheet.
There we go. Changes to a nice gray background.
Everything looks nice.
What do we want to import?
I'm going to import pandas as pd, numerical python numpy as np,
our old friends matplotlib.pyplot as plt, seaborn as sns,
warnings as filter warnings.
I'm going to use my magic command to plot my graphs right inside of this notebook, this web page.
I'm just playing around a bit.
I'm just changing the style of seaborn a bit.
You can, as I say, look up seaborn on Google or in your favorite search engine and just see how you can play around with line widths, figure sizes, font scales, the type of background, etc.
You can draw some beautiful graphs.
Filter warnings I just want to ignore as per usual.
Let's start off with measures of central tendency.
We see the mean, median, and mode.
This is import some of our data.
And I'm going to put it into a read csv.
Read csv, remember, is going to put it inside of a data frame.
Let's go.
Mean, median, and mode.
Now, you can have a string of values.
And the two of us, me and you, we want to have a discussion.
Every time we talk about our data, we can't repeatedly tell each other 10,000 data values.
I say, well, remember our patient group so-and-so, they had white cell counts of 10.5.
It's impossible to do.
It's just, it's just, it's just, it's just wrong.
We want a compact way of telling each other, or give each other some representative value, value that represents the whole data set.
And mean is one of those, median, and mode to two others.
So that is a representation, a single value that represents all of our data.
Now, mean is the easiest one.
I can ask anyone what the mean is, or the average value is, and taking the numbers 4, 5, and 6.
And I ask you what that is.
Well, there's 4, there's 5, there's 6.
You can add all of them and divide by how many there are.
You're going to be left with 5.
So that's a very simple way of, mean is a very simple way of getting a single value to represent all your others.
Median is a bit more difficult to understand, but sometimes much more useful.
It is simply the value that would be a value of which half of your values would be more than that value,
and the other half of your data set would be less than that value.
Once again, let's use 4, 5, and 6.
5 would also be the median, because half of the values is below 5, which is 4,
and half of the values is above 5, which was 6.
So you only want to count the values, irrespective of what they are.
If I had 4, 5, 10 million, 5 would still be the median, because one value is less than 5, and one value is more than 5.
The problem comes in if you have an even number of values.
Look at 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16.
Now there are 6 values.
Quickly you'll discover that 12 and 13 is our point of division there.
So what you do then is you take those middle two that you discovered,
and you take them in 12 plus 13 is 25, divided by 2 is 12.5.
So if I were to put in 12.5 there, 3 values will be less than 12.5,
and 3 values will be more than 12.5.
So that value needn't appear in your data set.
It is just a value for which half of the values in your data set will be less than half as more.
And it's a very good thing to use.
It's a very useful thing to have, because you might have a data set like this.
10, 11, 9, 40, 9, 10, 30, 43.
Now these are all very close to each other.
And there's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 of them, but these two others are quite away from those.
Now would it really be good to represent this data set as an average, a mean?
It's going to be skewed towards this 30 and 43, and you can ask yourself,
is that value that we're going to have really representative of this data set?
It might be much better just to give a median in this instance.
There's some other subtle uses of it as well,
and we're going to talk about the modified Alvarado score for patients with suspected appendicitis.
You're going to get a score for your patient, and these are integers.
They're either going to score 3, 4, 5, 6, whatever.
And if you have a bunch of these patients with scores,
it's really fair to suggest that those values have a certain mean.
A mean is much more geared towards arithmetical, numerical values,
to do some arithmetic with those values.
If you have integer values like this as a score system,
it's much better to use one of them and say,
look, half of the values are more and half are less.
It's more representative of the patients.
Half were obviously sicker, clinically at least, than the others.
So it might be two useful examples of using a median.
Mode is the last one, and that just simply tells us which value occurs most often.
If you have a look at my data set there, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, there's no mode there,
because each value occurs only once.
There isn't a value that occurs twice, or at least more than the other.
If there were two values, then you'd have bimodal, trimodal, multimodal,
depending on how many values there were that occurred most often, irrespective of what they were.
Let's look at measures of dispersion.
Now we can represent a whole data set with a single value.
But think about this.
Now I have these values, 9, 10, and 11.
Their median is 10.
Their average or mean is 10.
And I have two 10 and 18.
They also have a median of 10 and an average or mean and median of 10.
So if we talk about these two data sets, and we talk to each other,
and we say, oh, remember that data set, mean of 10, remember that data set, mean of 10,
average of 10, median of 10.
But really, those are two completely different data sets.
We can't just use a single value to represent this data.
There's another type of value that we want to add to this, just to tell each other,
give each other some idea of how spread that data was.
Now, there is various methods of measures of dispersion,
and in other words, telling ourselves how far spread that data was.
The first one is just simply the range.
This works very well, for instance, when you just want to tell people what the age range was in your data set.
And it is the minimum value and the maximum value.
And you subtract the minimum from the maximum, and that was your range.
Very simple.
The one that we really want to deal with is variance and standard deviation.
What is variance and standard deviation?
It's much easier to talk about standard deviation because variance is just the,
that's the one that you calculate, but it is the square of the standard deviation,
or the standard deviation is the square root of the variance.
And why do we have this square issue?
Let me show you on this little graph.
Don't worry about this code.
All I want you to know is,
here's our white cell count,
and we have this list of 10.1,
12.4,
13.1,
14.6,
9.9,
10.3,
11.1,
12.9,
10.9,
12.7.
And I can work out an average for those,
but I can also plot those on a line.
And that's the code I've written here,
so don't worry about it.
Let's just execute that.
And there we go.
In green,
there's all our,
there was our 9.9 probably down here,
the one just over 10,
and this one,
14.6,
or whatever it was,
is there.
I can put them all on a line,
all the green dots there.
And I can ask also to do the average one there.
There we are.
The mean is that.
So what is standard deviation?
What standard deviation was,
very cleverly,
it does the following.
What is the distance from this spot to that spot?
There's the distance.
So all I'm going to take is 12,
and I'm going to subtract from that 11.1,
whatever those two values was,
and there's one distance.
I'm going to take the next distance,
and I'm going to take the next distance,
and the next distance,
the distance from here,
to all the points,
on both sides.
And I'm going to add up all those distances,
and divide it by how many there are,
and that will give me the average distance,
my whole data was away from this spot.
And that is the standard deviation.
Now, of course,
in this direction,
it will be negative distance,
in this direction,
positive distance.
We won't,
don't want that.
But remember,
negative 2,
and you square it.
Negative 2 times negative 2 is positive 4.
And that's where the variance thing comes in.
Because we just take all of these,
and we square the values.
We add them all up.
We divide them by how many there are,
and we take the square root of that,
so that we are back to actual distance away.
And that's standard deviation.
One standard deviation,
it tells us the average distance,
all our values are away.
So remember,
we had an example of 8,
9, and 10.
8, 9, and 10 would be very close to each other,
so our standard deviation would be very small.
But if we had the other example,
I can't remember what the values were,
but the spread in that data was quite far apart,
so the standard deviation would be much larger.
So in the end,
we're going to have an average,
and then we're going to have a standard deviation
of so much.
But then we can also work out
what would be 2 standard deviations,
what would be 3 standard deviations.
And for that standard deviation,
we can actually get a value.
We can say,
well, 3 standard deviations would be there.
So there's the 2 blue blocks.
That would be 1 standard deviation,
so 2 standard deviations would be about out here,
so it would be just under 15, etc, etc.
And the further out you go,
the higher the likelihood is that you contain all your data.
So standard deviation is just an average distance away from one,
an average value away from the mean.
Lastly, quartiles,
well, almost lastly,
quartiles and percentiles.
This works a little bit like medians.
In other words,
you're also going to have all your values,
all your values,
and you can work out the quartiles.
Quartiles stands for 4 quarter 4.
So you're going to divide all your values into 4 equally sized groups,
irrespective of what the values are.
You just want an equal number of values in each little group.
And you get the zeroth quartile,
which is the minimum value,
and the fourth quartile,
which is the maximum value,
which makes the second quartile obviously the median.
And then you get first and third quartiles in between.
And for each of those,
just like for median,
we had a value.
All those quartiles will have percentiles,
or even more percentiles,
divides your data set into 100.
Quartiles is 4,
percentiles is divided into 100 little boxes.
And now you can be much more specific,
but the 25th percentile would be the same as the first quartile.
The 50th percentile,
which is the median,
would be the same as the second quartile.
The 100th percentile would be the same as the fifth quartile,
which would be the same as the maximum.
Okay, those are all quite easy,
and you can easily ask your computer program to do it.
Remember, we imported our data.
Let's just run that,
our little MOOC mock there.
We're just displaying,
remember dot head,
we're displaying the first three values.
And if we say dot describe,
just the ages,
there were the 150 patients,
a mean age of 30,
a standard deviation of 10.
And we can work out the range,
because it will be maximum 67,
minus minimum 18.
But you see there the 25th percentile,
which is the second,
the first quartile,
the 50th percentile,
or the second quartile,
or the median there,
third quartile,
75th percentile,
and then the maximum,
containing then all our values.
And you can play around,
you can play around with these,
you can look at length of stay also,
median,
standard deviation,
minimum, etc.
So,
just to recap then,
you'll have one value to represent,
all of your values,
and you'll have another value,
that just gives you,
an idea of how spread your data is.
Excellent.
