In this video we are interested in measures of central tendency. We're going
to look at mean, median and mode but also at minimum and maximum, the quartiles,
percentiles and percentile rank. On the left hand side here we have a column of
random numbers. They've been chosen to go from 10 to 50. Let's see how easy it
is to get the mean or the average value of this. I'm going to click in the cell
and type equals average. As I type I see some functions coming up starting with
those very same letters that I typed. I can move to the one I want and press enter
or double click on it. Now I see the open and closing brackets there so it only
needs the arguments and the argument at once is just all of these. I'm just
going to click on the first one and drag and let go on the bottom one and that's
it. It's going to calculate the mean from cell D3 right all the way down to D36.
If I hit enter I see the mean is 32.6. Same for the median. I can say equals M E D
median starts coming up. I use my arrow keys to move down. Hit enter and it's
selected. A shortcut key is if I hit the 34 I can do shift command hold them both in and hit down arrow and it
will suddenly select everything until it finds the first blank cell. On the windows
that will be shift control down arrow and we get the median is 33. Mode. Now there are
various modes. This is the old mode function. Let's still use that one and I'm
again going to click on the 34 shift command down arrow or shift control down
arrow for the windows. Hit enter and I see the number that comes up most commonly
is 30. Let's quickly move over to seeing what the minimum was. I see min come up.
This time I'll double click it instead of using my arrow keys to select it. Again
select all of those and the minimum is 10 and the maximum is. Let's use maximum. Now
I unfortunately clicked on a wrong cell there. What I can do is hit the escape key
so I can start again. Equals max is what I want. And again selecting my whole column. And as I said I
chose these numbers at random to go between 10 and 50. So the minimum is going to be 10 maximum 50.
Now to do the quartiles you see the 0th quartile there which I remind you is the same as the minimum.
So that's going to be equal quartile. As I start start typing I see the old quartile function there. But we're going to use this quartile.inc including all the numbers.
Maximum and minimum. So I select that. Once again I've got to select all my cells. But now comma and it wants to know what quartile I'm interested in.
Well I'm at the 0. So I'm going to just select 0 comma 0. Hit enter and that's 10. And indeed that does represent the minimum value as we can see there.
Let's do quartile. Again select down arrow and this time we want quartile 1. That'll give us 27. Let's do quartile.
Quartile 2. Now quartile 2 is going to be exactly the same as the median. And you see 33. And the median was also 33.
Let's finish up. Quartile. The one that you used most recently will be at the top of this list.
We'll use that. Shift command down arrow comma 3. And lastly we said quartile 4 should be equal to the max.
So we've. Let's just fix that one. Shift command down arrow comma 4. And that is quite incorrect. Because it only selected.
Now if I'm in that cell and I wanted to see what was happening. I hit CTRL U on the Mac. Or F2 key. The function 2 key on Windows. And I see I made a mistake there. I can now move back.
In there. Highlight it. Delete it. Select the correct cell. Shift command down arrow. So now they all selected. And indeed quartile 4 equals 50.
Now quartile can only take those arguments. 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4. You're simply dividing. All your data. Your whole data set into 4. Percentile is a bit different.
I can say equals. Percentile. Again we want the inclusive one. Or then the old one at the bottom. Let's use inclusive. The array that we're going to deal with. Shift command down arrow.
Comma. I want the 0th percentile. And that's exactly the same as asking quartile 0.
Now you see 0.25 is there. That would be the same as quartile 1. 0.5 is quartile 2. 0.75 is quartile 3. And 1 would be quartile 4.
But look at this. Percentile does not limit me to quartiles 1 to 4. I can put in anything I want. Equals percentile as long as it's between 0 and 1.
So let's select everything again. Comma. Now what if I choose this 0.5. So instead of having typed in 0.5, I click on a cell that contains 0.5.
And lo and behold it's 33. Because 0.5 is the second quartile. But if I now go in here and say well please give me 0.6. The 60th percentile.
Immediately the 33 updated to 35. So anything between and including 0 and 1. So from 0% to 100% can be included in percentile.
So I can break up my data set here as I wish. So 35 would represent a number below which 60% of the values will occur and above which 40% of those values will occur.
Percentile rank. Percentile rank. Just turns that on its head for me. Percentile rank. Inclusive.
Again I tell it what column to select from. Comma. Now I want to know the number 10.
So I'm going to click on 10 instead of typing in 10. So every time I change that cell percentile rank will change.
And indeed I see 10 was the lowest number. So it must be at the 0th. But let's see if I were to type in 50 here.
Well you'll see that you'll have to round it off. That is nearly nearly 1. Remember it is breaking up this relatively small data set into fractions of 1% each.
So it's not always going to get there exactly. But I can ask any value I want between the minimum and maximum.
Let's make it 40 and it will tell me it's at the 77.2% percentile rank.
So I've given it a number. It will tell me what percentile value that would be.
For me all.
This is a number.
The limit.
The limit you to your reading with the only making and your decision can be negative.
So the limit is always going to give.
