Let's have a look then at the standard deviation.
What we've done here is just created a column of values
and that might represent any type of data.
You can ignore this y-axis.
I just reconstructed that so that we have all the points
that represent these values marked on the x-axis.
It is then very easy to get the mean.
Remember, if I click on it and I wanted to edit it,
it would be F2, just hitting the F2 key on Windows,
but on the Mac it would be Ctrl-U.
And that would show me what I did to get that.
It was equal average.
And then in brackets you'll see a new kind of reference.
You'll notice that these two columns have got these little arrows on top
of the column headers.
And that means this set of data has been converted to a table.
Average now refers to, its argument refers to table 1,
which is what this table is called, and the X column.
So instead of having said A3 colon A35,
this would be the way that it is represented.
You can still go in and select it though.
Let's have a look.
Now to jump outside of this editing mode, we just hit escape.
Let's have a look at that.
You'll notice when I move my cursor just above that column,
it changes to a black downward pointing arrow.
If I now click on that, it would select all the values in that column.
And that makes things very easy.
I don't have to drag down or hit some special key combination
like Command, Shift and down arrow.
Let's select something else.
So I'm going to do this again.
It's equals average.
I go down to average and I select it.
Now instead of, and I can still click on the 14 and drag all the way down,
but now I can easily just move my cursor there, click on it,
and that whole column is selected.
When I hit enter, I get 29.1, a 27.1.
You'll see it's 27.1 and 27.09.
All we've done is use these buttons just to make the decimal places less.
These buttons under number.
Now standard deviation, I can recreate by equals STDEV dot.
Now I have options.
If my data represents all the values of a population, it's dot P.
If it represents only values of a sample taken from a population, it's dot S.
Let's suggest that this is dot P.
Now, again, I can just move my cursor over that X, select.
The whole table is selected and off we go.
Again, 14.77.
I can select it and make the decimal places less.
Now, look at the chart down here.
I've represented each of the values in this X column by these little blue diamonds.
This red square represents the mean.
And I have now worked out what the standard deviation is for this population.
14.8 is this distance from there till there or from here till there.
Both sides.
It means that on average, the data is this far spread from the mean.
And you can see on the positive side, there's some bigger values on this side.
Hence, it made the standard deviation a bit larger than you would expect here on the negative side.
Remember, it reflects both sides at once.
So, if I wanted to know what the value is one standard deviation away, it would very simply be.
Let's go there.
Ctrl U.
And see, this is in blue.
This is in green.
So, it's going to be the mean minus the standard deviation.
Escape out of that.
If I go into edit mode here, Ctrl U or F2, it would be the mean plus the standard deviation.
And that's how I got to 12.3 and 41.9, which represents these two values here and here.
One standard deviation above the mean and one standard deviation below the mean.
One standard deviation in this lie.
neb
We're notclubed.
Figured of the mean.
One standard deviation above the mean.
This is three Mand'ing.
What stop did we say?
We promise.
How do you say a example at this there?
We will.
Do you say in the letzten,ley, be the next stage below the estim whenmake the reimbursement embarrassed?
