In this acute care surgery literature review we're going to look at the meta-analysis of laparoscopic versus open repair of perforated peptic ulcers.
It comes from the Journal of the Society of Leproendoscopic Surgeons published in 2013, volume 17 from Stavros Antonio et al.
It is a meta-analysis of laparoscopic versus open repair of perforated ulcers.
They mentioned in the introduction, of course, these are managed by simple repair, direct repair, with or without a patch.
And that patch can be biological, omentum, etc., glue, or various other forms.
Now, the open repair has always been the gold standard.
But the laparoscopic repair was introduced in the 90s together with the advent of laparoscopic surgery.
There has, though, been a decline in the surgery for perforated peptic ulcers, specifically for major surgeries such as resection, but also for the types of surgeries that this study looked at.
And that happened because of the advent of H2 antagonists and PPIs.
Now, the laparoscopic repair is done very commonly, but we need to know whether there's any level 1 evidence to suggest that it is better than an open repair.
Now, the vast majority of evidence is based on retrospective reports, and we all know what the problems inherent with that is.
And the authors wanted to look whether there was any good evidence for laparoscopic approach to supplant the open repair.
Now, as far as the materials and methods are concerned, MEDLINE search, Accept America database, the Cochrane Central Register for Clinical Trials,
and then the Bibliography, of course, the references of the studies that were found.
They wanted to include only prospective randomized trials in this meta-analysis.
They also looked at the JDET score on the selected four articles that were found, and that's correct.
Only four prospective randomized controlled trials were found.
The primary outcome that they looked at in these four trials was in-hospital mortality,
and then secondary outcomes also operative morbidity, duration of surgery, the post-operative pain, length of stay.
Major complications that they wanted to note was suture line leakage, probably the most important,
then peritoneal abscesses and collections, pancreatitis, facial dehiscence, pneumonia, respiratory failure,
and then severe cardiac and cerebrovascular events.
And then the minor complications were wound infections, wound abscesses, UTIs, prolonged ileus, and incisional hernias.
Now, they found initially 290 studies.
As I mentioned, only four of those were randomized controlled trials that could be included in this meta-analysis.
Now, two of them came from the same group in China, and three in total were from China,
the only other one being from the Netherlands.
It included a total patient count of 289, with 151 laparoscopic repairs, and 138 open repairs.
Now, for three of those articles, a primary repair was done with a patch,
and in one, the trial didn't really mention what the exact surgical technique was, probably patches as well.
Male dominance, one and a half males for every female, with a mean age of 54.
Now, three of these studies had a J-DAT score of 3.
Now, I mentioned this J-DAT score.
That looks at how well a randomized controlled trial, a prospective randomized controlled trial, was put together.
And it marks it up to 5, 5 being quite excellent.
So, three of these studies only had a score of 3.
And that's quite, that's like a fair study.
And then one of them had actually a score of 2, which falls in the poor category, 1 and 2 being poor.
Looking at all those parameters of the primary and secondary outcomes,
though, nothing reached any kind of statistical significance.
So, no statistical significant difference in those variables.
So, clearly, there's no evidence to suggest that a laparoscopic repair is indeed better than an open repair or should supplant an open repair.
Now, as mentioned, the J-DAT scores on these four randomized controlled trials were not good.
And probably it's time for a well put together randomized, prospective randomized controlled trial of sufficient numbers,
as well designed so that we can see whether the large amount of laparoscopic repairs that is happening now are actually justified.
