All registrars are obliged to complete a master's degree dissertation before
completing their training in the College of Medicine final examination. This can
add a considerable load to your already busy attempt at becoming a specialist.
It need not be so though. In this short tutorial video I explained some of the
logistics behind getting this done. I will be looking at the aims of expecting a
dissertation from you. I'll discuss some upfront matters that we need to get out
of the way, how to and which initial steps to take, actually getting the
research done, submitting your proposal and finally I'll tell you about some
places to get support and give you some contact details. Why are you obliged to
complete a dissertation? There are many factors involved as far as the University
and the College are concerned and suffice it to say this is not up for
discussion here. What is important though is how this affects you and what you
might learn from this experience. Although not everyone will entertain the
thoughts of becoming an academic surgeon all of us must have the ability to
interpret medical research. It is very important for you to see this
dissertation as an opportunity to learn as much as you can about conducting
research. If not you are doing yourself a disservice. It is equally important not
to allow this dissertation to become a chain around your neck though. It should
not interfere with the other demands placed on you. Remember there are many
resources and people around to help you with your project. Just ask. First things
first, the University sends out information that might be of importance to
you. At a recent workshop for supervisors it was mentioned that some of the
biggest problems arise due to the fact that this information does not get to
you. As can apparently be seen by the fact that the most common excuse from
registrars when falling behind on some aspect is that they never received
this information. Note though that the University only uses your official
university email for communication. Seeing that most people use their personal
emails it is easy to conceive of a situation where the critical
information lies in your university inbox and you never open it. It is
possible to set the email to auto forward to your personal email but you must set
this up yourself. Perhaps it's easier to just regularly check your university
email. Just as important is to keep up your personal details on the
university systems. Go to www.uct.ac.za click on current students and choose
postgraduate students from the drop-down list. Then select services and
resources and then student administration self-services to log in with your
university username and password and make sure that they have your correct
information. Pay particular importance to your cell phone number as critical
information is also sent via SMS. The last matter pertains to forms. There are
numerous forms that you need to complete during the process of getting your
dissertation done. In some upcoming slides I will introduce you to these. They
are available from me and from the postgraduate office across the road past
the library. The first step to take is to get an idea for your project. You can
come up with one yourself. You can keep your ear on the ground and find out about
some interesting fact or two while on rotation in various units. Or you can get
one from me. Professor Khan has asked all the units to submit a list of topics that
they would be interested in getting registrar involvement. Contact me for these.
Once you have an idea or get given one, find someone who is qualified to be your
supervisor. After agreeing to be your supervisor the two of you have to
complete a form called the memorandum of understanding between postgraduate
student and supervisor. This form must be handed in within six months of
registering yourself as a postgraduate student at the postgraduate office. Now
you need to get some work done and write a study or dissertation proposal. You need to
do this with the help of your supervisor. Set up regular scheduled meetings with him or her
and talk about the topic at hand. Consider the current literature and build up a
reference library. I have examples of previously written proposals. You can get
these from me. This proposal must be submitted to the Department Research
Committee. Professor Maul is in charge of this and there are scheduled meetings
every month. Send a copy of your proposal to Varda Brown who will add your
project to the list and inform you when the proposal will come up. Get yourself to that
meeting and tell everyone about your project. If everyone accepts your
proposal you will be notified by Professor Maul and receive a proposal
number. Now you have to repeat the process with the Ethics Committee. Once
again I have the forms for this. Once you get a number from Ethics you have to
complete the appointment of a supervisor and the submission of a study
proposal form and submit it to the postgraduate office. The last form asks for a
signature from the Dean. Don't worry the postgraduate office will do this on your
behalf. You needn't wait for the outcome of this though. Once you have Ethics
approval get the ball rolling and collect data. Data collection might be the most
onerous task in this whole process and you have to budget some time for it. With
the data comes the statistical analysis. Don't let it scare you off. The statistics is
easy. Again ask for help. As an aside I do not agree with the whole starter software
issue. It is needlessly complicated and you will gain very little from it. There is
precious little that cannot easily be accomplished by Microsoft Excel. Again
ask me about it. About a month before completing your dissertation complete the
form submit a master's dissertation and hand it in to the postgraduate office. If
your surname starts with an A to an L, hand it in to Diane Price and if it starts with
an M to Z, hand it in to Lorraine McDonald. Remember it must be signed by your supervisor.
Your principal support comes from your supervisor. But remember there is also the student support
committee and the postgraduate students association. You can also ask them about funding for your
project. If you have any questions about this whole process speak to Audrey Winkler, the
manager of the postgraduate office and you see her number there. Otherwise you can always
contact me.
