A quick word about the mathematics of this equation of ours, or most specifically the
natural log of A divided by A0 activity now divided by activity as it was in the past.
Let's look at which of these radioactive isotopes would be the best if I am not looking for
a 5,300-year-old skeletal remains. I'm looking at a bottle of 10-year-old Merlot, a bottle of 10-year-old
red wine. Which of these would be the best to look at? Now, 10 years ago when this bottle
was sealed, I knew what the activity was at that time, and I can certainly look at what
the activity is today. What the activity is today. Now, which of these would be best to
use? And that relates to the mathematics of this equation. Carbon-14 is 5,730 years for
a half-life for half of those carbon-14s to undergo reconnective decay. So, in only 10 years,
most very, very, very few of those would have decayed. So, the activity 10 years ago versus
activity now is almost exactly the same. So, I'm going to be dealing here with a natural
logarithm of 1. Since these two are going to be very close to each other. And the natural
logarithm of 1 is 0. In other words, my time is going to show me a 0 time. On the other hand,
if I look at oxygen 15, it's only 120 odd seconds. In other words, there will be almost nothing
left today. The activity today is almost going to be 0. And I'm looking at the natural logarithm
logarithm of about 0 divided by what it was at that time. And the natural logarithm, obviously,
of 0 is not defined. And as the natural logarithm of a number, if that number tends to 0, the
natural logarithm of that is going to tend to negative infinity. So, I'm going to get a time
there of not 0 but infinite number of years. So, the best one is going to be this tritium 3,
hydrogen with two neutrons in the nucleus. And because that has an activity around about the age
of my wife. In other words, about half of them would have disappeared and we know that delta T,
delta N divided by delta T is proportional to how many there are now. So, there is going
to be a substantial difference between A and A0. And that will give me a nice fraction to get
a natural logarithm of with a negative value to give me a good estimation of the time, the age of that y.
So, we choose, because we have this natural logarithm of expression here, we have to choose our dating,
the animal molecule that we are using to date. We've got to choose it according to the half-life
to give us the nice accurate answers as far as that each of our specimens are concerned.
Good. Let's cement our understanding of carbon dating, radioactive dating at least,
by these three quick questions. Can carbon-14 dating be used for a wooden box?
Yes, it can if it was well preserved wooden box because that tree took in nutrients and carbon dioxide
from the air for photosynthesis and indeed we can use it for a golden box. Can we use it for a gold statue?
No, we can't. That gold was never living and never took in carbon. It has no carbon. It has a gold statue,
it will have no carbon. We can't use it. And for well preserved animal fur? Yes, what is fur?
It's like hair. Hair contains a lot of carbon. Keratin. In other words, yes, you can use carbon-14.
carbon-14. If carbon-14 to carbon-12 ratio was much more than the 1 to 8.3 times 10 to the power 11
thousands of years ago, would our estimation of T there be too small or too large? Too small or too large?
Well, remember we said A activity was N divided by, or delta N divided by delta T and that was proportional to N.
That was proportional to N, the number I have. So if this ratio was much larger, 2 to that or 3 to that,
then N would have been higher. That means my activity then, that means activity 0 would have been much larger.
If this was much larger, then this fraction was, this fraction is smaller and that means T is too small.
That means I'll underestimate the age of my sample of my specimen, I should say. Now can tritium be used for 700 year old specimens?
No, we said that tritium has a half-life of, I've forgotten now, we said it is a half-life of about 12, just over 12 years.
So certainly after 700 years, the activity today would be so low in my specimen now. That activity would be so enormously low.
Every 12 years I have half, I have half, half, half. There will be nothing left, I'll have almost negligible activity today.
That means I am taking the natural log of 0 there, which is undefined, so I can really not use, I can really not use tritium for an example that is 700 years old.
Good, here we have a meteorite. We know that there is 93.8% of the mass of the original isotope still present.
So somehow we know how much isotope there was versus how much there is now in the mass that remains as 93.8% of that radioisotope.
We calculate the age of this meteorite to be 4.51 times 10 to the power 9 years.
What is the half-life of a radioisotope?
So this is a convoluted problem and all they are trying to do is to see if you can do some algebra with the equations that you know.
Is it a very realistic problem? Are you going to deal with it in the day-to-day life if you work with this sort of thing? No.
Anyway, let's do it. Do we know the equation? Because that's the way I think, you know, that I look at this.
What is an equation that we do know for half-life? Well, we know that the decay constant equals the natural log of 2 divided by the half-life.
And that means the half-life is going to equal 0.693 divided by the decay constant.
I don't know what the decay constant is, but I certainly know another equation that has the decay constant in it right there.
So if I have n divided by n0, I take the natural log of that. That is going to be minus lambda t.
And that's the age t, not the half-life t. In other words, lambda is going to be the natural log of.
Now, do I know n divided by n0? Yes, I do. Because the mass, 93.8% of the mass of the original isotope is still present.
That means this is 0.938 as a fraction. 93.8% as a fraction is still left.
So that is going to be that divided by negative t. And I can put that in over here for my lambda, which will make this the natural log of 0.938 times minus t there.
This is a fraction. This is going to be negative, canceling the negative up there. And that gives me a half-life of 4.88 times 10 to the power 10 years.
So it's a simple algebra problem. Do you know your equations? Can you play around with them to give you the half-life?
Knowing that the half-life is going to have something to do with the decay constant.
Knowing that the decay constant has something to do with the ratio of the amount you have now divided by which it was.
So in the end, quite easy to work out. Now, this is our last problem in this section, but it's the most important problem.
And you have to look at something very carefully. We have a specimen, and it has 9.2 grams of carbon in total.
And that 9.2 grams of carbon has an activity of 1.6 bacterial. So in 9.2 grams of carbon, there's going to be a certain number of radioactive isotope.
And that has an activity of 1.6 carbon-14 per second. What is the age of the specimen?
Now, what we are going to take for granted is that over the last couple of thousand years, the living organism activity has been constant.
And remember, this is the most important part of this problem.
So we estimated before, 1 gram, 1 gram of carbon has an activity of 0.23 bacterial.
Remember, we took 1 gram of carbon. We looked at, because we said it was something 8.3 times 10 to the power 11 carbon-12 to 1 carbon-14.
And we worked it out what would be in 1 gram of a sample, how many there would be. And we worked out its activity.
So in a 1 gram specimen, we'll get this. So what are we going to get in a 9.2 gram specimen?
And a 9.2 gram will get this divided by this times that. And that gives me, I think, 2.1 bacteria.
2.1 bacteria. So don't get confused when we got that 0.23. That 0.23 is per 1 gram.
If I had 2 grams, more would be double the amount of carbon-14s.
So the carbon-14s per second activity would be double that.
OK, so 9.2 grams, we're going to get 2.1 bacteria activity.
And now we know that time is going to equal the natural log of a, which is what it is now, or in our specimen, 1.6, divided by what it's always been, 2.1.
2.1 times negative, 0.693, divided by 5, 7, 30 years.
OK, these, it's becular, divided by becular, so there's nothing left as far as units are concerned.
This is going to go into the numerator as years. This is the natural log of 2.
So I can plug in, if I plug in years here, I'll get my answer in years, since nothing else is in units.
I don't have to convert for seconds, I want my answer in years.
And this gives me about 2,300, 2,300 years if you plug those, 2,200, 2,300 years, if you plug those values in.
The important bit about this is, if it states that 9.2 grams has an activity object, our initial 0.23 was for 1 gram.
You have to convert that to be working with the same size specimen as it was then, versus what it is now.
And we worked that out for a living organism as it is now, but the now refers to the activity of the specimen that we have now.
This, what is in a living organism now, equals what it was for a living organism back then, A0,
which we just take for being the same over the last couple of thousand years, although that's not a correct statement in itself.
