Good, here's a fantastic problem. We have a power plant that produces 3.0 times 10 to the power of 9 watts.
It uses uranium 235 for fission and then each fission reaction produces 200 mega electron volts.
I see there's something I left from this problem.
So the mass of, we have to calculate the mass of uranium used per year.
I want to say also that the efficiency of energy production is 25%.
So 25% of that nuclear fission energy gets converted to useful energy that electricity that can run into the grid.
So how much or what mass of uranium is used per year? How to attack this problem?
First of all, I think let's see how much energy is produced per year.
So I've got 3.0 times 10 to the power of 9 joules per second and I need to convert that into joules per year.
Because we want the mass per year. So if I multiply this by 3600 seconds, that is in one hour, I have 24 hours in one day, I have 365 days in one year.
So I'm going to lose all of these and I'm going to lose all of these and I'm going to have joules per year.
And I think my answer was in the order of 9.46 times 10 to the power of 16 joules per year.
Now at least I know how many joules per year is produced. I require 9.46 times 10 to the power of 16 joules.
How can I get that joule? Well, I am producing per fission reaction 200 mega electron volt.
But only 25%. The efficiency of 25% means 25% of this will get converted to eventual energy.
So that means I've only got 50 mega electron volt per fission reaction.
Let me say per fission. It's not proper to write it like this but it's the thought that goes on in our minds.
It's per fission reaction.
50 mega electron volt. So let's convert that mega electron volt to joules.
And it's easy. It's 50 times 10 to the power of 6 and I'm going to multiply that by, to convert it,
I'm going to do 1.6 times 10 to the power of negative 19 joules per electron volt.
So 50 times 10 to the power of 6 times that gives me, did I do it somewhere on my board here?
Yes, I'm getting 8.0. 8.0 times 10 to the power of negative 12 joules per fission reaction.
Now this is already running at 25% efficiency.
So I'm not using the full 200. It's only 25% efficient.
Only 25% of this fission energy is going to be useful energy converted to electricity.
The rest is lost just as heat.
Okay, so if I require this per year and I get this per fission reaction, if I divide this in here now,
8.0 times 10 to the power of negative 12 joules per fission reaction,
that's going to give me fission reactions per year that I require.
So 9.46 divided by this 8 that gave me 1.18, 1.18 times 10 to the power of 26, 28 I should say, fissions,
let's call it fissions per year. That is how many. So many nuclei I need to,
I have to undergo fission to give me this amount of, this amount of power per year.
Now from Elgadro's number, we're using Uranium 235. So 235 grams to give me how many nuclei?
That's 6.32 comes 10 to the power of 23 nuclei. Okay, but I require so many nuclei.
So so many nuclei, so this divided by this times that gives me a mass then of about 4,600 kilograms.
So I need 4,600 kilograms of Uranium 235 per year to run a, what would that be?
300, 300 times 10 to the power of 6, 300 megawatt. To run a 300 megawatt power plant,
I need 4 and a half tons of Uranium 235 per year at 25% fissions.
Good, let's, before we carry on with the provinces, have a look at just the concepts of a nuclear reactor,
fission reactor. First one built by Enrico Fermi at the University of Chicago,
apparently on a squash court underneath a pavilion of the sports field, 1942 there.
The first one was built. Now today you get various types of designs,
various safety features, various power outputs, etc. They also use various amount of fuels.
And here we have Uranium 235. We've already shown that abundance is about 0.725%.
So you need to enrich that Uranium. In other words, so that the Uranium that you now use in your reactor
or reactor has a higher percentage, and typically we'll have about,
enrichment will increase that isotope 235 in your Uranium specimen used in the reactor to about 3%.
Okay, that would be enriched Uranium. So how does it work? This enriched Uranium comes in the form of
thin little rods containing the Uranium with the Uranium 235 and maybe even about a centimeter length of these long rods.
And many of them, and those rods combine, this one is called the reactor core.
Okay, now when fission occurs, we have thermal neutrons that bombard the nuclei, and each one of them will release other neutrons.
But those neutrons are not thermal neutrons. They typically have energies in the mega-electron volt range,
which is far too high to induce fission. So we need a moderator.
So between these rods we have water, because that's that high-energy neutron, goes into the water,
it bounces off water molecules, loses its kinetic energy, becomes a thermal neutron,
so we can be back at low enough energies, equal to less than 0.04 electron volt to be a thermal neutron,
to carry on this chain of action. So water is typically a moderator for our neutrons.
Then there are certain conditions. We call that, well let's do that.
When we have two neutrons that come off, we want this one to be lost to fission,
lost to fission, and we want this one to lead to fission. If that gives us two neutrons,
we want again this one to be lost to fission, and we want this one to engage in a fission reaction again.
And when we have this kind of reaction, where one neutron leads to one other fission reaction,
we call this running at critical condition. Running at critical condition.
When we run at subcritical condition, means that this process is eventually going to die,
slow down at this energy release, or eventually die out. And therefore we have something that needs to be done.
More importantly, the opposite of that is a reactor running in supercritical condition.
That is where you now have a chain reaction, where these are not lost.
Okay, so how do we prevent that? Yes, we have these controlling rods.
The controlling rod is made of something like boron or cadmium.
And these are rods that can be placed in between our reactor core rods.
And they will absorb some of the neutrons completely without ever going fission.
Obviously it's on that part of the curve.
Where it will not lead to fission is we don't have a mass defect,
due to the binding images that we discussed before.
So those control rods can be pulled out, brought in, and go up and down,
so that we always run at about a critical condition.
We don't want supercritical condition because that can lead to a runaway chain reaction,
which can lead to partial or complete meltdown.
And that obviously has some release of radioactive material as we recently had in Japan.
Okay.
How does it work?
Well, one form is a pressurized water reactor.
So we'll have our rods and cores in the water.
This will increase the fission reaction.
It releases energy.
Obviously there will be increasing the temperature of the water.
This water is piped to a heat exchange,
where there's other water that gets heated by this water.
These waters don't mix though.
We don't want that.
The water contains radioactive material.
We don't want that to mix.
This is converted to steam.
It charges the turbine and condenses and comes back.
So you have this whole process of this water going down.
The turbine turns to a dynamo and produces electricity for us.
So the electricity and magnetic properties of that dynamo.
And this whole process remains critical by these control rods.
Okay.
Let's do this problem.
We have a 5600 megawatt power plant.
Nuclear fishing power plant.
Cooling water enters it at 216 degrees Celsius and exit at 275 degrees Celsius.
It's pressurized, so it does not form steam.
If the specific heat capacity of water in this temperature range is about 4,420 joules per
kilogram per carbon, we want to calculate the mass of water we need per second to cool this
reactor core.
I just want to change batteries on the camera because I see it's going to die and then we'll
do this problem.
Good.
Fresh new battery from the nuclear power plant which is just a few kilometers that way.
this being in Cape Town and we have our nuclear fishing reactors producing at least some of the
energy in this area.
A few kilometers in that direction.
So back we've got this power plant.
We need to note how much water is produced here.
Well, from the amount of energy that is required to heat this temperature, the temperature of
this water, we know that that heat energy transfer that is going to equal CM delta T.
CM delta T.
So that is the energy that will raise this amount of water by this machine.
Delta T.
275 minus 216 is 59.
So our delta T here is 59 and we can do it in Kelvin.
We can do it in Kelvin.
Now, how much power, how much power is produced?
We know that power equals energy divided by time.
In other words, energy is going to be power times time.
So we have 5600 times 10 to the power 9 joules per second.
Joules per second.
Now, if we equate that energy as this energy that goes into creating this rise in temperature,
this rise in temperature, it means we can equate these two values with each other.
In other words, Pt equals CM delta T.
And what we want is mass divided by time.
So we want mass divided by time.
So that is going to be P divided by C delta T.
C divided by delta T.
So this power plant produces this much power.
So what we're saying is that it's energy per second.
And that energy is put into heating this water, into heating this water.
So if I have 5600 times 10 to the power 6 divided by 4,420 joules per kg per Kelvin times delta T, which is 59 Kelvin.
That gives me mass kilogram per second.
I get about 21,000 kilograms per second required for that 5.6 times 10 to the power 9 watt.
Or 5600 megawatt power plant requires 21 tons of water per second.
And obviously that happens for instance in Japan where we don't, where that water supply was cut off.
And you have this effect of not being able to cool the reactor core.
And that leads to the partial and full meltdown in the supercritical conditions.
