In this section we're going to discuss ionizing radiation in medicine or biological effect of ionizing radiation.
First of all we need to just define ionizing radiation.
And that is where either a high energy photon or particle delivers enough energy to an atom or molecule
to knock some of the electrons out of orbit.
We usually need about between 1 and 35 electron volts to do that.
And that will leave us with an ion.
And what are these high energy particles?
Now remember they're all in the mega electron volts so any one particle or photon can certainly ionize quite a few atoms.
But we are talking high energy photons and that will be gamma rays, that will be x-rays, and that will be ultraviolet rays even.
And then we are talking beta particles and we are talking alpha particles.
Beta particles, alpha particles and even neutrons.
Even just neutrons.
Now we have one of these.
These can come from naturally occurring radioactivity.
These can come from many equipment.
These can come from ionizing radiation from the atmosphere.
Now what will happen to that is that obviously exposes a certain material to this ionizing radiation which will then undergo ionization.
In other words, ions form positive ions and the electrons being knocked out of the shells.
So we define exposure in standard temperature and pressure.
So that will be 0 degrees Celsius and that will be at 1 atmosphere.
So we take a certain mass of air and we irradiate it with the ionizing radiation, one of the photons or particles there.
And we note how many positive ions form in coulombs.
And we define that as the rincon.
So 1 rincon is going to equal, I don't want to get this wrong, 2.58 times 10 to the power negative 4 coulombs per kilogram.
So this refers to the q value.
Well, for positive, for the positive ions that form divided by mass.
Divided by mass.
So the exposure that each of these can give will be if I take one volume of air with a certain mass.
And I can get that because I'm taking standard temperature and pressure.
And I look at how many coulombs of positive ions formed in there.
I get 1 rincon defined as 2.58m times 10 to the power negative 4 coulombs per kilogram.
That is the exposure to which if a human being, for instance now most recently Fukushima in Japan, that radiation there, that radiation there will expose someone to this amount of radiation.
And that is defined for in air.
Now that is not the same as what happens in the human body.
You will be exposed.
It's an aeroplane.
Anyway, you'll be exposed to that but your body will only absorb a certain amount and that is called the absorbed dose.
The absorbed dose.
And that is how much of this exposure, what you're exposed to, is absorbed by a certain mass of your tissue.
That equals energy, the energy absorbed, divided by mass, again the mass of the tissue that absorbs that.
So we're talking here, we're talking joules per kilogram.
We're talking joules per kilogram.
So how much energy is absorbed by a certain mass.
And we measure this in gray.
One gray.
And note it as one GY.
And usually in ionizing radiation for treatment of cancer, we give doses in centigrade.
But okay, that's the gray which equals one joule per kilogram.
For all the subsequent problems that we do there, we define another unit and that's called the RAD.
RAD stands for Radiation Absorbed Dose.
Radiation Absorbed Dose and that equals 0.01 gray.
So that's our conversion factor there.
And that is the energy absorbed, absorbed dose.
Now this part of physics relates to medicine and unfortunately we have these long words that we have to write in our equations.
Suppose us medical personnel are not so good at writing nice, clean equations.
Anyway, this is a lame joke.
That's not where it comes from.
But you'll have to deal with these long words in your, when you do these equations.
We'll look at one or two abbreviations.
But certainly these are terms that you'll have to memorize.
Let's very quickly just do this problem.
Now calculate to absorb the dose of water.
It will raise its temperature from 20 to 50 degrees Celsius.
Now once again the metal exposure was defined in standard temperature and pressure air.
But now some of that radiation is absorbed.
And how much of that will be absorbed?
Now we know that absorbed, absorbed dose, absorbed dose is the energy that is absorbed.
So that's going to be energy divided by max.
How much is that energy going to be?
Well, how much do I require?
I require energy in the form of heat transfer.
That is what is going to happen here.
And we remember heat transfer Q.
That is going to be the specific heat for water times the mass of water times delta T.
So if I plug that in here, because that is going to be my energy, this heat transfer.
That is going to be C in delta T divided by M.
My M's go.
Hence the problem doesn't say how much water we're talking about.
And I'm going to get per kilogram from my units there.
For water, that is 4186 joules per kilogram per Kelvin.
Okay, and my delta T, well that's just 30 Kelvin.
30.0 Kelvin.
And that's all I need.
And that gives me an absorbed dose of...
That equals 1.26 times 10 to the power of 5 degree.
And we like to express things in radiation absorbed dose.
And that is 1.26 obviously times 10 to the power of 7 rads.
Okay, that is the absorbed dose of the water required to raise its temperature by 30 degrees Celsius or 30 Kelvin.
Now just for interest sake, certain tissues will be much more sensitive to ionizing radiation than other tissue.
For instance, your bone will be quite sturdy, but your eyes or your intestinal mucosa, the lining of your bowel,
your bowel will be very sensitive to ionizing radiation.
And that depends on various factors.
But we are not interested in medicine so much as this absorbed dose.
And we just looked at absorbed dose in rads or grades or centigrades.
We are more interested in the relative biological effectiveness in a certain tissue, RBE.
So once again, these long words you have to use in your equation.
Relative biological effectiveness, that equals a ratio.
And we take the absorbed dose, the absorbed dose of, so let's say the dose, absorbed dose of 200 kilo electron volt x-rays to cause a certain effect.
So what dose do I need in that tissue with 200 kilo electron volt x-rays, how much absorbed dose of this do I need for a certain effect in that tissue divided then by the dose.
That will then be the dose of whatever radiation I'm using, the dose of radiation for the same effect.
For the same effect.
So I'm just relating it to the absorbed dose in that tissue of 200 kilo volt x-rays to cause that effect.
So it's just a relationship factor that we use.
The relative biological effectiveness of something.
Okay, and in the next video I'll show you how this is used.
It's not used on its own, but in another equation.
Good, now we get to the equation that we were really after from the beginning and it's biological equivalent dose.
So suppose when you do these equations you can write BED.
Suppose you can do that if you can write relative biological effectiveness you can write biological equivalent dose.
And that is measured in REMS, R-E-M.
And that stands for Rincon equivalent in Maine.
Rincon equivalent in Maine.
And what we simply do, we take the absorbed dose and we multiply it by the relative biological effectiveness.
Relative biological effectiveness.
As long as we keep this absorbed dose in RADs, not in grays.
In RADs, not in grays.
Times the relative biological effectiveness.
Now obviously this is dose divided by dose.
So there are no units here.
So multiplying that by this radiance that we express this in Rincon equivalent in Maine.
The biological equivalent dose.
And that is what we are after and we'll do a problem.
Because it's difficult to make sense of all of this.
And truth be told, as a surgeon, I never use this.
I never use this at all.
This is for radiologists and for radiation oncotherapists.
This is things that they use.
And then obviously the medical physicists who work out these doses for treatment.
And who monitor the equipment.
Thus these are for them obviously not for me as a surgeon.
So this makes, doesn't make intuitive sense all of these.
But let's do a problem.
Because usually through doing problems that these things become clearer.
