Let us do this problem. We, through alpha and beta negative decay, we go from radon 220 to lead 208.
And we don't know what sequence that is, we just want to know how many alpha and beta particles are we going to have in the end.
Now let's just write alpha decay again for ourselves.
Alpha decay.
Remember, that's going to start with some parent.
There's an atomic number, atomic mass number, and that's going to give us some daughter product.
We're going to lose 2 from our atomic number, and we're going to lose 4 from our atomic mass number.
And that means we'll have an alpha particle on this side.
If we undergo beta negative decay, we're going to go from some parent, the A, we're going to have some daughter.
The A stays exactly the same, and we'll actually gain one proton as a neutron gets, decays into a proton, plus an electron, and that electron remember is written as such.
Now, we're going to go from 220 to 208.
That's a difference of 12.
That means, if you look at it very simply, 12 will be 4 of these.
If I do this 4 times, though, I'm going to lose 4 times 2 is 8.
I'm going to lose 8 protons, but I only need to lose, let's have a look, we only need to lose 4.
If I do this 3 times, then I'm going to lose 6.
If I do this 3 times, I'm going to lose 12, which is what I want.
If I do it 3 times, I'm also going to lose 6, but I only need to lose 4, and that means I've got to make up 2, and I can make up 2 by doing this twice.
It's as simple as that.
Think about it.
I'll have 4, I'll have 4 heliums, 4 alpha particles, because if I do that 3, where am I this morning?
If I do this 3 times, I'm going to do this negative 4, negative 4, negative 4, that'll be negative 12, which is exactly what I want.
But that is going to leave me negative 2, negative 4, negative 6.
So that will leave me at 80, 208, 80.
But I don't want to be at 80, I want to be at 82.
Fortunately, I can do this twice.
It's not going to change my 208, where I'm at, but it will change my 80 to 81, and then to 82, so we'll have 2 electrons.
We're going to have 3 alpha particles and 2 beta particles.
Here's an old familiar problem, or the concept to solve it anyway, the equations to solve it.
I have uranium-235, and it decays into daughter products, and we have some gamma ray release.
And we know that those gamma rays, those gamma photons, have a wavelength of 1.14 times 10 to the power negative 11 meters.
What is the energy in mega electron volt?
You can write our simple equation that we know so well, and as much as remember this photon trails at the speed of light.
So I can use HPC divided by lambda, and if I substitute that, I get about 1.745 times 10 to the power negative 14 joule.
I need to convert that to electron volt.
One electron volt is 1.60 times 10 to the power.
I'm using 3 significant digits, whereas I can put a 2 in there, a bit more accuracy, depending on how, it's an important thing actually, depending on how you want to handle, or how you are taught to handle, significant digits.
Anyway, negative 90 joule, and that is going to give me 0.109 mega electron volt.
Simple enough.
Let's do our last problem.
We have phosphorus 32 there, and it goes beta negative decay to sulfur 32.
We have one electron, and I think in the next section, I think, we'll quickly do the neutrinos, and that would be an anti-neutrino because of the bar on tau beta.
Positive decay will give you a neutrino.
Beta negative decay is going to give you an anti-neutrino.
And if this is the atomic mass units of phosphorus 32 and the sulfur 32 and the beta negative particle, which is an electron, has this 1.20 mega electron volt.
What is the possible energy of anti-neutrino?
What possible energy can it have?
Well, if we look at it this way, if we combine these two, if we combine those two, it would mean that this electron is included in this, which, remember, is what we have for our units.
So if I subtract these two from each other, I'll get the units of this minus this whole lot combined.
And that gives me, if I subtract those two, I get 1.837 times 10 to the power negative 3 units.
That is the difference between those two.
So if I subtract those two, I can convert that into energy by multiplying by 931.5 mega electron volt per one unit.
That gives me 1.711 mega electron volt.
So those two combined should give me 1.7, those two combined minus this, gives me 1.711 mega electron volt.
Now, of that, the meter particle, because it has velocity, there's no velocity in there, so no kinetic energy in there, let's say it's all in that.
And that is 1.2, so if I subtract 1.2 mega electron volt from that, I get a total of 0.511 mega electron volt as the possible energy that this anti-neutrino can carry away.
