Now in this section we're going to look at radioactive dating. That is where we take all skeletal remains or any other kind of remains, any kind of object that we can date that was living, that we can date its age.
And before we can do that we just have to really look again at this concept of activity. And remember that we said that the change in the number of particles delta n divided by some t was proportional to how many that were at that time.
And that constant of proportionality we denoted as lambda and remember we said lambda was the natural log of 2 divided by the half-life, divided by the half-life.
Now let's call this delta n divided by delta t. Remember that was a negative to denote that it was decreasing.
Delta n over delta t, let's call that activity. Let's call that activity, but we'll make activity just the absolute value of something.
That will be the absolute value of n and that equals positive, that equals lambda n.
So we're going to call that activity. So the reason why we put the absolute value signs in is if we do an example you'll see we just want to express the activity at that time, it is decreasing for sure.
But we just want the magnitude of that, how much that is decreasing. Now that is obviously if I take this change and I take that change to be happening now, obviously there is also a different activity a long time ago when the n value was different.
So we're going to call an organism. An organism ate some food, it breathed, and it got in a certain amount, it had a certain amount in it.
Let's talk about a living organism eating an old stone age human being or later than that.
And he was eating and he was eating radioactive material. So at any one time during the day, during the night, he had a certain number of radioactive material that decayed.
So this change, this activity was dependent upon how much it was at that time. After death, there's no more consumption of that radioactive material. No breathing, no eating.
In other words, this is going to decrease. But let's call that initial, while still alive, we'll call that activity A0 and that's clear that that is going to be gamma n0.
Gamma n0. So I can rewrite this distance n equals a divided by lambda. I hope I didn't say gamma lambda.
And n0 equals a0 activity divided by lambda. So these two are equal to each other. If we then have n divided by n0,
that is going to equal a0. That is going to equal a0. So how many there is divided by how many there was is equal to the activity now divided by the activity at some time.
Now we do remember our equation for activity. Remember that said n equals n0 e to the power negative lambda t. In other words, we'll have n divided by n0. That'll be e to the power negative lambda t.
Now we have n divided by n0. Now we have n divided by n0. We can replace that by a divided by a0 equals e to the power negative lambda t. If I take the natural log of both sides, I'm going to have the natural log of a divided by a0. That is going to equal negative lambda t. In other words, I can solve for t time. And that means I'm solving for the age.
If I know what the activity is now. If I know what the activity is now. And I know what the activity was at that time. I have an equation now for time. How far apart these two are. If I solve for t, I have the natural log of a divided by a0. And I divide that by negative gamma.
Now the activity now. Now the activity now is going to be less than the activity before. So this is a fraction less than one. This is going to be negative. Divided by net negative is going to give me an equation for time.
So next we will just look at an example where we do calculate the age of some skeletal remains. As promised, we are going to do carbon dating of skeletal remains. But first of all, we need to look at what activity is like today.
So a living organism today. So a living organism today. Let's have a look. We have carbon 14. And the half life of carbon 14 is 5730 years. And that gives me 1.81 times 10 to the power 11 seconds. Carbon 14 undergoes beta negative decay.
And if we look at examples today. And if we look at examples today in the atmosphere, for instance, the ratio of carbon 14 to carbon 12 is 1 atom per 8.3 times 10 to the power 11 carbon 12 atoms. That is the ratio.
So let's ask the ratio. So let's ask the question. So let's ask the question. How many carbon 14 atoms in 1 gram of carbon in a living organism. I take an example, a sample of a living organism and I extract all the carbon from there. If I have 1 gram of carbon, how many of those atoms are going to be carbon 14 isotope of carbon?
Well, first of all, I know that 12 grams of carbon gives me a vegetal number, which is 6.02, 023, times 10 to the power 23 atoms. Because we're talking carbon, this will be atoms.
So 1 gram of carbon is going to be atoms. So 1 gram of carbon is going to give me how many atoms. That's 1 divided by 12 times that. That gave me, I think, 6.05. Was that 6.05? No, no. Let's have a look.
My answer was 5.02. My answer was 5.02. 5.02 times 10 to the power 22 atoms. So I have so many atoms of carbon, but I know out of so many, there will be 1.
8.03. 8.03 times 10 to the power 11 atoms of carbon 12. There will be 1 atom of carbon 14.
8.03. But I have so many of carbon 14. But I have so many to start off with. Divided by this, times the other side, that is going to give me 1 gram of carbon.
1 gram of carbon, I will get, where are we? 6.05 times 10 to the power 10. 10 carbon 14.
1 gram of carbon 14 atoms in 1 gram of my sample of living organisms. So that will be my first answer there.
Secondly, I want to know what is the decay constant. The decay constant is easy. That is going to be the natural log of 2, which is 0.693 roundabout, divided by the half-life, divided by the half-life.
And I'm going to do this in seconds because I want activity in the last problem. Activity in Becquerel is per second. So I'm going to divide that by 1.81 times 10 to the power 11 seconds.
And that gives me a decay constant. And that gives me a decay constant of 3.83 times 10 to the power negative 12 inverse seconds.
And then lastly, I want to know the activity. Remember the activity is the change divided by delta t. And that is going to be negative lambda divided by n.
Now this is my number n. Now this is my number n. I'm starting with so many multiplied by negative this. But I want just the magnitude of that for activity. As I said, I just want the magnitude of that for now.
What is the change divided by time? And that is going to give me this times the number that I have. And that gives me an answer of 0.23, 0.23 Becquerel, or then carbon 14 per second.
That is going to be my rate of change in the living organism at this time. Now, we've just looked at the fact that today the organism will have, the living organism will have carbon 14 activity of 0.23 in the second, or Becquerel.
0.23. Now, up to about, what we can look at is up to about a thousand years ago, the, this activity was present in as much as counting rings of old trees, looking at the, looking back at about a thousand years, we see that the activity was at more than a thousand years.
And things become a little less accurate. And it is estimated that up to about 30,000 years ago, the activity might be even up to 40% higher. And anyway, let's take it that, as estimation for our problem here, that we don't have this thousand year cutoff, let's say for instance, the last couple of thousand years, that has been the activity.
activity. Now, we've taken remains of a sample that we have today, old skeletal remains, and we note an activity of 1.21 Becquerel. How old is that specimen?
Now, in the very first video, we equated N to N0 as A to A0, and from our normal equation, N equals N0 e to the power negative lambda t, we derive this equation for time.
So now very simply, time is going to equal the natural log of 0.1 to 1, 0.1 to 1 divided by 0.23. If I have that, and I divide that by negative lambda, now this is going to be a fraction, which makes this a negative.
And we look at what the decay constant is. So that gives me an approximate age for two significant digits of about 5,300 year old sample.
Just equating what activity is in that sample to what activity was before.
And as I said, this is just an approximation. We can be accurate, I think, to the last about a thousand years. Our psalm is 5,300, so certainly there's going to be some discrepancy there.
But in our example, we just take for granted that activity has always been what it is today. In the previous example, we looked at exactly what activity in a living example would be today, extrapolating that to what it might have been before in a living organism,
to what it is now in our dead specimen that has been dead for many thousands of years.
of years.
of years.
of years.
of years.
