So we move on to induced nuclear reactions. Just as we have a chemical
reaction, I take some hydrogen, some oxygen and I get water. You also get
nuclear reactions or induced nuclear reactions. Before we looked at the
spontaneous decay of a nucleus. That's where we had a parent which then
converted into a daughter with either then alpha particle, a beta particle, a gamma ray.
But here we're going to induce that nuclear reaction. Inasmuch as our nucleus is now
going to be a target and we're going to at some velocity have a projectile and
that projectile can either be a proton, a neutron, a gamma ray, a proton, an alpha
particle and it's going to hit a target and then we're going to induce a nuclear
reaction. And because we have a change in element, here we go from nitrogen to
oxygen for example, we have transmutation. So we are, because we're changing the atomic
number, we change the element itself. So this is called induced nuclear
transmutation. Let's look at some examples. Here I have an alpha particle which is a
helium nucleus and I strike nitrogen 14 and what I get from that is oxygen 17 and a proton.
And what we have to obey here is the law, some laws of conservation.
There's the conservation of nuclear number and the conservation of electric charge.
So let's have a look at this. I have seven plus two. I have nine protons on that side. So on my
right hand side I have to still have nine. And eight plus one indeed is going to be is going to be
nine protons. And I have 14 plus four in total the nucleons. Atomic mass number there 18 and seven plus one
is 18. Now we can write that in shorthand. This is how you write it. This is my original, my target nucleus.
This is my daughter nucleus. This is what I get from there. And on this side we write the incident,
incident, this incident particle or ray and this high energy particle or ray that comes off on the
other side. So let's have a look at this. Here I have a proton and I have boron 10. And I note that
an alpha particle comes off of that. So what am I going to have? Well I have five protons there. So I
have five on this side. There's already two there. So whatever it is, it has to have three protons which
immediately makes it lithium. Let's just look. I've got 11 nucleons on this side. 11 minus 4 is 7. So I'm
going to end up with lithium 7 on that side. And if I had to write that, it'll be 10, 5 boron. And I'm
going to have a neutron. And from that is going to come an alpha particle. And I'm going to have 7, 3 lithium.
So that would be the short end for that. Now I have a gamma ray. Remember that's a high energy
photon. So certainly no protons or neutrons there. So I must have 12 protons. I already have one here. So it must be
11. So we must have 11 there which makes it sodium immediately. And it will be sodium 24.
Sodium 24. And as much as 24 is 25. 11 is 12. That's what I have on that side. And then lastly there I have
carbon 13. I hit it with a proton. So what am I going to have left if I have a gamma ray that comes off.
So certainly I have to have something with 7 that it makes as nitrogen immediately. And because there's no
nucleons on this side, I must have a total of 14 nucleons here. So I'm going to have
nitrogen 14. So all in all quite easy, quite easy to work out just as far as the
new conservation of nuclear number is concerned. Now because we get this induced transmutation,
nuclear transmutation, it obviously opened up a new chapter for the human race. Enrico Fermi in 1934
suggested then, well, let's make transuranium elements. Now uranium has 92 protons and anything
beyond that with an atomic number larger than 92 does not occur naturally on earth. But certainly
through induced nuclear reactions we can make some of it. So here we start with
and transuranium obviously this refers to the fact that anything with an atomic number more than 92
transuranium elements. So we have an incident neutron here into a target of uranium 238
and from that we're going to get uranium 239. It's captured that neutron and that is a
radioactive unstable nucleus. There's also a gamma ray and it has a half-life of about 23 and a half days.
So now we don't have to induce anything. It's an unstable nucleus. It's going to undergo decay and what
happens is one of the protons there decays into an electron. One of the neutrons decays into a proton
and an electron. So we jump one atomic number to 93 and we have our first transuranium element,
element 93, Neptunium. And with the nuclear number staying the same and we also have a gamma ray and the
half-life of this unstable Neptunium which does not occur naturally on earth. It has a half-life of 2.4 days.
It decays. It decays as well. Another one of the protons is going to decay into a neutron is going to decay into a
proton and an electron and we're going to get plutonium. We're going to get plutonium.
And with 94 protons we also get our high-energy electron and our gamma ray and this is where our
problems lie a half-life of 24,100 years. So we've played alchemist here and we have transmutated
elements into different elements all because we started with an induced transmutation.
Let's do a problem or two. We have a copper 63 target and it's struck by an unknown particle and from that
nuclear reaction we get copper 62 and a neutron and a proton and we want to know when that target nucleus
of copper 63 absorbs this unknown particle what transient element is produced. What transient element is
produced. Now first of all let's write that reaction. There's something here we don't know plus the copper
the copper 62 and the copper 63 and from that we're going to get the copper we're going to get the copper 62
62 29 and from that we're going to get the neutron and we're going to get a proton.
So that should be easy for us to work out what should be on this side and as much as we must have
a 29 we must have 30 protons on this side so we're going to obviously have a proton on this side 29 30
29 30 on this side 62 63 64 63 1 and there we have the sister hydrogen nucleus in other words a proton but
just combining these two when this proton is dissolved into this nucleus we have what will
we have 29 plus 1 is 30 and that makes it zinc and 64 so the answer is we're going to have zinc 64 is going to be this
transient nucleus nucleus that then decays and gives us and gives us those daughter products
let's do another quick example here here we have an induced nuclear reaction we have one neutron
and our target is magnesium 24 and our daughter product there is sodium 23 and we have this
h12 in other words it is one proton and one neutron and that's called a deuteron with a d-e-u-t deuteron
okay and if we have to write this in shorthand we're going to get 24 magnesium 24 and we're going to have
a neutron on this side we have a neutron on this side and for a deuteron we write d and on this side we have 23 11 sergium
