In this section we're going to start talking about the nucleus and the radioactivity.
Certainly we've learned a lot now about the electrons, so we need to start looking at the
actually much more interesting nucleus. And in the nucleus we have subatomic particles
again that we call the nucleons, and they are the well-known protons and neutrons.
Before we get to any of this, this is how things appear in the periodic table. You'll
have, instead of this X, you'll have the name of the element, Pb for lead, Au for gold,
N for nitrogen, O for oxygen, and you'll have the two numbers written there.
Z, which we're quite familiar with now, that's the number of protons, also known as the atomic number.
And then there's the number A written there, which is the atomic mass number.
And all that this does is it adds all the protons together with all the neutrons.
And that gives you the atomic mass number.
So let's look here. Carbon.
You get two stable forms of carbon on Earth in natural form.
Carbon means there are six protons in the nucleus.
And 98.9% of all carbon on Earth has six neutrons together with the six protons, giving us an atomic mass number of 12.
Six plus six is 12. But you also get carbon 13, meaning there is seven neutrons together with that six protons.
And that makes that 1.1%.
So, if we have carbon, we'll usually see a mass number underneath 12.011.
Instead of the 12 or the 13, the 12.011 takes into account the natural abundance of the different isotopes on Earth.
So, back to the proton. This is how we write proton.
The hydrogen nucleus is just a proton.
There is one proton, Z number.
There is one, the atomic mass number is one as well, because there's no neutrons in that isotope.
The mass number is 1.627, 622 times 10 to the power of 27 kilograms.
And then we'll have the neutron.
And the neutron you can see is slightly heavier at 1.674 instead of this.
672, 6749 times 10 to the power of 27.
Slightly higher mass.
And later on, we'll note that these subatomic particles are made up of even smaller particles called quarks.
And because we have two down quarks here versus one down quark there, the mass is slightly higher, but we'll certainly get to that.
Neutron was discovered in 1932 by James Chadwick.
And we'll denote the neutron.
There is no protons in there, zero, and the atomic mass number is one because we have one nucleon.
We remember the electron.
This is, if we use this kind of format, this is the electron.
Inasmuch as if you think about it, the six means there's six protons, but it also means the nucleus.
Nucleus has a charge of positive six inasmuch as the neutrons have no electrostatic charge.
So an electron there will be negative one as far as its charge is concerned.
So that's actually the z number.
And there is no nucleons because the electron is not a nucleot.
Then lastly, quickly in this section, we have this estimation of the radius of the nucleus based on the atomic mass number.
That's 1.2 times 10 to the triangle, 50 meters, times the atomic mass number raised to the power of a third.
That gives us the radius.
So if we just look at density very quickly, maybe we should just do that density rho equals mass divided by volume.
When we say that the nucleus is fairly spherical, that means we're going to have 4 over 3 pi r cubed.
And if we cube this, this is going to be the 1.2 femtometers cubed.
And if we cube this, that will be just the atomic mass number for that cube.
Now the mass, the way that we're going to do mass, say for instance of this, this is going to be six times the mass of the proton plus another six times the mass of the neutron.
That will be the total mass there.
And if you do that for two elements, say for instance oxygen versus lead, you'll see that the nuclear densities for those are basically the same.
It's a ratio of one to one.
Because we don't, the mass differences there are so small and because there's this relationship between the radius and the atomic mass number.
And these nucleons were almost the same.
You'll note that if you do an oxygen versus lead for instance.
And lead is the atomic mass number of about 207 versus the 16 for oxygen.
We'll see that there's no difference in the density as far as the nucleus is concerned.
So to cement our understanding of this section, we ask this question.
We have two nuclei with different number of neutrons and protons.
And they're both in the neutral atom.
Now, can they be isotopes of each other?
No, they cannot.
An isotope is the same difference, different atoms of the same element.
So the proton number, the atomic number, the Z number, has to be the same and it's not.
So they cannot be isotopes of each other.
Can they have the same number of electrons?
No, they cannot because they have a different number of protons.
For that matter, the nucleus itself of these two atoms, can they have different charges?
Of course they have different charges because they have different number of protons.
And the neutrons have no charge and they don't play a role.
Do they have the same density?
Yes, they have.
We've seen in the previous video that the oxygen and lead, if you work out those, they work out basically as a one-to-one.
Can they have the same radii?
Of course they can because, remember, the radius is proportional to the atomic mass number to the power of third.
So if you add, even though the neutrons and protons are different, the atomic mass number might actually be the same.
So yes, they might have the same radius.
Now let's just deal with this.
There's an immediate problem.
Here I have helium, two four, and I've done two protons, two neutrons.
That gives me an atomic mass number of four.
And from my radius equation, 1.2 femtometres times a to the power of third, and a is now four, I get a radius of about 1.9 femtometres.
And if I had this kind of setup where the two protons are as far apart as possible, that means twice the radius.
That means the distance between them is about 3.8 femtometres.
Now look at the electrostatic force between them.
Remember that's k times the absolute value of charge 1 times charge 2 divided by the distance between them squared.
And I'll note if the charge of a proton is 1.6 times 10 to the power of negative 19 coulomb, that means there is an electrostatic repulsive force of 16 newtons.
On something that weighs 1.67 times 10 to the power of negative 27 kilograms, that is nothing.
There is a force of 16 newtons that is a repulsive force because both are positive.
If you look at the force of gravity with g times 1 and 2, the gravitational constant times the mass of the two protons divided by the distance between them, which is our diameter squared,
that gives me a measly 1.3 times 10 to the power of negative 34 newton.
That's the attractive force between them.
That is nothing compared to the repulsive force.
So what keeps them together?
Well, that is the strong nuclear force.
Strong nuclear force.
We also are going to see the weak nuclear force.
We know electromagnetism.
And we know gravity.
Our four forces.
And the electromagnetic force, or the electric force I should say, together with the weak nuclear force make up the electroweak force.
So depending on how you look at the three or four fundamental forces in nature.
So we need something that is pretty strong.
That's a massive kind of force to keep these together.
But we'll also note that if we plot, if we plot protons to neutrons, and we make a one-to-one ratio there in as much as n equals p,
we'll note that just for slight exception here at the bottom, the number for all the elements,
as you get the number of nucleons going, you scatter all the values up.
We'll note that as the atomic mass number goes up, or the number of protons go up, certain number of neutrons actually get a bit more.
They do get a bit more, they do get a bit more, to force stability of the nucleus.
And the largest nucleus with a completely stable, largest, completely stable nucleus is bismuth.
And bismuth is 83 protons and 209 nucleons.
So anything more than that, say for instance, uranium with 92 protons is not going to be stable.
In other words, in time there's going to be a rearrangement of this nucleus.
The strong nuclear force, perhaps I shouldn't say it like this, but let's do, it's just not strong enough to keep all those neutrons and protons together.
But certainly through this example you can see how enormously strong the strong nuclear force is as opposed to gravitational force.
Much, much, much stronger.
The other thing about the nuclear force is that it does, or not, it is so strong that it has to overcome this.
Certainly gravity is not strong enough to overcome this repulsive electrostatic force.
One more thing that I wanted to mention is that this strong nuclear force acts over a very small distance and then it rapidly falls off.
If I have two, and remember how far apart they are because these electrons are very far away.
But if two million atoms were next to each other, there is no strong nuclear force between the two, between the two nuclei.
The strong nuclear force falls off rapidly with distance.
Whereas for instance this electrostatic force, the electrostatic force falls off as one over the distance, one over the distance cubed.
So once these protons get outside of the distance of action of the strong nuclear force, you're immediately going to get a repulsive force working there.
.
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
