Good day, about 1939, four German physicists, one of them being Otto Frisch, made a huge
discovery which brought us into the nuclear age, both as a weapon, unfortunately, but
also as a source of energy, nuclear power plants, and that is called nuclear fission.
What was noted is that if an incident neutron is absorbed by uranium-235, now look, we're
not dealing with uranium-238 as we did before, here we have uranium-235, and that is what
is meant by enriched uranium, I think some of that, you get uranium-235 from a sample
of uranium that contains other atomic mass numbers, so that you get pure uranium-235.
And that can undergo a lot of nuclear reactions, I've put two on here.
First of all, we get this intermediate, this compound nucleus, uranium-236, which vibrates
and becomes distorted, and eventually the repulsive electric force overcomes the strong nuclear
force due to the gluons, and it splits in two.
And here we have two.
We have barium-141 plus krypton-92 and three neutrons.
Or we have xenon-140 and stontium-94 and two, stontium-94 and two neutrons.
Now, there are various other ones, what we do note is on average, this nuclear fission
reaction will give us about two and a half neutrons, on average, combining all of them.
The other thing that we have to look at, very importantly there in the corner, is the average
energy produced by one fission reaction, one single fission reaction, one neutrons, about
200 mega electron volts.
And that's enormous.
Now, most of that energy is locked up in kinetic energy of these daughter products, in kinetic
energy.
And all of that comes from basically the stored electric potential energy that was in the
nucleus to start.
If it gets converted to this kinetic energy, you get 200 mega electron volts, on average,
per fission reaction.
That's about 10 to the power 8 times, 10 to the power 8 times, 100 million times more
than you'll get from gasoline or petroleum or coal, up to 100 million times more energy
release.
Then the chemical reaction of that molecule with oxygen, then you get from this, that's
100 million times less than you get from one fission reaction like this, which is an enormous
difference if you think about.
Here's an example to illustrate where we get about 200 mega electron volts per fission reaction.
And we're going to have a nucleus with an atomic mass number of 240.
And our binding energy, there's about 7.6 mega electron volts per nucleon.
Now, remember where we got that from, binding energy from a mass defect?
That if you took the atomic mass units of each individual nucleon, and you took it off the
combined, you subtracted that, and it gave you the mass defect, which you could convert
to energy, and that was the binding energy.
So, say that that undergoes fission, and we get roughly two of this, roughly 120 atomic mass.
Let's just say it's on average, it splits exactly in half.
And now each of them will have a binding energy of about 8.5.
And remember in the previous chapter, we had this graph of the binding energies, depending
on how many nucleons you have.
So, what would be the energy release?
Well, once again, through the mass defect, but already converted to energy, we'll see
that the difference between these two is about 0.9.
This is 0.9.
So that's going to be 0.9 mega electron bulb per nucleon.
Per nucleon.
But we've already started with 240 nuclei.
So, if you just do that, the nuclei, per nucleon nuclei, will cancel out, and I'm just left
with mega electron volts, and 0.9 times 240 is about 200.
Let's just average it out.
It's about 200 mega electron volts per efficient reaction.
Per efficient reaction.
Just one more word, or two more words on uranium-235.
If you look at all the uranium on Earth, 99.275 percent thereabouts is uranium-238, leaving
us with only about 0.725 percent being of the uranium-235.
Now that uranium-235, when it captures a neutron, it's much more likely to capture that neutron
and undergo efficient than uranium-238, hence using uranium-235 for nuclear energy production.
One thing that we must note though, and that is we need a thermal neutron.
It's going to have less than or about 0.04 electron volt.
Not mega electron volt, electron volt.
Very low kinetic energy that neutrons should have to be captured.
There's an estimation that if you use a one mega electron volt neutron, it will have about
a 500 times less chance of being captured by this uranium-235.
Now these thermal neutrons, as they're called, they are not only used to fish in uranium-235,
but for instance also plutonium-239, you know, it's also possible.
Another quick word, just on the thermal neutron.
Now we need that low kinetic energy, relatively low kinetic energy neutron to penetrate that nucleus.
Now a neutron is neutral, so it does not undergo any electrostatic repulsion because of similar charges in the nucleus.
If I use for instance an alpha particle or proton, there is a large electrostatic repulsive force
as the nucleus is also positively charged.
That has to be overcome, which is a much longer-range force instead of a strong nuclear force.
So that has to be overcome until the distance is short enough for the strong nuclear force to take over
and overcome that electrostatic repulsive force.
So if I had to use a proton or an alpha particle, it would have to have a lot more kinetic energy
to attempt to use it for nuclear fission.
Now just before we go on to nuclear reactors, I'll just say one or two things about them.
Let's just look at these few ideas on the board.
Chain reaction, what is a chain reaction?
We said that on average there's two and a half neutrons per fission for the action of uranium-235.
And what does that mean?
Two and a half, let's just take two.
So I'm going to have uranium-235 and I'm going to have two, say two neutrons come off of that.
And they are each, if they are each a thermal neutron, two neutrons that come off,
they are each going to cause fission, each of them fission of another.
So very rapidly we get quite a lot of fission interactions happen.
And that is the difference between a weapon and a power plant as far as nuclear energy is consumed,
as far as nuclear energy is consumed, as much as fission is consumed.
Now what happens in a weapon is there is lots of weapons-grade uranium,
in other words uranium-235, very pure.
All of those, almost all of those nuclei will undergo fission.
And within a fraction, a few millionths of a second, a lot of those nuclei will undergo fission.
And it's a massive instant release of energy which makes it a bomb.
Now in a power plant, many of these nuclei do not undergo fission.
So there is a different material mixed in with the, for instance, if uranium, in the case of uranium,
so lots of these will not be uranium.
In other words, there is a much slower reaction, there is not this rapid fast chain reaction
because a neutron, other neutron that perhaps comes off, will not lead to fission of this,
for instance, this nucleus.
So this whole chain disappears and that chain will disappear from these, for instance.
So by putting in another unfissionable material in between your fissionable uranium nuclei,
you slow that process down, you get a slower release of energy,
and hence we have a power plant, a much better use of nuclear energy there.
So we ask the question, if you have a neutron, an average neutron production in your chain reaction,
in your fission reaction of only one, can you sustain a chain reaction?
No, you cannot, obviously.
From two onwards, you can have a chain reaction, but if it's just one, one, one, one, one,
there is no, by chain reaction, it means a rapid spread in the number of reactions.
So certainly, a reduction of one neutron profission reaction,
you're not going to get this chain reaction.
And then lastly, just to make our understanding of this, would the fission of an element with
an atomic mass number 25 lead to energy release?
And remember, just before, we spoke about the binding energy per nucleon.
We had this sort of graph binding, that's the number of atomic mass number,
the number of nucleons and binding energy per nucleon on this axis.
So what you do need, you do need for the products, the daughter elements that come off of your fission reaction,
to have a higher binding energy.
It must have a higher binding energy.
So if uranium is down here somewhere, and I have, and I have my two daughters there,
they have a bind, higher binding energy.
They would have a higher binding energy per nucleon.
In other words, now I have a mass defect that can be converted to energy.
But if I'm on this side of the slope here, my two daughters, there and there,
are going to have lower binding energy.
So it is a more natural state for them to be in.
Forgive me where I place these, I don't know the figure directly from the top of my head,
so this is not literal where I've placed them.
And obviously they won't be that close together because if this splits in half,
you know, both of them should be there and there because twice this must make up that.
Okay, but the point remains on this upward side of the slope,
the daughter products will have lower binding energy and there will be no missing mass.
In other words, it actually requires energy for that reaction to happen
and not the release of energy.
So you've got to be on this downward side of the slope so that binding energy
of your two daughter products from that fission reaction has more binding energy.
And then you subtract this binding energy from those to get your energy release.
