This promise is troubling to help us out to understand. I've just put the relative biological effectiveness for you, okay, 200 kV, 1 kV, x-rays, obviously the ratio there will be 1. If I use gamma rays as my treatment, it'll also be 1. Beta negative particles, which are electrons, also 1. Switch over to protons.
That is not 1. I think protons are around about 10. Alpha particles 10 to 20 in neutrons, depending whether they're slow or fast neutrons, between 2 and 10. Relative biological effectiveness.
Okay, in whatever tissue, because then this is the ratio. So I'm irradiating a tumor with gamma rays with a relative biological activity of 0.7, so that will be the ratio of energy per unit mass of the tissue.
An absorbed dose is worked out to be 850 reds. Then it's exposed to a neutron beam with a relative biological effectiveness of 3.5, so 5 times more relative biological effectiveness than the gamma rays.
And I'm also told that the biological equivalent dose. And I'm also told that the biological equivalent dose of the gamma rays and the neutrons are equal to each other.
The work out to calculate absorbed dose of the neutrons. And we know biological equivalent dose. Remember that that is just the absorbed dose.
So what I'm going to have here is the absorbed dose of the gamma rays times the RbE of the gamma rays, because remember these two are equal, it's going to be absorbed dose of the neutrons times the relative biological equivalent.
So this is what I'm going to have here. This is what I'm going to have here. This is what I want. Calculate the absorbed dose of the neutrons. So this is just going to be this times this divided by that. So it's going to be 0.7 divided by 3.5.
So that is going to be 0.5. So that is going to be 0.5 of the absorbed dose of the gamma rays. So the absorbed dose of the neutron is going to be 0.5 of 850 rad.
So that is going to be 0.5 of the
And if we look at the biological effect of dose in Remkin equivalence in man, if you
are exposed to less than 50, there's usually no harm, and this dose can be delivered to
you in certain ways.
There's certainly the immediate exposure, one acute exposure if you have a whole body
CT scan, which people seem to love these days, you're going to get a certain once-off dose
or you can be exposed over a longer period due to radon gas coming through cracks in your
floor, so it's a more longer term exposure.
So if you're between 50 and 300, you'll still get radiation sickness and your symptoms and
signs are going to depend on the tissues that are damaged, as I said, the mucosal, the lining
of your interspinal tract is very sensitive, so if that gets damaged, you can just represent
a little nausea and vomiting, etc. Between 400 and 500 Rems, that is also called the LD50
or the lethal dose 50, that means 50% of people exposed to that will die.
And then more than 600 is actually LD100, so almost 100% of people exposed to that kind
of biological equipment dose will die.
So what is recommended, depending on what country you're in.
I think it's usually about less than 500 million Rems per year, but if you work in an environment
such as radiographers, when you are exposed to ionizing radiation, especially in X-rays,
you certainly can go up to about 5 Rems per year without being at risk for any kind of harm.
So let's do another problem. Beam of nuclei used to irradiate a quarter kilogram tumour has
an energy of 113 mega electron volts per nucleus. So that is the type of radiation we're using.
It has a relative biological effectiveness of 16. Let's see if that was correct. It has a relative
biological effectiveness of 16. Yes, and the tumour receives, the beam is such that the tumour
receives a biological equivalent dose of 210 in the Rems, the Remkin equivalent in men. How many nuclei are there?
How many nuclei are there? Well, that is really not too simple, not too difficult to do. But remember
that the biological effective, uh, equivalent dose, uh, biological effective dose, uh, was that correct?
Um, biological equivalent dose, I should say of, uh, uh, 210. Now remember that equals the absorbed dose
times the RBE, relative biological effectiveness. In other words, I can work out the absorbed dose.
So the absorbed dose, that is going to equal
biological equivalent dose divided by the relative biological effectiveness. In other words,
I'm going to get 210, 210 divided by 16. But remember this is now in RADs. In RADs. And I need to convert
that. And I remember that one RAD equals 0.01 gray. I hope in my initial video I didn't write it the other
way around. But remember, one RAD is 0.01 gray. Corrected if, if I indeed, if I made that mistake, I can't remember.
Okay, that gives me an absorbed dose of, uh, I got 0.13125 joules per kilogram. Joules per kilogram,
absorbed dose. So in the total tumour of a quarter kilograms, if I multiply that by a quarter kilogram,
I get, um, the, and certainly the energy. So that is going to be that per kilogram times a quarter
kilogram. I lose my kilogram. So I end up with, oh, what did I end up with? I don't know what the
fraction was, 21 over 640 joules. But I have 130 mega electron volt in it that's energy per nucleus.
So if I take 130 times 10 to the power 6, and I just need, that's electron volt, and I don't
know, it's 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 joules per electron volt. I lose that. So I could
convert that to joule, and that is joule per, that is joule per nucleus. I'm told that I use this
beam of nucleus and it has a, it has a 130 mega electron volt per nucleus. So that leaves me with
2.08 times 10 to the power negative 11 joules per nucleus, per nucleus. So if I take this
and I divide it by 2.08 times 10 to the power negative 11 joule per nucleus, my per nucleus is
going to go up, and it will give me nucleus. I divide these and that leaves me, I had how many
significant digits? 2 significant digits, 2 significant digits, and that gives me 1.6 times 10 to the power
9 nuclei. Okay, next problem. This time we irradiate a one and a half kilogram tumor and it receives or
absorption dose of 12 gray in 900 seconds. So certainly quite a lot of particles undergo, in their
greatest bubbles undergo decay. In other words, you have these high energy particles and they deliver an
energy to the tumor of 0.4 omega electron volt each. Calculate the activity, and remember activity is
delta N divided by delta T. So this is the previous problem we need from all of this, we need N. It's
actually an easier problem in that we don't come from biological effect of dose, a biological equivalent
dose I should say. We come straight from that absorptive dose. Remember that absorptive
dose, that equals 12 joules per kilogram. And if I just want the energy from that, because remember
your absorption dose equals energy divided by mass. So if I just want energy as absorptive dose comes
mass, that gives me an energy of 12 joules per kilogram times 1.5 kilogram, that's 18 joules.
Okay, that's a total of 18 joules. I have 0.4 mega electron volt per particle. That means I need 0.40
times 10 to the power 6 electron volts times 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 joules per 1 electron volt.
And that gives me how much? That gives me 6.4. So if I take that 18 joule and divide it by per particle, I'm getting 6.4.
6.4 times 10 to the power negative 14 joule per particle. I'm going to get the
number of particles. And for me, that's 2.8125 particles. And I need particles per time unit.
So I'm going to divide that by 900. And that gives me activity of 3.1 times 10 to the power 11 particles per second. Easy enough.
