Same type of problem. Just a bit more complex numbers. I want to calculate the binding energy in mega electron volts per nucleon. That should be my units. For mercury 202 with an atomic mass number of 2.01.970617 units. Nothing is going to change. Remember I'm still going to have my mercury 202.
I'm going to add some 202. I'm going to add some binding energy to break that apart. To give me the constituent nucleons. And if I do that, what am I going to get? I'm going to get 80 of these 1-1 nitrogens. That is with the electrons. Plus, how many neutrons are there going to be? Well, that's A minus Z.
And that is about 122 of these neutron atomic mass numbers. So the energy binding is then going to be 80 times. And we've done it in the previous problem. We've got to look that up.
And 122 times. We've got to look that up. That's 1.008665. This is 1.007825. And if I then subtract this to a 1.970617. I get 100. What do I get?
I got 1.7125 units. But I need to express this in mega electron mass per nucleon. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to take this energy binding.
I want it per nucleon. That means I'm going to divide an answer by A. And I got this by multiplying this with equivalency.
91.5 mega electron volts equals 1 unit. So those will cancel. So I'll have mega electron volts.
dividing it by my atomic mass number, which is 202. And that gives me an answer of 7.896999, but you can say 7.90 mega electron volts per nucleon.
Here's a fun problem. And if I have a 245 kilogram rock and it falls down a mine shaft, the mine shaft is 4.2 times 10 to the power 3 meters deep.
That means there will be a change in potential energy. It will lose potential energy. And it will take just as much energy to bring that rock back up.
Now, if you see that as the binding energy of the earth rock system, how much mass does the earth rock system lose due to that fall?
Due to that fall. Well, we do remember that potential energy was going to be mg delta y.
Let me just isolate that and we'll get back.
We've got the qualities for that. So that is going to give me a potential energy that binding we see in this now
as binding energy of, I got about 1.0 times 10 to the power 7 joules.
And mass of the earth is 5.98 times 10 to the power 24, and I have an f of g.
And then there's my delta y. So that I saw as my binding, that I saw as my binding energy.
And we know that rest energy equals mc squared. In other words, mass equals that divided by c squared.
So if I divide that by c squared, that is the change in mass.
And I get the change in mass of about, oh, what was it? 1.1 times 10 to the power negative 10 kilograms.
Which is quite interesting to think.
That the earth rock system loses that minute amount of mass due to that change in energy.
Due to that change in energy.
And we could say that it would take this amount of energy then to liberate the rock then up to the top.
And that's why we can see it as a sort of binding energy. Good problem.
Now, we've discussed up until now that the binding energy, that is the energy required to break up a nucleus into its constituent nucleons.
But I needn't break it up all into its own separate parts.
Look at this. I've got the atomic mass units of nitrogen 13, nitrogen 14, hydrogen 1, the neutron, and carbon 13.
And two things can happen here. Let's look at one, where I'm actually just looking at the binding energy to release one neutron.
In other words, I'm going to start with 14, nitrogen 14.
And if I add the binding energy to that, and all I want now is I want still nitrogen 7, but I'm releasing one neutron.
So my atomic mass number goes to 13, plus I've got one neutron.
In other words, if I'm just looking at the binding energy for that one neutron, how well is it bound and how much to release it.
So it will be this, plus that, minus this one, and that gives me a binding energy.
And if I then multiply that answer by 93, 1.5 mega electron volts per unit to get that answer in mega electron volts, that would be 10.55 mega electron volts.
You can do that yourself.
But I can also write something different.
I can also look for the binding energy of one proton instead of one neutron.
In other words, I'm still starting with nitrogen 14.
I'm still doing my binding energy.
And that is now going to give me carbon 13 plus one proton.
And that proton, remember, we are talking with the electron.
That is what the mass, this is what these atomic mass units are about instead of working with the kilograms.
So I can add that one to that one, which I have from my table, minus this one.
And I can multiply, that answer will then be in atomic mass units.
I multiply it by 93, 1.5 mega electron volts per unit.
And that gives me 7.55 mega electron volts.
And what that tells me is that this proton is a higher binding energy than the neutron.
So less energy would be required to release one neutron, than it would be required to remove one proton.
Less energy would be required to remove one proton, than it would be to release one neutron.
