In this short section we'll mention a few things about the neutrino.
When in the 1920s people looked at, physicists looked at the beta negative decay,
as we've just seen in the previous example, there was this extra bit of energy
which wasn't accounted for in the energy or the kinetic energy as far as the beta particle was concerned.
In 1930 Wolfgang Pauli suggested or made a suggestion.
What was noted that this extra energy could not have any electric charge
inasmuch as the charge was already taken care of by the daughter product and the beta particle.
So there was no charge disparity between the products and the parent.
And Wolfgang Pauli suggested well that extra energy must be in the form of a new particle
and since it is neutral, he called it the, in Italian, the little neutrino,
a little neutron, the neutron being neutral and came up with the word neutrino.
And many years later the neutrino was actually detected.
The problem with the neutrino is that it interacts so weakly with normal matter.
And it is said, and you'll read it in many books, that the neutrino can actually pass through one light year of lead.
So a quarter of the way to the nearest star away from the sun,
if you could fill all of that up with lead, the neutrino could go all the way through
without being detected because it doesn't react with any of the other subatomic particles
or not readily so anyway.
It's not to say though that it's not detectable.
If you fill large containers, for instance, with ultra-pure water,
like the Super Kamuyokondo experiment in Japan,
with 11,000 photomultipliers filling out that tank of water,
you can get some interaction which will produce a photon of light
which one of those filter multipliers will detect.
And you can indeed detect the neutrino.
It is thought that the neutrino, today thought that the neutrino does have some mass.
In other words, it cannot travel at the speed of light.
And it is thought that it is about 0.0004% the mass of an electron.
So very little mass indeed.
It's important for us to know that it's mass because there are so many neutrinos in the universe.
Through your body passes from the center of the earth where there is radioactive decay,
but mostly from the sun.
Through its nuclear processes, trillions of neutrinos pass through your body every second.
And it does not interact.
What it means though is there is a lot of these things about it.
Even if they have a small amount of mass,
they would, if you add all of that,
they would add considerably to the mass energy density of the universe.
There were a few other problems with neutrino.
Inasmuch as it was calculated how many neutrinos the sun should emit.
And through various experiments, it could only detect about a third.
And that was indeed a big, big problem.
Because it was even thought at once,
well maybe the sun is dying.
It's certainly not putting out what it's supposed to be.
Until it was noticed that neutrinos actually come in three flavors.
Now that doesn't mean it tastes like anything.
It's a bad joke.
Anyway, it comes in three.
Together with the three electrons,
you get an electron neutrino,
you get a muon neutrino,
and you get a hectare neutrino.
And it looked like in flight from the sun to the earth,
those neutrinos changed flavor.
Hence, the thought that they must have mass.
Now if they must have mass,
that means by the postulates from Einstein
that they cannot move faster than the speed of light.
And although these videos that I make now will get old in time,
at the moment is of course the question of the supraluminal neutrinos
from CERN that are detected in Italy.
And at the moment it does look like,
or that they were supraluminal,
but the experiment was opened up
so that everyone can look for mistakes that were made
and it looked like the GPS system or some wiring was faulty,
thereby inaccurately mentioning the time of flight
from production in CERN underground
to the detectors in Italy,
that there were some timing issue problems,
which means the neutrinos did not travel faster
than the speed of light,
which of course if it was proved to be so,
it would be tremendously exciting.
But one more thing,
the neutrino is mu,
the Greek letter in mu,
and in beta-negative decay,
it is an anti-neutrino,
and in beta-positive decay,
it is,
oh, what am I doing?
It is a neutrino.
So if we put a bar across the symbol for the subatomic particle,
it means it's this anti-particle.
One last word on the neutrino.
This beta-meta decay with beta particles and anti-neutrinos,
and the other way around as well,
is produced by the weak nuclear force
through W positive and negative bosons and the Z boson.
And that is called the weak nuclear force.
It was shown though by Charlton Glashow,
Abdus Salam and Steven Weinberg
that the weak nuclear force
and the electromagnetic force
are just two forms of the same force
called the electro-weak force.
Electro-weak force
and together with a strong nuclear force,
strong nuclear force and gravity
that makes up the three forces
that we now know about.
And some people still call it four,
electromagnetic force,
weak nuclear force,
strong nuclear force and gravity,
but we know these are too many stations of the same force.
So most modern textbooks will talk about
three fundamental forces of nature.
