Good, let's get some problems done. We have the atomic mass number of, well that's going to be bismuth anyway, but let's just say there's an element and it's the largest and smallest stable nuclei with atomic mass number of 209 versus 1, 1 for hydrogen, and because it's stable that is going to be bismuth as we've just seen.
So, if each is a sphere, calculate the ratio of their areas. It's quite easy to do, we know that the area of a sphere equals 4 pi r squared, 4 pi r squared, and we know that r equals 1.2 femtometers and then atomic mass number to the power of 3.
So, if we have area 1 over area 2, area 1 divided by area 2, we want that ratio. We're going to get, for area 1, we're going to get 4 pi, and then we have to square this value, so that's going to be 1.2 femtometers squared,
and a here is 209, 209 squared, but that has got to be 209 squared, where are we? Let's do it differently.
So, that's 1.2 squared, and that's 209 to the power of 3rd, 209 to the power of 3rd squared, divided by, we're also going to have 4, we're also going to have pi,
we're also going to have 1.2 femtometers squared, and now we're just going to have 1 to the power of 3rd squared as well.
So, that's just 1, we leave it out. This will cancel this, this will cancel this, this will cancel this, this will cancel that.
So, that leaves me with 209 to the power of 2 over 3, and that gives me, or if I see if I have done it, let's see, 35.2, 35.2 is the ratio of the area of the largest to the smallest stable nucleus.
Let's do this question quickly. The ratio of an unknown nucleus, a nucleus's radius to that of tritium is 1.10, and both have the same number of neutrons.
We certainly need this information, otherwise we'll be able to solve this problem.
What is the unknown nucleus? And I've got to write that, obviously, in the form, in this form.
Now, first of all, we are saying that the radius of this unknown nucleus to the radius of tritium equals 1.10.
In other words, what we're saying is the radius of this element x, the nucleus of that equals 1.10 times the radius of t.
We do know an equation for the radius, and as much as the radius is going to equal 1.2 femtometres times the atomic mass number to the power of 3rd.
Now, what is tritium?
Tritium is hydrogen inasmuch as there is one proton, but it has two neutrons, giving it an atomic mass number of 3.
3, one proton, two neutrons.
So we already know that this unknown nucleus must also have two neutrons.
So let's write this equation with the equations that we know.
So we're going to have 1.2 femtometres times the atomic mass number of this x to the power of 3rd is going to equal 1.10 times 1.2 femtometres times the tritium.
It's an atomic mass number of 3, so that is going to be 3 to the power of 3rd.
3 to the power of 3rd.
So, what's going to happen?
This is going to cancel, and that is going to cancel.
So 8, that is going to equal 1.10 times 3 to the power of 3rd.
And we're going to take all of that to the power of 3.
And that gives me, chip on your calculator, 3.999, whatever.
It's about at 4.
In other words, our unknown element x is going to have 4.
You already know it has two neutrons.
So 4 minus this 2 gives us 2, and that is nothing but helium 2, 4.
It's an interesting hypothetical question, and you perhaps will get questions on the mass and density of a neutron star.
But here we have the mass of the neutron, 1.67 times 10 to the power of 27 kilograms.
If we could pack a tennis ball with that radius of 0.32 meters, 3.2 centimeters, with neutrons at the same density as a nucleus,
how many neutrons would I fit in it?
If I then placed an object 2 meters away from this tenor ball, what would its acceleration be?
Now, you might be tempted to just to first work out density, and as much as density equals mass divided by volume.
You can then work out what the mass of this tennis ball is going to be.
You can, as much as mass is now going to be, rho times b, and you can work out this volume with the equation for radius,
and you can perhaps use helium to work it out for you, etc., etc., but actually there's an easier way.
So we can just look at what volume is, volume is 4 over 3 pi r cubed, and if we do the volume of the tennis ball,
if we do the volume of the tennis ball, and we do the volume of the neutron, just a single neutron,
what is that going to achieve for us?
That will give me the following.
The volume of a tennis ball, that's going to be 4 over 3 pi,
and then we're going to have 0.032 cubed,
and here we're going to have 4 over 3 pi,
but now we have to write this different radius with an a equals 1.
With an a equals 1, remember that radius is going to be 1.2 centimeters times a to the power of a third,
times a to the power of a third,
and a is now just 1, we're just looking at 1 nuclei, 1 neutron,
so that is, this is going to be 1, so it's 1.2 femtometres,
so this is going to be 1.2 femtometres cubed,
and that gives me an answer of about 1.9,
1.9 times 10 to the power of 40,
and that will be neutrons.
That will be neutrons.
And the reason why we can use this ratio,
just think about it,
it is this large volume divided by the small volume,
so how many small volumes go into this large volume,
that's a fraction learned from grade school,
that will be given about 1.9.
Now, as fast acceleration is concerned,
we know that force equals mass times acceleration,
but here we're dealing with that there's a mass of whatever that object is,
and what force acts upon it,
but the force of, this force is the force of gravity,
which is g times m1 and 2,
divided by, divided by,
r squared,
in other words, these two are equal to each other,
the m1s will cancel,
so acceleration is going to be g mass 2 divided by r squared,
and mass 2 is going to be the number of neutrons times the mass of a neutron,
times g at 6.67 times 10 to the power of negative 11
newton meters squared per kilogram squared,
divided by,
and this distance,
two meters away,
so divided by four,
that gives me an acceleration of about 527 meters per second squared,
which is about,
oh, I forgot it now,
about 54 g,
that is a massive acceleration,
54 times normal rotation acceleration,
due to a tennis ball of neutrons,
certainly if you multiply that by this,
you can get something to the power of 13 kilogram,
which is a massive mess,
just pecked in the size of a tennis ball.
