So let's look at a new space called the null space of our matrix A.
And what we really have here is a system of linear equations
such that all the right-hand side values equal 0, 0, 0, 0,
so that my B vector equals the 0 vector appropriate to the size
or the dimensionality that I'm interested in.
So let's look at this A, 1, 3, 2, and 6.
You can already see that 1 is just a linear combination of the other.
I mean, 1 times 3 is 3, 2 times 3 is 6.
Even 1 times 2 is 2, 3 times 2, that's 6.
So you can already see that there is a problem here.
This matrix will not be invertible.
But let's have a look at what happens if we do elementary row operations on this.
So there we go.
I can multiply this by negative 2, so I'm going to get negative 2, negative 6, and 0.
So I'm left with 1, 3 is 0, 2 and negative 2 is 0, 6 and negative is 0, 0.
So this is what I'm left with.
In essence, I'm left with this, if this was x sub 1,
I'm left with x sub 1 plus 3 times x sub 2 equals 0.
And this is the same.
2 plus 3 equals 0.
If I divide by 2, divide by 2, I get the same equation.
So in effect, I have this actually only had one equation as opposed to two equations.
And if I were to solve for x sub 1, that gives me minus 3 times x sub 2.
And I'm free to choose anything for that.
And the choice is usually that we make this choice 1.
So if that's 1, this means this is negative 3.
So my x vector here really is negative 3, 1.
Negative 3, 1.
And remember that we are talking about linear combinations of these.
So a linear combination just of this one vector will mean that my solution, my null space,
if I go negative 3, negative 1, negative 2, negative 3, let's go there.
So I go negative 3 down and I go 1 there.
So this is my vector here, negative 3, 1.
So any vector on this line, which is a constant multiple of this vector, is in the solution space.
Is in the solution space.
So I can plug anything on this line, any vector on this line in there to give me 0.
So this becomes the null space of this matrix.
And as such, it is a subspace, this line that is in there.
Let's have a look at 1.
Here's a weird system of linear equations.
And as much as there's only 1.
I only have 1.
So it would be 1, 2, 3, 0.
And there's 1 as my pivot.
I can't really do anything else.
Let's just solve as far as x1 is concerned.
So that's going to be negative x2 sub 2 minus 3 times x sub 3.
And what I can do here now is create two special solutions, if you can look at it.
Remember, this is just, you know, I can simplify this as well.
I can normalize this so that the norm of this vector is 1.
It will just be a vector with a length of 1, so it will just lie there.
So there's infinitely many solutions here.
That is what we're saying.
But they will all lie on this line.
So that was just on that one line, though.
Here, though, we're looking at three dimensions, so, you know, something slightly different is going on here.
Let's create two solutions.
I'm going to call the one just s.
Let's just call it s.
And what I'm going to do is let this be 0, this be 0, and this be 1.
So that's 1.
That makes this one negative 2.
So that lies on that line.
And let's make another one.
Or shall we make the other one?
Let's make it t.
It doesn't matter what it is.
So I'm going to make this 0 and this one 1.
So this 0 and this one 1.
So that means this is negative 3.
So I have those two special, I have these two special cases as far as my solution is concerned.
And remember, any linear combination of those then should also be, that is my null space of this single equation system of linear equations.
Let's look at a, we'll get deeper into this null space.
There's a few things to understand about this null space.
Let's do this.
I'm just going to clear the board.
Okay, so we've cleaned the board.
I've just moved it up.
I can multiply by negative 3, minus 3, minus 6, minus 6, minus 12, and 0.
That's 1, 2, 2, 4, 0.
That gives me 0.
That gives me a 2.
That gives me a 0.
That gives me a 4.
And that gives me a 0.
That's fine.
I can multiply this by minus 2.
So it's 0, minus 2, 0, minus 8, and 0.
And minus 2, minus 4 should be there, of course.
But I want, let's just leave that one out.
So I multiply this by negative 1.
So 0, minus 2, 0, minus 4, 0.
Add that 1 plus 0 is 1.
That gives me a 0.
That gives me a 2.
That gives me a 0.
That gives me a 0.
And here I'm left with 0, 1, 0, 2, 0.
So what I'm saying here is that I have x sub 1 plus 2 times x sub 3 equals 0.
And here I have x sub 2 plus 2 times x sub 4 equals 0.
So I can solve for x sub 1 here.
x sub 1 equals minus 2 times x sub 3.
And x sub 2 equals minus 2 times x sub 4.
So that's my solution that I have there.
Once again, as we did with the previous one, let's make a couple of solutions here, special solutions.
Remember, I still have 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 as my, you know, as the solution to any of these.
But let's do this.
Let's make this a 0 and we make this a 1.
So we're making x sub 4 a 0 and we're making x sub 3 a 1.
That makes x sub 2 a 0 and then makes x sub 3, that's a 1, makes that a negative 2.
Let's make, let's do another solution.
Let's make this a 1 and that is 0.
And if this x sub 4 is a 1, that makes x sub 2 a minus 2 and that makes x sub 1, if that's 0, a 0.
So you can see those special solutions that we can create once we get to this part.
And these solutions are all, they all form part and the linear combination form part of the null space of my matrix A that we started with.
Let's make this a matrix A.
Remember, it was the augmented matrix that we were only looking at.
That was one matrix A.
So I'm creating solutions that are in the null space of my matrix.
It's just a bit tricky when, you know, you'll see different answers.
But remember, the whole idea here is that the solutions are in this null space, here forming this line, here forming a linear combination of these.
So the solutions all fall within the solution, the solution that we are looking for, they all fall in this.
And the linear combination of these are in the null space of my original matrix.
So the derivative with the solution that we are looking for, you may also come in a sufficiently different frozen space for the Mm?
So the solution that we can create is in the middle space.
There's a 1234 point where between the solution the solution, there's a semi Koch coach.
So the solution that comes in the create and secure and renewable energies will rend out what the solution.
So thank you for yourself.
And through that consideration, my hearing will be helpful.
