So let's continue our look into the null space. Now yesterday we had a few
examples but in some sense they were very special examples and I don't want
you to think that that extrapolates to all examples. So let's have here three
equations and four unknowns. We don't have enough equations and our matrix of
coefficients would be 1, 1, 3, 1, 1, 3, 2, 4, 10, 3, 5, and 13. You can take the
matrix of coefficients which would make our matrix A. You could make the
augmented matrix if it's all zeros as well. You're going to end up with the
same thing. This is the row reduced form of the matrix of coefficients and if we
had done the augmented matrix there'd be another 0, 0, 0 here. That would happen
here. So what are we saying here? We're saying that x sub 1 plus x sub 2 plus x sub
4 equals 0. In the second row we have the fact that x sub 3 plus x sub 4 equals 0
and then last row we just have zeros. We just have all zeros so that doesn't help
us at all. So what do we want to do from here? Now in these circumstances let's just
look at that first one and there are four unknowns and I have three in that first
one so it's very easy for me to alternatively make this a zero and this a
one and then make this a one and this a zero and see what happens. So if I make
two a one and this is zero that means x is minus one, x sub 1 is minus one. I made this
a one. I made, now what happens to three? Well if I made this a zero this means x3 must also be zero
and I made x4 a zero. So all I'm doing here I just solve this first equation for x sub 1
so that's minus x sub 2 minus x sub 4 and this second one we can also make that is minus x sub 4.
So in the first instance I made this a zero and this a one. That made x sub 1 negative 1.
I made this a 1 so it is there. If I made x sub 4 a zero, x sub 3 is a zero. Now I'm just going to
swivel that around I'm going to make x sub 4 1 this time. So I'm going to make, so this was in essence
making x sub 2 into 1 but there's linear combinations of that. If I could have made it a 2 or a 3
it doesn't matter. This would be the sort of the simplest form I can get to and if I make x sub 4 a 1
in this instance and that means x sub 3 is going to be a negative 1 and if I made this a 1
where are we? If I made this a 1 and this is 0 x sub 1 is still minus 1 and I made this one a 0
and this was x sub 4 remember that I did. I made x sub 4 a 1 and what we are saying here is now this is
going to be different because there's not a 0 there. There's a 0 and there's not a 0. There's a 0 and
there's a 0 but there are not two 0s there so I can't just say any linear combination of this. It's got
to go to our special, it worked out for us especially in our previous examples that there was a 0 there
for instance and I could do linear combinations but what we are saying here is linear combinations of
these two and in our instance here making x 2 1 and there we made x 4 1 and x 2 0. There x 2 was 1,
there x 4 was 1, x 2, x 4 was 0 and x 4 was 1 and x 2 was 0. So let's do linear combinations of those.
So that is going to be minus x 2 there. I'm just adding them up and there's going to be a minus x 4
and there's going to be an x 4 and there that is linear combination of these two. What we are saying
is that these two special cases, that special case and that special case, that is our null space. Those
are special cases in our null spaces. These special cases, special cases. So I can solve, I can plug this
one in there, this one, I can plug this one in there but if I want to look at the whole null space it is
linear combinations of these together with this together with this. So in that instance, so now if I
set, if I set, let's do something very wild. I'm going to set x, let's make x 2 equal to, let's make that
negative 3 and I'm going to make x 4 into 6. That means a linear combination of this is going to be
minus minus 3, that's 3 minus 6 and x 2 is minus 3 and x 4 is 6 so that's minus 6 and x 4 is 6. So I'm left
with this, I'm left with minus 3, minus 3, minus 6, 6. That will also be, that would also be in my solution space. So that makes up this whole null space.
So be very careful when you look at these. And sometimes this feels very tricky, you know, what do I do?
Solve each of these lines for our pivot here, which is x1, that one's x3. And then this first one is very nice because I can just play around with these two, which means it gives me a solution to this.
So alternatively make this one and zero and make this one and that one zero, which gives you, if you make x1, x2, if you make that x, if you make that equal to one, this is your special case.
If you make this one one and x2, zero, this will be your special case. But the linear combinations of these are the linear combination of this, which is that.
So I can plug in values for this is my x1, this is my x2, this is my x3, this is my x4, so that I end up with this. If I make x1 this and x2 this and x3 this and x4 this, I have a solution to my, I have a solution.
That would be a solution. Linear combinations of these will give me a, will give me a solution to this problem that I have here.
So very, very important for you to realize how to construct these two. And it is linear combinations of these two special cases in this form, in this form, which will give me possible solutions.
And that null space, that is a special, you know, that is a subspace, that, this null space is a subspace in R4. If we took that, you know, all these coefficients here and all the solutions here must be real numbers.
This, you know, this, this will be a subspace of R4 called the null space of our initial problem. So I hope you see that distinction from what we had yesterday.
So here we are in Mathematica and let's have a look at this example that we just had on the board. I've created the augmented matrix here. I've called it uppercase A, lowercase A, could have called it anything.
And let's just hold down shift and enter. It is there. Let's just look at it in matrix form. And you can see other, different from what I had done on the board, this is the augmented matrix.
And let's get that in row reduced form. So row reduced A, A, and I want to see that in matrix form as well. And you see the, all the zeros on the right hand side, it's going to work out like that.
This is all the right hand sides are equal to zero. So in effect, if I were to read this off, it says one times X sub one plus one, one times X sub two, there's no X sub three is there.
So X plus X sub four, that's zero. And there I have an X sub three and X sub four zero. And I solve here, X sub one is then minus X sub two minus X sub four and X sub three is minus X sub four.
And I'm going to just look at that first one because you can see X sub four is in the second one. So alternatively, I'm going to make X sub two one and X sub four zero to solve for X sub one.
And because I made X sub four zero, I also have a solution for X sub three. And then I'm going to swap it around. I'm going to make X sub two a zero and X sub four one, which also gives me a solution for X sub three,
whilst giving me a solution to X sub one. OK, so let's go carry on. I've just now made the matrix of coefficients. I've left out the zero zero zero.
I want to do that because there is a null space function inside of Mathematica, but you just you can only enter the matrix.
Remember, we are writing AX equals B. We are really interested in that matrix of coefficients, not really the augmented matrix.
I just did the augmented matrix here just to show you how we get, you know, just an easy way to see how we get them from here to these equations that we have here.
So let's just have a and now I can call null space, null space of A.
It's going to give me two rows, but I actually want the column view. So I'm just going to transpose it.
Remember to always transpose it when you print it out to the screen with a null space. And I want it in matrix form.
And there we go. I should say the null space of A. And there we go.
And we see what we had on the board, the negative one zero negative one one.
It's just in the different order than we had. Here we can see X two is zero.
And in this one we see X four is zero. And here in the first one, X one is X four.
X sub four is one. And here X sub two is one. So it's just in the reverse order.
But it gives me that exact null space. So just as we did on the board, the mathematics is going to give you this exact same solution.
Now, let me show you how we can just test what we did on the board.
So I'm going to show you how to construct a function in Mathematica.
I'm going to call my function F one and I'm going to, inside of square brackets, give it all the variables that we are dealing with.
Just as you would have done in algebra or in calculus, you say the F of X or in multivariable calculus, you would say the F of X comma Y.
So let's put in X one. But to tell Mathematica that this is a placeholder variable, I'm going to put an underscore after that one comma.
There's an X two. I'm not going to do the sub script notation. I'll just keep it easy like this.
Underscore. I have X three. Underscore. And I have X four. Underscore. And I underscore.
There we go. And I close my square brackets. Now, I don't want any immediate execution here or any immediate equation of the right hand side to the left hand side.
So I'm going to use this notation colon forward slash. And look what happened.
These turned like a greenish color. And the colon means don't execute now. This is just a placeholder function that I'm creating.
So just as null space row reduce was a function, I am creating my own function.
And one of the functions I can create is just normal mathematical functions.
And remember our initial thing we had here, which was a system of linear equations.
So that said, it was X sub one plus X sub two plus two times X sub three.
And instead of times, I'm leaving a space between the two and X sub three plus two times.
Plus what did we have? Three times times as a space X sub four.
And I'm going to put a semicolon because I don't want that expressed to the screen.
So let's press enter. And I'm just going to copy and paste here from my second screen the other two.
So all I'm doing here basically is recreating my linear system that I had initially and they all equal to zero.
And, you know, the trivial solution is let me show you that. Let's shift and enter.
Let's do the trivial solution. I'm going to say if one and the placeholder see that it's just like a mathematical function.
Now, I have all these arguments that I have to pass to my function.
It's just so happens to be this time around a mathematical function.
So zero comma zero comma zero comma zero.
If I were to do that, I get the solution zero that zero vector is a solution.
But let's let's let's do something special here.
Let me say a new style and I'm going to choose I'll bring it in for you.
I'm going to choose display formula numbered.
Let's do that.
And remember, this first one was X sub four and the second one was X sub two.
So let's make X sub four.
Let's redo that.
Let's make X sub four.
Let's make that equal to, let's say, six and we're going to make X sub three.
X sub three.
We're going to that that equal, say, negative three.
And remember, this was in reversed order.
So this first one was X four and this one that should be X sub two.
The second one was X sub two.
So let's just do that and see where we get to.
So I'm going to say minus this minus negative three times this minus one.
That's three minus six.
So I'm going to end up with I'm just going to do some placeholder text here.
So that first one is going to be a negative three.
And if I do minus six times zero, zero and a minus three.
So that's also going to be a minus three.
And if I do six times minus one, that's minus six.
So this is going to be a negative six.
And if I do six times one is six.
And the negative three times zero is zero.
So they're going to end up with a positive six.
I'm just doing a little placeholder work for myself there.
And let's see what happens if I take F one and I pass this now.
It's negative three comma negative three comma negative six comma six.
And if I pass that, it is zero.
That is a solution.
So remember that you have to multiply this first null space here.
That's X four times this plus X two times this second one.
And that's going to give you a new solution in the subspace.
And you can check any one of these.
Let's just make sure.
Let's just do F two there.
F two was let's do a negative three comma negative three comma a negative six comma six.
If I were to do that also zero.
So that is a legitimate solution.
Let's just check F three as well.
And it's negative three comma negative three comma negative six.
Negative six.
And six close there.
It's a solution.
That linear combination of X four times this first one and X two times the second one gives me a new vector.
And I just wrote it here just for convenience sake because I don't want to remember negative three negative three negative six negative six.
But I've created this function called F1, F2, F3 to represent my system of linear equations.
I pop in this new solution there.
I pop in these new there and I do get zeros.
So I know that this is a solution.
It is in this null space, which is a subspace of R4.
It's R4 because we're dealing with four dimensions here, four unknowns.
And you see how beautifully, how beautifully this works out.
And you can also see my two special, my two special solutions here.
And linear combinations of those.
Remember where the X sub four and X sub two there.
Those linear combinations make up the full null space.
You mean, to the enlargement of the whole system, which, you may be able to lift us up saying three times.
Okay, so R5.
Let's, let's dig a little näl hotter next, if you can D were to.
Even from the now and other, there will be less related to this.
But I'll tell, you.
Let's look down here.
From the low and X sub two of the circuit good.
So I'll need to look down here.
I'm gonna Detroit and do the in this controller better for you.
What
