Hi there and welcome to this course on numbers and algebra for health data science and for
biostatistics. Many of our courses in healthcare and in public health require some level of skill
with mathematics. In fact you may also find that as you take different courses you start becoming
interested in those that require even higher skills in mathematics. It is a fact that some
students don't like math that much or simply haven't done any math in some time. That is what
this course is all about. A quick introduction and a refresher on the basics of numbers and algebra
just to build up your confidence and make you familiar with enough mathematics that you do
decide to take courses that require a good grounding in mathematics. After finishing this course you can
take those courses with much confidence. Now this is not middle school and we certainly don't
have to do things the old-fashioned way. Indeed we have very powerful computers and they are terrific
at doing math. So since we do not have to do repeated example problems as in school and we have powerful
computers we are going to use a computer to help us understand the mathematics and also to do the
calculations for us. Now you do not need any skill to use a computer to help you understand and do the
math. I will show you how to do it step by step. You don't even have to install anything. I will show
you how to do the calculations by hand with pencil and paper and then also by using your google drive of
all things. There's also a complete set of notes that you can read online or even download and print out.
I want you to succeed at any courses that you may want to take in the future by building an intuitive
understanding of mathematics. A link to all the resources are in the video description. Please read
it and also subscribe to this channel where you will find more lectures on mathematics. In this first
lecture we explore numbers and simple arithmetic. So grab a pencil and paper and come along on this journey.
So let's start this exciting journey by just looking at the different types of numbers that we can deal
with because many times in data science we want to do specific tests and you know some of sometimes
it will really depend on the types of numbers that we use specifically if we think about the real number
line with continuous variables or we think about discrete variables specifically the integers. So this is
I suppose a bit of review but it is very very important. So what I want to start with is just the counting numbers
or let's call them the natural numbers.
And what we're going to do is first of all just give them a symbol and the symbol that we usually use
is this double struck and by that we mean it's got two strokes there. A double struck N and the way that
we write the elements or the members of the set is by using a set of braces or curly brackets and we're going to
say these are the numbers one two three comma etc and then it just goes on and we use these three little
ellipses hopefully you can see them there. Once we are clear or when you write this when you think your
reader is clear about the pattern that you're trying to establish and this should be clear that we're
meaning one two three four five etc. Now some instances we really want to include zero in all of this
our counting numbers because it certainly is possible to have zero or something and in some textbooks you'll
see a little subscript there with a zero. Some textbooks will not have that and some authors will just
naturally include zero in the natural numbers and there's debate about that but it's not particularly
important as long as you tell people as long as you tell people what you think you know what you mean by
these numbers. So here we have a bit of mathematics and as much as we do have a set and a set is contained
within these curly braces and we have members or elements of the set and they are separated by commas.
One thing about the numbers that we get to deal with is that there's some natural ordering to this.
Three is larger than two which is larger than one and we have you know a minimum it's not what we say
bounded above because it goes off to infinity of course. In general though a set does not its elements
does not have to be ordered but we are dealing with numbers so we are going to stick with this.
And what I'm going to try and do is be clear about you know what these things are when we go through them.
So for me this is clearly a definition and I'm going to put a definition let's put it on this side.
Definitions will have a little green mark to it that is a definition and we're going to put a little
green arrow to that. The next thing that we're going to talk about of course is then the integers.
So let's say integers and the integers they have a symbol as well and that's a double-struck z.
Let me try my best there making a double-struck z. And of course that is a z for zalen which is German
for numbers. And again we use set notation and this time we start at negative infinity and then
let's perhaps put negative 3, negative 2, negative 1, 0, 1, 2, 3. And now it should probably be clear
to everyone what the pattern is so once again we can make use of our little ellipses to denote the fact
that this goes on from negative infinity towards positive infinity. And let's just put another
there we go let's put another green marker there just to denote that this is the definition for us.
So we're always going to have these definitions in green and I like to do this because we need to keep
track of in our notes of what things are and when you go through your notes it's very easy to quickly
find the thing you're looking for. Maybe I'm looking for definitions I'm always going to find them in green there.
Next up of course we are going to the rational numbers. Rational numbers or the rationals. Rational numbers.
They also have a symbol. It's usually a Q or it is a Q. Double struck again. The line there.
And of course now we have to come up with a new plan to showcase all the members or elements
of that set. And what we're going to do is set builder notation. And set builder notation is fancy
words which are saying we're going to have some recipe. And so we better write down our recipe and
we're going to say it's P divided by Q. And then in some textbooks you'll see a colon. I like to have
just the line straight down. And we read that as such that. And it's very important in mathematics that
we have these symbols for everything. We kind of want to move away from the English language or the
written or spoken language. Any other written or spoken language. Because language contains ambiguity.
And we don't want to use, you know, we don't want to be unclear about what we mean. So we don't want
double meanings for things. And of course in languages many words have many different meanings.
So we use this terseness by introducing these symbols. And so we say it's P divided by Q such that
both P and Q, so we just can say P comma Q, they are members of, and that's the funny looking E that we
write. They are elements of a set that we've already defined. And that's the set of all
these integers. Another thing we want, so we put a comma, is that Q is not equal to, and that's the
not equal symbol zero, because we cannot divide by zero. And so there you see a beautiful example of
set builder notation. Set builder notation says give me a recipe and give me the rules for that recipe.
So that's kind of like, you know, give me the ingredients and then how to combine these ingredients.
And there you have, we build all the elements instead of writing each one of them, or at least
representations of them, or examples of them. We have this pattern, this recipe, it's two numbers,
one divided by the others, as long as those two numbers are integers. And then we see that we cannot
divide. We just have to include the fact that Q cannot be zero because we cannot divide by zero.
And we have many of these, of course, and we have this sort of funny notion, I don't know why I'm
calling it funny, it is what it is, that we can write the same rational number in many, many ways.
So a half I can also write as two-fourths. I can write it as 50 one-hundreds. Many ways for me to write
exactly the same number. That is the same rational number written in many ways. And of course, I can
take any of my integers and just divide it by one. And that means that's also a rational number.
But in fact, if I divide anything by one, you know, nothing changes. One divided by one is one,
two divided by one is two. So we're just stuck with integers again.
So there's all these interesting aspects, I can say, of the rationals. Then, very importantly,
we have the irrational numbers. Now, we don't usually have a symbol for that.
Later on, I might put one there just to show you what we do write, but there's no
symbol that we use for this set. But the irrational numbers are any numbers that we cannot write
as p divided by q. We cannot write it as p divided by q. And there's some famous ones. Let's do the
square root, say, of two. That is an irrational number that cannot be written as this fraction,
p divided by q. If we think of pi, pi cannot be written. We think of Euler's number e. And these are
numbers that we see in data science and in statistics all the time. So usually, we have
these as numerical approximations. So let's just look at this. Let's just put a... We haven't really
defined it. I'll define it shortly when we get to the reals. But let's just put our little green there
that is going to be a definition of sorts at the moment. And let's just think about writing
here on the side. Let's write the number one half. And when we know that's a rational number, that's
an integer, that's an integer. And I can write that as a decimal value 0.5. But let's take something
like a third. And if I do that, and I do a decimal value for that, I'm going to have 0.333. It's
never going to stop. I must write three until the end of days. And that's impossible. But what we can
see is that there is a pattern to these. There's repeating elements of this decimal. And the way that
we would write that is to show this repeat pattern by taking the digits that are repeated and putting
a little line on top of them. A bar. We call that a vinculum. And that's to say that this is the element
that gets repeated. So if we write 0.333 and we truncate it there. So imagine I just stop there.
We call this part a numerical approximation. And we call this part the exact representation. That's an
exact number. That's a numerical approximation. Once I write it out like this, it really is a third. And
it's as exact perhaps as what this is. And let's think of another one. Let's do 1 divided by 7. Do
that on your calculator right now. And you'll see that's 0.14. It is 142857. And here comes my trusty
NVIDIA. And if you know anything about modern artificial intelligence, you know what NVIDIA is.
There we go. Let's put a little vinculum on top of that because this is the pattern that gets repeated.
0.142857. 142857. 142857. 142857. That's the pattern that repeats. And because we have this
repeated pattern and doesn't matter how long it is, as long as it repeats, we know that it is a
representation of p divided by q. And this is how we see if a decimal representation of a value is
indeed an integer. If you write the square root of 2 as a decimal value, if you write pi as a decimal
value, if you write e as a decimal value, the pattern of digits never ever repeats. And hence,
these are not irrational numbers. So let's look at the really important one. And that is the real
numbers. We do have a double stroke r for that, for the real numbers. And that is the real number
line that you can think of in mathematics. On the horizontal axis that goes off to negative infinity
on this side. That goes off to positive infinity on this side. And there is an uncountable infinite
number of values here. But every time, you know, in between any tiny little interval here, it doesn't
matter how small you make it, there's an infinite number of values. Because you can just forever and
ever and ever expand, you know, add decimal values. And this is the numbers that we'll deal with most
commonly, the real numbers. And let's put a little green there. We haven't really defined it. I'm just
going to use the natural intuition that you might have for the real numbers. And so just important that
we do have that. And now we can finally say this is a set of numbers. And those are two sets of numbers.
And actually, if you take what we call the union of these two, in other words, you combine all of
them into a bigger set, then we get the real numbers. Such that we can finally say that the
irrational numbers are the set of real numbers. And then we have a set difference, which is denoted by
this minus sign. If we take all the real numbers and we take away all the rational numbers,
take the reals, take away the rational numbers, then you are left with the irrational numbers. So
perhaps that would be a good symbol for the real numbers. I should say for the irrational numbers.
I just want to show you there's, you know, perhaps one more that I want you to know about. We're not
going to do algebra with this. But there's the set of complex numbers, and we write that with a C,
that is double struck. And a complex number depends on the addition of something called
the imaginary unit. Let's write that imaginary unit. So this is just a bit of extra information.
Always nice to know a few extra things. The imaginary unit or the imaginary number,
and that number is I such that I squared equals negative one. And that's a bit odd because you
might know that if we square in any number, squaring means you multiply it by itself. Three times three
is nine, but negative three times negative three is also positive nine. So squaring something should
give you a non-negative number. It's only zero squared, which would be zero. But if this number I,
if you square that, you get a negative one. And then we write all these imaginary numbers. And we
usually say we call them z equals a plus bi. And so we can just ignore this a little bit at the moment.
But a and bi, so both a and b, they are members of the set of real numbers. And then it's just that we
multiply b by i. And then we have this whole new set of numbers. And you can see that real numbers are
nothing other than complex numbers. Whenever b is zero. Zero times anything is zero. So this part falls away
and you're just left with a real a. And there's all your real numbers. So actually the real numbers
are contained within the complex numbers. So it's actually just, you know, fun but also important to
know about the complex numbers. And those are the numbers that we're going to deal with in this course.
We're definitely going to do the integers and we're definitely going to deal with the real numbers.
And in many instances, many of, you know, what we deal with, the equations that we deal with,
do contain pi and they do contain e. It's so bizarre and such a wonderful thing that we have these
irrational numbers appear in so much of what we do. Good. So in this next section,
we're going to talk about a little bit of arithmetic. So let's talk a little bit about arithmetic.
Something you can do easily on your calculator with a computer language, with a spreadsheet software,
and simply just doing it in your head. So the first one that I actually want to start off with
is the normal idea of the addition. Addition and the symbol that we use for that is plus.
And we can take any of these types of numbers and we can just add them to each other. And so we'll
usually just say a plus b. And a can be any of these numbers and b can be any of these types of
numbers. And we simply add them. But let's stick to the real numbers. And, you know, you can just add
any two real numbers. We can all do that. And the second one in mathematics that we're usually
interested in is this idea of multiplication. And of course, we can use multiplication symbol or just
put a dot in between so that we have a times b, or we write a dot b, or we simply just write a b.
And that's multiplication. And the one very interesting one is if we let a equal negative one.
So if I now have a value b, and I multiply that by negative one, and we'll usually do something
like this just to show it's negative one times b, well, that's going to equal negative b. And so
usually those are the only two that we really do require. We can think about subtraction. We can think
about subtraction. So if I just take a and I add to that something, and what I'm going to add to that
is negative one times b. And that's going to be equal to a minus b. And so subtraction is nothing other
than addition and multiplication. So, you know, it's not something that really stands on its own. It's this
idea of multiplying the second number by negative one and have addition before that. And that's how
we get subtraction. So we also have, of course, division. And we sort of have spoken about division.
There we have division right up there. It's two numbers that I divide by each other,
such that, you know, such that I can have a new number. And we will talk a lot more about addition
addition a little bit later, but also in later video lectures. So watch out for addition.
What you usually don't see under arithmetic, but I do want to add it here, this because I have to put
it somewhere. Let's talk about rounding. If I want to round a number and how rounding works is,
let's just use examples. So I'm going to have zero points, say one, four, let's make it seven,
and then five. And let's imagine this is where I want my rounding to be. I want to round to one,
two, three decimal places. I do have to look at what the next number is. And the cutoff that we
have is going to be if it's larger than or equal to five. So five, six, seven, eight, nine. If this
number is five or more, we're going to increase this last digit by one. So that's going to be
0.148. If my number was say 0.147, and perhaps there was a three there, and I want three decimal
places, this three is not five or more. So this is going to be 0.147. I think you've all seen rounding.
Two important types, I should, you know, call them types of rounding, but they are
something in their own right is the floor, usually the floor function. And what we're going to write
is brackets that just have their bottom bits there. So imagine I have the number 3.99,
and I want to take the floor of 3.99. And what you really have to think about here is
think about the real number line. So here I have say 1, say 2, here I have 3, here I have 4.
If I'm anywhere here, not including 4, but as close to 4 as I want to be, the floor is
what is the first integer that I find that is lower than that value. So in this instance,
that is going to be 3. And then we also have this idea of a ceiling, a ceiling, and we're going to
write this. So just with the one little line there. So what we're going to have is the ceiling there.
And even if I have something like, let's do, let's do 3.0001, but I want the ceiling of that.
Again, as long as I'm above 3, the ceiling would be the higher integer. So that is going to equal 4.
And that's how we have the floor and the ceiling. Now, none of these are that important to me that
I'm going to put, you know, little, little definitions there. But I think, you know, these
three are something that you should just, you know, take special note of. The next bit of
important arithmetic I want to talk to you about is the powers. And we've spoken a little bit about
powers before, but then we have powers. And that is simply where we have, let's start with an example.
Let's have 3 to the power of 4. And that's going to be 3 times 3 times 3 times 3. So this is our base.
And this is the number that we want to multiply the base. How many times do we want to multiply
it by itself, this base value? And we want it 4 times. So we'll have 1, 2, 3, 4 of those.
And so powers, I think most of you are very familiar with.
And you know how to probably do it on most calculators, or you can just simply do it by hand.
So let's very quickly move on from that. Let's not waste too much time on that.
Let's talk about square root. And we've seen that the square root of 2 is an irrational number.
So the square root is taking a value and seeing if you can factor it out into another number such that
when you square that number you get back to the original. So the usual one that we can write is
the square root of 4. Of course that is going to be positive and negative 2. Because if I take 2 times
2, I get 4. And if I take negative 2 and I multiply it by another negative 2, I also get 4. So we always
have to remember that there's a negative as well. Usually we're only going to deal with a positive
of these two values. Another way that we can write this is to write 4 to the power one half.
Because there's actually a little 2 there, and just because we deal with square roots so often we
just leave out that 4. So these would be equivalent ways to write it, which means we also have higher
powers. We have higher roots, I should say. So let's put higher roots. And so maybe I can have something
like 27 and I take the cube root of that. That would be the same as writing something like 27 to the power
one over three. And then you can see, you know, we can get quite ridiculous with these things.
Let's write 10,000. And we're going to take the fourth root of that. And of course that's actually
equal to 10. Because why if I take 10 times 10 times 10 times 10. So 10 times 10 is 100. 1,000. 10,000.
And then I'm back with my 10,000 again. So that will be the fourth root. And the root that we say is the
value that we put in the denominator right there. The next one we're going to talk about is
absolute value. The absolute value of summing. And the absolute value we usually write with two
little bars. So if I say if I have the absolute value of three, that means the positive integer
value of three. And that's just going to be three. But if I take the absolute value of negative three,
that's also going to be three. I'm just getting rid of this negative number. So we actually have a nice
way to write this. We say that if we take any number, and we take its absolute value,
and look at this nice notation that we have, we have this big set of, you know, open braces,
open curly bracket there. I say that's a, if a is larger than or equal to zero. And that's true. Look,
three is larger than or equal to zero, then you just leave it alone. It's three, it's three,
it's right there. But it's negative a, if a is less than zero. So does that make sense? Yes,
of course it does. Because look at this, there I have a negative number. My a is now negative three.
So my a there is negative three. So what I'm actually saying is minus minus three, which is
actually just minus one times minus three, and that's positive three. And there's my positive three.
So this is actually how we write it. And I've written it out so nicely. I think it really,
you know, it really needs a, let's put it, let's put it here. It really needs a
a little green mark there. That's a definition for the absolute, the absolute number.
Last in this section, I just want to mention the logarithm of something. I think this is very
important for you to know. And what we'll usually write something is the log, let's make it of base
10 of 100 equals two. So we write log, we have a base, we have the number that we're taking the log
base 10 of, and then we have the solution. And I see, I think you can see what this means. It says,
well, if I take 10, and I multiply, and I take it to the power two, I get 100. Isn't it not?
So what we're saying here is, if we write something like this, let's write the log,
let's write, let's write the log base, let's make it the base b of a equals c. So if I have a log base b,
here we had log, the base was 10, b was 10, of a, which is 100, I get c. In other words, what we're saying is,
we're taking this 10, which is the b, it says, this b to the power what gives me, and then we see
the c is to the power 2, but of what is that 100, that 100 is right there. So we put the little a there.
So if I write log base b of a, what am I asking? I'm asking, what must I raise b to,
to, to what power must I raise the base, to get a? To what power must I raise the base,
so that I get a? Well, that's the c. The c is what we're looking for. What must I raise 10 to,
so that I get 100? Well, I have to raise 10 to the power 2, to get 100. And so as long as you remember
that, I think you'll be okay with logarithms. And we can use many bases, very nice to use base 10,
but we actually have a special one. So I'm just going to put this, let's put it here because,
you know, we do need to show that the logarithm is nicely defined for us, at least on this side.
A nice base to use is base e. Now we've seen e, Euler's number is an irrational number,
and we actually have a special way that we write that, is we say ln for natural log,
log, and that actually just means the log with a base of e. E to the power what gives me this value,
say I want e to the power 10, log base e of 10, that would be the natural log of 10. I'm asking,
what must I raise e to, so that I get 10? And the natural log is just such a natural thing,
and again occurs very commonly in what we do. Seeing that we are on a roll, let's just do one
more thing, and that's the order of arithmetical operations.
And you might have learned this from school, and so if I have something like 3 plus 4 times 10,
we know that multiplication comes before addition, and this should actually be 40 plus 3 is 43,
but if you just did it from the left, you would have 3 plus 4 is 7, 7 times 10 is 70,
those are two different solutions, and we have this order. I don't like to be,
you know, to write things like this, there's ambiguity there, it depends on someone knowing
what this order is, and so I am personally, and I want you to be also just interested in the p.
And so even, we all know that multiplication comes before addition, or most of us know,
just put there what you want people to do. It does not take much effort just to put those
parentheses there. Even though that's within the rules of PEMDAS, the order of PEMDAS,
put those parentheses, don't try and trick people, or don't write something down,
and it's not clear to everyone what you mean by that, put parentheses there. Of course, if you wanted
the addition first, you would have to put the parentheses. If you want 3 plus 4 times 10 to be 70,
you'll have to put the parentheses there. But irrespective of the order, P is the most
important, and just use parentheses everywhere, and then no one will be guessing at the order.
So we're going to continue our look into just our introduction here to algebra.
And one thing I really want to discuss is the properties of real numbers.
There we go, the properties of real numbers.
Now when we do some of our calculations, it is very important for us to concentrate on these properties
of real numbers. And the first one I want to talk to you about is the commutative property.
Now some of these will be very, very well known to you, I suppose. Commutative property.
But some of them we just have to just remind ourselves of. So we get the commutative property
of multiplication of the real numbers. So of addition, what we mean by that, if I have any
two real numbers, a and b, and I say a plus b, that's exactly the same as saying b plus a.
And if I have two real numbers, a and b, and I multiply them, a times b, that's exactly the same as saying b times a.
So simple, yet so important for us when we start doing even the simplest of calculations.
And we just have to remind ourselves of the fact that this property exists.
The next one is the associative property. The associative property.
Once again, we have the associative property of addition,
and we have the associative property of multiplication. So let's have a look at these two.
As far as addition is concerned, we have, if we have any three real numbers, we can say a plus,
and first do b plus c. And that will be the same as doing a plus b first, and then adding c to the end.
And when it comes to multiplication, exactly the same thing. I can multiply b and c first.
Remember our order of arithmetical operations, parentheses, are done first.
So if I get this product b and c, and then do a times this product, that's going to be exactly the
same solution as if we get a and b, and then I multiply that by c. So again, very important for
us to remember this. Now comes the real, you know, one that I suppose we don't often remember,
but it's very important to us in algebra. Distributive property, the distributive property,
and we have distribution of what we say, multiplication over addition. So let's again
have these three real numbers a and b. And if I have a times, and this is how we would write it,
a times b plus c. Now we're very lazy. We don't put the multiplication there. But the distribution of
multiplication over addition means that I have to do this multiplication in, you know, with a with b
and a with c, and then do the addition of that. So that's going to be equal to a times b
plus a times c. So it's a times b plus a times c. And that's very, very important for us,
for us to remember. And one place where we might often see that if I have something like this, a
minus b plus c. Now you say, well, there's no multiplication sign there. But what we do have to
remember is this negative there actually means negative one. So I do have this multiplication
of negative one by these two b and c. In other words, I'm going to get a, there's my a. Now let's
forget the a, what I just want to look at this. I have multiplication right there,
distributed over addition. So negative one times b would be negative b. And negative one times
c would be negative c. So whenever we have a something like a minus, and then in parentheses,
b plus c, it turns out that we then have negative b and negative c. And that is the result that we deal with.
Next property of the real numbers I want to talk about, talk to you about is the additive identity.
Very important additive identity. And this, this value that we use when we talk about the absence of
anything. And that's the number zero. And remember that is still an element of or member of the set
of real numbers, such that when I have a plus zero, it's going to be the same as commutative property
zero plus a. And that equals a. I don't, you know, I don't change this particular element of the real
real numbers. It stays exactly that element. And then I have the multiplicative identity, multiplicative
identity. And that of course is the number one, is also an element of this set of real numbers,
such as that if I have one times a, that's the same as a times one. And that equals just that same
real number. I don't change anything. So those are the properties of real numbers that we always have
to be mindful of. And as we do calculations, these things will be very important to us.
The next thing that we're going to talk about is this idea of fractions. Very important when we
talk about fractions. Now, though, we've actually seen fractions before, and that's how we defined,
of course, the rational numbers. And this is just a form of division. And I promised you we'll talk a
lot more about division in this first section, but also in the rest of this course of this thinking
about division. So let's take a little example. I'm going to do 3 divided by 4. Now, we have one way
that we do write it. Remember, we can also say 3 divided by 4. And there's some other ways as well,
specifically if you use computer code. Of course, there's no way to write that to the computer as
far as writing with your keyboard is concerned, although there are languages that can express
that symbolism. And we also don't have that little stroke on our keyboard. But let's stick to these.
We know what we're talking about. 3 divided by 4 or 3 quarters. Now, one thing we do have to denote
that this is what we call the numerator. This is what we call the denominator.
So important just for us to remember these names, the numerator and the denominator. Now, I can have
something like 5 over 4. And clearly here, the numerator is larger than the denominator. It's 5
quarters. And here, I only have 3 quarters. So it can be bigger. But I sort of want us to imagine that
when we do talk about fractions, we are talking about fractions of a whole. In other words,
something where the numerator is smaller than the denominator. So when I say the word fraction,
that's usually what I'm going to talk about. And we're going to look at various ways that we can
compare to fractions like this and how we can add and subtract and multiply these. That's going to
become very important for us. But for us to get there, let's just stick to knowing that this is a
numerator and denominator. And even though we are going to see fractions like this, usually,
when I talk about fractions, I'm going to mean 3 divided by 4, where the numerator is smaller than
the denominator. The other thing I just want to mention right now, and we're going to see more
about ratios later. And this is something that we might write as the ratio of two different types of
elements. Maybe you go into your kitchen and you have some bananas or bananas and you have some apples.
And what is the ratio of one to the other? Maybe that ratio is 3 to 4. And we usually use that
notation. We put a colon. So note, though, that in total, you have seven elements. You have three of
the one and four of the other. So if you want to express this as a fraction, we would say, well,
there is three of the one kind. And here we have three plus four. There's seven in total. And we have
four of the other kind also of three plus four. So I'm dealing here with three over seven. And I'm
dealing with four over seven. Three sevenths of all my elements that I have are of the one type,
and four sevenths of the other type that gives me a ratio of three to four. So this is usually what we
mean by a ratio. So just that you are aware of that. Now let's do some comparison and arithmetic.
Let's write that comparison. Comparison. Or let's just do some arithmetic.
With these fractions, with fractions.
So let's look at starting in a case where we have the exact same valued numerator. So maybe I have
three eighths. And on this side, maybe I have three fifths. And maybe I want to compare them,
seeing which one is larger than the other. And let's just start with that. That's easy enough to do.
The thing about the denominator is what I like to do is always think of one of my favorite things,
and that's chocolate cake. And imagine then we just have a nice circular cake. The denominator is
really the number of equally sized slices that I cut my cake into. And now I just want to know,
you know, I really want to know how many of these pieces I have. As I say, that's my denominator.
And I'm just counting how many of those pieces I have. And that's the numerator. And if you think
about cutting your cake into eight equally sized slices, versus cutting your cake into five equally
sized slices, of course, this is the one I want. My slices are going to be much bigger. And if I have
three of smaller number, you know, smaller sized slices, and I have three of bigger sized slices,
of course, if I have three of these biggers, that is going to be larger than
three of the smaller size slices. So always for me, you know, an easy way to think about the
denominator is how many slices do I cut my cake into. And now I'm going to leave the addition,
the arithmetic of that, just for a couple of seconds. Let's compare the situation where we have
the same denominator. So maybe I, in this instance, I have four sevens and I have three sevens. Now,
this one's much easier in as much as I'm cutting my cake into the same number of equally sized slices.
Same, you know, two cakes, exactly the same size, cutting the slices equally big, and all the slices
are equal. That's what we mean by the denominator. Clearly, if I have four of these and three of these,
the four is going to be bigger. Now, I just have to look at the denominator, the numerator now,
because the denominator is exactly the same. If the numerators are the same, I just have to think,
if I cut that cake by the number of slices, eight slices of a cake and five slices of the same cake,
if I make those equally sized, you know, five equally sized slices, or eight equally sized slices,
of course, those would be smaller slices than these. And three of smaller slices is going to be,
you know, less than three of bigger slices. And then we have the situation where everything is
different. Everything is different. Let's have, for instance, three over eight, and I have something
like five over nine, five over nine. Now that becomes very difficult. Not only are my cake slices
different in size, and I also have a different number of them. So how do we go about this?
Well, let's start off with, by thinking of this specific middle example, where I'm going to add
these things, four sevenths plus three sevenths. And think of that, I have equally sized slices. Now,
imagine I took my two exactly the same size cakes, I cut them each into seven equal slices,
and I bring them all, which I've got 14 of now, by the way, and I just, you know, put them,
put them all together on a plate so that you can't, you don't know that you have two cakes,
they just see all these slices. What I mean by that is, they are equally sized, and I can simply
just count how many of them I have. And so I'm going to keep my denominator where it is, and I'm
just going to add my two numerators. And four and three are seven, and there I have seven sevenths,
which means I have one. I just have one. So what we can clearly see here, the trick of adding
any two fractions is that I must have that my denominator is the same. I cannot add two
fractions if I have an unequal value in my denominator. So when I want to do three eighths
plus three fifths, I have to do something special. If I want three eighths plus five ninths, I have to do
something special. It is only when the denominator is equal to each other that I can do simple addition
like this. Four sevenths and three sevenths is seven sevenths. Think about that. If you have a half
and you have another half, of course you're going to have two halves, which is this equal to one.
That makes sense because I do have the same denominator. I keep that denominator and I can do
that addition. So let's think about how to add these two numbers to each other. Well, one neat trick that I
can remember is this idea of my multiplicative identity, my multiplicative identity, one. If I
multiply anything by one, that thing just stays what it is. So let's multiply this one by one, one times
this one. Nothing's going to change there. And I do one times this one. Nothing is going to change there.
I put my parentheses so it's still clear that I'm doing this multiplication first.
One times three eighths is three eighths. Plus one times five ninths is five ninths. So I still have
three eighths plus five ninths. Nothing there. But now I do remember if I write seven over seven or two
over two or whatever number over itself, that's just one. So why don't we rewrite this one as eight eighths.
Eight divided by eight is still one. That's exactly one multiplied by three eighths.
And I'm going to be clever and I'm going to rewrite this one as nine over nine. Nine over nine times five
over nine. And now I just have to know how do I multiply two fractions with each other?
Well, that's no problem.
Let's multiply two fractions. Maybe I have A divided by B and I multiply C divided by D.
What I want to show here is that these are all, these are four different numbers. All that I need
to know is that B and D, of course, is not equal to zero. So I can't divide by zero. And this
multiplication is very, very simple. I'm going to have numerator times numerator. That's A times C.
And I'm going to have denominator times denominator. B times D. So what I'm going to have is AC divided by BD.
Very simple. And you cannot do that with addition.
But great. Now that we know how to do multiplication, now this becomes very simple.
Eight times three. I just have to think what eight times three is. And that's 24.
Eight times four. And eight times eight.
Am I stupid in my head?
Oh, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.
Stupid in me bloody head.
I'm concentrating so hard on other things.
So now I want to talk to you a little bit more about the arithmetic of fractions. Now let's look at
arithmetic. And the one that I want to start off with is just the multiplication. So let's put multiplication
as far as the arithmetic of fractions. Let's say arithmetic of fractions. Very important for us to
be able to deal with. So let's have two fractions. I'm going to have A over B and I want to multiply that
by C over D. So what I want to say here is that A, B, C, and D are all different real numbers.
But I cannot have that B and D are zero. So B and D cannot equal zero. So I can't divide by zero.
Now this is very simple to do. We simply keep the numerators. That's A times C. And we keep the
denominators. That becomes B times D. So we can write that very simply as A, C divided by B, D.
Very simple to do. So let's do an example. If I have three over four and I want to multiply that by
four over five. That's very simple. I have three. Let's do three times four divided by four times five.
And I'm going to have 12 over 20, which I can simplify. And later on we'll learn, of course,
we can just eliminate these two fours. But that's not what we're going to discuss now. What I want you
to remember now is just how to do multiplication. And that's so important to me. I think that deserves
our very first, for this video at least, our very first little green arrow there. Let's try and get
that straighter. There we go. There we go. Okay. That is going to be how we do multiplication. So let's
think about how we do addition. Now we're going to get different ways or different examples.
And one is where our denominator is the same. So let's have something like A over B.
And I want to add to that C over B. I just have to know that, again, B does not equal zero because
I cannot divide by zero. Now this is very simple to do. The denominator is the same.
So this is going to equal, my B stays the same, and I'm just going to have A plus C.
So let's think of an example. I have three eights maybe, and I want to add to that two eights.
That's B, that's B. It's not zero. It's totally legitimate, this. And because the denominator is
the same, I just keep the denominator. And I have three plus two, and that is just five eights.
Very simple, very simple to do. I have the fact that my denominator stays exactly the same.
But what if I have the situation where the denominator is not the same? So I want to do
AB plus CD, and that is not the same as multiplication. I cannot simply add B and D
as I multiplied B and D. I cannot have that. If I do want to do addition, I have to have the fact
that my denominator is the same. So how would I go about doing something like that? Well, let's have
a little example. Maybe I have three eights on this side, and let's add to that, say for instance,
five ninths. How can I go about adding that? I cannot do that addition. This is not multiplication.
I cannot simply say eight plus nine. Now, how can I turn these into something that I can add? Well,
I do remember my multiplicative identity. Now, so what if I put little parentheses here,
and I put little parentheses on the side, and I do multiplication here, and I do multiplication there,
and I multiply by one, and I multiply by one. So what have we done here? Well, we've remembered our
order of arithmetical operations, and the only one that I want you really to remember is parentheses.
So I've put little parentheses there to say, I want to do this first,
and then I want to do that part, and I'm just going to add these two values to each other.
And we do also remember that one is a multiplicative identity. So if I take one times three
over eight, it's still three over eight. If I take five times nine, and I multiply by one,
it's still five over nine. Now, I just want to be clever about this. I want to rewrite one, and one
way to rewrite one is to write it as nine over nine. Nine divided by nine is one. So I have not changed
anything here, and I want to multiply by three over eight. And let's do this one. I've got five over nine,
nine multiplied by, why don't I rewrite? So why don't I rewrite? So why don't I rewrite one as eight
over eight? It's still one, no problem. Now I can use this multiplication of fractions. Multiplication,
I can just do numerator times numerator, denominator times denominator. Nine times three is 27,
nine times eight is 72, plus five times eight is 40, and nine times eight is 72. Guess what?
I have the exact same denominator, and I can now do my addition. I've got 72, and I'm going to do 27
plus 40, and that of course equals 67 over 72. And I've done the addition of, I've done the addition
of two fractions where I have different denominators. I have different denominators. And the trick was
looking at these two denominators. This one was eight, that one was nine. So this three-eighths I'm going to
multiply by nine over nine as a representation of this nine that I have there. And this one I'm going
to multiply by eight over eight because I have the representation of eight on this side. So that I
have exactly the same thing in the denominator. I have nine times eight and nine times eight. Is that not
a very neat trick? I think that is a very neat trick. Now one thing you'll see also, it allows me to compare
two fractions to each other. I can very easily compare two fractions if I have the same denominator.
In thinking of slicing a cake into 72 equal, it'd be very small. I don't want to have a slice of that
cake. It's too small. I love chocolate cake. But imagine I cut it into 72 pieces. Now I can compare 27
to 40 of those pieces. And clearly 40 is larger than 27. So I would say five ninths is larger than three
eights. I can do both addition and compare two fractions to each other by getting this common
this very common denominator. So this trick might work very well in certain circumstances. But what
if we had this problem? Let's do another example. And in this example, we're going to say, let's take the
following fractions. 5 over 12 plus, let's make it 7 over 15. Now I'm going to employ the same trick.
Let's do 5 over 12. And I'm going to multiply that by 1. And to that I add 7 over 15. And I'm going to
multiply that by 1 as well. So I've changed nothing. I'm just writing it in slightly different order than
before, just to keep it a bit neater. So I've put my parentheses there so that I know I do this
operation first, then this operation. If I multiply anything by 1, I don't change that thing. I don't
change the 7 over 15. And in the end, I add them. So we really are back to where we started. But now we're
going to rewrite 1. And we're going to say 5 over 12. We're going to multiply that. And we look at the
opposite fraction. We look at its denominator, 15 over 15. So I'm going to say 15 over 15, which is
just 1. So no problem there. I'm going to take 7 over 15. And I'm also going to multiply that by 1.
But I'm going to write 1 slightly differently by looking at the opposite denominator. So in this term,
12 over 12. 12 divided by 12 is still 1. I have made, there's nothing different there.
But now this becomes a very difficult multiplication because in my denominators,
I have to take 12 times 15 or 15 times 12. And that becomes difficult. But let's do this. I'm
going to take 5. And I'm going to multiply it by 15. You can use a calculator. You'll see that that's 75.
And if I have 12 times 15, that gives me 180 plus 7 times 12. Well, that's 84. 15 times 12, that's 180.
Now I have a common denominator and I can eventually do my addition. For addition and subtraction,
I have to have the same denominator, unlike multiplication, where I can just do straight
on multiplication. But now I have to say 75 plus 84, well, that's equal to 159. So my fraction is
quite large. And what you'll see is we can simplify this fraction. So let's think about a better way of
going about this. And to be able to do this, we need to discuss something called prime factorization.
And it sounds difficult, but it's not. We have to remember what a prime number is. I'm not going
to write it down here. But remember, a prime number is any number that's only divisible
by one and itself. And because I've put and there, one, for instance, is not a prime. It's not
a prime because it's divisible by one and by itself, which is also one. So it's divisible by one and one.
That's the same thing. I need to be divisible by one and another number. And what do we mean by
being divisible by? Let's take some examples. I'm taking eight and I'm dividing that by four.
Another way to write this is eight divided by four. And of course, that's going to be two.
That equals two. There's no remainder. I can divide eight into four. I can take eight bits divided into
four. So I'll have two groups of four. But if I take something like nine divide by four,
that's still going to be two, but I'm left with a remainder. And my remainder here,
my remainder is one. Because if I take two and I multiply it by four, I have eight. And that's not
nine yet. I still have one left. And so when we say it divides, we mean that we have a remainder
here of zero. We have a remainder of zero. Eight divided by four is two because two times four is eight.
And I'm already at eight. I have nothing left. And that's what we mean by that. So let's look at some
prime numbers. Prime numbers. And they are an infinite number of prime numbers. The first one is
two. Two is only divisible by one and by two. If I take two and I divide it by one, well, that's two.
There's no remainder. If I take two and I divide it by two, well, that's one and there's no remainder.
Three is a prime number. Four is not a prime number because it's divisible by one,
by two and by four. And so that's not a prime number. Five is a prime. Seven is a prime. Eight is
not a prime. Nine is not a prime. Ten is not a prime. Eleven is a prime. Twelve is not a prime.
It's divisible by so many numbers. Let's look at twelve. Twelve can be divided by one.
Twelve can be divided by two. Twelve can be divided by three. Twelve can be divided by four.
And twelve can be divided by six. And twelve can be divided by twelve. All of these will leave me
with no remainder. So definitely twelve is not a prime. Thirteen is a prime. Fourteen is not a prime.
Fifteen is not a prime. Sixteen is not a prime. And so you can carry on. Now let's reinvestigate
a number such as twelve and a number such as fifteen. Why am I doing this? Well, look at our example here.
In my denominator I have twelve and my denominator I have fifteen. To use this trick to get to a common
denominator I multiplied by one. And I just expressed one as fifteen over fifteen and twelve over twelve.
But that left me with very big multiplications to do. So let's take the number twelve and the number
fifteen and do prime factorization. And you'll see what I mean by that. Let's start with these prime
numbers. We start with the smallest one. Can I divide twelve by two? Yes, I can.
multiply it by. Now if I take twelve and I divide it by two, what do I have left? I have a six left.
Now let's start all over again. What's the smallest prime that I can divide six in? Well,
I can divide six by another two. Well, if I take six divide by two, I've got three left. But three is a prime.
And look at that. Prime factorization. Twelve is equal to two times two times three. That's a prime,
that's a prime, that's a prime, that's a prime. And prime factorization means can I break down this
number into different numbers such that when I multiply them I get to twelve. But they all have
to be primes. And so a simple trick to do is again start with your number divided by the smallest prime.
That gives me a six. Again, divided by the smallest prime. That gives me a three. But three is also a prime.
And there we have it. I can divide by a two. I can divide by two. And I can divide by three.
Let's look at fifteen. What's the smallest prime that I can divide it into? I can't divide it by two
because then I'll have a remainder. Seven times two is fourteen. But I have one left. Three. Yes,
I can definitely divide fifteen by three because now I'm left with five. So I already have a three there.
Okay. Multiply it by, well, five is a prime. And so it immediately goes there. And now look what I've
done. I have been skillful here and I have written these numbers below each other. Certainly fifteen
does not have a two in it. Not a two. It does have a three. It does have a five. Three times five is fifteen.
I'm factorized fifteen into the product of two primes. And I will always write it as such that I write the
same numbers underneath each other. And let's do the following thing. Let's just bring them all down.
There's only a single two. That's great. There's a two. That's great. There's a three. That's great.
And there's a five. That's great. So all I'm doing with this, I'm not adding or multiplying anything.
I'm just looking down these columns. And I don't want two threes. I only want one of them.
Because I've got two threes there in a row. And do remember, I can't put that two right there
because it has nothing to do with fifteen. Do every row all on its own. But now let's check.
Two times two times three times five. Two times two is four. Four times three is twelve. Twelve times five is
sixty. That equals sixty. And now we have discovered something beautiful. We have discovered what we
call the LCM. Least common multiple. We are saying that sixty is the least common multiple of twelve
and fifteen. How do I get that? Well, if I take sixty and I divide that by twelve. And if I take sixty,
this is how we would commonly write it if we want to do long division. Sixty. And I divide that by fifteen.
Well, here I'm going to get five. And here I'm going to get four. Okay. Twelve times five is sixty. Fifteen times
four is sixty. Now let's revisit this problem that we had originally. Five over twelve. And I'm going to add
to that seven over fifteen. And again, I want to do this trick where I multiply by one and I multiply by
one because now I haven't changed anything. And let's say five over twelve times. But look at twelve here.
We know if I take twelve and I divide by sixty, I get five. So why don't I multiply or rewrite one as five
over five? And you'll see where I'm going to go with this very shortly. Seven over fifteen times. Let's rewrite one
as with a fifteen. Fifteen goes into sixty four times. Why don't I rewrite this as four over four?
Now I've used five over five and four over four. Why do I want to do this? Well, now this becomes a lot easier
than twelve times fifteen. Now I'm only doing twelve times five. And twelve times five is sixty. And five
times five is twenty-five. Plus seven times four is twenty-eight. Fifteen times four is sixty. And look how much
easier this is now. Now I have sixty in my denominator and twenty-five and twenty-eight gives me fifty-three.
And now I can see five twelves plus seven fifteens is actually fifty-three sixtieths.
Which is much simpler than one fifty-nine one-eightieth. And if you simplify this, you're actually going to get
to this number. And we're not going to deal with that. This is of course in algebra. So we're only looking at
some parts of these adding and subtracting fractions. So instead of this rather large fraction, I'm
getting a much simpler one. And why is that so? I did not have to do fifteen times fifteen, and I did not
have to do twelve over twelve. Fifteen over fifteen, twelve over twelve. I could make use of the fact that
the least common multiple of twelve and fifteen is actually sixty. If I take twelve and I multiply
it by five, and I take fifteen and I multiply it by four, I get sixty. That is the least common multiple.
Now take twelve, for instance, you can multiply it by two. You can multiply it by three. You can multiply
it by four. You can multiply it by five. Same with fifteen. I can multiply fifteen by one, by two, by three,
by four, by five, by six, by seven. It doesn't matter what I multiply it with. But I'm going to get
various numbers. So let's just think about that. Let's just do twelve times one is twelve. Twelve
times two is twenty-four. Twelve times three is thirty-six. Twelve times four is forty-eight. Twelve times
five is sixty. Etc. Let's take fifteen. And fifteen times one is fifteen. Fifteen times two is three. Fifteen times three is
forty-five. Fifteen times four is sixty. When I'm looking at these numbers, which one of those is
common to both of those, but it's got to be the least common. Twelve and fifteen, that's not common.
Twenty-four and fifteen. Twenty-four and thirty. Twelve and forty-five. Thirty-six and thirty. It doesn't
matter where I go. The smallest one that I'm going to find that is a common multiple that's common to both
would be sixty. And it's going to be the smallest one. There are going to be others, but sixty is the
smallest one. And how did I get to sixty? This idea of prime factorization. And that makes my addition
of fractions a lot easier. Let's do another example just of prime factorization. So imagine I have two
numbers that I want to add. One is over sixteen and maybe the other one is over eighteen. So that would
have been easy. Whatever this was, I could have said whatever over sixteen times eighteen over eighteen,
because that's just one, plus whatever this number was over eighteen. And I'm going to multiply this by
sixteen over sixteen. And so sixteen over sixteen is one. Eighteen over eighteen is one. I'm using
eighteen here because the opposite denominator was eighteen. I'm using sixteen here because the opposite
denominator was sixteen. And now if I take sixteen and I multiply that by eighteen, and you can do that
yourself, that gets to two hundred and eighty-eight. That's quite big. Let's rather do prime factorization.
So let's take sixteen and let's just remember our primes. Two, three, five, seven, eleven, thirteen,
etc. So the smallest one that I can divide sixteen in would be a two times. Well, if I take sixteen and
I divide it by two, I'm going to be left with eight. Now let's do eight again. What's the smallest prime
that can go into eight? Well, that's two again. So I'll have another two. And that gives me four.
Well, what's the smallest prime I can divide four into? Well, it's two again.
So there's another two. And now I'm left with two. And two itself is a prime. So there we go.
There's prime factorization of sixteen. It's two times two times two times two. Two times two is four.
Four times two is eight. Eight times two is sixteen. And these are all prime numbers. I can't make them
any smaller. Let's look at eighteen. Now, can I divide eighteen by these primes? Yeah, the smallest
primes I can divide that by is two. And then I'm going to be left with a nine. So I definitely have
a two multiplied by nine. Can I divide nine by two? No. Can I divide it by three? Yes, I can.
And then I'm going to be left with three. So there's a three. Now I want to write similar things
below each other. And so I can't write the three there. I'll have to write it all the way out here
times. Well, there was another three left that's already a prime. And there we go.
Two times three is six. Six times three is eighteen. The prime factorization of eighteen is two times
three times three. Three times three is nine. Nine times two is eighteen. That's my prime factorization.
Now let's bring all these down. Now there's a two in this column. So there'll be two.
There's a two in this column. There's a two in this column. There's a two in this column.
There's a three in this column. And there's another three in this column. So I've got to look at two
times two times two times two times three times three. That is a lot of multiplication, but you'll see
in the end that comes to 144, which is a lot smaller than 288. In actual fact, it's half of 288.
So I have that the least common multiple of 16 and 18 that's going to equal 144.
144. And so now I just have to look if I take 144 and I divide that into 16 and I take 144 and I divide
that into 18. What do I get? So this is going to be nine and that's going to be eight. Because nine
times 16 is 144. Eight times 18 is 144. And so now if I have something divided by 16
and I want to multiply that by one and if I want to add to that something that's divided by 18, I'm going
to multiply that by one. I know here I'm going to multiply by nine over nine and here I'm going
to multiply by eight over eight. That's one. That's one. I'm not changing anything, but I do know 16
times nine is 144 plus 18 times eight is 144. That's much easier to deal with. I'm using prime factorization
to get the least common multiple. And again, the least common multiple of 16 and 18 is going to be
144. And by that we mean least common. I can take 16 and I can take 18. I can multiply by one,
by two, by three, by four, by five, such that I get 16 times one is 16. 16 times two is 32,
etc. 18 times one is 18. 18 times two is 36. And I'll carry on and on and on here until I get to,
if I multiply 16 by nine, I'm going to get 144. And if I times 18 by eight, let's just put little dots
there by eight, I'm going to get 144. So that is common, common multiple of 16 and 18, 144. And that's
the smallest one. I'll find others like 288, for instance, but they are going to be larger common
multiples. I want the least common multiple. And the way that I'm going to find that is through prime
factorization.
