So it's already been a busy morning but I want to take some time to talk to you about
obstructive jaundice. So you might get asked that in the oral exam, you might get a clinical
case or you might actually face a patient with obstructive jaundice. So we're talking
an obstruction to the flow of bile into the duodenum, the surgical patient, surgical jaundice.
Now I want to show you on the screen here a list of causes that we see locally. Now we
haven't looked at this for a long time as far as the research project is concerned so
really this year I want to give it to one of the trainees just to do some research into
the proper order of the causes that we do see locally. But just in a rough order of what
we do see and what you might see locally, remember the following. Our number one cause always
is going to be choledocal arthiasis. We do see patients with stones in their bile ducts causing
obstruction to flow. Remember these patients though will present with cholangitis. We do
see biliary tract tumors unfortunately and we spoke about those the cholangiocarcinomas.
We also see extra hepatic compression on the biliary tree. We see that from nodal disease
whether that be lymphoma or other causes. This is the mass extrinsic to the bile ducts causing
obstruction of flow in the bile ducts. We see parasitic infections and our number one would
be Ascarus but you can see other parasites as well with accumulation of those products in the bile duct
causing an obstruction to flow. We see HIV cholangiopathy that is sometimes from the HIV
the virus itself from cytomegalovirus or from cryptosporidium we see that cholangiopathy.
Lymphomas. We've seen one or two cases of lymphomas present to us or refer to us as an obstructive
jaundice. One investigation turns out to be lymphoma and that can also be one of the causes of extra
bile duct compression. We see choledocal cysts. We've seen a few of those over the last couple of years but
they'll also present to our pediatric colleagues. Both acute and chronic pancreatitis can lead to
obstruction distally in the flow of bile. We have seen Maritzi syndrome that is cholecystitis. We have
a stone in Hartman's pouch. There's a big inflammatory mass and it compresses on the bile duct causing
obstructive jaundice. We haven't seen lately but you have to always think about primary sclerosing
cholangitis of course as well as a cause of an obstruction to flow. Then there's some other causes
that we see in our patients in the critical care unit. We do see it in cases of severe sepsis and
hyperperfusion. We do see it as a perineoplastic syndrome usually renal cell carcinoma. We've seen
one of those one or two of those and also patients on total parenteral nutrition. You've got to watch
out for these patients as far as the obstructive jaundice is concerned. So how are you going to see
these patients? Well they're going to complain of jaundice. They're going to be yellow. The family members
bring them in. They bring themselves in and they've got these yellow sclerae. They're yellow all over.
Now remember there's an obstruction of flow of bile. So bile does not get into the small bowel.
It does not get converted to starcobillinogen. So the stools are pale because that is what gives the
stool its brown color. That starcobillinogen is they're not available for reabsorption into the plasma
and excretion in the urine as urobilinogen. So if you have access to urinary dipsticks and they can
do urobilinogen you're not going to see urobilinogen. You are going to see bilirubin and
that abundance of bilirubin is going to give the dark color to the urine. So ask your patient dark
urine and pale stools together with the jaundice you are thinking an obstruction to the flow of bile
obstructive jaundice. So what are you going to do? Well you've got to confirm that this is obstructive
jaundice. So the first thing you might do is laboratory investigations and what you want to look
for there is your liver enzymes. And you are going to see high bilirubin levels, total bilirubin
and the largest fraction of those is going to be a conjugated bilirubin. So the conjugated hyper
bilirubinemia is what you're going to see. There will be an increase in the unconjugated fraction then
as well because remember this conjugated form accumulates in the hepatocytes. There might be a
reversal of the conjugation process and through diffusion or reabsorption that unconjugated bilirubin
gets reabsorbed or transferred into the plasma and that rises as well. The majority though is going
to be of a mostly conjugated fraction that you're going to see. The ductal enzymes are usually going
to be raised and that is your ALKFOS and your gamma GT and that is going to be raised out of proportion
with the cellular enzymes which are AST and ALT. So in a nutshell there is your obstructive jaundice.
You've got to go from there to find the cause of this conformation of obstructive jaundice and the
cause you're going to do get to through imaging. You can start with an ultrasound at least it's going
to show you that dilatation of the bile ducts. If there's an obstruction to flow proximal to that the
ducts are going to start dilating. We can go from there to a CT scan which is going to give us slightly
more information remember and you might even have to go to an MRCP, ERCP but these patients please
refer them to a unit that deals with this so that they can manage it. If you do admit these patients
usually please put up an IV line for them start hydrating them. Our number one cause of jaundice,
obstructive jaundice is still going to be cholangitis. These are septic patients with pain and fever
together with their jaundice. Give them antibiotics, give them fluid. Remember before that to take blood
cultures always. Irrespective of this put your patient on an IV line. Patients can become dehydrated
in severe cases, in special circumstances and we might talk about that a bit later. We can talk
about we have to mention hepatorenal syndrome so protect those kidneys by giving your jaundice patients
good good hydration. So I hope that gives you a framework to talk about obstructive jaundice in
the exam situation or at least guide you when you start seeing these patients in the ward.
See you next time.
