Okay, so in graph theory today I'm going to just talk about two types of graphs.
It's actually going to just be about Mathematica today.
And I'm going to show you some platonic graphs.
Remember, those are the tetrahedral, octahedral, cubical, icosahedral, dodecahedral graphs.
I'm going to show you what they look like.
And then I also want to show you the Peterson graph.
I'm just going to take the Peterson graph.
Now, you know, what's happening in graph theory?
You've seen a couple of lectures now, and it's just graph after graph after graph.
Well, I like to introduce graph theory in this way because you've just got to get familiar with all of these things.
And what we're doing is we just have this box, and we're just piling stuff in this box.
And later on, when we're so familiar with them, it becomes easy just to drag them out of that box.
They're just part of your mind, and you just boom, boom, they come out.
And you can just use these in graph theory.
So it's very interesting to look at these.
Start developing the concepts.
Start learning the language.
It's like a child learning a brand new language or an adult learning a brand new language.
Just become familiar.
Just enjoy these graphs at the moment and, you know, just get them in your head.
And later on, they'll just pop out, and you'll just be able to talk this language and use these things when we do some calculations or do something more interesting with these graphs.
So for now, just absorb all of these interesting graphs and learn Mathematica.
Learn how you can use Mathematica, the power of Mathematica, and play around with these and develop your own graphs or look up various ones.
So this one, let me show you some great graph data inside of Mathematica.
And that's going to be very interesting for you to come up with and explore new graphs, explore this wonderful world of graphs.
For now, just pump your head full of this interesting stuff.
So here we are, Mathematica, let me show you these platonic graphs, first of all, the tetrahedral, octahedral, cubical, icosahedral, and dodecahedral graphs.
Very beautiful.
Let's look, let's see what they look like, and then just explore one or two things about them.
So let's do all of them in one go.
So for that, I'm going to do the table, use the table function, and I'm going to use the keyword graph data.
Graph data, and I'm going to use a placeholder called n, comma.
And now let's specify what n is going to be.
Now, I'm not going to let n go from one to four to five or whatever.
I'm going to let it cycle through some nominal data, some strings.
So I'm going to put a comma and put all of those inside of square brackets.
So the first one I want is tetrahedral graph.
Tetra, now I must not make any spelling mistakes here because there's no auto-completion.
Tetrahedral graph.
Now, I am not the world's best typist, so if there's a mistake in here, I'll correct it in post-production.
But let's go with it.
Octahedral, octahedral is the, oh, octahedral, there we go.
Octahedral graph, remember to put the graph in the uppercase G there.
And then we had the cubicle, cubicle graph.
There we go, cubicle graph.
The next one was the icosahedral graph, icosahedral graph.
And then the most difficult one of all, the dodecahedral graph.
Let's go for that one.
Do-de-ca-hedral, do-de-ca-hedral.
This is very funny.
Anyway, graph, there we go.
And I've got to close my curly braces.
So you see these are just strings.
And strings go inside of quotation marks.
These are, well, these are all just nominal data types.
So it's just one, two, three, four, five of them.
They're in a list, so they go inside of curly braces.
But it's what N is cycling through.
So N is going to cycle through first tetrahedral group, then octahedral group, then cubicle graph,
then icosahedral graph, then dodecahedral graph.
And they are all going to be printed as graph data.
And this is all part of a table function.
So let me close that.
And we see that the Wolfram Research Data Server has been queried here in the desktop version.
And it's going to download this graph data from the Wolfram Research Data Server,
which might take a while, depending on your internet access and how busy their servers are, etc.
And there we are.
Lo and behold, we have a tetrahedral graph, an octahedral graph, a cubicle graph,
a icosahedral graph, and a dodecahedral graph.
Okay, let's just explore some of these.
Let's just have a look here at this first one.
Let's just do the tetrahedral graph.
We see, first of all, that it's a planar graph.
And remember, we did planar graphs before.
We're going to get back to planar graphs.
They're very important.
And look at this.
If I look at the edge count of this top little vertex on Nod here,
I note that it's 1, 2, 3.
Let's look at this one down here.
It's 1, 2, 3.
Let's look at this one here.
It's 1, 2, 3.
And let's hit the central one, 1, 2, 3.
So this is a regular graph.
Let's look at the octahedral graph.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4.
Oh, there we go.
Explore these.
Look at them in a bit more detail.
Of course, just looking at them as they are drawn here,
they are all planar graphs.
But explore, please explore the number of degrees of each of these edges.
Think about the things that we've learned before
and the terms that we might have used before as far as these platonic graphs are concerned.
Let's just look at the Peterson graph specifically.
And I'm going to use graph.
Let's do this.
Alt or command.
Option key, I should say, on a Mac.
Alt or option and 4.
And we're going to say the Peterson graph.
Peterson graph.
There we go.
Arrow down.
And let's just do this.
Again, we're going to find it using the graph data.
So that is querying the Wolfram servers just to get this information.
And you see a few come up there already.
Look at all of these.
And it's not nearly all of them.
But look at, oh, there we go.
Look at this list of graphs that you can explore.
Please explore them.
Be adventurous.
It's fantastic.
Peterson graph is the one that I want.
Let's have a look at that.
Again, it's going to install this from the data servers.
And it's going to take a couple of seconds.
And there we go.
The Peterson graph.
As we look at it here, is this a planar graph?
Is it possible?
Let's just look at the edge count.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
Oh, that seems to be all the same.
Now, have a look at this.
Let's do graph data again.
I'm going to say graph data.
I'm going to say the Peterson graph, please.
Peterson graph.
And I'm going to use a second argument, which is called alternate names.
Alternate names.
That's new.
Look at that.
10 cubic graph, 19.
10 cubic hyper-hamiltonian graph, 1.
10-edge transitive graph, 13.
Oh, so many interesting, tantalizing things to come.
Look at all those alternate names for the Peterson graph, and it all means something wonderful.
Okay, play with graph data this time around, and figure out some things about the platonic
graphs with the information that is inside of your head right now.
Play around with Mathematica.
It's fantastic.
It's fantastic.
It's fantastic.
