So we've looked at parametric equations. Now we're going to turn to polar coordinates.
Just changing to polar coordinates, so there's going to be a bunch of exercise problems in this video.
And we're going to look at polar equations, so rectangular and polar equations.
Problem 1.1. Derive a conversion from polar to rectangle coordinates.
So in the Cartesian plane, we have rectangular coordinates, and we have any point P, as we can see, x, y.
Of course, we can drop that down to the x-axis, which makes this length here x.
That makes that length y, and we can make the hypotenuse just r, which would just be the square root of x squared plus y squared.
And then this line, the hypotenuse, makes an angle of theta that goes counterclockwise from the positive x-axis.
And that's important because that's going to be our convention, going counterclockwise from the positive x-axis.
So if we draw in these lines, it becomes very clear that we can just use some trigonometry,
because I can now write the cosine of theta, and the cosine of theta is going to be adjacent, divided by hypotenuse.
So that's going to be x divided by r, and through simple algebra, I can write x equals r times the cosine of theta.
So x equals r times the cosine of theta.
If I have the sine of theta, that's going to be the opposite, divided by the hypotenuse.
So simple algebra tells me that y equals r times the sine of theta.
So if I'm given any point, I'm going to say a polar coordinate point, polar coordinate point.
And that point is r, theta, I can convert that to rectangular coordinates.
So I can get these rectangular coordinates from that.
So the rectangular coordinates are going to be some point p, x, y.
And that is going to be simply this point.
If I'm given r and theta, that becomes r times the cosine of theta, and r times the sine of theta.
So if I need to convert any points being given in polar coordinates, r and theta, I can convert that to x and y with this equation.
So in problem 1.2, we ask to derive a conversion from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates.
So again, I've got this point p, and on the Cartesian plane, x and y and i have got to express this in term of r, theta.
And because we have a right angle triangle here, for this point, just, you know, filling it in with a triangle,
I have the fact that r squared equals x squared plus y squared, the hypotenuse.
So I can just write an equation for r.
That's just going to be the square root of x squared plus y squared.
And we'll see, you know, that that's plus minus that.
And we're going to see how that works in a later problem.
So that's that.
And I also note that the tangent of theta, seeing that I know what x and y is, I'm given the point.
So the tangent of theta, that's going to be y over x.
And that means I have this equation for theta that's going to be the inverse tangent, or the arc tangent, of y divided by x.
So given any x and y value, I can convert it to something that contains r and theta.
And as much as I can now write this point, I can write the square root of x squared plus y squared.
That's going to be my r.
And I can write the inverse tangent function of y over x, as far as my theta value is concerned.
Problem 1.3.
Convert the point, p2, comma 3, so that's in the plane, so that's x and y coordinates, to polar coordinates.
So I need to write down these polar coordinates.
So let's just change color there, because we always put our equations that we have to remember in green.
So I've got to convert this.
I've given x and y, and I've got to convert this into r and theta.
So remember, this is going to be the square root of x squared plus y squared, comma, the arc tangent, or the inverse tangent function of y over x.
So let's just close down that square root symbol there.
So that is how I've got a converter.
So I'm given this point x is 2 and y is 3, and that's how we're going to convert it.
So let's do that.
So our point is going to be the square root of 2 squared plus 3 squared.
And then we need the inverse tangent function of y, which is 3 divided by 2.
And I can simplify this a little bit.
It's 2 squared is 4, 3 squared is 9, 9 plus 4 is 13.
So I'm going to be left with 13 as far as my length is concerned, and then the arc tangent, the arc tangent of 3 over 2.
Now, let's just try and, well, let's just look here at the Wolfram language.
So again, this will be available in the link down below.
And what I've done is I've created two, at least, of my own functions here.
So first of all, you give the function a name.
And because this is designed by us, we're going to start it with a lower case, but we've got this camel case notation.
So every word starts with an uppercase letter so that you can distinguish the different words.
But the first one starts with a lower case to show that it's not an inbuilt function, but one that we created.
So polar to rectangular.
And then I've got to give it the parameters on which it can work.
So when I call this function, I have to pass r and I have to pass theta because I have polar coordinates and I want to take it to rectangular coordinates.
And we put these little underscores after some name that we give it.
And since we're working with radius and angle, let's just keep it r and theta.
But you've got to put these underscores to show that these are parameters.
Then I put colon equals.
That's just the delay assignment because we don't want anything to be executed now.
We're just creating this function.
And then we're going to create this little list.
So we want returned a list.
So we put it inside of a set of curly braces and then some element, comma, some other element.
And so that will be x and y.
And what is x?
Well, it's r cosine of theta.
So remember to make a multiplication symbol.
We just leave a little space there.
You can see between the r and uppercase C, there's a space.
And theta, to get that little theta symbol, you can press the escape key on your keyboard, type th, and then escape again.
And that's going to give you that theta.
Let me show you.
If I hit the escape key, I get these three little dots.
I type in th, and I hit escape again, and they change to a theta, comma, r sine of theta.
So there's a little space there as well between the r and uppercase S, and theta.
And I'm going to create another one called rectangular to polar.
So there I'm giving x and y.
So remember the underscores.
And because it's x and y, why not give them the parameter names x and y?
And that's going to be the square root.
So I'm using the sqrt function here.
So in this notebook, I'm not going to use the fancy notation in the desktop version,
so that you can see exactly what it looks like if you want to use the web version.
So it's sqrt for square root, and that's x squared, and that's just shift 6 on my keyboard, the caret symbol.
So x squared plus y squared.
And remember there's an order of arithmetical operations, so square is going to come before plus.
So the two squares are going to happen before the addition.
So if we want to, we can really just put parentheses around this, just to force that order of execution.
But because there is this order of execution, that's not going to be a problem, comma.
Now the inverse tangent function in the Wolfram language is arc tan, with an uppercase A and an uppercase T.
And then just y divided by x.
So I can create these two functions.
So if I now call rectangular to polar, as we had in problem 1.3, we've given these values for x and y.
So if I just pass that, I get square root of 13, and then the arctangent of 3 over 2.
Now what is the arctangent of 3 over 2?
So we can express that as a numerical approximation with the n function.
So let's just write the n function, and then we pass to that arctan of 3 over 2.
So let's do 3 divided by 2.
And let's see what that looks like.
It's 0.98.
So almost 0.98.
And that's in radians.
So almost 1 radian.
And we know pi over 2 is right at the top.
That's the y-axis, goes up there.
Because I want to show you something else.
I want you to think about something.
So it's square root of 13, which is the length of this hypotenuse.
And then it makes an angle of almost 1 pi.
So let's just go here and just think about this for a little bit.
And I'm going to draw some coordinate axis here.
So there's my coordinate axis.
And remember, if I go up here, that'll be pi over 2 radians up there.
This is 0.
That's pi radians.
So pi over 2 is 3.14 divided by 2 is about 1 and a half.
So 1 and a half would be there.
So maybe here.
Let's just make a thinner point here.
So maybe somewhere in this direction.
Somewhere in this direction.
I'm going to find this angle here, which is this arc tangent.
Let's just write that the arc tangent of 3 over 2.
Imagine it's there.
So this is the direction we're going.
So we go from the positive x-axis.
We're going from the positive x-axis to this line here.
In other words, we're moving in this direction.
So from the origin in this direction.
And we're going square root of 13 units along.
So the point might be somewhere out there.
But what if I were to add something to this?
What if I took this angle, arc tangent of 3 over 2.
That's an angle, remember.
And I add to that pi radians.
Well, if I add to it pi radians, I'm actually going in this direction.
This is the arc tangent of 3 over 2 plus theta.
That's that direction.
If I'm going in this direction, but I go negative the square root of 13 in that direction.
So we're going down here, but instead of going down here, we go negative the square root of 13.
That means we're going up here, and we end up at the same spot.
So we can actually write this point also as negative the square root of 13, comma, the arc tangent of 3 over 2 plus pi.
So if we were to do that, that would be exactly the same point.
So remember, this angle tells us the direction we're moving in, and this is going counterclockwise from the positive x direction.
So if we go up this almost one radian, that means we're looking at it from the origin to down that line.
But if we add theta pi radians to that, we're all the way the other way.
And there's something else going on here, because I might as well go around 2 pi.
And then if I go around 2 pi, I'm in the same direction, and I can go around 3 pi times.
So what we should actually have written here is square root of 13, comma, the arc tangent of 3 over 2, or that 9.8, you know, plus 2 pi, oops, 2 pi n.
Where n is this element of the natural number starting at 0.
So because I can go around and around and around and around, and I'll still face that way.
And this one's got to be p, negative of the square root of 13, comma, the arc tangent of 3 over 2, plus pi.
And I can also go around 2 pi n times there as well, with n still being an element of the natural numbers starting out counting at 0.
So that would be all the points.
Because I can just go, with polar coordinates, I can just go around and around and around the circle, and I'm still going to face the same direction.
More importantly though, I mean, we're not going to work with those going around and around, so we're not going to work with these.
But this is definitely very important.
So just to add pi radians to that, meaning I'm facing the opposite direction, and then my radius has got to be a negative radius.
So I put the negative out there, and that's why I told you it's important to remember that we had plus minus the square root of x squared plus y squared.
Because we can certainly go in the other direction if, for our angle, we just add pi radians to that.
So in this problem we're going from polar to rectangular coordinates.
So we're given this, and this is exactly what we had before.
So let me just change to blue there.
So r is, in this instance, negative the square root of 13, and we have theta equals the arctangent, inverse tangent of 3 over 2, that's an angle, remember, plus pi.
And remember our point, what was our point?
Our point was 2, 3 was our point.
So let's just remember always, so how do we convert if we're given r and theta?
So what is this going to be?
This is going to be r cosine of theta, r sine of theta.
So always going to write that down.
So let's see if we get to that very same point we had before, given this previous problem.
So let's do that.
So the point P is going to be, well, we're going to have negative the square root of 13, negative the square root of 13, that's r, times the cosine, and now of this angle, and this angle is the inverse tangent of 3 over 2 plus pi.
So that's going to be our x coordinate.
And then we've got to look at our y coordinate, that's again r, so it's negative 13.
And we're going to take, let's just do that, and then we're going to multiply that by the sine of the angle, and the angle was the inverse tangent of 3 over 2 plus pi.
And that is going to be our y value.
So we can, might as well use a calculator.
I mean, I'm hoping that you'll have access to that in the exam, because to work out these values in pen and paper, that's a bit difficult.
So let's grab the Warframe language.
And then we have problem 1.4, so polar to rectangular.
So those are my values, negative the square root of 13, and then the arctangent of 3 over 2 plus pi.
And before we used the pi symbol, but you can just use the inbuilt keyword, pi, with the uppercase P.
So if we do this, we get back to the point 2, 3, just as we, just as we suspected and we showed in the previous problem.
So there we go, pi is 2 comma 3.
So we've had those two points.
We went from 2 comma 3, we went to the square root of 13, and then the arctangent of 3 over 2.
But we're also now showing that really that other point, the negative square root of 13, and then the arctangent of 3 over 2 plus an extra pi,
gives us the exact same point.
Problem 1.5.
If we asked here to convert rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates, find the rectangular coordinate of the polar coordinates, so polar to rectangular.
So let's just write in green always what we have to do, what we have to sort of memorize.
So we're given these r and theta values, and we have to go to x and y values.
So x is going to be r times the cosine of that angle, and y is going to be r times the sine of that angle.
So let's switch to blue.
So we're going to have p times, so r in this instance is 2 times the cosine of pi over 6.
Pi over 6, there we go.
And we're going to have 2 times the sine of pi over 6.
Now we just have to remember what that angle, what those angles are.
And if you can't remember what they are, just draw yourself a tiny little, neat little triangle.
Let's just do that.
So I've got our little angle triangle here.
And if we make it so that we have pi over 6, remember pi over 6 is a small little angle.
So let's draw it out there.
If we do that pi over 6, then we're going to have 1, 2, square root of 3.
And if we now look at the cosine of pi over 6, let's just go back to blue.
If we look at the cosine of pi over 6, that is adjacent, divided by hypotenuse.
So that's going to be 2 times.
So it's square root of 3 over 2.
And then we're going to have 2 times the sine is opposite, divided by the hypotenuse.
So that's 1 over 2.
So our point P is going to be square root of 3, comma 1.
1.6.
Find the rectangular coordinates of the polar coordinate point P, negative 4, and pi over 3.
So as always, we're going to remember, how do I get x and y?
Well, that's the r times the cosine of an angle, and r times the sine of that angle.
So always write that down.
And if you write it down often enough, it's going to stick in your mind.
So we're going to have negative 4 times the cosine of pi over 3.
And we have negative 4 times the sine of pi over 3.
And if you can't remember what those values are, remember our little triangle.
So in this instance, we have a bigger angle there, pi over 3.
So let's just draw that out here.
So if that was pi over 3, so this is obviously not to scale.
If that's our angle pi over 3, remember that's 1, 2, square root of 3.
And this is so, yeah, that is a right angle triangle.
And the square root of 1 squared plus 3 squared, well, that's the square root of 4.
And the square root of 4 is 2, so our hypotenuse is that.
So that makes it very easy to remember what these angles should be.
So here we're going to have P times, this negative 4 times the cosine of pi over 3.
So remember the cosine of an angle is adjacent divided by hypotenuse.
So that's going to be a half.
And then negative 4 times the sine is opposite divided by hypotenuse.
So that's square root of 3 over 2.
And if we simplify this a little bit, that's going to be a negative 2 there.
And that's going to cancel out.
So we have negative 2 square root of 3.
So let's just look at the Wolfram language.
We created those functions in the first problem.
So let's have a look at that.
And there we go, 1.6 there.
So it's polar to rectangular.
We've got negative 4 and then pi over 3.
And if we execute that, we see negative 2 comma negative 2 square root of 3, just as we got.
Problem 1.7, again, find the rectangular coordinates to the polar coordinates.
Write it down.
Always write it down when you do your exercises.
So what is x?
Well, that's r times the cosine of theta and r times the sine of theta for y.
And we have this point 3 comma, so this polar coordinate, the radius is 3 and then the angle is 3 times pi over 4.
So let's get our blue pen out.
And so we're going to have p times, well, we've got 3 as our length there.
And that's the cosine of 3 pi over 4.
And that's going to be 3 times the sine of 3 pi over 4.
So 3 quarters of pi.
So let's go to the Wolfram language and just use our little function that we created there.
And there we go, polar to rectangular, 3 comma 3 times pi divided by 4.
And we see our solution there.
We have negative 3 over square root of 2 and 3 over square root of 2.
P is negative 3 over square root of 2 and 3 over square root of 2.
And remember, you can rewrite this as just negative 3 square root of 2 over 2 and 3 square root of 2 over 2.
So this is you multiply the numerator and denominator by square root of 2 over square root of 2.
Sometimes that just looks neater to have it in that form.
Now the next set of problems, section 2, so this is problem 2.1, are actually quite a bit of fun.
And I hope you get to learn about these and have to do them.
So the first one is describe the curve r equals 2.
So we're given no information about theta.
But whatever theta is, and that is the crux of the matter, whatever theta is, that means theta can really be anything.
So let's write that down.
Theta is going to be on this interval, half open interval from 0, because remember we always start counting at 0.
But then it can go to infinity.
So we can really go around and around and around and around forever.
But whatever we do, we have to have this radius of 2.
So think about it going around, but at a fixed radius.
So I think you can already know where this is going.
So if we've got our plane here, and no matter what the angle is, as we go around, around, around, as long as we are two units away from the origin.
So if we were to do that, we just get a circle.
So what is described here is a circle, and the radius of that circle at any point is the radius of 2.
And yeah, just going around, around, going around twice is 2 pi, but you, you know, going around is 2 pi.
But remember we can always add 2 pi n to this inasmuch as for these values n being a natural number starting at 0.
If n is 0, that's just 2 pi.
Going around 1, this 1 is 2 pi plus 2 pi.
You get the point.
It's quite easy.
So if we think about the equation for a circle, that would be x squared plus y squared equals some radius squared.
So in this instance, the radius is 2, so that's 2 squared.
And we can solve for y.
That's going to be 2 squared minus x squared.
And y equals plus or minus the square root of 2 squared minus x squared.
And that's going to give us the same circle.
But here, as a curve here, we can just describe that whole thing as just r equals 2.
So in an opposite problem here, 2.2, we're not given r.
r can be anything.
So what we really are saying here, r is an element of this open interval from negative infinity to infinity.
r can be anything.
But theta has got to be fixed.
So if we have this here, at theta equals pi over 4, that's the angle there.
And r can be anything as long as that angle is fixed.
So what do we have?
We have a straight line.
A straight line through the origin.
A straight line through the origin.
Pi equals 4.
Once again, well, I suppose y equals x is what we could have written there.
Y is just x.
And the polar form of that, just simple, pi equals, theta at least equals pi over 4.
So, interesting problem to describe this curve, this polar curve, r equals twice the sine of theta.
So theta goes from 0, can go all the way around to 2 pi and around, around again.
But whatever that value is, if I plug in the value for theta, take the sine of that, multiply it by 2,
it has to be, at that angle, a certain radius.
So the radius is going to change.
So, you know, what do we have here?
Well, if we look at the right-hand side here, it looks almost familiar.
We remember that y equals r times the sine of theta.
I don't have r times the sine of theta.
I have 2 times the sine of theta, but I can multiply both sides by r.
So on the left-hand side, I get r times r.
And on the right-hand side, I get 2 times r sine of theta.
So now I have r sine of theta there.
And I remember, as we've written there, y equals r sine of theta.
So I just have y on that side.
But I also remember, on the left-hand side, I have r squared.
And r squared is x squared plus y squared when we do these conversions.
So now, on the left-hand side, I've got x squared plus y squared.
That equals, and on the right-hand side, I've got 2y.
So that's very interesting.
So let's just bring that all on to the one side.
x squared plus y squared minus 2y.
And I'm going to leave a little space and equals 0.
I'll just leave that 0 out.
Because what we can do here is just to complete the square.
If I put plus 1 there and plus 1.
Remember, that's this 2 that we have here, divided by 2 squared.
2 divided by 2 is 1.
So what we have now is x squared plus, and now I have here y minus 1 squared.
If you do that square, you're going to end up with y squared minus 2y plus 1.
And on the other side, I just have 1.
So what we have here, indeed, is, well, we have a circle.
And that's a circle, and it has a radius of 1.
So a radius of 1.
But it's not centered at the origin.
So it's centered at, so on x, it's going to be at 0.
But y, we've got to move over 1 to the positive side.
Because if we subtract 1 from that, we're back to the origin at 0.
So it's a circle of radius of 1, and that is centered at the point 0, 1.
Write a polar equation for the y-axis.
Now, the y-axis goes from negative infinity to positive infinity.
So from the origin, we know that r is just going to be equal to, you know,
on this interval, it is from negative infinity to positive infinity.
But that doesn't tell us much, because if we just wrote that, I mean, that is radius in any direction.
What is fixed, though, is the angle.
And if we go from the positive x-axis counterclockwise, we're going up theta equals pi over 4 radians.
If we do that, we are on the y-axis.
So irrespective of what r is, as long as we have that angle fixed, that is the y-axis.
So the polar equation for the y-axis is theta equals pi over 4.
We're mixing up the problems a bit.
Here's 2.5.
Back to a kind of problem we've seen before.
Describe the curve that the radius from the origin will always be 4 times the cosine of whatever angle we are at.
And if we look at the right-hand side, we remember that x equals r times the cosine of theta.
So that's very close, and we can certainly get it in that form by multiplying both sides by r.
So on the left-hand side, I have r times r.
And on the right-hand side, it would be 4r cosine of theta.
And we also remember, as with the problem that we saw before, that x squared plus y squared, remember, that's r squared.
In other words, we can just do all these substitutions.
On the left-hand side, we have r squared, which is x squared plus y squared.
And on the right-hand side, we have 4 times x.
r times the cosine of theta is x.
So I'm going to bring it to the left-hand side.
I have x squared minus 4x.
And leave a little space there.
Plus y squared equals the right-hand side, which is 0 at the moment.
And again here, I can complete the square.
Okay, so if I were to add a little something there, let's add 4, which is just plus 2 squared.
And that means it's 2 squared.
I've got to add to the other side as well, what I do on the left-hand side of the equation's sign.
I've got to do on the right-hand side.
And that gives us x minus 2 squared.
And if you square that, you get 2x squared minus 4x plus 4 plus y squared equals 2 squared.
So again here, we have a circle.
It has a radius equal to 2.
And it is centered at, where is it going to be centered?
Well, we have x minus 2 at the moment.
So the center has got to be in the opposite direction.
So that's going to be 2 comma, and the y is going to be 0.
So it is this circle with radius 2 centered at the point 2 comma 0.
So this one always gets me.
It's very exciting, this one.
You look at that, and you see this polar curve.
R equals the tangent of the angle theta.
And the secant of that angle counterclockwise from the positive x axis.
I hope I haven't said clockwise some other time.
Sometimes I just say clockwise when I mean anticlockwise.
Remember, these are always anticlockwise, the angle.
So look at that.
I mean, can you figure out in your head what that looks like?
And we've got to somehow change this.
And when you see this, just change it to stuff that we are working with.
We're working with sines and cosines.
So let's write that.
R equals the sine of theta divided by the cosine of theta.
And on this side, we have 1 over the cosine of theta.
So we have R.
I suppose we can bring the cosine squared of theta over to the left-hand side.
It's in the denominator there, cosine theta times cosine theta.
And that equals the sine of theta.
And I think from here it should be pretty obvious what we're going to do.
We're going to multiply both sides by R.
If we multiply both sides by R, you know, we've got something going on.
We've got R squared cosine squared of theta.
And on the right-hand side, R sine of theta.
So what's R sine of theta?
Yeah, that's just Y.
And what is R squared cosine squared of theta?
Well, just think about it for a minute.
X equals R times the cosine of theta.
And then if I were to go and just square both sides,
X squared is R squared cosine squared.
And that's what we have there, R squared cosine squared.
So it's X squared.
So Y equals X squared, the first parabola that you were ever taught.
And look at it as a polar curve.
The tangent of an angle times the secant of that angle.
Given that that is the radius, we have a parabola.
That's a lovely problem.
Problem 2.7.
Describe this curve.
R equals 6 over the square root of 9 minus 5 times the sine squared of theta.
If you can just look at that and know what this is.
Power to you.
Now, how shall we tackle this problem?
And we've seen one or two little tricks.
We multiply both sides by R.
But if we multiply both sides by R, that's not really going to help us here at all.
We see a sine squared there.
And we'd love to get an R squared in there.
But just looking at this algebraic equation here, that's not going to work.
I think the first thing that you should realize here is get rid of the square root.
Because there's nothing we've dealt with when it comes to these things that deals with square roots.
So to get rid of the square root there,
we can't multiply both sides by R, but we can square both sides.
Which, in effect, does mean the left-hand side is going to be R squared.
But here, it's not multiplying both sides by R.
It is squaring both sides.
So in the numerator, we're going to get 36.
Where did my little ruler go?
Here we go.
And that's going to be over.
And now, at least, I am rid of this square root symbol.
Now we can start getting somewhere.
Sine squared of theta.
And if I bring this over to the left-hand side, I have R squared.
And I have 9 minus 5 sine squared of theta.
And that's going to equal 36.
And this starts working for me, because now I have 9 R squared.
And I have minus 5 R squared sine squared of theta.
And that still equals 36.
And look at what we have here.
If we do remember that Y equals R times the sine of theta.
That's what we have always with our conversions.
And if we now square both sides, Y squared equals R squared sine squared of theta.
And we have R squared sine squared of theta.
So that's just going to be Y squared.
And R squared, remember, where's my green pen?
R squared.
That's just X squared plus 9.
X squared plus Y squared.
We remember those.
Those are just ones you should, of course, absolutely know.
So here, we're going to have 9.
And instead of R squared, we have X squared plus Y squared.
And remember where that comes from.
It's just the right angle triangle.
And that's just the Pythagorean theorem.
As far as the hypotenuse is concerned, that's where we get that.
Minus 5 times.
And what is R squared sine squared of theta?
Well, that's Y squared.
So we have all X's and Y's, because, you know, that's the only.
Why are we doing all of these problems?
I mean, I should have said so with the previous problems.
But we're trying to get these to rectangular coordinates,
because those are the ones we're familiar with, we can describe.
I mean, just looking at a polar curve.
Remember the previous problem, the tangent of an angle times the secant of that angle.
Who knew?
You know, who knew?
So we convert these to rectangular coordinates, and it helps us.
It makes sense.
So what we have here is 9X squared plus 9Y squared, and I have minus 5Y squared, and that's 36.
Can you see what kind of curve this is going to be?
I have 9X squared, and I have positive 4X squared, and I have 36.
What am I going to do?
I'm going to divide both sides by 36.
And if I divide both sides by 36, let's do that, divide by 36, divided by 36.
What do I have?
9 over 36, and 9 goes into 36 4 times, and so that's X squared over 4, which is 2 squared.
And I have 4 goes into 36 9 times, so that's going to be, oh, let's just fix that tiny little error there.
Where did that X pop in?
It's on a Y, of course.
So 4 goes into 36 9 times, so that leaves us with Y squared over 3 squared, and 36 divided by 36 is 1.
And what do we have here?
We have an ellipse.
Who knew from starting here that we're going to end up with an ellipse?
Problem 2.8.
This one, you've got to be quicker than me.
So we see the cos theta on the right-hand side, so we would love an R in there,
because we do remember X equals R times the cosine of theta,
and we do remember that R squared equals X squared plus Y squared.
So now, by now you should be familiar with these.
So we're going to multiply the left side by R.
So we have R times R, and on the right-hand side, we're going to have negative 10 times R times the cosine of theta.
R times R, R squared, well, that's just X squared plus Y squared.
Remember, we're taking this into rectangular coordinates, because those are the kind of curves we were brought up with.
Imagine, at school, we were taught polar coordinates before we were taught rectangular coordinates.
Then I suppose we would recognize these things, you know, as easy as we do now with the rectangular coordinates.
Anyway, we have negative 10 there.
And what is R times the cosine of theta?
Well, that's just X.
So we can bring that over to the other side, plus 10 X.
And we still have the Y squared.
And that's going to equal 0.
That's going to equal 0.
So I have this idea of just having to complete the square.
So if I took X squared plus 10 X, what can we do there?
What can we do to complete the square?
Well, if I just were to add, let's add 5 squared there.
If we add 5 there, squared, and I still have my Y squared, that's going to equal 5 squared over on that side.
So here, if I have X plus 5, all squared, plus Y squared equals 5 squared.
So what do I have?
Again, I have a circle.
I have a circle.
It's going to have a radius of 5.
And where is it going to be centered?
Where is it going to be centered?
Well, it's going to be centered at minus 5.
Negative 5.
And on the Y axis is 0.
And it's negative 5 because we've got to go in the opposite direction to what we have there to center our circle.
So again, negative 10 times the cosine of an angle.
So we're starting to develop, at least with these easy ones.
It should be rather simple to see that we are, at least start to see that we are dealing with circles when we see this kind of polar equation.
Problem 2.9, you should be able, by now, just to look at this and know, know intuitively what you have to do.
What we're looking for is X equals R times the cosine of theta.
We want Y equals the R sine of theta.
And we want R squared.
Remember, that would be X squared plus Y squared.
So, can we achieve this?
If you just look at the polar curve that we've been given there, R equals 6 times the addition of sine of theta plus the cosine of theta.
Remember, I mean, just make it simple for yourself.
It's 6 times the sine of theta plus 6 times the cosine of theta.
And all we need in there is an R.
So what do we do to the left-hand side?
Multiply by R.
So R times R.
And on the right-hand side, we also have that.
So it's 6R sine of theta plus 6 times R times the cosine of theta.
And now, R times R is R squared.
So that just becomes X squared plus Y squared.
And on the left-hand side, on the right-hand side, that is 6R sine theta is Y plus 6 times R cosine of theta is X.
And now we just have to bring it all to the left-hand side.
So I'm going to have X squared minus 6X.
And let's leave a little space because you know what we're going to do.
Y squared minus 6Y.
And that's going to equal the right-hand side.
And we'll have to do, you know, we'll have to do something there.
Okay, so 6, we divide that 6 by 2.
We square that.
So that's going to give us a positive 9 there.
Another positive 9 there.
9 and 9 is 18.
Now what we've done on the left-hand side, we've done to the right-hand side.
Competing the square we've done.
So that will be X.
Then we take the minus there.
And 9 is 3 squared, remember.
So that's going to be 3.
We square that.
And think about it.
X minus 3 is all squared.
That's X squared minus 6X plus 9.
So no problems there.
Here we have Y minus 3 all squared.
And that's just 18.
And 18 is 9 times 2.
9 times 2.
And that equals 3 squared times 2.
And if we are thinking about squaring that as far as what is the radius going to be.
So we need something that we can just square.
So we're going to take the square root of that and square it.
So we take the square root of that.
What's 3 times this?
No, it's 18.
So what we want is the square root of 18.
And we want to square that.
Because the radius will then be square root of 18.
But what is that?
Well, we can bring that 3 out.
So that's 3 square root of 2 all squared.
So what we have here, again, a circle.
It's going to have a radius.
A radius of 3 square root of 2.
And where is it going to be centered?
Well, this time we move both the X and the Y axis.
So we're going to be centered at 3, 3.
So that's a lovely, lovely problem.
And again, we're starting to notice this sort of pattern.
And I think if you do enough of these, you'll start to know what the curve is going to look like.
Just by looking, instead of the rectangular coordinates, looking at the polar equation there.
So describe the curve.
R equals 10 times the secant of theta.
Well, we know we can't work with secant and dealing with rectangular and polar coordinates.
We deal with sine and cosine.
And fortunately, we can easily rewrite this.
That's 10 over the cosine of theta.
And we can simplify this.
We multiply both sides by the cosine of theta.
So we have R times the cosine of theta.
That equals this 10.
But we know what R times the cosine of theta is.
That's X.
X equals 10.
Just this vertical line.
To 11, describe the curve R equals negative 3 times the cosecant of theta.
Very similar, of course, to the previous problem.
We're going to have, if I remember, just use my blue pen.
There we go.
So we're going to have R equals negative 3 over the sine of theta.
Multiply both sides by the sine of theta.
I have R sine of theta.
And that's going to equal negative 3.
And what is R times the sine of theta?
That's Y.
So Y equals negative 3.
We have this horizontal line going through.
Y equals negative 3.
So now in section 3, we're going to go the other way.
So convert the rectangular equation to a polar equation.
So we see X squared plus Y squared equals 25.
So that's going to be a circle.
It's going to be centered at the origin.
It's going to have a radius of 5.
So how do we convert this to polar coordinates?
Let's do a polar equation.
Well, let's just write these things down, just always to remember that X equals R times
the cosine of the angle.
And Y equals R times the sine of the angle.
And we have R squared equals X squared plus Y squared.
And we showed in the first problem where this all comes from.
So let's do that.
Seems to be the only course of action we can take.
So if we have X equals R times the cosine of theta, we've just got to square all of that.
So we're going to have R squared cosine squared of theta plus here we're going to have R squared
sine squared of theta.
And that looks easy enough to solve.
And on the right hand side, what do we have?
Well, we have 5 squared.
Nothing we can do there.
So we're going to take out R squared as a common factor there.
And I'm left with cosine squared of an angle plus the sine squared of an angle.
And we certainly know that trigonometric identity.
And that's going to equal 5 squared.
So here, cosine squared of an angle plus sine squared of an angle, that's just 1.
R squared times 1 is just 1.
So we have R squared equals 5 squared.
So R is just going to equal 5.
So that for us, that's just going to be a circle centered at the origin with the radius of 5.
But it's a square root that we're taking.
So in strict fashion, we should actually say negative 5 as well.
Well, because if I'm pointing one way for a certain angle, I might as well add pi to that.
So 180 degrees to that and point in the opposite direction.
So that still leaves me at that same point.
So we have both R equals 5 and R equals negative 5 as an equation for this circle.
Problem 3.2.
Convert the rectangular equation x squared minus y squared equals 1 to polar equations.
I'm just going to write these down all the time.
So it sticks in your head.
X equals R times the cosine of an angle.
And we have y equals R times the sine of an angle.
Make sure you know why this is so.
And x squared plus y squared equals R squared or R squared equals x squared plus y squared.
So what do we write for x squared?
Well, that will be R squared cosine squared of theta.
And we have minus now R squared sine squared of theta.
And that's just going to equal 1 squared.
R squared can come out as a common factor there.
So what are we left with?
Cosine squared of an angle minus sine squared of an angle.
And that's a trigonometric identity, which we should know that equals 1 squared.
Perhaps it's going to be given to you.
Perhaps not.
But that is just the cosine of twice the angle.
That's the cosine of twice the angle.
And that's going to be 1 squared.
So we can divide both sides by this cosine of 2 times the angle.
So that's going to be 1 over cosine of twice that angle.
And if we, I suppose we can really neaten this up.
We can say R squared equals the secant of 2 theta.
And we have R equals, well, strictly plus minus the square root of the secant of 2 theta.
That is our, or an easy conversion of x squared minus y squared equals 1 into a polar equation.
Interesting one.
This hyperbola, x times y equals 4.
Because remember, if we multiply both sides by 1 over x, we get y equals 4 over x.
Hyperbola.
So, as always, write these things down so you can remember them in your sleep.
That's a horrible thing to say.
Oh, no, just write 3 just because I want to be so horrible.
R cosine of theta.
Y equals R times the sine of theta.
And R squared equals x squared plus y squared.
Actually, I should write that the other way around to make, to keep things consistent.
But anyway, x squared plus y squared equals R squared.
So what are we going to write for x?
Well, that's just R times the cosine of an angle.
And we multiply that by R times the sine of an angle.
And that has got to equal 4.
So if R times R, that's R squared.
And that's going to be equal to, well, that's 4 over,
we have the cosine of the angle and we have the sine of the angle there.
And what does that equal to?
Well, that'll be 4 times the secant of that angle and the cosecant of that angle.
But hang on just a little bit.
We can really do something about this before we go that far.
Because let's just think about it.
Let's be slightly more clever about this.
So we're going to have R squared there.
And then I'm going to have cosine of an angle.
And I'm going to have sine of an angle.
This is showing you sort of something else here.
And if I were to just multiply both sides by 2, look at that, R squared.
And I have 2 times, let's just rewrite this as sine of theta, cosine of theta.
And I have that as equal to, I've got to multiply both sides by 2.
So that gives me 8 on the right hand side.
But what is this trigonometric identity?
Twice the sine of an angle times the cosine of an angle.
Well, that's R squared.
And that is sine of twice that angle.
And that's going to equal 8.
So I have R squared.
That equals 8 over sine of 2 times that angle.
So that's 8 times the cosecant of that angle.
And now we're just set with the fact that we have R squared.
So you can just take the square root of both sides.
So just think about that a little bit.
It might look neater.
Of course, this looks a bit neater than that.
And I've got to put 2 there.
It's twice the angle.
Cosecant of twice that angle.
Problem 3.4.
Convert the rectangular equation x equals 3 to a polar equation.
So that's just the vertical line.
It goes through x equals 3 up and down.
And y goes from positive to negative infinity.
And we've got to convert this to a polar curve.
And we know what x is.
x equals r times the cosine of theta.
Don't get those mixed up ever like I do.
x equals r times the cosine of theta.
So now, as you think about it, I mean, it's actually beautiful.
As the angle changes, now we're going from the origin to the positive x-axis.
We go counterclockwise.
As that angle changes, r changes.
And to such an extent that we have this straight line, this vertical line.
It's actually quite beautiful if you think about it.
And so I have the fact.
Let's just change.
Are we in blue?
Yes.
So we have, instead of x, we write r times the cosine of an angle.
That's going to equal 3.
So r is going to equal 3 over the cosine of that angle.
And that means if we just neaten things up, that's 3 times the secant of that angle.
So if you take 3 times the secant of an angle,
you're going to land up with this vertical line going through x equals 3.
3.5.
Convert the rectangular equation x plus 2y equals 3.
So that means 2y equals negative x plus 3 and divide both sides by 2.
So that's just a straight line.
And we've got to convert this to a polar equation.
I urge you to keep on writing this so that you don't forget.
x equals r times the cosine of theta.
And also remember why this is so.
y equals r times the sine of theta.
It's all to do just with a right angle triangle.
And we have x squared plus y squared that equals r squared.
That's better.
This time I wrote it in the, sort of in the right order.
So what are we going to plug in for x?
Well, we're going to plug in r times the cosine of an angle.
And we're going to have twice r times the sine of that angle.
And that's got to equal 3.
So, you know, where do we, sort of, where do we take this one?
Well, at least we can take out r as a common factor.
So let's do that.
And I have cosine of an angle plus twice the sine of that angle.
And that equals 3.
And we just take that to the other side.
3 over cosine of theta plus twice times the sine of theta.
And for this one, I think it's okay.
Okay, it's good enough if you leave it.
And this, you might, you know, you might need to, you know, do something else about it.
But certainly that is this polar equation being converted from a rectangular equation.
So here's a lovely problem.
So we're going to go the other way now.
When we described the curves, we kind of did this.
But now we just want to explicitly, you know, write this down.
Theta equals 3.
So it's this angle counterclockwise going from the positive x-axis.
And it's almost all the way around to the opposite side to the 180 degree because that'll be pi 3.14.
So, yeah, theta equals 3.
So it's going to be this line.
But let's write down an explicit equation for, sort of, for this line.
And if you think about what do we have for theta?
Well, we actually, if you think about the things that we've done, let's write that.
We have that the tangent of theta, that's going to equal y over x.
That's kind of all we have.
But here we just, we have theta.
We don't have the tangent of theta.
But we can certainly take the tangent of both sides.
There's nothing wrong with that.
So let's say that the tangent of theta, well, that's going to be the tangent of 3.
And that is going to equal y over x.
And now we simply solve for y.
So y is going to equal tangent of 3 times x.
And what's the tangent of 3?
Well, it's about negative 0.14, somewhere there.
And times x.
And indeed, that is a fixed slope because tangent 3 is just a constant, a constant times x.
So it is just going to be the straight line going through the origin.
And it has that slope, that negative slope.
So convert the polar equation R equals the tangent of theta to rectangular equations.
There's a route that you can go that leads you nowhere.
Because we do remember that we have something for the tangent of theta.
Well, that's just y over x.
But I can't write r equals y over x because if I solve, then y equals rx.
That doesn't help me because I still have a polar form in there.
So that's not going to help me any.
But, as we've done before, we can square both sides.
It's r squared equals the tangent squared of theta.
So I've just squared the right-hand side.
And the left-hand side, let's just write that down always, r squared equals x squared plus y squared.
So this time around, you know, remember to write those two equations, your two green equations, the ones that you should know.
So r squared, I now have x squared plus y squared.
And the tangent of that angle, that's just going to be y squared over x squared.
So let's just simplify this a little bit.
Let's just write it in a neater way.
So I'm going to have y squared, that is x squared.
And I have x squared plus y squared there.
So I've just brought the x squared over to the other side and just flipped it around.
So I have y squared equals x to the power of 4 plus x squared y squared.
I'm going to bring that over to this side, subtracting from both sides.
So that's going to be minus x squared y squared.
That equals x to the power of 4.
I can take out y squared as a common factor.
So I'm left with 1 minus x squared.
So that equals x over 4.
So I've got y squared equals x to the power of 4 over 1 minus x squared.
And I can take the square root of that.
So plus minus this x to the power of 4 and then over 1 minus x squared.
So certainly we can take out that x to the power of 4 as just an x squared.
So we'll have 1 over 1 minus x squared.
And 1 minus x squared.
Remember, that's 1 minus x, 1 plus x.
But nothing we can do about that.
So we've got our y on the one side.
And that's what we were aiming for.
So r equals the tangent of theta.
We have a rectangular equation for 3.8.
These are beautiful problems.
If you do these, it really shows that you understand the work.
So show that the, let's neaten that up.
That looks horrible.
Show that the polar coordinate point P, 3, 3 quarters pi, that that point lies on the polar equation.
R equals 3 times the sine of twice the angle.
So let's just see what happens here on the left hand side.
So this is r, that's theta.
So we're going to have 3 on the left hand side.
On the right hand side, we're going to have 3 times the sine of twice that angle.
So twice times 3 pi over 4.
So if we do that, that's 3 over 2 pi.
And that's negative 1.
So that's negative 1 times 3.
That's negative 3.
And 3 is most definitely not equal to negative 3.
So is this point really on the line?
Well, it kind of is, if you remember that.
I can go in a direction.
So if we go 3 quarters pi, counterclockwise from the positive x-axis, that's where we go.
And then from the origin, on that angle, we go in the positive direction, 3.
What we could also go is another pi radians further.
So another half circle around.
So we're still at this line.
As far as this angle is concerned, we just have to go radius in the negative direction now.
So this point is exactly the same point as negative 3.
Negative 3 comma.
So I have 3 pi over 4.
And I've just got to add to that another pi.
So that's 4 pi over 4.
That's still the same thing.
So I'm now left with 7 pi over 4.
So if I do that, 7 pi over 4 from this angle, this point P.
So 3 quarters pi plus another pi that leaves me with 7 pi over 4.
So that's still the exact same point.
So I still have my radius there.
And I still have my angle there.
Now let's do the left-hand side, which is now going to be negative 3.
And is that equal to, so I've got to have 3 times the sine of twice this angle, twice this 7 pi, 7 pi over 4.
So if I do that, that's still negative 1.
So I have the fact that negative 3 equals negative 3.
This point and this point is exactly the same point.
And you've got to visualize that in your head.
So I'm going to a certain angle.
I'm going in the positive 3 units along that angle.
But if I add half a circle to that, I'm going in the opposite direction now.
And if in that direction I go in sort of in the negative 3 units, I'm still ending up at the same point.
So this point is indeed on this polar equation.
So that was such a beautiful problem.
We've just got to do another one.
And I kid you not, it's going to be exactly the same.
But just repeat these.
They're going to stick in your head when you see that one in the exam or whatever.
No problems whatsoever.
Show that the, gee whiz, where, that the.
Show that the polar coordinate point P, 3 comma 3 pi over 2, lies on the polar equation.
R squared equals 9 times the sine of the angle.
So you plug that in, the left hand side is going to be positive, the right hand side is going to be negative.
So no, it doesn't look like that point is on that polar equation, that the curve of that polar equation.
So we've got to think, like we did before, that we can express this point in another way.
So we're going to go in the sort of negative that units for radius.
But we've just got to take this 3 pi over 2, and we add another pi to that.
Now we're going, sort of pointing in the opposite direction.
Now the radius just has to be also in the opposite direction.
So to make this simple, we put it over the same denominator there.
So we have 5 pi over 2.
5 pi over 2.
So negative 3, 5 pi over 2, that is the exact same point.
Those two points are exactly the same point.
And now if we plug it in, on the left hand side, we're going to get negative 3, negative 3 squared.
I hope I didn't say it was going to be certain signs on the left hand side.
Forgive me if I did that.
But negative 3 times negative 3, that's going to be a positive 9.
And on this side, I have 9 times the sine of this angle, 5 pi over 2.
What do you think the sine of 5 pi over 2 is?
It is 1.
And 9 equals 9.
So yes, this point is indeed on the curve of this polar equation.
So two more problems to go.
And I know I told you, use this in Wolfram language to sketch these things out.
You know, I see very little sort of point in doing these.
But come on, these two are fun.
So at least, let me just show you.
I'm still going to use the Wolfram language.
But let's do this.
Sketch the polar equation.
R equals 1 plus cosine of theta.
So I have a polar equation there.
I've got to sketch this curve.
And what you've seen there, I've drawn somewhat to scale what's going on here.
And what I'm going to do is just plug in values for theta there such that I go up in these increments.
Remember, going from the positive x-axis counterclockwise in pi over 8 units.
I'm going to go pi over 8, pi over 4, 3, pi over 8, pi over 2.
So I'm just going all the way around sort of those so that I can make this little table so that I plug all these in and I get values for R.
You see why I don't like doing this?
Because that's really, you know, you learn that, you know, make a little table and draw something.
That's really school stuff.
So I don't know.
I've got mixed feelings about this.
I don't like to do it.
But this one at least.
The end result is what I like.
And as much as I like, you know, these kind of curves, they're quite fun to use.
So let's go to the Warframe language.
And what do we have here?
So what I'm going to do is just create all these values.
0, pi over 8, 2 pi over 8, 3 pi over 8, 4 pi over 8, which is pi over 2, etc.
I'm just going to create all of them.
And we use the table function for that.
So I'm saying 8 times pi over 8.
And A is going to go from 0 to 16.
So 0 times pi over 8, that's just 0.
So we're starting on the 0 line.
Then A goes to 1.
So we have 1 pi over 8.
And you'll see now what the end result is.
So what the table function does is give it a little expression there to work out.
And then over what values of A, because I've used A there, but you can use anything else you want.
So it's just going to iterate over those.
A equals 0, then 1, then 2, then 3, all the way to 16.
And it's going to return all of those values as a list object.
And I'm just going to assign that to a computer variable called theta.
And there we have.
We have 0, pi over 8.
And then 2 pi over 8, 3 pi over 8, 4 pi over 8, 5 pi over 8, 6 pi over 8, 7 pi over 8.
And this is simplifying those.
And now I'm going to use the association thread function.
So I'm going to thread these two things together.
I'm going to pass theta to this equation, 1 plus the cosine of the angle.
So you see there, the 1 plus the cosine of angle.
I'm wrapping that as a parameter to the n function so that I get these numerical values back.
So threading means take my values that I have here, theta, so it's all those values,
0, pi over 8, 2 pi over 8, 3 pi over 8, and pass them to this function.
And the n just means express this in the numerical approximation terms for me.
So we can see all of them.
So 0 is going to end up at 2.
So if I plug in pi equals 0, r is going to end up at 2.
If I plug in pi over 8, I'm going to be going to 1.923.
If I plug in pi over 4 into 1 plus the cosine of the angle,
so 1 plus the cosine of pi over 4, that's going to give me 1.7.
So I have all these values.
So I'm just going to drag that to my other screen so that we can just start plugging these in.
So you've seen how to do that.
Of course, this is going to be available on GitHub as well.
So you can just save this to your free version on the Wolfram Cloud,
and you can just, you know, sort of look at that.
So let's just do this laborious task.
And again, I have mixed feelings of this.
So 0 is going to be, let's just choose a different color.
So 0 is going to be at 2.
So we're there.
Okay, so pi over 8 is going to be 1.9.
So if I go to pi over 8, the radius is going to be sort of 1.9.
So this becomes a bit, on this scale, a bit difficult to do.
So it's going to be there.
Okay, so if I go to pi over 4, I'm at 1.7.
So that's a bit there.
And if I go 3 pi over 8, that's 1.3.
So that's even less.
And if I go to pi over 2, I'm at exactly 1.
So it's sort of this arch up, and then we're going to come down.
5 pi over 8, I'm at 0.6.
I should have drawn this bigger, shouldn't I?
This is getting ridiculous.
And 3 quarters pi, that's 0.3.
So it's even closer.
And if I get to 7 pi, that's even closer.
And then if I get to pi, that's at 0.
And then I'm going to go a little bit out again, a little bit further out.
And if I get to 3 pi over 2, where are we?
3 pi over 2, that's going to be at 1.
So we're going to be up there.
13 pi over 2, we're going to be at slightly more.
And then we're going to be at 1.7, slightly more.
And slightly more.
So there we go.
So let me just show you.
It's this cardioid pattern.
So all the way around, all the way around, and then in.
Isn't that neat?
So of course, do it in the Wolfram language and have a proper graph.
But there we have a cardioid pattern.
So the next problem is going to be exactly the same.
Let's tackle that one.
Last problem.
We're going to sketch this almost same exact curve of this polar equation.
But instead of 1 plus cosine of theta, we're going to have 1 plus twice the cosine of theta.
Let's see how this affects what we're doing here.
So let's bring up the Wolfram language.
And I've done exactly the same.
By the way, you know the previous problem?
Let's just plot that so you can see what it should look like.
It's done beautifully.
The card weight pattern there.
So let's do the same thing.
So we're still doing this association thread.
So all these values of theta that we have, 0, pi over 8, 2 pi over 8, 3 pi over 8, all the way around.
And I'm passing all those values to this function, 1 plus 2 times the cosine of the angle.
This expression, I should say.
And I'm getting a numerical approximation value of that.
So if we do that, there are all the values.
So when theta is 0, 1 plus 2 times the cosine of that is going to be 3.
And then 1 plus 2 times the cosine of pi over 8 is going to leave us at 2.8.
And we go, and we go, and we go.
Well, instead of doing that, because my graphs look so ugly when drawn by hand, let me show you what it looks like.
So there it's the polar plot is the function that we're using.
We're saying 1 plus twice the cosine of theta, and we're going to let theta go from 0 to 2 pi.
So we're going to let it go all the way around, counterclockwise, and lo and behold, that's what we're going to get.
So we're going to go out to 3 units this time when pi is 0, all the way around.
So it's almost like a cardioid, but it actually, it comes down and makes a little loop there and comes back out again.
So do that by hand, and I'm sure in the vast majority of courses, you are going to be asked to draw this by hand.
It's making a little table as if you're a little kiddie.
Now I'm being very terrible.
Now I'm being terrible, really.
But anyway, just come back to the Warframe language.
Check it out.
Use the polar plot function.
Play around with that table function.
Table function is a very powerful function in the Warframe language.
And check it out.
So that's all the problems for this problem.
It was actually quite long, but they are fun.
And just to convert to polar coordinates, you're going to see in calculus, that helps you out so much.
It's just such a useful thing to be able to do.
So do these homework problems.
Do some more.
Leave me a comment down below if you've got some problems that you want.
Perhaps we can make some more videos.
You make a video.
Let me know about it.
And I'll put it down in the description below as well.
Do what you want.
Just enjoy these because they really are a bunch of fun.
And it's a very powerful skill to have to do these things in polar coordinates.
