And so it's already time for the third lecture. We're going to look at powers, and those powers
are also going to include roots, and then finally add some logarithms. Now we use logarithms as well
as powers all the time in data science, so this is a very important lecture. So let's start with
powers. Such an important aspect of algebra. And let's start with a little example, and if I might
say something like 3 to the power 2, what I mean by that is I have 3 and I multiply it by itself
twice. So we have the number that we want to multiply by itself, and in the superscript we put
the number that we want to. Now the number of times we want to multiply this with. So for pure
definition we'll usually write something like x to the power a, and remember from last time x would
usually be used when we refer to any real number, and a would be one of those symbols that we use
when we think about whole numbers. And so in this instance our x would be 3, which is a real number,
but more importantly our a is a 2, and so that is a whole number. And this is just going to say
multiply x by itself a times. And now we have words that we apply to these different parts. This is
called the base. Let's put base, and this is called the power. Let's put that there. This is the power.
It's also known as the exponent in some textbook. And so that's what we mean by powers.
So we have a little definition there. So let's put a nice little arrow there for us, and we're always
going to remember that's the base, that's our power, and we just want to multiply this base by itself.
And how many times do we want to do that? Well, we want to do it eight times. And so let's have
another little example. Let's do something like 4 to the power 2. So this is going to be raised,
multiply 4 by itself twice, and that's going to be something like 16. It's just a shorthand way
of writing all of this. Now that might make sense, you know, if we had to say 4 to the power 94,
you know, writing out 4 times 4 times 94 times takes a bit of time. But we want to do something
a little bit more exciting when it comes to these powers. And so we have the properties of powers.
Now the first properties that I want to talk to you about is the properties of the powers,
let's write powers of 0 and 1. These are very important and you'll come across them
every now and again. So let's do a couple of these. The first one is if I take any base and I raise it to
the power 1. What I'm saying is I'm multiplying something by itself only once. It's just that
number itself. And so nothing is going to change. We just still have the number, that number which
was in the base, which is the base. The second one is if I take anything and I raise it to the power 0,
anything raised to the power 0, we're going to define as being 1. And I'm going to say here,
unless something. And I'm going to say unless x is equal to 0. And that's going to be something very
specific and we'll talk about that when we talk about 0 to the power 0. So let's assume for this
assume for this moment that x is any real number, but it's not equal to 0. And if we do, if we do take
that exponent, if we do raise this to the power 0, we are going to define that to be the number 1.
And also if we take 0 and we raise it to any power, that is always just going to be 0.
And I'm going to say unless a is equal to 0. Again, I'm referring here to 0 to the power 0,
there was referring to 0 to the power 0. So let's just have that. I'm going to have 0 to the power 0.
We're going to say that that's undefined. That is not something that we define in mathematics to be
a real number. Now, just be careful. If you use certain computer languages, if you say 0 to the
power 0 is going to give you this property up here and it's going to tell you that it's 1. But in
mathematical terms, if we raise anything 0 to the power 0, we're going to say that's undefined.
But anything other than 0 raised to the power 0, we're going to define that to be equal to 1.
And so those are the properties of powers. The first one we're looking at and that's the powers
involving 0 and 1. So let's talk about powers involving products. So let's say products.
Products of powers.
So let's have a look at that one. Now we're going to have two beautiful examples here. We're going to
say x to the power a. That's our first power. And then we multiply that by x to the power b.
And do notice that we have the same base. That is so important for you to remember. The base is the
same. The powers are different, but the base is the same. And in between these two, we have a little
multiplication symbol. I'll just denote that with a center dot. And what we're going to say is this
is equal to x to the power a plus b. I'm going to add those two exponents to each other.
And so let's have a look at a little example of this. So let's put our example down here.
I suppose what we should do is just to show that we have a definition.
So there's our definition. If we see the same base and we multiply these two powers,
I can add those two powers. I can add those two exponents. And let's have a little example.
I'm going to take 2 and I'm going to say 2 to the power 3. And I'm going to multiply that by 2 to the
power 4. And immediately I'm going to say, well, the bases are the same. And I'm multiplying these
two powers. And so I can add those exponents. So I'm going to say that's 3 plus 4. And that equals
2 to the power 7. To the power 7. And let's just check if this is indeed so. Let's just multiply.
We're going to write all of these out. So 2 to the power 3, that's going to be 2 times 2 times 2
2 multiplied by, and then 4 times. 2 times 2 times 2 times 2. And by our original definition there,
we're going to say, well, there's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. That is 2 multiplied by itself 7 times.
And lo and behold, we have the fact that if we have the same base, we can, and we're doing a
multiplication there, most importantly, we're not doing addition on these. We're doing multiplication of
these two powers. Then we can add those two exponents. That saves us a lot of time. Now,
what I just want to say here, what you are not supposed to do. So it's very important to put this
in because we have to think about those. What if we have something like x to the power a, and let's have
y. Let's make that y to the power b, for instance. Can I look, can I do that? Can I say that's
multiplication? And now I can simply write x times y, and I'm going to have a plus b. Well, we're going
to put a big line through that to say that that is not equal to each other. We can only use this
product of powers if we have the same base. And x and y, now it's a variable that's a variable. It
might be that they hold the same values, but we usually mean by that is that these are not the same
numbers. Then I cannot do this. This rule is only there for the basis being exactly the same.
And so let's go on to some more exciting examples, because the more of these you do,
you know, the the better and the easier it gets. So let's have something like 2 to the power 3.
Let's have something like multiply that by, I'm just going to put dots, multiply that by 4.
Let's multiply that by x to the power 6. Let's multiply that by y to the power 5. Let's multiply
that by x to the power 4. Let's multiply that by y. There's a long expression, and it's actually a
single term if you think about it, because I don't have addition or subtraction between different terms.
It's just one big term, and a single term or more than one term gives me an expression.
So let's rewrite this, because we can rewrite 4 in a different way. Let's write 2 to the power 3.
And indeed we can write 4 as 2 to the power 2, because 2 times 2 is 4. There's nothing wrong there.
And then let's look at the x's. There's an x to the power 6 times an x to the power 4.
Certainly the two bases are the same, so I can add those two exponents.
6 plus 4. Here I have y. I have y to the power 5 and y. The two bases are the same.
Now if I just have y, I'm going to make use of this property right up here and say
that's just the same as saying y to the power 1. Because if I take anything to the power 1, it stays
that thing. So here I have 5 plus 1 is 6. So 5 plus 1. And for this, 2 to the power 3 times 2 to the power 2.
The twos are the same. I can add these two. That's going to be 2 to the power 5.
And I'm going to have x to the power 10. And I'm going to have y to the power 6.
And I can also rewrite this as 32. x to the power 10. y to the power 6. Because 2 to the power 5.
2 raised to the power 5. That's just 32. So look at some of these examples. If you do a couple of them,
you know, it helps cement your understanding of this idea of defining powers and this idea of the products of powers.
So this means we can also talk about the quotient of powers. Quotions. The quotient of powers.
Now here we defined x to the power a multiplied by x to the power b. But what if we have
x to the power a divided by x to the power b. In other words, that's just going to be
x to the power a over x to the power b. And now look at these. I have the same basis. There's an x,
there's an x. And what I'm now going to do is says that I can subtract a minus b.
And that will only be, and usually in mathematics, I want to show you that because you'll see it so
often in higher mathematics, we say if and only if. And we in mathematics have invented this word
IFF. If and only if. Again, we're lazy, so we have this nice abbreviation. If and only if.
Now what I remember is I cannot divide by zero. So how can I get zero in the denominator?
Well, first of all, if b was zero, that would not help. Because any number other than zero,
raised to the power of zero is one. It's definitely not zero. The only way that we can get this if the
base itself is zero. So I'm going to say if and only if x is not equal to zero. Because if is equal
to zero and then b is anything but zero, this is going to be zero and I cannot divide by zero. So I
just have to remember that when it comes to the quotient as opposed to the powers. So I'm just going to put
it to the slightly to the side. They haven't left enough space for myself. But do remember,
I've got the same base divided by the same base. And that means I can do the subtraction of these
exponents a minus b, a minus b. I just have to remember that I cannot divide by zero. So now that
we've looked at that, let's look at a little example, another little example. So let's say there's our
example, we're going to say something like, let's do two to the power five. And I'm going to divide
that by say two to the power three. Now I see that the bases are the same, which means I can look at
these exponents and I can consider subtraction five minus two. And that equals this, or that should be
a three. That's two to the power three. So five minus three. And five minus three is two. So two to the
power two. And that equals just four. And let's look at this another way. I've got two times two
times two times two times two. And I'm dividing that by two to the power three. So let's do this.
Two times two times two. Now you might remember from school is that if we have this multiplication,
numerator, denominator, we can start cancelling out. I'm going to cancel out that two with that two,
that two with that two, that two with that two. And so in the denominator, I just have left a one.
So it's something divided by one. And the numerator, I've got two times two. In other words, I've got four
divided by one. And that equals this four as we had in our little example.
So let's do another little example. We'll say, try and do as many of these as you can. Let's do something
like two to the power of five. Let's have times three to the power of six. Let's do five to the
power of five. And I'm going to divide that all by, say, three to the power of five. And I'm going to do
five to the power of four. So first of all, let's look at the numerator. I've got a base of two, three,
and five. Nothing I can do there because these bases are all different. If I look at the denominator,
three and five for the bases, I can do nothing about that. But I do see I have the same base
in the numerator there and denominator there, numerator there and denominator there. So let's
see what we can do about that. Two I can do nothing with. I'm still left with the two to the power
of five, raised to the power of five. But here I can make use of my quotient rule. I'm going to say
that's three. The bases are the same. I can do subtraction of these powers. So that's six minus five.
And I have multiplied by five. The bases are the same. I can do subtraction. Five minus four.
Five minus four. That's going to equal, well, two to the power of five is going to be thirty-one. You
can write it whichever way you want. And I'm going to multiply it. Thirty-two, I should say. Where is my
arithmetic? Two to the power of five is thirty-two. Three raised to the power of one. And five raised to the
power of one. So I've got thirty-two times three times five. And if you use your calculator, please do,
you should get four hundred and eighty. Four hundred and eighty. Let's do another example. Let's do
something with, let's do something with some symbols in them. Let's do four. Let's do times x to the power
six. Let's do y to the power three. Let's do z to the power two. And we're going to divide this all by,
let's divide that by two. Let's divide that by x to the power four, y to the power three, and z.
How should we go about that? Well, first of all, we have a base, a base, a base, a base. They're not the
same, which is what we mean by these variables. The same goes for the denominator, and they're not the
same. Nothing we can do that about that. But we see in the numerator and denominator, we have
similar bases. First of all, four divided by two is just two. You can do that. But you can also note
that four can be written as two to the power two. Two to the power one can be written. Anything to the
power one just stays that number. And so I'll have two and two minus one is one. And I just have two left.
But in this instance, it's so easy. You can see four divided by two is going to be two.
Let's look at the x's. Six and a four. Base and base is the same. So I can do six minus four.
I have a y and a y. So I can do three minus three. Three minus three. I have a z. And so I'll have two
minus. It'll also be a one. Two minus one. Whenever you see a variable on its own, do remember it's always
to the power one. And so four divided by two is just my two that I have there.
X to the power two. Y to the power three minus three is zero. And z to the power two minus one is
one. And just to simplify all of this, I'm going to say two is going to be an x squared. And I do
remember that anything to the power zero is just one. So it's multiplied by one. And z raised to the power
one. Well, that's this z. And so I'm left with two x squared z. So please do see if you can get
more of these examples. They are great to do. Let's talk about negative powers next.
I'm still busy with my properties of these powers. Let's talk about something
very important. And that's going to be negative powers.
So let's have a look at, I suppose, let's start with an example, just to tell you what I'm talking
about. Let's have x to the power two. And I'm going to divide that by x to the power three.
And you'll say, well, base and base, I can do x to the power two minus three, but that's negative one.
So I have x to the power negative one. And now I have to think, what do I do if I have negative powers?
How do I define that? So let's have a look. I'm going to take any number x, and I'm going to
raise it to the power negative a. And I'm just going to put a little caveat here. Remember, x now,
a is going to be a positive number. So when I say negative a, I really truly mean a negative number.
Now, of course, later on, we can make a negative number. And the negative times a negative is a
positive. So this will all just turn out to be a positive. But for now, let's just make it truly a
negative number. And we're going to say that that is equal to the following. That's going to be one
over x to the power a. That's how we define this x raised to the negative number. That's one over
x to the power a. And once again, I cannot divide by zero. And so I just have to have this little
thing if and only if x is not equal to zero. If x is equal to zero, zero to the power anything that's
not zero is going to be zero. Zero to the power anything is zero. Except if it's zero to the power
zero, which is not defined, remember. So I cannot divide by zero. So I can't have zero to the power
negative a. That's not going to work for me. But I do want you to remember from school, just remember
something called the reciprocal. So if I have a number four, it's reciprocal is going to be one
over four. This was actually four over one. And I just flipped those around, such as that when I
multiply these, I'm going to get equal, I'm going to get this equal to one. That's something a bit more
advanced that we can talk about at a later stage. But this reciprocal, so that if I have a look at this
once again, that this is just going to be one over x. So I can take any number, any number, raise it to
the power negative one. If it's one negative one, that's going to be the reciprocal of that number.
But now we can talk about what if it's negative two, negative three, etc. That is something else. I
just want to remind you of that. Now let's put this as a definition because that's quite important.
This is how we define negative powers. So I want you to remember that
x raised to the power negative a. Now a is a positive number times a negative. That's truly a negative.
We're going to write it as such. So let's look at some more examples just to make this clear.
Let's solve two to the power negative three. How would I go about that? Because, you know,
if we just look at our definition, how do I multiply two by itself negative three times?
That doesn't make sense. So we're going to make use of this definition of ours for negative powers.
Well, we're going to say, well, I can just rewrite this as two to the power three,
but I'm just going to put that in the denominator. Now it becomes positive three.
And I just put that in the denominator. That's going to be one over eight.
And that's going to be 0.125, 0.125. And so that is such an important thing for us now. How do we work
with this example where we have a negative in our exponent, a negative in our power? Well,
we do have a definition for that. We bring it down into the denominator such that we can still work
out a value, a solution to this problem. And that means we can also have something like this. What if
I were to write something like this? One over, let's make it x to the power negative three. How am I going
to solve that? I have x to the power negative three over there. And what I have to do is just to think
about this, this at least in reverse order. That if I have x to the power summing, I can rewrite this,
if this is in my denominator, rewrite it in this way. So I'm just going in this direction.
So that is going to be, well, take whatever is in the denominator. That is whatever is in the
denominator. And I want to bring it into the numerator, just, you know, bring it over to the
side. But I do have to take that a and I multiply it by negative one. So I'm going to multiply this by
negative one. And so negative three times negative one, well, that's positive three. And that's going to
be x to the power three. So if I have that negative down here in the denominator, that is nothing
other than x raised to the power positive three. So this is actually, I think, a very powerful example
that I want you to really think about and really concentrate on. Because that allows us to solve
something like this. What if I have this very weird fraction, one divided by a quarter, one divided by
one over four? Well, let's think about this. Let's think it through my numerator. Let's keep that one.
But I have this one over four. There's a four. Can I not rewrite that as four to the power negative one?
Let's have a look at this. What is four to the power negative one? Well, that is just going to be,
well, bring that down into the denominator and one over that four to the power one. That is just a
quarter. So that's another way to write a quarter. And there we have a quarter. There's another way to
rewrite it. And now I'm going to make use of this example, just putting all of my definition in reverse
order. So I'm going to have whatever was in my denominator. And I'm going to take that power,
and I'm going to multiply it by negative one, negative one times negative one is positive one.
And that equals just four. A very long way just to write four. So take some time and look at these
examples. They are very, very important when it comes to negative powers. Let's have a look at the
next thing on our agenda. And that's going to be the power of powers, which sounds a little odd. But I
like to not use the term exponents here. You'll see these written as exponents, et cetera. I like to say,
powers are powers, powers of a power. And let's define that. I'm immediately going to write x to
the power a, and all of that is to the power b. How do we define that? Now, this is not x to the power a,
and then multiplied by x to the power b. That's what we had before. This is x to the power a raised to
the power b. Well, that's just going to be x to the power a times b. x to the power a times b.
Let's put that as a definition.
Very important. And we do have to distinguish that from x to the power a times x to the power b.
That's not what we're saying. We're saying take x to the power a and multiply it by itself b times.
Multiply it by itself b times. So the easiest way to consider this is to look at an
example. Let's have 2 to the power 3, all of this raised to the power 2. And think about this.
I'm just taking this and I'm multiplying it by itself twice. So that would be 2 to the power 3
times 2 to the power 3. And now we're back to one of those original laws that we have.
This is the same base and I can just add these two. So that's going to be 2 to the power 6. But notice
that would just be 3 times 2. That is 2 to the power 3 times 2. Let's put 3 times 2. And that's
2 to the power 6. So these can be very confusing. It's not that I'm multiplying 2 to the power 3 and
then I have 2 to the power 4 or something like that and I have to add the exponents. No, this is this whole
value which if you think 2 to the power 3 is 8. 8 to the power 2. So 2 to the power 3 is actually my base.
And I'm multiplying that by itself twice. And we can then multiply these two powers.
Let's just do another simple little example. Let's have something like 2 to the power 3.
I'm going to raise that to the power 4. Well, that's just going to be 2 to the power 3 times 4. And
that's 2 to the power 12. That's a very simple concept, but we can get a little bit confused by this.
Let's just rewrite this. That's going to be 2 to the power 3 times 2 to the power 3 times 2 to the power 3
times 2 to the power 3. Now these are all the bases are the same, so I have to add those.
That's going to be 2 to the power 3 plus 3 plus 3 plus 3 plus 3 and that's 2 to the power 12.
Let's bring those negatives in when it comes to an example. Let's have something like
2 raised to the power negative 3 and I'm going to raise that to the power 2.
Well, that'll be just 2 to the power negative 3 times 2 to the power negative 3. Or I can just
remember that I can multiply these. That's going to be 2 to the power negative 6.
And that's going to be 1 over 2 to the power 6. There's so many ways that we can write this.
And 2 to the power 6 is of course 64. So that's 1 over 64. And again, you can rewrite this.
If you divide that with a calculator, hopefully you get 0.015625. Check that in your calculator,
make sure that that is correct. So here we can still make use of this power of, you know, power of powers
in my power. Yeah, I'm doing multiplication. I'm doing powers of my power. One more example.
These are just so much fun and they're so important to work with. Let's bring in something like this.
Let's take 3. I'm going to say x to the power 2. So x squared and y cubed, y to the power 3.
And let's take all of this to the power 2. Well, that's going to be 3 to the power 2. Now,
remember this is 1. So it's 1 times 2 is 2. x to the power 2 times 2 is 4. And then y,
3 times 2 is 6. And there we go. So we can rewrite this. 9 x to the power 4, y to the power 6.
Very simple to do if you think about it. Let's go on to power. Let's call it power roots. There's so
many names. Look in different textbooks, you'll find different names. And so one that I immediately
want to show you is, let's go for this. Let's say x to the power a divided by b. Now that is something
very special. In our power, we have a fraction. We have a fraction. And that is actually called,
I'm going to call this whole thing a radical. Let's just call this we have here as a radical.
And we have to think about what do we do. What do we do with this? How do we define all of this?
In actual fact, I think, let's go there. We've got different names for these.
This a in the numerator of the power, we're going to call this the radicand.
And the denominator, this b, we're going to call this the index.
So do look out for different names in different textbooks. But let's stick with these for now.
And I'm going to say that this is, this is a radical. We have a number raised to the power
of a fraction. So let's have a look at an example. And let's do something very familiar. You might have
seen this before, x to the power one half. And you might have noticed that that is rewritten
as a square root. And we put a little two there, but usually we'll just leave that two. And then we
have x to the power one. So what happens to this index, it goes right there when it comes to the root.
And we take the numerator there, and that stays the power of whatever we have there. And that's
usually just written as the square root of x. Now do remember, x must be non-negative for us to
still have a real number when we define the square root of, of um, n number. Let's have another little
example. I'm going to have x to the power two thirds. And so what I'm going to do is I'm going to take my
x, my base. I'm going to keep my numerator there. And then the three, the denominator, is going to go
into this root. So that's what we're going to call a cube root of x squared. So finally we can have,
let's write this, this is still going to be my x. I'm going to keep this raised to the power a,
and then I'm going to have the root right there. I'm going to put the index right there. So I'm keeping
my radicant, there's my base, and my index goes there. Let's put that as a definition.
And by definition here, I just mean this is the things that we really have to,
to remember. Now one thing we have to talk about, I suppose as an example we can do that,
is if we have the same, if we look at this power that's a fraction, if those things are the same.
So let's do a very easy example. I'm going to have the square root of x times the square root of y.
What am I writing here? I'm saying x to the power a half,
times y to the power a half. Now I don't want to confuse you before. Remember when we could
add these halves to each other, but then we need these two to be exactly the same.
So don't make that mistake. But what we can do here, is we can rewrite this
as the square root of x times y. In other words, I'm going to have x times y to the power a half.
So that means these two are the same. And I'm multiplying, then I can go ahead and do this.
So again, a very, very powerful example. Now one of those that we have to remember. Let's do it as an
example with numbers in it. So let's have 2 to the power a half times 3 to the power a half.
But remember that's the square root of 2 times the square root of 3. And I can rewrite this as
the square root of 2 times 3, which is going to be the square root of 6. Just one of those things,
I think, that is just useful for us to remember to get used to. Let's build on that. Let's do another
little example. This one might be a bit more difficult. Let's take x to the power 2 thirds.
And I'm going to take y to the power, let's make it 4 thirds. Now, what do we do? These two are not
the same. Those two are not the same. Can we make sense of this? Well, yes, we can rewrite this. We can
rewrite this in a number of ways, actually. Now remember here, we can take x, and we can keep that
radican, that 2. And this is going to be a cube root. And we're going to multiply that by another
cube root. There's the 3. So we're going to put a cube root there, y to the power 4. We've got the
same roots here, cube root, cube root. That is going to just be the same as taking the cube root
of x squared times y to the power 4. Now let's just think about that just a little bit here. Can I make
this look like that? So I do remember that these have to be the same for me in order, you know, to
use these examples. And let's have that. I can rewrite this as x to the power 2 to the power a third.
Now look at these two. They are exactly the same. I do remember what I do have up here. I can do a
times b, a times b, two times a third is two thirds. Nothing wrong there. And here I can take y
to the power 4 to the power a third. Four times a third is four thirds. No problem there. And now
I have a third and a third. Can you see there was a half and a half? Now I can make use of this. So
that a third, which means it is a cube root. And I'm left with anything to the power one is just that
thing. So I still have my x squared there. And I have my y to the power 4 there exactly as we had
up there. So I do remember if I can, you know, if I can rewrite this so that I have these same
radicals. There's to the power one over three to the power one over three, which is nothing other than
a cube root. I can make use of these, the law that we're trying to develop here. There's my x squared,
there's my y to the power 4. And even though these two don't look like each other, they are actually
the same. And I can make use of this very idea. And so what do we have here? What is the law that
we're trying to develop here? We're trying to understand what we can do when these indices
are the same. Remember the denominator is my index. There was my index two and two. They're the same.
There's my index three and three. They are the same. And I might have to do some extra work to remember
that two thirds is two times a third. Four thirds is four times a third. And I have the exact same.
And now we have three and three. We have three and three. We're thinking about this idea.
What do we do when this index, when the indices are the same? Well, then we can have all of these
examples. Let's do one more example. And this time we're just going to do division. So what if we had
two to the power a third and we're going to divide that by is divided that by three to the power a third?
Now, first of all, we can rewrite this, of course, that's two to the power a third
divided by three to the power a third. Now, remember, this is to the power third,
which we have mathematical notation for. We just write that that's the cube root of two
divided by the cube root of three. And we can make use of this rule where as same as with multiplication,
we can put this under the same cube root. So that would be two divided by three. Remember,
that's going to be the same as saying two over three all to the power a third. It means I'm applying
this to the power of third to both the numerator and the denominator. And so these are actually quite
easy to do and they are exactly the same thing as we did with multiplication. What I do want you to
remember though is the following, what you cannot do. If, for instance, we have, let's do, let's do the
ath root of x plus or minus the ath root of y. That is not equal to, if I do the ath root of x plus or minus y.
That this rule only applies to multiplication and to division. It does not apply to addition
or subtraction or subtraction. Only multiplication and division.
So let's do this example. Let's do a to the power of four over three and we're going to divide that by
b. Let's divide that by seven to the power seven over three. And you might think, well,
now I'm stuck. It's not as if I have a third and a third and it's division or multiplication. Yeah,
it is division. And so I think I want to make use of this rule, but I do not have the same power.
There's four over three and three over three. But what I do want you to recognize is the following,
that I can write this as a to the power of four to the power a third. And let's bring our ruler in
and let's divide this by b to the power of seven to the power of a third. And then we remember our law
where we had exactly as we had up here. We had something to the power of a third, something to
the power of a third, something to the power of a third, something to the power of a third,
so we can make use of this law. But I do want you to remember if I have a to the power m
to the power n, it's just going to be a to the power m times n. And so four times a third is four
thirds and seven times a third is seven thirds. But now I have a power a third a third. So I can
rewrite this as a to the power four divided by b to the power seven, all to the power third. Or if I
want to rewrite that as a cube root, that's going to be a to the power four divided by b to the power
seven. And no matter which way around I write it, we try we mean the same thing. So don't be fooled
when these powers are not exactly the same. Look at this denominator here. Look at the index here. The
index is the same. And hence I can make use of this law that we learned about before so that I have
these same powers. Please do remember that it is not applicable when I have addition or subtraction.
And then I want you to remember a couple of these. They're just useful. Later on, we're going to
learn about factoring, etc. And these might make slightly more sense, but it's just worthwhile to
remember these. If I have something like m and I have the ath root of say x plus or let's say plus or
minus n and the ath root of x. And you can see this is the same. The ath root of x, the ath root of x.
And what I can then just do is bring that m plus or minus n out on its own. And what I'm actually
doing is taking these out as a common factor, but we will learn about that later. And that is going to
be the ath root of x. So it's just one of common thing that you might want to remember. The next common
one I want you to remember is if I have the square root of a constant times the square root of another
constant. Now that's going to be the square root of c times c. And I'm making use of this exact same
law that we had up here. That is going to equal the square root of c squared. And remember I'm writing
nothing other than here the c to the power 2 over 2. That's what I'm writing here. And that's just going
to be c because 2 divided by 2 is just 1 and c to the power 1. But what I do have to remember that
it has to be the absolute value of c. Remember we can't take the square root of a negative number
when we just want to deal with real numbers. We don't consider the complex numbers. So we are talking
about the solution here if I take that the square root of c squared that I'm talking about the absolute
value of c or the positive version of c. One more that I want you to just to note if I have the ath
power of x. Remember that I can just rewrite this as x 1 over a. That's what we've been dealing with
all along. So that one you'll definitely know. And then if I have x to the power b a. Remember that's
this x to the power b over a. My radicant and my index is just different ways of writing it. And we've
been doing it all. We've been doing it there all along. Now the next big topic I want to talk to
you about is exponential expressions. Now what do I mean by that? Up until now we've taken some unknown
number x and we've raised it to a certain power. But what if this becomes the power? What if I have
something like a to the power x? Now we're going to say that that is going to be our variable.
This is going to be a constant. So it's a constant raised to the power variable. Here I had a variable
raised to the power a constant. So this is the other way around. The most important one that we have
actually is called the exponential function. And you'll see some textbooks talk about the exponential
function. And that is where this constant is Euler's number e. And we raise that to the power
x. We're going to call that the exponential function. Later on we'll talk about the difference
between expressions and functions. But for now just remember when we use the term exponential function
we're usually referring to this. But in more general terms I don't want this constant to be just the
number e. Euler's constant or identity. I can think of this a being any constant but I'm raising it
to the power of a variable. And so how do I deal with these? Now there are some properties to these.
And these are so important. Properties. There goes my pencil. That is so important. So let's have a
couple of these. I'm going to have a to the power x and I'm going to multiply that by a to the power y.
So what I'm saying this is a constant. This is a constant. That's a variable. That's a variable.
Very important here. My two constants are the same and I can simply keep them there and I can have
x plus y. And so that shouldn't be too surprising to you. Again if I have a to the power x and I divide
that by a to the power y. My bases are the same. So I can stick with my base which is a constant now.
And I just take x minus y. I do have to remember though that I cannot divide by zero. So I'm going
to say if and only if a is not equal to zero. I cannot divide by zero. What about something a to
the power x to the power y? Well this is going to be a to the power x times y. And you think that well
that's nothing that we haven't really seen before. Nothing that we haven't really seen before.
What about if I have a to the power x and I'm going to have b to the power x?
Now these are not the same but these two powers that I have, these two exponents that I have,
they are exactly the same. Well what I can do here is say a b and I raise those to the power x.
Let's see an example just to make sure that this last property does indeed hold at least by one
example. Three to the power four and I'm going to multiply that by two to the power four. I have
the fact that I have exactly the same values up there and I'm going to say well I can do this.
That's a three times a two which is a six to the power four. And use your calculator. I think that
should be about 1296. 1296. But think about this. Three to the power four. Check this on your calculator
as well. That's 81. Two to the power four that's 16 and 81 times 16. Lo and behold that should also be
1296. So check on that. Check on the fact that we have at least this one example where this would hold.
So we've had these properties of the exponents. I really want you to look at them
and do remember these. They come in so handy when we work with when we work with all kinds of data
analysis. Next important topic that we have spoken about before but I want to expand on that a little
bit here. I'm going to talk about logarithms. And so by definition let's see if we can remember what
that is. We have the log and we have a base. We're going to call that base b of x equals some value y.
What do I mean by that? Well that's going to hold if and only if. Do you like to use that term in
mathematics? We do. So if and only if we have that b to the power y equals x. What are we saying
with this? We're saying if we take if we think about a logarithm we're asking what must I raise
the base by to get this value? What must I raise b by to get x? What must I raise b by well by y
to get x? And let's put a little green arrow there because I always want you to think along these terms
that is such an important concept. And so let's put a little green arrow there. This is what we mean
by taking the log of a number. We're saying this base of the log to what must I raise this base by
to give me this value that I'm taking the logarithm of? Well the solution to that is why I must take
the base and multiply it by this or at least raise it to the power this number to give me this value.
And again as our little example do remember that if I take 10 to the power 3 that's 10 times 10 times
10 is going to be three zeros there that is going to be a thousand. So I can think what is the log
base 10 of 1000? Well I'm asking what must I raise 10 by to get a thousand? Well I must raise 10
by 3. So the log base 10 of a thousand is going to equal 3. Now a very important thing here if we
think about the base. What values can the base take? Well for us here we just want to keep the base
2, 3, 4 and we're going to go up. But we can also have other bases. A nice base for us would be e.
When the base is e that is going to be the natural logarithm. We're going to call that the natural log.
So we're going to write log base e of some value a. So that's an e and we have different notation for
that. Remember we just write ln of a. That will be the same as log base e. We have this ln for natural log.
Many computer languages we just write log and by log we mean base e or the natural log.
Now let's talk about properties. Properties of the logarithm. Very very important.
Now the first property I want to talk to you about is if I have log base, any base. Let's just keep that
base b. And I've got the multiplication of two values x and y. Now it is so important in data
science. I have a multiplication problem here. It would be so much easier to turn this into a. If
I just looked at that multiplication. Turn that into an addition problem. Well the logarithm helps me
turn a multiplication problem into an addition problem. Because this is equal to the log base b
of x plus the log base b of y. So I do have to have the same base. Base and base. And I have
multiplication there. I could also think of the log base b of something like x divided by y. Well that's
going to be the log base b of x minus the log base b that's got to stay the same of y. These are just two such
important aspects of algebra and we use them over and over and over again. So my base stays the same
and I've got to have multiplication or division there. That is the only way that it's going to work.
Or if you see this the bases are the same and I'm doing addition you can rewrite it as such. If I have the
basis are the same and I have subtraction between two logs then I can rewrite it as such. But I cannot
have x plus y here and x minus y there. That's usually where the confusion lies. It's got to be
multiplication here and I'm taking the logarithm of that multiplication. I turn that into the addition
of two separate logs. I turn division into the subtraction of two separate logs. The next one is
let's have log. I'm going to have base b and let's have a different number. I'm going to have a to the
power c. So I'm taking the log base b of a to the power c. Now what I can do there in that instance is
take this exponent and I can bring it to the front. That is going to equal c times
the log base b of a another very very important one. And then the last one I want to show you.
The last one of these laws. If I take a log and I have that to sum base b of a. I can change this
by saying the log base. Now let's make a different base. I'm going to make base c of a divided by
the log base c of b. And that's called the change of bases. Maybe I don't like the base b. I want to
change it to the base c. So I take my number that I'm taking the log of. There it is. But I'm changing
this to the log base c. But now I have to divide it by taking the log with this new base but of the
old base right there. So those are numbers. Apologies for it being on two separate pages. But those are
the four very important properties that you have to remember when it comes to logs. And again, as with
the exponents, these are so, so important for you to remember. So let's do a couple of examples just to
just to remind ourselves. I'm going to have the log base. Let's make it base 10. And I have the number
three times the number four. Well, that's going to be log base. I take keep that same base there.
And I have the log three plus the log base 10 of four. So let's have an example of the log base. Let's
keep it base 10 of three over four. And that is going to be the log base 10 of three minus the log
base 10 of four. I'm taking this fraction. I'm taking that product. And I can rewrite this as subtraction
and addition. Let's have another example. I'm going to take log base. Let's take it log base 10 of let's
make it 100 to the power three. Now I do remember I can bring this three to the front. So that's going
to be three times the log base 10 of 100. In the last example, let's do something like the log. Let's
make it log base seven of five. But I want to rewrite that say as log base 10. So that's going to be log
base 10. I keep my five and I'm going to divide that by log base 10. So those have to be the same
of my old base seven. So I've changed from a base seven to base 10 by doing this five divided by seven.
But it's a log base 10 of five divided by the log base 10 of seven. That is this change of basis.
And there you go. What you've seen now is the most important part of taking powers, considering powers
and considering exponents. And lastly, again, considering logarithms. You have to practice these.
If you are taking the course, do remember to do all those homework problems for your credits.
