So we've looked at dividing a group up, you know, and then getting a quotient group.
Now that is something that we've put in our box.
Keep it in your box. We are going to revisit homomorphisms and isomorphisms by using that.
But before we do that, whereas before we divide it, let's now multiply.
So let's talk about the product group.
Product group. So what I want you to consider is just two very arbitrary groups, H and K.
They can be finite. They can be infinite. The sets can be totally different.
The group operations can be different. And so they're two totally separate groups.
And I'm going to define the product of these two as such.
I'm just going to say, I'm just going to use the universal multiplication sign there.
And if we just consider the set that is going to make up what I claim to be a group, I'm claiming if I do this,
I just have to define something we decide.
How do we define the set that is going to make up this group?
Instead, I'm going to do this Cartesian product.
Cartesian product, remember, I take every element of the one group and I pair it with the element of the other group.
So I'm going to have this Cartesian pair, those two, such as H is an element of that group and K is an element of that group.
So I'm just considering this.
So remember, I mean, if the elements in the one are A, B, C and the elements here are X and Y,
I'm going to have A and X and I'm going to have A and Y, you know,
and then I'm going to have B and X and B and Y, B and X, B and Y.
And I'm going to have C and X and C and Y.
So all these Cartesian pairs, so they needn't be the same size.
As I said, they don't, you know, they don't have to share any elements.
The set that makes up this one group and the set that makes up the other group,
they can be totally disjoint.
You know, it doesn't matter what we do.
And I'm going to define, you know, I'm going to say that that is the set.
And now if that's the set, I still have to make up a group operation.
So, you know, that's my set.
And now how do we define this group operation that we're going to have?
And we're going to define, we're going to define it as such that if we take one element,
I'm just going to call it, say, H sub 1 and K sub 1.
That was my 1.
And I'm going to do the, my binary operation, which I'm claiming will form a group.
And I'm going to have another one, say, H sub 2 and K sub 2, my second Cartesian pair.
So I'm just defining what this is going to look like.
And I'm saying I'm going to define this as another Cartesian pair.
And it's going to be H1 composed with H2, those two, and they both come from H.
And then K1 and K2.
That is our human definition, how we decide we are going to do that.
Now we need to show that this product group, this product is actually a group under this defined group operation.
Now, for me to show you that this is a group, it must have all the properties of the group.
First one is closure.
And since, you know, this came from a group with its binary operation,
and we can actually make that this, you know, this has a different binary operation,
so it needn't have been that.
You know, it doesn't have to share this binary operation.
But anyway, that, you know, came from a group.
And there's closure there, and there's closure there.
So we have closure.
Associativity.
Associativity.
Well, actually, that's by our definition that we've chosen here, it's going to be very easy.
So imagine then I also have here, I'm going to have H3 and K3.
And if I do these two first, you know, I'm going to have the binary operation with those two,
comma, the binary operation of those two.
So that gives me a new element, and that gives me a new element,
and then the binary operation with that would just be the binary operation, you know,
with these two, then that one.
And if I did this first, and then that one, it doesn't matter.
I'm going to end up with this scenario.
And comma.
I was going to end up with that scenario.
If I did these two first, and then that one, or these two first, and then that one,
I'm going to end up with exactly the same thing.
There's not going to be any problems there.
Identity element.
Well, from the way that we've defined it, that's very simple to show.
It is just going to be the identity element for my one group, and the identity element of my other group.
And then I can show that if I were to plug those in my original definition of how I do my group operation,
that no matter if I do that first, and then the identity element, or the identity element first,
and then this one, I'm just going to end up with either this one or that one.
You can do all of the paperwork.
That's not an issue at all.
And then you can well imagine that, so that's a unique one,
and then you can well imagine that the inverse element for each element,
inverse elements, you know, each of these are going to have their own unique elements,
such as if I do the binary operation with the inverse, I'm going to get the identity element,
or the other way around, I'm going to get the identity element,
and that is very simple, going to be the inverse,
and the inverse following from the way that I defined initially the group operation on my new group.
So that is all follows from how we define this group operation,
how we define it, and from that follows very easily that it has all the properties.
So what we are just saying is that this whole thing here,
this whole thing here, each of these is now a separate element,
even though there are two elements listed in there,
that Cartesian pair is just now a new element in a group.
You know, and just because we do it separately, it doesn't matter.
It is now a unique element inside of a group,
and then every element will have this in this group,
and this group is going to have this inverse,
this whole group is going to have this unique identity element,
there's going to be associativity, and of course there's going to be closure.
So very simple, that is how we define a product group.
