And here we go, our research question. Now, we're going to come up with a fake little project. In
other words, we're not going to collect any real patient data, and we're going to really
oversimplify things. This is really going to be the low-hanging fruit that we're going to
pluck just to form a basis for you to work from. Now, in many instances, institutions are resource
constraint. We don't all live in a fancy first world ivory tower sort of situation, but these are
really the basics from which any kind of project can be built. And if you have these down, you can
really start doing your own medical research. So we're going to draw a sample set of patients from
a population admitted with skin and soft tissue infections due to diabetes mellitus. So these
patients have problems with their insulin regulation, their sugar levels go up in their
blood, and they develop all sorts of infections. So we have our make-belief little hospital, and we
admit patients. Admission criteria is that they must have diabetes, and they are admitted because they
have some infection, either skin or soft tissue infection. Now, we're going to classify these
infections into two groups. To do that, we do have to have a definition. We don't have to be rigorous
about it here. I just want to set up two groups to compare to each other. And we're just going to call
them, for argument's sake, minor infection and major infection. We could say that all the minor infections
would be someone who's just admitted short-term, who's just getting some local dressings on their
infection, on their skin infection, getting oral antibiotics. And we could say that the definition of
major infection would be that they require intravenous antibiotics, or some form of surgical
intervention, cleaning the wound surgically. When we do a proper medical research, we have to be very
proper about these definitions, though. But for argument's sake here, we have two groups, and we're going to
compare various variables between these two groups. We've got to define them. And what are our questions
going to be? Well, we come up with these as clinicians, as we do ward rounds, as we see patients,
as I'm a surgeon, as I take patients to surgery, you start wondering about things. You think, I wonder
if there's a difference there. I wonder if I were to do things differently. I read something in the
literature, and it might make me think of doing something differently, something new. Thought processes
that occur other than just the normal care of the patients. So our research question here is really
going to be very simple. We're going to compare the difference between these two groups that we
formed, minor infections, major infections. Between these two groups, we're going to compare
the admission HbA1c and the admission CRP. So in case you don't know, HbA1c is a marker in a
patient's blood. It really tells us how good their blood sugar level control has been in the recent past.
And CRP stands for C-reactive protein. It's a marker in the blood. Both of these can be tested in
laboratory by a blood sample. CRP is a marker for infection or inflammation. And absolute values
are not necessarily that helpful to us as clinicians, and we really care about the trend. So
if we do serial analysis and the CRP level starts coming down, we know we are on top of the
inflammation or the infection. As it starts rising, we are concerned and we might do further
investigation, even further surgery, change our management in some way. But the absolute value is
not necessarily that crucial. But if you have two patients and both of them have a CRP of 50,
they might have very different severity of the infection. So it's not the absolute value.
So just that we're clear about what HbA1c and CRP really mean. So in the context of this little
project here, we're just using them as surrogate variables that we can collect data points on and do
our analysis. So a nice little research project here. It's not a real world project. We're not
collecting any real world examples. And the question that I'm asking here is perhaps not
really of any clinical significance. But it's real nice data to work with. And we've got our two
groups to find. We can do our analysis. Now the next step is going to be to go to the literature and do a
research and see what others have published on this topic, on these research questions.
