So finally we get to do some inferential statistics. We're going to compare groups to each other.
Now there's various ways to go about sorting out your data frame. I'm going to use just the
simplest way here. I'm going to create smaller little data frames. I'm going to create four of
them, a minor data frame, a major data frame, a female and a male. And this is the syntax. This
is how you go about it. So I'm going to create these four computer variables. I can call them
whatever I want. I've used these descriptive terms. So I refer to the data frame and then in square
brackets, you see the whole square brackets there, it takes two arguments. There's my comma and colon
at the end. And in the first bit we're going to have data frame, the infections column, dot equals
equals. So it's a boolean question but dot refers to each individual cell. So it's going to go down
the infections column and it's going to say, is this equal, is this entry equal to minor infection?
If it returns a two, it's going to pop it into this new minor data frame. Same with major. Down the
infection data frame, if it finds major, it's going to put in the major data frame. Again, look at the
syntax. It's data frame, open and close parentheses, then data frame and its column. So and its column
and then dot equal equal. So I'm asking a question, is it equal to cell by cell? If it finds major
infection, it's going to put it in the comma colon. And I'm using a semicolon right at the end because
I don't want this to be printed out to the screen. So I've created four little smaller data frames
and they are very specific as far as the infection entries are concerned and the gender entries are
concerned. Now let's do some proportional analysis first. We're going to count the level of
amputations by gender. So we're going to take the minor and the major columns because we want to
construct a two by two contingency table here so that we can do some categorical data analysis for
proportions. So again, I'm going to use my by function, takes the following arguments, the data frame,
the column, and then I'm constructing this new variable d such that I create this data frame with an n
new column called n which is the size of how many different things it finds. So for gender it's
going to find male and female and it'll count for me how many of those it finds and it'll pop it into
this new column called n. There we go. So in the minor data frame I find female and male entries and I
find I've got this new column header called n, new variable n which is a count of those and I'm going to do
the same for the major column. Now as far as the hypothesis test package is concerned it does not
have a chi-square test but it does have a Fisher's exact test so I can construct this two by two
contingency table. So I'm just showing you how it's done. I have female and male as my two categories
and I have my rows as minor infection, major infection. So remember for the minor infection
we found 29 females, 31 males. So fill it in there the 29 and the 31. If I do the construction this way
the 29 under female is A, the 31 is B, the 31 under female is C and the 29 under male there is D. So A, B, C, D
goes along like that. And those are the four arguments for Fisher's exact test. 29, 31, 31, 29.
Let's run that. And the hypothesis test package is very nicely constructed because look at the beauty
of all of this. The output, Fisher's exact test, population details, the parameter of interest is an
odds ratio with a value under the null hypothesis that the odds are 1, 1 to 1, that there's no
difference. The point estimate that we get is 0.87, 0.88, my 95% confidence intervals low and upper
limits and under a 5% alpha value I failed to reject the null hypothesis because a two-sided p-value gives
me that and it gives me a little summary of the contingency table. So here I just put it so that we can see
what it looks like. All you have to do is to put in Fisher's exact test with its four arguments
and it shows you there that indeed you did it right, the A, B, C, D. And we see that proportional
analysis here shows us that there's no statistical significant difference in the proportions between
male and female, that distribution for minor and major infection groups. Now we're going to deal
with not proportions but we're going to deal with continuous data type, ratio type numerical, we're
going to compare age, age groups for the minor and major, we're going to do the CRP for minor and major
and we're going to do the sorry the age, the HPA1C and the CRP. Now you can do it with plotting the
quantiles and seeing if that forms a straight line. But there's also a statistical test that you can do
that is in the hypothesis test package and that's the what the hypothesis test package refers to as
the Kolmorov Smirnoff test. And what does it do? It takes the distribution, it takes the actual values
of your sample and it compares it to an ideal distribution based on a mean and a standard deviation.
Now remember the terms, use them properly if I have a point estimate or measure of central tendency of
my sample such as mean or median, that is a statistic. If I have the mean or median of a whole population
that would be a parameter. So what are we doing when we decide between a parametric or non-parametric
test? We want to know if the sample values we have, if they were taken from a population in which that
parameter was normally distributed. If it was then I can use a parametric test, if not my p-values will
be inaccurate, my analysis is wrong and I have to use a non-parametric test. So let's run this,
this is how it's run, exact one sample ks test and it takes these three, well two arguments. The data
frame with all the values, so all the age values and it's going to compare that to a normal distribution.
So this normal comes from the distributions package which we imported and says construct for me a normal
distribution around this mean and the standard deviation and all I have is my sample. I don't
have values for the whole population so I'm going to enter the mean and the standard deviation for
the ages of the patients that I do have. Now I'm cheating a bit here because you've got to do it
separately for the minor and the major groups. Do this ks test for both and if either one of them or both of
them are not from a normal distribution you cannot use a parametric test. So this is only for illustrative
purposes so I only want to run it once just to show you what we have here. So as far as the age is
just the age of all the patients in my data sets concerned we see a two-sided p-value, very significant.
I then reject my null hypothesis and say that the ages here were not taken from a population in which
that parameter, the age parameter, was normally distributed. So I cannot use a parametric t-test like
a student's t-test. I have to use a non-parametric test but again do it for minor and major both,
not for the whole group as I've done here. So let's do that. We've actually I think got to do
it for all of them but for argument's sake yeah I'm just doing it on all the patients. So let's compare
HbA1c against this normal distribution with this mean and the standard deviation and we see that's not
significant. In other words we failed to reject this null hypothesis. We can use
we can use in this instance a parametric t-test. Let's do it for CRP and we find there a statistically
significant difference. So let's compare the patients in the two groups. Let's compare their ages.
Now we saw up here the age for instance. We should use a non-parametric test and that's exactly what we're
going to do here. Numerical data. It's a ratio type numerical continuous variables. We're going to use
the non-parametric Mann-Whitney-U test. Mann-Whitney-U and it just takes the two arguments.
And we see here the null hypothesis states there's no difference between the group. We find
a if statistic here for our Mann-Whitney-U test of negative 2.4 that converts to a two-sided p-value of
0.28. It's not significant. We failed to reject the null hypothesis and we can write that in our report.
Now let's go over to the HbA1c. Now remember as far as the HbA1c was concerned we could use a t-test
if I remember correctly. But let's use the non-parametric test and let's run that. And again
we see well we find a very significant extremely significant p-value. We won't write that
in a report. We'll just say it's less than 0.01 for instance or less than 0.05.
But let's do something. Let's check the variance of the HbA1c in the minor comma and then in the major
group there. And we see that well the variances are nearly equal so we can probably use an equal
variance t-test. A proper student's t-test. And this is how it looks like. Equal variance t-test
and takes the two arguments the HbA1c values in the minor data frame and in the major data frame.
Now I'm just going to compare those two values to each other and lo and behold you see you're
still going to find a significant p-value there. Nothing is going to change. And it gives you your
number of observations. It gives you your t-statistic. It says there was 118 degrees of
freedom. Remember 120 patients minus two groups. That's your degrees of freedom. And it gives you
your empirical standard error there. So beautiful there a non-parametric and a parametric test
for our data there. Now I can describe quickly the HbA1c. I can describe the HbA1c for minor and major.
If I had used the non-parametric test I could describe the medians for both and say that we
found a significant difference. If I use the t-test I can describe the two means of the group 7.1 and
4.8 and say I found a significant p-value of less than 0.01 there. Beautiful. Everything I want is
right there. I even have my 95% confidence intervals around the difference in mean. Beautiful, beautiful,
beautiful. Just for argument's sake let's run the Mann-Whitney-U test. Mann-Whitney-U test takes two
arguments. The values in this array here minor CRP and major CRP. Remember those are just two sets of
values that I'm comparing to each other. And again we see we find a significant p-value. In this little
file I've also done comparisons between female and male. We can quickly run through them using a
non-parametric test. HbA1c and then lastly just the CRP and you can see the values that were there. And
look at these beautiful results. We can really use Julia to do beautiful statistical analysis. Everything
here from the plots in GADFLY to the results here ready to be used in writing a paper for submission
to a journal. Lovely stuff. I hope you've enjoyed this project. I hope we can do some more.
...
...
...
