So there we go let's do our descriptive statistics. The first thing I want to do
is just to look down the infections column. Remember I only have major minor infections
but I might not know that. I might not be the one who's done all the data gathering. I just
want to see what data point values appear there. I just want a list of them and I want to know how
many of them there are. Remember these were words, these were strings. They'll be categorical data and
to be more precise they're going to be a normal type categorical data. There won't be any order
to minor infection, major infection. I suppose you could say one is worse than the other but that
depends on your point of view. We're going to create a computer variable called groups because I want to
save those numbers and this is the by. By is our function, the data frame's function.
It takes a few arguments. You see it takes the name of the data frame. It takes the column you want to
look at. Then it creates this computer variable inside of it. Then it becomes very difficult because
I'm going to assign to that. I'm going to use this data frame keyword. I'm going to create a new column
called N and it is going to tell me how many times whatever I find occurs. Very difficult to get used
to this but it's very powerful. Note it down and you'll see it works beautifully. Let me execute the
code so that you can see. So it is going to create a data frame. It is going to have two columns because
it's going to take this infection column and see what it finds and it only found two things.
It's going to create N which is a new column and to it it's going to pass how many times it finds
whatever it finds there. So it found 60 instances of major infection and 60 instances of minor infection.
Okay, difficult to get used to this line of code. Look at it. Let's do another one. We're going to go down
gender and see how many of it we found. Now we set up our data set that we would have these nice numbers
but it goes down. It's a sort by. You can see it as it's going to sort by the gender column how many
it finds. It's going to add this new column called N and in it is going to find how many of the instances
of whatever it finds female male it finds and that's where the size again the size function comes in.
So now I know I can almost make a little two by two contingency table of this and I can do a
statistical analysis on this for proportions, can't I? And we certainly are going to do that.
I can do simple descriptive statistics. I can say mean. What is the mean or average value?
That's a function in Julia. Passed to the argument, the data frame, the age column,
which is going to in essence be a data array. It's going to be an array of numbers and Julia's
is going to work out for me the average value. And there it is in a split second. The mean age of
that whole age column of our house was 22.96, 786 etc years. Simply I can do the median,
I can do standard deviation, that's std function, std, and then takes the argument of this data
array that I want to pass to it, which is the age column of our data frame. I can do quite a few
things at once. There's this nice describe function. Pass to it the argument of the column that I'm
interested in as well and it gives me quite a few things. A little bit of a summary statistics.
Mean, we saw it was 22.9 or something odd. We get the minimum value was 10 years. The first quartile
was a 12.967. The median, the third quartile, the maximum. So we can immediately do the interquartile
range. We can start to calculate what statistical outliers would be, etc. We can do this describe
function for everything. So immediately I can start getting a feeling my median, my mean HPA1C was 5.9%,
my median was 5.6% and I can look at the CRP. So nice descriptive statistics. I don't have to do a
thing. The only thing that it doesn't give you here, which is always helpful, is just the standard
deviation. But you can simply ask STD. So we see the mean was 51, the median 44, so a bit of a difference
there. So we know that we might be dealing with a few outliers. Now I want to stop there because I
want to spend a little bit of time and I don't want these sections to be too long. Very excitingly,
we're going to do some GetFly plotting.
