So let's have a look at the packages that we are going to use. Now when you run Julia
Box on your own you might not have access to all of these. You might have to install
them first just depending on where the Julia Box is at the moment. I remind you all you
could do is to say pkg that's uppercase p dot add and then in parentheses and quotation
marks there you're just going to put the name of the data frame in case it is not loaded.
Here are all the ones. As I say load them or add them with package dot add. If not you can just run them as is.
So the first one is the data frames. Now data frames is going to take a comma separated value file
which we have imported into Julia Box onto the Amazon web services. It's in the same folder as this Julia file
so I can refer to it directly. But data frames is what's going to take that
comma separated values table and it's going to convert it into something that Julia can work with.
So I'm going to execute that cell. It's going to take a while. You see the little star there.
It's going to execute those lines of code. Which reminds me, let's just increase the size of the screen a little bit
so that we can not get lost in this small type. So that's executed. We're going to use Gatfly.
As I say Gatfly. Very beautiful plots that you can get from Gatfly. Really intuitive computer coding language
that you use for Gatfly right in Julia and producing these wonderful plots. See the little star that's running
and we wait for it to compile so that we can use Gatfly as part of Julia.
It's executed. We're going to go on to StatsBase. StatsBase is part of statistics package that we are going to use
to do our statistical analysis in. So we really want to import that as well. HypothesisTests that contains the
students t-test, the main Whitney u-test, all the kind of inferential statistics tests that we're going to use
in this depending on what our data looks like. Remember we're analyzing our data.
We can't presume anything. We can't assume anything. We're going to do our analysis.
And lastly distributions. We're going to compare our data to a normal distribution
and that's going to help us decide what kind of statistical test use on our numerical continuous data types.
In future lessons or in other lessons I am going to talk about Plotly, the use of Plotly in graphing.
But for the sake of this exercise, this statistical analysis, we're just going to do our plotting in Gatfly.
So we've imported all our packages. We are ready to import our data file and start having a look around it.
