So here we are in Google Drive and I presume you've locked into your Google Drive and I've
made some folders and I've navigated to the folder where I want to create my Google Form
and it's very simple.
We're just going to click on New and under More you'll see Google Forms.
That is our Google Form and it is going to open a new form for you.
You see if I've already done one there so that's what it's going to look like if it exists
there and if data has already been collected you'll see the little spreadsheet on the right
hand side there.
But let's go ahead we're going to make a new More Google Form and it opens up for us there
and this is what it looks like.
At the top just our form settings let's increase the size there so we can see what's happening.
It says require login to view this form.
Of course you want to be able to login to this.
Again, as always I reiterate make sure that you have permission to do data collection using
a tool such as this.
You can ask for a progress bar at the bottom of the page as the page has been filled in.
Only allow one response per person requires a login while we want to log in many patients
so we won't do that.
And we don't want the shuffle order to the questions.
We can quickly give it a name.
This is going to be our Julia case control series.
There we go.
Give it a little description.
This is our data collection tool.
And we're just going to do our first question.
Now remember our first question was patient ID.
I'm going to try not to use any kind of spaces because that's the way the data frames package
in Julia with a data frame refers to the column headers.
It will I think put underscores I think if there are spaces but try it for us not to use spaces
here at all.
We don't want to put any helper text there.
Remember we want to keep things anonymized.
I'm not going to say this refers to the specific patient, look them up, buy the ID, nothing like this.
It's not a multiple choice.
It is just going to be text.
And I want it to be required.
So just simple text.
I want it to be required.
I don't want any blank or missing values in the data collection tool.
That's very important specifically when it comes to data frames.
Difficult in Julia to handle missing values.
And you have to do a bit of extra work to deal with that.
So we're going to say required question always.
And now we want to add a new item.
So I can just say add item or this little drop down box.
And the next one remember was going to be cat1.
But we only want people to be able to select either A or B.
So let's say choose from a list.
And remember so for us this was going to be just cat1.
I don't want to do any helper text.
I don't want to tell anyone what this is.
And I only want people to be able to select either B or A or B.
That's it.
And it is required.
It must be filled in.
That's all I want.
Next one was going to be cat2.
Also be able to choose from a list.
So it's going to be cat2.
No helper text.
And remember we said we had a C, an X, or an R, or we had an F, an L, and a B.
This just makes data entry a bit quicker.
And it also allows for minimizing the mistakes that someone can make.
Because it's easy to type on a keyboard the D key if you wanted to hit the F key or something like that.
But it does, it could provide a little bit of guesswork on a part of someone who gets
hold of this data to see where we were going with that.
So it's a bit of give and take here.
But for our accuracy sake, always constrain what someone is able to enter the data on.
It minimizes the mistakes that can be made.
Again, it must be required.
Next one, remember that was just going to be text that we want because that was VAR1,
which was just the age.
And we have told each other, everyone involved in the study,
if you do do the data collection, mentally add five to the patient's age.
If they were 32 or 33, I think was the example I used, make them 38.
And that is what's going to be entered.
Again, it has, it is required.
Next one was also text.
Remember that was just VAR2.
It was required.
And that was going to be the patient's ABA1C.
And then lastly, also just text.
It was going to be CRP, which we called VAR3.
And it's also required and done.
That's it.
It's all done.
Our form is ready.
We can see what the live form would look like.
And this is what it would look like if someone filled it in.
These were what they were able to see.
There we have nicely.
And it says this is required.
I can't carry on before that was done.
End of story.
Now we can change the theme.
You saw that I had a little, made it look, look nice.
These are some themes you can choose from.
They're not terribly inspiring and really
sometimes a bit overdone.
We don't want any of that.
We're going to stick to that.
You can customize it by choosing a different header.
You can choose your own image.
You can choose, change the title there around.
When you say choose image there, I think you can either drag it from,
from some examples that are given here.
That perhaps is not the worst one.
Let's select that.
Or you can use your own pictures.
And if you now view the live form, you see it's going to be,
or should at least be updated.
Your form looks, looks a little better.
Okay.
Now what we want to do though, we finished with changing the form.
We're just back to editing the questions.
Now we can send the form electronically to our collaborators.
So send forms.
In other words, we can put someone who's going to do the data collection for us,
email address in there that it will appear in the email inbox.
And when they open that email, they can hit on full the forms inside of a browser,
which is usually the safest thing to do.
When they do that, they are going to see this live form.
And they just fill it in every time.
When they hit submit, it is going to now create,
in our folder here, something like this.
A spreadsheet.
And there's our column headers there.
Simple as that.
And we're going to say file, download as,
and remember comma separated values.
That is what Julia likes to work with,
what the data frames package likes to work with,
with comma separated values.
We're going to download it as a comma separated values.
All the patient details filled in.
There are no missing values.
And it's that comma separated value file that we're going to import into Julia box.
And we're going to use in our data analysis using Julia.
