Now we have our research question, we've done our literature search, we need to know what
the variables would be required to do our research. Now the first thing would be to
do a power calculation, I'm not going to go through that, that is for us to try and determine
how many patients we would need for us to be able to have some power in our statistical
analysis. That's a very important step and perhaps we'll make some extra videos just
on that. We'll have to identify the patients from some sort of register, we might have our
hospital register, the ward register where these patients are admitted, where diagnoses
are written and that is the set, where we're going to get our sample set from. And we have
to now collect data on the type of infection, so we'll have to either classify it as major
or minor, and that is a nominal categorical data type. If I were just to write my data
points under the variable type of infection as minor, major, minor, major, minor, minor,
major, those data points, the data type of those data points are nominal categorical. Categorical
because minor is a word, I can't do mathematics using a word. It's nominal because there's no
natural order to it. Now major is worse than minor, but there really isn't a natural order
sequence to these. The next data we're going to collect is gender. Now that's not part of our
original research questions, but you'll see on most clinical research papers, there's a bit of the
background information of the patients that we are dealing with and gender and age,
usually two of the common things that we do list. So once again, we'll have two data points just to
keep things simple here. We'll either classify sample patients as either male or female. And once
again, you can well imagine this is nominal categorical data. Next, age comes up. We'll just
make note of each patient's age, and we might use that in a little comparison as well, although that was
not part of our original research question. And that is a ratio type numerical continuous data type.
Ratio type because there is a true zero, someone can be zero years of age. It is numerical because we
can do mathematical equations using those data points. And it's a continuous data type.
The admission HbA1c, that's also going to be a ratio type numerical continuous data type.
And admission CRP, also it's a value also with a true zero, so that would also be a ratio type,
numerical data type, which is also continuous. Important, when we think about these variables,
the data points that we are going to collect for these variables, it's important to think about what
type of data that is because that will determine what kind of statistical analysis we can do on those
data points when we get to Julia. Next up, we'll set our hypotheses.
