Very important here, you see that our hypothesis comes before we design our data collection
tool, before we collect any data, before we even look at our data.
That is such an important point in doing proper ethical research.
Now we're going to have our two main questions there, research questions, we're going to
compare admission HbA1c levels between patients with minor and major infections, and for that
question we need to set a null hypothesis and an alternate or test hypothesis.
Now null hypothesis will state that there is no difference between the two sets of patients
as far as the HbA1c admission levels are concerned.
That they'll be the same.
Our alternate hypothesis or our test hypothesis will be that there is a difference between
the two.
That if I were to take the mean or median, depending, and we'll get to that, of the minor
patients HbA1c and the mean or average or median of the major infection groups admission HbA1c,
that there will be a difference between the two.
Note, my alternate hypothesis does not state that the patients with major infection will
have a higher HbA1c level than the minor, or lower than the minor.
That would constitute what we call a one-tailed test.
And the difference between a one-tailed test and a two-tailed test is really taking your
p-value and dividing it by two.
And that's a very dangerous thing to do, especially after the fact, after you've looked at your
data, after you've calculated your first p-values.
Now suddenly to change your mind and say, well, I've got a p-value of 0.08, if I suddenly
said no, but before I knew the major would be higher than the lower, and therefore I choose
a one-tailed test now, I divide that p-value in two, so it becomes 0.04, in essence.
Statistically significant, I published my research, it sounds wonderful, I don't tell anyone about it.
That's unethical research.
Only at this stage do you set these hypotheses.
You do not change them after the fact.
And how do we choose here?
How would I choose between a two-tailed and a one-tailed test?
Why didn't I say, well, I think the HbA1c is going to be higher in major infection patients
than in minor?
Well, it's about convincing your colleagues that this is so through logical arguments or
absolute proof that exists in the literature beforehand.
But somehow you've got to convince your colleagues that it would be proper to look at this from a
one-tailed perspective. Otherwise, please always default to two-tailed and never ever change that after the fact.
Now we come to comparing the admission CRP between patients with major and minor infection.
Null hypothesis, again, there'll be no difference between the averages or the medians for the two groups.
And my alternate hypothesis, again, I'm going to say there's going to be a difference.
One might be more or less than the other.
I make no judgment call beforehand. I'm just going to call it a difference.
Once again, that's a two-tailed test. And you see the little graph on the right-hand side there.
Just a simple graph shown there where we do a two-tailed test. So we're going to,
from a, if we use a t-statistic, we're going to see, we're going to calculate the area under
the curve for both sides of our distribution function there. A two-tailed test. Lastly,
in our hypothesis here, we've also actually got to set our alpha level, our level of significance.
And if we, we are going to choose 0.05. So if we find a value of less than 0.05,
a p-value or 5%, we're going to call this a significant difference. And we will reject our
null hypothesis and thereby accept our alternate hypothesis. If not, if it's more than 0.05,
we will fail to reject the null hypothesis. Remember the correct terms. You can never
prove the null hypothesis. You can only fail to reject it. So our alpha level here will be 0.05.
0.05. Next up, we'll have a short chat about protocols and ethics.
