So let's look at the type of research. Now other than meta-analysis and systematic
reviews this is a good classification of medical research and you see the two main
classifiers there. Observational studies and experimental research. Now in an observational
study we don't do anything special. That is just doctors or surgeons. We just go about our normal
business taking care of patients and we collect data on that and analyze that. That is as opposed
to an experimental research where we say whoa stop the bus. We're going to design a study and we're
going to alter our normal day-to-day routine. Now we usually talk about these as clinical trials or
randomized trials where we're going to make groups of patients and we're going to select at random who
falls into what group and every group will be managed differently. Whether we do different
surgeries, whether we give different drugs inclusive of a placebo drug. There's all sorts of experimental
research in clinical medicine but we intervene in an active way or even omit certain actions. That
could also be done but that's an experimental research that's clinical trials or randomized trials.
Observational trials we're just going to gather data on our normal day-to-day business and you can
well imagine what the strengths and weaknesses of both of these main groups are. For the observational
types of research there's four main types. There's case series where you just take a subset of patients,
a set of patients and we just describe some variables in them. Then we get a case control series.
That is really where we're going to compare two groups to each other. That is what this little study of
ours is going to be about. We've got patients with a major and minor infection. Now it says case control.
One can be the case and the other one the control. It doesn't really matter in this scenario that we
have yet. It's just that we have groups and we can compare them to each other. The specifics though of
a case control series is that something happened and we look back in time. So in our little study we have
patients they already have either a minor or major infection by definition and we looked at something
before that. What is the CRP level? What is the HbA1c? That is opposed to the cohort study which you see
listed the fourth on the list there. That is why where we have a point in time and we look forward in
time. Imagine we were to admit these two sets of patients. We treat them and we look what happens over the
subsequent days or weeks. So that is from a point looking forward. You will also see these referred
to as a prospective cohort study. The third one that you see that's a cross-sectional study. That's
also very common. That's a prevalence type studies or it's just a flashpoint in time and it need not be
an instant in an instant second. It might be over a week or over a month. These are usually prevalence
studies if we're worried about epidemiology or if we hand out a survey for for people to complete.
These are cross-sectional studies just a snapshot in time. So that is a good classification system
to to memorize and most studies will fall into either these groups or be some form of combination
of these. Apart from these two main groups of course we get our systematic reviews and our meta-analyses.
Our research here is going to be a case control series.
Thank you,
So
for
