So we've done all the hard work we're going to bring in our data set in a comma separated
values format into Julia. Here I am in Julia box where we are going to continue doing our
work and I've logged in using my Google account. At the top remember you'll see these tabs and we're
going to files you can simply navigate to the folder that you are going to work in that you
are going to get your Julia file in and you can simply from your computer drag onto this area on
the right your comma separated values file it will then upload into the Amazon web services and you
can use it right there. So let's go back to our iJulia and this is where it is ccs.csv you can
see it there that is the comma separated values and case control series is the file the Julia file
that I am going to work with. Now I've already created it here I've done all the hard work I've
done all the typing so that we don't waste time in that. You can either get the file yourself or
you can do all your own typing. You see it's Julia 0.3.11 the file is opened up remember Julia the
Jupyter notebook here if I double click on a cell you see it is a markdown cell and I can use either
html tags or markdown shortcuts like this the pound sign hashtag sign means h1 or equivalent to h1 in
html so that will be the largest text a heading type one text if I execute that cell beautiful nice
text there for us. As always I'm going to start my Julia coding just to see if things are working
properly I'm going to call the addition function there pass the two arguments so we know that's
the same as writing two plus two and if I execute that line of code lo and behold four I kind of know
that everything is working now. So what are we going to get up to just using Julia here I'm going to show
you how to import the packages and the packages that we are going to use to do the statistical analysis
on the data that we've worked so hard on to get. We are going to show you how to import that data using
the data frames package that is. We're going to change the coded values remember we wanted to protect
the identity of the patients we've changed some of the values we've used code words and I'm just
going to show you how to revert that back to something that we can understand while we do the
analysis although you can leave it as such except for the actual values that you changed words not so much
but the values we've got to bring back. Remember we changed the for instance the ages of all the
patients we can't analyze that because that won't be a true reflection of our sample. We're also going
to have a look around at the imported data set I'll show you how to get to certain cells how to get to
certain columns only display them. We're going to do some descriptive statistics that's including some
simple plotting using the gatfly package now we're not going to get into any depth in the gatfly package
but it's so beautiful just to to plot some of your data it's a nice way for a human being to get start
getting a feeling for where the data is going to go together with that just some easy descriptive
statistics and then we're going to make groups and we're going to compare them we're going to do some
inferential statistics using the hypothesis tests package including showing you how to do a test to
decide for continuous numerical data to decide between a parametric and a non-parametric test
so a lot of exciting stuff in this part of of this lesson
