So yesterday we just looked at noticing the fact that if we look down Achilles tables row or column
that we see that all the values in the set that make up our group are there and they're unique.
So for a finite set that's easy enough. I mean if everyone's unique, of course they'll all be there
but what about an infinite set? The other thing is those are small little examples, you know,
it doesn't hold for all. So we really have to prove the fact that if we have a set G,
I should say a group G that contains a set of elements and some binary operation on that,
do we have the fact that the rows and the columns represent unique values and all the values?
Can we prove that? First of all, let's create a Cayley's table here. There we go.
We have our binary operation. We represent our whole group G here, all those. And let's select
an arbitrary element of our group and we'll call that arbitrary element A. And I'm going to look
down this row. Because it's arbitrary, it reflects all of those rows, every single one of them.
And what I want to know is, you know, is each of these entries unique? That's the first thing I
might want to show. So if I take any element G here and I look at A and G, the binary operation
with each other, is that unique? First of all, let's suggest that there are two here. I have also
a G prime, so that I have this and this. And I'm going to suggest to the contrary, that it is so that
these two are equal to each other. So I'm suggesting that there's another one here,
and they're actually the same, meaning the entries down the row is not unique.
Well, I'm told that this is a group. So if A is an element of my set and my group,
then A inverse better be there. And if I do this, I've got to do it on this side as well.
And that's the identity, that's the identity. So G equals G prime. In other words, this is actually
not two different things. Because remember, we don't repeat it when we write the Cayley's tables.
This one and this one's actually the exact same thing. So it sits on top of that. So
every element there really is unique. It really is unique. Let's do the column.
Let's look at the columns and see there's my binary operation. My whole group G is represented here.
I again take some arbitrary element and I look down its column. It is an arbitrary element. So if it's
arbitrary, it means all of them that are there. And again, I'm going to look at G here. So this is
G binary operation with A. And once again, I'm going to suggest that there's a G prime of A,
different from that. Remember this way around. And I'm going to say it is not unique. In other words,
that I have this G and A is going to equal G prime with A. I'm going to write multiply,
write not multiply, the binary operation with A inverse. And again, I get this, this fact. So it's
actually the same thing. And these elements that I get here are absolutely unique. Now I'm going to
clear the board because now we need to show that all of them are represented there. As I said, with a
finite set, if they are all unique, then of course, they will all be represented there. But what if
it's infinite? Let me clean the board. Okay, so we've proved uniqueness. Now we have to prove that
they're all there. So I'm still here with A and I'm still looking at its group. And I'm saying, let me
look, is G there? Now, G is an element of the group. And I'm saying it is arbitrary. So it's any one of
them. And if I take any one of them and prove that it's true, it is obviously true for everyone. So I'm
saying, can I, can I get any element here? Can I find G here? And since G, if I can find G there,
and G is any one, then that means they're all there. And let me suggest that there is a G prime.
It's not the G prime of the previous bit. So I'm saying that A binary operation G prime equals G.
And the question now is just, can I, you know, which one is this G, you know, how do I calculate
this G prime? Well, it's very easy if I just put the inverses on this side. If I put the inverses on
this side, it just means G prime equals A inverse, A inverse with G. So I, you know, this, there is
closure. So this must exist. That's an element. A is an element. The inverse must be there. There's closure.
I'm told that these are all elements of a group. That's a given. So this one must be there.
And it's this, the result of this must be there. And there it is. And if I find it there,
and I find A inverse, I actually get a G. So irrespective, I took arbitrary ones, I will find
it there. So even if there's an infinite number of these, I will find it in the row. So we've shown both
it's unique and all of them are there. And the same would go for this. Can I find G in this column?
Well, let's suggest that this is G prime here. And again, we're going to say that G prime binary
operation with A equals G. So I can very easily find G prime. That is just going to be G binary
operation and A inverse. That's in the group. That's in the group. It is a group. There's closure.
So I can do this. Its result. Its result is G prime. G prime must be in the group. So G prime
must be somewhere. There it is. I would, the binary operation with A inverse will give me
that G prime. So I know where it is. If I do that with A, I'm going to find G. If I, if I do A
here with G prime, I'm going to find G. G was arbitrary. I can find it no matter, no matter if
these entries are infinite, I'm going to find it. So both in the rows and the columns, we prove
that all the values are there and each one of them is unique. So it wasn't just some special case for the
little examples that we've seen before. It holds for all of these. And as far as the group is
concerned, and that's a very deep insight. We're going to use it later when we look at proper proof
for, probably look at Cayley's tables and what that implies. But this is a very deep,
this is a very deep insight that we've gotten into groups here. And that if we look at these rows and
look at these columns, there is this wonderful property for all of them.
Thank you.
