In this lecture series, we're going to make use of Python to do everything.
We're going to import our data, we're going to analyze our data, do our statistical analysis,
draw plots and graphs, figures, everything in Python.
And I've got to sort of motivate why we are going to use Python.
Why choose Python?
Now, this is an IPython notebook.
It's code that you can write that renders right inside of a browser.
And I'll introduce you to IPython later in the lecture series.
What is Python?
Well, Python is a programming language, just as Java, C++, C-sharp, all programming languages.
It's an excellent language to use when you start with computer programming.
Now, this course is not going to turn you into a computer programmer,
but you're going to pick up so many things that you're going to be well on your way.
We're going to use a small subset of Python just for statistics.
It's an enormously powerful language.
It's free of charge, as you can see there, free of charge.
Many operating systems, for instance, macOS, comes with Python pre-installed.
Most of the Linux distributions have Python pre-installed.
It's open source.
In other words, lots of people work on Python.
That would set it apart from a commercial venture where a company would employ a few,
sometimes a lot, of code writers to develop their language or their package.
But with the open source nature of Python, there are countless developers out there who work on Python
and develop Python for you, making it an enormous beast of a system.
And by that, I mean that in the best possible way.
It is enormous and there is so much you can do with it, especially these libraries, modules and packages.
There are so many of them that you can import into Python, just expanding the capabilities of Python again and again and again.
As developers, all developers out there expand the language through these libraries, modules and packages,
Python just becomes more and more powerful.
Now, you could use something else.
You could use other statistical analysis software, SPSS, for instance.
Very, very expensive.
If you sit at a university and there's a university license for it, you might be able to use it.
But as soon as you leave that environment, you are lost and you have to buy this.
Very, very expensive.
There's also limitations to some of these softwares.
Now, you might say the R statistical language is free of charge as well.
The thing for me about R though, it is, and I don't mean this in a derogatory way, but it is a one horse pony.
It is really for statistical analysis.
If you learn Python, you can do so much more.
There's many things outside of statistics.
You might want to do a proper web development.
You can do that with the same code words that we're going to learn here.
You can use Python for web page development, for so many other things.
It is really a learn once, use in so many fields type of product versus the others.
Very good other products out there.
If we just think about mathematics itself, Mathematica or MATLAB.
Very expensive.
Small number of developers who work on it.
Not open source.
There are many negatives to all of these other products.
As good as they are.
I think there is no other choice to make but Python.
So how do you get Python?
You can click on any of these.
IPython.org
There we go.
That's the website.
Now Python, because of the size of Python and so many people developing it,
it can become a bit confusing to expand the Python language and expand whatever is installed
on your system with new modules and new packages.
Fortunately, there are companies who bring this all together.
Now IPython is an interactive computing environment.
That's what we're going to use in this course.
But on their website, if you click on, there we go, IPython.org
So if you click on the homepage, you'll see the install.
Click on install.
And if you go down, you'll see these how I am getting started with Python.
Continuums, Anaconda or Enthoughts Canopy.
I like to use Anaconda.
So when you click on Anaconda, it takes you to this install page.
Now what that does is it combines a lot of stuff and a lot of modules and packages
all in one installation.
So you download it once, double click it and it installs.
Now if we go back to our notebook here, look how wonderful this notebook is.
I can actually display web pages within.
This is an active web page within my code.
So I wrote a line of code and I've got the web page right in there.
Now let's run this one as well.
Run that code.
I can run another web page right inside of my Python environment in my development environment.
But this is what the install is about.
It's going to give you the option of installing for Windows, for Mac OS and for Linux.
Those would be your options for install.
Once you do that, you're going to get these download buttons, both in 64-bit for modern
computers, modern operating systems and the older 32-bit to play it safe.
One other thing that you're going to see is Python version 2.7 versus I1 Python 3.4.
Now 3.4 is the newest development environment, the newest development of Python.
And that is really the one that I'm working with here.
Quite a few things have changed between 2.7 and 3.4.
Some of the code will not work for you if you sat with 2.7, which is still the default installation on many systems.
So I'm on Mac OS here.
So I would go there.
I would say I want 3.4 and there's my installer.
Anything for Mac OS version 10.7 or higher is going to use the 64-bit.
And I'm basically just going to install that.
The boot, or click that, it will download.
You double click on the download and it installs.
You can get some information as to how to run it just in the documentation there.
For Windows, Linux, as per usual, is a bit more convoluted.
You have to type in a command there.
But there's some explanation there how to do the install.
For Windows and Mac OS, you simply click the download.
It installs, remember, 3.4.
It installs, it downloads.
You double click that download and it installs without problems.
Select all the defaults as it installs.
Now, this is the packages.
Let's get on 3.4 there.
So I've got an active web page right inside of my development environment, inside of my code.
Now, if I look down this list, remember I said there these packages and modules
that expand the language.
Now, if you download and install this Anaconda version, for instance, of Python.
The same with Enthort though, but I like the Anaconda version.
Look at most of these packages that get pre-installed together with that download
that you're going to do.
And bar one or two that we have to do manually,
everything that we're going to use in this course is already installed
in the Anaconda version that you're going to download.
All of these packages, you'll see there, they are in the installers.
Some are false there.
So they won't be.
So one or two of them will have to do manually, and I'll show you how to do that.
So please, please, please consider not using the default Python installation
or installing it in any other way than to come to Anaconda.
And that really comes from the IPython.
If we were just to jump back a little bit, comes from the, there we go, right to the start,
the IPython, the IPython.org website.
Just click on install and then go through to Anaconda.
Once it is installed, how do you run it?
Well, there are two ways to run it.
Let me show you this image.
This is a launcher.
Now, if you install on Windows or you install on Mac OS, you're going to get this launcher.
It's either going to be on the desktop or you have to place it on the desktop,
or it's just going to be somewhere within your folder structure.
In other words, if you hit the start button or you look under applications on Mac OS,
just look for this launcher.
It will launch all the development environments that come with Anaconda.
And there are three of them.
One is the IPython notebook, which is what we're using here,
what we're going to use for this course.
There's also a console, a Qt console, and there's also a spider app.
That's not the same for Linux.
In Linux, you'll have to start it manually.
And the way to start it manually is to, under Linux or Mac OS,
there's something called the terminal.
There's the terminal.
To search for terminal, this program will come up.
And inside of this, we can type IPython notebook.
That would be for Mac OS and for Linux.
And in Windows, if you look for the command prompt, it looks the same as this.
If you type in IPython notebook and hit enter, your default browser will open as it has here.
And with the development environment, IPython notebook ready to run.
And you can start coding.
I hope I've convinced you that Python is the best way to use.
It's quite easy to install.
Let's all install the same version from Anaconda 3.4.
64-bit or if you have an older machine, 32-bit for your specific operating system.
You can go to center.
Here at the beginning of the recording system.
And you will see.
If you turn around.
Let's see how factor this setting will Singapore is looking at whatever you are in the Kimony這一.
It's not something small pieces coming in the building.
And, once you have to line up, you can attack the map.
You can actually Click 2 to choose one if it is inside.
Or were you there.
The 128-483 tokens creatively legislate the map.
