So let's do an example of a quotient group and I'm not going to be any fancier than most of the textbooks are.
Most of the textbooks you'll see your group is going to be the integers under addition
and my normal subgroup of g is going to be 3, it's going to equal 3 times z, 3 times the integers.
So what does the set look like that makes up 3 times the integers?
Well remember that is just going to be say 3 times z such that z is an element of z, something like that.
Remember if you were to look at that it would be say minus 9, minus 6, minus 3, 0, 3, 6, 9, etc.
So that's how you can see it. I'm calling that my normal subgroup.
It is stable, you can check it out, it is stable under conjugation.
So what I'm now looking for is this quotient group, this quotient group.
Integers over 3 times, over 3 times the integers.
So if this is my, you know, this is my n in other words, remember, so that would just be my n and this is my g, so the quotient group g over n.
So now let's make the cosets because we've got to, you know, it's all the integers, negative infinity, positive infinity.
I've got to make, you know, I've got my normal group now, what about the cosets?
Now since this is a normal group, you can check that out.
We have to have, we know that the left and right cosets are the same, so let's just stick to the left cosets.
So my first coset is I'm going to let, I'm going to let a equals 1.
Remember where a is an element of my bigger group g.
So what do I have here now?
I have, I have 1z.
an, in other words, my first left coset an, 1z.
And that is just going to be, remember my binary operation here is addition.
So I'm just going to have this set 1 plus x, such that x is an element of, of n.
So what is that going to look like?
So my first coset, 1 integers, that is just going to be, I'm going to add 1 to each of these elements in n.
And this n, remember, is 3 times, I'm using those 2 interchangeably.
So that's going to be minus 8, and that is going to be minus 5, and it's going to be minus 2.
It's going to be 1, 4, 7, etc.
So that's 1, let's choose a equals 2.
So I'm now looking at 2n, 2h, or remember, a, h, a, n, the next coset.
Well, that is just going to be 2 plus x, such that x is an element of this n, my normal subgroup.
And what is that going to look like?
Well, that's minus 7, and minus 4, and minus 1, and where are we? 3.
Where am I? Let's not make too many mistakes here in being so hasty.
So I'm just going to take each of these, and I'm going to add 2 to that.
So that's all the way negative 7, and I add 2 to that, that's minus 4.
And I add 2 to that, that's minus 1.
And I add 2 to that, and that is 2.
And I add 2 to that, that's 5.
And I add 2 to that, that's 8, etc.
And what we'll now find is that we have partitioned into equivalence classes, basically, the whole of my original, the set that makes up my original group.
Because if I chose a equals 3, I'll just land up straight back with n.
So what I have here now, what I have here now is the following.
That I have this quotient group, and that is going to consist of my elements 0, 1, and 2.
And we've just proven that that is indeed a group.
And we can have this binary operation of addition on these two.
And I can have 0, 1, and 2, and 0, 1, and 2.
And remember, this is going to be my identity element.
Because if I add anyone to that, it means I take a representative one here, say 0.
Why not?
And I take 1 in there, which is 1.
0 plus 1 is 1.
Where is it?
It is in this.
Remember, this is this.
This is this.
Okay, so I just end up there.
Here I'm going to end up here, and here I'm going to end up there.
1 and 1 is going to be 2.
Because if I added, you know, 1 plus 1 is 2.
2 is in this subclass.
1 and 2 is 3.
But 3 is back in n, which was that.
2 and 1 is 3, which ends us up in that.
And 2 and 2 is 4.
And if you see, 4 ends us up back in 1.
So just as we have, you know, we showed Cayley's theorem there.
These are all unique.
These are all unique.
No problem.
I indeed have a group.
And I can find the identity element.
I can find the inverses.
And I can find associativity.
And of course, there's closure.
So that is a beautiful example of just cementing this understanding of the very simple in the end concept of a quotient group.
One more thing.
One more thing that reminds me.
So if I, what do we have here?
We have a quotient group with 1, 2, 3.
We have a group.
And so that's going to be my group now.
And I see that it contains a prime number.
This contains a prime number of elements.
So this is really going to be isomorphic.
And this is where we're leading to.
We're going to look at homomorphisms again.
This leads us to the fact that this is isomorphic to the cyclic group with 3 elements.
And you can see because I can take any one of these.
So what is that going to, where is that going to leave me?
Well, this element 1, if we just raise that to the zeroth power, that is just going to give me this to itself.
And then, you know, one of them plus another one then is two of them.
And one plus two of them is three, which lands me up at zero.
So there we are.
That is indeed, I can start with any one of these.
I'm going to get the cyclic group.
So this is indeed isomorphic to the cyclic group in three elements.
