So we spend an enormous amount of time on co-sets, so we better put this knowledge of our co-sets and Lagrangian theorem to some use.
And the first place that we're going to use it is to develop our understanding of what is called the quotient group.
The quotient group.
So what I want you to imagine is that we have a group G that contains some set and some group operation.
And I'm going to have a normal subgroup.
Now just to confuse things, sometimes in textbooks you'll see they change from H, which we had in the discussion before, to N.
So we're now going to have this special subgroup called N of G.
And we want N, you know, we don't want it to be one of the trivial cases.
So we don't want the cardinality of G, the set that makes up G, to be a prime number.
We know what that is all about now.
And so that we can make this normal subgroup.
And remember the normal subgroup is stable under conjugation.
What does that mean?
Well, if I have G element of G and I have N element of N, I have this fact that G composed with N composed with G inverse is still an element of N.
Stable under conjugation.
And we know we can also have these the other way around because it'll just be the inverse of the inverse.
So that is what I want us to start with as this very normal subgroup.
Now we want to have N now.
The reason why we do this at least is the following.
Is that we now have the fact that our left cosets and our right cosets are equal, you know, such that this N is an element of N.
And this is defined as A-O-N and this is defined as A binary operation with N and N binary operation with A for all N elements of N.
So I have this left and right cosets.
And we saw from Lagrange's theorem that if this is our large group G and say, for instance, this is N.
Now that we have all of these, we have all of these cosets.
Imagine there are just three, just for argument's sake.
So it'll be A-N and B-N and C-N.
Imagine, imagine that was true.
What we want to show now is if I take any element of the, I want to define this as something new.
I want to bring in a new, just some new terminology.
I just want to call this, instead of calling it N, all these elements and all these elements left coset or right coset of A, left to right coset with respect to B, with C.
I'm going to call them just, I'm just going to give them another name.
And in many textbooks, you'll see that this normal subgroup is called E with a bar on it.
And the name is taken as that, remember, E would be the identity element, would be one of the elements here.
But there'll be many other elements in, inside of this.
And there'll be many elements, same number of elements here, same number of elements here.
And I'm going to take one of them and one of them, and we have shown is that A will be one of them.
So I'm going to rewrite, rename this coset as A bar.
And I'm going to write this coset as B bar and this coset as C bar.
And if there were more, I'm just going to write them.
And from this, I'm going to form this new quotient group.
But first we're just going to look at some set, and usually it's written as G over N.
It's a division, it's a fraction, it's a quotient.
We're talking about division here, division that's sort of what is going on.
We're dividing this group into different subgroups, which is the normal subgroup and cosets,
the unique cosets that follow from that.
And I'm going to define this as a set, first of all.
And the set is going to be this set, B and C bar, and if there were more.
I'm talking finite groups here.
And I just mentioned that in passing, but it's actually quite important.
Anyway, so I'm just rewriting this.
So this is a set in itself, this is a set of sets.
This is a set, this is a set, this is a set, this is a set, because there's many elements.
There's many elements in each of these.
And what I'm trying to suggest is that this, this, these sets are mathematical objects in their own right.
That I can do mathematics with that object.
So I needn't just view them as individual.
Remember integers mod n?
I mean, we, we viewed them as, you know, that, that class as this, as the separate mathematical entity with which I can do.
I can, I can look at them as, as that, this combination of all of this or as the individual elements.
The same is going to happen here.
So I'm saying this is a mathematical object and I can do mathematics with these objects.
So much so that I'm going to define, remember, we still have this binary operation that I'm going to define the binary operation of two of these.
I'm seeing that as an object and that is an object, not necessarily now as an element of each of these.
I have to define this.
And I'm going to state that this is, if I just take two arbitrary elements in there and I take that binary operation, that composition, and that is going to land up in somewhere else.
That, that element that I get now, I have to go find that element and it's going to be inside of, you know, one of these.
And I'm just going to call that because I don't know for now what it is because this is an arbitrary, arbitrary.
I'm just going to call it that.
In other words, it is one of these.
It is one of these.
And my claim here is that no matter which element I take in here and which of the elements I take in here, not necessarily the A or the B, you know, any of the elements in there,
that if I do the binary operation between them, I will always land up in the same one of these.
It's going to be an element and I'm going to go look for that element, but it will always be in the same.
If it was in C, it will always be in C no matter what A, what element in A I choose, what element in B I choose.
This A binary operation B, if I go look for that element, I'm saying it's always going to be in C.
Okay, so let's get a representative of this one.
And that is going to be a binary operation with N.
And I'm going to get a no, and that's binary operation with a representative of this.
Let's make this one, let's like make this one, that's B O and I've B, I don't know why I always say, but anyway, binary operation.
And I've just got to make sure that this is not necessarily the same N.
Remember for the co-sets I have to run through all the N's element of N.
And now I want to be slightly sneaky about all of this, because I'm going to move this N here.
I'm going to move that N here, and inside here I'm going to put a B and a B inverse.
Now that's just the identity element, so I've done nothing, I haven't changed anything.
And by the associativity, remember this is all part of a group, associativity, I'm going to put these two together.
And remember this is a normal group, so that is an element of N.
Let's call this whole thing, let's make it N star star, because it is one of the elements of that, and binary operation N star.
But now remember both N star star and N star, they're both elements of N, so if I take their binary operation, that is also going to be an element of N.
So what I have here, if I do associativity, is just this, let's make this three stars, because those two, these two together,
is just an element of N, and let's just choose an arbitrary element of N.
So what do I have here? I basically have this coset, this left coset, and remember it can also be a right coset, because this is a normal group.
I have just one of the cosets, but irrespective, this was arbitrary, this was arbitrary, and it will always then end up in the same,
I hope you can see that, this will always end up in the same coset.
So, if I have this and this, I'm going to land up in a coset, and I've just proven that it will always be, irrespective of which one,
I chose an arbitrary one, I chose an arbitrary one, and I chose an arbitrary one for B bar, which was B binary operation with N star.
I'm always going to land up in the same coset, so that's very important, to show that, that if I have a binary operation between any two of these,
I'm always going to, and I take any element inside of any one of those sets, and the binary operation with them will always land up in the same,
irrespective of, inside of that, which one I chose. So, I hope that's very clear.
Now, the only thing I want to do is to show that this, this is actually a group.
So, this is actually a group. So, I'm going to have my, my elements here, and I'm sticking with three,
but you do understand that they can be more, and I still have this binary operation. I need to show that.
Now, if I want to show that that's a group, I must have the group properties, the first of which is closure,
and is there closure? Well, I've defined this as just that. So, I take the binary operation between any one of those two.
Now, since A is an element of my group, B is an element of my group, the binary operation between them better also be,
under the laws of, property of closure, a part of the group. So, by definition, I really have closure,
by the way that I've defined the binary operation between any of these elements in that set.
Do I have associativity?
Sociativity? Yes, by definition, really, I have, because what I'm trying to show here is if I have these two,
that it's exactly the same as this, B and C. And remember, you know, how did I define this?
Well, I took an arbitrary element there and an arbitrary element there, did the binary operation with that,
and then C, and then on this side, it was the same thing. I had BOC, which is now its own element,
and it falls in one of these, it falls in one of these sets. And, you know, still by definition,
this would be taking that one and that one and finding it, and the same goes for there.
This just follows from the definition how I define this. So, associativity is no problem.
What about the identity element? Do I have an identity element?
So, what I want to show, if I take A and binary operation E, the identity element,
that will be the identity element, binary operation is A, and that's just going to be A.
And how do I define this? Well, that's just AOE, and that is just E, binary operation A.
Forgive me for saying O all the time, but anyway, and what is this?
Well, by definition, that's an element of a group, that's an element of our group G,
the binary operation, that is just going to be A equals A.
So, we know that there is this identity element, one of them is going to be the identity element,
and for, is there an inverse? Is there an inverse for every element?
Does every one of these elements, the normal set and all the cosets, do they all have an inverse?
And for that, what I really want to show is that if I have this, that there is some inverse,
that one of these is the inverse of this one, and that is going to give me the identity element.
Well, since we, you know, we can choose an A element, an A element of this one,
we might as well choose the fact that our A inverse now is going to be this A inverses,
you know, A inverse is going to be an element of that, and by that I just have A inverse,
and I take that, and that is going to give me, that is just E.
So, quite easy to see that, you know, every element, every element does have its inverse,
and I am going to find that inverse somewhere, and that is going to be inside of one of these,
in one of those, and that will give me the binary operation, no matter what arbitrary element I take,
what arbitrary element I take inside of these, I am going to get the identity element.
So, let me, so, so I've shown that this is indeed, with this set, this is indeed a group,
easy to understand, and very easy to understand why I, if I do the binary operation, define it as such,
I will always land up in exactly the same coset.
.
.
.
