In this video I want to show you how to do reductions. Now you might not use that word
very often when you deal with tables or you deal with the data analysis but reductions. Let me
show you what this is all about. I'm going to hit escape in this cell. It'll turn blue. I'm going to
use the keyboard shortcut M to change it into a markdown cell. Enter or return just to get it
back to green. Two of those little pound signs hash signs. Let's do reductions. Shift enter shift
return. Let's go. Let's just remind ourselves what table 2 was all about. Table 2. That's better.
And we remembered the primary key ID group HBWCC. And what if I wanted to know what the sum total
of all the values say for instance in this last column was WCC. I want to know if I were to add
all of these it might be easy if there were just a few but if there were thousands and thousands of
rows that'd be a bit difficult. So let's use the reduce function. Reduce. Open close parentheses.
The first argument is what we want to do. I want to add all of these. And remember these operators
such as plus they are actually functions inside of Julia. They're really first class citizens.
So I can just use the plus sign there. It just says add all of the values. And I'm going to reference
table 2 as the object in which I want all of this to occur. And then I'm going to use the select
keyword argument. Select. And what I want to select is this WCC column. And I'm using the symbol
notation. In other words colon WCC for that column name. Shift and enter. Shift return.
And it adds up for me all the values there inside of this WCC column. It's going to just add all of
them and give me the result there. That's quite easy to do. Let's do something slightly more useful.
What if I wanted to look down that column? And imagine again it's hundreds and hundreds of rows.
Thousands of rows. I want to know what the minimum and what the maximum value is.
Reduce once again. So this time I want two things to happen. So I'm going to put them
for this reduce function inside of its own set of parentheses. And I'm just going to use the min and max
functions there. Once again I'm going to say look at table 2 for me please. Table 2 and select.
Select equals symbol notation WCC. Shift enter. Shift return. And it very neatly finds it for me. It
says the minimum value was 8.8 and the maximum value was 16.6. Now let's ramp this up a bit and make this
really useful. Remember we imported online stats. The online stats package. Now that has nothing to do
with being online. It's just online stats. You'll have a look at it a bit later. So I'm going to say
reduce. And what I want here. And again I'm going to put those inside of its own set of parentheses.
I want the mean. And that is a function. So I'm just going to use the open and close parentheses
there. And I want the variance. Open and close parentheses. And once again I want this to be
on the object in table 2. The computer variable table 2. And I'm going to select once again
the white cell count WCC. Shift enter. Shift return. And now the online stats package kicks in.
Gives me this very nice output here. And I haven't done anything specifically. So it's giving me
equal weights to each of these elements inside of my list. So and it also says number of observations
10. There were indeed 10 observations in each of and in the WCC column. So I see a mean of 12.76
and I see a variance of 7.08. Remember that's the square of the standard deviation. So very easy
just to get out a bit of information by using the reduce function.
