In this video I want to discuss the concept of related rates by way of an example.
Chapters in your textbook that deal with related rates refer to word problems,
where you have to set up polynomial or transcendental functions
and use calculus on those equations to solve the word problem.
Important steps that you have to go through when analyzing the problem is
which changing rates are related to which, hence the term related rates.
By determining what is related and writing equations for what is pertinently given
and what is asked for it is usually easy to get to the answer.
Here we have a cone shaped tank that has been filled with water.
At the top the cone has a radius of 4 meters and the tank stands 10 meters high.
A very impressive tank indeed.
The hose delivers 2 cubic meters per second.
At what rate is the height of the column of water increasing when it reaches the 5 meter mark on the tank?
Sit back for a minute and picture the problem.
Down below the tank is narrow and any constant filling will result in the level rising quickly.
As the tank fills and the meniscus gets higher, the tank becomes wider and the level will rise slower and slower.
The rise in the meniscus is thus not linear but will probably be some polynomial function.
The rate of the rise in the water is related to a number of factors.
Firstly the volume of water, which would be dV dH, the change in volume over change in height.
Secondly the time, as the volume increases constant, this would give you dH dt, change in height over change in time.
These can all be expressed as polynomial functions and indeed the question in this problem asks you to determine the change in height over time at a certain height.
It thus asks for dH dt, which is one of the related rates that I have just mentioned.
The change in height is a velocity, so distance over time.
If you look at the dimensions of the tank itself, there are related rates as well.
These are linear though.
The tank is static over time and its sides are straight.
The ratio of the radius to the height is 4 to 10.
Thus R over H equals 4 over 10 and the radius equals 2 fifths times the height.
It is taken for granted that you know the equation for the volume of a cone.
It is volume equals a third times pi times the radius squared times the height.
One equation is already given to you and that is the change in volume over time, which is dV dt and that equals 2 cubic meters per second.
So take stock of what you have.
You have an equation for the volume.
You know dV dt.
You know the relationship between radius and height.
You know that dV dH exists and you need to find dH dt.
Strictly speaking you don't have dV dH but you can get it from the volume equation.
Firstly you can get rid of the radius by substituting radius equals 2 over 5 times H.
This leaves volume equals 4 times pi over 75 times H cubed.
Differentiation with respect to height gives you dV dH equals 12 pi over 75 times H squared.
You can now set up a simple equation dV dt equals dV dH over dH dt.
The two dH's would cancel.
Substituting leaves 2 equals 12 pi over 75 times H squared times dH dt.
You need to determine the rate of change in height at a height of 5 meters.
Now substitute that 5 meters for the height and solve.
At a height of 5 meters the rise in the meniscus will be 1 over 2 pi meters per second.
