In this new series of the Here for Joester academic program, we asked some of our medical officers or registrars to come tell us a bit more about various review articles.
Good morning everybody. My review article that I've got to talk about this morning came from the Surgical Clinics of North America.
And it's a great review article on the evolution of damage control surgery.
Now, damage control surgery, you would think that it's been around for quite some time, but the truth is that it really only started gaining some respect and started being used since the early 1980s.
And like quite a few things, it has had its origins in military medicine and in military surgery.
Initially, I think mostly also in terms of trauma surgery, the common surgical delusion kind of prevailed that a surgeon has a sick patient, a patient that's an extremist.
You go into theatre, you perform your miracle and the patient comes out of the other side and everything is fixed and everything is fine.
But the reality is that that often does not happen, especially in multi-trauma patients.
What they have been discovered slowly but surely, especially in the military setting where it's often a position where you don't have everything you need to give the patient the best care,
is that there's certain things that anybody can do to resuscitate a patient and to limit damage in such a way that the patient physiologically can recover for more definitive procedures.
Okay, so damage control surgery is also known as the great equalizer.
Because if you really look into it and if you can sass out the important bits, anybody can do it.
If you understand the principles, you don't need fancy stuff, you don't need vast surgical technique experience.
If you can take out the important bits of various procedures, you can simplify it and you can do it with your head screwed on right,
then you can really make a difference to a patient's life.
So the main thing when you are in a situation where damage control surgery is going to be your mode of operation is to keep calm.
So whenever you encounter massive bleeding, the first thing to remember is that it is not your blood.
Okay, so you have to have a plan.
So it is the capability to recognize that you need to go into damage control mode.
And the article speaks about it extensively, has proven to be quite difficult,
is this very first step in recognizing when damage control is appropriate or not.
And unfortunately, even after about 20 years of research in this topic,
there is not yet very clear guidelines as to when to do damage control surgery.
Because we've gone from not embracing the concept at all to almost overusing it now.
So we are still struggling to find the perfect balance as to when it is appropriate.
The bottom line is, I guess, like so many things in surgery, it is about experience.
And it is about having the capability to recognize the final nuances of a patient's physiological status.
But when you go into damage control surgery, when you have to shoot, shoot, don't talk.
Once you decide to go into it, you have to, you have, you've made your decision,
you have to be clear cut in all your further steps that you take.
Okay, so basically damage control surgery has been, has evolved, as I said, in the military.
It's a term that has been instituted in the 1980s.
It came from the ability of sailors to keep a battletorn ship afloat.
And it then has been brought into the theater situation, especially the military field theaters,
where they have divided the surgical procedure now into three tiers.
The first one being, your only goal being to control hemorrhage, to control contamination,
and to achieve temporary closure, so that you can get the patient to a, to a high care unit,
or in their case, a different field hospital, or a better level of care,
in order to, to achieve a good physiological resuscitation.
Where there's three main things that you would be addressed, would, would address,
is your hypothermia, acidosis, and coagulopathy.
This is also known in damage control surgery as the lethal triad.
And it's been for long, sort of the basis on which you make your decision to go into damage control mode.
If your patient starts getting cold, if your patient starts getting acidotic,
if your patient starts developing a coagulopathy.
And those are things that's easy to recognize in a surgical situation.
However, it must be said, once your anesthetist is telling you,
oh, your patient is 33 degrees, and you've got a pH of 6.9,
and it's patients oozing from everywhere, you've probably missed the boat.
So, it's not just about recognizing the triad, it's actually seeing the triad coming.
So, there's a few things that I will come back later to,
especially when you do a damage control atherotomy,
that can sort of guide you early on, that this is where you're heading.
Okay, point is, once your damage control tier 2 has been sorted out,
and you're happy that your patient has been physiologically resuscitated,
within 24 and not later than 72 hours, you're supposed to go back
and do definitive surgery for that patient.
Now, this whole process has sort of evolved,
that damage control starts even before the patient arrives in theatre,
and a lot can be done now, in our case, on the road, on the battlefield,
in military surgery, on the field itself,
and then also that the damage control continues afterwards,
where rehabilitation, and even especially in military surgery,
a step up in care, and often transcontinental transfers, etc. happens.
So, this is for general surgery, basically, the TSE,
if you are interested in military surgery, they have different steps in between,
which mainly involves the safe transfer, and basically,
concomitant resuscitation of patients between field hospitals,
between, you know, on fixed wing airplanes, on road transfers, etc.
But we're not going to go into that.
Okay.
Basically, the damage control surgery, in terms of civilian surgery,
has started developing in the late 1980s, as I've told you,
with the availability of semi-automatic weapon,
especially in terms of gangsterism, since one of the big cities of the United States of America,
and hundreds of studies have subsequently been done on the value of damage control.
Basically, I think damage control surgery has first only had application to damage control laparotomy,
but it has subsequently evolved to include damage control thoracotomy,
damage control vascular surgery, even damage control neuro and orthopedic surgery.
But the damage control laparotomy is still sort of the central tier of this whole process.
Now, if we look at the pathophysiology, I'm not going to go much into it.
The article also doesn't.
But basically, it just goes back to advances that we have made,
especially in the neuro-immunological response of the body to surgery,
and the release of especially interleukin-1 and interleukin-6,
as well as tumor necrosis factor, etc.
that causes, especially this last one, coagulopathy,
that is a good predictor of a bad and detrimental outcome for your patient.
Okay.
I think what we can do is quickly discuss just your strategy and your tactics
when you look at your various damage control procedures,
a laparotomy, a thoracotomy, and your vascular surgeries.
During your damage control laparotomy, as I said, it's very easy to put this in.
You want to control hemorrhage, you want to control contamination,
and you want to achieve temporary closure only.
Okay.
So, basically, one of the big things with a proper trauma laparotomy is
how do I gain the quickest control of hemorrhage?
And the anterior lateral thoracotomy, we cross-climb the Aorta,
prior to starting with the laparotomy, has for a long time been the mainstay of hemorrhagic control.
There is quite a few studies now that show that the physiological burden of a thoracotomy prior to laparotomy
actually can be detrimental to the patients.
And there's a lot of people currently looking into what is our alternatives.
They're looking at quite extreme things like cooling the patient down with extracorporeal support systems
and direct endovascular closure, et cetera.
But those studies are all in the very, very beginning stages.
And at the moment, anterior lateral thoracotomy with cross-tamping of the Aorta,
should that be indicated, is still sort of the mainstay of vascular control.
Once you do your laparotomy, it's easy.
You have to have a systemic approach.
There's nothing difficult about it.
You start with what you can see.
So, I'm just going to go through the different quadrants.
If you look at the liver, liver lacerations, as we all know, can bleed like hell,
and it's difficult to control.
But packing, and this has been one of the first damage control surgical techniques used,
and that's packing of the liver.
Okay.
Not just with the liver, but with anything else, the finger is more powerful than the clamp.
Okay.
If you can apply direct compression, you can achieve quite a bit.
So, damage control in terms of the liver is packing.
Packing on top, packing at the bottom.
There's eight swaps that you can put.
There's various techniques that you can use.
Those swaps can be left in sito.
You don't have to remove them at the end of the procedure.
They can stay inside the abdomen.
In terms of your hollow organs, stomach, bowel, the idea is to identify leaks, to identify disruption.
You are not going to do any repair.
If it's really minor, you can try and do a primary suture, but they don't advise it at all.
The idea is to cross clamp and to tie off.
I don't know if any of you have seen us do this, but the little green strips at the end of an abdominal swab works really well.
In the article, they even describe leaving clamps inside the abdomen.
That is just to control contamination, make sure that there's no further leakage to physiologically compromise your patient.
In terms of spleen, splenectomy is indicated as a damage control procedure.
It's very difficult to stop the spleen from dealing with suturing or with packing.
And splenectomy is quite easy and it's a quick thing.
Once you know how to do it, so if the spleen is a problem, you take it out.
In terms of kidneys as well, if you don't leave a kidney in, you don't try and sell a working kidney.
They don't, there's been few studies indicating is their time, is it useful doing on-table IFPs, etc.
It doesn't make a difference in a damage control situation where you want an alive patient at all costs and that's what you're aiming for.
If you can identify another kidney, you take out the kidney that's giving you problems.
And then in terms of the other big thing that often causes problems is the pancreas, of course.
And there the broad classification is, is it a distal pancreatic injury or is it a proximal pancreatic injury and can you identify a leak?
There's been a few studies where they've attempted pancreatectomy and all sorts of things,
but I think at the moment the feeling is that especially with distal injuries, actually with all pancreatic injuries,
is you can do a distal pancreatectomy because that can be quite quick and especially if you are taking out the spleen as well
and they are in close proximity, that is acceptable.
But in terms of proximal injuries, if you have a suspicion of any leak, leave a drain, a big drain or usually leave more than one drain.
So that you can see what's happening, especially when you come back.
In terms of intra-abdominal vascular injuries, if you can tie it off, tie it off.
There's a big move towards temporary shunting, but that asks for a greater level of skill.
So if you really are doing primary level damage control surgery, if you're worried about distal flow, obviously it gets a bit complicated.
But if you can sacrifice it, sacrifice it and get out of the abdomen.
And then in terms of closure, there's been a few people that looked at should you spend any time trying to close this abdomen
because isn't skin and isn't physiological tissue covering better than artificial ones?
And it has been shown no, actually not.
We've gone through various stages of temporary closure from bockety bands that's being sutured into the sheath
to now the more commonly used and in the articles described as now kind of acceptable is the vac pack
where you create with an abdominal swab and any other, I don't know, these various ways that you can create,
create sort of a vacuum suction.
That seems to be acceptable and to give the best outcome for the patient.
So a temporary closure, no skin, no sheath, you close the patient like that and then get them into the high care unit as soon as possible
where aggressive resuscitation is needed.
They don't spend a lot of time on this tier in the articles but basically I think basic ICU principles is applicable
and then to recognize when to move on to the third tier of your damage control.
The sooner the better but too soon is also bad.
So again, it's about insight, it's about reading the finding nuances, physiological nuances of your patient and experience.
But they made it very clear that it has been shown if you wait longer than 72 hours,
the patient probably is not going to have a good outcome.
Okay, then the other thing that we can discuss is the damage control thoracotomy.
Now, when I read the article and I read around it, I was finding it quite hard to distinguish between a damage control thoracotomy
and then what is not a damage control thoracotomy.
I think that only other thoracotomy is an elective thoracotomy because it seems by the criteria that this uses,
all the thoracotomies for instance that we do here is considered damage control.
Basically, it is you want to stop the bleeding wherever it's coming from.
So it is to open the chest in the quickest way possible which usually is an anterior lateral or lateral thoracotomy
that you can easily extend over the midline.
It is to visualize what is bleeding, whether it is lung, whether it is heart.
So the thing is to release any tamponade and then to put your finger or your hand wherever it is bleeding,
which we have often seen in front.
If you can just get your finger where the bleeding is, then you can start doing more definitive things.
In terms of cardiac repair, in terms of lung repair, big quick sutures don't, it's not neat, it's not tidy.
It's just, you just want to stop the bleeding.
Lung lacerations, definitely try and open the track so that you can see where the bleeding is coming from.
In terms of high lip leads, it's quite difficult but they do describe the loosening of the ligament and the twisting of the lung as a good measurement to stop bleeding.
Leaving in multiple chest strains so that you can see what's going on in the chest when you take your patient to high care.
They also describe the possibility of leaving in swabs and clamps in the chest if necessary.
But what makes the chest quite different from the abdomen is like what we do is basically what they describe as a damage control.
You get in, you get out, you leave drains and you watch and wait.
I think where this comes in and you actually go back for more definitive surgery is your big vessel injuries.
But the truth is that those patients often have a dismal outcome in any way if you start looking at aortic injuries and etc.
Then in terms of your vascular injuries, as I've said before is that there's a definite move now towards creating temporary vascular shunts.
Basically what you want to do for these patients is you want to do a quick thrombectomy before a shunt placement and then regional anticoagulation with heparinized saline.
They say it's fine and then creating a shunt with anything that you have available.
You can basically use from catheters to chest tubes to anything that's available.
Obviously depending on the diameter of the vessel that you're working with.
Important thing is to create the right size shunt.
You want obviously the shunt to extend the distance of the injury but also you want some overlap at the sides because you want to tie the shunt in.
On the other hand you don't want to a bigger shunt because when you go back for your definitive surgery that part of the vessel where the shunt was inside it is going to be excised.
So again, a judgment thing but not hard. It's quite logical to do.
Then you tie the shunt in usually with silk sutures on either side and then the other thing that they advise is to mark the shunt with a big other suture or tie that you can easily see so that when you go back for your definitive surgery it's easily identifiable.
Part of your vascular damage control often involves a distal fasciotomy as well to prevent compartment syndrome when your patient is in recess.
The three main things, they don't talk at all about neurosurgical orthopedic damage control here but the same principles apply.
In terms of complication, it's definitely been proven over and over again now that the benefit of damage control far exceeds the complication rates of damage control.
Yes, it is true that there is complications especially in terms of wound healing and often these patients end up with large hernias, they can end up with fistulas.
You do have an increased rate of wound infection but in comparison to other complication which often is the loss of life, those complications seem easily manageable.
And yeah, damage control surgery I think has made a huge change in terms of survival rates, not only in military but also in civilian surgery.
Okay, and it's not difficult, I know trauma surgeons would like to think that they are gods, but it's not a refined thing.
If you understand the principles and you can simplify things for yourself, act quickly, damage control surgery can definitely make a huge difference to your patient's outcome.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks about the changes in the секertal Gumトel on Ireland.
Thanks a minute.
This is really the three main things.
They don't talk at all about neurosurgical or orthopedic damage control here, but the same principles apply.
In terms of complication, it's definitely been proven over and over again now that the benefit
of damage control far exceeds the Complication rates of damage control.
Yes, it is true that there is complications, especially in terms of wound healing, and often these patients end up with large hirnias, they can end up with fistulas, you do have an increased rate of wound infection, but in comparison to other complications, which often is the loss of life, those complications seem easily manageable.
Damage control surgery, I think, has made a huge change in terms of survival rates, not only in military, but also in civilian surgery.
Okay, and it's not difficult, I know trauma surgeons would like to think that they are gods, but it's not a refined thing.
If you understand the principles and you can simplify things for yourself, act quickly, damage control surgery can definitely make a huge difference to your patient's outcome.
