Here we are in the next tutorial. We're going to look at the scatterplot. First of all, my cascading
style sheet. Let's run that. And we have this notebook that looks a bit better. Scatterplots.
Let's set up our Plotly library. As per usual, we're going to import iPlot so that we can plot
right inside of the notebook. And we've got to initialize this notebook mode. So we're going
to import it. And then we're going to execute that function with these parentheses there. I should say
we're also going to import the high-level chart objects. So Plotly.graph objects as go, G,
O. There we go. Indeed. We're going to import the numerical Python library. So NumPy. And
we're going to use the abbreviation NP. And then we're going to seed this seedo number
generator. So let's go NumPy.random.seed. Let's create a bit of data, some data point values
for us to work with. We're going to have one, two, three, four, and then five, six, seven,
eight computer variables here. Female age, male age. So we're going to stick to, just for
the sake of ease of explanation, just to this binary way of looking at gender. So only female
and male. And we are going to have female. So let's create these data points. We're going
to have female age and male age. We just, for the sake of ease of explanation here, stick
to the binary view of gender. So only female and male. We have the age there. We have salary
and we have debt. So female age is going to be from a random integer with a low of 20,
high of 65 and 100 values. And then the same for males. The salary, we're just going to play
a bit. So we're going to take female age and we're going to add to that random uniform value
from negative 10 to 10 and add another thousand. So this is going to be element wise. So for each
element in the list of a hundred values that we have here in this numpy array, we're going to add
the corresponding value in this uniform value of a hundred and add another thousand. And we're going
to do the same to male salary there. And then we're going to as female debt equals male debt. So
that's the way to make two computer variables and make them exactly the same as each other. And
that's going to be a random integer from 15 to 30 with 100 values. So instead of using
the keyword name saying low equals high equals, because these are normal keywords, you don't
actually have to use the names. And so it's 15, 30, 100. And then the tax, we're going to create some
of those. And again, just add 10 to each of those values. So let's run that. Let's do a bare bones
scatter plot. That's what it's all about. So we're going to go go dot scatter, scatter being this high
level plot that we can use when it's created on top of our figure. And we're going to use x equals
female age, y equals female salary. So what can you see here with a scatter plot, it's numerical
variable against numerical variable. And each one of them will be each dot that we create in the scatter
plot will be part of a pair. And the mode that we're going to use is just markers. And data equals trace. So
just this trace part of a list, and we're going to use this key value pair of a Python dictionary to
pass it to the i plot. And let's run that. And there we can see the way that we created it by
adding those values that there's some sort of correlation between what we have at the bottom
age and the salary on the left hand side, the y axis that we can see here. So those are quite small
dots, we can really do something about that. So let's change these markers. So I'm going to have
mode still being markers, but then for marker, we're going to pass a dictionary of values. So the dict
function here in Python, so the size being 12 and the marker being this orange color with a bit of
opacity there, only 90% of the opacity. And let's change the layout. So the way that I'm going to use
layout here is again as a Python dictionary. So we're going to have title being correlation between
female age and salary. The x axis is the key, the value is another dictionary with a couple of key
value pairs, title being age and zero line being false. And with a y axis title being salary and the
zero line being false as well. And I plot the data as data and the layout as layout as per usual. There
we go. So now we have an x axis title here, a y axis title, we have a title here at the top correlation
between female age and salary. And we see these much larger orange dots. And if I just hover on one, you can
see that the value for them for that one was 1039. And the age was 34 that we can see at the bottom. We can
change that. And now we can see them plotted the hover there being 31 age and 1021 being the salary 0.161.
So let's do more than one data set. So for that, I'm going to create two separate traces. And one
being the female one being male. And again, it's age against salary. I think you know what's going on
here now data will be the list of the two traces and the data. I'm going to just pass the data that
I've created here, this list of the two traces to the data key value in my dictionary here. And we
can I plot that. So there we go, we've got female and orange and the male in this blue. And we can
see all the values as we go up, we can see this beautiful correlation between age and salary there.
So let's add a third variable in this 2d space. And that's what scatter plots are all about. And I can
do that in a few ways. One is by marker size. And, and the other one is by marker color. So let's start
with this with this marker color. And that's to introduce a color scale. And you can see all
the color scales that are available grays and this and that and that and that and that etc.
We can use Portland. There's Portland there. So we're going to create a trace. And it's x equals female
age, y equals female salary, mode being markers, the marker being a dict of the size of 10. The color
is, color is going to be the female debt. And the color scale is Portland. So we have age,
salary and debt, all in the same t2d plot. And that's going to create a scale on the right
inside a color scale. And we want that scale to be true. Look at the layout, what we've done there,
let's do the I plot. There we go. And now we've added this third variable because we've got age
and salary, but this color is also going to be this color that we introduced here as the debt level.
So down from 16 up here, 28. So these red ones have more debt, say, than these blue markers here.
So that's one way to introduce a third variable. The other one is just by way of what we would know
as a bubble chart, actually. But that's just the marker size. So what we're going to do here is just
change from female to male. And the marker is going to be the size of the marker is passed as a
part of a dictionary here. And we give it a color. Let's have a look at at this. So now we see that
this debt is now the size of these. So the larger the size, the larger the debt. So that's one extra
way of of bringing in this third variable. So that means we can actually have four variables that we
plot in 2d space because we can just combine, we can just combine the color scale and the size.
So here I've made the size, the debt and the color, the tax so that I have four variables actually drawn
right here in my two dimensional scatter plot. And that's actually quite fantastic to do. So we've
added this four variables just in this flat file by just looking at this bubble size, the marker size,
and then this color scale. And you can see there the size was the debt and the scale here was the tax.
So higher the tax value here, the more brown these values are. And we've again used earth. This time
we've used earth just as the color scale that we have on the right hand side. So have a lot of fun
with your scatter plots. You can really convey a lot of interesting information just using scatter plots.
I'll see you in the next, in the next tutorial. Please remember to subscribe and hit the bell so that you
can receive notification of all the tutorials that I do upload to YouTube.
0
0
0
0
0
