Have you ever wondered what to do once you work meticulously on a machine learning model and you
want someone else to be able just to use it? Well you can pickle that model. Let me show you how it's
done. First of all I'm just going to run my cascalling style sheet. To run and create my
model I'm just going to use the random forest regressive from model from the ensemble library
in scikit-learn and then just the ROC area under the curve score there. My receiver operating
characteristic area under the curve score there. More importantly though the pickle. Import pickle.
Let's just run through this model. This is not a video about how to create a random forest regressor
model but let's have a quick look. It's the second sheet here which means sheet name equals one of my
Microsoft Excel spreadsheet here and if we run that the first five rows of this data frame we see
four numerical variables three categorical variables and my outcome here. So I have the seven predictor
variables here and one outcome variable. I'm going to pop off that outcome variable as a vector. It
is now gone from my data frame and it lives inside of this computer variable y. Just to make sure there's
my data types my seven predictor variables. Now three of them are categorical. This is a little
function that will just extract all the categorical variables from a data frame and just describe them.
So it found category one, category two, category three as categorical variables. 700 rows in each of them.
We see three unique values two and four unique values and the mode there with a frequency. Now I've got to
dumbify this if I want to create a random forest regressor model. So I'm going to take category one,
category two, category three. I'm going to do a little for loop through all of those. I'm going to full
NA with missing and I'm going to create this this set of dummy variables and in the end delete these three
columns. So if I look at the result of that this is what we have perfect ready for use inside of a
random forest regressor model. So I see the four numerical variables and then this numeric representation
through dummy variables. So there's a one under cat 1a. So this would have been an a,
it would have been a roman numeral 2 for cat 2 and it would have been an r for
cat 3. There we go. All ready to go. Let's run our model. There we go. I use random forest regressor,
pass all my arguments, I fit my data, my outcome variable to the model and we see an area under the
curve there of 0.8977. Now imagine for a while I've worked meticulously on this model. I've really worked
hard on it and this is the best it can be and I want to send it to someone else so that they can
just import their data and use the model. And this is how we're going to do it. We're going to simply
pickle our model. So I'm going to open a file. There you can see my file name dot pkl. The wb
argument is for write binary so it's open for writing in binary format. And now I'm just going to use the
dump function. Pickle dot dump, pass two arguments, the model that we've just created after meticulous
hard work. And then the file, this reference through the computer variable to the file that is open to
be written to in binary format. There we go. And we should run this first. There we go. There we go.
It is run. And then lastly, we really just want to close that file. Remember always to close that file.
So we save. I'm going to file close here. If I go here, we can see that the pickled file lives here now
in the same folder. Now, a colleague or co worker or someone else wants to use that model that I've
worked so hard on. Let's see how they're going to do that import pickle there. Now, what they're going
to do is to read the pickle file, get this reference, this computer variable that references this file,
opening of this file, I should say in read binary mode. There we go. They create a computer variable
called model, which is what I've used there and pickle dot load. So they're going to load the model
from this file. There we go. And just to show you, there's the model. So now we're here that we import
scikit-learn, create the model, anything. It is the model that was pickled from before. Just to be sure,
we can see there, there were 13 features, the feature importances. More importantly, now,
there's a new, in this instance, I'm supposed that this is data from a patient. But I'm going to pass
values for these 13 feature variables here, predictor variables. And we're just going to see
what our model predicts. This was a regressor model. So there was an 8% chance that this patient
would be have a one outcome or successful outcome. Remember, outcomes are coded as zero and one
for the regressor model. So a beautiful way just to save your model and for others to start
using the model that you've worked so hard on.
