Now that you've seen me take pencil to paper and solve quadratic equations,
even develop a quadratic formula, let's use Python and make our lives a lot easier.
So we've opened our new notebook. You see it's pre-populated. Again, I don't want you to watch
me type on the screen. That'll take a really long time. So we see solving quadratic equations. We
do remember quadratic equations, that's second order polynomials. So the highest power of our
variable x would be 2, x to the power 2. Again, I'm only going to import the functionality from
the Simpy package that I would require in this notebook. Now the first function that we're going
to call as always is the init underscore printing function. We do want that beautiful mathematical
typesetting when we execute our Simpy code. Let's look at our first problem. It's a polynomial.
The highest power is 2 and that leading coefficient is 1. So we have x squared plus 5x plus 6 equals 0
and I want to solve that for x. Now I've got to use Simpy to create a mathematical variable x and I do
that with a symbols function as we've done many times before and I'm going to set that to be any
real number. I'm going to sign that with the equal symbol, the assignment operator. I'm going to sign
that to the computer variable named x. And so let's use the EQ function. So it takes two arguments.
Remember, there's my left-hand side of my equation, comma, the right-hand side of my equation. Let's
execute that just to make sure that we have the problem correctly printed and it's x squared plus 5x
plus 6 equals 0. That's fine. I'm going to now pass all of that to the solve function as first
argument. My second argument is going to be x because I want this solution to be in terms of x.
And we see two solutions, negative 3 or negative 2. Now what I want to do is just to substitute this
into x and just make sure that I do get 0 on the left-hand side. So everywhere where there's an x,
I'm just going to pass negative 3 inside of a set of parentheses. Let's do that. And indeed,
we see the solution 0 as we would expect. Let's substitute the other solution, negative 2. And remember,
this is the simple arithmetic. There's no Simpy involved there. I'm just using Python to do some
simple mathematics. And indeed, we see the solution as 0. We've verified that those two solutions,
negative 3 or negative 2, they're absolutely correct. Let's solve the following polynomial,
a quadratic, a second order polynomial, 4x squared plus 5x negative 6 or minus 6 equals 0. Let's print
that to the screen. It seems we've got everything right there when we typed. Let's pass that to the
Solve function. And we see two solutions, negative 2 and 3 quarters. Once again, I want to verify
these results. Just simple mathematics. I'm going to substitute negative 2 and I see the result is
0. Quite correct. And now I'm just going to say 3 divided by 4. I'm not going to use the rational
function because I just want simple arithmetic. And indeed, the result is 0. It's going to be a floating
point number, 0.0, because 3 divided by 4 is going to give me 0.75. So Simpy is going to say, or at least
Python is going to say that this is a floating point value and it's going to do 0.0 instead of
just the integer 0. Let's do the following problem. x squared plus 6x plus 7 equals 0. I'm going to print
that to the screen. Make sure that what I've typed there is correct. It does seem to be. Let's pass
that as first argument to the Solve function, the second argument being x. And look at that with a
pencil and paper exercise. Without that quadratic formula, we would not have been able to get to the
solution. And look how easy this is with Simpy. So let's substitute there. I've got negative 3
minus the square root of 2, the SQRT function. I imported that from Simpy. So let's run this and
we see, well, unfortunately, the arithmetic has not been completed for us. And the way that you would
solve that little problem is to take your substitution that you had right there, put it inside of a set of
parentheses. So that becomes a single object. And then on that object, I'm calling this simplify
method. We've discussed this many times before. And now you see the arithmetic has been completed
and I get the solution 0. I'm going to verify the second solution. That's negative 3 plus the
square root of 2. Once again, that arithmetic will not be completed. It looks very nice, but let's pass
all of that inside of a single set of parentheses. I'm creating a single object, as you can see me
highlighting there. And then I'm going to call the simplify method on that object. And we see the result
is indeed 0. Next problem, x squared plus 4x plus 5 equals 0. Let's print that to the screen, make sure
that our typing was correct. That seems fine. I'm going to pass that to the solve function. And look
at that. No solution whatsoever. Now, I set x to be any real number, and there seems to be no real
solution. So let's recreate the symbol x. But this time, we set it to be a complex number. Now, remember,
all real numbers are complex numbers. So I would still get the real solutions. But if there are no real
solutions, I will also get the complex solutions. I'm going to reassign that I'm going to overwrite
the little piece of memory in my computer, call that little piece of memory x again. But this is
now a new symbol x. Let's execute that. And now let's solve this equation. And now I can see I do get
some solutions. It's negative 2 minus i, negative 2 plus i, my two solutions. Those are both complex
numbers. Now, I imported uppercase i. That's the symbol i. That means the imaginary unit i. So I can verify
my result by substituting my solutions. And we see the solution there. It looks beautiful. But the
arithmetic has not been completed. So once again, I'm going to pass that into set of parentheses. And
I'm going to call the simplify method. And we see the arithmetic has been completed. The solution is
zero. When I want to verify the second solution, once again, I will have to pass all of that to a set
of parentheses and then call the simplify method. And I get the solution zero again. Lastly, let's look at
that quadratic equation, you know, the solution that we found. So let's just do ax squared plus bx plus
c equals zero. I want to solve for x, a not being zero. So I'm going to create these symbols a, b and
c. Remember to put the commas on the left hand side. Those are the computer variables. I want to separate
them. The symbols that I'm actually creating, I don't need to put commas in between there inside of
that string object. Let's create the equation printed to the screen. That's fantastic. And now let's look at
what happens when we do the solve function. There we get our solutions that we work so hard for in the
pencil and paper exercise just beautifully rendered to the screen. SymPy is great at working with
quadratic equations and solving for x.
