In the previous lecture, we looked at solving quadratic equations. Those are second-order
polynomials. But what about cubic equations? Those are third-order polynomials. Let's take
a look at how to solve those. Let's start thinking about cubic equations.
Let's do our definition right there of a cubic equation. We're going to say that that is equal
to ax cubed plus bx squared plus cx plus d equals zero. And we know that a cannot be equal to zero
because of that zero, that first term disappears. And that's just a quadratic equation. So here we
have a cubic equation. The highest power of our variable is three. Now we've already looked at
some of these. Let's look at a cubed. But let's make that x cubed plus a cubed. And now we can
indeed factor that. You might remember that's going to be x plus a multiplied by x squared.
That's minus ax and then plus a squared. And we cannot just factor that very easily. We also had
x cubed minus a cubed. And remember in both these instances, a is just going to be some constant.
And then we had x minus a and then x squared plus ax plus a squared. And again, it's not easy just to
factor that. Let's look at an example of one of these. Let's do x cubed. Let's do plus 27. And this is an
equation. So we're going to set that equal to zero. Can we find solutions for x that satisfy this
equation? Now we can rewrite this, of course, as x cubed plus three cubed equals zero. And now it's just that what we have
right up here, a is now this constant three. And so we can just plug in three everywhere where we see a.
So we're going to have x plus three. And we're going to have x squared minus three x. And then plus nine,
because three squared is just equal to nine. Now this equals zero. Now we just have to think about,
you know, what to do here. Now we've got two terms here, one and a second one. And we multiply those,
and that equals zero. That means we must have that either x plus three equals zero. Or we must have
the fact that this polynomial x squared minus three x plus nine is equal to zero. So we will have that
x is equal to negative three. I'm just subtracting three from both sides. Or I must have this equal
to zero. And what we're going to do now, let's do some work on the side. This is ax squared plus bx plus c.
So don't think about these, a's and b's now. Let's just concentrate on this quadratic.
My leading coefficient for x squared is going to be one. My b is going to equal negative three.
And my c is going to equal nine. I'm just doing ax squared plus bx plus c. Let's put it out there.
ax squared plus bx plus c equals zero. So don't think about, don't worry about what we had up there.
It's a brand new problem that I'm dealing with as far as this quadratic is concerned.
And I do remember that we have that x equals minus b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus
four ac. Let's draw neat lines. That's going to be divided by two a. So let's substitute for a, b,
and c. So we're going to say x equals negative b. Now b is already negative three. So negative negative
three. This is going to be positive three. Then plus or minus the square root of b squared is going
to be negative three squared. So that's nine minus four times one times nine. So four times one times
nine. And that of course is 36. And we're going to divide that by two times a and a is just one. So
that divides by two. This leaves us with x equals three plus or minus the square root of, and now we have
the square root of negative 27. And so we will absolutely have to involve complex numbers.
Now let's look at what 27 is. Remember 27, that's just going to be three times three times three times
negative one. Now this negative one, if we take the square root of negative one, that's just going to
be i. And if we consider two of these, we can bring one out and then be left with a single square root
of three. This would come from the fact that if we have the square root of three squared, well, that's
just going to equal three because three, you know, if I take this very nice squared, I get three squared.
So we know that we can say x equals three plus or minus, that's going to be three square root of
three times i divided by two. And so now we have three solutions. And we really want three solutions
because this, the problem that we started with is a cubic equation. So we're going to have x equals
negative three, or we're going to have x equals, let's do three over two, let's do the plus first, plus
three square root of three divided by two i, or x is going to equal three over two minus three
square root of three divided by two i. And we see our three solutions. Now in some cases, we're going to be
very fortunate. Let's write out again, ax cubed plus bx squared plus cx plus d equals zero. In some
cases, we're going to be very lucky in as much as d equals zero. So let's look at an example. And let's
do a very simple one. Let's have x cubed, let's do minus eight x. Now in this instance, we also see
that b is equal to zero, there's no x squared term, but definitely d is zero, we don't see any constant
there. Now this is very easy to do because I can take out a single x as a common factor. Because do
remember this is x times x times x minus eight x. In this term, I have a single x, I have a single x on
this side, I can take that out as a common factor. So there's my x. What am I left with? Well, I'm left
with x times x, which is this x squared. And then I'm left with negative eight, negative eight equals zero.
So now either one of these two has to equal zero, it's either going to be x equals zero, or we have
x squared minus eight is equal to zero, I can add eight to both sides, and I get x squared equals eight,
and then x equals plus or minus the square root of eight, I'm just taking the square root of both sides.
Now what can I do with eight, I can say eight equals two times two times two. Well, there's two twos there,
I can bring that outside of the square root symbol. So that's going to x equals plus or minus two,
and I'm left with a single square root of two. So my final solution, I get x equals zero, or x equals
two square root of two, or negative the square root of two, as we can see there. Underline that. So let's do
another example. Let's have x cubed minus four x squared minus five x equals zero. Again, you can see
the d term is not there, the constant term is not there, is equal to zero. Once again, I can take out a
common factor, a single x, which means I'm left with x squared minus four x minus five is equal to zero.
So either x is equal to zero, or our polynomial here, x squared minus four x minus five is equal to zero.
Fortunately, we can look at this polynomial on the side, this quadratic, I can do x and x. And if I look
at five, well, I can think of this as negative five plus one, because negative five times one, that's
going to give me the negative five. But I have negative five x plus one x leaves me with negative
four x equals zero. And this one is very easy. I'm going to have x equals zero, or x equals five,
looking at that term, and for this term, or x equals negative one. That was a simple one to do.
Sometimes we're very fortunate that we can do grouping. Let's have a look at this example.
Let's have x cubed plus x squared minus four x minus four equals zero. Now let's just do some
association. Let's put x cubed plus x squared minus, let's do four x, let's do plus four.
Why the positive there? Well, I've taken out negative one. If I distribute this negative,
I'm going to get negative four x, negative four. And I'm left with the original problem.
Let's look at this first term. Let's take out x squared as a common factor. So I'm left with x plus
one, x cubed, x squared, that looks fine. Let's take out four as a common factor here. And I'm left
with x plus one. You can verify that, just do the distribution, you're going to land up with the
exact same problem. Now look at this, I have some term in common for both of these. So let's take
out x plus one as a common factor. Yes, you can do that. And I'm left with x squared minus four equals
zero. Again, with two terms equaling zero, that means either x plus one is equal to zero, or x squared
minus four is equal to zero. I can subtract one from both sides. I'm left with x equals negative one.
And on this side, x squared equals add four to both sides, x squared equals four, I can take the
square root of both sides, that leaves me x equals plus or minus the square root of four. And that means
x equals plus or minus two. And so it's a cubic. And I have my three solutions, x equals negative one,
or x equals two, or x equals negative two. And one by one, you can substitute negative one. On the left
hand side, you should get zero. Two, you can substitute, you should get zero. Negative two, you can substitute
into x, and you should get zero. So you can always verify your work. Now let's take the exact same
problem. I'm going to have x cubed plus x squared minus four x minus four equals zero. And I'm going
to do a different technique. I'm going to look at my constant term d. My d is equal to negative four.
And I'm going to look at my constant term a. In this instance, it's one. Now I'm going to look at all
the factors of these two numbers. By factors, I mean what integers will divide these numbers,
leaving me with no remainder. So let's start with d. Well, certainly positive and negative one will
divide negative four without remainder. So will positive and negative two, and so will positive
negative four. My a term is very easy. This is going to be positive negative one. You can divide either
positive or negative one by one, and you're not going to have a remainder. Now the next step in this
division technique is to take each one of these terms and divide it by each one of the terms for a.
Now this one's going to be very easy because we only have positive negative one. So that will leave us
with positive negative one, positive negative two, positive negative four, which means I can write six
terms. I can have x plus one, x minus one, x plus two, x minus two, and x plus four, and x minus four.
So we're just going to take each of these values and we're going to pop them in there. There's my
positive one, negative one, positive two, negative two, positive four, negative four. Now I want to know,
do any of these terms divide my original problem? So let's start with this first one. I'm thinking,
x cubed plus x squared minus four x minus four. Let's start with this very first one, x plus one.
So I'm going to say divide that by x plus one. I want to know, does this divide the numerator without
any remainder? Well, I'll have to do some long division. x cubed plus x squared minus four x minus
four. I'm going to divide that by x plus one. So just some long division from school.
Now we do that by looking only at the first term. How do I get from x to x cubed? Well,
I multiply that by x squared. So x squared times x plus one. What would that be? x squared times x?
Well, that's x cubed. x squared times one. That's positive x squared. And now I'm going to do
subtraction. x cubed minus x cubed. That's nothing. x squared minus x squared. Well, there's the zero x
squared left there. Now I bring the negative four x down. And I'm thinking, how do I get from x to x
x squared? Well, I multiply that by zero x. Zero x times x. That's zero x squared. Now zero x times one.
Well, that's just positive zero x. And I do my subtraction once again. Zero x squared minus zero
x squared. That's nothing. Negative four x minus zero x. That leaves me with negative four x. I bring down
my negative four. How do I get from x to negative four x? Well, that's just minus four. Negative four
times x. That's negative four x. Negative four times one. That's negative four. And look at that. If I do
the subtraction, there's nothing left. There's no remainder. So indeed, x plus one does divide x cubed
plus x squared minus four x minus four. And I can write x plus one times x squared. I can drop that zero x
minus four equals zero. If I multiply these two terms, I get back to there because I did the division
and there was no remainder. And now look at this. It is what we had before. x equals negative one or this term
x squared minus four equals zero. Or x squared equals four. Or x equals plus or minus the square root of
four. Or x equals two. Or x equals negative two. And you can see as before, I have the very same results.
Let's do one more example. Let's do two x cubed. Let's do plus three x squared.
minus 11 x minus six equals zero. Now my d term there is going to be negative six. It's right there.
My a term is going to be a positive two. Let's think about all the integers that I can divide into
negative six. That leaves me no remainder. So let's look at the negative six. Obviously, that's going to
be plus or minus one because negative six divided by one. That leaves me with no remainder. Negative
six divided by negative one leaves me with no remainder. It's very easy to do. Two will also
divide negative six. Plus or minus two. Plus or minus three will divide negative six. And plus or minus
six will do the same. Let's look at the term. That's my a term there. Remember ax cubed. And there's
my d term there. This is going to be plus or minus one and plus or minus two. Now let's do all our
divisions. Plus or minus one divided by plus or minus one. That leaves me with plus or minus one.
If I take plus or minus one and divided by plus or minus two, that's going to leave me plus or minus
a half. So I can move on to the next one. Plus or minus two divided by plus or minus one. That leaves
me with plus or minus two. Plus or minus two divided by plus or minus two. Remember there's four divisions
going on here. Plus two divided by plus two. Plus two divided by negative two. Negative two divided by
plus two. And negative two divided by negative two. All of them is going to leave me with plus or minus
one. So that's fine. I can now move on to the three. Three and the one. That's going to leave me plus or
minus three. Three divided by the two. That's going to leave me with plus or minus three over two.
and then 6 divided by the 1, that's going to leave me plus or minus 6
and 6 divided by the 2, well that just leaves me with a plus or minus 3
So I've actually got many, many terms here
There's going to be an x plus 1 or an x minus 1
There's going to be x plus a half and x minus a half
There's going to be x plus 2, x minus 2
There's going to be an x plus 3 and x minus 3
There's going to be x plus 3 over 2, x minus 3 over 2
There's going to be an x plus 6, there's going to be an x minus 6
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
You'll have to check 12 of these, it'll take a long, long time
Now do go one by one, I'm going to skip a few
I'm going to go straight for trying x minus 2
But please, you can't just skip around, you'll have to do one by one
So let's do x minus 2
We'll have 2x cubed plus 3x squared minus 11x minus 6
Let's see if x minus 2 indeed divides that expression
Let's put our long division
We've got our lines there
And so how do I get from x to 2x cubed?
Well, that'll be a 2x squared
Because 2x squared times x, that's 2x cubed
2x squared times 2, that leaves me with negative 4x squared
I do subtraction, 2 minus 2, that's 0
3 minus negative 4, so that's 3 plus 4
That leaves me with 7x squared
I'm going to bring down the negative 11x
How do I get from x to 7x squared?
Well, I've got to multiply by 7x
Now that's it for this video
There's an equation that will solve all cubic equations
There's actually also one that will solve all of these
That are polynomials raised to the power of 4, 4th order polynomials
Once we get to 5th order polynomials or higher though
There are no longer any such easy equations to solve them
