Okay, in this problem we have a cube made of glass with edges measured by an observer who's standing still next to the cube, glass cube, of 15 cm.
So there's no relative motion between those two reference frames, the observer and the glass cube, so we can immediately call that L0.
According to the observer's standing width, it has a mass of 2.9 kg.
Now relative to this cube, an observer is special, whizzes by, and it measures parallel to one of the edges.
It doesn't matter which edge, it's parallel to one of the edges, and it measures the density of the cube to be 7,800 kg per cubic meter.
Calculate the relative speed of this observer 2 relative to that cube.
Where to start?
We will need, we will need that velocity.
What is clearly going to happen here is he measures a higher, you think about it, he measures a higher density for that cube because he's going to have a smaller volume.
So that kilograms is going to be in a smaller volume.
We can equate volume to length, and since we're doing length contraction, that's what we want.
We know that density equals mass divided by volume, and then volume of a cube, I think we can say is some length cubed.
This L is going to refer to this length which he sees, which he sees.
So he's going to see mass divided by length cubed.
And let's make that just a row, whereas that observer there maybe is going to see this, he's going to see mass divided by L0 cubed.
So that's where the difference is going to come in.
I think we can, we can all agree upon that.
We can all agree upon that.
Now, since we want L, let's solve for that.
L cubed is going to equal M divided by Rho.
In other words, L is going to be 3M over Rho.
That's what it's going to be.
That's what it's going to be.
So we're just dealing with length contraction.
Let's look at that.
We know, we know what this is.
And I think you can now quickly see where we're going to get.
L is going to equal L0.
L is going to equal L0 times 1 minus V squared over C squared.
And we just need to solve for, we know what L is.
Inasmuch as we can get L because we know mass and we know Rho.
So we know what L is.
So now we just have to solve for V because we know L0 and we know obviously what C is.
So if I have L divided by L0, that's going to be 1 minus V squared over C squared.
I can square both sides.
In meaning, I'm going to be left with L squared over L0 squared.
And that's going to equal minus V squared over C squared.
I can get V squared on its own to make the last story short.
I'll just write it there.
Or just V then.
V is going to be C times 1 minus L squared over L0 squared.
Okay, so I'll just solve for V there just to say some time.
It's a simple algebra.
And as I said, I know what L is.
So I'm going to be left with V equals C times the square root of 1 minus L squared.
So we're going to be left with 3.
M over Rho squared divided by L0 squared.
There is my full equation.
I know what mass is.
I know what Rho is, which we decided is the one that the astronaut on the spaceship is going to measure.
And we can just express all of this as a fraction of C.
So if I calculate all of this, I get 0.88c.
So just knowing, just understanding that, first of all, what density is,
seeing that we are indeed going to have to look at length contraction.
And we can equate these two.
We know what L0 is and we can also solve for L.
And if we simply put that in our equation, we can solve for the velocity.
