The first concept that we're going to deal with is time dilation.
We're going to have a person standing on the face of the Earth,
which we will take as to be still,
and relative to that we're going to have a person in a spaceship,
and he has an exact same clock,
and he obviously travels at a constant velocity relative to our observer.
So we have the astronaut, we have the astronaut,
and we're going to have the observer.
They each have the same type of clock.
Now this clock works in the following way.
A mirror, and at the bottom we have a source and a detector.
So that source is going to send up a beam of light,
the beam of light travels back,
and when it gets detected there,
that will be the passage of a certain amount of time.
The first distance is D,
and through the speed of light postulate,
we say that each of these clocks here will measure the same value for C.
C has got to remain a constant.
Second postulate of special relativity,
the speed of light postulate.
So they both have this.
So let's see what this astronaut sees.
We always take velocity equals distance over time.
So for him, time, which is now going to be measured as one tick of the one tick,
and that's the time from the time that the beam starts going, bounces off a mirror,
and it ticks when the detector ticks there,
and we'll take that as being at the same spot as the source.
Okay.
So that's the distance there.
He's going to measure time for him.
We'll call it time zero.
Time zero is going to be distance, which is 2D, divided by the speed of light.
So for his clock, this is what's going to happen.
This is our astronaut.
He's traveling at a great speed, a great velocity,
but this clock travels with him.
So it's like you on the plane.
Anything that you have with you on the airplane,
for you, that's staying still.
So you're just going to see this light go up and down, tick, tick, tick.
So this moves this distance 2D.
So every tick for you is going to be 2D divided by C.
Now the observer sees something completely different.
So what we can say about the astronaut,
he sees events happening at the same place.
That tick is in the same spot every time a night there he can point to it.
The observer sees something completely different.
It sees the light come out here.
It sees the light move up to hit the mirror.
As the mirror moves, the clock moves, there it goes with the observer,
and then comes down.
And he sees these 2 events happen.
He or she sees these 2 events.
I might say he, I might say she.
He sees these 2 events happening at 2 different places.
Which the astronaut sees it happen at the same spot every time.
The observer sees this tick happen in different places.
And if we take from, if we divide this, because it's constant velocity,
if we just divide this in half, we say that this distance is twice L
from the time the light source leaves until the tick.
And that means with this being D, we can write the following.
We can say that.
We can say that S, this distance equals the square root of D squared plus L squared.
Because now, for the observer standing on the ground,
he's going to see this light beam travel a lot further path
than the path that the astronaut sees.
The astronaut sees 2D.
The observer sees 2S.
2S.
That's D squared plus L squared.
2S.
But for this observer, this beam also travels at the speed of light.
And therein lies the conundrum.
This is the speed of light.
This is the speed of light.
And speed equals distance over time.
If C is going to be the same for both, because C can't change, D over T,
that means if D changes, that means T changes.
That means they can't measure time at the same rate at all.
They can't measure time at the same rate at all.
Still for the observer, this beam has got to travel.
So still for this observer, C has got to be 2S divided by some passage of time.
In other words, 2S equals C delta T.
Because it's S and another S.
So the speed of light for this observer, that beam,
goes at the speed of light, goes at the speed of light.
Speed of light can't change.
Second posture of special relativity.
So I have 2S and 2S.
2S and 2S.
This delta T now belongs to the observer on the ground.
This delta T zero, sorry, this delta T zero belongs to the astronomer.
Okay?
So we have that 2 times the square root of D squared plus L squared.
I'm just going to leave this L out just for a little bit.
Just for a little bit.
We'll fill in something in there.
It's going to equal C delta T.
There's 2S, there's 2S.
Now, this observer also sees the spaceship travel at a certain velocity.
And that velocity is going to be 2L divided by delta T.
In a certain time interval, it's going to travel this distance.
In other words, L is going to equal V delta T divided by 2.
And I want to put that in for this L squared.
I want to put in V delta T divided by 2 squared.
Okay, I'm going to erase some of this because I need a lot of space.
Let's square, let's square both sides, so I'm going to be left with 4.
2 squared, the squared root is going to disappear, so I'll have 2D squared plus.
I'm going to have V squared delta T squared over 4, but I'm multiplying by this 4,
so that disappears as going to equal C squared delta T squared.
Let's solve quickly for delta T squared.
I'll get this C squared delta T squared minus V squared delta T squared equals 4D squared.
And I will have delta T squared on its own.
That's going to equal 4D squared divided by C squared minus V squared.
I can get delta T by taking the square root of both sides.
That's going to leave me 2D there.
That's going to leave me the square root of C squared minus V squared.
C squared minus V squared.
And you'll see in the textbooks this can be rewritten in another way.
I'm going to have 2D over, I'm going to take out C squared as a common factor.
That will leave me 1 minus V squared over C squared.
If I multiply that I get C squared minus, the C squared will cancel, minus V squared.
Now this C squared I can just bring out as a C.
Because the square root of C squared is the C.
So that is where we are at.
Now that distance D appears here for the astronaut and as much as D is going to equal CT0 divided by 2.
Let's put that in there.
So we're going to have delta T equals, the 2's will cancel, the two C's are going to cancel,
and I left with T0.
Just do this for yourself, you'll see there's no mistake.
Line is, wait, that's not too many squares.
Line is V squared over C squared.
So I'll just replace this D with this.
And look at what this equation says.
This is time dilation for special relativity.
One, the astronaut sees the events happening at the same place,
and for him T0 time passes, delta T0 time passes.
For an observer to which this astronaut moves at a relative velocity, relative to that person standing still,
he sees a different time.
Now look at the, we are just, we are saying here that delta T is proportional to delta T0,
and the constant of proportionality is 1 over the square root of this.
So V squared is smaller than C squared, so this is going to be, end up being,
1 minus something, this is going to be 1 over, so this is going to be a larger number.
So, in effect, if you just plug in some values here, you'll note that.
You'll note the following, that a certain time is going to pass for our observer,
and he's going to see time passing slower, time passing slower for this observer's clock.
Because this observer's clock has got this extra length to travel.
And this is how we equate the two.
So this is the passage of time for that observer standing here.
He says one second goes by, and he sees less than a second has gone by for that clock.
So he sees that clock running slower.
He sees that clock running slower than his oak clock.
And this is the derivation that you should know for that.
I thought I might have ended a little bit abruptly.
Let me just give a full explanation of what I'm dealing with here.
If this is the velocity at which the spacecraft is traveling, it's going to be less than C.
Meaning, I'm going to have a 1 minus some fraction, which is going to give me a value less than 1.
If I take the square root of that, I have a value less than 1.
In other words, here, having 1 over, I'm going to have 1 over some fraction, 0,5.
In other words, this will be a larger number.
So I'm going to have some value here that is larger than 1.
So for these two to equal each other, and as much as we have an equal sign here,
that means if this is a number larger than 1, this number has got to be less, T0 has got to be less than T.
Delta T0 has got to be less than delta T for these two sides still to equal each other.
In other words, if 1 second passes here, less than a second will pass there.
This observer sees the clock on that spacecraft run slow.
Let's do a very simple problem.
I have a spaceship traveling at 2.76 times 10 to the power 8 meters per second.
We know what the velocity of C is.
For that astronaut, delta T0, a time passing for 1 click is 1 second.
Well, the speed of light over 1 second means D is pretty large.
But anyway, let's take, he sees that how many seconds will pass for the observer?
How many seconds passes for the observer, delta T?
Remember, in our equation, that's why time dilation here,
we know that delta T equals delta T0 divided by the square root of 1 minus V squared over C squared.
Now, usually we don't express things like this.
We'll express V as a fraction of C, as a fraction of C.
And if you divide that into that, you're going to get that V equals 0.92 times 3.00 times 10 to the power 8 meters per second.
And it is commonly written as 0.92 C.
Okay, so what are we going to have?
Delta T.
Delta T is going to equal delta T0, which is 1.00 seconds, divided by the square root of 1 minus,
I'm going to have 0.92 squared C squared divided by C squared.
And that leaves me 1 minus 0.92 squared.
And 1 divided by the square root of all of that is delta T equals,
it's about 2.6 if you do two significant digits.
I think we'll be able to set to use two.
Anyway, about 2.6 seconds.
So 2.6 seconds are going to pass for this observer up and down.
It's going to take 2.6 seconds.
Looking at the clock there, it will note that that clock only passed,
or only one second passed for that clock.
So the observer is going to see that clock running very slow.
As 2.6 seconds passes for my clock, only one second passed for that clock.
But now we are talking a very high fraction of the speed of light.
This is nearly very close to the speed of light as far as that spaceship is concerned.
And that's why we call this special relativity.
Because the velocities that we deal with on Earth, V is so small compared to C,
that this fraction here approaches 0.
Approaches 0.
And we have 1 minus 0 is 1.
The square root of 1 is 1.
And the mic lock in the car that drives past my office, which is just outside this window,
hence all the noise, with the school right across from that.
So 1 minus V squared over C squared means these two are going to be almost exactly the same.
And that's why Newton's laws work, because that's a very special case,
a very special case of V squared being so much smaller than our everyday experiences.
Even of a jet fighter going at 2,000 kilometers per hour,
that's got nothing, nothing compared to C.
So in our world that we observe every day, Newton's laws work.
We don't have to entertain even a special relativity.
Now special relativity, as I say, just expands our possibilities, our world just a little bit.
Now we can take velocities larger than or that approaches some appreciable fraction of the speed of light.
And you'll hear the common example of the global positioning satellite system.
Sat nav, as they call it in the UK, perhaps GPS, as it's called in South Africa.
Those clocks are there, and the clock on your little unit in your car has to take into account this,
because we are dealing with some fractions that if we don't use special relativity,
if we just use Newtonian equations, the GPS, the global positioning system, would not work.
It would not be able to pinpoint it. We've all heard of that example.
So now, through special relativity, we've expanded.
If there is this constant velocity difference between an observer and another event,
source and observer, whichever way you want to see it,
we have now have some extra equations that that can deal with us.
And then the general theory of relativity goes even further.
Now we can have non-inertial reference frames, and that makes it infinitely more difficult.
