What is crucial in many of these time dilation problems is to decide which values are delta t and which are delta t zero.
We've got to decide which is which.
And delta t we said that's for the observer, but more than the observer it means the person who sees events not taking place in the same physical location, in the same place.
And then delta t zero, that is called the proper time interval, proper time interval.
And that is for the person who sees, now when we talk about time, we talk about the detector at the end of our light clock.
So the light goes up from the source down and hits the detector.
That is the point where time is measured, on that spot.
So now we have people heading onto a spaceship and they travel the distance 4.3 light years to the nearest star system, Alpha Centauri.
4.3 light years, the distance that light travels in a year and it will take 4.3 light years.
But they're traveling not at the speed of light, they're traveling at 0.95% the speed of light.
Imagine we could do that, wouldn't that be fantastic?
Now, so which one is t, because we want to know now, from the time that they set off, imagine they can immediately travel at 0.95c, so they travel this distance, a certain time will pass for the observer on Earth, a certain time will pass for the travelers on the spaceship.
And we need to know, how much will those be, but which one belongs to which one, because now the spaceship is traveling from one place to another place, so that changes, and the observer is staying on Earth.
So which is t, delta t, and which is delta t0?
So as I said, we're dealing with time, for time we're going to deal always in our minds with the light clock, and if that clock stands on the engine, right on the floor, it is going to measure when the first light pulse comes out, as they move away, it's going to move up and down a certain amount of time, and when they land on the other side, will be a tick at the bottom, so as far as time is concerned, the tick at the bottom didn't move,
because they were moving with the spaceship, because they were moving with the spaceship, so that will be proper time, for the travelers, will be proper time.
The observer sees, let first light come out of the clock, on the spaceship, and it sees it land, we're here at a different spot, 4.3 light years away, so this will be the time that passes for the person staying behind on Earth.
Now, what time is that person going to see? Well, it's going to see a spaceship traveling at distance d, and it's going to see it then travel at a certain velocity, and from velocity equals distance over time,
time, that means it's going to see time as distance divided by velocity. So what type is going to travel for that person? Delta T. Delta T is going to equal the distance, now we have 4.3 light years distance.
So we're going to have 4.3 light years, divided by this velocity of hours, 0.95, 0.95, 0.95 C.
4.3 light years, divided by C. Now we can multiply this out, we can say, the distance that light travels in a year at 3.00 times 10 to the power 8 meters per second,
and we've got to multiply that by year, which is 365 times 24 times 60 times 60, and you can multiply this by that, and divide all of this,
or you can just be clever about it, or you can just be clever about it. This will be 4.3 years, 4.3 years, 4.3 years, okay?
4.3 years times C, at the speed of light. So I'm going to multiply 4.3 years times the speed of light, that is going to give me my distance.
I have time multiplied by meters per second, meters per second, and the C's are going to cancel, and all I'm left with is going to be some time unit.
In this instance, just C. So to say you can be clever about this, and this is going to give you, it gave me about 4.526 years, okay?
But it was just going to be 4.3 years divided by 0.95, without you having to do the whole long thing, but certainly if you want to do the whole calculation, please do that.
Now, from this equation, we know. Notice what this person is going to see.
If someone travels at a certain velocity over a certain distance, it's going to take a certain time.
4.52 years, traveling with 4.3 light years at that velocity.
Now, what is the proper time that's going to pass for that observer who sees events happening in the same place?
The time is going to take at the bottom of his clock, but there's no room with respect to him.
So we need delta T0, and delta T0 is going to equal delta T times the square root of 1 minus V squared divided by C squared.
That is going to be this 4.526 years multiplied by 1 minus, we're going to get V squared, which is 0.95 squared, C squared, divided by C squared, which will be 0.95 squared.
And that gives us a proper time, so they are traveling this long distance for which the Earth observer, which 4.4 and a half years, is going to pass for the observer on Earth.
And if you do this calculation, you are going to end up with 1.41 years.
So for them, only 1.5, less than 1.5 years is going to pass, while 4.5 years is going to pass for the person who remains on Earth.
In this example, we're going to talk about the life of a muon.
What is a muon?
Well, you get, you get different types of subatomic particles, and you get the force carriers, which are called bosons, and you get the particles themselves, we might be going to spin and all of those, but we'll call them the fermions.
The bosons will be like a photon, the Higgs boson that the searches I'm going for, the W bosons, the Z boson, in which those are the force carriers.
And the fermions, on the other hand, you will get electrons, and you will get hadrons, or hadrons.
The electrons, for us, are the neutrinos, and then the electron, the electron, the muon, and the tau.
These particles all have a charge of negative 1, and under the heteron, we'll get, for instance, we'll get the baryons, and then the quarks, and etc, etc.
But let's just look at this, so the muon is also a particle with a charge of negative 1, just as the electron, but it's of much higher energy, in other words, of much higher mass.
And it is not a stable particle, in as much as it will very quickly give off its energy, and that energy will be used to create other particles, in other words, it decays.
It decays, and the muon lives for only 2.2 microseconds.
It lives for only 2.2 microseconds.
Now, there are different places that muons are created.
You need a lot of energy to create a muon, and that energy can be, you can get that energy where particles collide at a massive velocity.
For instance, right in the upper atmosphere, we have cosmic rays, and cosmic rays are just subatomic particles moving at a massive velocity as they get ejected from supernovae, or whatever their source is.
They travel in the head atoms or molecules in our upper atmosphere, about 10,000 meters up, 10,000 meters up, 10 kilometers up.
That high energy provided in that collision, it gives enough energy for other particles to be produced, one of that being a muon.
And say, for instance, that muon travels at a velocity of 0.998 c.
Now, certainly at 2.2 microseconds, even at that velocity, if that is in the velocity, it's not going to reach the surface of the Earth.
Yet at the surface of the Earth, we can indeed measure them.
We do find them.
We can detect them.
The same in a particle accelerator.
So for instance, at LHC at CERN, where those two hydroms collide, there's a massive amount of energy that takes place in the detector, whether it be CMS or Atlas detector.
And these muons, which are negatively charged, will obviously curve in this magnetic field.
But if we're going to go for 2.2 microseconds, it's not going to get very far.
But because it travels at an appreciable velocity, an appreciable fraction of the speed of light, we have to take into consideration the special theory of relativity.
In other words, we have to take care of time dilation.
Now, so for the observer on Earth, you've used these muons, which lives only for 2.2 microseconds.
But because of this high velocity, we've got to consider time dilation.
So in our equation, delta T equals delta T0 divided by the square root of 1 minus V squared over C squared, what is that 2.2 microseconds?
Is it that or that?
Well, that muon, with it, travels its own little atomic clock.
In other words, it's going to measure that it ticks right in the same position as it moves with it.
So that is proper time.
This muon's lifespan is proper time.
So that is T0.
I can plug in T0 there.
And I can plug in for V squared 0.998C squared.
C squared C squared will cancel.
So it's 1 minus 0.998 squared.
And that gives me an answer of about, if I do three significant digits, will give me 3.48, 3.48 times 10 to the power of negative 5 seconds.
And if you look at that, negative 5, negative 6, that's going to be 34.8 microseconds.
Now, look at that massive difference.
So the observer on Earth is going to see that muon exists for 34.8 microseconds.
And how far can it travel in 34.8?
So that's what it sees from the time that it creates to the time that it decays into other particles.
would be 34.8 microseconds at that velocity.
If that is the constant velocity, or that's the difference in the velocities of these two reference frames.
The reference frame of the muon and the reference frame of the observer standing on Earth.
Now, velocity equals distance of time.
In other words, distance is going to be velocity times time.
So here we're going to have velocity times time, which is just going to be this.
So delta T0 divided by the square root of 1 minus V squared over C squared.
And if you plug all of that in, and you plug in all of these values,
you're going to get a delta T of about, I think it was 1.04 times 10 to the power of 4 meters.
And if it has to travel, so it will travel just over 10,000 meters.
That means it will make it down two.
And if this was the only time it had available, according to us,
yeah, it will never reach 10,000.
We will never be able to travel to 10,000 meters.
We will never be able.
And also in the detector, they will never be able to measure those energies coming off because of muons.
And one of the detectors is a CLS, which stands for Compact Muon Solenoid.
Okay, so muons are quite important to us.
Apologies, I didn't notice that the card was full.
I'm not quite sure.
Obviously, as per usual, when exactly it stopped.
But we were talking about the fact that muons are quite important to us.
As far as practicalities are concerned, it's useful too.
And of course, for helping us measure the search for the ex-bosum as much as the energies that are released there
for the hadrons colliding, the protons colliding there.
So eons are very important to us.
Certainly, at this lifespan, we weren't going to be able to find it useful.
But if it travels at appreciable fractions or the speed of life, its life prolongs considerably
as far as us as the observer is concerned, and we can make it useful.
