New problem, we're traveling in a constant velocity starships.
The starship and the spaceship and the astronauts on board that spaceship
travels to a new planet from Earth at a constant velocity.
We don't know that velocity. It takes 9.2 years, according to them,
to travel this distance at their velocity.
But on Earth, an observer on Earth sees 15 years past before that spaceship lands.
We want to know the distance from Earth to the new planet in meters.
First of all, we do know what the velocity is related to Earth,
so velocity equals velocity.
Which one is T0, which one is delta T0, which one is delta T?
Well, the astronauts, for them, their little cloud sees these ticks
at exactly the same spot because their clock travels with them.
So the events in time, the time event takes place at the ticks,
which is the time event takes place at the same time.
So for that same spot, that's T0.
The observer on Earth sees those ticks happen at different spots.
So the events occur, the beginning and end of the events occur at different places.
So that is going to be the dilated time, and that's going to be the proper time.
Now, we need, let's see, we know that delta T0 equals what?
There we go.
Delta T equals delta T0 divided by the square root of 1 over v squared over c squared.
But what do we want to know?
We want to know the distance to that planet.
And velocity equals distance divided by time.
In other words, distance equals velocity times time.
So we certainly know from this observer on Earth, we know the time that it takes.
We know the time that it takes for these astronauts to reach.
It takes, according to the observers on Earth, it takes 15 years.
So we need the velocity.
So out of this we need the velocity because we know what delta T is.
We know what delta T0 is.
We know C.
1 is 1.
So we need to solve for v squared.
And that's easy to do.
And as much as it's stupidly, 1 minus v squared over c squared is going to give you delta T0 over delta T.
So we're going to get that 1 minus v squared over c squared is going to be delta T0 over delta T all squared.
v squared over c squared is going to equal 1 minus delta T0 over delta T all squared.
In other words, v is going to equal just the square root of c times 1 minus delta T0 over delta T squared.
In other words, v is going to equal just the square root of c times 1 minus delta T0 over delta T squared.
OK, apologies for that.
We were busy taking the square root of both sides.
We shall leave us velocity equals c times the square root of 1 minus delta T0 over delta T squared.
So that is certainly the velocity here.
That's going to equal c times the square root of 1 minus delta T0 over delta T squared.
And that's going to be multiplied by delta T0.
And that's going to be multiplied by delta T0.
Not delta T0 because this distance, velocity equals distance over T.
Observer sees the spaceship go at a certain velocity in a certain time that it sees.
It's the velocity of the ship multiplied by the time that it sees and that gives me a distance of 1.12.
See if you get the same, times 10 to the power, 17 meters, the distance between the Earth and the new planet.
Now, let's do this problem.
I have a bacterium that can divide every 24 hours.
And I'm going to start with one bacterium and I'm going to let a certain number of days go by until I have 256 bacterium.
So I have one bacterium after 24 hours.
There will be two because I'm starting with N initially equals 1 and N finally is 256.
And that's what happens on Earth.
And I make two copies of the two little meaty dishes with it.
And one I keep with me on Earth.
The other one goes on the spaceship and that spaceship can travel at that velocity 0.66 c.
So I want to know, as far as the observer on Earth is concerned, when his bacteria count reaches 256, how many are there on the spaceship?
So what are we dealing with here?
First of all, we'll have to see how many days go by on Earth to reach 56 because we're talking about time dilation.
This is obviously a time dilation problem.
So if you think about it on day, I'm going to start on day zero with one.
That'll be my day and that'll be my count, N.
After one day, they have 24 hours, I'm going to have two bacteria.
After two days, I'm going to have four bacteria and so on until I get to 256.
You can very quickly see that this is a sequence in A of N and my sequence is going to be 2 to the power N and N being from 0 to 8.
Because 2 to the power 8 is 56.
On day N equals 0, I'm going to have 2 times 0 is 1.
On day 2, N equals 1.
I'm going to have 2 to the power 1.
That is two bacteria and then eventually on day 8, on day 8, I'm going to have 256.
So we're talking eight days.
Now what is that?
Eight days passed for me, but we are, that isn't for me, but we're talking about what is happening for the bacteria.
A little time clock goes with the bacteria and it will measure 1, 2.
So it stays the same for me as the observer.
I see 1, 2 for those of bacteria traveling at a velocity relative to me.
In other words, delta T, 0, we don't know.
Delta T for me equals eight days.
We've just established on day, end of day 8, I will have 256.
So that's eight days.
Now it's really simple.
We have to see what the time dilation is going to be.
What the proper time is going to be.
So delta T equals delta T, 0, divided by 1 minus b squared over c squared, the square root of that.
For us to work out delta T, 0 is going to be delta T times the square root of 1 minus b squared over c squared.
And that gives me, now this is dimensionless, and if I use these as days, that will be days, and you'll see that your answer will go to four days.
Four days.
So what is going to happen, how many do they have at the end of four days?
That makes my n equal four, so I'm looking for a four.
That's going to be, in my sequence, two to the power of four.
And that equals, I will see them having grown 16 bacteria, and at that time I get 256 bacteria.
With that, all I can do is find myself.
Thank you very much.
Any other questions?
I would agree.
Yes!
I would agree.
So I'm always happy.
And now I'm happy.
And now what I linked around to the profile hydrologes is to the Cancer University.
Now Profano Vale D워 City See for me, should be片iden from兒 and Lunch streaming.
Oh my gosh, it's wonderful.
I I did seeISH thank you.
Like youréfee.
Oh my gosh, I did.
That average.
Thank you.
