Let's do some quickfire problems. If I have a cup of coffee, two cups of coffee, they are at 95 degrees and then that one at 60 degrees and I have them at sea level and the other two on Mount Everest, same temperatures. Which one has the largest mass, which one has the smallest mass?
Well, the higher they are, they'll have potential energy as far as the height is concerned. And obviously the one that is warmer will have more heat energy. So certainly the one with the most mass is going to be the one on Mount Everest at 95 and the one with the lowest mass is actually going to be the 60 degree cup of coffee at sea level.
And another question is, if I have a system of two positive charges, when will that system of the two particles have largest mass? When they are close together, a finite distance or infinitely far apart? Well, closer apart because they're going to have higher electric potential energy.
Next one, if I have a parallel plate capacitor and it's uncharged and then I charge it by taking electrons away from one plate and putting it on the other, which capacitor will have the highest mass? Obviously the charge one, because again, we'll have energy because of that capacitor charge.
Last quick question is if I accelerate a proton to a certain speed and I accelerate an electron to a certain speed. Obviously that takes energy to do that. Which one will take the most energy? Obviously the proton will take more energy in as much as it has larger mass and there's an equivalence between mass and energy.
Now let's look at this. A quasar is believed to be the active nucleus of a young forming galaxy. And we can measure some of those quasars and they put out, they have a power output of 1 times 10 to the power of 41 watts. How many, how many kilograms per second does that active galactic nucleus lose?
Now power equals energy divided by time. In other words, energy equals power times time. And this is going to be the energy that it puts out because this is joules per second. Joules per second. So we have joules per second times time in seconds that just gives us joules.
So we're talking about this. So we're talking about this amount of energy. So we're talking about this amount of energy. In other words, 1.0. Just showing you another way to do this problem because we did this before with a problem with sun times 10 to the power of 41 watts times pi.
That's what we're talking about. And that's what we're talking about. And that's what we're talking about. And that's what we have. And this energy that it puts out, we can equate this to, we can equate this to, we can equate this to, we can equate this to mass.
And as much as this rest energy is going to equal mc squared. In other words, 1.0 times 10 to the power of 41 watts times time equals mc squared.
And what do I want? I want m over t. How many kilograms per second? So we have m over t is going to be 1.0 times 10 to the power of 41 watts divided by c squared. And that gives me 1.1 times 10 to the power, 10 to the power, 24 kilograms.
And if you think that the mass of the earth is about 6 times 10 to the power of 24 kilograms, it means in less than a second, in less than 6 seconds, in every, say, in every just under 6 seconds, it's going to lose the mass of the earth in every 6 seconds.
Phenomenal.
