Okay, we have the mass of the Sun, we know that, and we know that it radiates and the
electromagnetic radiation is 3.92 times 10 to the power 26 watts. 26 watts, that is joules per second.
And I want to express that as a loss in mass per second because if it loses this amount of energy per second
and there's an equivalence between energy and mass, I should be able to calculate what the mass per second,
what the mass per second loss is. And if we just look at how we do relate those,
so we're going to use E0 of the rest, the rest mass is going to be MC squared, in other words the mass,
the mass is going to equal E0 divided by C squared. But I don't want mass, I want mass per
time unit, so I'm going to have to put the time unit in there as well. And energy divided by time,
remember power equals energy divided by time, so what I'm asking for here is power divided by,
this power divided by C squared, so I'm going to have this, and power divided by C squared,
I get, and if I do that I get, power divided by C squared, I get 4.36, 4.36 times 10 to the power 9 kilograms per second that the sun looters.
Before we got interrupted there, we also wanted to know what fraction would this be in a human lifetime,
a fraction of the total mass of the sun. So if this is, if this is M over T, we just need to multiply this by 75 years,
remember this is in seconds, and that will give us delta M divided by the mass of the sun itself,
and that gives me a fraction of 5.18, 5.18 times 10 to the power of negative 12, that fraction.
So if you convert that to percentage times 100, you're going to get about 5.18 nano percent,
something like a nano percent. So a negligible loss, even at this mass of 4.36 billion kilograms per second,
that is still nothing over a human lifetime. Now we looked at total energy, and we said that the total energy
equals MC squared divided by our famous V squared divided by C squared, 1 minus V squared over C squared.
And that is the total energy, and we looked at how that encompasses potential energy, for instance,
and as much as we'll have the rest energy plus kinetic energy. Sorry, kinetic energy.
But this doesn't only include kinetic energy, it's all forms of energy. For instance, if you have a spring.
Here we have a spring in this rest form, and now I'm going to stretch that spring out, and we're going to have this delta X, delta X change,
or here I'm going to compress this spring. And now I'm going to have this delta X compression.
So we know that the spring, the potential energy in the spring is going to be equals KX squared.
So it doesn't matter if I compress it, imagine these were the same, it doesn't matter if I put it out or compress it,
I'm changing the potential energy of that spring, and that change in energy, that change in energy,
and obviously it gets compressed and it stands there, so we're talking about rest energy,
so the change in rest energy is going to equal a change in mass times C squared.
So if I change this energy by this much, if I change it by this much, there's also going to be a change in mass.
But because obviously this is so small compared to C squared, that mass is not going to change.
When I add heat energy, I transfer energy in the form of heat to water, I'm going to change the mass of that water.
Once again, small comparison, that amount of energy, small comparison to C, so you're not ever going to notice the change in mass.
But any transfer of energy to or taking energy away from a system is going to lead to a change in mass as well with that equivalent.
Let's just do that. I have one kilogram of water and I add heat energy to it of 1,000 calories or 4,186 joules
to raise its temperature by 1 degree Celsius or 1 Kelvin.
What is the change in mass of that water?
Well, at rest, we're going to have delta N times C squared.
In other words, delta N is going to be delta E zero divided by C squared.
So that's going to be 4,186 joules divided by C squared.
And that leaves me something horribly small like, I think it's 4.7, what was it?
4.7, 4.7 times 10 to the power of negative 14 kilograms.
Negative, so it's 47, what is that?
4.7 times 10 to the power of negative 14 kilograms.
That's a minuscule amount, but it does change.
In this video, I'm just going to relate to momentum and total energy.
And we'll remember relativistic momentum equals mv divided by the square root of 1 minus v squared over C squared.
So p over v equals that.
If I just look at energy, total energy, remember that equals mv divided by 1 minus v squared over C squared.
And all of this, all of that, this part equals p over v.
So I'm left with p c squared over v.
So e equals p c squared over v.
Usually we don't leave it there.
We can write the following.
We can write the following.
I'll just show you all the steps.
That equals p times c times c divided by v.
If we get v over C, I bring the v up, one c down.
It's going to be p divided by e.
And if I substitute that v c in there, in other words, squared is going to equal this squared.
So I'm going to be left with energy equals, energy equals mc squared, mc squared divided by the square root of 1 minus.
Instead of v over c, I plug in p c squared, p c over e squared.
If I square both sides, I'm going to have a square.
There I'll have a 4 and I'll be right of my squared sign there.
So I can bring all of this.
I can bring all of this to this side.
Let's carry on here.
Let's do one more step.
So e squared times 1 minus p c over e squared equal m squared c to the power of 4.
I can multiply those out.
So I'm going to have e squared minus the e squared.
And this e squared is going to cancel out.
So I'm going to have p squared c squared equals m squared c to the power of 4.
In other words, e squared equals p squared c squared plus m squared c to the power of 4.
And that is the relationship between relativistic or total energy and relativistic momentum.
Now, a photon is massless and it can reach the speed of light, the ultimate speed limit.
But any mass cannot approach, cannot get to the speed of light.
And we can see that from this equation for kinetic energy.
And what happens as v approaches c, so what we're doing mathematically is just taking the limit as v approaches c.
So we're going to get as far as this is concerned, we're going to get v approaches c, we're going to get a 1 for that fraction there.
And 1 minus 1 is 0.
So this denominator is going to approach 0 as v approaches c.
And 1 over that is going to leave us with infinity there.
So we're going to be left with, if we take the limit of this kinetic energy as v approaches c,
we're going to get m c squared, we're going to get infinity minus 1.
Okay, so we are approaching infinity.
But from the work energy to get, as we approach c, we're going to get an infinite amount of kinetic energy.
But from the work energy theorem, that means we'll have to put in an infinite amount of work.
And an infinite amount of work does not exist.
Hence, we cannot have v equal c.
No mass can be reached in the speed of light.
