Now in this section we're going to start talking about special relativity.
Special relativity.
Now it's exciting when you get to this part of physics.
The way that I feel about it is you've paid your dues.
You've gone through the normal classical mechanics.
You've gone through electricity and magnetism.
You've gone through waves and optics.
You've paid your dues and now eventually, eventually, eventually the interesting stuff starts happening.
Special relativity, matter waves, the atom, nuclear physics.
Now things start getting very interesting.
The way that I feel about it, you've gotten there.
Let the good times start.
Now special relativity, what is the word special?
Why is there special and general relativity?
Just as Newton's laws of mechanics with very special circumstances,
very special set of circumstances have to be adhered to for those laws to be accurate in.
The next step in describing full reality would be special relativity.
It describes a bit more or a few more conditions around your experiment that will make your equations be a true reflection of what really goes on.
And then you move on to general relativity.
And then you move on to general relativity.
It makes things even more general.
You include more conditions into which your equations will actually describe reality.
It does not encompass the world of the very small, for that we need quantum mechanics, and we still need a theory that will describe the whole world.
So what does special relativity, what circumstances are we talking about, that extends Newton's world?
Well the first thing is something we have to talk about, and that is inertial reference frames.
Inertial reference frames.
What is an inertial reference frame?
Well the reference frame is I'm measuring something with respect to something else.
I have a coordinate system, we usually choose physics, we choose a two-dimensional coordinate system.
We have the y-axis here, and we can have either x, or we can have time on that x-axis.
We can have displacement, or time, or something else on that x-axis.
But we'll have a zero point, that is this is our reference frame.
That stands absolutely still, and everything else happens in that reference frame.
That reference frame does not move.
And an inertial reference frame is a reference frame in which Newton's law of inertia, or Newton's first law, holds.
And that law states, and that law states that if no net force acts upon a body, that body will either remain absolutely still, no displacement,
or will move with constant velocity.
That is an inertial reference frame.
So special relativity only works in inertial reference frame.
So if there's a net force on the one reference frame, then it accelerates.
Now, the equations that we use here do not encompass those circumstances.
But certainly we are now extending what Newton has said.
It might not be obvious why at the moment, but you'll soon see why.
So we have to have inertial reference frames.
And what this refers to is the fact that these two reference frames.
One might be the source.
We would call that the source.
And the other one is the observer's reference frame.
So if I'm driving in my little car.
Let's draw a little...
I'm standing in the back actually of the car.
It's a little pickup truck.
And I have a colleague that's standing next to the road.
And I am moving along.
Our two reference frames are not the same.
I might also be flying in an aeroplane.
My reference frame inside of that big air bus or Boeing as I'm flying off to London.
I can walk in there.
I can pour some tea or coffee.
And the world around me is standing absolutely still.
My reference frame as I'm moving at constant velocity is absolutely high.
Except for the drone of the aircraft and full knowing where I am.
I might not know that I'm actually moving.
My reference frame is standing still.
But someone on the ground.
His reference frame, his or her reference frame is totally different.
He will see me move past as if he's standing still.
And I see him move or pass me on the road as if I'm standing absolutely still.
If both of these are inertial reference frames.
If both of these are inertial reference frames.
Okay, now we have a good idea what an inertial reference frame is.
If it's only when both of us are standing still.
Or one of us or both of us are moving with respect to the other at constant velocity.
Nothing else.
So for special relativity to work, we have to adhere to two postulates.
And there are two postulates.
The first postulate for us is going to be the inertial reference frame postulate or the relativity postulate.
Relativity postulate.
And that is exactly what we've described here.
We have to be in an inertial reference frame.
And we are both standing still.
Both of the source and the observer.
And what we're going to do here now is shine a torchlight.
I'm going to shine a torchlight at the observer.
So I'm going to be the source and the person standing here would be the observer.
But he might also be in a car travelling towards me.
As long as we're either both standing still or one or two.
Or the both of us move at constant velocity relative to each other.
So that's the relativity postulate.
And the second one is the speed of light postulate.
Speed of light postulate.
So there we go.
Two postulates.
And what is the speed of light postulate says?
That says, we take for granted, that the speed of light in a vacuum, C, is a constant
for all observers in an inertial reference frame.
And this is where the fun starts.
Because I am moving towards the observer.
He's standing still at zero meters per second.
And I'm moving towards him at an enormous rate of 20 meters per second.
And I shine my light.
And he now sees this light coming towards him and props to him.
What is he going to measure?
He will definitely not measure C plus 20 meters per second.
He's definitely not going to observe that.
Because we take for granted that the speed of light is always a constant in air.
We're going to take air when we live on Earth.
Okay.
So 20 meters per second.
He's not going to see that extra 20 meters per second.
So for him, he's going to measure it at C.
Where did this 20 meters per second then disappear to?
Because certainly if I throw a baseball at a pitcher or a ball, a cricket ball at a batman.
If I stand still and throw the ball or if I run and throw the ball, okay, those two are additive.
And that's in Newton's law.
Because the speed that I'm talking of now is a lot smaller than C.
Once we approach an appreciable fraction of C, once we come close to C, we've got to make arrangements to handle this case because this is impossible.
And the only way that that holds, that this postulate will hold, and this is what Einstein realized, is if time was not a constant.
These two people are going to have a different experience with respect to each other as far as the passage of time is concerned.
They're not going to have that.
So we have to have the relativity postulate.
And remember, Earth, if I do two things like this on Earth, it doesn't mean whole because we are going around in a circle.
As the Earth spins around, we're going around and around the Sun as the year goes by.
The Sun goes around and around the whole galaxy.
So we are experiencing centripetal force.
And the centripetal force means there is a net force.
So we are actually accelerating different strength.
So this is what we are going to deal with as far as special relativity is concerned.
Let's get started.
Thank you.
