Now we're going to look at the relativistic addition of velocities.
So we're going to have three, let's say three observers.
So we're just extending the concept where before we just had two, there were two reference frames.
We're going to now have three reference frames.
Now this is a little man standing on this little cart.
Relative to this observer who's standing still, so he has his own reference frame.
The man on the car, in other words, this car itself has its own reference frame.
And this car is moving towards this person, so there's relative motion between these two.
But he throws a ball while the car is moving, and this ball will have its own frame of reference.
Its own reference frame.
So there are three reference frames here with velocities or motions relative to each other.
And it is, no matter what problem you get to solve, it is always easiest to break it down.
You're going to get spatial problems most definitely, most of the time.
To break it down into this simplistic schoolboy scenario.
And based on that, I memorize this little triangle.
I draw this little triangle where B is the ground, C is the man in the truck, and A is the ball.
And this is our, this is our equation, the equation that you must know for adding relativistic velocities.
Adding relativistic velocities.
Now look at this.
A, B.
Because what we want to know is, this man sees the truck move towards him at a certain velocity.
And that is my C, B.
My C, B.
He is standing still, this truck is coming towards him.
He throws the ball at a certain velocity, that is this velocity up here, A, C.
And we want to know, I mean if this truck was driving at 10 meters per second,
and he threw the ball at another 10 meters per second relative to himself,
this guy should see the ball come at him at 10 plus 10 is 20 meters per second.
And this is this A, B.
A, B.
This is what we want to know.
We're adding these two velocities.
We're adding these two velocities.
And we want to know, what will this velocity be, the second velocity?
Do you just add them?
Well, in Newtonian mechanics you do, but we know that that is wrong.
We can extend our equations to fit more of reality, and that's where special relativity comes in.
So I can work out this A, B.
And there's my equation.
The velocity A, B, of what do I measure?
The ball coming towards me.
Same as the baseball pitcher throwing the ball, he has a forward motion, forward velocity,
and then added to the velocity of the ball.
Or a bowling kicker runs towards the near side stops and bowls, but he runs in quite fast.
And then adds the velocity that he has to the ball.
But relativistically that doesn't work.
We have then A, C.
A, C, that is the velocity at which the ball was thrown.
C, B, the velocity of the truck, but then I divide it by 1 plus the product of those two.
I multiply them, divide it by C squared.
Now we're going to do a problem because I leave this side of the board on.
I leave this side of the board on because every problem we have we're going to equate to this little triangle and this equation that we should know.
Thinking back, always take that question that you're given and relate it to this very simplistic model of this little schoolboy model.
Let's do this problem.
A truck has a speed or velocity relative to the ground of 0.8 times the speed of light.
Very unrealistic truck.
Someone on the ball throws a ball in the same direction.
So this is positive, positive.
Let's make it that.
Relative to the truck at 0.5 C.
What is the velocity of the ball relative to the ground?
So if I just added those two, I did 1.3 C, and we know any finite mass cannot approach the speed of light, so certainly that would be wrong.
If I stood on the ground, I could not measure the velocity of that ball coming towards me at 1.3 C.
That is impossible.
Now these things, 1, 2, 3, we've got to now put them in our little triangle.
We've got to start learning how to use this triangle to get some experience with this triangle.
Which will be the truck relative to the ground?
This will be the truck.
This will be the ground.
And this will be the ball.
So quite close to what we have before.
So let's see.
What will be VAB?
VAB is certainly this bottom line.
That's what we need to get.
The ball relative to the ground.
So VAB?
We don't know.
What is VAC?
VAC.
Well, AC is this line here.
That is the velocity of the ball relative to the truck.
That is going to be 0.5 C.
What is VCB?
That's the last one we need.
VCB.
CB is the truck to the ground.
Truck to the ground.
0.8 C.
Now it becomes easy.
We're just going to plug in AC.
AC and CB in there.
AC and CB in there.
And check your answer I get for VAB.
My answer was 0.9 C.
Certainly not 1.3 C.
Now there's just one trick because you're going to get a problem like that.
It's not stated specifically in this problem.
But you are going to get that.
If this person on the ground sees the truck coming at him at 0.9 C.
At 0.9 C.
And he sees 0.8 C.
And he sees the ball come toward him now at 0.9 C.
What is the velocity that he sees between the difference of velocity between the truck and the ball?
While there's just the same reference frame.
I'm taking these two velocities relative to the same reference frame.
So then it just becomes a simple subtraction.
He sees this come towards at 0.9.
He sees the ball come at 0.9.
So he sees the ball leave the truck at 0.1 C.
At 0.1 C.
Certainly not the 0.5 C.
That this person on the truck sees the ball leave his hand.
Okay.
This is seeing these things from the same point of view.
I see the truck come at 0.8.
I see the ball come at 0.9.
That means it looks to me as if the ball is leaving the truck at 0.1 C.
So both of those are done from the same reference frame.
So there is no relativistic difference there.
That is a simple addition of the one away from the other.
Because the reference frame from which it is taken is exactly the same reference frame.
So don't make that mistake and we'll certainly get to a problem as far as that is concerned.
Now here's a good problem.
We have a spaceship that turns at a constant velocity and is being chased by a cruiser.
Also at a constant velocity.
The cruiser moves towards the spaceship at 0.7 C.
So as far as that spaceship is concerned.
It is standing still relative to a person in that spaceship.
It is standing still but it sees the cruiser coming towards it at 0.7 C.
So that is the velocity of the cruiser relative to the spaceship.
Now this cruiser who is chasing and catching up at that speed.
The cruiser finds a laser light at the spaceship.
And we want to know the velocity of the laser light relative to the spaceship.
And we want to know the velocity at which the spaceship sees the laser leave the cruiser.
Now we've got to figure out which is A, which is C, which is B.
And I think this is an easy enough thing to do.
If we make B, instead of this B standing still now, we make this the spaceship.
Let's make this the spaceship.
The laser light, we make this the cruiser coming towards it.
Not because it's C, but because it's the way that it works out for us.
And it's firing this laser beam towards this side.
So definitely I think this was the laser.
So let's see what is relative to what.
Let's see what is relative to what.
What answers do we have?
The spaceship is a constant velocity.
We don't know how much.
And the cruiser also.
The cruiser towards the spaceship.
So the cruiser towards the spaceship.
This is certainly the CB that we do have.
So we have CB equals 0.7C.
All moving in the same direction, so we don't have to worry too much.
We don't have to worry too much about that.
What is the laser light being fired by the cruiser?
The laser light fired by the cruiser.
Well, that is the cruiser, the laser light relative to the cruiser.
Laser light is light in a vacuum.
Electromagnetic wave in a vacuum.
That is always going to be C.
So we're going to have the velocity CA, or AC I should say, equals C.
Now we want to know the velocity of the laser light relative to the spaceship.
So we're looking for the laser light relative to the spaceship.
So we're looking for VAB.
VAB.
That's what we're looking for.
Ah, let's see.
And if we plug those in, what do you think we're going to get?
What do you think we're going to get?
We don't even have to do the sum then, do we?
We don't have to do the sum because any observer in an inertial reference frame
will measure the speed of light at exactly the same velocity, and that velocity is C.
But certainly you can plug this into your equation here.
You'll have 0.7 plus 1, and you'll have 1 plus 0.7.
You'll have, because 1 is C squared, the C squared cancels out.
So you're just left with the, ah, you're just left with the CD, which is 0.7.
So you have 1 plus 0.7, ah, 0.7 plus 1 over 1 plus 0.7.
And it is 1 over 1, which is 1.
C, you know, the C at the top.
The speed of light will always be measured by any observer in a constant frame of, ah,
in an inertial frame of reference.
So it's either constant velocity or standing still.
We'll measure the C to be exactly the same.
Now the second part comes in, and we've just talked about it.
The velocity at which the spaceship sees the laser light leave the cruiser.
And so both are now measured by the same frame of reference.
I'm going to see the cruiser come at 0.7.
I'm going to see the light come towards me at 1.
So the difference is just going to be 0.3.
This difference here is just going to be 0.3, plus 0.3 C.
It's going to look to me as if this laser light leaves the ship at 0.3.
Because it comes at 0.7.
This comes to me at 1.
So it's just that difference because both are measured relative to the same frame of reference.
Even more reference.
