In Newtonian mechanics, we look at momentum as something that is conserved in an isolated system.
In an isolated system, there are no net external forces.
So we had that, for instance, with collisions, that the momentum before must equal the momentum after.
Now we're going to talk about relativistic momentum.
And that gives a different momentum to a particle as it moves at ever greater velocities.
And because we're only going to measure constant velocity differences between the two reference frames, this is special relativity.
Okay, we defined momentum as the product of mass times velocity.
Now we are going to look at relativistic momentum.
I'm just going to give you a short conversion of the derivation of the equation.
And we'll add the equation to our time dilation, length contraction, and relativistic momentum.
So this is our third equation that we are after.
The new definition for momentum is going to be mass times delta L, or L0, I should say.
So that is the length that our mass travels as measured by an observer whose relative velocity to this path is 0.
So their two reference frames are equal, but we are not going to divide that, remember, that velocity equals distance of a time.
So I've got the mass here, and I'm doing velocity, distance.
But I'm going to divide by the proper time.
I'm going to divide by the proper time for relativistic momentum.
Now this is the observer that travels with the particle, with the particle.
Now, just to make life easy without explaining too much, I'm just going to multiply by delta T over delta T.
And that is the time as measured for that mass to travel by this observer standing still.
So, not proper time, if I just rewrite this, I'm going to be left with mass, I'm going to be left with L0 over delta T.
And delta T, I'm going to be left with delta T over delta T0.
So this length, for this observer standing here sees this mass travel, this length, proper length, divided by the time that he observed,
which is just the velocity, that is just the velocity of the particle.
And what is delta T over delta T0?
Well, delta T, when I bring delta T0 on this side, I left with one over that square root.
So this will be the square root of one minus V squared divided by C squared.
And that is the equation for relativistic momentum.
Because I started with this abnormal description, let's call it abnormal, it is what it is.
Now we have an equation for relativistic momentum, the mass of an object times its velocity,
which we will then have an appreciable fraction of the speed of light to make a difference for us,
divided by the square root of one minus V squared over C squared, relativistic momentum.
I don't know if it comes out in the corner there, I shouldn't write any further down in there.
So our equation for relativistic momentum.
Now I have an electron with a mass of 9.11 times 10 to the pound, negative 31 kilograms at rest,
but I accelerated to this enormous speed, which is reached at the Stanford linear collider,
three kilometers long linear collider, and I accelerated to that massive velocity,
0.0.9999999997C.
And I want you to know what is its relativistic momentum, first of all.
I know that relativistic momentum equals mass times velocity divided by 1 minus V squared over C squared.
And if I plug in that mass, that velocity, and 1 minus the C squared will cancel,
so it's just that squared, I get an answer of about 1.1 times 10 to the power of negative 17.
Negative 17, and that will be kilograms meters per second.
Now I want to know how does that differ?
How much has the momentum increased?
By what factor versus the electron that is just drifting at a very low velocity?
And remember, the non-relativistic momentum, I'll say the relativistic and the non-relativistic,
versus mass times velocity.
So if I just divide these two by each other, relativistic by momentum, non-relativistic,
I'm going to get this divided by this.
These two cancel, so I'm just left with 1 over 1 over 1 minus V squared over C squared.
And if you do this, this answer is more than 40,000.
Okay, so I've increased the relativistic momentum, increases momentum at lower velocities by more than 40,000.
By more than 40,000.
So indeed, a much higher momentum of an electron, just in 3 kilometers.
Let's do a conservation of linear momentum problem.
I have a man and a woman standing on ice skates next to each other, standing still,
and then they push away.
And her final velocity is 2.5 meters per second if her weight is 54 and his weight is 88.
Let's just leave this out for a moment.
Then we want to know what will be his relativistic speed if the speed of light was 3 meters per second.
First of all, we've got to see under non-relativistic terms what his velocity is going to be.
Remember, for conservation of linear momentum, non-relativistic means that the initial and the final momentum
is going to be equal to be the same.
And we know that non-relativistic momentum is just mass times velocity.
So initially, it will be his, her mass times velocity plus his mass times velocity,
which is still zero because both of their velocities are zero.
Then we're going to have her mass times velocity, final.
And that's going to be plus his mass times his velocity, final.
So that will go to the other side.
We'll get negative.
In the end, we're going to get velocity.
His velocity, final, is going to equal negative her mass times her velocity, final, provided by his mass.
And that gives us a negative 1.5, 1.5, 3, 4, thereabouts, meters per second.
That's what's going to happen to him.
Now, relativistically, P is going to equal M times V, that's his mass, we're interested in now.
Now, his mass times his velocity, there, divided by 1 minus V squared, which is going to be his velocity,
final squared, divided by C squared, but C squared is now just 3 meters per second.
And if you do that, you're going to get a certain velocity.
But remember, momentum equals mass times velocity.
We want his velocity, so we're going to just divide all of that.
We're going to divide all of that by his mass.
So, we're going to divide all of this, and divide it by mass of the million, and that is going to equal,
give us his relativistic velocity.
So, if we divide by that, we take away this one, and then I get, then I get, I think about,
negative 1.8 meters per second versus that negative 1.5 meters per second for the relativistic velocity
as far as this change in relativistic momentum is concerned.
