Let's do this quick and easy problem. We have a spaceship that travels...
Oh, let's change it to a UFO. Let's make it a UFO that travels at 0.9C relative to the Earth.
It's coming towards the Earth at 0.9C. And the Earthling measures...
In the direction of travel, it measures the diameter of that space...
Of that UFO to be 300 meters. Now the UFO lands,
What will the Earthling now measure the UFO's diameter to be?
So what is what in this? The velocity is going to be 0.9C.
Everyone will agree with that. C will be C.
And the Earthling measures it while it's traveling to have a diameter of 300 meters.
That means the length in the direction of observation...
In the direction of movement, I should say, is 300 meters.
This one's standing still. There's relative motion to this reference frame...
Or this reference frame. In other words, this must be L.
L equals 300 meters.
Okay, L0 would be what we want.
Now, the spaceship, the UFO, and the observer, both of their reference frames...
Are standing still. There's no relative motion between the two reference frames.
So certainly that is what we want.
We know L equals L0 times 1 minus V squared over C squared.
But we want L0, and L0 is going to be L over the square root of 1 minus V squared over C squared.
And to... There's two significant digits there. So we have to go to two significant digits.
If we plug that in with 300 meters for L, I get 690. I think 688 something.
Which for two significant digits will be 690.
So traveling at 0.9C gave us length contraction of more than 50% as far as...
And remember, neither of these is the two. There's no reference frame that is preferred over the other.
But here, there is a relative motion between the two reference frames.
And this is no relative motion between the two reference frames.
And that is what we take to be L0.
When it comes to time, I will repeat it.
But there's no relative velocity between the two reference frames.
The person who measures and the time clock...
As the vents take place in the same...
In the same place.
Then we talk about delta T0.
That is proper time.
Whereas this is proper length.
Let's do this...
If we talk about spaceships at 0.9C being a bit unrealistic.
Now this is just as unrealistic.
We have a walkway that is 9 kilometers long.
Straight 9 kilometers.
A walker walks at 1.3 meters per second.
Then if the speed of light in a vacuum is 3 meters per second.
How long would that walker measure the length of this walkway?
So there is a relative motion between these two reference frames.
The walker's reference frame and the path's reference frame.
So if there's a relative motion...
Well, let's just say we all agree that V equals 1.3 meters per second.
And we're going to...
C is going to be 3.0 meters per second.
But is that 9 kilometers L or is it L0?
Well, that walkway...
If someone stands still on that walkway...
There is no relative velocity between the reference frame of the person standing still and the walkway.
Which makes this L0.
So L0 is going to be 9.0 kilometers.
So we need to solve for L.
We know that that's L...
1 minus V0...
V square root of C squared.
L0 times the square root of that.
And if we simply plug in 9 kilometers here...
We don't have to change these.
These units are not the same.
We don't have to change them there because...
These two are going to be squared and cancelled out.
So this is without any units.
So I can leave this in kilometers.
And then for two significant digits I did 8.1 kilometers.
It's going to be the length of this pathway measured by this walker.
If indeed this was the unrealistic speed of light in the vacuum.
In this problem we're dealing with an unstable subatomic particle traveling at an appreciable fraction of the speed of light 0.99c.
According to a scientist in the lab it travels a distance 1.05 millimeters.
First of all I want to know what is the proper distance travel.
Now the proper distance we said that that's L0 first of all.
And that is made by an observer who is at rest relative to the reference frame of the path.
A scientist standing still his reference frame.
The path itself is standing still.
There's no relative motion between those two reference frames.
That gives us L0 and we said that the scientist measures this.
It's 1.05 millimeters.
Now I have an observer who travels.
I shouldn't write the L there.
I have to explain it first.
Now we want to know the distance traveled according to the particle.
Now there is the particle has its own reference frame.
According to it it's standing still.
It is moving over this pathway.
Let me just answer this phone.
Apologies for that.
So this particle is moving.
And there's a relative motion between this reference frame and the reference frame of the pathway.
So we'll be measuring time and distance contraction.
So that's L.
Which is going to be L0 times the square root of 1 minus v squared over c squared.
And that is going to give me this 1.05 millimeters.
And then this square root here.
Which gives me an L of 1.48.
1.48 times 10 to the power of negative 4 meters.
So that's 0.14 millimeters.
So certainly a lot of length contraction.
What is the proper time interval and that was the lifetime of, proper lifetime of that particle.
Now remember that is delta.
That is delta T0 that we're looking for.
Now because the events, that's the start and the end.
We're talking about time of the clock happens in the same spot.
Happens in the same spot according to the clock that travels with this particle.
Those events occur in the same place.
So there's no relative motion between those two reference frames.
So we want delta T0.
And from our equation here, we know that that is delta T.
Well, let's put it like this.
We don't use any equation.
We know that velocity equals distance over time.
In other words, we're looking for time.
Time equals distance over velocity.
But what we are looking for, as we said here, is delta T0.
What does the particle measure?
What is the distance it measured?
Well, it is this distance.
It is this distance L that it measured, divided by it, by this velocity.
And L we've just seen as this.
So we're going to have L0 squared root of 1 minus V squared over C squared divided by V.
As I said, I don't like to use in calculations, in exam situations, this because I might have made an error while punching the numbers into my calculator.
Now to use that here, by V means that answer is also wrong because of your mistake made upstream.
So you can do it that way and you can recheck yourself by writing the whole equation and redoing it.
So check your two answers are the same.
And then lastly, what is the lifetime measured by the scientist?
The scientist.
Now the scientist is going to see that clock move, is going to see that clock movement, as you saw in the first videos.
So its delta T is going to be, okay, the full, the length, so that's why we, it sees that motion, so we're talking delta T, my delta T0.
So what is the length, the distance that it sees this particle move?
Well it's going to be this proper distance L0 divided by V.
And we were given L0, we were given V, so this is a simple one to do.
And I get 3.54 times 10 to the power of negative 12 seconds.
Sorry, I forgot to give you this answer.
This answer that I got was 4.99 times 10 to the power of negative 13 seconds.
Okay, we have on the earth, we have a ramp built with this angle of 30 degrees, standing with respect or relative to the, to this blackboard as it is.
So we have a spaceship driving along this axis at 0.730C.
We want to know what angle does it measure for that 30 degree angle.
What angle does it measure?
Now first of all, what is going to happen if this relative motion is parallel to this axis?
So if we call this the y axis, we've got to call this the x axis.
So what is going to happen?
This x axis is going to get, it's going to get shorter.
Why would there be distance contraction?
Well, according to someone in the spaceship, with its reference frame in the spaceship,
this ramp is moving in that direction relative to.
So there is relative motion between those two reference frames.
In other words, we are not going to measure proper length.
Proper length under these circumstances will be, let's look at that.
The tangent of theta, let's call that theta 0, is going to be y over opposite over adjacent.
And that x there, I think we should take as being L0.
Because this ramp, an observer standing in with this ramp, there's no relative motion between those two reference frames.
In other words, it is measuring, an observer here would measure the proper distance, which would be L0.
What would the person on the spaceship measure?
Let's make that tan of theta.
And that's also going to be opposite, which does not change for these two circumstances,
because this length is perpendicular to the direction of motion.
Okay, so it's going to measure this contracted length of x, which will just be L, which will just be L.
So we have how many unknowns?
One unknown, two unknowns, another unknown.
So we better get rid of some unknowns.
What we can equate to each other, the only thing that is equal in all of this, I think, are these two y's.
So we can certainly get rid of the y's in as much as y is going to be L0 tangent of theta 0.
And y is going to equal L times the tangent of theta 0.
So we can put those two together certainly in as much as we're now going to have that L0 times the tangent of theta 0 equals L times the tangent of theta.
That was L times the tangent of theta.
What we want to solve for, actually, is this tangent of theta.
Because if we take then the arc tangent of both sides, we are just going to be left to theta.
So if we have the tangent of theta, we need to get that to be L0 tangent of theta 0 divided by L.
Now, we do have an equation for L.
Since we don't know L, it's something we can get rid of.
And there's L.
So let's write for L, L0 square root of 1 minus V squared over C squared.
We'll get rid of our L0s.
And now we're left with something on the right-hand side for which we know all the variables.
Theta 0 is 30 degrees.
V squared where V we were given.
And C squared we know.
In other words, we can just solve for theta, which is going to be the arctangent.
The arctangent of the following.
The tangent of theta 0, which is the tangent of 30 degrees divided by 1 minus V squared over C squared.
And the answer that I can check yours is, for three significant digits, is 40.2 degrees.
That's what is going to be measured by the reference frame of this spatial.
So the only clue lay in the fact that we've got to decide, we do have an equation for these two are not going to change.
They are equal.
And which is L0 and which is L purely based on difference in the velocity or its relative motion between two reference frames.
If not, between someone who observes standing here, it's going to measure proper L.
And the spaceship on whose reference frame there is relative motion as far as this frame is concerned.
This is going to measure the contracted length, the contracted length L.
