Let's just use some of our quickfire questions just to make sure that we understand this concept of time dilation.
We have a baseball pitcher, the baseball, the batsman.
The ball gets pitched to him and he hits the ball, I'm not an American, I don't know the exact terms,
pops it up straight up and the ball comes straight down.
And we want to know, we want to know of three people who views proper time and who views dilated time.
First of all, someone sitting in the stand.
There's someone sitting in the stand.
Okay, what is he going to see? He's going to see the start event and the catching of the ball right at the same event.
So, he is going to see proper time.
What about the person sitting at home watching TV?
Now, it's going to be centered on the screen as he hits the ball and then someone's going to run in, catch the ball.
So, the start event and the end event is going to appear at the same spot.
So, he's also going to see proper time.
What about the person running in from second base, whatever, runs in and catches the ball.
And catches the ball.
He sees the start event take place a long distance from him.
He runs in at constant velocity and he sees the end event right here by him.
So, this effect happened for him.
The start event was there, went up and then came down and ended here.
So, he is going to observe the dilated time.
Where as the person in the stand and the person watching TV is going to notice the proper time interval.
Another quick fire problem, although we are going to deal with this in triple force service.
This is going to be a net force, not just an inertia reference train.
Things are moving so slow.
We can probably see it as we have this carousel and then through the central axis.
Okay, we have an observer and his eye is right there.
And he sees we put three clocks.
We put the first clock there, a second clock halfway at, a third clock there.
And we want to know which clock would he observe to run slow as this carousel spins around.
Well, this one is not going to travel any distance.
So, the beginning and the end events are going to be at the same time.
So, the distance travel is going to be exactly the same.
This one is going to travel from there, say to there, from the start to the beginning of an event.
As the start of the clock, end of the clock.
Certainly, this will travel a distance and as the radius goes out, this one is going to travel even further.
In exactly the same time, which means the observer here is going to see this clock run the slowest,
second slowest and this clock run the fastest and indeed at the same time as what the observer sees here.
This is proper time, it's going to experience proper time, it's going to experience proper time.
The observer is going to experience time dilation for this clock and this clock and for this one more so,
for this one more time dilation so than for this clock.
Let's do another problem for time dilation and this is going to be the reverse of what we had before with the muon problem.
Now we have a pion. A pion is a type of headlock. It moves at a velocity in our laboratory of 0.990C.
So, quite fast. And as a scientist in the laboratory, we observe this particle, this pion to exist for 3.5 times 10 to the power negative of 8 seconds.
How long does the hypothetical observer that sits and lies with this pion, how long does it see the pion exists?
Hypothetical question. Okay.
What we can also say is if the pion was staying still relative to us, the observer, how long would it survive?
That would be a better way of asking this question.
Okay, we know. We just got to assign t0 and t. Well, t0 I would assign the proper time I would observe to this hypothetical person going with the muon
because it's going to see the muon or the pion into existence and out of existence at exactly the same spot.
So, I would denote that as delta t0. So, delta t is going to be this which we observe. We observe because we see it there as it starts in here.
It's not the physical location. It is, remember again, at the little clock of hours it's going to start up.
So, where it starts we're going to see there and where it detects again going up and down many times it's going to detect here.
So, the start event and the time, the start and end time event of the time and the time, not the physical distance of something moving towards us.
Because there can be relative movement here. We're concerned about where the time starts and where the time ends.
So, that's going to be delta t. And we know that delta t equals delta t0 divided by 1 minus v squared over c squared.
And we want to know now this hypothetical time, the time that's going to pass for this observer standing still with the, or standing right next to this fast moving.
So, in other words, we're seeing the pion now standing still in the laboratory rushing past it. Okay?
So, that's going to be delta t, that's going to be delta t1 minus v squared over c squared.
And if we plug that in, I get 4.94 nanoseconds. 4.94 nanoseconds.
And this is 35.0. This is 35.0 nanoseconds. We're going to be seeing at this very high velocity, there is a big, there is a very big difference.
Now, as far as the spine is concerned, how far, what is the displacement that it sees you as the observer in the laboratory?
Well, that's also, I mean, that is really simple. Velocity equals distance divided by time.
Distance equals velocity, which we know there, times time, which we now know to be delta t, times the square root of 1 minus v squared over c squared.
This is what we've just gotten here, times velocity, that gives me a distance of 1.47 meters.
So, we saw it move 1.47 meters, or it saw the laboratory move past it at 1.47 meters.
Okay, there we go. You are on a spaceship. You travel at 0.975C relative to the Earth.
Relative to the Earth. You breathe at 8 breaths per minute. You breathe at 8 breaths per minute.
What is your respiratory rate as seen from the Earth? So, what are we saying?
We are observing, someone is observing you from Earth. Someone is observing you from Earth.
That observer sees you travel at a certain velocity, 0.975C.
Now, for you, you breathe at 8 breaths per minute. 8 breaths per minute.
So, your respiratory rate for yourself equals 8 breaths per minute.
Now, we need to convert that into how long does it take for 1 breath to be given.
That would be 1 over 8 minutes. 1 over 8 minute per breath.
So, you see what we've done. We've discussed this before. That is this 1 over 8. 1 over that will give you minutes.
Now, I'm going to multiply. Remember, delta T equals delta T0 divided by 1 minus V squared over C squared.
This is the denominator. The denominator is without dimension. So, I'm dividing with something without dimension.
So, I want my answer to be per minute again. So, I don't have to convert this to seconds.
Because I'm just going to have minutes here and minutes there. So, I don't have to change to SI units.
But, be careful when you do this. I'm very sure that you don't have to.
So, this is going to be minutes is going to equal my delta T0.
That is the proper time because I am counting on my little clock is staying with me.
So, it's start and end events are going to be at exactly the same spot.
So, that would be T0. So, delta T as seen from the earth, that is going to be delta T0 over 1 minus V squared over C squared.
And we've seen this before. I mean, it's easy to do. And that gives me about 33, 33 point, well, that was done in seconds.
Now, I converted mine to seconds. But, it's the same. You don't have to.
It's going to give you so many seconds. But, I want the respiratory rate per second.
So, I'm just going to do 1 over that, which is going to then be per minute.
Or, as I said, now, if I didn't change this, if I didn't change this, if I used 1 over 8 minutes, it was going to give me so many minutes.
But, I want per minute, which is just going to give me 1 over this.
And that gives me about 1.78 blitz per minute. Blitz is not an SI unit. It's like radiance.
I'm just interested in how many events per minute that is 1.78. Versus, they're going to see me read at 1.78 blitz per minute on their clock.
But, I'm reading at 8 bits per minute on my own clock.
