And speaking about spinal cord injuries today, there is a document that John has,
in a little bit more detail, this is just a presentation.
Let's start.
As we all know, spinal injury is a very serious life-altering injury.
It's quite devastating.
It affects thousands of people worldwide.
The reported incidence varies quite a bit, I suppose, as a result of difference in data protection,
difference in deformations, whether or not people that died or they reached the hospital were included.
But it's a wide range, about 2.5 to 7.8 per million per annum.
It's a lot.
It's currently an estimated 260,000 Americans living with spinal cord injury.
And unfortunately, no stats available for South Africa.
And it's often seen in a bimodal distribution with the first peak affecting mostly young males.
And then there's a second smaller peak affecting an artery that's basically resulting just from simple fall.
The most common causes is by far road traffic injuries, whether as a driver or as a pedestrian.
And the second most important falls from a height, falls from just simple standing, like I said, in the artery.
Sporting injuries is quite common.
And then intentional violence.
Obviously, there's variance, again, between different countries.
It's quite interesting.
For instance, in Bangladesh, they say that most people sustain their injuries from carrying something heavy on their head and then tripping and falling.
South Africa is an area of stabbing.
It's very common.
It doesn't happen anywhere else, really.
And then the sports that are often associated with spinal cord injuries.
You can imagine your contact sports like rugby, American football, and also gymnastics, horse riding, and diving.
Society has the most common causes.
Survival spine is the most commonly affected part of the spine.
For several reasons, including its increased vulnerability.
It's quite mobile, unlike the lumbar spine, thoracic spine.
It's not protected by ribs or strong musculature.
And with the count score, about 49% to 55% of all spinal injuries.
The rest being equally shared between the different parts of the spine.
And just before we go into the presentation and the management of spinal cord injury,
it's important to just have a look briefly at the relevant anatomy.
If you're going to spend too much time here, you know .
If you're going to spend too much time here, you can see what it is.
In the neck, most of your, it's the most mobile point of the spine as well.
So you get almost 180 degrees of rotation at your C1, C2 joint.
And then also more flexion than the rest of your spine, your atlanto-occipital joint.
And then there are certain important considerations if you're going to be measuring nerve roots,
seeing what the level is.
For instance, that C1 exit above C1 vertebra, the nerve root.
And then there are actually eight nerve roots and only seven vertebrae.
It's important to note that.
Okay, then you must keep in mind that your neurological level isn't going to necessarily coincide with your vertical level.
If you have a T1 fracture, you're not going to have, no, you probably will have T1 neurology.
But if you have an L1 fracture, you're not going to have L1 neurology.
The thoracic cord actually ends at the level of T18 adult.
And I'm recording it in the sacral cord, like we all know, is in the post-pandora.
So it's right above the level of L2.
From which downwards is the chord aquinal, which is actually lower material.
There's the important ligaments in the spine.
There's the anterior longitudinal ligament, the posterior longitudinal ligament, the ligament of the father.
And then there's also the intertransverse in the spinous and sub-spinous ligaments.
And all these lead quite a lot of stability also to the spine.
Especially in the neck where the vertebrae themselves do not lead that much stability.
And then the different tracks in the spinal column.
So, important if you're looking at the presentation of the spinal cord injured patient.
And there's, right, they've just written the primaries, probably know this much better than me.
But there's the lateral and anterior spinal thalamic tracts.
That's pain, temperature, and, of course, tactile sense.
And they are situated, I have a picture, here, in the lateral and anterior white mantle.
And I'm applying those descending tracts.
There it is.
And then there is the corticospinal tract.
Which is these dark green ones here.
And they relate to the movement.
And then there's also the posterior column, which is here.
Which conducts vibration and proprioception, sorry.
And find discriminative sets.
And an interesting fact is that the tracts within the spinal cord are somewhat that are clear range.
So, they're not very random.
They're very specifically put as far as your sacral, lumbar, cervical spine is concerned.
So, you end up having, for instance, here you'll see that the cervical fibres, the upper limb fibres tend to be more centurally.
With the sacral ones being more peripheral.
And this explains certain features which you see in your spinal cord injured patient.
Let me go back to that.
For instance, with the central cord syndrome.
Why?
That you'll see that they have more severely affected other limbs than lower limbs.
Because of the fact that the cervical, which nerves fibres tend to run centrally.
And also why you see sacral swearing problem with the most severe injuries.
It's just because it's more protected there on the outside.
And then also just innervation of the bladder is something that confuses the hell out of me.
It's both sympathetic and parasympathetic.
When are you going to get a tonic bladder or automatic inflex bladder?
What does it mean?
So, a tonic bladder is basically a reflexive flaccid bladder that you find in your spinal shock period.
It over-descends and empties by overflow.
And then the automatic reflex bladder.
It's in fact that it's slightly higher injuries above S2.
Where there's reflexive emptying every three to four hours.
And then the autonomous bladder.
I think this was probably the most common one.
When it's damaged to the sacral cord, over-descension,
you get this bladder which reflux, hydronephrosis, and inevitably hydroquinone failure.
Because of that.
When you get the classification of spinal injuries,
you can classify it according to where in the spine it is, obviously the vertebral level.
The severity of the injury, which is probably the most important part of the classification.
Is it complete? Is it not complete? Stable versus unstable.
And then there's also specific syndromes that are quite well described.
So this is the ASEA standard neurological classification scale.
I'm not sure that it uses in casualties.
We don't use it either.
But this is what they recommend to use.
And it's actually quite nice in English.
We should probably start instituting it.
But you have lots of places where you can say, for instance, what's your power.
And there's specific points where you have to take for sensation to make it universal.
And you also say complete versus incomplete.
Basically, the only incomplete, after only complete classification is if there is no state of
prosperity.
Even if you have no motor neurological function below the level of the injury,
they do a peri-anal sensation.
That is an incomplete injury.
And that makes a very big difference as function problems as a concern.
Patients with incomplete injuries have a good chance of recovering,
whereas that's not really the case with complete injuries.
And here they also give you a space where you can say,
there's a central core, the ground support.
Muscle you grade according to the MRC,
bowel grade and scale they all know well from 0 to 5.
And that's the classification.
Then there's stable versus unstable injury.
The importance of this is to determine whether or not further intervention is required.
Because that's basically what you're trying to do.
Determines what you're going to do now.
And the stable injury basically means that the vertebral components
will not be removed by the movement.
The undamaged spine is not in danger.
And there's no development of incapacitated brain injury.
Unstable injuries, there's numerous different definitions for this.
And there's no consistency across the board.
But about more than 50% loss of vertebral height.
It probably means it's unstable injury.
Angulation between vertebral bodies is more than 11 degrees.
Atroxylation between vertebral bodies is more than 3.5 milliliters.
Segmental spine sparsus widening, facet joint widening.
Malalignment of the spine sparsus is on the AP fold.
Also a lateral tilt on the AP fold.
It's very obvious.
And the failure of at least two of these three columns.
Or compression of three or more sequential vertebral.
And here's a picture of the three columns.
We talk about it.
It's a posterior column.
As you can see, it consists of all the posterior ligaments, the inter-lumens.
The supraspinous ligaments, the lamina, and that's it.
In the middle column is the posterior longitudinal ligament.
And then also the posterior part of the individual discs.
So if two of them all have failed, then you have an unstable injury.
Now just looking at the pathogenesis.
It's basically divided into your primary injury process and your secondary injury process.
Now the primary injury process occurs at the time of the injury.
It is a mechanical thing.
It's deformation, transection, contusion, and persistent compression of the spinal cord
by debris, by the deform, formed spine, by the hematoma.
There's nothing you can do about that.
There's no way that we as physicians can reverse that or address that or make that better.
And it's out of our control.
