What is, however, something that can be addressed is the secondary injury phase.
This starts almost immediately after the initial force was transmitted and then it can continue
to do it. It's a biochemical process with lots of different chemical reactions and it's
very poorly understood but I think as far as the general medical field, it's moving towards
scientific kinds and inflammatory processes and it's the same thing with spinal cord injury.
It turns out that is the one thing that we can address and several theories exist as to
what exactly is the mechanism behind secondary injury. There's the three radical theories.
The division of your anti-oxidants, free rate was accumulated, damaged cell membranes.
Calcium theory, again, influx of calcium into the cell, into a stretch of swelling, activation
of your phosphatases, phosphorylases, and again, might call your failure, cell membrane disruption.
There's a theory that says that your endogenous opioids somehow propagate the original injury.
I'm not sure what the mechanism of this, but witness and alixone have been used in trials
and shown some moderate benefit, but not statistically significant. And then there's the inflammatory
theory, which basically just says that you have your inflammatory medias, your cytokines,
you know, or you can trace the usual culprits of accumulating in the cord and putting cell
damage locally. Then once the secondary injury process has been initiated, it's cell death
in series. Two causes of cell death, or two mechanisms of cell death would be in the process.
Usually this is at the time of accident. And then actually programmed cell death with apoptosis
also occurs, mostly in your oligodendrocytes. And this causes axonal degeneration adjacent to
the mesions. You'll have a transection, but then your corn will actually die around it as well.
Cystic degeneration of the central brain matter of course, you get like a cirrhix basically,
and then forms what's called a glial scar. That creates a mechanical barrier that even
if the axons did want to degenerate, they got, because there's a glial scar. So all these things
that have been identified as other genic mechanisms are possible targets for all therapies to stop,
for instance, the formation of the glial scar, or to stop cystic degeneration, etc.
Let's get to the management. The goals of treatment is, obviously we're looking at the
patient as a whole, and we'll get to the ABCs now, but goals of treatment of your spinal cord
injury is to realign the spine to prevent ulcer function and damaged tissue. That's a
secondary injury that you have to prevent. Improved neurological recovery of day stability
and then early functional rehabilitation. So the emergency management starts in the field,
and there's actually been a marked improvement in outcomes in neurologic people, spinal cord
injured patients, since the improvement in tracking and awareness of your person. This is
not new, but the fact that they now, that every patient is managed as a fixed spinal cord injury,
the use of spinal trauma boards, heart collars, it has made a huge difference. One of the
contagious issues is what is the neutral position? How should the spine be immobilized? And there's
no consensus about this again, but in a position of slight flexion, which they say is about equal to two
centimeters, centimeters of elevation of the occiput, you get widening of the spinal canal at the
level of C560, which is a good level because it's a, it's a quite a common size of dislocations
and fractures. And then the patient must be immediately transported to a trauma facility. So ABCs,
your airway and breathing is always still your first priority, whilst of course maintaining
the illness of the spinal spine. And aspiration of gastric contents, and then even the
shock are actually the two biggest causes of death prior to hospital arrival. So it's not
something that should be taken lightly, of course. And with the high C-spine injuries, just
due to the secondary injury process that we've discussed, the patient can have, for instance,
a C4 injury, be able to breathe spontaneously when he gets to hospital and then one level up
from swelling and it becomes a pain. So in the patient, they actually recommend that your
severe cervical spinal cord injury patients should be monitored in an ICU or high key setting
for at least a week, just due to all these other considerations. And then circulation is
a bigger topic in spinal cord injury patients, just because it's so hard to, especially again
in your high injuries, to maintain hemodynamic stability. Because there is volume depletion
on the one hand from associated injuries, intra-abdominal bleeding,
fractures, long bone fractures, and things like that. And then also neurogenic shock and
spinal shock. That's the principle, we'll get to that now. And then what's also important
is that the injured spinal cord, the same as the injured brain, you can basically infer quite
a lot in the management of your spinal cord injury from traumatic brain injury, which has
been abundant research, is that the cord is now unable to auto-regulate blood flow, same
as the injured brain. So if you have a systemic hypertension, you won't be able to compensate
for that. So it's left quite vulnerable. And there hasn't been a lot of studies in the literature
about, specifically spinal cord injured patients, and what's the idea of blood pressure, etc.
But there's been a lot of traumatic brain injury, and they have found, in not very well
publicised trials, but that the same rules apply, and that the outcomes are better if you
actively resuscitate and get the blood pressure above 90, stomach above 90, get the
sensitive person 100%. And this is just to maintain as good as possible blood and oxygen
applied to the injured cord. Now what is neurogenic shock? At this, in your high spinal cord
injury, there's about the level of T6, you get lots of your sympathetic outflows, you get
unopposed by will-outflow, which means that you will not have a vasoconstriction, you will not have
a tachycardia. And patients then present with hypotension and hyperrelative bradycardia. So this
is how you can distinguish it from neurodynamic shock. One thing that's important in this case
is that there's quite a significant risk of fluid overload if you're trying to correct
the hypolymer or the hypotension merely with fluid. And they recommend basic monitoring, even
in the newest articles with a swan-guns catheter, even though this is something that the guys
at Trittisky, it's almost like sacrilege juice or blasphemy to talk about swan-guns catheter
because it's old school, but they say this is the only way to make sure that you do not
fluid overload and then kindotropes should be used if you cannot maintain blood pressure
of blood. And I'm just putting this in because I don't know there's often confusion between what's
the difference between neurogenic shock and spinal shock. Neurogenic shock refers to the systemic
loss of, or the systemic sympathetic to me, so the one I just mentioned. And then spinal
shock refers to the physiological interruption of all function below the level of the injury.
So you're going to get some kind of plastic paralysis, a reflexive nose sensation, bowel and
bladder dysfunction. And then one of the typical features of the spinal shock is a sustained
biopism. And this is usually the last one to four days about, and how you know it's over
is that your bubble cavernosis reflex will be the first procedure, and then you can accurately
assess the severity of the injury because at this stage there's just nothing. And now we
get to the D of the ABCDs. Once you've stabilized the patient, he's got all his monitors and his catheter
and it seemed too bad that it was necessary, then full neurological examination needs to
be done. And then also appropriate imaging according to the ATLS protocol. And, of course,
this does include the C-spine, but also the other ones, just X-ray and the pelvic X-ray.
And in your conscious patient, your first step will be taking a history of finding out what
happened, was it a, were you a drug, were you a death stream, did you fall, was there any temporary
sensory or motor loss, this will also give you a clue as to what you can expect later on.
You, head to toe exam, including your brain or nerves, and a classical coma scale, because
I didn't, sorry, I don't have it on here, but there's a very high incidence of concomitant injury,
like they say for patients with significant spinal trauma, about 25% also had a head injury,
and, of patients with a head injury, about 5% of the G-spine injury. So, there's quite
a lot of correlations, you can't just ignore the brain. And then, as a head to toe examination,
back up front, log roll the patient, look at the spine, while he is log roll, do a rectal
exam, do your bubocuponosis reflex, and then also exclude any other socio-epic injuries
that you might have missed. And I'll just briefly go through the, um, the typical
cord syndromes, you've got the central cord syndrome, that we, um, which we previously
presented with, and also really affected upper limbs. This is, of course, a risk in your
C-spine, which it usually is. And you see this in all the patients with long-standing
sconellosis and osteophytes, and also, uh, congenital spine, and that's some nurses
who are also predisposed to this. You get spastic metroplegia, with your hands and your
upper limbs affected more. You usually have, say, conspiring, for the same reason. Um, let
go back to it. Okay? So, you see, that part's affected. Okay. Anterior cord syndrome, this
is the worst prognosis of all your partial cord syndromes. It's usually caused by, uh,
friction injuries with the function of compression of the anterior spinal artery. You get a complete
motor paralysis, and the only thing that's saved, basically, is your dorsal column sensation,
so vibration, proprioception, and fine touch. Okay. So, let's see. Okay. So, let's see.
So, let's see.
So, let's see.
So, let's see.
So, let's see.
So, let's see.
