In the brown spot syndrome, we all know well, it's in the hemisection of a cord and you get
ipsilateral motor paralysis and then loss of retroception and vibration and fine touch because that should also come.
And then on the contranatural side, you have loss of pain in temperature.
That's your anterior spino thalaric drug, that's pain in temperature.
And what happens here is that it's actually a cross tractor.
It crosses two or three levels above entering into the cord.
That's why you will have a discrepancy in your dermatomes for those temperature sensations.
It's very rare to see a brown spot syndrome very often.
I think the only ones I've seen was with stabbings.
And probably two in my career.
Okay, and there's a picture of that.
And then the contranatural syndrome is usually the injury is above the L2 level.
When you develop a symmetric spastic paralysis with fasciculations, perianal numbness,
and ulterior and fecal incontinence.
And they're called equinal syndrome.
It's unilateral, causing a flaccid, lower motor neurone puralis.
That's why it's lower motor neurone cell compresses.
Glossic sensations are often localized to specific dermatoins.
And urinary ulterior and ulterior and ulterior and ulterior.
So, getting to the radiographic assessment in your spine injuries.
The primary survey according to ATO, it must include at least the lateral C-spine.
Additional abuse can be requested if indicated.
And since if you have a trauma patient, there's no neck pain, no urology, nothing in the lateral C-spine.
You're not going to pursue that necessarily.
Usually you do want clinical suspicion before you request an additional one-spine.
You'll get an anterior-posterior view.
But don't do it for big views and then a swimmer's view if you cannot visualize T1 properly.
There is a fairly high incidence of non-contiguous multiple-level injuries.
There's a scheme that shows like if you have, it occurs in certain patterns like C-spine injuries,
there's a 3% chance of having associated T-spine injury.
So, once you have an established fracture somewhere in the spine,
it's advised to take forms of the entire spine to exclude this.
It's a 3% to 5%. It's actually quite high.
And then the forms must be adequate.
You must always include T1.
Otherwise, you cannot actually clear the C-spine at all.
When you look at your lateral X-ray, you're examining the four different lines.
This is your anterior and posterior vertical lines, your spinal laminar line,
and then the posterior spinous line.
And any of these lines are disrupted.
It's indicative of significant trauma.
There are some measurable parameters.
So, for instance, the pre-dental space, which you know is this area between the dents and the anterior arch of C1,
should be less than 3 mm in adults, less than 4 to 5 in children.
The C2-C3 pseudo-subluxation, I'm not actually that sure what they mean,
but it's like a subtle shift.
It looks...
It could look at normal to the anterior arch.
It should be more than 2 to 3 mm.
The retrofringual space,
like rotary members, less than 6 mm at C2, less than 22...
Oh, that should be less, sorry.
Less than 20 mm at C6.
Angulation should never be more than 11 degrees,
and your core dimension is about 10 to 30 mm in both adults and children.
There's just another picture.
So here is where you're looking basically at C6, you want 22 mm there,
and then C2, or more than 6.
Right here, it's just a picture of a, obviously, increased pre-dental space.
And this is usually a stable injury, but it's associated with rupture of your transverse area,
and the ligaments of the debts.
Here's another picture where it illustrates that increased angulation between the vertical bodies
that we talked about should be more than 11 degrees.
And it's quite clear here that it was a process as well, actually.
Point in work, would you?
Then, once you've done your x-rays, when are you going to do CT and MRI?
Once you have a confirmed fracture,
then you need to visualize it better than you can on the C-spun.
Providing, of course, that the patient isn't deteriorating,
in which case you need to do something like that.
But otherwise, you would want to do a CT to illustrate bone in detail better,
and an MRI to show whether or not the pores compress,
whether there's ligamentous injury.
And in patients, in a sky borer, they must also do an MRI to exclude ligamentous injury.
And MRI is the only modality that actually shows cord edema, whereas none of the others do.
Okay, so now, you see one of our goals of treatment is that you want to stop, you know, for the deterioration.
So, you have to decompress the spine because as long as the deformity persists,
it's just going to continue aggravating the original injury.
So, you have to regain stability.
So, you can do this in casualties or in detail.
So, non-surgical management, and this should technically start happening together with your other resuscitative measures.
Because what they say is fairly obvious, actually, is that if they do survive the original injury,
then the level or the degree of spinal cord injury will be the main determinant of the quality of life.
So, it is quite important.
So, how you can obtain retraction?
This is mostly the same at your C-spine.
It's not very much a clinical T-spine or spine fracture at this stage.
Skull traction by means of skull tongs or skull tongs or halo.
I've never seen a halo mousse.
I don't know if any of you guys have, but it's described in the American literature.
So, you start with about five kgs weight.
You put the skull tongs two centimeters above the pinow of the ear,
about in line with the travis, and you just inject some amygnocaine locally onto the periosteum as well.
Then, it's tight.
It's not pleasant, but then neither is quadripedia.
So, split in.
You start with a five kilogram weight on the head, and you take an X-wrap.
And then you increase the weight incrementally,
and you take an X-wrap after every additional piece of weight that you put on,
until you have realignment of the spine,
or you also stop if there is neurological deterioration,
and more than one centimeter distraction.
And once you've obtained a reduction,
say for instance there was an unnatural tacitral dislocation,
or something like that,
then you remove 50% of your weight
to prevent over-distraction,
and to maintain the stability.
If that fails,
or if the patient continues to deteriorate,
despite having reduced your fracture,
then the patient needs to go for emergency decompression.
And it should not be delayed to obtain the MRI first.
It's not indicated.
And then as far as the pharmacological management is concerned,
I'm not going to spend too much time on this,
but it's also, there's numerous experimental therapies at the time still being investigated,
lots of trials have been done.
So, corticosteroids as usual was the first thing to be tried,
and it's gone in and out of fashion as more evidence became available.
And then like I also mentioned before,
naloxone have been tried based on that opioid therapy,
but it hasn't really been shown to make a statistically significant difference.
And then just on the steroid issue,
there has been three huge trials in America,
all three of them showing some benefit
with administration of middle britainless loan
within the first three to eight hours,
post-injury for 24 hours.
There was a more significant increased incidence of death
if they administered for 48 hours,
and this was usually due to pulmonary complications for severe sepsis.
And then other international trials
have actually not been able to replicate the results
that these three trials did.
So, okay.
So currently,
I know at Krittiski they do not use steroids,
even though most of the textbooks still recommend it,
it's not being used yet.
And the current recommendation,
I'm going to give it to you now because I can't read it exactly,
basically says that it is an option if you want.
It's an option that you can use,
but the treating physician should know
that there is more evidence showing that
it's associated with increased complications
than there is evidence to show any benefit.
But some people argue that spinal cord injuries
are so debilitating if there's the slightest chance
of improving your neurological recovery reticulatory.
But you should really give it.
Keep that in mind.
Keep that in mind.
You are the only thing that my parents
calls for people are important to see
because I am in my big mouth,
even though this story will still be
going to make sense.
I don't have a Cinemat
anyům Drew trying to give it a incarnate
jak
