In this video, I want to talk about confidence intervals.
Now in statistics, we're interested in the population as a whole.
All human beings with a certain disease, but we certainly cannot include all of them in our study.
We have a sample, a sample size, and in that sample, we can do various statistical analysis on, for instance, the mean.
Now the results of the sample is then used to extrapolate data to the population as a whole,
and that's why we call this inferential statistics.
We're inferring that our results also work out in the wild, if I can use that term.
Now we usually have the following in our research.
Obviously we know the sample size.
We know the mean of our sample size.
We can quickly calculate that, as well as the standard deviation, and then also the standard error.
And we're going to use all of those in an equation to get to the confidence interval.
So with these parameters, we can calculate the population mean, as our sample infers.
Now we usually want to be 95% confident that the population mean falls between an upper and lower limit,
as calculated from our sample mean.
Say for instance, not a good example, but let's use a leukocyte count of 14,
and that is our sample mean.
And we want to be 95% confident, though, that the population mean would be, say for instance,
between 11.4 and 16.3.
That's how we would state our results in a journal article.
But remember, if we are 95% confident, it means there's a 5% chance that we are wrong.
Now, if we want higher confidence intervals, a higher level of confidence,
we can, for instance, say, well, we are 99% confident.
But remember, to do that, we'll have to widen the gap between the upper and lower limits.
So a wider gap gives you a higher level of confidence.
But usually 95% confidence is quite acceptable.
And here's the equation.
So we have 95% confidence interval.
And that equals your sample mean, capital X with a bar on top,
plus or minus, plus for the upper limit and subtraction for the lower limit,
1.96 times the standard error.
And remember how to do the standard error.
That's standard deviation divided by the square root of the sample size.
And that gives you an upper and a lower limit.
And you can see there it is based on the sample mean.
Now, it's a bit small here, but you can see there are 20 cases in the left column.
On the right column, there's Whitesalk counts, various ones from a sample.
So the number would be 20.
20 cases is our sample number.
We can calculate our mean, the standard deviation, the standard error.
Remember that standard deviation divided by the square root of the sample size.
And then we can do our 95% confidence interval upper limit and lower limit by using this equation.
Now, where does this 1.96 come in?
Where does it come from?
Well, what we are assuming is that we have a population distribution
that forms a symmetric normal curve, also known as a bell curve.
So, if we say 95%, we mean by that we look for an upper and lower limit
that will include 95% of the area under the curve for the population distribution.
Now, you remember what area of a shape is, the area of a square, the area of a rectangle, the area of a circle.
Well, any curve, a graph, also has an area under it.
And we calculate that by using calculus, more specifically integration, which we needn't go into to be able to do statistics.
But we want 95% of that area to be included.
And that is a 95% confidence interval.
For 80% confidence interval, you're going to use a much smaller number, 1.282.
Now, if you multiply that by the standard error, that's obviously a smaller number.
And if you add and subtract that from your sample mean, you see that the gap will be smaller.
So, the lower your confidence, the smaller that gap gets.
But if you want to get to 99%, being 99% confident, it goes up to 2.576.
Now, this is called a T value, this 1.96.
And you can actually look this up on various tables.
The 1.96 example that I use here, though, remember, only works for tables that have sample sizes of 40 or more.
So, if you only have 20 in your sample, it's certainly not going to be 1.96.
