In this video series I want to introduce you to some concepts in statistics as it forms
part of general mathematics.
I have been a consultant surgeon for the last decade, and although it takes up most of my
time, I am currently also studying physics and mathematics as an undergraduate student.
Statistics does not form part of my curriculum as such, and was not offered as a course at
the universities where I obtained my primary and specialist medical qualifications.
It is nonetheless an integral part of medicine, and no doctor can embark on any research,
nor adequately evaluate the surgical literature without proper knowledge of statistics.
I have therefore decided to complete a course in statistics, and will make my studies available
on YouTube as short lectures that you can follow to improve your knowledge of statistics too.
If you have any questions, or are indeed a seasoned statistician, please feel free to leave some
comments from which we all can learn.
In this first video I will start things off slowly and look at some important definitions.
The first two definitions pertain to the two basic categories of statistics, and they are
descriptive and inferential statistics.
To understand these two terms though, let's look at a few others first.
Sample and population come to mind.
A population includes all patients that can possibly fit your research, such as all females,
all diabetics, all smokers, etc.
For obvious reasons you cannot investigate all smokers on the face of the earth, and you
will therefore identify a representative sample of smokers who will be your subject of investigation.
Gathering data on this sample will leave you with results that pertain to the population
as a whole, provided that your sample was not biased in any way.
The next two terms are parameter and statistic.
Quite simply, data that is used to describe something of interest about a population is called
a parameter, and data that describes a sample from that population is called a statistic.
This brings me back to descriptive versus inferential statistics.
An example of descriptive statistics would be auditing your last 100 operative cases.
The population is finite, and you can look at the number of various procedures you have
performed, what your average time on each of the various different procedures were, and
so on.
The data is purely descriptive, and is not used to infer any characteristics of a larger population.
Looking at the number of colon carcinomas managed in an institution who provides the full service
of oncological procedures over the last decade will allow you to infer what the average incidence
of colon carcinoma is in South Africa.
Using a representative sample of a population and extrapolating data from that sample makes
use of inferential statistics.
You now know six new words.
Let's carry on.
Primary data is data that you gather personally, and this stands opposed to secondary data which
describes data gathered by someone else.
Direct observation is our next term and means simply that the subject under investigation is
unaware of this collection of data about them.
It is more common for inferential medical statistics to form part of an experiment based observation,
where the patient is aware of the data being collected.
Another form of data collection is by means of a survey, asking direct questions from your
population or representative sample.
Data can be classified as either quantitative or qualitative.
Qualitative data uses numerical values to describe something of interest.
This includes values such as mean arterial pressure, hemoglobin level, etc.
Qualitative data uses linguistic terms to measure or classify something of interest.
The last topic for this video pertains to classifying the way in which data is measured.
This is important as it has a consequence on the type of statistical analysis that can be
done on your data.
First up is a nominal level of measurement, which deals exclusively with qualitative data
that is then assigned to a pre-determined category, such as male and female, pediatric versus
geriatric and so on.
Mathematical operations cannot be performed on this data, nor can it be ranked.
These data points are very restrictive and a bit boring to the mathematician in any statistician.
An ordinal level of measurement includes the properties of a nominal level of measurement,
but with the added benefit that it can be ranked.
It might be qualitative or quantitative, and simple mathematical arithmetic can be performed
on it.
An example of ordinal quantitative data includes the level of pain relief offered by an analgesic.
The patient may be allowed to mark 1 as no relief, up to 5 as complete relief.
There is no way to infer though that marking 4 means that the pain relief was double that
of marking 2.
An interval level of measurement pertains only to quantitative data.
An example here would be patient temperature.
38.5 degrees is 1.5 degrees warmer than 37 degrees.
Addition and subtraction is allowed, but not division and multiplication.
Data that allow all 4 simple mathematical operations are called the ratio level data.
These include age, weight and height.
A true zero point is set to exist, and this allows you to say that a mean arterial pressure
of 80 is twice as high as that of 40.
Good, that ends this first video.
The next will be on visual ways to chart your data before we get to some hardcore mathematics.
