In this video I will take a look at some ways to graphically represent data.
Representing data in a graphical format is not merely for visual pleasure.
It allows the human mind to discern information of interest that is usually not appreciable from mere tables of numbers.
I will take a brief look at histograms, pie charts, bar charts and lastly the common line chart.
In order to understand a histogram I need to explain the concept of frequency distribution.
Here I have a list of the number of patients with penetrating trauma seen per month over the last 2 years.
Just looking at the numbers presented in this fashion hides some extra information which we will note if we construct a frequency distribution.
The least number of patients seen was 50 and the most 90 per month.
Now I will construct classes or groups of even distribution.
It is usually best to have between 5 and 15 classes. I will choose 8.
They must all be of the same size and make provision to include all values or class frequencies.
So I will have 50 to 54, 55 to 59, 60 to 64, 65 to 69, 70 to 74, 75 to 79, 80 to 84, 85 to 89 and 90 to 94.
Each class has 5 possible values and there is no ambiguity.
For example classes of 50 to 60 and 60 to 70.
If there is a data point of 60 it would fit into 2 classes and this is not allowed.
Representing the data I now have the following table.
It is best to avoid open ended classes which in medicine is unfortunately not always possible.
Looking for instance at creatinine and phosphokinase levels after blunt trauma or rat poison ingestion will for example have values in the hundreds and lower thousands for the majority of cases.
Every now and again there will be the case with values in the tens of thousands making frequency distribution charts difficult.
From the frequency distribution table above I can construct a histogram.
It is simply a bar chart with a number of months in each class represented by the height of a bar and each bar representing a class.
Next up I need to tell you about a relative frequency distribution.
Here the number of months on the right is simply expressed as a percentage of the total.
This chart looked at a 24 month period therefore the total will be out of 24.
The total must be 100% or near 100% because of rounding errors.
A pie chart uses the relative frequency distribution to complete a circle with sizes of the slices of the pie representing the class frequencies.
Next up I will take a short look at the stem and leaf chart.
It also represents data in the form of frequencies.
Here is a look at our data presented as a stem and leaf chart.
It is easy to see that the digit on the left represents the tens in the decimal system and the digits on the right the ones of the individual data points.
It is a sort of a histogram but with numbers.
Lastly there is the common line chart which most will recognize.
It simply plots two sets of values against each other in a two axis Cartesian coordinate plane and joins the dots.
That's all for this video.
In the next video I will start with some real statistics and take an introductory look at the measures of central tendency
which are mean, median and mode.
Which are mean, median and mode.
