In the previous video, I took a look at replacing a set of data values with a single value that in some way measures central tendency.
In this video, I will take a look at ways of measuring how far individual data values stray.
If you read that the mean of a data set is 100, it gives you no information on the individual values.
Were they between 90 and 110? Or between 0 and 1000?
To address this issue, statistics provide methods of measuring dispersion and they are range, variance and standard deviation.
I will start with the simplest of the measures, namely range.
It calculates the difference between the highest and the lowest values in a data set and provides a quick way to get a feel for the spread of the data set.
If the initial post-operative Apache 2 score of 10 patients eventually requiring a second look laparotomy is 8, 14, 13, 18, 17, 9, 11, 13, 12 and 10,
Then the range is 18 minus 8, which equals 10.
The second measure of dispersion is variance.
It describes the relative distance between the data values in the set and the mean of that set.
It is not often used in the medical literature, but you need to understand it before you can go on to standard deviation.
Depending on whether the data set you are working on is a sample or the whole population, there are two basic equations.
Let me show you the first, which deals with sample variance.
It states that the variance of the sample, s squared, equals the sum from i equals 1 to n of the square of the data values minus the mean of the set divided by the number of data values minus 1.
In other words, you subtract the mean from each data value and square this result.
Then add all these squares and divide them by 1 less than the number of data values.
If your data set contains a large number of values, then this can become very laborious.
Another simpler calculation is represented by this equation.
It first takes the sum of all the data values, each squared, and subtracts from this the sum of all the data values squared divided by the number of data values,
and divides this by 1 less than the number of data values.
If your data set contains all the values of a population, not merely a sample as before, then there is a simple change in two symbols,
namely a lower case sigma instead of s, and a lower case mu instead of x bar.
Note also that you now have to divide by the number of data values, instead of one less than the data values.
Just as in the case of the sample data equation, there is also a simpler form of the last equation,
which is easier to use if the number of data values are large.
Finally, I get to standard deviation.
It is simply the square root of s or sigma above.
Initial data values that fall within the mean, plus or minus the standard deviation, is said to be within one standard deviation, and so on.
If you plot a histogram of your data values and it forms a symmetric or bell curve, centered around the mean or median,
there is an empirical rule that states that 68% of the data values will fall within one standard deviation,
95% will fall within two standard deviations, and 99.7% of the data values will fall within three standard deviations of the mean or median.
If a histogram shows that the values do not form a bell curve, as in this example, then you need to make use of Chebyshev's theorem.
It states that for any number k, at least 1 minus 1 over k squared times or 100% of the values,
will fall within k standard deviations from the mean, provided that k is larger than 1.
The last concept in this video will deal with the method for identifying outliers.
Outliers are data values that are extreme and don't seem to fit the data set under investigation.
Outliers can skew statistical analysis and should be discarded.
A first step in identifying outliers is to determine quartiles.
The name implies that the data set must be divided into four equal parts.
First arrange the data set in ascending order.
Here I have 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 14 and 14.
Now I will find the median, which is 9.
I will call this q2.
This leaves 3, 5, 6 and 7.
The median of this lower half is 5.5, called q1.
And the median of the upper half, with 10, 12, 14 and 14, is 13, called q3.
Now I determine the interquartile range.
IQR.
It measures the spread of the center half of the data set.
Mathematically it is simply q3 minus q1.
Any data value that is more than q3 plus one and a half times the IQR, and any data value that is q1 minus one and a half times the IQR, is said to be outliers and should be ignored.
That is all for this video.
In the next video I will take an introductory look into probability theory.
Before I say the
think form.
