Now I've spoken to some of you guys, I think in Aesthetic there's a wonderful protocol
on massive leptom fusion. I've spoken to some of the BC people about further resuscitation,
because we all know this talk is about hemorrhagic shock. And I think you guys have got your
protocols. So, you know, when you get to one of these talks, it's usually about crystalloids,
colloids, all those kinds of alarms. So before I start, I just wanted a quick question. How
many millimoles of fluoride in Thesmoid L? How much lexate in Thesmoid L? No, no. Come, come closer.
Maybe we shall... No, put your food down. You can't do that. Now, hang on. What happens
if I mix these two? You can now tell me. Now, what is that? What is that? What is that?
That's all right. So, you guys have to think about what happens when you mix them. Do you
ever think about that? Now, what would happen if I do this? Stop it! Stop it! Stop it! Stop
it! Stop it! Now, do you see that grab? Did you see that water stop flowing? That's what
today's talk is about. So, towards consensus in the management of surgical bleeding here
for yours, so that we can all talk because we're all dealing with the same patients. From
you guys setting it up for us, to you guys putting it to sleep, and for us stopping the
bleeding. Okay. So, this talk is not about colloids and crystalloids. It's not about massive
blood transfusion. It's stopping the bleeding. Okay. We're going to talk about defining the
problem by STK studies that I want to mention quickly. By defining the term surgical bleeding.
So, I lied to you. This talk is not about hemorrhagic shock. It's about surgical bleeding. Okay? And
we're going to, I think our consensus should be based on this European guideline which came,
was published and I'll talk about it quickly a few years ago, as to how to manage these patients.
So, finding the problem quickly, case one. It's all used to problems. They are, um, I've just
highlighted a few things. Based purely on this and all this will make more sense as we talk.
Twenty-week pregnant, middle-aged female, sent out abdominal gunshot wound. The incident time
to the hospital was almost an hour. And, um, three hospital, she had a sitting bench,
her brain, um, her second unit of crisps when she came and everything was okay except for
the poor pulse pressure. She fell cold and clammy. So, all of these are going to be
in a radiative shock. The single bleeding case is met. You can see her, her, her, her,
uh, she's wild, of course. These massive lines here and the hole in the IVC. So, all the
lovely stuff you poured in here. So, this is why I did this little demonstration. Because
what did she do? She did not grant for opening up this line to fill up the other bag, which
was very kindly there. Nice, not a large core, but it's beautiful. She went to close the
hall with a little bit. So, I think that little demonstration, some of you might have made
a long, long time. It's about closing that hall. It's not about opening that tap. Okay.
Young female with multiple, um, young male, multiple stabbing, anti-the-chest of both upper
bottoms, incident to hospital time for quite a long time, unknown volume of crystalloids.
Also, same sort of picture, poor pulse pressure, pain, cold, clammy, again,
again, two large core lines, right arm and femoral, massive printed
suspicions, colloids and duct products, together with the crystalloids that we already had.
Cold for chest x-ray, EKG, routine bloods, multiple stab wounds, indicated distaining abdomen,
also distained neck veins, left hemothorix on chest x-ray, acidotic high lactate, low HD,
ECG changes. Okay, continued fluid resuscitation in the EC, left intercostal drain inserted, then
it was consulted. We decided on an urgent laparotomy and sternotomy, but one of our younger colleagues
in anesthetic was quite adamant that even in theatre he would not put the patient to sleep
with his whole clinical picture and us prepping to open the sternum and the abdomen.
We wanted an ultrasound and a farce of the abdomen in the operating room before intubation.
And that delayed us somewhat, for obvious reasons, and we found a right ventricle, a gastric,
a small dog, and a mediteric vestibulation. Okay.
All of those picked up clinically, of course, the picture was shouting us in the face.
Special Investigations. Third case, young male with stab wounds to the right of the sternum.
One hour before coming to us, crystalloids again. Same story, pulse pressure, pale cold and cancer.
Initial management again, two large ball lines, arm and femoral, massive fluid resuscitation,
colloids and blood products. Score for the usual old stuff, nice knee-jerk reactions.
Single stab wound as indicated, right hemothorix and chest x-ray, also sound unclear to the massive amount
of fluid in the right chest cavity. It was acidotic, yet high lactate, low HP, again ECG.
Continued fluid resuscitation, right into costal drain, surgery decision of an immediate stenotomy,
delayed by the ER team in an effort to continue resuscitation through hemodynamic stability
in view of continued bleeding from the ICP.
The surgical consultant was informed and he ordered the team to run for the patient to theatre.
Unfortunately there, the stenotomy saw was broken and our award winner here,
where he kindly opened the right chest and stopped the bleeding.
Unfortunately, that patient, as far as we could estimate after the clinic,
had a severely stunted myocardium and he never could maintain the blood pressure again and die postoperatively.
I think he's my colleague, he just suffered due to the massively lower delay from coming in the front door
to being in fear that they're just a bit too long.
Okay, so these are denitized, I'm not pointing fingers at anyone.
There's none of us who sat here, who sat here for long enough that, you know,
had a, unfortunately, had a patient demise because of poor, poor judgment on our first part.
We see patients that are bleeding but are stable and they've got the type of bleeding
where she can't take them.
Yeah.
So what I'm going to be doing especially with these wonderful things that,
in 20 to 20 years of the time, when I'm going to attack me,
then they're from extreme to the patient side,
and they're from extreme to the patient side,
and they're from extreme to the patient side,
and they're from extreme to the patient side.
A massive ball.
Okay, and all that needs to happen to that ball.
Okay.
That's all that needs to happen with that.
And I want us to walk away from here,
knowing that we have to look for that guy clinically,
and not waste time with all our fancy equipment and fancy tests,
you know, to manage this guy.
Because people do die.
Now, last week we had a review.
We're going to write up all our stenotomies and spirochotomy,
and last week I presented just the first 33 cases,
and our time from entering the EC to operating was 109 minutes.
109 minutes.
In your mind it goes by like a flash,
and you think that,
oh, we just rushed the patient to theater.
Black and white.
Look at the research.
It's all there for you to look at.
So only the first 33 cases we've got a lot more to put on.
Okay, and we'll present the whole lot and publish it when we are done.
But 109 minutes from entering the doors to landing on theater time.
Okay, when you look at the numbers in the file, you are shocked.
Because as I say, in your mind the time we buy so quickly that we're wasting time.
Before I carry on, just for the rest of it here,
is that just as far as the statement of our conference has been mentioned,
we also saw that nearly 50% of our cases come via another hospital to us.
So there's been such a long pre-hospital time that we're super selected for the ones that are going to be able to maintain themselves longer.
Okay, but that means that the other 50% that come in very quickly that are not selected,
that might die on you like this guy.
This guy had a clear delay.
Okay.
And because of that delay, as far as we, you know, clinically, we don't have a peer in his office.
The clinical picture is just that, oh, he bled for too long before Tino could get his hands on that part of his sword.
Okay.
So we've got the final surgical bleeding.
So the European Consensus Guidelines, they say,
massive bleeding is the loss of one blood volume in 24 hours,
or half of blood volume loss in 3 hours.
Now, me and Jeremy discussed this yesterday.
We don't agree with the European Consensus Guidelines in as much as.
You need to bleed this much into your pericardial space, and you will die.
And that is surgical bleeding as well.
So this is not the only.
You can bleed this much into your brain, into your cranial cavity, and you will die.
So this for us is not the true definition of massive, well it is of massive bleeding, but not of surgical bleeding.
Okay, surgical bleeding, I've got to close that problem.
Okay.
So the picture that you must take from here is the difference between hemorrhage and surgical bleeding.
We all go for the hemorrhage patient with our massive transfusion protocols, with our workup, with all of that.
But we must not forget, we must not forget this patient.
And this is where we are really, where we are clinicians.
Because this is a clinical bioengineering.
Okay.
And there is no shame in just rushing no patient to care to without knowing any of the harms
because you didn't reach any of your pain.
Okay.
So from a surgeon's perspective, as we discussed it, we define surgical bleeding as an injury in which no amount of fluid resuscitation will improve outcome.
No matter what your fancy numbers are, no matter what parameters you try to resuscitate the patient to, no amount will improve outcome.
That's our definition.
And a delay in definitive surgery will worsen the outcome as well.
And what can we delay?
By fluid resuscitation, by special investigations, and by non-infinitive interventions.
Okay.
So.
It was published in Critical Care 2007.
You guys can look it up.
I can give you a copy if you want.
It's a multi-disciplinary task force with advanced leading care and trauma.
So, you know, systemic review of the published literature.
And if you don't know how GRADE works, you know, maybe I think you could ask a question after we've done the presentation.
You can sift through all the papers.
There's obviously a lot of people in the room with a lot of knowledge and experience.
And they bring out guidelines depending on, you know, the experience, but more importantly, on the literature.
They experience more of the literature that will exist as far as research we've done in the field.
So based on the evaluation, they did a number of recommendations.
I'm not going to go through all of them because there's quite a few questions.
Awesome.
So the first one is, the time elapsed between injury and operation must be minimized for a patient in need of urgent surgical training control.
And that recommendation is one thing.
So that's the highest recommendation.
So the literature supported this.
Take a look completely.
Okay.
That makes common sense.
We've just seen it here.
If she didn't close that bag, how much blood was left in that bag?
Very little.
Huh?
But if they, that patient survived.
Okay.
She did not call for an ultrasound on the bag.
She did not open this valve.
She did not put a second one in.
Okay.
There's some little...
To save some time.
The extent of traumatic hemorrhage should be clinically assessed so as to identify the
patient with surgical bleeding in need of urgent surgical care.
So we have to watch out for the mechanism and type of injury.
For the shock rating according to the American College of Surgery.
I mean there's other things.
None of you are stupid.
You can see that patient in front of you.
It's just about making that, okay, forget all my tests.
Let's just run with the patient.
That little mind.
Do not hyperventilate the patient.
Or use excessive pee.
Because everything happens so fast, depending on the different places, they have different
ventilators there.
But I've certainly seen it in some fancy places.
I mean people just put that because that machine has just run.
They stopped someone bagging now because they have to run for something else.
Put it on a bench.
Even in the emergency center.
In emergency center.
Even in emergency center.
You know, it's just about taking that.
It's about making that, okay, forget all my tests.
Let's just run with the patient.
That little mind.
This little mind.
I'm sure it's not doing too much.
Do not hyperventilate the patient.
Or use excessive pee.
Because everything happens so fast.
in the emergency center. And use massive hyperventilation to be better detrimental to your patient.
Although there's only a grade 2C recommendation that as much as a lot of these were animal
studies and retrospective human studies. And once you see something like that, always be
concerned about bias. Because it is the patient who is worse off to start off with who has
this massive, let's try something, you know, a massive ventilation method. So you do select
for the worst patient. So that's why this is grade 2C. But still I think we should
. Patients in hemorrhagic shock
with an unidentified source of bleeding should undergo urgent assessment. Now what does that mean?
Once again, this was for hemorrhagic shock, not surgical bleeding.
Okay. If you don't have an identified source of bleeding, where are you bleeding?
I mean, you're not bleeding from the arm where you can see it. It's not coming out from the arm where you can see it.
One of those. Okay.
And be aware of this pelvic ring thing. Because if you bleed in your pelvis, you know, we all know what to do.
To stabilize that pelvis, even if it's a sort of sheep. Okay. There's one problem with that guy.
And that's the guy that bleeds from his pelvic into, freely into his peritorial cavity.
Binding him with a sheep ain't gonna help you lick the nonsense. Okay.
And that is still a surgical bleed that needs to be over. Okay.
One thing when you're young, we think we can do everything and we can save everyone.
This guy, that bleeds into his abdomen, he is screw rooty.
Okay.
But we do heroic, try and do heroic things on these guys.
And there's some stuff we can try interoperatively.
Dying off the eye, the internal eye, all sorts of heroic things.
And it doesn't ever work.
But anyway.
So they're not always going to present so nicely that it's just a red peritoneal pelvic
leave from the venous plexus in front of the sacrum. Okay.
They, you know, they might bleed into a peritoneal as well.
So there's always going to be that red herring that we can't save.
But we will plan. Okay.
Now, the other two is chest and abdomen.
And I just need to know in the surgeon which cavity do I open.
Which cavity do I open?
And as far as we are concerned, the only place will open.
This is not the diagnostic tool to tell me the grade of injury of the liver tear,
of this flea, you know, of the incidental equipment.
What cavity do I open?
It is to tell me what cavity do I open.
There's fluid in the abdomen, I'm going to open the abdomen.
There's fluid in the chest, I'm going to open the chest.
It's not a diagnostic tool.
None of us sitting here are drinking.
And it helps us to decide what to do.
It's not a nicety to walk away with knowledge.
That knowledge is not for patients.
Not for patients.
If hemodynamically unstable, the factor is that indicates the cavity that I open first.
It's not a delay thing to give him.
It's not fancy diagnosis.
Okay.
Five.
Hemodynamically stable patients suspect that dead chest, abdominal bleeding,
throwing high energy injuries must undergo assessment by CT.
Now, you know, this comes from centers that have 24 hour CT available at 24 hour radio.
We don't have that.
But there's nothing that needs to CT in the hemodynamically stable patient.
Okay.
And what happens with us is we need to take the patient, we sit with them the next morning,
we need to do a CT people to do a CT file.
They send it via ultrasound, we go and do a CT file.
We have massive problems.
We can't live up to this liquidation, which is the standard.
This is the tweak.
Well, you know, science has advanced us to the stage where we have multi-slice, you know,
64 slice and more CT scan.
You can be scanned from head to toe, you know.
But hey, we're a poor country and the poor people don't have access to normal technology.
It's not even, you know, some people in this government drive cars that are more expensive
than, you know, the CT scan and all of it.
It's a technology that exists in the world and it's actually, it's a trying shame,
something like that.
In a country, in a place where we have more trauma than these Europeans will ever see
in their lives, okay, that we don't have this.
I mean, this is what we need to do.
We're not going to get to Philly and worse next year.
So, recommendation six, no recommendation for the usage of a single HP measure
at the mark of bleeding.
Those of you who are going for exams, it's always a nice exam question
and I ask it for the intermediate people as well.
When you bleed massively right and I take your HP, your HP is going to be normal,
even though three quarters of your blood lies next to you now
and you all understand why they're there.
So, Staten serum lactate is very sensitive to the estimated extent of bleeding,
but more so for shock.
Now, not the active surgery.
Okay, so it's more for shock.
And we look at lactate for all sorts of things.
And if you don't have lactate, when you face it with machines that don't have lactate,
you can also do basic symptoms.
That's the same change.
In relation eight, systolic target, 80 to 100.
This is rough.
And once the main, this major bleed has been stopped.
Okay, major bleed, I don't care what the blade's lactation.
I just care about putting a clamp on a finger or an injury inside that hole is bleeding.
I couldn't care less what this is.
So, in surgical bleeding, this is not a number to change.
Obviously, in the emergency shock, this is good.
We don't want hypertension.
We don't want you to facilitate the guys for hypertension.
Because that's...
We all know that it's close to college.
I think there'll be some more.
For proper care...
I mean, there we have airway, all of those, you know.
But the G stands for full regard to surgery.
I know that you'll find excellent Bä, everything that Steelhouse is going to be
done on the Understood Council.
I know a lot of times again, even though we have food.
Sponsors surgery.
That's all below this question.
We ask?
Until next time, David?
...
...
всего 6
...
