So I like to go very fast with these videos. I hate it when I learn something online and I start the playlist or I start the video and I see it's 40 minutes long. Difficult. So I like to keep things short, but sometimes you have to slow down a little bit.
And so what I want to do here is to just slow it down so we can just look again at homomorphisms. We've looked at homomorphisms, isomorphisms before, but we didn't really have enough to build to where we really want to go and that is to look at the theorems of isomorphisms to get a very deep understanding of what is really going on here.
At the moment, we still sat with a problem I mentioned right at the beginning. You have this box and you have to fill up, keep on filling up this box. You don't know where these things fit in. You don't really know why, but that's the thing about abstract algebra.
You've got to build these, you've got to build all this knowledge, put things in the box, put things in the box, pull them out when you need it. And two things come together into something greater, but that goes in the box again until you can pull it out.
And that makes it very difficult because sometimes to know this, you first have to learn this, but to learn this, you needed to know something about it goes all over the show.
Anyway, let's just make sure that we understand, slow down a little bit and understand what is happening here.
I have a group G, it consists of a set of elements and a binary operation. I have a group H and it consists of a set of perhaps different elements and perhaps a different binary operation.
And I've got this homomorphism F and that maps G to H. Many textbooks you're going to see it's phi and it maps a G to G prime, all sorts of things.
It's all over the show, textbooks, lectures, all over the show. It doesn't matter what is written on the board or in the book.
It's a mapping of one group to another group. It maintains the structure, this homomorphism maintains the structure.
Now what we're interested in is isomorphisms and we know for an isomorphism we have to have that this mapping is bijective, so it's got to be injective and surjective.
Now we want to stick to, and you'll see most books, it's going to stick to the fact that we only need to look initially at surjective homomorphisms.
And it's almost, we can state that any homomorphism we have, we can reduce it to a surjective homomorphism.
So it doesn't matter what the homomorphism is, we can reduce it to a surjective one so that we only need to look at it being injective before we say it's an isomorphism.
So can we really prove that we can do this?
Because remember if I had H there and it has a lot of elements, G there and it has elements here,
what we can say is that for surjective more than one of the elements here can map to the same element, the same element there.
And it might very well be that some of these are not mapped to.
Imagine if I have a function, an old-fashioned function, E, you know, old-fashioned meaning, you know,
what you learned at school or the beginning of college or university, E to the power X.
I'm mapping R, so F of X equals, I'm mapping R to R, real numbers to real numbers.
This is the domain of all values X and this is the co-domain, all the real values there on the Y axis,
but I'm not using up all of them.
I'm only using up the positive ones here and that is called the image of this co-domain.
So I have a domain, I have a co-domain, but only the ones that have been mapped to.
And I'm suggesting that whenever I'm, you know, busy with this homomorphism F here between these two groups,
that I can discard all of these and I only need to consider the image, it's called the image of F.
So of this whole set, this is the set of elements that make up H,
I only need to consider those elements that make up the image of F.
So the image of F really is just the set of all elements, the F of G, such that G is an element of G.
So there might be elements here in H, you know, that is not mapped to by an element in G
and I'm suggesting I can discard them.
So the only thing I'm left with is this surjective homomorphism.
And no matter what H was before, I'm claiming that I can always do that.
How do I prove that?
The first thing that I really need to do, I've got to show that F maps the identity element in G
to the identity element in H.
Because in that image, I've got to have the identity element,
otherwise this doesn't make up a group anymore.
So let's just have a look at how we can prove that.
The way that we go about it that you'll see in most books,
take X, which is an element of G, and state it has the following property.
That if I take the binary operation between X and itself and I land up with X again,
the only way that that can be is let's write binary operation with the inverse.
So I'm going to have X, binary operation X inverse, which just leaves me with the identity
that is going to be this.
And X has got to be the identity element, in this case in G.
So let's just remember that fact.
Let's just remember that fact.
So let's take the F of, let's take the identity element in G,
binary operation, the identity element in G,
and by definition of homomorphisms, that is going to be the F of the identity element of G,
binary operation, different binary operation.
Now, F of that, okay?
In group G, binary operation between the two identity, the identity element with itself.
Well, that's this F of the identity element in G, okay?
Looks, in G, looks a lot like that.
Let's just rewrite that and we put this first and then this second.
So that's binary operation.
Equals, okay, so I've just swung it around.
And what do I, what do I have here?
Something that looks very similar to this.
The only way that this can be so, if I then, let me do the full thing for you here on the board.
So I've got this, I've got this.
I take the binary operation with the inverse of this and that equals, okay?
These two, if I take this element and it's inverse, that leaves me with identity element.
So I'm left with here with this equals and I have, this is an element of H.
This is an element of H.
It's inverse of this one.
That leaves me with the identity element in H.
And that shows that this homomorphism, E of G, is going to be here.
It is always going to map to the identity element in H.
So I'm suggesting here that under the image, now this, G is this.
It is going to map to that.
So it's always going to be in the image of F.
So we know that the identity element in H is always going to, is always going to be there.
I'm going to clean the board because the next one that I want to show you is this.
That, remember, A is mapped to A, F of A.
A inverse, that's mapped to the F of A inverse.
Now, curious fact is, these two in G, the inverses of each other, are these two inverses of each other.
In other words, is the F of A inverse, is that equal to the F of A inverse.
That's what I've got to show now.
So remember, A is also an element of G.
And it has been mapped to something.
So that is going to be in the image.
And this is in G.
So it's also going to be mapped to, so it's also in the image.
This is also an element of the image of F.
And that is so, that would mean that all the inverses, really all the inverses, you know,
so for every element F of A in here, its inverse is also there.
And the only way that I can show that is if these two are really equal to each other.
So let's prove that.
Okay, now we need to show these inverses.
Now, so if I have the F of A and I have the F of A inverse, that is by definition this.
And that is nothing other than the F of the identity element in G.
And that is nothing we've just shown to be the identity element.
And the only way that the binary operation between these two can give me the identity element
if this one and this one are inverses of each other.
In other words, this one and its inverse equals that.
In other words, this is exactly the same thing.
So I could just left binary operation here with F is inverse.
With F is inverse.
And let's do that.
So I have F of A, it's inverse, binary operation with F of A.
And binary operation with F of A inverse.
So there.
And that has got to be the F of A inverse, binary operation with E of H.
So I've just taken that first one.
And on this side, the inverse of that.
The inverse of that and it.
That gives me the identity element of H.
So on this side, I'm just left with F of A inverse.
And that has got to equal the binary operation with this.
And its identity element is just this.
F of A inverse.
And this is an element of G.
This is an element of G.
They've both been mapped to the image.
So what we really have now is we have actually shown that this image of F.
This image of F is a subgroup of H.
Because we've shown that it will have the identity element.
We've shown that all the inverses will be there.
So this is a subset.
Remember, we just took this as a subset of H.
So we are going to inherit the associativity property there.
And the only thing that we really still need to show that this is a group in itself is if there is closure.
So if I have two elements, H and H, this element of the image of F,
I want to show that the binary operation between these two.
So these are two different elements there.
Must be an element of the image of F.
I've still got to show that.
I've got to show that that's.
So let's just take elements G and G star.
Just arbitrary elements of G.
So I am going to have the F of G.
And let that be H.
I am going to have the F of G star.
Let's make that this element.
Quite legal to do.
These are arbitrary elements.
And if I take the binary operation between these two.
So I am going to take the F of G, the binary operation, and the F of G star.
Remember, that's going to equal the F of G binary operation G star.
That's in G.
This is nothing other than H.
This is nothing other than H star.
And this is F of G and G star.
But remember, G is a group.
So the binary operation between two elements of that is still an element of G.
So I am mapping an element of G to something.
And in other words, and that's how I define the image.
So these two must be an element of the image of F.
Because that exists in G.
The mapping is mapping to something inside of the image of F, one of the elements.
This is that.
So the binary operation would lead to these two must also be there.
So we've shown that we can really take any homomorphism that we have.
And we can reduce it to a surjective homomorphism.
So we needn't worry about that at all.
You know, just reduce it.
It's always reducible.
I've shown you that it is reducible.
Just reduce it to, you know, if need be, throw some of the elements of HOA
so that you only have a surjective homomorphism.
Now we only need to show that it is injective
if we want to show that this homomorphism is indeed an isomorphism.
A specific kind of homomorphism called an isomorphism.
Because we can always just reduce our homomorphism to a surjective homomorphism.
And we don't have to worry about that anymore.
All these mappings that we see that maintain structure now,
F or phi or whatever it's named in your textbook or by your lecturer,
we can always just reduce it to a surjective.
No issues there.
And now we can move forward.
And just then now test for, you know,
which ones really are injective as well.
Which ones really are going to have to be used across
