Let's have a chat today about one of the very interesting groups, types of groups at least, and that is the symmetric group.
Symmetric group.
Now in order for us to look at the symmetric group, first a few things.
The first thing we need to look at is just permutations.
That's a very interesting thing, permutations.
So imagine I have a set, my set is called S, and it contains three elements.
One, two, three, alpha, beta, gamma, apples, oranges, pears, doesn't matter, it contains three elements.
What are the permutations?
The permutations are a bijection.
It's a function, first of all.
Let's call it a function, which means actually it's a mapping, and I'm going to map the set onto itself, or let's say I'm going to map the set to itself, and that mapping is a bijection.
Remember those lectures?
I'll put them up in the link, in the little card at the top.
Click on that I, and you can watch these lectures on bijections.
So it's injective and surjective.
In other words, if I have one, two, three, I have my three elements.
So my set, and again to my set, and that means the mappings that I do, each one of these has to be mapped to, and they have to be mapped to them only once.
I can't have one mapped to one, and two mapped to one, and three mapped to one, and they all have to be used, and they all have to be unique.
So that's a bijection.
So how many of these bijections can I make?
And those will be my permutations.
We see here that I have three elements, and if I use the counting numbers, this, and in this instance, n equals three, turns out I will have three factorial.
In other words, if there were n, I would have n factorial of these mappings.
So I would have n factorial of these mappings.
Now let's do a few of them.
And the first notation that we're going to have, I hope you see why you will have six.
Maybe I'll get that.
Let's do array notation, which is usually called array notation.
And that is where I just write one, two, three, and I see what does one map to.
Well, one can map to one, two can map to two, three can map to three.
And that would be one permutation.
And usually we call this permutation I.
That's usually what it's called, this permutation I.
So that's sort of matrix, that's just the mapping and array notation.
One maps to one, two maps to two, three maps to three.
The second one is usually called a transcription, and therefore the books use tau, and that's one, two.
So that's where we have one, two, three, and one maps, one maps to two, two maps to one, and three maps to three.
And because, you know, there's just these two that swap around, when there's usually, when there's just two that swap around, it's this transposition.
We have another one called tau, one, three, usually, that's one, two, three, and that's where one maps to three, and three maps to one, and we leave two alone.
And then there's two, three, and that's where we have one, two, and three, and that's usually where we leave one alone, and two turns to three, and three turns to two.
And then we have one called sigma, one, and two, two, sorry, and a three, and that's where one maps to two, two maps to three, and three maps back to one.
And then if I repeat this one twice, I have the last one, I already have one, two, three, four, five, so I need one more, six, and that is just where we have two, three, one, is that right?
Let me just check. If we have sigma squared, if we do this one twice, and I have one, two, three, that's the last one that is left.
So let's do this one, let's just do this one twice. So let's imagine that I have one, two, three, I have one, two, three, and I have one, two, three.
So what I'm doing here is I'm saying sigma, sigma of x, and I'm combining these two functions.
I'm combining these two functions. So let's just do sigma. Sigma says one goes to two, two goes to three, and three goes all the way back to one.
And I'll do that again. One goes to two, two goes to three, and three goes all the way back to one.
So what do we have left? Let's see where one, two, and three goes. One, two, and three.
So one goes to two, and two goes to three. So one goes to three. Two goes to three, and three goes to one.
So three goes to one. That can't be.
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
1 goes to 2
2 goes to 3
so 1 goes to 3
2 goes to 3
so 2 goes to 3
and 3 goes to 1
in other words
2 goes to 1
there we go
3 goes to 1
and 1 goes to 3
in other words
3 goes to 1
and 1 goes to 2
in other words
3 goes to 2
3 goes to 2
so there we have it
1, 2, 3
So 1 goes to 3, and 1 goes to 3, 2 goes to 1, 2 goes to, 1 goes to 3, 3 goes to 2, and 2 goes to 1.
There we go.
That took me a while, didn't it?
Anyway, so there we have sigma and sigma squared.
So if you look at it, those are the six permutations that we have.
So that's array notation.
And we've got sigma squared through the composition of functions.
And that's going to become important.
And I just want to show you another notation to write this.
And that is just the cycle notation.
And the cycles that I'm going to force, so there was a array notation.
There's a cycle notation.
And what I want to do here with cycle notation is just to write these cycles.
1 goes to 1, and then it just cycles to 1.
So that stays on its own.
2 goes to 2, and it just cycles to 2.
And 3 goes to 3, and it just cycles to 3.
So it's not very impressive there.
This one is those 1 goes to 2, 2 goes back to 1.
1 goes to 2, 2 goes back to 1.
So that cycle just carries on there.
1 goes to 2, 2 goes to 1, 1 goes to 2, and just carry on.
And then 3 just goes to itself.
So there's nothing there.
So tau 1, 2 is usually written like that.
Tau 1, 3.
Remember, we have 1 goes to 3, but 3 goes back to 1.
1 goes to 3, 3 goes back to 1.
It just cycles around there.
And then we have 2 all the way out there.
Here we have 1 just cycles to 1, all the way around.
But 2 goes to 3, and 3 goes to 2.
So that way around.
This one is 1 goes to 2, 2 goes to 3, 3 cycles back to 1, 1 goes to 2.
So it's just that I don't have this redundancy here.
And then lastly, I have 1 goes to 3, 3 goes to 2, 2 goes to 1.
So I'm back at 1, 1 goes to 3, 3 goes to 2, 2 goes to 1.
So that is the cycle notation that we do have.
So we have this array notation, and we have cycle notation.
So I'm going to leave those there.
So that's all our permutations.
So let's suggest that there's a group in here somewhere.
There's a group in here somewhere, and it's called a symmetric group.
So I'm going to suggest that I have this group, and it's going to have a set.
And my set is going to be this set.
Let's call this set S on 3 elements.
And I have my group operation, where S3 equals this I tau 1, 2, tau 1, 3, tau 2, 3, sigma, and sigma squared.
And my binary operation is this composition of any of these two.
So, you know, we usually write that.
In other words, I might say, what is I and tau 1, 3?
The composition of those two mappings.
And remember, the way that we do that is we do this one first and then that one.
So it will sort of be I of the tau 1, 3 of X.
And, you know, X is any one of these, 1, 2, or 3.
So I would say, get the tau 1, 3 first of each of these, and then get the tau of that.
So let's just do one of those.
So we're going to have the I of tau 1, 3 of 1.
And that's going to equal something.
We're going to have the I of tau 1, 3 of 2.
And we're going to have the I of tau 1, 3 of 3.
So we do that side first and then this side.
So let's have a look at what that is.
So tau 1, 3.
So this is going to be I of something now, I of something now, and I of something now.
Let's do that.
And that something is the tau of 1, 3.
Well, the tau of 1, 3, 1 goes to 3.
And that's where that cycle notation works very well.
So that's the I of 3.
Tau 1, 3 of, what is the tau 1, 3 of 2?
If we look at 1, 3 of 2, 2 just stays on its own.
So that's of 2.
And the tau 1, 3 of 3, 3 goes to 1.
So that's just 1.
And the I of 3, well, that's just 3.
And that's just 2.
And that's just 1.
So we have that this composition is, of this, is I'm just left with tau 1, 3.
I'm just left with, if I have this composition of functions that is just going to be, it seems
like this I does serve in this instance as, this I serves as an identity function.
And it is 1, 3 because remember, 1 went to 3, 2 stayed with 2, and 3 went to 1, which is exactly tau 1, 3.
So remember the composition of these methods.
So that's what I have.
So my binary operation is the composition of functions.
I have I, I have tau 1, 2, I have tau 1, 3, I have tau 2, 3, I have sigma, and I have sigma squared.
I have I, I have tau 1, 2, tau 1, 3, tau 2, 3, sigma, and sigma squared.
And it is for you to fill this in.
Now these ones are going to be very easy.
I and I is that.
It's going to be tau 1, 2, tau 1, 3, tau 2, 3, sigma, sigma squared.
And this is going to be tau 1, 2, tau 1, 3, tau 2, 3, sigma, and sigma squared.
And we have to fill in all the rest of these 36 in total.
So maybe we should just do, do a few of them.
And then at your leisure, you can do the rest.
What I'll do at the end is I'll just fill it in and I'll skip in the video to that so that you can see that you get the same, same solution as what I, as what I get.
So let's do, let's do tau 1, 2 and tau 1, 2.
So that's tau.
Let's get another piece of chalk here.
Tau 1, 2 with tau 1, 2.
So I'm going to do that one first and then that one, but they are the same so it doesn't really matter.
So 1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
And 1, 2, 3.
So let's do tau 1, 2 first.
1 goes to 2.
2 goes to 1.
1 and 3 goes to 3.
And then I do the 1.
1 goes to 2.
2 goes to 1 and 3 goes to 3.
So in the end, what am I left with?
1, 2 and 3 and 1, 2 and 3.
So 1 goes to 2, goes to 1.
So 1 goes to 1.
I have 2 goes to 1 and 1 goes to 2.
So 2 goes to 2.
And I have 3 goes to 3, goes to 3.
So I'm actually left with the identity here.
The tau 1, 2 composed of tau 1, 2 is the identity, is our first I.
And I want to call it identity because we have to look on our table in the end if we want it to be a group.
Remember, we have to have our famous four properties.
Closure, associativity, an identity element, and an inverse for everyone.
And an inverse for everyone really means that, you know, if I look down any row, each one of these have to be unique in any column.
And if I have to look down any row, each element has to be unique as well.
And then we'll get those inverses.
So let's do one more.
So from these two, we've got I.
In other words, tau 1, 2 is its own inverse.
Let's just do another one.
Let's do tau 1, 3 composed with tau 1, 3.
Let's compose that with tau 1, 2.
So we do this one first.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
You can also do it just by doing it with the cycle notation.
So tau 1, 2 takes 1 to 2.
1 to 2, 2 to 1, and 3 to 3.
Tau 1, 3 takes 1 to 3.
It takes 3 to 1, and at least 2 to 2.
So let's see what we have left.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2, 3.
So 1 is going to 2.
2 goes to 2.
So 1 goes to 2.
2 goes to 1, and 1 goes to 3.
In other words, 2 goes to 3.
2 goes to 3.
And we have 3 goes to 3.
3 goes to 1, so 3 goes to 1.
So I have this 1 goes to 2.
2 goes to 3.
3 goes back to 1, and that's just sigma.
And that is just sigma in there.
So I'm going to fill in the rest, pause the video, and see if you get exactly the same.
And what we have here is this group of permutations on this set, the set with 3 elements, gives us this set of permutations, all of the permutations on the set with 3 elements, to combine with the binary operation of this composition of functions.
It's going to give me a group, and you can check if all four properties hold for this, and indeed it does.
So the symmetric group on n elements is going to be, well, it is a group.
Let me fill this in, and in the end I'll show you.
So there you go, I've completed this table, and we can clearly see that we do have our identity element E, which is just going to be our I permutation.
And it seems that every one does have an inverse, because the composition of any one of these is eventually going to give me the identity element.
So if I have any two of the permutations, permutation 1 and permutation 2, I'm going to get E, every one of them, well, every one of them will have its inverse.
So if I look at tau 2, 3 times tau 2, 3, that's its own inverse, but when I get to sigma, sigma's inverse is sigma squared, and sigma squared's inverse is sigma, and that gives me, so they're the inverses of each other.
So check the associativity, there's inverses, there's the unique identity element, and there's closure.
All of these do belong to my original set of permutations, so we have a symmetric group.
