So, even though we've looked at the quantum model of the atom, we're still actually only dealing with the Bohr model in as much as we have one electron.
We've seen that that equals negative 13.6 electron volt times z squared over n squared z, the atomic number, the number of protons.
But we've got to deal with the energy, total energy of the atom for more than one electron.
And Wolfgang Pauli wrote up his famous exclusion principle, and that will help us to look at the energy levels of the different orbits, how they fit together, and how many electrons can actually be in each orbit.
Inasmuch, we remember the Eisenberg Uncertain Principle, it's not really a defined orbit, there's a probability, etc.
But it will help us to find how many electrons in an orbit, because there's not only the electrostatic attractive force between the nucleus and the electron, but the electrons also repulse each other.
In other words, there can only be a certain configuration of electrons, that is just logical, and this is where Pauli's exclusion principle helps us, and it says no two electrons can have the same combination of quantum numbers, same combination of quantum numbers, in a single atom.
I'm not talking two different atoms, they can each have, you know, this, this, an electron in each, both of those can have the same combination, but in one atom, no two electrons can have the same combination of quantum numbers.
So let's have a look at that, let's start at n equals one, n equals one, and we're going to add some new names to these, this is called the K-shell.
And these shells are these clouds, this cloud, this cloud of electron, Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, not with standing, that is the orbit, that is called shells, and that is the K-shell.
What is the only value for L, well, L is going to be zero.
If L is zero, ML, so for all of these we're going to say that there's no external magnetic force, okay.
So ML can also only be zero, so this poor shell, and this electron in the shell, let's try and put two of them in.
Can we put two of them in, well, so far they have the same N number, the same L number, the same ML,
they may have a principle, orbital, magnetic, spin quantum numbers.
But fortunately for us they spin up and spin down as far as the spin quantum number is concerned, spin up and spin down.
So indeed I can fit two electrons in this K-shell.
Because one can be one, zero, zero, plus a half, and one can be one, zero, zero, negative a half.
So they don't have the same combination, so in my K-shell I can fit two electrons.
Happily fit two electrons, oh, that's not.
I can fit two electrons in there.
There's a new term we're going to do, and that is an L, the L is called a sub-shell.
And I'm going to add another name in here, so that's the K-shell, and that's the one of its, or its only sub-shell.
And when L equals zero, we call this the S-sub-shell.
The S-sub-shell.
And later on we're going to see that we have a shorthand for this.
So we're going to write the N number is one.
The sub-shell is called L equals zero, that's S.
And it can have two electrons in it.
So if it has one electron in it, that'll make it hydrogen.
And if it has two in, so we can write one is two, that's the maximum.
There can't be one is three.
Because for one is three, there are only these two possibilities, two combinations of these numbers.
So if I had a third one, it would have to have the same combination as one of the other ones.
So that is impossible.
I cannot have more than two electrons in this K-shell, as far as the fact that I only have a single L equals zero, the orbital quantum number zero.
So this will be hydrogen, and this will be helium.
Let's look at the next shell, the N equals two shell, and that is called the L-shell.
Now for N equals two, we have two possibilities.
We have L equals zero, called the S-subshell, and L equals one, which is called the P-subshell, which is called the P-subshell.
So for L equals zero, we only have L equals zero, and for the MS, we can have, again, spin up and spin down.
Which is N equals, MS equals positive 1 half, and MS equals negative 1 half.
So this subshell of this L-shell can also take two electrons.
So for this one, if we're looking at something with three electrons, we're going to have 1s2, and the second one will have to fit into 2s, 2s will have 1.
And there we have lithium.
It cannot have more than two electrons in this first subshell, which is the only member of the K-shell.
You'll see now, obviously, that the L-shell has two subshells, an S and a P-subshell.
And as much as L equals zero and L equals one.
And we'll put one electron in this first one.
It can take two.
And if we have 1s2, 2s2, which will then fill up this one.
And there can't be more in there.
Due to the Pauli exclusion principle, we're going to have beryllium.
And I'm talking neutral.
I'm talking neutral atoms here.
I should have said that.
I'm talking neutral atoms.
So that will be for beryllium.
Now we look at L equals one.
That gives us a lot of possibilities for ML.
Because now ML can equal one.
ML can equal zero.
And ML can equal negative one.
So there are three possibilities.
And each of them can have spin up, spin down.
Spin up, spin down, spin up, spin down, spin up, spin down.
So they can have six.
I can fit in.
And now why don't we call this?
We'll call this 2.
We'll call this P.
This subshell would be 2P.
And it can take up to six electrons maximum.
So it can have zero, one, two, three, four, five, up to six electrons we can fit.
We can fit in there.
That gives us, if we just look at these examples here,
we can write an equation for the maximum number of electrons in any subshell L.
And that is 2 times 2L plus 1.
It's a very important equation to remember.
Because if I take zero here, two times zero is zero, plus one is one, times two is two.
I can fit a maximum of two electrons in there.
I can fit a maximum of two electrons in there.
But look at this.
Here I can fit in six.
L equals one.
Two times one is one.
Two times one is two.
Two plus one is three.
Three times two is six.
I can fit a maximum in there of six.
Now if we go to L equals, N equals three.
Just very quickly.
That is the N shell.
And we're going to have L equals zero.
We're going to have L equals one.
And we're going to have L equals one.
And we're going to have L equals two.
So if I look at this subshell, and we've got to have a new name for this subshell.
And that's called the D subshell.
Remember that's S.
That's P.
That's D.
For D.
I've got to be quick.
I don't think I have much time left on this recording.
For D.
If we put two in there.
Two times two is four.
Plus one is five.
Times two is ten.
I can fit ten electrons in this subshell.
We'll continue.
Now this, I don't know if we can call it a table, this diagram is extremely important.
You can understand it.
You can, so that you can work it out for yourself.
You can work with it every day.
Three.
Then obviously you'll know it as well.
Or three, you can memorize it just before the exam.
Take any one of those three, depending on your situations and your decision.
But this has to be imprinted in your memory.
And look what we have done.
We have the N equals one.
K shell.
And it only has one subshell.
L equals zero.
Remember that all electrons with the same N and L number is in the same subshell.
Now we go to N equals two.
It will have an L equals zero and an L equals one.
So N two gives you an L equals zero and an L equals one.
Now, just the same thing together.
What do we get?
One plus zero is one.
Let's do that.
Two plus zero is two.
Two plus one is three.
Three plus zero is three.
Okay.
Three plus one is four.
Four plus zero is four.
Now, look at this.
I'm going from lowest energy possible.
And it goes higher and higher as we move up.
As we move up.
Now look at this carefully.
N equals three.
We'll have L equals zero.
L equals one.
And there goes it's L equals zero.
L equals one.
L equals zero.
There goes it's L equals two.
Higher than the L equals zero for N four.
Because three plus two is five.
And five is higher than four.
So I could not put L zero, L one, L two,
and then enforce L zero.
Because three plus two is five.
And that's higher up.
That energy.
That's the way to understand this.
Okay.
A way to understand this.
So we have N four.
This is L zero.
This is L one.
Because four plus one is five.
But because we have two fives there.
This is we have two fours there.
And look at this four.
Why is this four on top of this four?
Because this is N three and this is N four.
So that's going to take precedence that will be a higher energy to start with.
Here we have two fives.
But this five comes from.
This five is going to come from an N three.
And this five is going to come from an N four.
So that one will be higher than this one.
Okay.
Now we get to another five.
Five plus zero is five.
But it will be higher even than this five.
Because this five comes from an N four.
And this five comes from an N three.
So they have to be stacked that way.
And now we get this two here.
But this two comes from N four.
That will be the lowest six.
The lowest six we can find.
So you have to know this.
There's no other way.
We can put some stuff in.
This is L equals zero.
So we can put an S.
That's an S.
Remember what L is.
What one L equals one is.
That's P.
This is an S again.
This is a P.
This is an S.
Now what is this?
This is a D.
Back to one which is a P.
Back to an S.
And two again is D.
So when you do write this out.
Say for instance on the exam.
You open your textbook.
You open your exam paper.
Before you do anything, write this in the back.
If you're going to memorize it the morning before,
the night before, this is the time to write it.
But I've just shown you.
You can actually work it out.
So from lowest energy to highest energy.
And now in the next part, what we'll do is we'll put the maximum amount of electrons in here.
Because that's easy to do.
We have an equation which says 2 times 2L plus 1 is going to be the maximum number of electrons that we can fit in anywhere.
Let's do that in the next section.
Let's do that in the next section.
