In the previous videos we saw that in 1913 Niels Bohr made some assumptions to explain his model of a single electron atom.
And one of the assumptions for instance was an electron in that certain orbit will not radiate any electromagnetic energy away so that it remains in that orbit.
But the other assumption was that the angular momentum L was quantized.
L is quantized. That was his other assumption.
And we remember how we got that. We know that angular momentum equals moment of inertia times angular frequency.
We know angular frequency, moment of inertia equals mass times radius squared.
We know angular frequency equals velocity divided by radius.
We put that in there and we are left with angular momentum equals mass times velocity times the radius.
And he said L is quantized.
In other words it is multiples because N equals 1, N equals 1, 2, 3.
It is these constant integer multiples of h bar.
Planks constant divided by 2 pi.
And then in 1923, Louis de Broglie, 1923, so we're talking 10 years later, he said, well, I have my de Broglie wave equation.
So the wavelength equals constant divided by momentum, I can perhaps use this concept of the fact that a particle has wave-like properties to explain why things are, why angular momentum is quantized in that orbit.
Now, he said, well, the speed of, or the velocity of, I should say, the electron is way lower than the speed of light, so we don't have to use relativistic equations here.
I can just let T equals mv, momentum equals mass times, equals mass times velocity of that, of that electron.
And he said, well, let's just look at resonance.
If I have a length L here, and I have this wave pattern, but what I want to do is to fit at least one wave in, so that is not, remember, that is not the fundamental frequency for tide at both ends, would be that, node, anti-node, node.
So in one length L here, I will fit two quarter wavelengths.
What I want is, I want this situation where I have a full wavelength, full wavelength in resonance, a standing wave is called at a specific frequency.
And he said, well, what is the length of an orbit?
Well, the length of an orbit is these, the coefficients of a circle.
In other words, that's two pi r, two pi r.
And that can fit in an integer, a positive integer number of wavelengths.
Okay, so in this instance, we have L equals four times, because remember, from any node to anti-node, there's a quarter, so I have one, two, three, four of these quarter wavelengths, and that equals just the wavelength.
So I wanted a full wavelength in there, otherwise the particle is going to go, you can't, you, it's got to make full wavelengths around, so that you can have a standing wave pattern around.
You have to, there's always nice pictures I can't draw, I'm terrible at doing that on a board, but you have to fit in these full wavelengths, so that the particle, when it's around at its original spot, it can just carry on.
So it doesn't have to now turn back on itself, make a little cusp there, okay, it's got to fit in full, full, um, uh, full wavelengths there.
In other words, we can have the two pi r equals n, and for lambda we have h over mv, and if I just rewrite this, live and behold, I'm going to get mv r equals n,
n, I'm going to spoil the surprise for you, n, and we're going to have h divided by two pi, and there we have an explanation for the quantization of the electron orbits, because Niels Bohr said he assumed that the angular momentum in these orbits are quantized.
And de Broglie showed, through his concept of the fact that matter has wave-high properties, that he can explain why these orbits are indeed quantized.
The Bohr model only describes an atom with a single electron, and certainly most atoms have more than a single electron.
And if we want to describe the state of an atom, we need four, what is called four quantum numbers, and then we can describe the state of an atom.
So that goes beyond just a Bohr model, and we're talking about quantum mechanics here.
We need four numbers, the principal quantum number, the orbital quantum number, the magnetic quantum number, and the spin quantum number.
Now, the principal quantum number is just the same as the Bohr orbits.
In other words, the possible values are n equals 1, 2, 3, etc.
Then the orbital quantum number, that's something different.
That is a number that we use in an equation so that we can calculate the angular momentum of that electron.
And the angular momentum of the electron is because it moves in a circular motion around the nucleus.
And that is the square root of L, L minus 1, times h-bar.
That is the equation.
And we need to know what this values of L is.
And the value of L depends just on whatever the value of n is.
And the possibilities for L is anything in as much as it's n minus 1.
So what that means is, if we have an n number of 1, then we can only have an L number of 0.
Nothing, we can't have anything more than that.
Which will give us a 0 angular momentum there as well.
By the way, if n equals 2, then we have two possibilities for L.
L can be either 0 or 1.
It can have two possibilities.
So it's always that.
In other words, our values for L is going to be 0, 1, 2, whatever, up till n minus 1.
That will be the maximum possible.
It's always 1 less than.
But it's not only 1, as you can see here.
So if n equals 3, the possible values for L is going to be 0 or 1 or 2.
It can be any one of those three.
So this makes the number of states, just depending on the single principle quantum number,
as that increases, we're going to get a rapid increase in the possibility of states.
Because we're going to describe the state of an atom based on all four of these.
Okay.
What about the magnetic quantum number?
Well, there's something called the Zeeman effect.
Zeeman, Dutch physicist.
And he said, if you apply a net external force, a net external magnetic force, if that atom
isn't a net external magnetic force, you're going to change the energy of that atom, of those
electron orbits.
And then we denote that by ML.
And what this describes for us is the angular momentum in a certain direction due to the magnetic
field.
And that is Lz, which is going to be ML times h bar.
Well, we just need to define that ML.
And that ML has got a substitute L because it depends on L. And how it depends on L is that
ML can take the following values.
Negative L, comma, what, what, negative 2, negative 1, 0, 1, 2, whatever, until positive L.
Okay, it doesn't make a lot of sense, this using an example.
So if L equals 1, then ML can have the following values, negative 1, 0, and 1.
We just take that value there.
So if L equals 3, our possible values for ML is going to be negative 3, negative 2, negative
1, 0, 1, 2, and 3.
And now we can see we are exponentially exploding the number of states because everything up
now depends on N.
So if N equals 3, we have 0, 1, 2, we already have 3.
And each of those 3 can be, have each of those possibilities.
1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, obviously 7.
7 times 6, 21.
So we're already sitting with 21.
Possible states just because N equals 3.
And then last is the spin, so what this could be, sorry, is this the value L, this LZ equals,
that is, we always take Z, that is the direction we're looking at.
So the component of the integral momentum in that specific direction will be ML times H bar,
H divided by 2 pi.
And the last one is the spin quantum number, and an electron can have one of, as a fermion,
can have one of two possible spins.
It must be half-integer spins, so N equals positive 1 half, or N equals negative 1 half.
So this is not dependent upon ML, which means it's not dependent on L.
So each one of these then, the 3 that we got from the 0, 1, and 2, which we got from 3 there,
each one can have that, and each one of those can now be spin up or spin down, that's the other term.
So this is sometimes referred to, or is referred to a lot as spin up, positive 1 half,
and this is referred to as spin down, spin down.
So if I have all four of these quantum numbers, I can describe the state of that atom.
And in the next example, we'll see how rapidly the possible values of numbers,
the possible numbers of states explodes as N goes larger.
Let's just do an example of N equals 1 and N equals 2.
