Just a short word on emission lines and absorption lines. Up till now we've talked about emission lines. The Lyman series, Barmer series, these are emission lines. I've taken hydrogen atoms in a glass tube and we've put a large potential difference over that tube. We're excited. We've transferred some energy to them and the electrons in higher orbits, they fall back and they emit electromagnetic
waves at a certain wavelength and we've seen why because we do have these Bohr equations. Now those are emission lines. On the other hand you also get absorption lines. That is where you shine, electromegalactic light is shown through this gas. A good example would be for instance the sun. In the centre of the sun it's very hot, a nuclear fusion takes place, there is a lot of energy
energy released from that. Those electromagnetic waves move through the cooler outer layers of the sun and some of that energy in that electromagnetic waves is used to cause an electron to jump from a lower to a higher orbit. In other words, those photons are removed from that continuous spectrum that comes out from
from the centre of the centre of the sun. And if you put that line through the fraction grating done by, this is called Fraunhofer, you get these Fraunhofer absorption lines. So that is the opposite of these emission lines. So you'll see the whole spectrum but there will be these black lines in the spectrum where those wavelengths were taken up by the atoms to move an electron from lower to a higher orbit.
the concentration of the absorption lines. Let's do a few problems. Let's take a few problems. First one, we want the radius of helium plus, so the ion of helium. Helium has two protons in the nucleus meaning it has to have two electrons, we can only do these problems of Bohr model with a single electron, hence helium plus that will leave us with one electron in the second excited state. Now we haven't explicitly
Now we haven't explicitly defined these excited states. So I just want to do that. When n equals 1, that is the ground state. The ground state. And then n equals 2 and all the ones after 2, those are excited states.
Excited states. So n equals 2 is the first excited state. And so n equals 3 would be the second excited state.
So we're looking for the second excited state. It means we are placing z would be 2 because it is here. And the second excited state leaves us n of 3. We know the equation for rn.
And as much as that is going to be h squared divided by 4 pi squared mke squared. Is that correct? Yes. Then times n squared divided by z.
Just make sure I made no mistake. So if I'm looking for r3, I'm going to plug in 3 there. So that gives me a 9. And that gives me an answer of 239 picometres.
Just plug those values into your calculator to see if you get the same answer.
Next question. What is the minimum energy to remove an electron from the ground state in helium plus?
And what is the ionization energy of helium plus?
So the first part of the question might not clearly state what we want. We just want to remove it from the ground state.
The minimum energy. That means the minimum energy would just go from 1 to 2.
That would be the minimum energy required to remove the electron from the ground state.
Ionization energy means you take it from the ground state all the way to n tending to infinity.
So it's a free electron. So let's do the second part first.
To remove it from the ground state, so there's the nucleus, there's the first orbit.
I want to go from n equals 1 to n tends to infinity.
So to do that, remember that the energy here per definition is going to be 0.
Because if I plug n tend to infinity in here, the energy is going to tend to 0.
So I don't need to do that part of the film. There's a few ways in which you can do this.
You can write long equations, one minus the other one, but you just think about it clearly.
So the ionization energy equals the absolute value of this energy in the ground state.
Because if you take this as the final and you take this as the initial energy, remember this is going to be a negative.
So if you have e final, which is 0 minus e1, which is negative, you're just going to be left with a positive number.
So there are various ways, you know, that you can certainly look at this.
So let's just work out what the energy is in the ground state.
So that is for this part B, the ionization energy.
All you need to do is just to work out e of a n of 1, a n of 1.
And for that I get, for helium with a z number of 2, I get an electron valve.
I get 54.2, 54.2 electron valve.
That is substituting that 2 in there and 1 in there and then multiplying the answer by 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 to get to electron valve.
And then you need to work out what e2 is for this first part.
You need to work out what e2 is for this first part.
And then you just need to subtract these two from each other.
This is going to be less.
The energy is going to be less in the second because we put in a larger denominator there, 2 squared.
So if you just subtract these from each other, you are going to then get the minimum energy required to remove it from the ground state.
This is going from 1 to 2.
That's going to give you...
E3 is going to be even less.
So the difference is going to be more.
But we want the minimum difference.
So that is, this is going to be between e2 and e1.
Plug those in your calculators here.
I haven't done that on the board.
And you also can get to the correct answer.
Easy problem.
I want to know the ratio of energy between the nth orbits of beryllium 3 plus and hydrogen plus.
So beryllium 3 plus will have a z equal 4.
And then we will have a z equal 1.
So we just want the energy ratio of that one to that one.
So it's going to be this with a z number of 4 and divided by the same equation but with a z number of 1.
You can clearly see if I have that energy for the beryllium divided by the energy for the helium.
Those equations are everything is going to cancel out.
And I want the nth orbit for both of them.
So all I'm going to be left with is going to be after canceling was the z of the beryllium squared divided by the z of the hydrogen squared.
And that was hydrogen plus and beryllium 3 plus.
So we're going to have 4 squared divided by 1 squared and that was just going to give us 16.
For the quantum numbers, less than or equal to 9, calculate the lowest 3 energies in the electron volt for which helium is equal to lithium.
Helium with a z2, z3.
In other words, if we take 2 away, if we take 1 away, we're left with 1 electron for each.
But we can use the Bohr equations.
And we haven't explicitly used this term before, I think, for the quantum number.
That just means the orbit number, the n number.
So for some orbit numbers, or quantum numbers, equal to less than 9,
we're looking for the 3 lowest energies where the 2 energies are equal to each other.
So what we are saying is that the energy of the lithium and the energy of the helium is going to equal each other.
If I write these 2 equations, everything will cancel except those will be equal to each other, the z and the n.
So I'm going to be left with z squared for lithium divided by the n for lithium squared.
And that is going to equal the z for helium.
Oh, what was the question? Is it helium and lithium?
For helium squared over the n then for the helium squared.
Now what is that going to equal the lithium?
The lithium is 3, so that is going to be 9 over the n for the lithium squared is going to equal 4 over the n for the helium squared.
That's what we say.
And you might look at that and say, oh, what numbers are we going to put there to make these 2 sides of the equation equal to each other?
Well, let's just solve for one of them. Let's just solve for the n for lithium squared.
In other words, I'm taking that up. So this is going to go down.
So that will be 9 over 4 times the n of the helium squared.
So I've taken that up. So I've taken that up. So that's lithium. That was lithium times 4.
Helium times 9. And I just took the 4 over to the other side.
So let's just solve for the n for lithium.
That is going to be 3 over 2 times the n for the helium.
So let's make helium 1, the quantum number for helium 1.
That is going to leave the quantum number for helium 3 over 2.
And we know we can't have any fractions.
These numbers should be, these orbits are quantized, so they should be positive integers.
If I make helium 2, though, so the n for helium equals 2.
That will give me the n for lithium equals 3.
If we make that 2, the 2's cancel. I'm left with 3.
If I let the helium equal 3, that's not going to have work because that will be 9 over 2.
But if I make 4, I'm going to get an n for the lithium of 6.
And if I make n for the helium 6, I think you'll notice that that will give me an n for the lithium of 9.
And we set the quantum number, we've got to stop there.
It's going to be equal to or less than 9.
So this is lithium.
This side is helium.
That leaves me as Z equals, for the helium equals 2.
And Z for lithium equals 3.
So these will be, so I can use any of those.
Remember, the smaller the, we want the, we just want the energies.
So we only have 3 to work with.
So those are going to be the lowest 3 energies in electron ball.
So I can use either this column or that column.
It doesn't matter.
I can plug in for Z equals 2 and n equals 2.
Z equals 2, n equals 4 and Z equals 6.
And 2 and n equals 6.
Or I can plug these ones in and the 3 lowest ones.
See if you can get them, I get them in electron balls.
I get negative 13.6 electron balls.
I get negative 3.39 electron balls.
And I get negative 1.51 electron balls.
So it was basically, it was very simple algebra that we had to do.
Just equating the energy of the one equals the energy of the other.
Everything cancels out except those two values.
