Now let's start taking a closer look at the atom. By 1911 there was still this plum pudding model of matter.
And that came from JJ Thompson where they thought that the positive charge was just this sticky glue embedded into which were these electrons.
Then in 1911 Rutherford set up this experiment with these skewers and they had this gold foil, very thin gold foil.
And at that they shot some alpha particles. Now they had no idea what alpha particles really were.
But they shot them, and we now know it's just the nucleus of helium, shot them at this thin gold foil and they had this zinc oxide screen going around.
It's much smaller than this. If this alpha particle struck there, there was a bright flash there.
I think you could view it with a microscope and see these bright flashes.
And indeed, if there was this plum pudding model, this nucleus would have just gone straight, the alpha particle would have just gone straight through.
But they saw these deflection angles, some quite sharp and some even went back.
And that made it rather fit to suggest a new model for the atom in which there was the nucleus, positively charged nucleus.
Because if this alpha particle had a head-on collision, it would come back.
Or if it was just glancing, it would be deflected. Versus just the spread of positive charge.
And then the electrons in a cloud around it, which is more a planetary model of electrons around the central nucleus.
Now, first of all, that caught a few problems because if you had a positively charged nucleus and you had a static electron there, positive charge, negative charge, attraction,
and immediately the electron would spiral into the nucleus.
On the other hand, it was quite obvious to suggest that it was in orbit around.
But orbit suggests centripetal acceleration.
And when an electron accelerates, it's going to have radiated electromagnetic radiation so it will have energy loss.
In other words, it will spiral in, spiral in, and still hit the nucleus.
So there were certainly problems with this model as well, explaining how the electron can stay in orbit around.
But certainly it was clear now that the positive charge was centred.
The positive charge was centred around the centre of the nucleus.
Now we just have to just look at sizes.
The radius of the nucleus, the radius of the nucleus, is in the order of 1 times 10 to the power negative 15 metres.
That's 1 femtometre.
And if we look at the electrons in orbit around that, in that cloud, the radius of the electrons, the electron cloud,
that is about 1.0 times 10 to the power negative 10 metres on angstrom.
So that is a factor of 5, 10 to the power 5 difference between those.
And we'll do one or two problems where we can just look at this.
So if you had to think about the atom as a planetary model,
and you made the nucleus the size of the sun, that means the electrons would be in orbit, let's call it orbit,
10 times further out than Pluto.
10 times further out than Pluto.
That means that atom is a lot, there's a lot of empty space in an atom.
So certainly we can't really use a planetary model as far as the atom is concerned.
We'll do one or two realistic problems.
You're going to see, just sort of get a scale for the size of the constituents of an atom.
So in this problem, suppose you want to show your friends or colleagues a model of the atom,
and you use a ball with a radius of 3.2 centimetres.
So say something in order of a tennis ball.
And we know now that the radius of the atom, the ratio of the radius to the atom,
of an atom to the ratio of its nucleus is 1.0 times 10 to the power of 5.
So if I represent my nucleus as a tennis ball,
the radius of that nucleus becomes 3.2 centimetres.
What then is the radius of the atom, of the atom?
In other words, where must I go and place the nucleus to use a tennis ball?
Science.
So that will be quite easy.
So what we're trying to solve here is the radius of the atom.
So the radius of the atom is going to equal 1.0 times 10 to the power of 5,
times, I've taken that to the other side, radius of the nucleus.
And all I've got to do is just use this conversion factor,
because we want to convert this centimetres to miles.
So it's going to be 1 mile divided by 1.61 times 10 to the power of 5 centimetres,
so that my radius of the nucleus 3.2 centimetres cancels out.
And I have to answer in miles.
And for two significant digits, do that for yourself.
You'll see you'll have to put whatever you take then as your electron
two miles away from your tennis ball to represent the size of an atom.
Let's just have a quick look at a problem with simple algebra and equations for area and radius.
The ratio of the area of the nucleus to the atom of the gold atom is 2.6 times 10 to the power of negative 7.
So what are we saying? We're saying that the area of the nucleus divided by the area of the atom is 2.6 times 10 to the power of negative 7.
We said the radius of the gold atom, so the radius of the atom equals 1.4 times 10 to the power of negative 11 metres.
We want to know the radius of the nucleus.
We want to solve for radius of the nucleus.
We don't have an equation for that.
We have an equation for the area of the nucleus.
The radius of the atom is that.
So we need to solve for the area of the nucleus.
That is meant to equal 2.6 times 10 to the power of negative 7 times the area of the atom.
And we know that area equals pi radius squared.
So area of nucleus, we're going to have pi, the radius of the nucleus, which is what we want.
Square is going to be 2.6 times 10 to the power of negative 7 times pi times the radius of the atom.
Square, we're going to lose our pi's.
We're going to say that the radius of the nucleus is going to equal the square root of this side.
So we're going to have the square root of 2.6 times 10 to the power of negative 7 times the radius of the atom.
So we were given the radius of the atom there.
If we solve for this, I get an answer of 7.1 femtometres.
7.1 times 10 to the power of negative 15 metres.
But the mate has got to take on track of the rink of the atom.
So this is different from great goosebumps.
So information.
You can confirm the molecules.
If you like the radius of our nucleus, you must confirm it.
Or if you highlight the upper backbone between lap evangelists, you may see each other in the way.
As soon as you can confirm it, you'll be able to see each of the upper left and Rechtится.
So finally, there's a problem.
Keeping an error.
Should you walk through the said minus 1, as you've processed, you oh, which interest 250 metres or no.
Oh, here's the saiy és.
Where could you see the bottom?
That's not funded the氣 as I've requested.
Department of 97.
That's not yet function!
There should be something to do with that.
Holy Bible I can hear it.
Your...
