The connection between probability and area. Here we go, our first real statistics.
Now you're going to go to a statistics course, they're going to tell you all about probability.
It's very important, but most of it you don't really need.
They're going to show you equations for p-value, and I've let the cat out the bag there, p-value means probability.
You don't need all of that. What you do need though is a deep understanding of what it really means.
Where does it come from? We all read p-values, but what is it really?
I think before you find out what it really is, people think it's this magical thing and you just do a little sum and boom, out pops the answer.
It is much deeper than that. It's actually very exciting stuff. Let's get going.
Normally, just I'm going to import the style sheet so that I have this, don't worry about that, the environment that I want to set up.
What I'm going to import is this thing called NumPy, numerical Python, because I just want to use a bit of NumPy.
I'm going to use the usual abbreviation there, NP.
I'm also going to import my old friend matplotlib so I can do some plotting, and seaborn to make it look nicer, and my usual filter warning, filter warnings, and matplotlib inline.
I'm using the magics there so that it renders right on this webpage, and I'm going to ignore those ugly pink boxes. There we go.
You've got to understand a little bit of probability because, as I said, that is the p-value, and let me let another cat out of the secret.
It's just geometrical surface area. That's all it is.
Let's roll two die. That's the only probability we need to do in this course.
So I've got one die, second die, they've got one to six, six-sided.
The one to six, I'm going to roll the two of them, and I'm going to see what is possible.
What are all the possible outcomes? I can roll a one on the first die and a one on the second die.
If I add those, I get two. I can roll a one and a two. Let's add those. I get a three.
I roll a one and a three, and I get a four.
So you see, I can get a three there, but I can roll a two and a one as well.
So that gets me three as well. But those are two different rolls on the one die there.
The first die had a one, and now it has a two.
And there are all the possible outcomes. I haven't repeated anything, and I haven't left anything out.
There's no other outcome there. And you can count all of them up. There's 36 possible outcomes.
36 possible outcomes.
Now, because I don't repeat any, and I've included all of them, we call that mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive.
That's my whole universe as far as these two die are concerned.
So look at it. You can throw a two in only one way by doing a one and a one.
I can throw a three in two ways. A one and a two and a two and a one.
I can hit four in three ways. A one and a three, a three and a one, and a two and a two, etc.
And you'll see there you're most likely to get a seven because there are six ways to get a seven.
I can work out a probability for that. If 36 are all the possible outcomes, it's collectively exhaustive.
There's not 37 ways. There's only 36 ways.
And six of them will end up being a seven. Six divided by 36.
That gives me simplified one over six or 16.67% or as a fraction 0.167.
So my probability of throwing a seven when I roll two to die is 0.167.
Beautiful.
It's very difficult for a human being though, as I said before, to look at all these numbers and make any kind of sense out of that.
So let's do that.
Okay.
So I'm going to create the space in memory, a bucket.
I'm going to call it dice underscore outcomes.
And instead of making a list, I'm going to make a numpy array.
Could have made the list as well, but I'm not going to import it into pandas or anything.
So I'm just going to call np.array.
Open and close my parentheses as normal and then square brackets and I just list all of them.
And it's two, three, four, five, six, seven, three, four, five.
So there we go, it's two, three, four, five, six, seven, three, four, five.
Just all that possible 36 outcomes that we can get there.
All of them, all of them, all of them.
Let's just run that.
And let's just plot them.
Now there's going to be our first plot.
What I want to do, let's just go sell all output toggle.
So it's all hidden before we reveal the secrets.
So now we're going to just learn a bit about matplotlib.pyplot.
Remember I used the abbreviation PLT.
So I'm going to say PLT dot figure.
It gets Python ready to draw a figure for me.
And this is one argument I'm going to use, one of the many arguments.
I'm going to use fig size and that's going to create a certain size of the figure.
And I'm going to use 8 comma 6.
Eight units wide, six units up.
What do I want to plot?
I want to plot.
I want to plot a histogram and that is the code for histogram.
PLT dot hist and the arguments.
There are two arguments here.
Dice outcomes is what I want to plot.
There they are.
And there's the bins.
Remember, I can only throw a 2, a 3, a 4, a 5, a 6, a 7, a 12.
There's only 11 of them.
So that's why I say bins 11.
Make 11 bins for me.
This will soon neaten things up.
PLT dot title.
So if I put some text in there.
Remember, text is also always in quotation marks.
Outcome of rolling two die.
X label.
There's a label on the X axis.
I want to call that outcome values.
Either 2, a 3, a 4, a 5, a 6, a 7, up to 12.
And the Y label, the number of occurrences.
How many times does it occur?
So this is all I need to draw my plot.
And eventually I want to show the plot.
I'm saying PLT dot show.
I leave my arguments empty.
And that semicolon there, if I leave the semicolon out,
it'll write some text before actually drawing the plot.
So I like to put the semicolon there.
Let's run that.
And there we have.
There's our title.
There's our Y label.
There's our X label.
And look at that.
There was only one way to throw a 2.
There were two ways to throw a 3.
Here's the 4.
There were three ways.
Remember to get a 4.
And all the way up, there were six ways to hit a 7.
Now, let's represent this as a fraction load.
Because this is the total number, 6.
But I want to express it as 6 divided by 36.
And for that I'm going to use another PLT dot figure.
I'm going to say, come on Python.
IPython Notebook.
Get ready to draw a figure for me.
PLT dot figure.
And fig size.
Again, 8 comma 6.
You can omit that.
Because if you use SNS, it will do all of that automatically for you.
But I've done it there.
And remember our old friend, the dist plot.
Distribution plot.
I want to do dice outcomes 11.
And the reason why I want to do that is this.
Look at the Y axis now.
It's changed.
Forget this kernel density estimate here.
Just forget that for a moment.
Just look.
It's a complete re-representation of our histogram there.
But now it's expressed as fractions.
So, your chances there of hitting a 7.
There's the 7.
It's about 0.167.
Almost 0.17, which would be the line there.
So, that gives me probability.
Now, think about that one.
Just think about that formula.
Just think about it.
These outcomes, the variables that we're dealing with here.
Are they continuous?
No, they're not.
You can't throw a 7.5.
Or you can't throw a 7.456.
You can either throw a 7, a 6, a 5.
So, they're discrete values.
And because they are discrete, what we're going to do with discrete values is we're going
to say the width of this little rectangle here is 1.
1 unit.
Now, you might be dealing with other discrete values that do have decimals or are much larger.
So, it's not because we jump from 6 to 7 and there's one difference between the two.
We say the width is 1 purely because it's discrete.
Now, what is the area of a rectangle?
Well, it's width times height.
And this height was 0.167 times the width, which is times 1, leaves us the area of this rectangle.
And all I'm doing now for you is equating area to probability.
So, if you can express things so that the sum of all these areas equal 1.
If I were to sum up all of these areas, they're going to equal 1.
So, all my values, that's why I said it's mutually exclusive, collectively exhaustive.
The collectively exhaustive is there's no other outcome possible.
So, if I added all of this up, it was going to equal 1.
If I break it up now, the area of this little rectangle tells me the probability of getting that outcome.
The probability of throwing a 7 is the area of this rectangle.
It is as simple as that.
That is what p-value is.
To calculate a p-value, a graph is drawn and the geometrical area, remember the area of a circle, pi r squared.
The area of a triangle, half of the base times the perpendicular height from that base.
The area of a rectangle, width times height, area. That's all. It's geometrical area.
And that gives you probability.
So, I can say what was the probability of throwing more than 11.
The only thing that was more than 11 is 12.
So, I can work out the p-value, the probability of having thrown a 12.
So, p-value is nothing other than area.
Of course, here it's easy. I'm dealing with discrete variables.
With discrete variables, I'm always going to have a base width of 1.
So, it makes it very simple to do.
Now, I've shown you there the probability of rolling a 2.
That was 1 out of 36. That's 0.028.
So, that's quite significant when you throw a 1.
If you roll a 2, a 1 and a 1.
Just to let you know, p-value is nothing other than area.
So, what the clever mathematics does behind the scenes is going to draw a curve.
We're going to draw a curve and it's going to work out probability.
We have an immediate problem now.
Because we've got to step up to continuous variables.
Now, a continuous variable, you can subdivide and subdivide and subdivide by definition ad infinitum.
Smaller and smaller and smaller. More and more and more fractions.
So, what are you going to make the base width now of your little rectangle?
Now, it becomes impossible because it really tends towards zero.
And you can't have a width of zero because then you're going to have zero area.
So, when we deal with continuous variables, we have a bit of a problem.
You can't just say the probability of a certain value.
Now, forget for a moment, for me, please, just this histogram and just concentrate on the kernel density estimate.
See how beautifully, the beautiful normal distribution we have.
So, say for instance this wasn't dice.
This was just a representation of possible outcomes.
No longer is there a tiny little rectangle underneath each point.
Because if you give me a tiny little rectangle, it's a continuous variable,
I can immediately divide it into two or three or four.
So, the only thing that you can do is you can calculate the area under this curve between two values
or from a value more or from another value and less.
Let me show you.
So, let's do that. Let's just look at this graph, for instance.
There we go.
You can remember this one from school.
It's just an upside-down parabola.
But there was a way to calculate area under the curve between two and ten.
You can't use geometry because what is the height?
Because the height there is different from the height there is different from the height there.
You could use calculus.
It's as simple as that.
Now, you don't have to do any calculus at all.
But what it boils down to is the Central Limit Theorem.
And we're going to have a lecture on the Central Limit Theorem.
The Central Limit Theorem basically suggests the following.
All the possible outcomes in all possible studies is going to be normally distributed like this.
So, any study you do if you're comparing two means, the computer in its mind, in the background, is going to draw this curve.
And it is going to say the one that you found is somewhere.
It's going to work out the area under the curve from that point out.
From that point out.
And then it will tell you if something is clinically significant or not.
Let's have a look at this one.
So, there's two things going on here.
In this first one, I've taken, I've coloured in, it's not done to scale.
But I've got 5%.
I've chosen 0.05 as being very rare.
But I'm dividing it up into each side, 0.025.
So, one on each side.
So, that represents 2.5% of the area under the curve.
And that represents 2.5% of the area under the curve.
Very cleverly low, this curve will always have a total area under the curve of 100% or 1.
So, this will be 0.025 of the area under the curve, 0.025.
So, in a very clever way, it's going to take your data.
It's going to draw this curve.
And I'll show you in the central limit theorem where this curve comes from.
And then it's going to say, well, this was your finding there.
And it'll draw a little line.
And it'll say, well, the area under the curve is more than 0.05, this green bit.
More than 0.05.
Therefore, your result was not significant.
Now, very quickly, you can see here, I've split my 5% into 2.
And here, I've put all of it on the one side.
That's called a two-tailed and a one-tailed hypothesis.
We'll get to that.
But, think about it again.
With a continuous variable, white self-count, hb, whatever you find.
You cannot have these nice little boxes.
You're going to have this type of graph.
It'll always be normally distributed, no matter how skew.
Well, I mustn't say that.
I'll say that in quotation marks.
No matter how skew your data, your data.
It does form part of a larger set, which is always going to be normally distributed by way of the central limit theorem.
We'll get to that.
The computer draws this graph.
It works out specifically where these cut-offs are that would represent 5% of the area under the curve.
And it'll then take your specific data, draw a line there, and then work out what the area under the curve would be from there on out.
Or, if it was on this side, from there on out.
Or, if it found it there, say right there, from there on out.
Of course, if your value fell there, you'd have a small area under the curve, which would be less than 0.05 of the area under the curve.
So your p-value is going to be significant.
So there we really have it.
P-value is nothing other than the area of a rectangle there, the area under the curve, always seems such that all the possible outcomes represent 100% of the area, or 1.0.
And yours is going to fall somewhere, and that gives you the probability.
And you don't have to understand how that is done at all.
You can write a few lines of code, and the answer is going to pop out for you.
But it is nothing other than geometrical area, the area under the curve.
Remember here with continuous data, I can't draw a little rectangle.
I can only go from one certain point out.
If it fell on this side of our little hump there, it would be from this side.
It'll work it out from here out, the area there.
That's just the way it works.
You cannot with continuous data just have one little block from there to there, and work out a little block.
It's got to be from your side out, or from this side out.
And I can lump all my 5% on one side, called the one side hypothesis, or as is the norm, I can divide my 5% into two sides.
So 2.5% on this side, 2.5% on that side.
Lovely stuff.
helock.
Hello.
Hello.
Hello.
Hello.
I did tell you this.
I don't know what's going on today.
We're all right now to watch.
