Good, here's our example as promised. Imagine we have no net external magnetic force. So the magnetic field here equals zero. I want to know how many states can my atom be in for n equals 1.
For n equals 1, let's have an n. Let's do l, ml, and ms. Spin quantum number, principal quantum number, orbital quantum number, magnetic quantum number, and spin quantum number.
Principle, we only have one. That means we only have one possibility, and that's zero, which means we only have one possibility there. But here we have two possibilities, and I can have a positive 1⁄2 and negative 1⁄2.
So I have two states, two possible states with no net external magnetic force. I can have two states, and they both have the same energy. And remember, I can write energy by negative 2 pi nk squared e to the power 4 over h squared z squared divided by n squared.
So this is my hydrogen atom with n equals 1. I've got two states, and they both have the same energy. Now let's quickly look at n equals 2. If n is 2, I have two possible l values, don't I? Because I will have 0 and I will have 1.
That will be my two possible states in as much as l is always n minus 1. If l is 0, the only possibility is here for ml is 0, but here we will definitely have 3. 1, 2, 3.
And as much as if that's 1, we can go from negative 1, 0, and 1. And each of these will have spin up and spin down. Spin up, spin down, spin up, spin down, spin up, spin down.
In other words, in other words, this one, as well as 0, is also going to have its own spin up and spin down.
So I have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 possible states. So I've gone from two possible states to eight possible states, and if there's still no net external magnetic force, magnetic field, I'm still going to have the same energy value for all those possible states for n equals 2 orbits.
Now to jump from the Bohr model to quantum, to quantum mechanical model, we've got to ask ourselves this question just to make things clear.
If I have two hydrogen atoms in a zero magnetic field, can the electron in each of the same, and I say the electron in each of those two hydrogen atoms have exactly the same energy.
Now I have to ask ourselves a question. For a given value of n, can angular momentum be zero?
Now remember Bohr said that l, he said it was quantized, l equals moment of inertia times that. In other words, that was equal to nvr, and he said that that was quantized.
In other words, in other words, it was some positive integer value of h bar, h divided by 2 pi, and n equals from 1, 2, 3, etc.
So angular momentum, according to Bohr, would not be zero. But quantum mechanics says yes, it can.
Because remember, here we are saying that l equals the square root of l times l positive 1.
I think in the previous video I might have had a negative there. Just have a look at the previous video.
This has got to be plus 1. Plus 1 times h bar.
So if I have any given value of n, let's make n equal to 2. That gives some possible l values of 0 and 1.
So it's got to be 1 less, but 0 can also be in there. That's a 0 there. That means the square root of 0, 0 times anything is 0.
So yes, indeed, for any value of n, any given value of n, because if n was 1, l was 0, and then we had to have a 0 angular momentum.
So for any value of n for both of these, if they have the same energy, and no exomagnetic field, yes, indeed you can have angular momentum of 0.
They'll just be different states. These two will be in different states, but they'll have the same energy.
And indeed 0 is possible for the angular momentum of that electron.
And then for a given value of n, can the angular momentum have different values? Yes.
Indeed, that is just what we've just said.
According to Bohr, no, it cannot, because for both of them the n value will be the same.
But for the same argument as we used before, for n equals 1, for n equals 2, we'll have 0 and 1.
So we'll have different values here. That will be 1 times 2. That will be the square root of 2 divided by h bar, which will then be h over 2 pi.
The 2 is the square root of 2 over 2 pi.
In other words, yes, you can get different, according to quantum mechanics, you can get different angular momentum for the same value of n.
So we've gone from the Bohr model now to quantum mechanical description of the atom.
Now we want to further contrast the Bohr model to the quantum mechanical picture of these electrons at the orbit.
And the other contrasting aspect we want to get to is the position of this electron in the orbit.
So, we have an equation for rn, so the radius, depending on the principal quantum number, we can work out the radius.
And we can find an exact radius.
But, unfortunately, this is not what we find by experiment.
If we looked at an experiment to find the position exactly of an electron, and we did it again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again.
what we're going to notice is this cloud forming
and so what we're dealing with is probability and we're back to the Schrodinger
the Schrodinger
sorry I can't spell Schrodinger
the Schrodinger wave equation which is a probability equation
for this wave so we're going to find a cloud
of probability around this
around this nucleus
and the cloud is going to have an area where it is
densest and where it is densest
for n equals 1 we are going to find the radius exactly as
the Bohr model suggests but because this is a probability wave
it won't exactly
be that we might find the electron less of a chance of doing it
but further away from or closer to the nucleus
than the pure Bohr model would suggest
now if we have n equals 2 we have many more states
we have more states
and if you can look in textbooks you'll find pictures of these
your cloud will start to look differently
there will certainly be more than one area of
like probability
probability and as n goes to 3 this becomes these pictures become not circular clouds but they can become clouds like this and that is the nucleus there and then less and less and less and less darker there and then less etc so you can get very weird probability these probability clouds of where we can find the electron
the electron so that is another contrast between the quantum mechanical picture and the Bohr model of our atom
now not only do we have to bring the Schrodinger wave equation
we have to bring the equation into this discussion but also the Heisenberg uncertainty principle which is now going to state for us that delta y and delta p in the y direction has got to be
remember some books of h over 4 pi
some h over 2 pi
but certainly
it's got to be more than that
now
what if
I say in my Bohr model
I know exactly
I measure the electron and I know exactly
how far it is from that nucleus there
what does that tell me
what does that tell me
about the momentum
in other words the velocity
because remember now for one relativistic
one relativistic purposes
momentum equals mass times velocity
well if we know this
to a very high precision
so this is tending towards zero
this has got to tend towards infinity
to still give me a value of more than
a half h bar
or some in some textbooks just h bar
in other words it has implication for
the Bohr model would have severe implications for
the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle
because remember this delta y refers to the probability that we find it in a certain
and now we say well we're finding it in exactly that spot
so this is tending towards zero
not towards that
you've got towards zero
this means this has got to explode
massively
you've got to tend to infinity
to still give us a value of more than
than h over 4 pi
let's just do these rapid fire questions
so in the Bohr model as the electron gets closer to the nucleus
the total energy gets less
because remember it's zero up at infinity
and negative 13.6
and n equals one
for the quantum mechanical model
though that is not necessarily so
because we have uncertainty
in the position
remember we said that there's this cloud
of probabilities around
so even for n equals one
we're going to be uncertain about
exactly how far away it is from the nucleus
and that will still relate to n equals one
we'll still have the same energy
so the closer it gets
it's not necessarily that we get this smaller energy
for which quantum number must angular momentum be zero in the quantum model
that's for n equals one
because for n equals one
l equals zero
and from l equals the square root of l times l plus one
and the square root of that times h bar
we are going to get a zero angular momentum
now we have two atoms each
this is in a different excited state
so the two electrons are in different excited states
so angular momentum is the same for the Bohr and quantum model
the quantum model for two atoms with different energies
now l remember equals n times h bar
for the quantum model
but l equals this
so even though
so if they have different energies in the quantum model
no they cannot have the same angular momentum
but they can have the same angular momentum
as far as
because say if I have n equals two
I can have an l of zero, one or two
in other words
and if the other one was n equals three
I can have l of zero, one, two, and three
so I can have l equals one
my orbital quantum number
I can have one for both of these states
and if both of them are one
and I supplement it in there
substitute it in there
so I get the same angular momentum
the same for question four
if I have an increase in the orbital angular momentum
for the Bohr and quantum models
then does this mean that there is also an increase in the energy?
no
it is so for the Bohr model though
because as the angular momentum goes up
n has to go up
but not again necessarily so for
the quantum mechanical model
because of my equation that I have for angular momentum there
it's not necessarily that the energy
that the energy will go up
will go up as well
because all of this infrastructure
still does it
I know it's a fundamental difference
