So, welcome. Let's have some fun in mathematics.
I think complex analysis is kind of one of the most fun things you can study.
We can all get into it. At least initially, it's not very difficult.
We're going to extend the real numbers to the complex numbers,
and we're just going to have some fun with it.
So, in this very first lecture, we're just going to talk about one thing,
and that's called the imaginary unit.
So, let's start with that. Let's put it out here, the imaginary unit.
It's the name that we're going to give this new number
that we've never had before.
And this number, let's put it out in black, why not?
Let's say that this imaginary unit is called i.
That's just a lowercase i.
We're going to have some fun with this lowercase i.
We want to define this i, and we've got to motivate for it somehow.
And let's go back to just some school algebra,
and we're going to look at this polynomial.
We're going to say x squared plus, let's make it 0x, plus 1 equals 0.
So, I'm going to rewrite that because, you know, that's a second-degree polynomial.
I've got a 1, a coefficient of 1, a coefficient of 0.
And so, that's just going to drop away.
So, I have plus 1 equals 0.
x squared plus 1 equals 0.
And immediately, that's got to raise the red flags, shouldn't it?
Because if I square any real number, I've got to be careful here.
Let's just put it out there.
I'm going to say that x is a member of the set of real numbers.
And I know if I take any real number and I square that, the lower bound of that,
the smallest value that I could get is 0.
0 squared is 0.
But any negative number squared or any positive number squared,
that's going to give me a positive number.
And now, so I've got, you know, at least a 0.
And I'm adding 1 to that.
How am I going to get back to 0?
So, that just doesn't make sense.
And as much as I take x squared, I subtract 1 from both sides.
That's going to be x squared equals minus 1.
So, how can I take a real number squared and I get a negative number?
So much so, if I take the square root of both sides,
I take the square root of x squared.
I'm going to do plus or minus the square root of negative 1.
So, here on this side, I'm just going to be left with an x.
And that's going to be plus or minus the square root of negative 1.
And I'm going to think, how can I get this?
You know, how can I calculate the square root of negative 1?
Well, here comes the imaginary unit.
And it's just going to come to our rescue.
Because we're going to define this and our definitions.
Let's try and keep trying to keep to this.
Keep our definitions and our equations,
and our definitions at least in green.
And so, I want to define this.
So, let's write, let's define this.
This and our definitions going to be i such that i squared is going to equal negative 1.
That is how I'm going to define this thing called i,
such that this new number i, this imaginary unit i,
if I square it, I get negative 1.
And let's see, you know, what do we have there?
We have that negative 1 in there.
And if we square that negative 1, we get rid of the square root.
And that leaves us with this idea of i squared.
And now, we have, you know, we have a solution here.
Let's go back.
Let's do it in blue because we actually now have a solution.
We're going to say x equals plus or minus i.
If I take that plus or minus i and I plug it into my original polynomial.
So, let's see what happens.
If I now take x squared, that's going to be positive i squared.
That's just going to equal i squared.
And we've defined what i squared should look like.
i squared is negative 1.
And there I have negative 1.
And if I take square and I plug in the minus i squared.
Well, a negative times a negative is a positive.
i squared is negative 1.
So, this is going to leave me with a negative 1 as well.
So, that's brilliant.
I've actually got two roots now.
These would be roots because I'm setting my polynomial equal to 0.
And look at that.
If I plug in either of these, they're both negative 1.
If I plug in negative 1 there, negative 1 for my x squared.
Negative 1 plus 1 is 0.
I have solved this polynomial for x.
All I had to do is introduce this new number called the imaginary unit.
And we're going to make use of this imaginary unit all over complex analysis.
I mean, that is what complex analysis is all about, complex numbers.
And we'll look at complex numbers in the very next lecture.
