Now let's get to some exciting stuff. We're going to work in a few minutes through the
thoughts of Niels Bohr. And around about 1913 thereabouts, he had these following problems
and these following thoughts. Those weren't his only thoughts, we'll carry on with a few
more. So now they had the Rutherford model from 1911 of the atom, and they had the nucleus
and they had the electron in an orbit around him. And the problems with that were obviously,
as we mentioned before, if the electron was still standing, electromagnetic attractive
force would just bang it straight into the nucleus, or if it was in orbit indeed, it would undergo
centripetal acceleration, thereby releasing electromagnetic radiation, that is a loss of energy, and it
will spiral in, in, in, as it loses that energy. So he had to come up with waves because the
experiment now showed that that seemed to be the way that the atom looks like. So he thought
of Max Planck's quantum, that the energy, energy was somehow quantized, that you only got these
steps with the black body radiation, and he thought of Albert Einstein's photoelectric effect. In
other words, there are these photons coming off of the atoms in the metal, and you can do the
videos on the photoelectric effect. So there were these certain wavelength photons that came off. So he
thought to himself, well, what if there were different energy levels for different orbital radii? So he had
the nucleus, and he had now these orbits, and he thought, well, what if there were different
energy levels to these orbits, and you only allowed those orbits, nothing in between. So if you go from a
higher orbit to a lower orbit, initial energy to final energy, there's going to be this change of energy, and that change of
energy, and that change of energy gives you the energy of the photon, E equals HF, and the photon then comes off.
Because now this solves the Balmer lines problem. Why are these lines, and there's nothing in between?
There's only these certain wavelengths, and remember that equals HC divided by lambda. There's only these certain
wavelengths that come off, and we saw those equations for those wavelengths, because that certainly would solve this
Balmer's line problem, and also sort of explain the Rutherford model. So he made a few assumptions, and this is one of the
the first ones. He assumed that the stationary orbits, so if it was just stuck in that orbit, there was no
electromagnetic radiation. If it was stuck, the electron wouldn't have radiated any
electromagnetic radiation. In other words, it wouldn't lose any energy, so it wasn't going to spiral in, it was just stuck.
But as physics was known then, that was a problem, because certainly there was some acceleration, there was
some tributal acceleration. So certainly there, as I understood it then, there had to be some, but he assumed that there was nothing.
And based on these first few thoughts, we're going to derive some equations, and we'll continue with some more of these thoughts.
Now, we must work out the total energy of this electron in this orbit now, that emits no electromagnetic radiation.
It's kinetic energy, total energy is going to be kinetic energy plus potential energy.
Now, we have a particle with mass, so kinetic energy is going to equal half mv squared, but this is not linear.
This electron is not free, it's not a linear motion, it's a centripetal motion, and we know that
centripetal force equals mv squared divided by the radius. What gives us this centripetal force?
It's the electric force, it's the electric force, the force due to the negative and positive charge.
So that force equals k, q1, q2, divided by r squared, and we're looking for the magnitude of this force.
So that is what gives us the centripetal acceleration. We just need to know what q1 and q2 is.
Let's make one the electron, and let's make one the nucleus.
So a nucleus, so let's just rewrite f, but for f we can write mv squared over r equals k, 8.988 times 10 to the power of 9 newton meters squared per coulomb squared.
So let's make this the nucleus. The nucleus is going to have a charge of the electron,
this is positive times the number of protons. And let's make this the charge of the electron,
divided by r squared. In other words, we're going to have that mv squared is going to equal k,
it's going to be an e squared, a z divided by r. Divided by r. What about the potential energy?
Well, the potential energy due to an electric field, that's an electric potential energy,
was going to equal k, q, q0, divided by r. Here again, this q was going to be,
that was going to be, that was going to be this absolute value of e times z,
and that was the electric, the charge of the electron. And that gives us potential energy of the electric field
of negative k, e squared, z divided by r. Now we've got to add these two, and for kinetic energy this mv squared
I can replace with this. In other words, energy, poor noted, was going to be a half of this, minus a full one.
These two are exactly the same, so it's just a half minus one, which is going to leave us with a negative a half.
So negative, that was going to be negative k, and we write it ze squared, divided by 2r.
So here we work like that, that is the energy level, that is the energy, total energy of each orbit, each orbit.
So look, these are going to be negative, and with a large, the larger this r value gets, the smaller this gets,
but remember there is that negative in there. And we'll place this somewhere on the side, because we're going to leave it later,
as we develop these thoughts a bit further, in the next videos.
Thoughts 5 and 6. So he had this equation for the energy, or total energy of an orbit, of an electron, around the hydrogen atom.
Negative k times the number of protons times e squared, that's the charge of an electron divided by the radius, but from that he required the radius.
So he made another assumption, and he assumed that the angular momentum, the angular momentum of the electron was quantized.
How did that help? Now we remember that the angular momentum equals moment of inertia times angular velocity.
We also remember that the angular velocity equals the angular velocity divided by the radius.
Or certainly the velocity was equal to omega r.
So if we substitute those values in there, we're going to get mr squared, v divided by r, and that is going to give us m v r.
And now for his assumption, he assumed that the angular momentum was quantized.
In other words, the angular momentum, he thought, was some multiple of plums constant divided by 2 pi.
That was his assumption. And plums constant divided by 2 pi equals, that's h bar. But anyway.
In other words, m v r, m v, which is now going to be a function of how many n's there are, r of how many n's there are, equals n, h divided by 2 pi.
So if we solve this for velocity, we're going to get an n, h divided by 2 pi, and we're going to get an n, and an r n.
And we remember when we just looked at kinetic energy, one of the intermediate steps was this.
And if we plug v in for that, we're going to get an n. Now we're going to get v squared, that's n squared, h squared, divided by 4 pi squared, mass squared, r n squared, equals k z e squared, divided by r.
And now I just want to solve for r, because that is what he required. He required the radius.
So if I solve for r, which is now dependent upon n, n 1, n 2, n 3, because he said that angular momentum was quantized.
n is integer multiples of h bar, so n is 1, 2, 3, 4. Solving for that, I'm just going to write it off the board there, so you don't have to do all the algebra, do it yourself.
That's going to be 4 pi squared, m, k, e squared, n squared, over z, and then n equals 1, 2, 3, etc.
So he now had an equation for the radius, as he requires. And we can plug radius in here. And we're going to get the following. If you plugged r in there, you're going to get the following.
I'll just write it off. I'll just write it as well. 2 pi squared m, k squared, e to the power of 4, divided by h squared, and that was z squared over n squared. That's the way it's written.
So now we get to the equation for the energy of these orbits. The energy of these orbits. And if we plug all the values in for a hydrogen atom, and you plug in n equals 1 there for the very first orbit, you're going to get it.
This will give you a kilojoules, and you just have to convert that to electron volts. So it's going to give you a negative 13.6 electron volt.
If you plug in infinity, in other words, that electron is totally free at a radius of infinity, and that will be the infinite orbit, this all goes to zero.
So that's for one. That's for a free electron, standing still, that is going to be zero electron volts.
So you require 13.6 electron volts of energy, whether you do that by exciting the gas with electric potential, adding heat to the system, whatever.
If you give that atom, hydrogen atom, an energy boost of 13.6 electron volts, you are going to free that electron from the hydrogen atom.
So this is the equation that we now require, all due to the hard work and thought of Niels Bohr, making the assumption that in these stable orbits, n equals 1, n equals 2, n equals 3, you will have no electromagnetic radiation.
Second assumption, second assumption that this angular momentum, this angular momentum is quantized, and it is equal to some multiple of H bar.
And that will give you the energy levels, energy levels of the different orbits of an electron around a nucleus, depending on how many protons they are.
