After yesterday's Let's Talk surgery I had quite a few comments of people saying
yes indeed my needle is bending. So what exactly is happening? Now just think of
this needle, here's my little needle and I'm holding it two-thirds of the way
back so I'm fixing that position and I'm trying to roll my wrist. So I'm rolling
my wrist so I'm pointing this force vector in that direction trying to push
it through. But what if the tissue is tough so I have a much larger vector
pushing back at me and I'm trying to fix this point. Actually in the fixing that
point I'm even putting torque on that. So what happens is it is as if there's a
mass or weight hanging from this, pulling this down while this point is fixed. This
force here has been transmitted along this body and it's pulling this down and
this poor little needle is going to bend and bend and bend and there you sit with
the bent needle. Of course the closer you are, if you put in the middle, the
closer you are to the spot that you are working. This is a much straighter line
than this is a lot more curved. This is almost straight this line. So doing that
punching motion as I mentioned yesterday is going to get you through the tissue in
a very atraumatic way. You're going to let that reverse cutting needle at the tip
do its work and just smoothly glide through that tissue as opposed to trying to
tear and you're causing tears as you move. This needle is moving as fast as the
tissue is concerning. This cutting edge here it is like a knife with three edges
at the front. It's going to cause this ragged edge as you go through. That hole
in the tissue is bigger than this. This is a swage needle so the material comes out
there. It's larger than the thickness of this material and you have these ugly
holes that you're causing and your needle is bending. So that's that's actually
terrible. Hold it closer. So the complaint is but now I've got no room to
maneuver. I'm going to put the needle through and it doesn't come out the other side.
Well if it doesn't, if you've put the needle through and it is there and the
needle's not out the tissue yet, just replace it a little bit. Remember the
tissue is here now as you pushed it through. Replace it a little bit, push it in. Now the
tissue is there. Take a little bit, push it in. The closer you are working to it, the
less of a chance you have. There's a lot more tensile strength in that little bit
than distributed across a long section of that. So you're not going to cause damage to
your needle. Just push it through, push it through, push it through until it comes out
the other side. And treat that tissue, in other words you're treating the tissue with
care and you're treating the needle with care as well so you're not going to get this
damage to the needle. So that was one, that was the one issue. The other one was of course
just holding this. So imagine that's my laceration that I'm just trying to, to suture. Remember trying to work towards yourself always. Don't put sutures in going further and further away.
And we're trying to put a suture perpendicularly across the laceration. So I've lifted the patient up. The patient is now on the board here.
And if I put this straight, look at the angle at which my wrist has to bend while I'm working. Especially if you're trying to hold it far away from here, which I don't like doing at all.
Now some, some instructors might not like this, but I really like to claw my instruments because the closer it is to my hand, it actually becomes part of my hand. It is my hand that is working. Whereas if I work far away from my hand, it is something else that's working.
That's besides the point though. If I put this at an angle like this, now my wrist is straight while I'm trying to work and that's much more comfortable to do.
And I have much more control over what I'm doing if this needle is put in at an angle. So there we go. Put your needle in the middle.
This is a much straighter line. That's going to have a lot less chance to bend. And of course, this reverse cutting edge there, there's actually three cutting edges there.
That edge cuts, that edge cuts, that edge cuts. And if you're trying to apply a force, you are actually, the skin starts or the tissue starts slipping here.
And instead of a nice neat little hole, which this suture material can go through, is now much bigger because you made this huge rent in it actually,
as you try to tear it through, that's no good at all. So my advice really, take it closer and number one and number two,
put your angle, put your needle on at an angle to your instrument.
