Welcome to my second video on anatomy using the Wolfram language inside of Mathematica.
The notebooks or the material that I'm going to make available for you are in the form of
what Stephen Wolfram refers to as computational essays.
It is a bit of a generic term and I suppose, from my point of view, what he means by that
is that inside of Mathematica, we have this beautiful notebook environment started in the late 80s when Mathematica started.
And today we see lots of copies of that in the form of our studio with our markdown files.
We see that in the Jupyter notebooks that can use your browser in which you can code many languages.
But this notebook environment where we write our code and we see the execution of our code,
the results of our code, really allows for this idea of a computational essay.
An essay in the form of a narrative, something that I can put down on a screen,
which I suppose I can eventually print so it can be on paper as well, but let's keep it on the screen.
A story that I can write, a narrative that I can weave to provide information, to give information and knowledge,
to write down the story of words and code and results with pictures, graphs, etc.
It is a beautiful, something tangible that you create that you can share with others.
Now, I mentioned before, you might have access to Mathematica through your organization, your college, your university's site license with the Wilfram Research Company.
It is not that expensive to buy if you want to do that yourself.
You can buy a yearly license for yourself and that really, if you string together a few cups of coffee at your favorite coffee shop,
you're going to be able to afford this.
You can also use the online version, for instance, the Programming Lab here.
You can sign up for that free of charge and use it here in the web, absolutely free.
You can also sign up for this Programming Lab for a small fee every month.
That will allow you a special desktop version to download and also to code right here in your browser online and store all your files online.
There's so many ways that you can get involved in Mathematica without paying a single cent or for what you get actually pay very, very little.
So here we are in the Wilfram Cloud. It's simply wilframcloud.com and this is the page that you'll see and you'll click on this Programming Lab.
And I'm not even going to sign in. I'm just going to show you what happens if we click on the free version.
That is what you're going to see. You can watch a short video on this development platform.
Again, it allows you to sign up so that you can at least save your files.
I'm not even signed up. I'm not logged in or anything.
I'm just showing you around for you to get an idea of this computational essay.
And then if you click on create a new notebook, this is what you're going to see.
A beautiful coding environment.
Your empty notebook here.
You're going to see some advertisement on the bottom because I'm not signed in.
I haven't signed up here.
And so you'll see this at the bottom.
On the right hand side, quite a few things for you to look at.
The documentation is fantastic.
If there's one thing about the Wilfram language, it is the documentation.
Everything that you need to know about the code is inside of a very easy to use and spectacular documentation.
There's so many coding environments that we have today have such poor documentation that cannot be said of the Wilfram language.
The documentation is excellent.
There's also this elementary introduction to the Wilfram language.
If we click on that, that's a book written by Stephen Wilfram himself.
And you can click on all these topics on the left hand side, all these chapters.
And you can just go through them and step by step teach yourself more about the Wilfram language.
I'll put some links in the code below, in the description below that will also show you some of my own courses that you can take if you want to learn more about the Wilfram language itself.
I have a course just on the Wilfram language and one on statistics using the Wilfram language.
So, let's create another new document here.
This is what it looks like.
And you can see it's already nicely formatted.
I've put some, I suppose, sections and titles in here.
And if I click on format here, you see the formatting bar on the right hand side.
And you see also these marks on the side here.
These are cells.
Everything that you do inside of this computational essay in the Wilfram notebook, Wilfram language notebook or Mathematica notebook, exist in cells.
So, I can highlight all of these cells here that says section one and then these bullet points.
And if I double click on those, they actually just move up there and they are hidden away.
But I can see this little arrow here.
If you look closely, you might not see this if you're viewing it on a small screen.
But if I double click on that, it just all opens up.
And you can see if I want to add something new, there's this horizontal bar.
I can just start typing.
The default would be to enter code.
But if I click on this little plus button, it tells me the default is Wilfram language input code.
Or I can just do plain text.
There's three form or the Wilfram alpha query that you've actually seen before.
And, but let's go for other style.
And if we move up to the top, we'll see title.
And that's exactly how I got this big title up here.
Subtitle is how I got that one.
And there's section one.
Let's just do another section.
And if you view this on a large screen, you'll see it actually says alt plus four.
So if you hold down alt or option key and hit four, you'll get a new section.
And I'm just going to hit my down arrow and there's a new one.
Let's just add some normal text, plain text.
This is a line of text.
There we go.
Simple as that.
Let's do a new section.
And let's make it another section.
Let's call this section three.
And you can see what we mean by computational essay.
I can create this beautiful, almost word-like document, but it is so much richer.
I can add so many things.
Let's just say anatomy plot 3D.
See the auto-completion there.
I can just hit the tab key.
I can also hit these little down arrows and it'll show me what I have to put in there.
And I can also click on the little plus, the I sign there, I should say.
And then on the right-hand side, we're going to see the documentation appear.
There we see the documentation.
And let's do this one, left femur.
So arguments always go inside of square brackets.
I hold down control or command and hit the equal sign.
And I'm going to write left femur.
And I'm going to hit the tab key.
And it states that this is an anatomical structure.
Do I want to accept that?
Yes, I do.
And I'm just going to close my square bracket.
Hold down shift and enter or shift and return.
And there we go, our femur.
And really beautifully, I can also turn this femur around.
All the anatomy that I want to see right in front of my eyes.
The computational essay, this idea of this notebook with these sections that exist inside of cells
that I can just close down and open back up, I can really weave a narrative here and produce
this beautiful document.
And this is the document that we're going to look at next.
We're going to talk about the clavicle.
It's going to be our first anatomical object that we're going to discuss.
And you can see the content that we're going to look at there.
This is inside the desktop version of Mathematica.
And you can see these cells have been collapsed.
And I can open them up by double-clicking here.
I'll close them again.
Or on the desktop version, there are these little markers here that allow me to open up.
And you can see what we have here.
Text.
It's a document that's going to exist and that you can download.
And you can really just read through the information there.
We're going to look at parts.
You can see text and code and the execution of the code.
a computational essay, a beautiful, beautiful document that you can use for so many things.
