Now let's just look at the concept of this problem. I want the ionization energy of lithium 2 plus. So it's a lithium ion. Lithium has what it is. How many protons does a lithium atom have? Well that equals three. Three protons. In other words it has to have three electrons.
If you look at Bohr's equation here, what it does not make any room for is the fact that you can't have more than one electron because it doesn't take into consideration the electrostatic force between the various electrons.
It was only between that one single electron and a nucleus. And a nucleus with a number of protons. So if we look at lithium, we have to look at lithium 2 plus.
In other words, two electrons have been removed already. There's only one electron left. One electron and a nucleus with three atoms. Three protons.
If you think about it then, it should take more energy. The ionization energy was to remove it completely.
So your initial energy was at an n value of one. And to ionize it, it means you remove completely that electron. In other words, your final, your final, we're talking about n equals infinity, the infinite orbit.
If I can call it, then it's totally, then it's totally free. And then the ionization energy is just going to be EF minus EI. We know that this leaves us with the energy final equals zero because n goes to infinity.
There's infinity in the denominator. Certainly that equation tends to zero.
So we just need to work out what the equation would be for n equals one in the first orbit. And it's going to be nine times because it's three to the power of two. That's nine.
So it's going to be nine times the 13.6 that we had for hydrogen. And certainly that works out to an email of about 122 electron volts.
You're going to need to totally ionize or totally remove that one last remaining electron, which we'll take to be in the first orbit to totally remove it.
Now back to the line spectra of hydrogen.
And this is actually where Niels Bohr's equation for energy, as we had there, was vindicated and why it was taken on board by physicists as being correct.
Because what we need to show, what his initial problem was, remember, is that the energy of the photon is going to be proportional to the difference between the orbital energy levels.
If he could do that, he could explain the Balmer lines, for instance.
And his assumptions let him then explain the Rutherford model.
So if we go from initial energy to final energy, meaning the initial energy is going to be larger than the final energy, or the initial orbit is going to be larger than the final orbit.
That's the assumption we're going from.
And you'll see in books when you look at those energy lines, for instance for hydrogen, the negative 13.6 will be here, and then further up, and then the differences just become closer and closer together.
And the same happens with the radii of these orbits away from the nucleus, large, smaller, smaller, smaller, smaller, smaller, smaller, smaller gaps.
And if you remember those spectral lines as well, towards the short end, they'll be closer together and further apart, and then the final one, Lyman series.
And then again for the Balmer series, etc.
Okay.
So all these things are tied, all these things are tied together.
So let's do this.
So what we started off by trying to show, or started off by trying to show, is that there's this portionality in it that's going to equal the energy of that photon that gets released.
So the photon, or the wavelength of that electromagnetic radiation, and we know that that energy equals hf, or hc divided by lambda.
Now, let's do that for ni.
Now, let's do that for ni and nf.
Remember there, so we're going to have your ei, so that was going to be negative 2, pi is squared, mk squared, e to the power 4 is z squared, divided by h squared, ni squared.
Now, we're going to have minus, negative, so that will be a positive, 2, pi squared, mk squared, e to the power 4 is z squared, divided by h squared, now n, final squared, and that is going to equal hc, divided by lambda.
So, so, we can certainly take out some common factors, because the only difference between these two expressions is the n values.
So, we're going to have 2 pi squared, mk squared, e to the power 4, z squared, divided by h squared, divided by h squared, then we're going to have 1 over, that was the positive,
nf squared minus 1 over ni squared, and that is going to equal hc over lambda, or if we just got lambda on its own, we brought that to the other side,
let me do this on this side, that is going to equal h cubed, times constant cubed, times c, the speed of light.
So, I've just taken these two to the other side, and look at this, this looks a lot like those first equations, 1 over, 1 over lambda.
That looks a lot like those first equations we have, and as I said, if you do this part, you'll see that that equals, or very closely,
is equal to the Rydberg constant, and that's vindicated this equation, that Niels Bohr got to.
Now, if we look at making, in final, equal to 1, in other words, the electron is going to go from any higher orbit down to, to 1,
and you'll notice that, that leaves this as 1, which means we're working with this Lyman series,
because remember, that said 1 over lambda, was going to equal, it's a terrible lambda,
1 over lambda was going to be R, which is basically this, this was going to be 1 over 1 squared minus 1 over n squared,
and this N, now, if you look at it, this is the N final, is 1, and the N initial, anything that it jumps from,
that higher orbit to a lower orbit, and remember, we said that the larger the N is, the smaller the wavelength is going to be,
the larger initial, so if it jumps from infinitely high, right down to the bottom one,
that's going to be the biggest energy difference, that is going to give us the smallest,
and the N that's going to give us the smallest wavelength,
so right, on the side here of the, of the, in the ultraviolet spectrum,
and those lines are initially close together, because from infinity, you know,
you're going to be infinity minus 1, infinity minus 2, infinity minus 3,
or then more realistically, say 10, 9, 8, 7, those are going to be much spaced much closer together,
the smaller differences between those, and then larger as we get,
that's why you'll get those lines go like that, okay,
and then if we let N final equal 2,
then we're going to get to the Balmer series,
Balmer series, and if we let N final equal 3,
uh, 3, uh, and that means you're going to get, uh, the passion series,
you know, the correct pronunciation of that,
okay, and that's why, for the alignment series,
this N had to be, had to be 2, 3, 4,
because you can only jump from a higher to a lower,
we stated that in the initial, from a higher to a lower,
in other words, you can only jump from 2 to 1, 3 to 1, 4 to 1,
and now you can only jump from,
3, equals 3, 4, 5, 5, etc.,
and then this one was in 4, 5, 6,
because if there jumps to the final one,
it's got to be lower than that,
so everything made beautiful sense.
Now, for atomic hydrogen,
we also have another series called the bracket series,
and that is where the final,
the final orbital value N equals 4.
So the first question we want to know is from what N value,
from what orbit, orbital number,
if I can call it that,
must we jump to get the longest wavelength,
and remember that's set for the smallest.
Remember, this meant that N or N initial had to be 5, 6, 7, etc.
So for the longest wavelength,
we need the smallest N value.
So if we have 1 over lambda for the bracket series,
the bracket series was going to be the Rydberg constant,
1 over, for bracket,
we were going to have 4 squared minus 1 over N squared.
So, longest wavelength meaning the smallest value of N,
which is going to be then 1 over 16 minus 1 over 25,
and that gives me a lambda value of 4051 nanometers,
and then from 6,
so 1 over lambda for the bracket series,
was going to equal R,
and was going to be 1 over 16 minus,
then for 6, was going to be 1 over 36,
and that gives me a lambda here of 2625,
2625 nanometers.
Okay, and you could expect that
because we had Lyman,
we had Balmer,
we had Passion.
Obviously, that was going to be on the longer wavelength side
as we carry on with higher final orbits.
And this part of the spectrum still is
in the infrared part of the spectrum.
and the color here so I had that
I wanted to give you a lot of love right here with me.
So, when I talked about your body as it
is just the world.
