Let's look at the fourth video in the series on temperature, heat and the first law of thermodynamics.
And now we, as promised, eventually get to the first law of thermodynamics.
In the previous video it was clearly seen that when a system changes from a given initial state to a given final state,
remember that's in the pressure volume diagram,
both work and heat depend on the nature of the process.
Irrespective though of the process, the quantity Q minus W remains a constant for any similar initial and final states.
This quantity represents the internal energy of the system.
And that is what this chapter eventually is all about.
The first law of thermodynamics.
And here we have it.
So that change in going from initial to final state, that is the change in internal...
That's a bit of a mistake there.
The change in internal energy.
And that is int...
There we go again.
Let's see if we can get rid of that.
Doesn't seem to undo it.
Internal energy final minus internal energy initial and that equals heat minus work.
First law of thermodynamics.
Let's look at a few facts.
The internal energy of a system increases if energy is added to the system as heat
and decreases if energy is lost as work done by the system.
Read that again so that you understand it.
Energy may be transferred in or out of a system as either work or heat.
Up till now we've only looked at heat in videos one and two.
Three we introduced this concept of work through a definite integral, an area under a curve.
In applying the first law of thermodynamics we assume a closed system with no change in kinetic or potential energy of the system.
Remember that.
And the work done on a system is always the negative of the work done by a system.
Remember that.
Last fact.
The internal energy of a system tends to increase if heat is absorbed by the system or if positive work is done on the system.
And the internal energy tends to decrease if heat is lost by the system or if negative work is done on the system.
What is meant by positive work done on the system?
Remember that piston in the in the previous video that piston is pushed down.
Positive work is done on the system and the thermal energy or the internal energy of that system will increase.
Negative work done on the system.
That is when the volume decreases when that piston is pulled up.
The volume will increase but negative work is done on the system.
Let's read it again.
The internal energy of a system tends to increase if heat is absorbed by the system or positive work is done on the system.
Okay.
That's what it means.
So volume actually increases.
Positive work is done on the system.
The system.
So don't make the mistake that I just made.
Learn from it.
So that was the piston in the system with the gas there.
If this piston is lifted up, this volume increases.
And if volume increases, positive work.
And if negative work is done, that means this piston is now pushed down and the volume will decrease.
That's a smaller volume.
So from the initial state to the final state, the volume has decreased.
And that is negative work.
Negative work done on the system.
Good.
We're going to look at four special cases.
The adiabatic process.
The constant volume process.
The cyclical process.
And then free expansion.
We're just going to run through them quickly.
The adiabatic process is a process that occurs so rapidly or occurs in a system so well insulated.
That no transfer of energy as heat as possible.
So if work done by the system is positive, the internal energy decreases.
So what are we saying Q?
We're just saying Q is zero.
And if delta E internal, by the first law of thermodynamics, equals Q minus W and Q is zero.
So that's just going to be negative the work.
So if you do positive work, the internal energy is going to decrease.
If you do negative work in the adiabatic process, negative five negative is positive.
So delta E internal will be positive.
A constant volume process.
If the volume of the system is held constant.
Then that system cannot do any work.
So if heat is absorbed by the system.
Because that's the only thing that can happen now.
Work is now zero.
Heat is positive.
The internal energy of the system increases.
And if heat is lost by the system.
Q is negative.
The internal energy of the system will decrease.
That's easy enough.
A cyclical process is after certain interchanges of work and heat.
The system's internal energy does not change.
So delta E internal equals zero.
Then it means heat transfer and work will be equal to each other.
The net work done during the process must exactly equal the net amount of heat transferred.
Free expansion.
Here everything is zero.
And there are types.
This is a type of adiabatic process in which no transfer of heat occurs and no work is done.
Either by or on the system.
An example is a totally thermally isolated system containing two cylinders.
One with gas and the other one a vacuum.
Separated by a valve that is then open between the two.
Then there's free expansion of that gas in the first cylinder into the second cylinder.
The volume is expanded but no heat has been transferred.
And certainly no work was done.
This is an important problem in that it's a prototype for more complex problems of which you will get many.
For one complete cycle in this pressure volume diagram is the change in internal energy positive, negative or zero.
Well if it goes from the state back to the same state nothing has changed as far as internal energy is concerned.
You end up at the initial state again.
So internal energy.
The change in internal energy.
Change in internal energy.
Delta E internal equals zero.
Secondly is the net energy transferred as heat positive, negative or zero.
Now it doesn't matter.
And this problem is not stated where we start.
Remember the pressure volume situation we had in video three.
Say for instance this is initial and this is final state.
So the volume is going to increase.
So this is going to be our area under the curve.
That's the first part.
Let me just erase this.
And let's do the second part.
Let's do the second part.
Now we go from there to there to there.
So there is a decrease in the volume.
So this is going to be a negative area under the curve.
And let me use red.
This was our first area.
So the difference between the two is going to be negative.
There is a larger negative area and a smaller positive area.
And it doesn't actually.
You can start wherever you want in this whole process.
You are always going to end up.
You are always going to end up with negative.
There will be a negative energy transfer as heat.
Negative.
Because the area under the curve in going in the negative.
In the positive direction is smaller.
Than the area under the curve going in the negative volume direction.
Here is a proper problem in this regard.
Note the PV diagram.
A gas in a closed chamber undergoes the indicated cycle.
From A to B to C to A.
It's a whole closed loop.
Calculate the net energy added to the system as heat during one complete cycle.
Now again imagine work done in going from A to B.
The area under the curve would be that of a trapezoid.
Okay we are just going to have.
And this is marked.
So you see the cubic meters at the bottom.
And on the y axis the newtons per square meter.
As far as the pressure is concerned.
So the first area under the curve.
If this is our zero.
This is our zero zero mark.
So it's going to be this area here.
It's a trapezoid.
And there we have the area of a trapezoid.
Half times this length.
Times that length.
Times the base.
Okay.
Let's erase that.
And the second part.
Is going from B to C to A.
That's negative.
But it's this whole area under the curve now.
And that's just a rectangle.
And that is why we end up with negative.
That's a negative 30 joule.
It is a closed system.
That we start and end at the same initial state.
So delta E internal.
Is going to be zero.
So just from our equation.
Delta E internal.
Equals Q.
Minus W.
That will leave Q as.
Delta E internal.
Plus W.
That's what we have there.
So delta E internal was zero.
The work was negative 30 joules.
So our heat transfer.
Is going to be a loss.
Of 30.
And that is just what we had at this problem.
It was going to.
Always going to be.
A negative.
Last problem for this video.
Water is thermally insulated.
In a thermally insulated system.
At 100 degrees Celsius.
Changes from a liquid into a gas.
So there's just phase change.
No temperature change.
By adding heat.
From a reservoir inside the insulation.
Is volume increases by 1.67 cubic meters.
And the pressure remains.
At atmospheric pressure.
So pressure is a constant.
Calculate the work done.
Now we know.
An equation for work.
It's the definite integral.
Going from initial.
To the final volume.
Of pressure with respect to volume.
Pressure was a constant.
So we can bring that outside.
Of our definite integral.
Okay.
And.
So this is just going to.
Leave us the.
Pressure.
And then.
Volume final.
Minus volume initial.
We certainly were given that.
Pressure was atmospheric.
The change in volume.
Was 1.67 cubic meters.
So very easy.
We're going to end up.
Just with.
So many joules.
Of work done.
If we just look.
At the second part.
Where will we calculate.
The work time.
I didn't calculate.
The amount of energy.
Transferred.
As heat.
During the process.
Now this is just.
A phase change.
Problem again.
Heat was going to be.
The vaporization.
Remember.
Because we're going from.
We're going between.
Solid.
Between a liquid.
And.
And a gas.
Times.
The mass.
That we have there.
Very easy.
To calculate.
Q there.
And.
That should be equal.
Last part of the question.
Was.
Calculate the changes.
In the system's.
Energy.
During the process.
Well.
Change in internal.
Energy.
Equals.
Q minus.
W.
We have Q.
And then.
We have W.
Very easy.
Then.
To the power.
Six.
Jewel.
See you.
In the next video.
