Let's get back to some blackboard videos and we're going to look at the molar specific
heats, molar specific heat of a gas. And I think we'll remember from previous sections
that we said that Q equals NC mole delta T. I don't have those old ones with me, I hope I remember that correctly.
We said that's the number of moles times the specific heat but we need to know how we actually got there.
And that is where we look at the concept of the internal energy of the atoms in a gas.
And the first gas we're going to look at is an ideal gas and it's monatomic. Monatomic means it's an atom like
argon gas, neon gas. So it's not oxygen which is diatomic or molecular.
And in the previous section we also looked at the average translational kinetic energy, AVE.
And we said that that was 3 over 2 Boltzmann's constant times the temperature.
And that's why it said it had nothing to do with the mass.
Now if you want to look at the total kinetic energy of all the atoms in our ideal monatomic gas,
we've just got to multiply that by N. So if we're looking at K average total,
so that is this the number of atoms times 3 over 2 KT.
And remember we can get that N if we have moles because we're looking at molar specific heat.
But that is going to be the number of moles times Avogadro's number 3 over 2 KT.
We also remember that the Boltzmann constant can be written as,
we can rewrite the Boltzmann's constant as K equals R over NA, I think it was.
Is it R over NA? Yeah, so let's replace that K in there.
So this is going to equal N NA for 3 over 2.
And K will be replaced by R over NA times T.
Obviously the NA's are going to cancel, so we are left here with 3 over 2 N R T.
So these are, where is my green? I don't think the green comes out so well.
So we have uppercase N 3 over 2 KT.
We have N NA, that's moles Avogadro's number KT,
and we finally have 3 over 2 N R T.
And that is the total average kinetic energy.
And we're going to make a, we're going to assume that that equals the total internal energy.
The total internal energy of an ideal monatomic gas.
And what you'll notice in all of these, it depends only on one thing,
and that's the temperature.
For any specific number, for the sizing of your sample,
which goes down to the moles or the number,
it's only the temperature that will give you,
that is dependent for the total kinetic energy.
So we're going to rewrite this, we're going to rewrite this as an energy internal equals 3 over 2 N R T.
Or if you wanted one of these other, one of these other equations.
So the internal energy of an ideal gas is a function of the gas temperature only,
and it does not depend on any other variable,
obviously except the size of your sample.
But I mean, you understand, it's about the, it is about the temperature.
Now we can go back, we are looking at the molar specific heat.
I think let's just leave that for the next video, otherwise it becomes a bit too long.
Okay, the board is clean, and we're again looking at Q equals N.
Now look at the difference.
Right at the beginning of the chapter, or even the previous chapter, I can't remember exactly,
we wrote it as heat equals the number of moles times, we had a lowercase C mole,
so that was the molar specific heat times the change in temperature.
We now change this to an uppercase, but remember we're not talking here,
it's not the C of specific heat, remember we had specific heat, or heat capacity,
I'm sorry, the capital C was heat capacity, and the lowercase C was specific heat,
heat, according to the mass, and we had specific heat for the number of moles.
We write C, capital C here, it's still specific heat, so it's not heat capacity.
And you'll see we're going to have two different subscripts, one is V and one is P,
and a V means constant volume.
We're also going to have heat for heat capacity, molar heat capacity for constant pressure.
So let's first off start with constant volume heat capacity, constant volume motor heat capacity.
Okay, now we've got the full term.
If we remember the first law of thermodynamics,
delta E internal equals Q minus W, Q minus W.
We can replace this, delta E internal equals NCV delta T minus work.
But this is constant volume.
So remember what happens to constant volume?
Work equals zero.
Work equals zero.
So we can get CV molar specific heat at constant volume.
And constant volume is delta E internal divided by N delta T.
Divided by N delta T.
From the previous video, remember that I've got to get this right now.
Delta E internal, delta E internal equals also 3 over 2 N R delta T.
So I can replace that, I can replace that in there.
So that is going to be 3 over 2 N R delta T divided by N delta T.
So that goes, that goes, that goes, and that goes, and that says CV equals 3 over 2 R.
And we remember the gas constant at 8.31.
So it's going to be about 12.5.
Now look at this.
Now look at this.
Remember, remember, remember, remember.
I said this is for ideal gas.
And it should be monatomic.
Monatomic.
Examples, argon, neon, et cetera.
If we look at molar specific heat and constant volume for diatomics is 5 over 2 R.
And that's ideal again.
I think the textbook will give you certain values for specific real gases.
And then for polyatomic, now we're talking about methane gas, for instance.
So polyatomic is going to be 3 R.
So monatomic, diatomic, polyatomic.
Remember, this is constant volume.
Hence we can get rid of the work.
His book.
He says the height toū.
Ni rot.
Now it's two or four times.
viamente began.
Now that gives you a 600.
Noóc.
Ni rot.
Now it's gonna be quicker.
Jawan.
No, no, no.
No.
You whoa coob.
I, lan Seit.
Ni rot.
Many caron.
Nothing is something to do.
You whoa.
But a9.
No What?
No, no.
No.
No.
No, ni.
