Let's look at the second video on temperature, heat and the first law of thermodynamics.
First a quick look at temperature.
Just compare a system like a cup of coffee to its environment.
So we're going to look at the transfer of energy as heat between the two.
So we're always going to have a system, whether it be the cup of coffee in its environment,
or room air, or a piece of hot metal put into a beaker of water.
There the beaker and the water is the system, the environment,
and the piece of metal that we put into that water in the beaker is then the system.
Thermal energy is an internal energy.
So it's just the sum of the kinetic and potential edges of the motion of the particles that make up that system.
Now a transfer of this energy, a transfer of thermal energy to and from a system, to or from an environment,
is symbolized by Q.
And then heat is the energy transferred between a system and its environment
because of a temperature difference that exists between them.
When thermal energy is transferred to a system from its environment,
so from a system to its environment, it's called positive transfer.
And I should say that again.
When thermal energy is transferred to a system from its environment,
it is called positive transfer and the system's temperature increases.
Heat is negative when energy is transferred from a system to its environment.
That's easy enough.
So the transfer of thermal energy or heat transfer, Q,
can be done by means of a force acting on a system, doing work on the system.
And that is where we're going to get to the first law of thermodynamics.
It's the difference between heat and work, but we'll get to it.
Heat and work, remember, are not intrinsic properties of a system.
They only have meaning as a description of the transfer of energy.
Work done on or by a system is expressed in joules, remember.
So we're going to have heat and we're going to have work in joules.
Before when heat was not seen as a transfer of energy,
it was described in terms of a calorie,
and that was how much work needs to be done to heat a certain amount of water
at a certain pressure by a certain amount of degrees.
And just to equate the two to each other,
one calorie equals 4.1868 joules of energy.
But we use the joule, although we are going to do problems with a calorie,
but they'll usually just cancel out and it won't be a problem for us.
So we're going to discuss in this video four things.
Heat capacity, which is C, capital C, which is a proportionality constant.
Specific heat, C, that's lower case C, which is heat capacity proportional to mass.
So that's specific heat.
The molar specific heat, C with a subscript mol,
is heat capacity proportional to molar mass.
And then finally we're going to look at heats of transformation,
transforming from a solid to a liquid to a gas and the other way around.
So let's start first off by looking at heat capacity, capital C.
That is the proportionality constant between the heat Q that an object absorbs or loses
and the resulting temperature change of that object.
So it's joules per Kelvin.
Remember capacity does not mean an object can hold something.
There's no maximum capacity it can go to.
Anyway, there is our equation.
There's our equation for using heat capacity.
So heat equals heat capacity times change in temperature.
So temperature final minus temperature initial.
Heat capacity is proportional to mass though.
So the two objects of the same material will have different heat capacities according to their mass.
And now we use lower case C.
So we're talking about specific heat, joules per kilogram per Kelvin as opposed to just joules per Kelvin.
Remember though, we are generalizing a bit because the specific heat of any substance actually depends on its temperature.
It is not a simple linear proportionality.
But near room temperature, near the type of problems that we are going to get in the series,
we can take that as being the same.
And here is our equation for that.
Q equals specific heat times the mass times the change in temperature.
Molar specific heat uses the amount of moles instead of mass.
So we're going to end up with joule per mole per kilogram.
And remember that there are 6.02 times 10 to the power 23 elementary particles, whether it be atoms or molecules in one mole of a substance.
And later we'll see that that is Avogadro's number.
And here is our equation now.
So heat is going to be molar specific heat.
See mole times, that should have been, there must be a mole there, times the amount of moles times the change in temperature.
Okay.
Absorption of heat by solids and liquids, our first problem.
A certain amount of heat, Q, will warm 1 gram of material A by 3 degrees and 1 gram of material B by 4 degrees on the Celsius scale.
Which material has the highest specific heat?
Now, first order of business, a certain amount of heat.
So, with using material A or B, we're going to, the amount of heat transferred is going to be the same.
We have an equation for heat that equals specific heat times mass times change in temperature.
So, just through algebra, specific heat, because we've got to look at which one has greater specific heat.
So, specific heat equals heat divided by mass times delta T.
But, we're given a certain amount of heat.
So, Q of A and Q of B will be the same.
If we then look at C of A, that's going to be Q over 1 gram times 3 degrees.
And, C of B is going to be 1, the same Q.
So, those two Qs are the same.
1 gram times 4 degrees Celsius.
If we just divide C A by C B, we're going to get 4 over 3.
So, C B, if we just get C B on its own, it's going to be 3 quarters of that should be C A.
In other words, C A is more than C B.
So, all we did is we realized that we can cancel these two out because they are the same.
And, we actually don't need them in this problem.
And, because we're comparing specific heat of A to specific heat of B, we just divide them by each other.
All of these units will divide.
So, we're going to be left with C A, C B.
These are smaller, lower case C's.
It's going to be equal to 4 over 3.
And, we then have C B equals 3 quarters of C A.
Later on, we are going to get to gas.
So, note that this heat transfer only pertains to doing problems with solids and liquids.
There's pressure and other things involved with gases.
And, we'll certainly get to those later.
So, when you do answer these problems, note that they are for liquids and solids only.
So, what we've looked at now is that we've added heat, we've transferred heat or we've taken away heat from a system or its environment.
And, that is change the temperature of the system and environment.
But, this transfer heat does not necessarily have to change the temperature.
It can also cause a phase change.
And, that is what all the problems that you can get in the exam are going to be when it pertains to this chapter.
So, when heat is transferred to or from a system, it does not necessarily change its temperature.
It can also change its phase.
In other words, solid liquid gas.
In simple terms, when considering water starting off as ice.
The initial heat transfer to ice will first raise its temperature to zero degrees.
Then, some more heat transfer, energy transfer will be used to change from solid ice to liquid water.
Without raising the temperature.
So, it will remain at zero degrees.
Some energy needs to go into that system to just change the phase.
But, it will stay at zero degrees.
And, the same will happen at the boiling point.
And, what we'll see later is the same happens in reverse.
So, when you go from gas to liquid down to ice, that same amount of energy needs to be taken from the system.
Just to change that phase without changing the temperature.
So, the part of the transferred thermal energy or heat used to change the phase of an object is called the heat of transformation.
And, here we have Q equals L times the mass.
Let's look at L.
There are two types of L.
Two types of heat transformation.
And, they differ.
It's not the same amount of energy that's going to change ice to water that will change water to steam.
There will be a different.
So, you get heat of vaporization.
And, that happens between the liquid and the gas phase.
So, either way there.
And, the heat of fusion goes from the solid to and from the liquid phase.
So, just be sure which one is given and which one you asked to do in problems.
When thermal energy is transferred from an object, the same principle applies.
Okay.
So, it's a back and forth situation.
Let's look at a problem.
How much heat must be absorbed by ice of mass 0.7 kilograms at negative 10 degrees Celsius to make it a liquid at 15.
So, three heat transfer.
Three heat transfers are going to happen.
Here we have Q total.
It's going to be a Q1, a Q2 and a Q3.
The first thing that's going to happen.
You need to transfer heat to the system to raise its temperature from negative 15, from negative 10 to 0 degrees.
So, that ice has got to go from negative 10 to 15.
Or negative 10 to 0.
And, we know Q equals specific heat times mass times change in temperature.
So, for Q1 here, we're going to have LF fusion.
We're dealing with this heat of fusion.
Not yet, not yet.
That comes in Q2.
Apologies, I'm ahead of myself here.
So, we're just going to raise the temperature.
So, we're going to have specific heat times mass times delta T.
No phase change.
That comes as Q2.
Apologies for that.
So, C, we know for ice there, 220 joules per kilogram per Kelvin.
We've got 0.7 kilograms.
And, we're raising the temperature change by 10 Kelvin.
So, we're going to need 15,540 joules for that.
Q2, now we come to just keeping it at 0 degrees.
So, there's no delta T here.
And, LF.
Once again, back there.
The heat of fusion to go from, to add it, to go from ice to water.
Or, to take it away to go from water to ice.
Is, um, 333,000 joules per kilogram.
Times our 0.7 kilograms.
So, we're going to end up needing 233,100 joules.
Lastly, we've got to now, now it's changed phase.
It's remained at 0 degrees.
It's just changed phase to liquid.
And, then we have to go up to 15 degrees.
And, that is going to be the last part.
Q3 there.
Again, which is going to be specific heat times mass times delta T.
specific heat.
Now, not for ice, but now we're dealing with water.
4,190 joules per kilogram per Kelvin.
Times the mass that we have.
Times, we're changing it by 15 Kelvin.
And, that's 43,995.
So, all in all, we need to add about 2.9 times 10 to the power of 5 joules.
So, remember the 3 parts here of heat that needs to be transferred into the system.
To go from, from ice of negative 10 degrees to water of 15 degrees.
See those as, as being different.
Another thing to be very careful about is the specific heat there.
Remember the specific heat of ice and the specific heat of water is not the same.
Another problem.
A piece of copper with mass 75 gram is heated to 312 degrees Celsius.
And, dropped in a glass container with 220 grams of water.
In a beaker.
And, they both are 12 degrees Celsius.
The heat capacity of the beaker is 45 calories.
See, here we're dealing with calories.
But, that will cancel out.
So, it's not a problem.
Per Kelvin.
We don't have to now convert to joule.
Assume that the copper, water and beaker is thermally isolated.
And, that is the most important part of this whole problem.
That means, all the transfers.
Some are going to be positive heat.
Some are going to be negative heat.
But, it's, the whole system is in isolation.
No external heat is transferred or work is done by the system.
We'll get to that later.
The first law of thermodynamics.
But, adding them all has got to be zero.
There will be a hot piece of metal copper.
Yeah, dropped into water with a beaker.
So, the copper is going to get colder.
The water and the beaker is going to get warmer until thermal equilibrium.
But, all those transfers will be, if you add all of them together, they've got to equal zero.
Nothing has happened with that system affecting it, being or being affected by an outsider.
When it states that this whole system and its environment is thermally isolated.
All the transfers of heat, all of that will cancel out and will equal zero.
So, first of all, let's look at the heat of the copper.
So, here's the first part.
So, Q for the copper.
That is going to be specific heat of copper times the mass of the copper times the change in temperature.
Temperature final, we don't know.
Let's say temperature final, we don't know.
But, we certainly know what the temperature initial is of the copper.
We've been given that at 312.
For the water, same thing.
Heat capacity of water.
The mass of the water.
And then temperature final, we don't know.
But, we do know the temperature initial.
So, and the same goes for the beaker.
And all three of them, it's the temperature final that we want.
All the other things we do have.
So, if we add this QC, QW and Q for the beaker.
The heat of the beaker.
With all those transfers together, that's going to still equal zero.
Simple algebra.
I'm going to leave you to do that on your own.
So, you're going to get T final all on your own.
All the other values you were given in the problem.
So, the final temperature of this whole system is going to be 20 degrees Celsius.
When you do the problem, there's one thing that you will note though.
There's no mass for the beaker.
But, we were given the heat capacity of the beaker.
45 calories per Kelvin.
Okay.
So, we're not looking for the beaker.
We're not looking at specific heat.
We're just looking at the heat capacity.
So, the Q for the beaker is just going to be C.
Capital C of the beaker.
And then the temperature change.
Temperature final minus temperature initial.
So, we're not going to talk about the specific heat.
We're just talking about the heat capacity of the beaker.
So, look.
See when you're dealing with joules per Kelvin.
Or joules per kilogram per Kelvin.
So, just make sure.
But, in this problem, it solves itself perfectly.
There's no problem.
And we're just going to substitute all the values in here.
And get to the answer.
Another problem.
A certain substance has a mass per mole.
So, we're dealing with molar mass in this problem.
Of 50 grams per mole.
When 314 joule is added as heat to 30 grams of the sample, its temperature rises by 20 degrees Celsius.
Calculate the specific heat and the molar specific heat.
So, first per kilogram.
And the secondly per molar mass.
First, once again, we start with our equation that we know for heat transfer.
And that is going to be specific heat.
Which is now, remember, for mass.
Times the mass times the change in temperature.
Simple algebra.
This is what we want.
We want, first of all, we ask to calculate the specific heat.
So, C gets C on its own.
So, that will be Q over M times delta T.
And if we substitute all of that, we're going to get 523 joules per kilogram per Kelvin.
That's the first part.
Now, the molar mass.
Now, we need to get the molar specific heat.
Now, there's a few, there's more than one way to solve this problem.
Let's just look at, let's just look at solving it just by looking at the dimensions that we're dealing with.
Sometimes that is a neat thing, thing to do.
So, we asked for C mole.
So, we're going to have joules.
We need joules per mole per Kelvin.
That is what we need.
We know joules per kilogram per Kelvin.
And we know that 50 grams or 0.05 kilograms is in one mole.
And if we write it like this, kilogram per mole.
Look how neatly, and if we multiply that by what we've just had for C here.
If we multiply that out, kilogram and per kilogram are going to cancel out.
And what are we left with?
We are left with joules per mole per Kelvin.
Exactly what we want.
So, just looking at the dimensions is very easy to solve this problem.
And the same goes with the third part.
And I think I'm going to do another problem just looking at the dimensions.
Just to get used to that way of using that technique.
Just dimensional analysis to solve a problem.
We've got 0.03 kilograms in our sample here.
But we know what the molar, we were given the molar mass.
We said it has a mass per mole of 0.05 kilograms.
So, one mole is 0.05 kilograms.
But we have 0.03 kilograms.
The kilograms are going to cancel out.
And we are left with 0.6 moles.
Very easy problem.
Next one.
A small electric immersion heater is used to heat 100 grams of water.
The heater is rated at 200 watts.
Calculate the time taken to bring all the water from 23 degrees Celsius to 100 degrees Celsius.
We are not dealing with a phase change here.
First of all, we just need to know how much thermal energy transfer is going to be required.
Q equals specific heat times mass times change in temperature.
For water is 4,190 joules per kilogram per Kelvin.
We have 0.1 kilogram of it.
100 gram is 0.1 kilogram.
And the temperature change from 23 to 100 is 77.
So we need 32,263 joules.
We are given a rate what this little heat of ours is rated at.
It is rated at 200 joules per second.
So one second.
One second.
In one second, 200 joules is going to be delivered.
But we need 32,000 joules.
So 32,263 joules times.
Look at this again.
Dimensional analysis.
Or using dimension to solve a problem.
I shouldn't call it dimensional analysis.
One second over 200 joules.
So this is actually second per joule.
But that's not what we, we're not miraculously changing.
We're just using, using the dimensions.
Because joule and joule will now cancel out.
And 161 seconds will be required by this little immersion, electric immersion heat, immersion heater to, to heat up our water.
Consider a solar water heater with 20% efficiency.
What collector area is necessary to raise the temperature of 200 liters of water in a tank by 20 Kelvin in one hour.
When the intensity of incident light is 700 watts per square meter.
Looks like an absolute nightmare of a problem.
It's not.
First of all, let's see.
How much heat do we need.
To, to, to raise that amount of water.
By 20 Kelvin.
Again, heat that we require heat transfer is specific heat of water times the mass of the water times the temperature change we want.
4190 joules per kilogram per Kelvin times 200 kilograms of water times 20 Kelvin.
And there's the massive amount of energy that we need to do that.
We have one hour to do that in.
So all of that per 3600, per 3600 seconds.
Joule per second is watts.
So that is the amount of watts that we need.
41900 divided by 9.
I haven't used decimal points here.
I've just used it as a fraction as it comes out the calculator.
So 41900 over 9 watts we need.
So there's the watts that we have.
And now we are given incident light.
700 watts per square meter.
But we said this thing is only 20% efficient.
So 20% of 700.
It's only going to deliver 140 watts.
What's actually per square meter.
So it's just a little trick in the problem.
It's 20% efficient.
20% of 700 is 140 watts per square meter.
Again, look at this time using dimensions.
This is the wattage we have.
We need.
This is what we have.
One square meter will give us 140 watts.
Watts cancelled out.
And that gives us 33 square meters required.
I'm going very quickly over these problems.
Because these videos get very long.
Sit with this problem and see.
Actually, it looks like a nightmare when you read it.
But it's so easy to solve.
Last problem.
I think last.
Is there one more?
No.
Second last one.
Two 50 gram ice cubes are dropped in 0.2 kilograms.
So 200 ml of water in a thermally insulated container.
That should raise immediately a long balance.
Say that things have got to.
It's insulated.
If the water is initially at 25 degrees Celsius.
And the ice is initially at negative 15.
What is the final temperature thermal equilibrium?
Okay, I remember this problem now.
It's a bit of a trick question.
There's two things that you've got to realize.
First of all, let's look at what needs to happen.
How much heat do we need to transfer to get ice from negative 15 to 0 as water?
So remember, two things have got to happen.
First, we're going to raise it by 15 degrees.
And then we're going to have a phase change from solid to a liquid.
So if we just look at what amount of heat transfer, thermal energy transfer is required.
So again, just looking at the ice.
Just the temperature change is going to be specific heat of the ice.
Remember, that's different than water.
Times the mass of the ice times delta T.
And we've got to change phase.
So that will be fusion.
Okay.
Times just the mass.
So remember 2220 joules per kilogram per Kelvin.
Specific heat of ice.
And we're going to raise by 15.
And there's our phase change.
So we require 36,630 joules.
Let's just see.
So that is the amount of energy that we need to transfer into the system.
To lower the temperature from 25.
Let's just see from 25 degrees Celsius to 0.
Let's just look at that.
Not directly to solve the problem.
But this is a bit of a trick question.
So the specific heat, again, times mass times delta T.
If we go from 25 degrees to 0 degrees, it's going to take, you have to take away 12,570 joules.
But think about that.
You've got to add 36,000 joules just to get it to 0 degrees water.
That's far more than to drop the temperature from 25 to 0.
So they're going to meet somewhere in the middle during this phase change.
You're going to actually end up with ice water at 0 degrees.
Because there's not enough heat that can be drawn out of the 25 degrees.
To raise from negative 15 to 0 and to change the phase.
So you're going to be locked in that phase change area.
So just something to think about.
A very interesting problem.
Last one.
Ethyl alcohol boils at 78 degrees Celsius.
And freezes at negative 114 degrees Celsius.
It has a heat of vaporization.
So that's, remember that's between the gas and solid part of 879,000 joules per kilogram.
And a heat of fusion.
And that's going to be between the solid and liquid phase of 109,000 joules per kilogram.
And a specific heat.
And that, remember, so that will just be for changing the temperature.
No phase change involved of, what is it, 2430 joules per kilogram per Kelvin.
How much energy must be removed from 510 grams of alcohol.
That is initially a gas at 78 degrees.
So that it becomes a solid.
So once again, this is a very simple problem.
You've got to go through all three parts.
Two phase changes and a temperature change.
So just to change phase from a gas to a liquid.
So we're going to use the vaporization.
L of V first.
Okay.
So that will give you 448,290 joules.
Then the temperature change.
So specific heat times mass times delta T.
It will be that amount.
And then lastly, another phase change to go from liquid.
Now it's vaporization to go from liquid to the solid.
Which will give you that.
And we add all of those.
Which will give us 7.42 times 10 to the power of 5 joules required.
See you in the next video.
in this video.
L of V.
C2 and�3.
out of T also.
In this video numéro 20, I would give you 6500 máximo.
In this video, E1, T, on E10.
