In this first video I've put together some slides on temperature, heat and the first law of thermodynamics.
First let's have a look at the zeroth law of thermodynamics.
And that very simply states, and this is something that you need to understand, there won't be any problems specifically related to it.
But it states that if bodies A and B are each in thermal equilibrium with a third body T, then A and B are in thermal equilibrium with each other.
Now this first came to light only in the 1930s, and that is when the first and second laws of thermodynamics were already described, hence it now being called the zeroth law of thermodynamics.
Now each body has a property called temperature. When two bodies are in thermal equilibrium, their temperatures are equal.
There are different temperature scales, and there are different ways to look at it, but by agreement the triple point of water was assigned a temperature of 273.16 Kelvin.
At this triple point temperature, and at a single specific pressure, we'll get into a lot more detail about that later, solid ice, liquid water and vapour can co-exist.
There are three commonly used temperature scales. Kelvin is the scientific scale. It starts off at an absolute minimum, which is zero Kelvin, where there is no kinetic energy in the particles that make up an object.
And to convert temperature in Celsius to Kelvin, you simply add 273.15 degrees Celsius to whatever Celsius degrees you're looking at, that gives you Kelvin.
In the United States, there's obviously the very non-useful, or scientifically at least, non-useful Fahrenheit scale.
And to convert from temperature Celsius into Fahrenheit, you first multiply by 9 over 5, and add 32, and if you need to convert back to Celsius, first you subtract 32 from the temperature in Fahrenheit, and then multiply by 5 over 9.
Most important though to understand that Kelvin starts at absolute zero, and if you have degrees Celsius, say for instance 20 degrees Celsius, just add 273.15, that will give you 293.15 Kelvin.
We don't really talk about degrees Kelvin. We don't really talk about degrees Kelvin. We only say Kelvin. 273 Kelvin.
Let's move on to our first problem. On a new temperature scale, the freezing point of water is given as minus 14 T, and the boiling point at 65 degrees T.
Assuming that the T scale is linear, what would 50 degrees Celsius be on the T scale?
Very easy sort of problem to look at. We are given the freezing points, and the boiling point of water, we know that at atmospheric pressure, sea level, that is going to be 0 degrees for freezing, 100 degrees for boiling, and the difference between 100 and 0 is 100 degrees Celsius.
So our change there in degrees Celsius is going to be 100 degrees.
That's going to correspond to a change of 79 degrees T, because 100 minus 0 was 100, that was our difference in the Celsius scale, centigrade scale, and delta T would be from 65 minus negative 14, that's going to be 79 degrees T.
So a change of 100 degrees T. So a change of 100 degrees T equals a change of 79 degrees T.
So if we just look at 1 degrees Celsius, that's going to be 79 over 100 degrees T. Those two units are going to be equal to each other.
Now how do we get to 50, our 50 degrees Celsius, that we, the problem states we have to convert to temperature T, degrees T.
Well we took 100 degrees and we subtracted 50. So we need to do, we subtracted 50 units of degrees Celsius from 100.
So in those same unit scale, but for temperature T, we need to subtract that from 65, because 65 degrees T equals 100 degrees Celsius.
So 65 minus, now we need 50 units of this degrees T. So it's 50 times 79 over 100.
And that's going to leave us with 25.5 degrees T, which will equal 50 degrees Celsius.
So all you have to do is just equate two equally sized units.
And for both of the scales you're given an upper limit and a lower limit.
And so you know what the change in each is, and that change has got to be the same.
No matter what temperature scale you measure the boiling point and the freezing point of water in,
I mean it happens at some physical property of that, of water.
So if you just equate the unit sizes of one to the other, and you subtract the unit, the unit size,
you could also, we could also have chosen the minus 14 and the zero, and from the zero just added 50,
which means you would have had to add 50 of those temperature degrees T units to negative 14.
You would also have gotten to 25.5.
Looking at thermal expansion, now things get a little more interesting.
There's linear expansion and volume expansion.
Now linear expansion has its equation there.
The change in the length of an object equals the length times alpha times delta T.
Alpha is the coefficient of linear expansion and its unit there is per Kelvin.
So always saying we're taking an object, make it square or cube or cylinder or something,
and we heat it up, its length is going to expand as it gets hotter.
And that change in length from the initial length, so the delta L,
so we're not looking at L final, just the change in length,
so just the little bit that's going to be added equals the initial length times alpha times delta T.
And that alpha is the coefficient of linear expansion.
We can also look at volume expansion and that will have in it the coefficient of volume expansion.
Now the volume is going to be cubic meters.
We're looking at length, width and breadth.
So there are three things to consider, three units to consider.
And the change in volume equals the initial volume times beta,
the coefficient of volume expansion times delta T.
And that delta T must be in degree Celsius or Kelvin.
Now just think very carefully about it.
One single unit of degree Celsius equals one unit of Kelvin.
To go from zero degree Celsius to one degree Celsius is a one unit change in Celsius.
And that is exactly the same.
So if you had to go from 273 to 274 Kelvin, that would be the same as going from zero to one.
So just subtract them.
The change in Celsius and the change in Kelvin are exactly the same.
Although specifically a single value of Celsius like zero equals 273 Kelvin in the Kelvin scale.
So they don't equate to each other.
But the differences, if you just subtract two from each other, that is exactly the same.
So that delta T change in temperature, the final temperature minus the initial temperature,
can be either in Celsius or in Kelvin, doesn't matter.
But our coefficient of linear expansion is in per Kelvin.
It can also be per degree Celsius if you want to use Celsius.
Fahrenheit, obviously a different story.
One thing we must remember is that this beta, the coefficient of volume expansion, equals three times alpha.
Not alpha cubed because that will be per cubic Kelvin.
And what is a cubic Kelvin?
So it's three times.
We're just looking at three units multiplied by each other.
Just quickly looking at water.
Remember that water does not behave as other materials.
If water is between zero and four degrees, something magical, almost magical happens.
Water has a maximum density at four degrees Celsius.
Above this level, water expands as the temperature rises.
But between zero and four degrees, it actually becomes more dense.
It shrinks as it gets warmer.
Which is not the same for any other material.
Between zero and four degrees Celsius, water contracts as the temperature rises.
For this reason, ice has a lower density than the surrounding, slightly warmer water.
And it floats.
Just something to remember.
Now just let's look at some thermal expansion problems.
Identical thickness metal plates.
With sides either L, 2L or 3L.
If I can just, obviously that is going to be 2L.
And that is just going to be a single, a single L.
And these are going to be 3L.
And that's going to be 2L.
Just drawn slightly to scale there.
Rank them in descending order according to the increases in vertical heights.
So there we're just looking at linear expansion.
And areas.
There we're looking not at volume expansion, but 2 times the linear expansion.
If we can do it that way.
Remember, let me try and highlight it there.
That is our equation for linear expansion.
And our equation for volume expansion.
So the first, if we just look here at block number 1.
That delta L is going to be 2L.
We're just looking at what is the length going to do.
The initial was 2L times alpha.
We don't know what alpha is for, because we're not told what this material is.
But certainly they are the same for them.
And delta T, we don't know what the temperature increase is.
But for this problem, each of them are going to have the same delta T.
So we're going to have 2L, 3L, 3L, 2L, 3L, 3L and 1L.
All of these are the same.
So our final answer is just going to depend on this.
So obviously, 2 and 3 with a 3L is going to be more than 1, which is only 2.
And 4, which is only 1.
If we look at delta V.
Now this is strictly not correct because I've got a third dimension that I have to put in here.
But for interstake and this problem, let's say they all have the same depth.
So we don't have to put that in.
But once again, the first one is going to be a length of that and a width of that.
So that's going to be 2L squared.
That's going to be 3L squared.
That's going to be 6L squared and 2L squared again.
So obviously, 3 would be the biggest there at 6.
Number 2 will be 3.
And both of these, number 1 and number 4 is going to be 2.
So 3 is more than 2 is more than 1 equals 4.
So once again, easy enough problem.
Next problem.
At 20 degrees Celsius, a brass cube has an edge length of 30 centimeters.
So it's a cube.
So it's length and width, height and width is going to be exactly the same as 30 centimeters.
What is the increase in the cube surface area when it is heated from 20 degrees to 75 degrees Celsius?
So we're not asked the volume here.
So we can't use beta, our volume coefficient of volume expansion.
We just have to be slightly careful with this problem.
The coefficient of linear expansion of brass we've been given there is 19 times 10 to the power negative 6 per Kelvin.
So just think about it.
Our final length is going to be our initial length times delta L.
And we know what delta L is.
It's L initial times alpha times delta T.
So L initial was 30 centimeters.
So that was the initial.
And now we're just going to add to that our delta L which is 30 centimeters.
And our linear expansion coefficient times the change in temperatures from 20 to 75 is 55 Kelvin.
I've already explained why that would be the same difference as the Celsius difference is.
So our final length is going to be 627 over 2000 centimeters.
But we asked what is the difference in the surface area.
And our cube has 6 surfaces.
So we have to multiply that by 6 to get to our answer.
And the initial one is just going to be 6 times the initial length.
It's cube.
So I said length and width is the same.
So 6 times length initial squared.
That is going to be our initial area.
Subtract that from our final area.
And do that.
Put that in on a piece of paper with your calculator.
And you'll note that the change in area is going to be 11 square centimeters.
I think that concludes this video.
We'll carry on with this chapter in the next video.
.
