This video is just about understanding the pressure volume curve.
And in understanding the pressure volume curve we start to understand the relationship between heat and work.
So what we've got represented here, what we've got represented here is just a cylinder filled with gas.
So this is the gas and it can be, there's a piston that can be pushed up and down.
It's thermally insulated and then there's a heater source here at the bottom.
Now in the textbook there is a derivation as to how to get to this equation for work.
Which is just the definite integral and going from initial volume to final volume of P with respect to volume, pressure with respect to volume.
It's easy to get to this equation just by using an idea from this.
And the external force that is applied over a distance is this piston that goes up and down.
So you can look in the textbook how to derive but certainly you just need to know this equation.
So at the bottom here, quite small unfortunately but I'll walk you through it, of various, an expression, a graphical representation by a graph of what happens to the system of ours.
First of all, here we have volume, remember volume is on the x axis and we have pressure on the y axis.
Here we have an initial state here at a certain volume and at a certain pressure.
And here is the final, final state.
So what happens in going from the initial to the final state, going down means the pressure is going to decrease but the volume is going to increase.
So if we're looking for work, we're looking for the area under the curve going from initial to final volume.
Here is initial volume, here is final volume, here is the curve so it's this area under the curve will give us work.
Obviously this will be positive work.
Now we can go from the initial stage, state to the final state in a different way.
First of all we can just increase the volume and then decrease the pressure and we still get to the same final state.
So certainly we have a different graph here, a different equation, but still we'll have an area under the curve which will give us work.
So this change in volume is going to be a larger amount of work than here.
We can do the process differently.
First of all we can drop the pressure by cooling the system down for instance but keeping the level pegged there.
So the volume stays the same and then increase the volume but keeping the pressure the same.
So our area under the curve is now going to be smaller.
So there are different ways to get from an initial to a final state by doing different amounts of work.
If we look at this graphic here, there's initial again, there's final and we can go IGHF or ICDF.
If we take the top one we'll have a large area under the curve and if we go the bottom route we're just going to have a small area under the curve.
Look what happens if we go in the negative direction from final to initial.
We'll still have an area under the curve but this will be the integral, if I can write that, of V final to V initial.
Which is going to be negative going from V initial to V final if you know calculus.
So this is going to be negative work done.
Finally we need to look at going from initial to final say in this direction and then back to initial.
Later on we'll look at delta E thermal.
The change in thermal energy if we go from initial to final back to initial is going to be zero because we end up at the same place.
But what we are dealing with here, if I can draw it there, I hope it comes out.
The first path is in this direction.
So it will be that.
The second one, I hope you can see, let me draw it here.
The second one is going back there, in that direction.
So it will be that area.
So this area minus this area leaves us with this area under the curve.
So work is positive.
If we had done it differently though.
Let me draw it in red here.
If we had gone this way around initially.
And then this way around finally.
We'd have the smaller area first.
Minus the larger area second.
And then we'd also have work being negative.
So this is understanding the pressure volume curve.
PV, the PV curve.
And understanding what work means.
And we are finally now going to relate in the next video or two.
Heat transfer to work.
There's something that happens between the two of these.
And we'll see what that is.
That's going to give us our first law of thermodynamics.
But understand.
Go look up in the textbook how to derive this if you want to.
But understand or know this equation.
And know what it means.
It's area under the curve.
Which is this basic calculus.
And seeing that there are different paths that you can take.
That will change the work.
The value that you get for work.
And understand specifically how you get this.
Depending on which way you went first.
And which way you went second.
To get an area under the curve.
And whether it will be positive.
Or negative work.
qui tale of the dolphin.
And using this technique.
As you get in.
Within the cabeça.
And instead of attempting to dive.
Or at the hop.
The beauty of the fungus.
And on to hakk.
The essence.
You see it.
You see it.
Take the manners.
The smell of the wealthy amigo.
And whenever it happens.
The Deutsches in Sixth股.
And the leftBrad likes.
Even when the dumplings.
So because that their hands could solve.
You see it.
It's conclusively.
If you want.
You see that.
You see it.
Brett talking in front of the room.
