In this video I will discuss inflammatory thyroid conditions known as thyroiditis.
It is not a single disease entity but encompasses a diverse group of disorders.
Thyroid disorders can be looked at from various points of view.
Some textbooks and teachers will base discussion on thyroid function
and some will base it on the diseases themselves.
That is because there is a great deal of overlapping
with a single disease causing hyper and hypo function
and in many cases there is a poor understanding of the conditions themselves.
Looking at it from a disease point of view, the various forms of thyroiditis can be grouped in various ways
but of most clinical use is probably to divide them between those that cause acute illness
and those that are more subclinical with an impact on thyroid function.
The first group then contains all the acute infections called acute infectious thyroiditis.
These are not common as the thyroid is remarkably resistant to infection.
Infective organisms reach the thyroid through hematogenous spread
or through direct seeding from a nearby focus of infection such as a sinus.
Infectious organisms include most of the acute bacterial infections such as Staphylococci and Salmonella
but also more chronic organisms such as mycobacteria, fungi and pneumocystis species especially in compromised hosts.
All the symptoms and signs of infection are present such as pain in the neck and difficulty in swallowing,
tenderness over the thyroid and even fever and chills.
The patients may not localize pain to the thyroid because it may be referred to the pharynx or ears.
The aim of management is diagnosis and treatment of the infective organism.
It can be expected that the thyroid function will not be significantly affected
and the residual effect may only be microscopic scarring.
The second group of diseases causing thyroiditis is inflammatory in nature as opposed to infectious
and comprises Hashimoto's thyroiditis,
granulomatous or dequeur vein thyroiditis
and subacute lymphocytic thyroiditis.
First off is Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
This is the most common cause of hypothyroidism in areas with sufficient dietary iodine.
Hashimoto described patients within a large thyroid or a goiter with an intense lymphocytic infiltrate in 1912.
Together with Graves disease Hashimoto's thyroiditis forms the leading causes of immune-modulated thyroiditis.
As with most immune-modulated diseases, women are much more commonly affected and outrank men between 10 and 20 to 1.
The most prevalent age is between 40 and 60.
There is strong evidence that genetics underlie the pathophysiology of Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
Almost half of homozygotic twins will suffer from Hashimoto's thyroiditis if their twin does
and more than half of any siblings of a patient with the disease will have circulating antibodies.
Many genetic and protein abnormalities have recently been identified
and usually include those that lead to susceptibility to other autoimmune diseases.
These genetic mutations predispose the patient to a loss of self-tolerance to thyroid-specific antigens.
Antibodies to thyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase are common in the serum of patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis,
but it is not present in all.
Various abnormalities in regulatory T-cell activity have been identified.
The end result is apoptosis of follicular cells and replacement with mononuclear cells and fibrosis.
It is possible that workup of a patient can sometimes erroneously lead to surgery for what is eventually diagnosed as Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
This happens because the gland can be enlarged and even form nodules.
Fine needle aspiration may show hurtle cells with a possible diagnosis of hurtle cell neoplasm.
At surgery the gland is then well demarcated and firm and the cut surface will appear pale and yellow tan.
Clues in the cytology that the case may present Hashimoto's thyroiditis is the presence of a mononuclear cellular infiltrate
with small lymphocytes and plasma cells.
There is a variant of this disease in which the gland will appear very fibrous with dense keloid-like scars.
It is distinguished from redal thyroiditis by the fact that the fibrosis does not extend beyond the thyroid capsule.
Clinically most cases of Hashimoto's thyroiditis will come to your attention due to the development of a painless goiter.
This will usually be accompanied by some degree of hypothyroidism.
As mentioned before the gland may either be smooth or nodular and hence the fear of a neoplastic condition.
Serology will show a decreased level of T3 and T4 with elevated TSH.
In rare instances this hypothyroid state can be preceded by what is termed hashy toxicosis
with elevated serum hormone levels and decreased TSH levels.
This is due to follicular disruption and the release of hormone.
Radioactive iodine uptake is decreased during this period.
Patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis have an increased risk of other autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes, SLE,
myasthenia, Sjogren's syndrome, B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma and mucosa associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas sometimes referred to as maltomas.
There is no treatment for Hashimoto's disease other than to monitor thyroid hormone levels and replace as necessary.
Screening for other associated diseases may be of value.
Looking at subacute or granulomatous or decueve thyroiditis we note a much lower incidence than Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
It does affect the same age group but the female to male ratio is only about 4 to 1.
It is believed that subacute thyroiditis is triggered by viral infection.
The majority of cases are preceded by an upper respiratory tract infection and there is a definite seasonal distribution.
Many viral infections have been implicated including coxacuvirus, measles, mumps and adenovirus.
It may be that the body responds to viral induced thyroidal injury exposing thyroidal antigens.
A cytotoxic T lymphocyte response leads to follicular cell damage.
This process is self-limiting and transient.
The queer vein thyroiditis is the most common cause of thyroidal pain.
Clinically there is some enlargement of the gland and serum analysis shows an increase in T3 and T4 with decreased TSH.
Unlike other hyperthyroid states such as Graves' disease, radioactive iodine uptake is diminished.
Fine needle aspiration cytology reveals typical epithelioid foreign body type cells.
Normal thyroid function returns in 6 to 8 weeks.
Symptomatic relief can be achieved by anti-inflammatories and corticosteroids but these do not alter the causes of the disease.
Subacute lymphocytic or painless thyroiditis usually presents with a painless swelling of the thyroid gland with elevated thyroid hormone levels.
Like the other forms of thyroiditis it is more common in women and occur in middle age.
A disease process that resembles painless thyroiditis occurs in about 5% of postpartum females.
Many authorities see painless and postpartum thyroiditis as subgroups of Hashimoto thyroiditis.
That is because the majority of patients will have circulating antibodies against thyroid peroxidase or will have a family history of other autoimmune disorders.
As many as one third of cases will end up with permanent hypothyroidism and the thyroid histology resembles Hashimoto's disease.
Redal thyroiditis is a very rare form of autoimmune thyroiditis with characteristic fibrosis that extends well beyond the thyroid capsule.
Patients may even suffer from fibrosis elsewhere in the body most notably in the retroperitoneum.
Circulating antibodies are present and the firm nature of the developing neck mass is usually mistaken for a neoplastic lesion.
In very rare cases airway obstruction may ensue requiring endotracial intubation and surgical relief of the obstruction.
This is affected by only dissecting the constricting portion.
As in the retroperitoneum any extensive dissection will lead to more fibrosis.
Most patients respond well to thyroid hormone replacement.
