This video follows the introductory video on thyroid disease in pregnancy and deals with hypothyroidism.
Avertely elevated serum TSH levels occur in about 2.5% of all pregnancies.
The incidence in iodine deficient areas is obviously a lot higher.
The most common cause is Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
This is followed by prior radioactive iodine therapy or surgical ablation for Graves disease.
It is also important to consider overtreatment of hyperthyroidism.
The illicit taking of antithyroid drugs and the use of other medication that can alter the absorption of T4, such as ferrosulfate and sucralphate.
And T4 clearance, which is increased by carbamazepine, phenytoin and rifampicin.
Lastly, extrathyroidal causes such as pituitary and hypothalamic diseases should be considered.
The diagnosis of hypothyroidism in pregnancy is very important due to the adverse effects on mother and child.
Clinical diagnosis is very difficult, as only 20-30% of women with overt hypothyroidism will show symptoms.
Even when symptoms do occur, they are often attributed to the pregnancy itself and include weight gain, lethargy, decrease in exercise capacity, constipation, hoarseness, hair loss and brittle nails.
The diagnosis is secured by an elevated TSH level, although, as mentioned before, normal reference values in pregnancy are not published by manufacturers of assays.
Furthermore, TSH levels will be decreased in cases of pituitary and hypothalamic causes.
Although hypothyroidism does lead to a measure of infertility, many hypothyroid patients do fall pregnant.
The prognosis for both mother and child depend on correct and early diagnosis and the adequacy of treatment.
The effects and consequences of hypothyroidism are varied.
It has been documented that hypertension occurs in 36% of patients with hypothyroidism pregnancy.
Furthermore, there is a marked increase in the use of caesarean section because of fetal distress.
There is a risk of placental abruption, of anemia, postpartum hemorrhage and preterm labour.
The risk to the development of the fetus is very complicated.
The fetal thyroid begins production of thyroid hormone at about 12 weeks, but T3 is noted in the fetal brain by 7 weeks.
Presumably, this is from local DIO donation of maternal T4.
The effect of hypothyroidism before and after 12 weeks gestation is not completely understood,
and there are conflicting study reports comparing the neurological development of young children in various cohorts.
Prolonged, untreated hypothyroidism will certainly, though, lead to a difference in mental capacity in children
compared to those from an early and adequately treated or normal pregnancy,
and indeed, iodine deficiency is the leading cause of mental retardation in the world.
There seems to be a direct effect on somatic development of the fetus, apart from premature delivery,
as the administration of exogenous T4 seems to result in an increase in fetal growth rate in some studies.
Clearly, more studies are required, but it is clear that the combination of the effect on fetal development
and the direct effects on pregnancy and delivery make it important to manage hypothyroidism.
The successful diagnosis and management of these women start with screening for hypothyroidism
by evaluating TSH levels at the diagnosis of pregnancy.
This must be repeated at the start of each trimester.
In newly diagnosed hypothyroid women, the commencement of thyroxine treatment should commence immediately.
The starting dose depends on the TSH level.
The usual dose is 2 micrograms per kilogram per day, but if the initial TSH level is less than 10,
100 micrograms a day may suffice.
For these initially treated patients, and for those with known hypothyroidism falling pregnant,
TSH levels are then monitored every 3 to 4 weeks, that is in the first half of pregnancy,
and then every 6 weeks thereafter.
The aim is to keep the TSH level below 2.5.
If the TSH level is between 2.5 and 10, the dose of thyroxine must be increased by 50 micrograms
per day.
If the TSH is between 10 and 20, then increase the dose by 75 micrograms per day.
And if the TSH level is more than 20, the dose must be increased by 100 micrograms per day.
With every dose adjustment, the TSH level must be repeated every 3 to 4 weeks, even in the
second half of pregnancy.
It is important not to overdose the patients.
Concomitant T4 evaluation should show a T4 level about 1.5 times higher than for non-pregnant
women.
To ensure adequate uptake of the drug, it is advised that there be a 4 hour time gap between
taking thyroxine and any prenatal supplements containing iron or calcium or any soy products.
Iodine intake in pregnancy should also be monitored, and equal about 220 micrograms per day.
After pregnancy, the dosage of thyroxine can be reduced and TSH levels can then be checked
every 4 weeks.
The next topic in this video on thyroid disease and pregnancy pertains to patients who are
euthyroid but have thyroid antibodies.
An American national survey showed almost 13% of otherwise healthy women under the age of 40
have thyroid peroxidase antibodies, and 14% have thyroglobulin antibodies.
Once pregnant, there is a definite increased risk of spontaneous miscarriage, subclimical
hypothyroidism, and postpartum thyroiditis.
The exact mechanism underpinning the increased incidence of miscarriage is unknown, but it
is speculated that the heightened autoimmune state adversely affects the fetal placental
unit.
Almost 1 in 5 pregnant women with antibodies will develop raised TSH levels, in other words
hypothyroidism.
The cause underlying this may well be the poor reserve of the thyroid to cope with the demand
for increased hormone production during pregnancy.
The single study looking into this issue was performed in an area with borderline iodine
deficiency, and the results will have to be verified.
At present, the recommendation is for hypothyroidism, and all pregnant women with antibodies and
a TSH level above 2.5 should commence on the regime that I have already mentioned.
There is one other condition of hypothyroidism in pregnancy that has been described, and that
is the so-called isolated maternal hypothyroxinemia.
This is diagnosed by a low T4 level, but normal TSH levels and occur in the first half of pregnancy.
A large retrospective study showed however that there was no deleterious outcome and currently
no treatment is advised.
In the next video I will look at hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.
