Hi there, my name is Jean Klopper and I am a surgeon. One of my passions is
medical education. In this series of presentations I'll talk about things
surgical. Remember these presentations are available for continuous professional
development points so I'll leave the description to that down below. In this
presentation I'm going to talk about thyroid malignancies. Now I do have
another presentation where I talk about the workup of a thyroid nodule and the
aim of that workup is to identify the patient with definite or possible
thyroid malignancy. Fortunately they are not very common but it's important to
know what to do with a patient with thyroid malignancy.
This is a heterogeneous group of tumors. They are usually identified as thyroid
nodules and it must be remembered that thyroid nodules are very very common
and thyroid cancers make up a small fraction of all thyroid nodules. Now the
true proportion of nodules that are cancerous that depends on how the
incidence of thyroid nodules are determined. Now since the true incidence of the
latter is probably in excess of two-thirds of all human beings the minority of
proper nodules are malignant. So thyroid follicular epithelium that can give rise
to four types of cancers. Most commonly we have papillary thyroid cancer, then
follicular thyroid cancer, hertel cell carcinomas and anaplastic cancers. Now the
papillary thyroid carcinoma, as I said that's the majority of cases, 85% of all
thyroid malignancies. And then follicular thyroid carcinomas, that's second most
common and that gets down to 10 to 12%. And then the anaplastic or undifferentiated
thyroid cancers, that's very rare, it's about 3%. Now there are subtypes of papillary
thyroid cancer. So let's look at the most common papillary thyroid. You get the
classical types but we also get tall cell variant, the columnar cell variant and the
follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. Now the tall cell and the columnar
cell subtypes, they appear to be slightly more biologically aggressive than the
classical type. And there's also a variety of follicular carcinoma subtypes too. Now
these include the clear cell variant, the signet cell types, the follicular thyroid
cancer with glomeruloid pattern, a spindle cell follicular thyroid cancer. And it's not
really clear whether these variants have a different outcome from classical follicular
thyroid carcinoma. Herthal cell thyroid carcinomas, they used to be seen as a subtype of follicular
thyroid cancers, but they are biologically distinct. Now it does however follow a very
similar clinical path to follicular thyroid cancers and we really do manage them the same
as a follicular thyroid cancer. There are two types of non-fellicular epitheliums of the thyroid and the
first is medullary thyroid cancer that arises from the C cells in the thyroid that do help in the
calcium metabolism. Medullary thyroid cancer, they can be sporadic or they can be part of familial
syndromes. And these are then the multiple endocrine neoplasius type 2 to A and B or isolated
familial medullary thyroid cancers. Now the second non-fellicular epithelium thyroid cancer
remember is primary thyroid lymphoma. Yes, a patient can also develop a lymphoma primarily in
the thyroid itself. Then lastly we get metastases from other tumors to the thyroid and most notably
those will be the breast, from the kidneys, from the colon, as well as malignant melanoma. Remember
malignant melanoma can really metastasize anyway and they can present as thyroid nodules.
So let's look at the workup of a patient then with suspected thyroid malignancy. Now the workup
of thyroid carcinoma, that's the result of the workup of any thyroid nodule. Now this involves
thyroid function tests, an ultrasound of the head and neck and fine needle aspiration cytology of the
nodule. Now most patients with thyroid carcinoma are uthyroid. It's only rarely do we find papillary
thyroid cancer that is hyperthyroid. So that's very rare. Now ultrasound, that should include imaging of the
cervical lymph nodes. That's the central and the lateral neck regions because we do look for
metastases specifically for papillary thyroid cancer that metastasizes to the lymph nodes.
Now they are present in up to a third of cases. If you look carefully with ultrasound you're going to
find those nodes. Now the presence may require a change in management. So yes we have to look for
them. Now thyroid gland itself, it makes it a bit difficult to detect the central nodes and they
actually missed in up to half of cases. So invariably we make this decision on the surgery at or what to
do with these nodes at surgery because sometimes that that is when you discover them for the first
time. Now fine needle aspiration cytology, that can diagnose most thyroid cancers. It can unfortunately
not differentiate between a follicular thyroid carcinoma and a follicular thyroid adenoma.
So papillary, most common and yes it can be diagnosed on fine needle aspiration. The 10 to 12 percent of
cases that are follicular thyroid carcinomas, no we can't diagnose that on cytology. We really need the
presence of infiltration of the nodule perimeter and associated blood vessels and nerves and that is
required to differentiate between an adenoma and a carcinoma. You need to see that tissue architecture and
whether there is invasion. And we can only do that on histological evaluation of a surgical resection. So
we've got to take that lobe out and submit it for histology to differentiate between adenoma and
carcinoma as far as follicular lesions are concerned. With more advanced local disease, we ask for a CT scan
or an MRI of the neck and usually to evaluate the extent of the disease. If it's advanced, does it go down
into the thorax? Does it invade local tissue? We must remember though that if we use iodinated
contrast medium for a CT scan, that will delay the use of radioactive iodine therapy after surgery for
months. So we've got to think carefully, weigh up the risk and benefit of using contrast enhanced
CT scans in these patients. And really the knowledge gained in planning the surgery can outweigh this delay in
the use of radioactive iodine therapy. So we just have to decide. And then also laryngoscopy and
endoscopy, we can use those as well to look for local infiltration into the esophagus or the trachea.
Now symptoms and signs that may indicate the presence of advanced disease, because we see all
these patients with the nodules, most of them won't have a carcinoma, but things that make us
concerned. And that is heart matted lymph nodes. So you examine the neck, central lateral compartments,
hard matted nodes, the nodule itself, if that's hard and fixed to local structures,
patients who complain of dysphagia, if there's any respiratory compromise, including dyspnea or this
feeling of choking, proper voice changes, any kind of paralysis of the vocal cords, and then also
hemoptysis for advanced disease. All patients in whom the preoperative workup is diagnostic of a thyroid
cancer. And in those with equivocal cases of advanced TIRADS or Batista classification,
they should be evaluated for a thyroidectomy. So we've worked up the patient. I do have a separate
presentation on the workup of a nodule. We've come to the stage where this is highly suspicious,
and we need to go for surgery. Now there's no randomized controlled trials that have investigated
properly the extent of the surgery. And we do have a lot of literature to guide us though. Now there
are various terms used for the extent of the thyroidectomy, and we just have to be clear about
those. So a total thyroidectomy, that refers to the removal of both lobes, all the thyroid tissue.
It's probably a bit of a misnomer, as most patients still have some residual uptake
on scintigraphy postoperatively. So it's very difficult to clear that whole bed.
Now by definition, the bilateral dissection is just the resection of both lobes. And we take
great care to preserve the recurrent laryngeal nerves and the parathyroid glands. And we'll talk
about those complications. Now some centers advocate the use of auto-transplantation of one
of the parathyroid glands. So we have a pathologist in theater, they confirm the fact that there is a
parathyroid gland. It gets sectioned into smaller pieces and auto-transplanted in the
synocleidomastoid. And that's really to prevent hypocalcemia in case all the other, or at least
the other three, most people only have four parathyroid glands are injured. A near total
thyroidectomy, that refers to complete lobectomy on the one side, that's the affected side,
and removing most of the contralateral lobe. Most of the contralateral lobe. A unilateral lobectomy
and isthmus resection. That's done most commonly. We have unilateral thyroid disease. We're not sure
whether this nodule, not 100% convinced that this nodule is malignant, but there's a high potential.
We're going to go for a unilateral lobectomy and isthmus resection. And we leave the contralateral
side unopened, undissected. So in case we have to come back, the surgery on that side is a lot easier
and with less complications. And then we get this horrible subtotal thyroidectomy. That's not a
treatment option for any suspected malignancy or confirmed malignancy. And what that does,
it just leaves the posterior parts of both lobes. And yes, it does protect the parathyroids,
it does protect the recurrent laryngeal nerves, but it doesn't really play a part
in the management of these patients. So our minimum surgery is a unilateral lobectomy and an isthmus
resection. Now, we do reserve this procedure for lesions that are less than four centimeters in
diameter, no suspicion of contralateral disease, and no imaging or interoperative
indication of any kind of extracapsular invasion or nodal spread. Now, it should also not be reserved
for patients with a history of head and neck irradiation or a strong family history of thyroid
carcinomas. So if the preoperative evaluation identifies multifocal papillary thyroid cancer
with more than five foci, or if a unilateral thyroidectomy is performed and the final
histology is that of a multifocal papillary thyroid cancer with more than five foci,
we're going to do a thyroidectomy or come back and do that completion thyroidectomy.
So a total thyroidectomy that is advocated for all advanced cases, so more than these that I've just
mentioned. Now, this includes patients with distant metastases,
because this facilitates the concentration of radioactive iodine in the metastatic tissue that
would otherwise have been concentrated in the remaining thyroid. So we still do a total
thyroidectomy in patients with distant metastases. Now, in the cases of suspected but not confirmed
malignancy, that's advanced thyroids or Batesta, remember that's your ultrasound and your final
aspiration cytology, a unilateral thyroidectomy and isthmus resection can be performed. Now,
the final histology can then inform the need for follow-up surgery, the contralateral
labectomy. So that happens quite often. So given an intrathyroid differentiated thyroid
carcinoma of less than four centimeters in greatest diameter with no signs of spread,
who does not require post-operative radioactive iodine therapy, and who can be followed up adequately,
we do a unilateral labectomy and isthmus resection. That's advanced by the American Thyroid
Association of which I'm a member. Now, 10-year disease-specific survival in these cases has been
shown to be as high as 98.6%. So really excellent outcome. Now, since the presence of extra capsule
invasion or contralateral disease and suspected lymph node spread can sometimes only be appreciated
intraoperatively, remember we must, patients must be given, must give consent for a more radical
dissection with all its increased risks prior to doing the surgery. So that must be part of the
informed consent. We might change our mind from a unilateral resection and an isthmus resection to
total thyroidectomy. Now, nodal disease must also be managed during surgery. Now,
the American Thyroid Association only recommends nodal dissection, that's central or lateral,
in cases of evident nodal disease, that's on imaging or interoperatively. So we decide on
on which nerves, which nodes to remove. Now, prophylactic level six, that's your central
compartment node clearance, that's controversial though. So you find these tiny little nodes,
it is propellant thyroid cancer, do you do this, this prophylactic central clearance. So this level
six, the central compartment that is confined between the two jugular veins laterally, the hyoid
bone superiorly, and then the sternum inferiorly. Now disease confined here, that necessitates a
resection of all the central nymph nodes. So if they are there, if there are bigger nodes there,
yes, we clear that block. But if not, it's controversial whether you should do this prophylactic
clearance. Now levels two, three, and four, that's the upper, middle, and lower jugular compartments.
Now nodal involvement in these compartments, that really necessitates removal of that whole
jugular chain. All patients require thyroid replacement therapy after surgery. So just remember that
patients had thyroid cancer therapy, we put the majority of them, I should say, on thyroid
replacement therapy. Now the complications of surgery, we see these patients post-operatively,
take care of these patients post-operatively, we've got to be aware of the possible complications,
irrespective of the surgery that was done. And nodals, remember nodal resection and complete
thyroidectomies, they're obviously going to have a higher incidence of complications. Now other than
the risk of bleeding and surgical infection, and anesthetic complications, the two main risks
are hyperparathyroidism and nerve damage. And then the more radical injuries will also have,
might have injuries to, to the aerodigestive and the neurovascular structures. And that's,
that's horrible, but it is possible. Now post-operative hematomas, they are not common,
but they can be fatal. And that's the first thing you've got to watch for, even if things went
really smoothly during the surgery. Now the incidence is lowered by stopping all anticoagulants
prior to surgery. Patients can't be in anticoagulants for these nectar sections.
And we use meticulous technique with complete hemostasis prior to starting the closure. And
we witness this by placing the operating table into a Dellenberg position, that's head down,
to cause some venous congestion there, and just make sure that there is no bleeding. That's prior to
starting any closure. You can put a small suction drain to, to, to really avoid the, the formation
of these hematomas. Now the ward, the staff in the ward, they should really be made aware to be
vigilant about checking for the development of a hematoma. And then the wound should be opened
immediately, even if it has to be done in the ward prior to taking the patient back to theatre. So just
quickly snip open that wound. Remember, put subcuticular sutures and then some interrupted
vicral sutures in the fascia and fat layers underneath the skin. They just get opened right
there in the ward. It's a life saving procedure because that patient is going to die from asphyxia.
Seromas, that's much more common. And fortunately, they're typically small and we just
usually manage these conservatively. We don't have to, to drain seromas.
Hyperparathyroidism is the result of damage to the parathyroid glands. This can either be due to
direct damage or removal of those glands together with the, with the thyroid or damage to the blood
supply to these glands. Now, hyperparathyroidism follows more commonly in cases with large tumors
causing anatomic derangements that you're not sure exactly where these, where these parathyroids are.
And remember, some parathyroids are intrathyroidal, so they're inside the thyroid capsule actually.
Now, the, the, the resultant acute hypocalcemia, that, that might be mild or, or even, uh, present with
even severe tetany. So in mild cases, patients present with this perioral numbness, uh, paresthesias
of the hands and feet and some muscle cramps. And then in severe cases, patients can experience
carbopedial spasms, laryngospasm, or even seizures. Now we're all familiar with the Shostek sign,
that's the perioral twitch on tapping the facial nerve or the Trousseau sign,
that's the, um, forearm muscle contraction when applying a tourniquet. And those are well-known
signs of, of hypocalcemia. Now in patients with mild symptoms, and then those with a calcium level,
uh, below two millimoles per liter, we give them calcitriol, uh, uh, half a microgram twice a day,
and some calcium carbonate, 500 milligrams, four times a day, and that should usually suffice.
Now in patients with more severe symptoms, we can give them calcium gluconate that's added
intravenously for the first day or two, or until their calcium level rises above two,
two millimoles per liter. And then in the emergency treatment for patients with cardiac
electrical derangements on the ECG, or those with seizures, um, we add to that administration of
10 milliliters of a 10% solution of calcium gluconate over 10 minutes.
So oral vitamin D and calcium carbonate that's given orally, and then it's tapered and discontinued
over about two months, two months, two months period. Now, if that's not possible, a low
parathyroid hormone level will confirm the diagnosis of permanent disease. So remember,
I'm talking about these 20%, 25% of cases with a transient disease. We give them the vitamin D and
the calcium carbonate, taper that over two months, and they're fine. But if it, uh, if the calcium levels
do not improve, we do that PTH and we can see, uh, it's low and, and, and that will be a permanent
disease for them. In some centers, vitamin D and calcium carbonate is started the day before total
thyroidectomy and continued and tapered over the next, uh, two months or so. And that really
tries to avoid this transient hypocalcemia. Um, and then the opposite of that, that is obviously just,
just to treat the cases that actually develop. So those are the two schools. Permanent hoarseness,
that can follow from dislocation of the retinoid, um, or, or nerve damage. And if it's a dislocation,
those have to be, uh, promptly relocated. Now, recurrent and superior laryngeal nerve damage,
that's well described. And in many cases, the damage is transient and that can actually happen
in up to 7% of thyroidectomies. If you look for it carefully, you're going to find it.
The recurrent laryngeal nerve, remember that loops from the bottom, um, that might be
intentionally sacrificed in advanced cases. So we can discuss that with a patient beforehand and,
and we might have to sacrifice that nerve. Now, vocal cord paralysis,
that can follow traction injuries to the recurrent laryngeal nerve. And then these usually resolve
by about six months. So it's just that traction on the nerve during the, during the resection.
There's a bit of vocal cord paresis and, um, just from that traction of the nerve and that will
resolve. Now, speech therapists, they may be of help and that, that they, they help the patient to reduce
the strain on their vocal cords. And, and that's usually of great help. Now, unilateral vocal
cord paralysis, that follows ipsilateral permanent recurrent laryngeal nerve damage. So we're talking
the paresis, that's just from the traction that resolves, but permanent paralysis, that's from that
same side, um, complete injury of the nerve. Now, the affected vocal cord, it's paralyzed, it's, uh,
either in the paramedian or in the lateral position. And what we try and do is to get the
vocal cord fixed medially, call it medialization. And that allows for the contralateral vocal
cord to actually close the larynx. And that really, uh, improves swallowing in speech. So if they stuck
medially, that's fine. If they stuck in the paramedia, in the paramedia, uh, lateral position,
we've got to medialize that, uh, your nose and throat, uh, colleagues help with that. Now it's
usually, um, it's useful to commence with speech therapy. And, um, in those who develop aspiration
pneumonia and ineffective cough or disabling dyspnea or hyperphonia, um, those are really
the ones that we go for the medialization. And that's instituted quite early. So bilateral recurrent
laryngeal nerve injury, that's a devastating injury. And that usually follows, um, it's a high
incidence after re-operation and is diagnosed on extubation with acute stridor and dyspnea.
Horrible situation. Patients re-intubated. Um, if the cords are aducted though together,
you even have to do an emergency tracheostomy, uh, just to get, uh, to get airflow. Then, um,
um, a partial posterior laser cordectomy. It can be done just to, to get these vocal cords, uh,
open again. Now, when the nerve is transected during surgery, an attempt at a tension-free
repair must be made right then and then. And we can even do a little interposition nerve grafts.
And we take, um, nerve tissue from the anterior cervicalis or the hypoglossal nerve. Those can
be sacrificed as an interposition graft. Now, the superior laryngeal nerve, that damage,
that produces vocal fatigue and subtle voice changes, um, with the inability to, to, uh, to
project, uh, the voice. So the patient has had their surgery for the suspected, uh, carcinoma.
It turns out to be carcinoma. What do we do now? We stratify the risk, uh, after the surgery.
And the patients must, uh, be continuously monitored because the, the risk evaluation
can lead to a change in the risk. And we really look at low risk, intermediate risk,
and the high risk patient. So the low risk patient, that's papillary thyroid cancer.
And with all of the following must be present. They've got to have no metastases.
All macroscopic tumor has been resected. There's no invasion of local tissue. There's no aggressive
histology. There's the variants that I spoke of before. There's no vascular invasion. Um,
there's no radioactive iodine uptake in the thyroid bed. And it's an N0, that means no nodes, or N1 nodes,
less than six of these micrometastases, these small little nodes that are less than two millimeters.
So if you have all of those, that's low risk. Also in low risk group is the intrathyroidal
encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer.
Also the intrathyroidal follicular thyroid cancers with no or minimal vascular invasion,
less than four foci. And then lastly, intrathyroidal papillary microcarcinoma,
even if they are multifocal. So that gives you a low risk. That patient's in the low risk group.
Intermediate risk group, microscopic invasion into the perithyroidal soft tissue.
Cervical lymph node metastases or radioactive iodine uptake or
metastatic foci in the neck on the post-treatment scan done after
thyroid remnant ablation is done with radioactive iodine therapy.
Tumor with aggressive histology, tall cell variants, insular cell variants,
columnar cell carcinomas, hurtle cell carcinomas, follicular thyroid carcinomas,
or the hop nail variant, all of these fancy variants,
or if there's vascular invasion, that's an intermediate risk patient.
Clinically, if they're N1, N1 nodal disease with a TNM classification,
or more than five pathological N1 nodes with all involved lymph nodes less than three centimeters
in the largest diameter, intermediate risk. And then also multifocal papillary thyroid
microadenomas with extrathyroidal extension. High risk, the ones that we're worried about.
That's macroscopic tumor invasion, that is incomplete tumor resection with gross residual
margins, patients with distant metastases, post-operative serum thyroglobulin, suggestive
of distant metastases, and pathological N1 nodes with any metastatic lymph nodes more than three
centimeters in the largest diameter. And then a follicular thyroid cancer with extensive
vascular invasion, more than four foci. So that's your high risk patient.
Now, we use this risk stratification to determine the use of adjuvant therapy. Now,
there are actually numerous classification systems, and they're not all routinely used by everyone,
and that makes comparison in the literature and what exactly to do be very difficult. But let's
look at radioiodine treatment. So radioactive iodine that is taken up by functional thyroid tissue,
similar to the non-radiactive iodine. So iodine is essential in the production of thyroid hormone,
and thyroid tissue is unique in its ability to concentrate and store iodine. There's also breast
tissue that can absorb iodine, but really it's concentrated and stored in the thyroid gland.
Now, thyroid tumor cells, they have a reduced expression of the sodium iodine transporter in the
cell membrane that actually absorbs that iodine. So they're not like normal thyroid follicular cells.
So radioactive iodine therapy is of no use in patients with little or no uptake.
And we're really thinking here of anaplastic carcinomas and then also carcinomas in the
thyroid that do not come from follicular epithelium. That's the medullary thyroid cancer
and lymphoma. That's not going to help to give these patients radioactive iodine therapy.
So iodine-131, so 131 nuclei, protons and neutrons in the nucleus of the iodine atom that is
radioactive and it produces high energy beta particles and also gamma rays and those gamma
rays that are used obviously in the scintigraphy and imaging. So these beta particles, high energy
electrons, they have a short path length, one to two millimeters, and they cause acute cell death.
So radioactive iodine, that's used to ablate remnant thyroid tissue after surgery.
So if there's any remnant tissue left or left in the bed, even after total thyroidectomy,
we ablate that tissue. And so why do we ablate it? Why do we get rid of everything? Well,
the aim is then to be able to use thytoglobulin. So blood test is thytoglobulin. It's made by
follicular cells and that can monitor the patient following surgery. So we're really looking for
metastases here. A patient has no thyroidal tissue left. As far as we know, we do the thytoglobulin
post-operatively. There's no thytoglobulin. And with follow-up, suddenly that rises up. It gives us
an idea that there's a recurrence or distal metastases. So if normal thyroid tissue is
ablated and metastases that produce thytoglobulin, we can detect them on serial follow-up. And it also
facilitates the use of radioactive iodine in detecting these metastases used on imaging,
because those metastases or recurrence might then take up the radioactive iodine. So radioactive iodine
therapy, it is also used as adjuvant therapy, eliminating subclinical tumor deposits and
treating known metastases. So not only for ablation, but also for actual therapy. So the role in the
former, it's as adjuvant therapy that requires a balance between the potential risk and benefit and
risk of the use of radioactive iodine therapy is generally not recommended in the following cases.
Introthyroidal cancer, less than four centimeters in greater diameter and with no other risk features.
And multifocal disease, all less than one centimeter in greater diameter with no other
high-risk features. So this includes then all cases with less than five nodes measuring less than
two millimeters. So radioactive iodine therapy is indicated in the intermediate risk cases with
microscopic invasion into the perithyroidal tissue, clinically significant lymph node metastases,
vascular invasion, histological subtypes such as tall cell carcinomas, columnar cell carcinomas and
insular carcinomas and in cases that are deemed high risk. So for all of those patients. Now the
uptake of radioactive iodine, that requires thyroid stimulating hormone, TSH, and all iodine containing
food and medication, that should be stopped in advance of the therapy. We want those TSH levels to be
high. Now the use of iodine containing contrast during CT imaging, that will delay the use of,
the possible use of radioactive iodine by several months. So we can use recombinant human TSH that is
used in some centers to improve the uptake of the radioactive iodine. And then all thyroid
hormone therapy, that's really withdrawn four weeks prior to radioactive iodine therapy.
It must be remembered that pregnancy and breastfeeding, those are hard contraindications
for the use of radioactive iodine therapy. And then lastly, just to remember the side effects,
cell adenitis, secondary tumors, dysfunction of the gonads, and then a reduction in fertility
that goes with that, and then naso-elacrimal duct obstruction with the dry eyes, and then swelling of
the tumor tissue itself. So there you have it, the management of thyroid cancers.
Please remember that this video series is part of a program of continued medical education,
and the information for that will also be in the description down below.
