The availability of thyroid antibody tests has been established for many years.
There exists however great confusion as to the use and the interpretation of these tests.
In this short video I will endeavour to clarify some of the aspects surrounding the use of
these tests and hopefully give you a clearer understanding of thyroid disease itself.
I feel the need to mention right at the start that these tests are overused and the results
ill understood.
It is far too common to simply rely on the few lines of explanation at the bottom of
printed results from your lab.
It is always good advice to speak to your local pathology unit for some guidance.
Thyroid antibodies were first detected in 1956.
These were antithyroglobulin antibodies related to Hashimoto's disease.
In the same year a serum thyroid stimulating factor was discovered, later shown to be antibodies
to the TSH receptor.
Nine years later microsomal antibodies were noted and these later turned out to be targeted
against thyroid peroxidase.
Many antigenic targets have subsequently been identified and these even include the sodium
iodide symporter which transports inorganic iodide into the follicular cell.
Antibodies against thyroid hormone have also been identified and these can interfere with
evaluation of correct hormone levels.
These are fortunately rare.
Not all of these tests that I have mentioned are commercially available assays and today the
most common serum analysis tests for the presence of antithyroglobulin, antithyroid peroxidase
and antithyroid stimulating hormone receptor antibodies.
The widespread use of these assays has indicated autoimmune thyroid disease as affecting 2% of
women and 0.2% of men making it the most common autoimmune conditions.
Subclinical disease is even estimated to affect 20% of women and 2% of men.
Despite these fancy statistics it is sometimes bewildering to make sense of the various tests
available and how they may be of value in the clinical setting.
Moreover, there are differences between laboratories in analysing these assays and indeed in which
assay is used and that makes comparisons very difficult.
Lastly, these tests are not diagnostic as illustrated by this table.
Antithyroglobulin is present in 3% of the normal population, in 12-30% of Graves patients,
and in 35-60% of Hashimoto patients.
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies is present in 10-15% of the normal population, 45-80% of
Graves patients and 80-99% of Hashimoto patients.
In thyroid stimulating hormone receptor antibodies in 1-2% of the normal population, up to 100%
of Graves patients and 6-60% of Hashimoto's patients.
How do you make sense of something that is present in 6-60% of patients?
It's very difficult.
Let me start with antithyroglobulin antibodies.
They are a large group of different immunoglobulin molecules and they show considerable promiscuity
in light chain, heavy chain combinations.
About 99% of patients with antithyroglobulin antibodies will have thyroid peroxidase antibodies,
but only 35% of the patients with the latter will have antithyroglobulin antibodies.
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies, as mentioned previously, were first termed antimicrosomal
antibodies.
To date, more than 30 thyroid peroxidase antibody sequences have been identified and studied.
The anti-TSH receptor antibody is very sensitive for Graves disease and almost 100% of patients
will test positive.
The lower incidence of positive tests in the past has led to some confusion though.
Initial assays used murine antigen and were called long-acting thyroid stimulator or LATS,
but now human antigen is used.
The fact that there are still some negative tests in patients with Graves disease is explained
by the fact that some commercial kids might not be sensitive enough to pick them up.
So where do these tests fit into clinical practice?
I will consider their use in Graves disease, in autoimmune thyroiditis such as Hashimoto's
disease and in differentiated thyroid carcinomas.
First we will have a look at Graves disease.
As mentioned, anti-TSH receptor antibodies are the test of choice.
The 10% of patients with Graves disease that test negative only do so because of the fact
that the tests are not sensitive enough.
These patients do though, usually have a milder form of the disease.
What is more important is the fact that more than 80% of patients can be diagnosed with
Graves disease without the help of antibody analysis.
Those tests aren't specific to Graves disease either.
They also test positive in Hashimoto's.
Patients with Graves disease have homogeneously enlarged thyroid glands, elevated thyroid hormone
levels and have symptoms and signs of the disease.
Their TSH levels are decreased and similarly most syntagraphic studies are helpful.
The test for anti-TSH receptor antibodies does not form part of the routine workup.
They can be used though to monitor those on antithyroid drugs especially as they complete
a course of treatment.
If levels are as high as pre-treatment levels then a relapse rate of 90% can be predicted.
Whether this is justification for more aggressive ablative therapy is debatable though and might
as well suggest a continuation of antithyroid drugs.
It remains a clinical decision, not an antibody decision.
A lowering of levels after treatment with antithyroid drugs has no predictive value at all.
Patients with transient hyperthyroidism as part of other autoimmune thyroiditis conditions
such as Hashimoto's might also have positive tests not only for anti-TSH receptor antibodies,
but also for antithyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase antibodies and care must be taken when using
these tests to distinguish these diseases.
I've mentioned it more than once now.
It might be more useful to consider clinical assessment, radioiodine uptake measurements,
clinical course documentation and even biopsy results.
It has been considered that high levels of anti-TSH receptor antibodies predict a poorer
outcome for radioactive ablation of the thyroid in Graves disease and that its levels might
also be used to determine the dosage required.
It must clearly be noted though that there are no level 1 studies to support these claims.
The use of thyroid antibodies in pregnancy is a very specialized topic and I will deal with it in a separate video.
A small proportion of patients with Graves disease are euthyroid and have eye symptoms as they only complained.
Unfortunately, only 20-70% of these will have anti-TSH receptor antibodies,
and the incidence of raised levels of other antibodies are even lower.
Work is currently being done on specific antibodies as markers for eye disease.
The group of autoimmune hypothyroidism contains conditions such as Hashimoto Thyroiditis and Subacute Thyroiditis.
Various epidemiological studies make the diagnosis, management and clinical significance of these
conditions very difficult.
At autopsy for non-thyroidal causes of death, 30% of women will show moderate to severe thyroiditis.
Furthermore, 10-15% of women have circulating thyroid antibodies and 5-10% will have subclinical
hypothyroidism, in other words normal T4 levels but elevated TSH levels.
Biochemical hypothyroidism is present in only 1% of women.
The only use for thyroid antibody testing in cases of autoimmune thyroiditis is in prognostic use.
It has been shown that new thyroid patients with autoimmune thyroiditis and initial high
level of TSH together with the presence of thyroid antibodies predict an outcome of eventual
clinical hypothyroidism.
The only other true value is in those who present with a rapidly enlarging thyroid.
If any antithyroid antibodies are present, lymphomas of the thyroid should be suspected.
Thyroid peroxidase antibody testing can also be considered in those with pre-existing autoimmune
disease, especially in type 1 diabetics and in those on amiodarone or cytokine therapy and
those with Turner and Down syndrome.
A presence of these antibodies is suggestive of future autoimmune hypothyroidism.
Lastly, a look at differentiated thyroid carcinomas.
In those who have had ablative therapy for differentiated thyroid carcinoma, thyroglobulin levels offer an
excellent way of follow up.
It is imperative though to also test for the presence of antithyroglobulin antibodies, as
the presence of these will cause false low values.
As you can see, the use of thyroid antibodies are limited.
Make sure you use them in the correct setting and understand the results that you get.
