Hyperthyroidism in pregnancy is not as common as hypothyroidism and only 1 to 4 in a thousand
pregnant women are affected.
Graves' disease makes up more than 85 to 90% of these cases.
The rest is caused by single toxic adenomas, hyperfunctioning multinodular goiters and
cases of subacute thyroiditis.
Although much less common, exogenous thyroxine intake and hydatiform molar disease must also
be considered.
As I have mentioned in the video series on hypothyroidism in pregnancy, there is an increase
in HCG during the first half of pregnancy.
This causes stimulation of the TSH receptor and in some cases patients present with gestational
thyrotoxicosis marked by elevated T4 levels and suppressed TSH levels.
One possible consequence of this mentioned in many papers might be hypermesis gravidarum.
This condition is defined by severe nausea and vomiting leading to a 5% loss of body weight,
dehydration and ketosis.
Less than half of these have elevated T4 levels though, so a causal relationship is not proven.
Treatment of gestational thyrotoxicosis is almost never advised, but other causes of hyperthyroidism
should be sought if it continues beyond 20 weeks.
Graves' disease is then the most common cause of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.
Patients can present as new cases or a sudden worsening of previously stable cases.
In previously diagnosed patients there is a tendency towards worsening in the first trimester
and then gradual improvement thereafter, complicated by worsening again after delivery.
A clinical diagnosis is difficult as eye and skin symptoms are usually absent.
Most though will have a goiter and even a brui.
TSH is suppressed and T4 elevated.
The majority will have TSH receptor antibodies.
Remember that the use of scintigraphy is not advisable in pregnancy.
The risk to mother and child is directly related to the severity of the disease, but most importantly
to the adequacy of treatment.
Hyperthyroid pregnancies are prone to preterm labour, preeclampsia, miscarriage, growth retardation
and congenital malformations not associated with the use of thornomides.
The incidence of all of these complications is lowered significantly by adequate management
of Graves' disease.
In the next video I will discuss the management of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.
