Thyroid disease is common in women of childbearing age, but because the symptoms are subtle and
non-specific and may be masked by the hypermetabolic state of pregnancy, its presence is often
overlooked.
It is important to recognize thyroid disease during pregnancy though, for proper management
is essential for a healthy pregnancy.
Thyroid disease can affect the fetus in various ways, either directly, as with transplacental
movement of antibodies, hormones and drugs, and indirectly by the abnormal maternal physiology
that results.
To properly diagnose thyroid disease in pregnancy, it is first important to understand the changes
in thyroid physiology during pregnancy.
The physiological changes in thyroid metabolism during pregnancy are varied and complex, with
various changes occurring during different time periods in pregnancy.
This is further complicated by the fact that manufacturers of commercially available assays
do not always publish reference ranges for pregnancy.
The thyroidal response to pregnancy is also greatly affected by the dietary iodine intake
of each specific patient, and a wide range of values for various thyroid function markers
may be normal.
In areas with definite iodine deficiency, there is a common trend towards increased TSH and
thyroglobulin levels, decreased thyroid hormone levels, and goiter formation.
One alteration is fairly constant in pregnancy, and that is the increase in thyroid binding
globulin .
It does unfortunately not help as a diagnostic tool in thyroid disease.
It does however have various effects on the thyroid.
The increase in TBG begins during the first trimester and reaches a maximum during the second,
which persists until shortly after delivery.
The availability of extra-TBG expands the extra-thyroidal pool and results in an increase in hormone production
by the thyroid.
This elevated T4 and T3 synthesis is further stimulated by the increased loss in renal iodide
caused by an increase in GFR, and by transplacental loss of T4 and iodide to the fetus.
Another stimulator for increased thyroid hormone production is human chorionic gonadotropin.
This hormone has intrinsic TSH activity and stimulates follicular TSH receptors directly.
The increase in HCG begins shortly after conception and increases to a maximum at 10 weeks gestation.
A decrease occurs thereafter to a low point at 20 weeks.
During the same period TSH levels are decreased relative to preconception and late pregnancy values,
usually indirectly proportional to HCG levels.
Looking at hormone levels themselves, it is noted that free T4 levels vary widely between
patients and in specific pregnancies.
It is important to consider total T4 levels, and it may be safe to accept normal reference
ranges that are between 1 and 1.5 times higher than non-pregnant female values.
In the next video, we will have a look at hypothyroidism in pregnancy.
