In this video, I will discuss toxic multinodular goita.
The term toxic nodular goita refers to the development of thyrotoxicity,
usually in a long-standing multinodular goita.
Areas of autonomous function develop in the heterogeneous multinodular goita,
and first subclinical and then overt hyperthyroidism follows.
This condition is also referred to as Plummer's disease.
The mechanism of this change to hyperfunctional autonomy is uncertain.
60% of patients have TSH receptor gene mutations, and some have G-protein mutations,
but the full extent of the underlying pathophysiology remains unknown.
Irrespective of the underlying cause, a single or a few of the nodules in the multinodular goita undergo autonomous changes.
The hyperfunctioning nodules resemble follicular adenomas,
and the rest of the thyroid, inclusive of hyperfunctioning adenomas, become inactive due to TSH suppression.
As I have mentioned, patients with Plummer's disease have a long-standing history of multinodular goita,
and are therefore usually older than 50 years.
Females predominate, and this change to toxicity has a high incidence in iodine-deficient areas.
The usual symptoms and signs of thyrotoxicosis are present,
although they are not as severe as in Graves' disease, and eye and skin symptoms are very rare.
If ophthalmopathy develops, it usually indicates the development of concomitant Graves' disease.
Cardiovascular complaints tend to dominate the clinical picture,
with atrial fibrillation, tachycardia, and even cardiac failure common in older patients.
The patients show marked emotional ability.
Obstructive symptoms are more common due to the high incidence of retrosternal extension.
Ultrasound confirms the presence of multinodular goita,
and distinguishes this from a single nodule and Graves' disease.
Because toxic multinodular goita develops from long-standing multinodular goita,
these patients should have a yearly follow-up determining their TSH levels.
In patients with a TSH level between 0.1 and 0.4 mU per litre,
there is usually no thyrotoxic symptoms, and they are termed subclinical hyperthyroid,
and they should have a closer follow-up, or even decide to undergo definitive therapy
to avoid the development of hyperthyroidism.
When TSH decreases below this, pre-T3 and T4 levels should be checked,
and elevation of either confirms thyrotoxicosis.
Two equally valid forms of definitive therapy is available,
radioactive iodine ablation and thyroidectomy.
In overt hyperthyroidism, these patients need management by antithyroid drugs and beta blockers.
The usual positive and negative aspects of the two forms of therapy
must be discussed with the patient who must make the ultimate decision.
Contraindications do both exist,
and I urge you to watch other videos in this series that discuss these.
