Let's go for a few more problems. We are asked to get the first derivative with respect to x of
function y. And our first problem is y equals Euler's number to the power negative 5x.
We'll have to use the chain rule. Let us make u equals the whole of the exponent negative 5x.
That will leave us with the function y equals E to the power u. We are asked to get to dy dx.
That is going to equal, according to the chain rule, dy du times du dx. That will equal to the ddu
of y, which is now e to the power u, times the d dx of u, which is now negative 5x.
That equals E to the power u, but remember u is negative 5x,
times negative 5. So our answer here would just be negative 5 e to the power negative 5x.
That's an easy enough one. Let's move to the next one.
Again, with u substitution, we find if we make u again the whole exponent there, 5 minus 7x,
that will give us now a new y, writing y in a new, new, new way, y equals E to the power u.
Again, remember we were asked to get the d dx of y with our chain rule. That will be the ddu of y times the
ddx of u. That is going to be the ddu.
You can do this all just in your mind. You don't have to write out and do all of these steps of
the chain rule. But I find if I do it this way, I don't forget any steps or befuddle things in my
mind too much. You're still going to make mistakes though. ddu of y, and y equals now E to the power
u times the ddx of u. And u is now 5 minus 7x. That is going to be e to the power u. And u is 5 minus 7x
times that this is going to be negative 7. So negative 7 e to the power 5 minus 7x.
Next problem. That one looks interesting. It is basically one term minus another. So we can break
it up into two parts. Probably not the way you are taught in math school. But let's make this y1
would then equal x e to the power x. And y2 would be e to the power x. Now our first term there is a
product of two functions. So we'll have to use the product rule. So let's make the f of x equals x.
And the g of x. And the g of x will make e to the power x. f prime of x is just going to be 1.
g prime of x is going to be e to the power x. If we get, let's do that, y1. So if we get y1 prime,
it's going to be the f of x times g prime of x plus f prime of x times g of x. So that is going to be x
e to the, I always say e and I write x. So that is going to be x times, so that x times e to the power
x plus that 1 times that, which is plus e to the power x. Now y2 prime is going to be,
that is just going to be, again see what I did there, I say e but I write x, always do that.
So that's e to the power x, so y2 prime would still be e to the power x. So if we get the y prime all in
its own, it's going to be, um, the y1 prime minus y2 prime. Let me write it there, y1 prime minus y2 prime,
because that's what we had there, the minus. So y prime is going to be x e to the power x plus e to the
power x minus e to the power x. Those two would cancel, so y prime or dy dx then equals x times e to the power x.
Not so difficult after all. Let's look at this one. Again, it's the product of two functions. So we'll
use the product rule. We'll, of course, call the first, let's call the first product f of x, or we
can just call it u, equals x squared minus 2x plus 2, and v equals e to the power x.
u prime is this going to be 2x minus 2. v prime is going to be e to the power x.
So y prime is going to be u times v prime plus u prime times v. So that is going to be x squared minus
2x plus 2 times e to the power x. Oh, that just looks awful. e to the power x. Added to that,
we're going to have 2x minus 2 times e to the power x. We can take e to the power x out as a common factor
that leaves us with x squared minus 2x plus 2 plus 2x minus 2. So y prime equals e to the power x.
that cancels, that cancels, x squared. So that one works out quite well.
