Let's evaluate this problem. We are given an equation e to the power y times the d dx of y
equals 2x with x being larger than the square root of 3 and we're given an initial value and that is
y of 2 equals 0. What we have here is actually a differential equation which we will deal with
later in that a variable or a function then because we are going to solve for y so y is a
function is multiplied with its first derivative. That is what is written on the left hand side.
So you have y which in the end we're going to solve for and therefore it is a function.
It's going to be y equals something with respect to x. But we also have that function's first
derivative d dx of y equals 2x and we'll deal with differential equations which is a whole
big part of mathematics on its own. We'll deal with some of those videos perhaps later.
The one way that we do know of that we might get rid of this first derivative is to take
the anti-derivative or the indefinite integral of e to the power y times dy dx and we take
that indefinite integral with respect to x. So dx that is the indefinite integral of 2x with respect
to x. The anti-derivative and derivative are opposites according to the fundamental theorem
of calculus and they would just cancel each other out. But you can also note that those
two would cancel out leaving e to the power y dy which is going to be e to the power y.
And on this side by the constant multiple property of indefinite integrals we can bring the constant
outside of the integral and we'll have x with respect to x. So on this side we'll have 2 times
a half x squared. Now because we we are taking an indefinite integral we'll are left with some
unknown constant. What we could actually do is on this side we'll have a plus c1 and this side a plus c2.
If we bring this to the other side it'll be minus c1 but a constant minus a constant is just going to
leave some constant c. So what we could do is just leave ourselves with a constant plus c on this side.
Now we need to figure out, well we can just simplify e to the power y equals x squared plus c.
We are given an initial value. So when x equals 2, so let's make that 2 squared plus c,
then y equals 0. So that'll be 0. Anything to the power 0 equals 1 equals 4 plus c and therefore c equals
negative 3. Let's expand our page here. There we go. So we know that our equation reads,
our equation reads e to the power y equals x squared minus 3. Now we need to solve for y.
Y is a function and the way to get rid of your variable as an exponent is to take the natural log.
What you do on one side you've got to do on the other. So the natural log of e to the power y equals the
natural log of x squared minus 3. We can bring the exponent in front of the logarithmic symbol
according to the, according to the exponent rule of logarithms and that leaves us with y times the
natural log of e equals the natural log of x squared minus 3. The natural log of e equals 1. So that will
just leave us with y on the left hand side equals the natural log of x squared minus 3.
And that is a function. What we can also do is test whether we came to the correct answer. Initially we
were told that e to the power y times the first derivative of y was equal to 2x. Let's see if we plug
in our answer if we do get to 2x. So we will have e to the power y and y equals natural log of x squared minus 3
equal, times the d dx, the first derivative of y, the first derivative of the natural log of x squared minus 3.
Now we know about the powers of the logarithms. On this side we'll just get x squared minus 3 times.
Now we need to get the first derivative of the natural log of x squared minus 3. We will need to use
use the chain rule. So we'll let u equal x squared minus 3 and that gives us a y value of natural log of u.
If we take the first derivative with respect to x, apply the chain rule, we'll get d du times du dx.
x. That is equal to d du of y, y is now natural log of u, times the d dx of u and u was x squared minus 3.
That leaves us with 1 over u times 2x.
And if we substitute back the value of u we get 2x.
We get a ruler here. 2x over x squared minus 3. We have to, let's just open a new page.
So that is going to equal x squared minus 3 times 2x over x squared minus 3.
And that equals 2x. Exactly where we started with. So we have checked and our answer for
the value of y. The function of y is, is, is correct.
