Let's look at the definition of the natural logarithm function. What it is
going to boil down to is that we can use a definite integral to define the
natural logarithm. A few surprising things will come from this and it'll
solve some problems that you might have noticed before in taking a definite
integral. Let's start the discussion and you'll see where this leads and in
various directions and is actually quite interesting. If I have a function that f
of x equals a to the power x, now this is a transcendental function, our variable x
is in the exponent. It's not a polynomial function where it would be x squared, x
to the power a, where a is a constant. Now we say that the inverse of this
function is the log base a of x. How do we get there? Let's have a quick look. If
we have y equals a to the power x, how can we get rid of, how can we get rid of the
variable being in the exponent? Well, we can take a log of both sides and that
will be log a to the power x. We can use our property of exponents and we can bring
that x forward. So that'll be x log of a and we can solve for x which will now be
the log of y divided by the log of a. Now how can we change that to an inverse
where we just swap x and y's around. So we'll have y equals the log of x divided by
the log of a. And how do we change that to this? Remember the last property that we
learned about as far as logarithms are concerned is if I have the log of a b, I can change that
to the log of c, base c of b divided by the log base c of a. And that is exactly what we
have. That is exactly what we have here. It's the base, whatever the base is of this log, say
for instance the base there and the base there. These two bases are the same. Those
two bases are the same and that is exactly what we have here. Two of the same bases and
we have a b and a a or an x and a a. So there's our b and that is actually an x and there's
our a which is our a. And we can change this back and write it in this form now. In other
words, y equals log a of x. And that is how we can say that the inverse of a to the power
x is log base a of x. Now, knowing this, let's go to this graph. Here we have a graph of the
function f of x equals 1 over x and its inverse is the natural log of x. Now, if we look, we
can define the natural log of x as the definite integral and going from 1 to x of 1 over t dt.
Now, this 1 over t, 1 over t, what is its antiderivative? Well, that is t to the power negative 1. What did
we do to get the antiderivative of this? Well, the exponent is 1. We divided the exponent by
a number which we get from taking the exponent and adding 1 to it. Negative 1 plus 1 is 0.
t to the power 0. Now, clearly that does not exist, so we can't get the antiderivative.
But we say an antiderivative does exist on an interval from 1 to x. And that is the natural
log of x. So we actually do have an answer for this antiderivative. And there we go. Just
look at these two graphs though. One being the inverse of the other. We say that if x is greater
than 1. So here is 1. If x is greater than 1 and we look at this function, the log of the
natural log of x, then the natural log of x equals the area under the curve of y equals
1 to t equals 1 to t equals x. So the answer to the question log of x, say x is now 3. That
will be the area under the curve of y equals 1 over t from t equals 1 to t equals 3. What
happens between, what happens between, what happens between 0 and 1? Well then the log of x equals
negative the area under the curve from x equals, from x equals x to x equals 1. So that is negative
that area under the curve. The natural log of 0 is not defined. And for that matter anything
less, equal to or less than 0 is not defined as far as the natural log is concerned. And
then lastly there is a very special circumstance where the natural log of x equals 1. And that
is that point. And that if you trace down to the x axis will be Euler's number. So the natural
log of Euler's number is 1. Because what we are saying is log base e of e equals 1. So quite
a few surprising tricks and we can, I shouldn't call them tricks, but we can define the natural
logarithm of a variable as a definite integral of 1 over t with respect to t and then going from 1 to x.
In other words, x has got to be larger than 1. If x is exactly 1 or the natural log of 1, then we use the zero
width interval rule. Because in effect what we are going to do is say the natural log of 1 that is going to
go from 1 to 1 of 1 over t dt. And we know if we don't, if we made little rectangles, if our a
and b values there are the same, that is just going to be zero. So the natural log of anything more than 1
is going to be, so from there more than 1 is going to be the area under the curve of that function.
That function I should say. Then at 1 there is going to be a special case because it goes from 1 to 1.
And then below that, that is going to be negative the area under the curve of going from that x to there of the
function 1 over t with respect to t.
