Now here we have one long scary problem. We are asked to get the first derivative of
theta times the sine of the natural log of theta plus cosine of the natural log of theta.
I think what we have to realize here looking at this problem is that we have a product
of two functions here. Let's try and solve it that way. So we have our f of x. No, no,
we'll have the f of theta. I know x is here. The f of theta equals theta and we'll have the g of theta
equals sine of the natural log of theta plus the cosine of the natural log of theta.
For us to use the product rule, we'll have to get the f prime of theta and that will just be one.
And now we have to get g prime of theta. What would that be? Now it is the addition of two elements,
so we can treat them each separately. And I'll use variable names that are used in the problem,
but I'll use different colors so that we don't get confused. Let's call y equals sine of the natural
log of theta. Sine of the natural log of theta. Let us say then that, let's do u substitution and
we'll say that u equals natural log of theta. So y is going to be the sine of u.
Uh, y is going to be the sine of u. Um, let's see if we then say
that dy dx is going to be, well, it won't be dy dx. Let's just do it another way. Let's not,
let's not confuse. Let's just explain u substitution before I lose my mind. So with u equals natural log
of theta, y prime is this going to be cosine of u and u prime on this side is going to be one over theta.
So y prime is going to be the cosine of u, which is the natural log of theta, uh, times one over theta.
Let's change color and do the second part. On this side we'll have, uh, let's just change color.
On this side we will have y equals the cosine of the natural log of theta. And we shall then say u
equals natural log of theta. We'll have y prime equals then the cosine, um, or y equals the cosine,
sorry, the y equals the cosine of u with u equals natural log of theta. Y prime is going to be negative
the sine of u and u prime is going to be one over theta. So y prime and actual fake is going to be
negative sine u was the natural log of theta, uh, times one over theta. If we substitute all of that
into our g prime of theta, we're going to have the cosine of the natural log of theta times one over theta
plus on this side, we're going to have actually negative. Let's change that into a negative sine
of natural log of theta times one over theta.
Okay. Let's just give ourselves a bit more space there so I can breathe a bit. Good. So
y prime, the actual y prime is going to be f of x times g prime of x plus f prime of x times g of x.
So what is f of x? It's theta. What is g prime of x? Well, we've just had it here.
That is going to be if we simplified the cosine of the natural log of theta minus sine of the natural
log of theta, all divided all over theta because it's a common denominator. And we're going to add to
that. We are going to add to that. So that was f of theta times g prime of theta. So plus f prime of theta,
which is one times g of theta, which is actually just the, let's just use sine of the natural log of
theta plus the cosine of the natural log of theta. These two are going to cancel out. So we're going to have
the cosine of the natural log of theta negative the sine of the natural log of theta plus the sine of
the natural log of theta plus the cosine of the natural log of theta. And this is quite nice because
those two cancel out and we're going to have an answer of two times the cosine of the natural log of
theta. And if I looked at that original problem, I probably wouldn't have guessed it. Although
if you had broken that down into y equals x plus the sine of x plus the cosine of x, it's probably not
that difficult.
