We have to look at some proofs. And first we look at the proof of the addition of two logarithmic values.
And what that means is, if I can just put it, squeeze it in here, is that, well here we have an example.
We start with saying that the log, natural log of a times x would be the natural log of a plus the natural log of x.
And what we're going to use to prove this is corollary two of the mean value theorem.
And just to remind you, that means that if f prime of x equals g prime of x at each point x on an interval from a to b,
then there is a constant c such that the f of x equals the g of x plus c for all x's and those x's being elements of that interval from a to b.
So let's look at that. What we are also going to use is the fact that if we look at the derivative of, let's do that.
the first derivative of d dx of the natural log of a x, where a is a constant.
And we look at the first derivative of, um, let's say the natural log of x.
If we do that, on the right hand side, we'll have to use the chain rule.
And if we have dy dx, it's going to be dy du times du dx.
And if we have u equals, uh, we'll have u equals a x.
So we're going to have dy dx.
And that is going to equal the d du, the natural log of u times d dx of a x.
That is going to be 1 over u times, uh, if a is a constant, that is just going to be a.
And 1 over u is 1 over a x times a, and that is just 1 over x.
And on this side, d dx of the natural log of x is 1 over x.
So the first order derivative of the natural log of a times x is the same as the natural,
uh, as the first derivative of natural log of x.
And with corollary 2 of the mean value theorem, that states that.
So we're just saying this is our first derivative.
So that would be f prime of x.
And that would be g prime of x.
And if those are the same for all x's.
And here we have x's positive, uh, value.
I mean, greater than zero because it is natural log.
That means that the f of x equals the g of x.
Plus some constant c.
And the f of x was the natural log of a x.
And that equals g of x was the natural log of x.
Plus some value c.
Now, since this holds for all positive values of x,
it must also hold for x equals 1.
So, let me just make some space.
So let's evaluate x equals 1.
That means the natural log of a times 1 equals the natural log of 1 plus c.
And the natural log.
This will then be the natural log of a equals what is the natural log of 1?
Well, that's the 0 plus c.
That means c equals the natural log of a.
And if we substitute c, there, or there, we have that the natural log of a times x equals natural log of x plus natural log of a.
And we can just rewrite that as natural log of a x equals the natural log of a plus the natural log of x.
And there's our proof.
Okay, so we can see that now.
If you're still there.
If you're trying to remember everything, I do it equal you justifiably and keep the gleiche.
Now, I'm going to be정을ue.
Now, we have to megawake.
So now.
I'm going to go ahead and see that.
The back in the computer.
Then we canстracuse and find your strength to find that there.
I'm going to see it.
You can definitely try and do anything.
