We're going to continue with our proofs of the properties of logarithms, again using corollary 2 of the mean value theorem.
But this time we are looking at our exponent property.
And we again note the fact that if we take the first derivative, let's do that, let's take the first derivative,
dy dx of the natural log of x to the power r, and we take the first derivative of dy dx, that is, dy dx of the right hand side r times the natural log of x.
If we do that, we will use our chain rule on the right hand side, dy dx, and that is going to be dy du times du dx.
Some more space. Let's just do the right hand one and finish that off quickly.
If r is a constant in this instance, it can just be brought in front, dy dx, natural log of x, that equals r times 1 over x, and that equals r over x.
Let's look at the left hand side, so dy dx equals d du of the natural log of u times d dx of x to the power r, because that is what we set u to.
So dy dx on this side is going to be 1 over u, and u was x to the power r, and on this side it's going to be r times x to the power r minus 1.
If here we have r minus 1 minus r, so we're just going to be left with minus 1.
So we're going to have r x to the power r minus 1, and that equals r over x.
So we have that both sides have the same, exactly the same first derivative value, and that means that they are exactly the same, differing only by some constant, differing only by some constant c.
So actually the natural log of x to the power r equals r times the natural log of x plus c.
Now this will hold for all values of x greater than 0, that is where natural logarithms hold.
Now one little caveat here is that this only applies to r being an element of the rational numbers.
And we have to say that here because we have not proven the power rule, any rules yet, for irrational exponents.
Now if we have no point of view of x, if we have no point of view of x, if we have no point of view of x greater than 0, it must also hold for x equals 1.
And if we evaluate that, that will be the natural log of 1 to the power r, and that equals r times the natural log of 1 plus c.
Now 1 to the power r, it just remains 1. The natural log of 1 is 0, equals the natural log of 1 is 0, r times 0 is 0, plus c, in other words c equals 0.
And we are back to the fact that the natural log of x to the power r equals r times the natural log of x, plus 0 for the c.
