Here we have another example that we could look at when we asked to evaluate the definite integral and going from negative pi over 2 to positive pi over 2 of 4 times the cosine of theta divided by 3 plus 2 times the cosine of theta with respect to theta.
Let's just do it the long way round first this time with u-substitution.
We haven't recognized that perhaps if the denominator is the f of x, its first derivative partly forms or forms part of the numerator.
So let's do it the long way round.
So let us use u-substitution.
So we're going to have u equals 3 plus 2 times the sine of theta.
The u-d theta is thus going to be 2 times the cosine of theta.
And the du by simple algebra is going to be 2 times the cosine of theta d theta.
But we've noticed that it's 4 times up top.
So we have 4 cos theta d theta.
So let's multiply both sides by 2.
So that will be 2 du equals 4 times cosine theta d theta.
So let's substitute now.
Well, not yet because we're going to do substitution.
Remember, we also now have to substitute our interval, the values for our intervals here.
And let's do that here.
So, um, if we make, um, the u of, let's just do negative pi over 2.
Remember, this is the u of theta.
That will be 3 plus 2 times the sine of negative pi over 2.
And that equals 3 plus 2 times the sine of negative pi over 2 is negative 1.
That equals 3 minus 2.
So that equals 1.
Now, the u of pi over 2 is going to be 3 plus 2 times the sine of pi over 2.
And that equals 3 plus 2 times the sine of negative pi over 2.
And that equals 3 plus 2 times 1.
And that equals 5.
Let's make some space here.
Let's go back.
Let's substitute now.
So that is now going to be the definite integral in going from 1 to 5 of 4 cosine theta d theta.
In other words, this part we're going to substitute.
There we have it with 2 times du.
And that 2 is going to be over the 3 plus 2 times sine of theta.
We're going to substitute with u.
Now, we know the constant multiple rule.
In other words, we can bring out this 2 definite integral in going from 1 to 5 of 1 over u du.
We know that that would be 2 times the natural log of the absolute value of u.
And we're going to evaluate that on an interval going from 1 to 5.
Now, remember, back to definite integrals.
If we didn't do this substitution of the lower and the upper values,
the upper and lower values of our interval,
we would have had to substitute u back as 3 plus 2 times the sine of theta
if we wanted to leave the upper and lower values of our interval as they are.
But now we have substituted them, those values,
and we have new upper and lower values for our interval.
So we can just carry on.
So that will be 2 times the natural log of the absolute value of,
well, this is 5 times the natural log of the absolute value of 1,
which is just 1.
And that will equal 2 times the natural log of 5,
because the natural log of 1 is 0.
But let's look at this problem again.
And then noticing that we do have in the numerator
the first derivative of the denominator.
So we have the absolute value,
the definite integral going from negative pi over 2
to pi over 2 of 4 times.
It was the cosine of theta divided by 3 plus 2 times the sine of theta
all with respect to theta.
Now, we said that the first derivative of the denominator
is not completely the value in the,
of the denominator is not completely the value of the numerator.
But we can rewrite this as 2 times 2.
If we do that, we can use the constant multiple rule
and bring out that 2.
So that would equal 2 times the definite integral
going from negative pi over 2 to pi over 2
of 2 times the cosine of theta
divided by 3 plus 2 times the sine of theta
with respect to theta.
And now we have,
if the denominator is the f of x,
then the numerator is f prime of x
and we can use the formula
or the equation that we learned,
learned about just in the previous video.
So we have,
that would equals 2 times
and now we are simply going to have
the, remember that will be
the natural log of the absolute value of f of x
which was our denominator, remember,
and we are going to do that
on an interval from negative pi over 2
to pi over 2.
So that will be 2 times the natural log of 3 plus 2 sine theta
and we are going to do that on our interval.
Now you can see we are basically back to where we were before.
Now you can see we are basically back to where we were before.
up and over values of our interval.
We have not done u-substitution,
so we haven't changed those.
And let's just make sure that we do get to the same answer.
That will be 2 times
the natural log of
3 plus 2 times
sine of theta divided by 2.
The sine of theta divided by 2
is 1.
So 3 plus 2 times 1
which is 3 plus 2
and that is 5
minus the natural log of
the sine of negative
pi over 2 is negative 1.
So that will be 3 plus 2 times negative 1.
So that will be 3 minus 2
which is 1.
The natural log of 1 is 0
and we get exactly the same answer
2 times the natural log of 5.
