Let's look at the derivative of the natural log of x.
And what we're going to use is the first part of the fundamental theorem of calculus.
And remember what that stated, which is here.
That if we have capital F, if we have a function f of x, its first derivative is going to be this capital F of x.
But that is the first derivative of the integral of a function.
Now if we apply that to our definition that we have for the natural logarithm of x,
which was the definite integral going from 1 to x of 1 over t with respect to t.
Remember that only if x is greater than 0 is the natural log of x defined.
Just remember that part.
But let's take the first derivative of both sides of this equation.
And this is what we're trying to determine.
That is the topic under discussion here.
The first derivative of the natural log of x.
Now if we look at this part here and we get the antiderivative and then the derivative of that.
That is just going to, because it goes from 1 to x, that is just going to leave us with 1 over x, which is our f of x there.
So that equals 1 over x.
So the first derivative of the natural log of x is 1 over x.
And it works the other way around if you think about it.
We just showed in the previous video that the antiderivative of 1 over x is the natural log of x.
And we couldn't do that before, remember, because this states x minus 1.
And if you add that to that and divide that by plus 1, you'll be dividing by 0 there.
So by the fundamental theorem of calculus part 1, it works both ways.
And the first derivative of the natural log of x equals 1 over x.
Remember that x must be greater than, it cannot be equal to 0.
Because 1 over x, if x equals 0, is not defined.
But as far as x is concerned, as part of the natural log of x, it's got to be greater than 0.
Now, if we look at the chain rule, if we have a function y equals the natural log of u,
with u a differentiable function of x, and x being greater than 0 so that the natural log is defined,
then in any case this is our formula for the chain rule.
Let's try and apply that if y equals the natural log of u.
So what will dy dx be?
Now remember we have a u there, it's not x.
So that will be equal to ddu.
Remember that's where I get the ddu from.
And y, but remember y is the natural log of u.
Because that is what it states.
Times du dx.
And we just saw that du, the ddu of line of u, but remember natural log of u,
we just had the d dx of the natural log of x, that equals 1 over u.
It was 1 over x in our explanation before, times du dx.
Let's look at an example and just use that.
So we asked what is the first derivative of the natural log of 2x.
Now remember, here we have our u being 2x.
So what is the d dx of, let's write it here.
So we're looking for the, well let's do it underneath here.
We're looking for the, so that is the natural log of u.
So 2x equals u, we're looking for the d dx of, of the natural log of u,
which is 1 over u, but u is 2 of x in this instance.
So that will be 1 over 2 of x times, times the d dx of the f of x.
And our u here, that was our f of x.
And the first derivative of 2 of x is just 2.
So there's 1 over 2 of x times 2, and that equals 1 over x.
Which is quite interesting that the natural, the first derivative of the natural log of 2,
2 times x is still 1 over x.
Just the same as if it was just the first derivative of the natural log of, of x.
