Example time again. Let us look. We are asked to simplify. Let's do number one. Asked to simplify e to the power of natural log of 4.8. We know that will just be 4.8. We just bring that, that is the value after the natural log. If that is in the power of Euler's number is just the answer.
For number two, by the exponent property of logarithms we can take this negative one and bring it up. So that is going to equal e to the power natural log of y to the power negative two. So our answer is going to be one over y squared.
And three, the properties of logarithms will allow us to write e to the power natural log of a over b. And that is just going to equal a over b.
Let's try some other examples. We can simplify. Let's do 2 natural log of the square root of e. Let's do the natural log of the natural log of e to the power e.
That's a famous question. And let's do natural log of e to the power minus a squared minus b squared.
So for number one, for number one, by the properties of natural logarithms we can write the square root can be brought up as an exponent.
And that is going to be the natural log of 3. And that is going to be the natural log of 3.
In number two, the natural log of, we can bring that down, e times the natural log of e, which is the natural log of e times 1, which is the natural log of e, which equals 1.
In number three, we can bring the exponent down. So that will leave us with negative a squared, negative b squared times the natural log of e, which is negative a squared, negative b squared.
Let us do in this one. Let us do in this one, solve for y.
And number one, we could do natural log of y equals 2x plus 4.
We know now how to get rid of a natural log. We can exponentiate both sides.
So we can write e to the power natural log of y equals e to the power 2x plus 4.
We know the left hand side will just be y equals e to the power 2x plus 4.
That's an easy one at least. Let's do, let's do number 2.
Let's do natural log of y minus 20 equals 5x.
Again, we can exponentiate both sides.
So we can have e to the power natural log of y minus 20 equals e to the power 5x.
That'll be y minus 20 equals e to the power 5x.
And y equals e to the power 5x plus 20.
Let's solve for y in the natural log of y minus 1 minus natural log of y plus 1.
And that equals the natural log of the sin of x.
And we still need to solve for y.
By the properties of natural logarithms, I think we can write natural log of y minus 1 over y plus 1 equals the natural log of the sin of x.
We can again get rid of the natural log by exponentiating both sides, which will leave us e to the power natural log of y minus 1 over y plus 1 equals e to the power natural log of sin of x.
So, I think what I did wrong in this example is to make this squared.
Let's do that y squared and we can just carry on with the problem.
That'll be y squared, that'll be y squared.
So, this will leave us with y squared minus 1 over y plus 1 equals the sin of x.
So, we'll have y minus 1, that's wrong, y minus 1, y plus 1 over, I've just expanded, the numerator over y plus 1 and that equals sin of x.
y plus 1 and y plus 100 cancel out, that'll leave us y equals sin of x plus 1.
There we go.
