Let us have a quick look at the derivatives of inverse functions. And we say that the derivatives of a function and its inverse are reciprocals. Let's look at an example of f of x equals x squared. And we're given an interval so our domain is from 0 to infinity, positive infinity, because on that domain this is a one-to-one function and therefore we'll have an inverse.
So if we change this to the f of x, so it's x squared, then f prime of x, or the first derivative, would be 2x. If we get the inverse on that domain, so that would be y equals x squared, so that means the square root of y would be x.
Correctly, that would be the absolute value of x. But then we swap x and y's. So y would be the square root of x. And that would be the inverse of x.
In other words, x to the power of x. If we get the first derivative of the inverse function, that would be 1 over 2 times the square root of x.
And what we say is that these two values are reciprocals. They represent the slope of a tangent line at certain points on the graphs of these two functions.
But they are reciprocals. But they are reciprocals at certain points. You have to compare two points with each other.
Let's have a look at this graph.
First, in blue, we have the graph of a function. And we have its reciprocal. Now, although if you think about it, it does pertain to the previous example, but we've switched the graphs around.
So don't be concerned about that. Just get the concept of the fact that the tangent line of the blue graph at AB will be the reciprocal of the tangent line of the inverse, in other words, the orange graph at point BA.
Remember, we swapped the x and y values when we got the inverse. So if we go back and we say, what happens, let's change to a lighter orange color, what happens at the f of 3, for instance?
Well, at the f of 3, x squared, that means 3 squared, that would be 9. So we're evaluating here the point 3, 9. That means, if we look at the derivative at that point, f prime of 3, that would be 6.
The reciprocal of that would be 1 over 6. So we're looking for a point on the inverse of f of x, where the slope will be 1 over 6. But because we swapped x and y's around, we can't look where x equals 3 on the inverse graph.
We have to look where x equals 9. In other words, if we do here, the inverse of x, its first derivative at point, at 9, where x equals 9 on this graph would be 1 over 2 square root of 9.
And that is 1 over 2 times 3. And that is 1 over 6. And that is what we mean when we say that the first derivatives of a graph and its inverse are reciprocals.
So here we have 6. So here we have 6 and here we have 1 over 6. But remember, because we changed x and y around, we have to look for the tangent line at the, make the y value of the original graph the x value.
So here we have to look for the tangent line at the, make the x. And we have to make the x value and evaluate the tangent line at that point. And these two lines will have slopes that are reciprocal of each other.
You
