Again, the product of two functions. Let's do f of x equals e to the power x, g of x equals
sine of x cos plus cosine of x. So f prime of x is going to be still e of x, g prime of x is
going to be, it's the sum of two different functions actually, so we can do each individually.
So that'll be the cosine of x minus the sine of x. The first derivative of sine of x is
cosine of x, the first derivative of cosine of x is negative sine of x. So if we want
y prime, that is going to be f of x times g prime of x plus f prime of x, g of x. And
that leaves us with e to the power x times cosine x minus sine x plus f prime of x is
e to the power x times g of x, which is sine of x plus cosine of x. We can bring out e to
the power x as a common factor. That leaves us with cosine of x minus sine of x plus sine
of x plus cosine of x. Those two would cancel, so we're left with y prime equals e to the power
x times 2 times cosine of x. Cosine of x plus cosine of x is 2 times cosine of x. I just brought
the two in front. Let's do this one. I think we will obviously need u substitution here in
the chain rule. I think let us substitute the whole of our cosine functions value there. So
that is equal to e to the power negative x squared. So that will leave us y equals cosine of u. That
might make it easiest. We are asked to get dy dx. That is going to equal dy du times du. As I said before,
you can do these steps in your head. No problems there. That will leave us with d du of y, which
is now the cosine of u, times the d dx of u, which is now e to the power negative x squared. Now certainly
that might cause us a few problems. Let me open another page. Let's work with that separately and
I'll do it in red because we'll have to do another u substitution all on its own. So we'll say on this
side, remember the u's and y's that I'm going to use now has got nothing to do with the original u's
and y's. That's why I just changed color. So we can just separate the two carefully. So in this instance,
I'm just doing this. I'm just doing this bit. So u equals now negative x squared. That will give us a new function y equals e to the power u.
Again, dy dx for this expression is going to equal dy du times du dx. And that equals d du of y, which is now e to the power u times d dx of u.
And u equals negative x squared. So that is going to give us e to the power u, but u is negative x squared times on the side we'll get a negative 2x.
So if we bring the two together. So if we bring the two together, if we bring the two together, we're going to get the d du of the cosine of u is negative the sine of u.
So let's just replace our original u there, which was, which was e to the power negative x squared of e to the power negative x squared.
Okay, and then times on this side, we have a e to the power negative x squared, and we have a negative 2x.
If we simplify that, we have two negatives, so that'll just be a positive 2x.
We'll have an e to the power negative x squared, and we'll have a sine of e to the power negative x squared.
Just a combination of all the rules that we know for differentiation.
With and of the power…
And there we are most people running.
Yes.
This mean?
