Let's take a look at the inverse of functions as we start our look at transcendental
function calculus. What is the inverse of a function? Here I have a graph of the function.
This would be y equals the square root of x. Now the domain is down here.
And the range is the y values. So if I plug in a domain value, in other words an x value,
I will get a range value, in other words a y value. Now the domain of y equals the square root of x
is from 0 to infinity. It's from 0 to infinity. Now for any value on that domain that I plug in,
so for any x value that I plug in, I will only get one y value, a single y value. Another way to say
that is if I draw a horizontal line, the graph will only cross that, the red line will only cross the
graph once. So for every value in the domain there is only one value in the range. If I move down here
to this and this graph is y equals x squared. So any value in my domain
and this being my range, if I would plug in say this value
one, if this was one, my answer would be one. So that is one. If I plug in negative one,
I will also get one. So I have two different domain entries that will give me the same
range entry. So this is not a not one to one function. So I might not have mentioned that this
is a one to one function. Let's write it in red. One to one function. So for every end, so for every domain input
I will only get one range output. Here I won't. There are two domain inputs that will give the same
range output. So that is not a one to one function. Here I have y equals x squared again. Let's change that
to blue. Here I have y equals x squared again, but now I limit myself to an interval.
Say from zero to x on that interval. So that is my new domain is that interval only.
That function y equals x squared is one to one because my horizontal line will only cross my graph once.
In other words, for every single domain input on that interval, I will only get one range output.
There are no two different domain inputs on that interval that will give me the same range output.
So on that interval, this is a one to one function.
Now how do we establish then the inverse of a function? Well, the reason why we looked at what
a one to one function is, is that only a one to one function can have an inverse.
This is the function, say for instance, y equals the f of x.
So I have a domain of f on my x axis and I have a range of f on my y axis. So say for instance,
this was y equals one over two, say half x plus one. How do I get the inverse of that?
Now, so don't look at the, this is not represent, the graph is not representative of my function here,
but let's just see how we get the inverse. We have looked, for instance, we have plotted this graph.
Once again, this is not the graph of that function. So we've graphed this function
and we've noticed that it is a one to one function. So if we do a horizontal line on the whole domain
of this function, it only crosses our graph once. Now, how do we go about getting the inverse now?
It is a one to one function. So it does have an inverse. Well, we just solve for x. So let's
multiply out by two. That'll be x plus two. So x would be two y minus two. And now we just replace
x's with y's. So we say y equals two x minus two. So I've just, wherever there was an x there,
I made it a y and that y I made an x. So this new function, if this function was the f of x,
this new function is the inverse of the f of x. Now note, this is not an exponent negative one. This
is not, write it in bold, this is not one over the f of x. That is not what we mean by this. It is the
inverse. It is the inverse. This function is the inverse of that function. First of all,
we noted, well, we didn't draw the graph, but let's take for granted this is a one to one function.
So on the whole domain, that means the whole of the x axis from negative infinity to positive
infinity, it is a one to one function. Solve for x and just replace x and y. And that gives you the
inverse. If you want to know how to do that on a graph, let's look at that.
All we've done here is redrawn that previous graph. Now remember, it's not the function we dealt with
anymore. And we've just changed the range and domain. So this now becomes the range of
the inverse of f. And that is how you pronounce that f to the power negative one. Remember,
it's not a power, it's the inverse of f. And this becomes the domain. And lastly, here's how that
works. If this was the f of x, if this was the f of x, this is the inverse of the f of x. And what we
do is draw a 45 degree line, y equals x, and reflect. So fold the paper along that line and trace the graph
on the other side. Now this remains the domain. And this remains the range of both functions, f and f of x,
and the inverse of f of x. The range of f of x and the inverse of the f of x. So instead of now here
having to change the domain and range around, I can reflect the graph along the 45 degree line y
equals x, and draw my new graph, which is the inverse of the f of x. And it will have the same domain
as the f of x, now that I've redrawn it.
