Let's look at the indefinite integral of 1 over u du. We would have had a problem before.
If we had, let's say, the indefinite integral of u to the power n with respect to u, that
would have been 1 over, because our coefficient there is 1, and that would have been u n plus
1 divided by n plus 1. But here we have the indefinite. Let me just make some space. Here
we have the indefinite integral of u to the power negative 1 du. If we applied this expression
of ours, that would be 1 over 0 u to the power 0, because negative 1, this negative 1 plus
1, that plus 1 there is 0. Fortunately we know that we can define the natural log of x as
a definite integral in going from 1 to x of 1 over u du. That is how we defined it earlier
in this chapter. So we know that there must be a definite integral, or there must be an
multiderivative for u to the power negative 1. And that leaves us with the fact that we
do have an integral. We can do an integral when we have u to the power negative 1. The only
thing that we do have to watch out for is that this has to be an absolute value. In other words,
we know that the natural log is only defined for values of x greater than 0, only positive
values. And for the types of equations that we are dealing with at the moment, this value
n must also be just on the side. Remember, this must be rational. Okay. So we do have, if
we were just asked then to have the indefinite integral of 1 over u du, that would be the natural
log of the absolute value of x, well u in this instance, so we are dealing with u, of u plus
c. It has to be the absolute value. Now if that is so, and we let u equals the f of x, that
means if u equals the f of x, then du dx must be f prime of x. And du, therefore du must be
f prime of x dx. It's a simple algebra. I've just taken the dx to that side. If we substitute
that into this equation that into this equation that we know now. Fortunately, we know now
that we can take the integral of u to the power negative 1 or any function to the power negative
1. So if we substitute what we've done here, let's do that. The indefinite integral of 1
over the f of x. Remember u is now the f of x and du is f prime of x dx. And that would
equal the natural log of the absolute value and u is now the f of x plus c. If I just rewrite
that, that means the indefinite integral of f prime of x over the f of x dx equals the natural
log of the f of x plus c. So apologies for actually splitting this video into two parts. This is
actually where, I think where we should stop, say there, showing that we do, that we can
take the integral of u to the power negative 1 whereas before, before we learned about the
transcendental function which is the natural log, the natural logarithm we couldn't. Now I'm
going to take it one step further and just show, let me just make more space, show another way
of doing definite integral problems. And that's where I've gone under the green line here and
actually set, set up this nice, where we set up this nice equation to help us solve some problems. And I
did that, remember, by stating that u equals the f of x. And then just substituting. So if we have an
example, say the definite integral and going from zero to two of two of two of two of x over
two of x over x squared minus five with respect to x. If I say f of x equals x squared minus five, then f prime of x would be
2x. So this is exactly what I have here. I have a function in the denominator and its first derivative in the numerator.
So I can, if I see that in my problem, I can immediately jump to this as an answer. In other words, I could say
that that would equal the natural log of the absolute value of f of x, which is x squared minus five and all of this
on an interval going from zero to two. If I substitute that, I get the natural log of the absolute value of two squared is
four negative minus five would be negative one minus the natural log of substituting zero. Now that'll just be
negative five. So that would equal the natural log of one, which is zero minus the natural log of absolute value of
negative five is just five. So my answer would be negative than natural log of five. If I did this with u substitution,
let's see if we would have gotten the same, let's see if we would have gotten the same answer. Let's just do a bit
more space. Let's start there. Let's do the problem again, but using u substitution. So the definite integral
I'm going from zero to two of two of two x divided by x squared minus five with respect to x. So let us say
let u equal x squared minus five. So du dx would be 2x and du would be 2x dx. It's a simple algebra.
Now if I'm going to do substitution, I also have to substitute my values. I have to get the u of two. So that would be
two squared minus five. That is four minus five. That equals negative one. And the u of zero would now be negative five.
negative five. So I just have to rewrite that in my substitution. So that will be the definite integral. And going
now from, let's see, zero negative five to negative one of. Now I'm going to have my two x dx. This two x dx I'm going to
substitute with that two x dx. So that would be du. And then this will be one over x squared minus five.
five x squared minus five is u. And we know now that this is going to be, we know we do have a value now for
u, the, the anti-derivative of u to the power negative one du. And that is the natural log of the absolute value
u. And we're going to now evaluate this on an interval from negative five to negative one. So that will be
the natural log of negative one minus the natural log of negative five, which will be the natural log of one
minus the natural log of five, which would be zero minus the natural log of five, which is negative the natural
log of five. So we get exactly the same answer as we got before. But here it was easier for us to do
because we recognized that this is the first derivative of that.
