Now here's another example for us. The indefinite integral of the tangent of x with respect to x. That would be the same as writing the indefinite integral of the sine of x divided by the cosine of x. You've got to know these identities with respect to x.
Now the anti-derivative of the cosine of x is negative the sine of x. At least a part of that is in the numerator. So we can say that the denominator is f of x and the numerator is f prime of x with an added negative 1. Negative 1 is a constant so we can bring that outside of the integral problem.
And most textbooks will tell you that now that you know that the integral of f prime of x over f of x with respect to x gives you a shortcut. It's not because you know that equation or that formula.
If f prime of x over f of x with respect to x the integral of that you know that you can use your natural log is because you know now that 1 over u or u to the power negative 1 with respect to u that you can get the integral of that.
And that would be the natural log of the absolute value of u plus c for indefinite and that would be the natural log of the absolute value of u plus c for indefinite is because you know that fact now that you can solve that you can solve this problem.
I will use first an example. I will use first an example where we just use u substitution so we don't use the fact that it is f prime of x in the numerator and f of x in the denominator but just the fact that we now do have a value for the integral of u to the power negative 1 with respect to u or for that matter the integral
of x to the power negative 1 with respect to x. So let us say let u equal the cosine of x that means du dx equals negative the sine of x and du equals negative sine of x dx.
Now we can multiply both sides by negative 1. So we have negative du equals sine of x dx. And I do that because all I have here is sine of x dx to substitute with.
Now we don't have to do any other substitutions because this is an indefinite integral. Just create a bit more space. There we go. There we go. So we're going to have here the indefinite integral.
Now sine of x dx. Now sine of x dx. There we have. I'm going to replace with negative and a du. I know where things are going to fall so I'll just put the negative out there.
And 1 over cosine of x I'm going to replace with 1 over u.
Now this negative 1 is a constant. So I can bring it outside of the integral. So that will be negative 1, the absolute value of 1 over u du.
And that will be negative 1 over u. And that will be negative 1. And we know now that that will be the natural log of the absolute value of u plus c.
And we know that u is. We said initially u equals the cosine of x. So that will be negative 1 times the natural log of the cosine of x plus c.
And we can certainly use the exponential property. So that is going to be the natural log of the absolute value of the absolute value of cosine of x to the power negative 1 plus c.
And that is going to be the natural log of the sine of x. And that is the natural log of the secant of x plus c.
So in no way did I use that f' of x over f of x property. But if I were to use it, it will just make what I've done now a little bit easier.
we would get to the answer more quickly. You can also do it yourself, but if you were asked to get
the indefinite integral of the cotangent of x with respect to x, that is this going to turn out to be
negative the natural log of the absolute value of the cosecant of x plus c.
You can work that one out for yourself.
