Now we come to a second proof. First we showed that the first order derivative of the natural log of x equals 1 over x and that is the first important proof in calculus of transcendentals.
Now that we have proven that we can use that information to prove that the first derivative of e to the x equals e to the x.
First of all, we can just make use of what we know about the properties of logarithms. Let us just for now ignore the derivative that we have to prove and let's say what is the first derivative.
Again, get something to draw a straight line. What is the derivative with respect to x of the natural log of e to the x?
So it's not quite the proof, the expression there that we need to prove. But we can use our exponent property of logarithms and rewrite that as the first derivative of x natural log of e.
Now the natural log of e is just 1. So that would be the first derivative of x and that equals 1. Simple.
But if you think about it carefully, there is another way to get the first derivative of the natural log of e to the x and that is to use the chain rule.
Let's do that. And if we've got some space, let's do it on this side. So that would be the same as saying let u equals the inner function. In other words, e to the x.
So what do we have? The first derivative of the natural log of u, which we already showed was 1 over u. Remember the natural log, the first derivative of the natural log of x is 1 over x.
So the first derivative of the natural log of u. So the first derivative of the natural log of u would be 1 over u. But if u equals e to the x.
If u is equal to e to the x. What is du dx then?
What is du dx of u? In other words, what is the d dx of e to the x? We don't know that. But for us to use the chain rule we have to multiply these two.
So 1 over u. Remember u was e to the x would be 1 over e to the x times d dx of e to the x.
So using the chain rule, that would be another way of getting the answer of this expression.
Look, clearly I'll just explain again what we did with the chain rule. We said let u equals e to the x.
So that's our inner function. So we need to get the d dx of the natural log of u, which is 1 over u.
But you also have to get the first derivative of the inside function then, which we have made u.
And that will be the d dx of e to the x.
Now, since we've done this in two different ways, that means this must equal that.
So let's write that. So 1 over e to the x, e to the power x times d dx of e to the x must be equal to 1.
And if we multiply both sides by e to the x, we have that the d dx of e to the x equals e to the x.
And that is our proof.
