Some more examples. We are asked to solve for x in the next few problems.
The first one should be rather easy. We can take the natural log of both sides.
2 to the power x equals natural log of 4. 2x equals natural log of 4.
So x is going to be a half times natural log of 4. Or natural log of 4 over 2.
We can, in this problem, 100 times Euler's number to the power of 10x equals 200.
We can divide both sides by 100.
e to the power of 10 times x equals 2.
We can take the natural log of both sides and that will leave us natural log of 2.
So x is going to equal a tenth natural log of 2.
In this example, we can take the natural logarithm of both sides.
That will leave us with x over 1000 equals natural log of a.
That will leave us with x equals 1000 times natural log of a.
This problem, if we take the natural log of, log of, of both sides.
We'll get negative 0.3 x equals the natural log of 3 to the power 3.
That will leave x equals, we can bring that 3 forward by the properties of logarithms.
So that will be a 3 times a negative 0.3 times the natural log of 3.
That will leave us with x being minus 10 times the natural logarithm of 3.
In this problem, if we take the natural log of both sides, we are left with kx equals the natural log of 1 over 2.
So x is going to be 1 over k times the natural log of a half.
Now natural log of a half can be written as, it can be written as 1 over k times the natural log of 1 minus natural log of 2.
Natural log of 1 is 0.
So x equals 1 over k times, we can bring the negative out, negative times the natural log of 2.
In this problem, if we take the natural log of, natural log of both sides, we'll get, we will get that x times the natural log of 0.2 is going to be the natural log of 0.4.
So x simply will be natural log of 0.4 divided by natural log of 0.2.
We can't simplify that further.
Remember that it's not the same as the previous problem.
If we look at this, this is not natural log of 1 divided by natural log of 2.
This is natural log, this is by the properties of logarithms, natural log of x over y.
That will be natural log of x minus natural log of y.
This last problem, if we take the natural log of both sides, we'll get the square root of x equals the natural log of a squared, which is 2 times the natural log of a.
If we square both sides, we'll get that x equals 4 times the natural log of a squared.
As some of the different things are depending on the other log of 1.
Seeing as possible as possible.
