Now that we know the properties of logarithms we can have a look at some examples using
those properties. First we ask to simplify 2 log base 10 of x plus 4 times log base
10 of y minus a half log base 10 of z. First of all we can use our power property. In other
words this coefficient here can become the power of x. In other words log base 10 of x
squared plus log base 10 y to the power 4 minus log base 10 z to the power a half. Now because
all our the bases of all the logs are the same we have addition and we have subtraction. So
we can use our law our properties of of multiplication and then division. So we can write log base
10 of x squared y to the power 4 divided by the square root of z. That one was quite easy.
Let's look at the second one. We will use our special property of 1. We have log base 6 of
x plus log base 6 of x minus. Let's change that. I think just make our life a little bit easier
in our example. Let's make that x minus 1 equals 1. Let's see. Both the logs there have got the same
base of 6. So we can use our property of multiplication and write log 6 of x times x minus 1. So it's
that times that because there is a plus sign there and that equals we can rewrite this as log 6 of 6
because log base 6 of 6 asks the question 6 to the power what equals 6. Let's write it there. If I write
log 6 6 I am writing 6 to the power what there. I want that answer equals well equals 6. Well 6 to the power
1 will equal 6. Okay so 1 I can rewrite as log 6 of 6 and I am using the base of 6 because I have a base
6 on this side. If I multiply out I get log base 6 of x squared minus x equals log 6 of 6. Now what we can do
algebraically if we if we look at this this and this is the same. In other words this and this should be the
same. So I can rewrite this as x squared minus x equals 6 or x squared minus x minus 6 equals 0. If I get the roots of
those that looks like it looks like it will be x minus 3 x plus 2 equals 0. In other words x equals 3 or x equals
negative 2. Now the last important thing to learn from these two examples is that the domain of logarithms
logarithms are greater than 0. In other words this does not exist and our answer is x equals 3. So a few
important things that we've learned from especially example 2. To use our property of 1 that if you have
log base with the same base with the same base on both sides that means our two elements will be equal
to each other and lastly and most importantly that the domain of logarithms the domain of logarithms is
greater than 0. So we can't have our answer x equals minus 2.
