Now that we've seen how to do differentiation for e to the power u, let's just rewrite that. That was d dx of e to the power u equals e to the power u d u dx, where u is a differentiable function with respect to x.
Now let us look at integrating. And what you'll find in textbooks is usually something like this, the indefinite integral of e to the power u du equals e to the power u plus c. Now don't be confused by this. This doesn't mean that you, whatever e to the power is, that you just rewrite that in plus c. That u is a differentiable function of x.
Say for instance you ask to evaluate the definite integral and going from 0 to natural log of 2 of e to the power 3x with respect to x.
What this means is you have to get this in the form of e to the power u, where that u is now 3x.
So let's do that. Let's say let u equals 3x. In other words, du dx is now going to be 3. It's now going to be 3.
And that means dx is going to be a third du. So we already know we can replace that. We can replace that.
But now we need to check out these two because we've got a new function.
u equals 3x. So we need to see what u is, u of the natural log of 2 is.
So that will be 3 natural log of 2. And that is natural log of 2 to the power 3 by the exponent property of natural logarithms or all logarithms.
And that's the natural log of 8. And u 0 would be 3 times 0. And that is just 0. So those will be our new upper and lower values for our integral.
So this is going to be, let's substitute the whole lot. So there we have a 0. There we have natural log of 8.
And there we still have e. And 3x is now u. And dx was a third du. A third du.
We can take this third outside the integral because it is a constant. From 0 to natural log of 8 of e to the power u du.
Now it is in this form that you'll see in the textbooks. And now you can write, this will be equal to a third, e to the power u.
And we're going to evaluate that from 0 to the natural log of 8. And that is what is meant by what is written in the, in the, in textbooks.
You can't just, let me do it for instance here. You can't just do, say, well, if you are asked to evaluate, evaluate the, in, in, at the different integral going from 0 to the natural log of e to the power 3x dx.
You can't just say, well, that equals e to the power 3x. You can't just say, well, that equals e to the power 3x. And evaluate from 0 to natural log, that was 2, natural log of 2.
Okay. Okay. So if we evaluate this, that's going to be a third, e to the power natural log of 8, minus e to the power 0.
That equals a third. E to the power, to the power natural log of 8 is 8. E to the power 0 is 1. And that leaves us with 7 over, with 7 over 3.
Let's do another example.
We are asked to evaluate the definite integral and going from 0 to pi over 2 of e to the power sin x, cosine x, dx.
Now, this is just the reverse of what we had in the video before, where we were asked to get the first derivative of e to the power sin x.
So, we need to get this in the form of e to the power u du. That's what we need.
So we need to get rid of this dx cosine x and we need to make this a u.
So let's do that. Let u equal sin x. That'll make du dx equal 2 cosine x.
And that'll make du dx equals at least, or du equal cosine x dx.
Now, lastly, we need to take care of these two. That would have been in the case of x, but we are now changing to u.
So let's do the u of pi over 2. That'll be the sin of pi over 2. And what is that? That equals 1.
And u of 0 would be sin of 0, which is 0. So we have our new upper and lower limits there of our integral.
The domain of the integral that we're taking.
So, let's substitute. That'll be the definite integral and going now from 0 to 1 of e, sin x is now u, cos x dx is now du.
And there we have it. So we can say that'll equal e to the power u and we're going to evaluate that from 0 to 1.
That'll equal e to the power 1 minus e to the power 0. And that equals e minus 1.
Well, let's see if is so ISE to GIANORPOL.
But the player is above all.
Now, I'll take care of this.
And the third player is above all.
And the, again, the goal is above all.
Suppose only will you know or how the value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value value為 value value value value value value.
