So today in the Algebra very simple concept and that's the transpose of a matrix
transpose of a matrix. So if I have a matrix A and it has columns I and J
the transpose of that, the transpose of this we usually write like that
and that is just where we interchange rows and columns.
So if I were to have this A11, oops, let's do A11, A12, A21, A22, that's my matrix A
so I'm going to interchange rows and columns. So A transpose is then going to be
A11 stays where it is because that changes around. A12 becomes A21 so it is
going to move there. So I'm going to have A12 is now suddenly going to be
there. A22 is still the same rows and columns but this one here is going to go
up there. So as these just grow bigger that's what you're going to have. So let's
just look at the transpose of a matrix say for instance 3, 2, 1, 4, 2, minus 3.
So that is a 2 by 3 matrix and you can well imagine that the transpose of that
has got to be a 3 by 2 matrix. So I'm just going to take this row and make it a
column. So this becomes 3, 2, 1 and the second row becomes the second column
4, 2, minus 3 and lo and behold this is a 3 by 2 matrix. So you see that's quite
simple this idea of just taking a matrix taking its transpose. We're just making
columns out of rows or rows out of columns. So what happens if I have the
following? I have A plus B and I take its transpose. So remember if I want to
add two matrices to each other they better have the same the same side. So let's
make this an M by N matrix and I add to this B and this must also be an M by N
matrix and the result of that will might be another matrix C but it will also be
M times N. Now what happens if I take the transpose? What happens if I take the
transpose of this? If I take C transpose it is going to be N times N matrix. Those are
going to swap around. The rows and columns are going to be swapped around. So this
was AB. I added them first and then I got the transpose. If I have A transpose
though that's going to be N times N and if I have B transpose that's also going to
be N by M and if I add them together I'm also going to get an M by N. So it
doesn't matter what you do this is going to be the exactly the same as A
transpose plus B transpose. There's going to be no difference between those. Where it
gets tricky of course is if you do multiplication. We do multiplication and an
easy way just to remember that is remember that if we had AB inverse that was
equal to B inverse A inverse. Same here that the transpose of AB multiplied first
that's B transpose times A transpose. And let's just look at the dimensionality of this
to see that it makes sense. So imagine A is I'm going to make it A times B and then
that means B must be B times B must be B times C because those have to be the same and this
is going to give me a resultant matrix which is A times C and if I get the transpose of that
that that's going to be C times A. Now let's get B transpose B transpose here is going to be C times B
and A transpose A transpose is going to be B times A B times A and if I multiply that out that's going to
give me another matrix C which is going to be C times A which is exactly which is exactly what we have there.
So if I take it's transpose in other words so that's the transpose and the
transpose of those two so I get exactly the same thing as I as I got here. So please remember that
A times B transpose is B transpose times A transpose. So let's have a look at one more thing which
naturally follows from this and those are the symmetric matrices. So a symmetric matrix is where
this the matrix is directly equal to its transpose. It's directly into to its transpose. Let's have one
two two and five would that work as A. What would A transpose be? One and two and two and five
and I have exactly the same thing. I have exactly the same thing that the matrix and its transpose are the
same and those are referred to as as symmetric matrices. If I do those two I get exactly the
I get exactly the same thing. So that is something that one and two that row becomes a column and that
row becomes a column and they're exactly the same thing. So that will give me a symmetric matrix.
What is the inverse of a symmetric matrix? Is that also so let's stick with a symmetric matrix. I have A
equals what was it one two two and five. Let's get its inverse very quickly and there are a variety of
ways of doing that. I showed you how to do that if we have one two two and five one and zero zero one and
we did elementary row operations. What I was going to end up with is five and one and minus two and minus
two. Just check on that that's exactly what you were going to get. I can do that easily in my head
because with two by two matrices we just swap these two around and we multiply that by negative one and
that one by negative one and we get exactly that. And what is A inverse? What is the transpose of A
inverse? Well that row becomes a column and that row becomes a column and we see that they exactly the
same. So if A is symmetric its inverse is also symmetric in other words its transpose is exactly the same as
where we started. So these are all very simple things and I don't think you will ever ever struggle
with that. It would be very easy to do. One last thing perhaps is remember vectors and vector
multiplications. So imagine I remember I had a vector u and it's a column vector 1 u2 u3 so this would
be in three-dimensional space and if I have v and it's v1 v2 and v3 also in three-dimensional space and I
want to get the inner product the dot product and I would say u dot v those two vectors u dot v
and that would be u1 v1 plus u2 v2 plus u3 v3 and that will give me a scalar and it gives us a very nice
way to do this this idea of a transpose gives us a very nice because I can also take v transpose u
v transpose u so if I transpose v that becomes v1 v2 v3 and I multiply it by u which is u1 u2 u3
just as we did with matrix multiplication remember we wrote it like this and like this so it's this
column this row which is just u1 v1 plus u2 v2 plus u3 v3 so that gives us exactly you know that gives us a
way to do dot products of two vectors as you take the second one take its transpose put it in front
of the first one and do normal matrix see this is a matrix see that is a matrix the transpose and that
naturally follows from that the scalar or inner product or dot product of two vectors so in short
that's the transpose of a matrix there's really nothing to it I don't think you will ever struggle
with a transpose of a matrix ever struggle with a symmetric matrix and and a nice way to see the dot
product or inner product by just just using the transpose
