Let's introduce Euler's number to the power x, exponent x.
And it is the forerunner of the fact that we are going to use the variable as the exponent in derivatives and integrals.
Now we have to find the natural log of x and we define that as the definite integral and going from 1 to x of 1 over t dt.
But we are now going to define a function which, if we say the function of x equals natural log of x, what is the inverse of f?
The inverse of f of x, well, that's the inverse of the natural log of x.
And that equals E to the power of x.
So the inverse of the natural log of x equals E to the power of x.
And that is something you need to remember.
Now, if we have a function like E to the power natural log of x, what is that going to be?
Well, if we had that E to the power of x equals the inverse of the natural log of x, what have we done?
We have now said that this x now changes to a natural log of x.
So we need to substitute this into there.
So we're going to have this equals then the inverse natural log of the natural log of x.
So look carefully what I've done.
That is just an inverse there, the inverse there.
And the x I have, the x which came from there, is now this.
So I've just substituted it there.
So what is the inverse natural log of the natural log of x?
Well, those cancel out and that just equals x.
That's quite powerful that you can write any number.
Say, for instance, A can be written as E to the power natural log of A.
Any number.
Take 2 on your calculator.
Take the natural log of 2.
That's a way irrational number.
Take E, which is a way irrational number.
Take that to the power of the natural log of 2 that you've just gotten on your calculator.
And that will be 2.
Quite powerful and fantastic.
Quite powerful and fantastic.
Now, let's just get a new page.
And let's just do one or two examples just so that we can cement what we have just said now.
Say, for instance, evaluate what I've just said now.
What would be E to the power natural log of 2?
E to the power natural log of 2.
So, we've just said here.
Let me write it in red.
E to the power x equals the inverse of the natural log of x.
Because natural log of x and E to the x are inverses of each other.
If that is so, I now just have to substitute this x value that I have there with that.
So, this is going to be natural log of x value.
So, this is going to be natural log inverse of x is now natural log of 2.
And that equals 2.
No problem.
if I had evaluate e to the power natural log of x squared minus x minus 6 as I
tried to evaluate this e sorry evaluate e to the power that well it's simply going to be x squared
minus x minus 6 as simple as that so this has become that and it'll be the inverse of the natural
log inverse natural log of the natural log of x squared minus x minus 6 and that equals x squared
minus x minus 6 quite powerful x
