Lastly, we must consider the tangent of the sum and difference of two angles.
The tangent of an angle is the sine of that angle divided by the cosine of that angle
and therefore the tangent of alpha plus beta equals the sine of alpha plus beta divided
by the cosine of alpha plus beta.
We can now expand the numerator and the denominator with our knowledge of trigonometric identities
and we get the tangent of alpha plus beta equals the sine of alpha times the cosine of beta
plus the sine of beta times the cosine of alpha divided by the cosine of alpha times the cosine
of beta minus the sine of alpha sine of beta.
If we divide both the numerator and the denominator on the right by cosine alpha times cosine beta
we have divided by one and we have not changed the value of the expression.
Therefore, the tangent of alpha plus beta equals the sine of alpha cosine of beta plus the
sine of beta cosine of alpha divided by the cosine of alpha cosine of beta over the cosine
of alpha cosine of beta minus the sine of alpha sine of beta over the cosine of alpha cosine
beta.
For completeness sake, and so as not to lead to confusion, remember that what you do on
one side you must also do on the other.
So we have to divide the tangent of alpha plus beta by one as well, but that just leaves the
tangent of alpha plus beta.
Simplifying leaves the tangent of alpha plus beta equals the tangent of alpha plus the tangent
of beta over one minus the tangent of alpha tangent of beta.
Work this last step out for yourself.
It is pure algebra and remember that the sine of an angle divided by the cosine of that same
angle is the tangent of that angle.
As with the sine function, the tangent function is an odd function and therefore the tangent
of an angle equals negative the tangent of negative of that angle.
For example, the tangent of 1 over 4 pi equals 1 and the tangent of negative 1 over 4 pi equals
negative 1.
It is thus simple to calculate the tangent of alpha minus beta.
Simply replace the positive beta with negative beta and every tangent of beta with negative
the tangent of beta.
That leaves the tangent of alpha plus negative beta equals the tangent of alpha minus negative
the tangent of beta over 1 plus the tangent of alpha times negative the tangent of beta.
Simplifying leaves the tangent of alpha minus beta equals the tangent of alpha minus the
tangent of beta over 1 plus the tangent of alpha tangent of beta.
For fun let us consider the cotangent function.
The cotangent of alpha plus beta equals the cosine of alpha plus beta over the sine of
alpha plus beta.
Once again we can use trigonometric identities and expand this function.
The cotangent of alpha plus beta equals the cosine of alpha cosine of beta minus the sine
of alpha sine of beta over the sine of alpha sine of beta plus the sine of beta cosine
of alpha.
If we divide the numerator and the denominator on the right side by sine alpha sine beta we
are dividing the right side by 1 and we do not change the value of the expression.
That leaves the cotangent of alpha plus beta divided by sine alpha sine beta over sine
alpha sine beta.
And that equals the cosine of alpha cosine beta minus sine alpha sine beta divided by sine
alpha sine beta all over the sine of alpha cosine beta plus sine beta cosine alpha over sine
alpha sine beta.
Note that what I have done on the left I have also done on the right.
But it is dividing by 1 and nothing changes.
Just to make sure that you do not get confused by the algebraic manipulation of this equation.
Remember that the right side can be rewritten as the cosine of alpha cosine of beta minus
sine alpha sine beta over sine alpha sine beta times sine alpha sine beta over sine alpha
cos beta plus sine beta cos alpha.
The sine alpha sine beta cancel out.
Simplifying through algebra and remembering that the cosine of an angle divided by the
sine of that angle is the cotangent of that angle leaves the cotangent of alpha plus beta
equals the cotangent of alpha cotangent of beta minus 1 over the cotangent of beta
plus the cotangent of alpha.
As for the tangent function, the cotangent function is an odd function and that leaves the cotangent
of the cotangent of alpha minus beta minus 1 over negative cotangent beta plus cotangent
alpha.
We can write this in a neater way by dividing the numerator and the denominator on the right
by negative 1 and that leaves the cotangent of the difference between two angles equals
the cotangent of the first angle times the cotangent of the second angle plus 1 all divided
by the cotangent of the second angle minus the cotangent of the first angle.
There are many ways to play with the trigonometric functions, resulting in many identities.
The ones that I have expressed in these videos are the common ones though, and it is good
if you know them by heart and even memorize how to derive them.
