Now that we understand the sine function as used with the addition or subtraction of two angles,
let us consider the cosine function under the same circumstances.
To derive equations for this I will use geometry.
Here is a simple right triangle with angles BAC, ABC and ACB.
Now I will add a few lines to make new triangles and a rectangle.
It might look confusing at first but let us analyse what we have.
Line AC has been extended to point F.
From point F a line is drawn to point E so that line EF is parallel to the old triangle side BC.
From E a line is drawn to BC at a point D so that ED is parallel to ACF.
This makes CDEF a rectangle.
A line drawn from B to E is perpendicular to line AE.
And finally a line is drawn from A to E dividing angle BAC into alpha and beta.
Because ACF is parallel to ED angle AED is also alpha.
And because angle BEA is 90 degrees or pi over 2 radians, angle BED is pi over 2 minus alpha radians.
That leaves angle DBE also equal to alpha.
Make sure you are comfortable with all the angles and parallel lines.
Now in triangle ABC the cosine of alpha plus beta equals AC over AB adjacent over hypotenuse.
We note that AC equals AF minus CF and also that CF equals ED and therefore AC equals AF minus AD.
over AB.
Now we can rewrite the cosine of alpha plus beta equals AF minus ED over AB.
Expanding leaves the cosine of alpha plus beta equals AF over AB minus ED over AB.
If we multiply AF over AB by AE we have multiplied by 1 and have not changed its value.
It can also be rewritten as AF over AE times AE over AB.
The AEs cancel and we really have changed nothing.
Similarly we can multiply ED over AB by BE over BE and rewrite this as ED over BE times BE over AB.
Rewriting our original cosine function leaves the cosine of alpha plus beta equals AF over AE times AE over AB minus ED over BE times BE over AB.
Now let's go back to our triangles and our triangles.
In right triangle AEF the cosine of alpha equals AF over AE.
In right triangle ABE the cosine of beta equals AE over AB.
In right triangle BDE the sine of alpha equals ED over BE.
These are precisely the ratios in our cosine of the sum of two angles equation and substituting them leaves the cosine of alpha plus beta equals the cosine of alpha cosine of beta minus the sine of alpha sine of beta.
Again just as before because sine is an odd function and cosine is an even function the cosine of alpha minus beta equals the cosine of alpha times the cosine of beta plus the sine of alpha times the sine of beta.
Lastly if alpha equals beta then the cosine of alpha plus alpha equals the cosine of alpha times the cosine of alpha minus the sine of alpha.
And that is cosine of two times alpha which equals the cosine squared of alpha minus the sine squared of alpha.
We can further simplify this based on the fact that the sine squared of alpha plus the cosine squared of alpha equals one.
This identity can be rewritten in two ways.
We can get sine squared alpha on its own and cosine squared alpha on its own.
Substituting these values one by one into our double angle cosine function leaves the cosine of two times alpha equals the cosine squared of alpha minus one minus the cosine squared of alpha.
And that means that the cosine of two times an angle equals two times the cosine squared of that angle minus one.
And then the cosine of two times alpha equals one minus sine squared alpha minus sine squared alpha.
And that means that the cosine of two times an angle equals one minus two times the sine squared of that angle.
