Let us look at the sine function in relation to the addition and subtraction of two angles.
I have set up a scalene triangle not dissimilar to the ones you've seen before.
Triangle ABC has angles AB and C, none of which are 90 degrees, and sides AB and C opposing
the angles.
A line connects angle C with the side C in a perpendicular fashion at point P.
Line P divides the side C into two sections.
Appointing section AP a length of X leaves PB with a length of C minus X, so that summing
the two parts AP and PB equals X plus C minus X, which is C.
The line CP also divides angle C into two angles, named alpha and beta.
Let us see what information we can get from the three triangles ABC, CAP and CBP.
Firstly, by the sine relationship, the sine of C over C equals the sine of A over A and
that equals the sine of B over B.
Since angle C is divided into alpha plus beta, we have the sine of alpha plus beta over C
equals the sine of A over A equals the sine of B over B.
In triangle CAP, the sine of angle A is opposite over hypotenuse and thus the sine of A equals
H over B.
And the cosine of alpha is adjacent over hypotenuse and thus the cosine of alpha equals H over B.
We have H over B in common, so the sine of A equals the cosine of alpha.
Similarly, the sine of B equals H over A and the cosine of beta also equals H over A in triangle CBP.
And with H over A in common, the sine of B equals the cosine of beta.
Substituting these values into the sine relationship leaves us with the sine of alpha plus beta over C
equals the cosine of alpha over A and that equals the cosine of beta over B.
Getting the sine of alpha plus beta on its own, if we just consider the sine of alpha plus beta
over C equals the cosine of beta over B, leaves the sine of alpha plus beta equals C times
the cosine of beta over B.
We can expand C as C equals X plus C minus X.
Remember that we divided side C into two parts by the line CP.
Therefore the sine of alpha plus beta equals X plus C minus X times the cosine of beta over B.
If we expand the product on the right side, we get the sine of alpha plus beta equals X times
the cosine of beta over B plus C minus X times the cosine of beta over B.
Remember that earlier we showed that the cosine of beta over B equals the cosine of alpha over A.
If we substitute this equality into our last factor on the right, we have the sine of alpha
plus beta equals X times the cosine of beta over B plus C minus X times the sine of alpha over A.
Looking back at our triangle, we have in triangle CAP that the sine of alpha equals X over B.
When in triangle CBP, the sine of beta equals C minus X over A.
We note these terms in the equation we have so far.
Here's X over B and here's C minus X over A.
If we substitute them, we have a useful equation for the sine of the sum of angles, called the
sine identity of the sum of two angles.
the sine of alpha plus beta equals the sine of alpha times the cosine of beta, plus the
sine of beta times the cosine of alpha.
We can furthermore suppose that alpha equals beta.
We thus have the sine of alpha plus alpha equals the sine of alpha times the cosine of alpha,
plus the sine of alpha times the cosine of alpha.
This leaves us with another useful trigonometric identity.
The sine of two times an angle equals two times the sine of that angle times the cosine
of that angle.
You might learn later that the sine is a nod function, in other words, if x is the sine
of an angle, then the f of minus x equals minus the f of x, and that the cosine is an
even function, so that if x is the cosine of an angle, then the f of minus x equals
positive the f of x.
This means that the sine of negative beta equals negative the sine of beta, and that the cosine
of negative beta equals the cosine of beta.
Substituting negative beta for beta in our trigonometric identity leaves the sine identity
of the difference between two angles.
The sine of alpha minus beta equals the sine of alpha times the cosine of beta minus the
sine of beta times the cosine of alpha.
In the next video we will look at the cosine of the sum and difference of two angles.
All right.
All right.
