There are six trigonometric functions and they apply to right triangles only.
A right triangle is a triangle of which one angle is 90 degrees as we can see here.
The six trigonometric functions are expressed with respect to an angle of interest.
If this is the angle of interest, then this is the opposite side of the triangle.
And this is the adjacent side of the triangle.
If this is the right angle, then this is the hypotenuse of the triangle, across from the right angle.
If we changed our angle of interest to this angle, our opposite and adjacent sides change places.
Let us keep this angle as our angle of interest and define the six trigonometric functions.
We will also label the hypotenuse H, the adjacent side Y, and the opposite side X.
The sine of theta is opposite divided by hypotenuse, thus X over H.
The cosine of theta is adjacent divided by hypotenuse, thus Y over H.
And the tangent of theta is opposite divided by adjacent, thus X over Y.
These are the three main trigonometric functions.
They are also inverse functions of the above.
If we look at the sine relationship and we take the inverse of X over H, in other words H over X,
we name this new relationship the cosecant, which is hypotenuse over opposite, or 1 over the sine of theta.
H over Y, or hypotenuse divided by adjacent, is 1 over the cosine of theta, called the secant of theta.
Lastly, Y over X, or adjacent divided by opposite, is 1 over the tangent of theta, called the cotangent of theta.
These are the six trigonometric functions of a right triangle.
Through algebraic manipulations, there are various other triangle relationships, called trigonometric identities.
The first of these use the Pythagorean theorem, which in our triangle here, would be H squared equals X squared plus Y squared.
If sine theta is squared, then X over H is squared, and if cosine theta is squared, Y over H is squared.
If we add sine squared theta and cosine squared theta, we have X squared over H squared plus Y squared over H squared.
With simplification, we find X squared plus Y squared in the numerator.
Since we know that X squared plus Y squared equals H squared, from the Pythagorean theorem,
we have H squared over H squared, which is 1, the first trigonometric identity.
Through algebraic manipulation, we can also find another relationship between the sine and the cosine of an angle.
If we divide sine theta by cosine theta, we have X over H divided by Y over H, which leaves X over H times H over Y, and that is X over Y.
Looking back at our six main trigonometric functions, X over Y is the tangent of theta.
Thus the sine of theta divided by the cosine of theta is the tangent of theta.
Another identity requires further algebraic manipulation of the first trigonometric identity.
Sine squared theta plus cosine squared theta equals 1.
If we divide both sides of this equation by the cosine squared theta, we get sine squared theta over cosine squared theta,
plus cosine squared theta over cosine squared theta, equals 1 over the cosine squared theta.
Simplifying gives us the tangent squared theta plus 1, equals the secant squared theta.
