In this video we're going to talk about the arithmetic we can do with vectors.
Vectors are mathematical objects, just like normal numbers are, just like real numbers are.
They are mathematical objects and we can do arithmetic with a special kind of arithmetic.
And it's not very difficult to do, especially when we take it back to just the geometrical
interpretation really of what a vector is. Everything just falls out naturally and it's
really easy to understand. At the end we're just going to mention two specific kinds of arithmetics,
types of multiplication with vectors, we call those dot products and cross products. So we're
not going to go into too much depth, I just want you to understand that those two things exist
and what the implications are for vectors that are orthogonal or perpendicular to each other
and ones that are parallel to each other. So let's look at vector arithmetic. So let's then talk about
vector arithmetic. Now vector arithmetic, we've seen the intuition behind it. It is quite simple
if you keep in mind what we've seen up till now. I just want to put it on, as I said, on a bit of
firmer ground. So first of all let's start with something we cannot do. We have a vector here which
is in R2 and R2 and we have a vector which is in R3. That vector in R2 we don't know what a z component
is. That can be anything. So it's impossible to add it to a vector in R3. This is impossible. So it's
got to be component wise and they've got to have exactly the same, they've got to be in the same
space otherwise we can't do that. Vector addition is, as you can see here, it is commutative. It doesn't
matter in what order. If I want to walk some way I can go around the block one way or I can walk
around the block the other way. And you know these days getting out the house just go by and do some
shopping. If you live close by your shopping center just to add a bit of spice you can walk,
try and walk two different ways to the shop. Interesting times we live in. Of course if you
watch this way in the future hopefully this is not too bad in memory for you. So I have two vectors
there and you see the upside down. A here in mathematics if you've never seen that symbol
before that means for all. Just for all. So for all, well I write it as one word there because
I'm used to writing it in latex. Anyway, for all. So for all vectors A and B, elements of Rn,
so that's just a very short annotation for writing out everything. For all vectors,
for all vectors, and I list two generic ones A and B in Rn, so if it was R2 they both had to be in R2,
if it was in R3 they both had to be in R2. We have that the following holds, that A plus B
equals B plus A. It doesn't matter which, plus A. It doesn't matter which way around I walk,
whether I walked, and remember those two green ones, if I walk this way and that way,
it's the same as if I walk that way and that way. I'm going to end up in the same spot. No problem
there. And you see the two vectors that I have here. I've just named A sub 1, A sub 2, A sub 3,
B sub 1, B sub 2, B sub 3, and I just print them both to the screen. In actual fact, this is what this
function matrix screen was. Remember, I'm passing these as a list object. But if I want Mathematica or
the Wolfram language to print it out nicely to the screen as a column vector, I use the function
matrix form and I pass that list object to it. And there we have it. I have my two column vectors.
And if I add A and B, or if I add B and A, we inherit from the properties of real numbers. Real
numbers are under the binary operation, as we call it, of addition. It's commutative. 3 plus 4 equals 4
plus 3. Because we inherit the property from them, because they are all real numbers, that means the
whole vector is commutative. And we see there A plus B and B plus A. The Wolfram language was going
to change it around, so they look exactly the same. In many computer languages, we also have this idea
of Boolean logic. So you see a double equal sign there. It just asks the question, is the left hand
side equal to the right hand side? Is A plus B equal to B plus A? Yes, it's true. And it's using these ones
that I created up there. Remember, this is a computer variable name. It creates a little space in my
computer memory. Another little computer variable name, a little space in my memory. I add an object
to it. And in both instances, those are list objects that I add to it. So I'm just asking the question,
if I add those two list objects to each other, do I get exactly the same thing when I commute them? Yes,
indeed we have. Another thing is associativity. And it says for all vectors, for all vectors A, B,
and C in the same space, A plus B first and then added to C would be the same as adding A to the
addition of vectors B and C. So that associative property is there. And again, we inherit that,
element-wise, we inherit that from the fact that we're dealing with real numbers as far as the
elements or components are concerned. And I'm just showing you there how to do it. I've just added
another vector C there. And I show you A plus B and then plus C or then A plus B plus C. And we ask,
are they the same? So there's the one printed to the screen. There's no semicolon there. So it is going
to print to the screen. You see the second one and the two are exactly the same. So there's
the associative property holds. Then there's this idea of an additive identity vector.
Now an additive identity, we all know what that is for the reals. That's just the number zero. If
I take any real number and I add zero to it, I get that same number. And that zero is unique. There's
no other number in the reals that has the same property that when you add it to an arbitrary real
number, it gives you zero. There's only one. It gives you the same number, I should say.
It's only that. And we do get the same thing in vectors. There exists. This backwards E means
there exists. There exists. So there exists a zero subscript n. And we put the zero and we put an
underline over it because it says a vector. It's not just a single zero. And it is an element of rn.
So if it's r2, this is going to be 0, 0. And if it was r3, 0, 0, 0. And that's why we put the
underline over it. And n, the subscript n means it's got to have the same number of components as the
space that we're in. And then this little thing, sometimes people write colon or st for such that.
for all v elements in that same space, it follows that. That means it follows that.
One thing you've got to love is math notation. It's just absolutely fantastic. How succinct can we
write that? This looks absolutely fantastic. A whole sentence there just written so beautifully.
such that the zero vector plus v equals v.
And that's just it. There exists this. And now it is unique. In some courses that you take,
you'll have to prove all of this. And you'll have to prove that it is unique. There's no other vector
in that same space with that property, just as it's with zero with the reals. But anyway,
there exists a zero vector in this, in an element of this vector space, such that for all v, no matter
which one I take in that same space, it implies that zero plus v equals v. Why don't I also write v
plus zero equals v? Well, I don't have to, because I already showed the commutative property. It is now
implied. So we don't have to repeat it. So we're just building, building these properties one on top
of each other. Later on, we're going to see that this is actually the wrong way to go about it.
We're actually going to construct these axioms. And then we're going to have this group of elements,
and we're going to see if they obey those properties. And if they do, they are a member
of that structure that we create. So we're actually creating here what is called a vector space. And
vectors are elements, they are members, I should say, of vectors of this structure, this mathematical
structure called vector spaces. But anyway, now we're just listing them as properties.
And there I go on to show you, I have the zero vector there, which I just call O, O there. And
there we go. Show you to the screen, it's three zeros. And if I add that to anything, I'm just getting
that value back. So this is additive identity. Then quickly talk about scalar vector multiplication.
We've already seen that when we talked about unit vectors. So if I have a scalar, which is now just
going to be a simple real number, and I multiply it by a vector, I'm doing it element-wise.
In computer science, we'll call that broadcasting. I'm broadcasting the scalar two components in a
list. And so each one of those are multiplied by that. So you can well imagine that if I have a
vector and I multiply it by a scalar, if that's my vector, all I'm going to do if I multiply this by
three, I'm just going to make it three times longer. Because each component, this component becomes
three times longer, that component becomes three times longer. Intuitive sense, I told you, if you
remember those basics, it really is as simple as that. Which means if I take the norm of this new one,
and you can see the reasoning there because I can take out that c squared as a common denominator and
bring it outside. So the norm of a constant multiple of a vector is just going to be
that constant multiple times the norm of that vector. And that should make absolute intuitive
sense. Which also means I can multiply by negative one, and all I do then is I just change the direction
of a vector. Because if I have my components there, if I just change each component into its negative,
this is supposed to be x-axis and y-axis by the way, just flat on the screen, if I have this vector
pointing up towards the right, and I multiply each by the negative, each component, the x component just
becomes a negative, the y component just becomes its negative. So there we go, I have the two here,
and you can see there goes my zero line, and there, right about there, right about there, whatever.
Um, it's just the vectors pointing in opposite directions. They're pointing in the v direction
and the negative v direction. And all I do when I multiply by a scalar, which is negative one,
I point in exactly the opposite direction. The length is still the same, the norm stays the same,
that's always positive, because remember I'm adding a bunch of squares, so that's always going to be positive.
This idea of scalar multiples of negative one allows me to do vector subtraction, because vector
subtraction is just the addition of one that points in the other way. So v plus negative v,
intuitively, that must be the zero vector. No problems there. But it also means if I have two
vectors here, we have vector u and vector v, and if I want to say u minus v, all I do is I take this v,
and this vector v, and I multiply by the scalar negative one, so that I get this idea of u plus
the negative of v. That's exactly the same thing as u minus v. So I'm just going to keep my addition
there, and just, this was all multiplied by negative one, and if I do simple addition now,
I get zero to negative nine. Really is quite simple, and I just do it there in, in, in using the
Warframe language. There is this arithmetic that we can do with a vector, and that is
starting to get a bit special now, when we talk about the dot product, or the scalar product,
or the inner product of vectors, and that's one of the two ways in which we can multiply vectors.
We can multiply two vectors. So I've created two vectors there in rn, a, and b, and I'm going to take
their dot product. You're going to see the dot product gives me back a scalar, a single value.
So there we write a dot b. We put that dot in the middle. It's also going to be, now it's going to
be an element just of r, not of rn. It's just a real number. And what we do is component-wise
multiplication. So it's this a1 times b1. I've got a sub 1, b sub 1, and I add to that the next one,
a sub 2, b sub 2. So a sub 2, b sub 2, plus all the way to the end, a sub n and b sub n.
a sub n, b sub n. So that's the dot product, or the inner product, or the scalar product, whatever name,
and we can write it very succinctly there. It's just the sum over i equals 1 to n of ai times bi.
So I just do it component-wise, which shows you something else. They better both be in the same
space. Otherwise there's going to be some of these elements without friends, and we just can't have
that. So that's the dot product, unfortunately, in the Warframe language. There's a function for that dot,
and I just pass it a and b, and you see we get back the exact same thing. One other thing about the
Warframe language, it has a lot of shortcuts. So instead of writing dot, I can use the shorthand
notation. Let's put a full stop between that. So a full stop b, behind the scenes it is dot a comma b,
and behind the scenes there's obviously even more going on. But anyway, exactly the same thing is going on.
And that should tell us something in as much as, look at those two vectors. Let's just draw them
quickly on the screen there. Let's draw them on the screen. I've got there. Let's do that.
And there. So I've got 3 comma 5, 1, 2, 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. So it's about up there. So there's my one vector.
And let's draw the other one as negative 5. I'm going to try and be the same here. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5 there. And 3 up. 1, 2, 3 up. So it's about there. What do you note about these two vectors?
Well, they are at a right angle to each other. They're at a right angle to each other. And if I
now do the dot product, I'm going to get zero because one doesn't have components in the other
one's direction. If you can look at it as just these two separate vectors here. This one here
will have no components in this one's direction. And this one has no components in that one's
direction. And later on we'll see another equation for doing this. And it is going to involve a cosine
and the cosine of 90 degrees or pi over 2 radians is zero. Just a little tidbit there to wet the appetite.
But if you do the dot product there, remember what it is? It's component-wise multiplication and then
addition. So we have 3 times negative 5 and we add to that 5 and 3. And that's negative 15 plus 15.
And that equals zero. So this idea is very easy to find out if two vectors are perpendicular. We call it
orthogonal in linear algebra. Well, they're orthogonal if their dot product is zero. And that'll hold no
matter what space we're talking about. We've just done a flat plane here with the R2.
Very simple to do dot products. Now the vector cross product. That's a very interesting thing. It has
many applications. Applications in how to get the area of a parallelogram. It has an application, of course,
in physics, in physics quite a bit where we have this idea of the cross product of two vectors.
Now the cross product of two vectors. I'm just going to show you something very quickly here.
I put my ruler on the screen here. I'm just doing this with a ruler on the screen itself. Physical ruler.
So there I have my x, y, and z. My y, my x, up here is my z. If I have two vectors, say this vector here,
and that vector there, you can imagine, just think to yourself in the corner of your room, you've got two
vectors coming out the corner there. You can actually make a plane from those two. In other words, if they were
physical metal rods that you put out there, you can actually put a sheet of cardboard or whatever
on top of those two, lying on top of those two, they define a whole plane. And the interesting thing
about the cross product of two vectors is the resultant vector is going to be perpendicular to
that plane. So these two are in the same plane, and this one is going to stick out perpendicular to that
plane. And that's quite interesting. So it's going to be orthogonal to the plane made by those
additional two, those original two vectors. And here we can see, get some idea of the cross product
of two, of two vectors. And the way that I'm going to show you is actually a lot simpler. I'm going to
have two vectors, let's make them a and b. And I'm going to write a sub one, a sub two, and a sub three.
I'm going to have a vector b, b sub one, b sub two, and b sub three. And I'm going to take their cross
product. And the way that we're going to do that is we're going to incorporate i hat, j hat, and k hat,
and then we're going to write them a sub one, a sub two, a sub three. And do the same thing, b sub one,
b sub two, b sub three. And I'm going to take the determinant of that. I'm going to take the determinant
of this. Now you might wonder what a determinant is. And of course, we're going to devote a whole
section just on the determinants very quickly. I'm going to show you how to do it. And it's going
to make no sense whatsoever. But the way to do that would be, I'm going to go first in the i hat
direction, which means I'm going to close off the column i that i contains. So that's this a sub one,
b sub one, and the row that it contains. And I'm going to do this cross multiplication here. So I'm
going to say a two, b three, minus a three, b two. And that is going to go in the i hat direction.
Then I'm going to have a negative. And we'll see later why that is. So I'm going for j now. So I'm
going to close off the column that j is in and the row that j is in. And that leaves me with a one, b three.
So that's that a one and across from it is the b three, minus a three, b one. And that's going to be
in the j hat direction. And then a positive. Now I close off the column with a k and the row with a k.
That leaves me with a one, b two, minus a two, b one. And that's in the k hat direction. And that
vector there is going to be perpendicular to a and b. So we're not going to do any of the exercises here.
I just want for now this intuitive understanding that the cross product gives me a vector and
cross product gives me a vector and a dot product gives me a scalar. And I want you for now to
understand that if I take the dot product of two vectors that are perpendicular to each other,
it's got to be zero. And the cross product, think about the cross product. What about two
vectors that are parallel? So remember, if they're the same length in the same direction,
they're the same because I can bring their tails together so that they're both the same.
If you take the two rods in the corner of your room and you bring them out and they're right,
they're coincident. They're lying on top of each other. Can I still form a plane from those two?
No, I can't. Because if I put the cardboard on top of the rod, just laid on top,
cut somehow so it fits nicely in the corner there. I can swivel it over that rod this way and that way,
which means I can form infinitely many planes with those two. So if I can do that,
how can I find a vector that's perpendicular to that plane if I have no idea of what the plane is?
So this gives us an idea that if I have two vectors and the angle between them is zero,
then what is that going to mean for the cross product, which has to be perpendicular to that?
Well, it's going to be zero, isn't it? So intuitively, we have this idea of the dot product,
how that can help us to determine where the two vectors are perpendicular, and the cross product,
which is going to help us to determine if two vectors point in the same direction,
the angle is zero between them. So a very gentle introduction. The normal arithmetic is very,
very easy. And then this idea of the dot product and cross product, you know that it exists now,
and that's all we have to do now. We know that it exists. And then this idea of vectors being
perpendicular or vectors being parallel.
