The thyroid is a brownish red gland that sits in the front of your windpipe just underneath your Adam's apple.
It produces an essential hormone called thyroid hormone that controls most aspects of your metabolism.
It is not surprising then that diseases of this gland can affect so much of your life.
My name is Jean Klopp and I am a specialist surgeon with a specific interest in glandular disease.
Feel free to use these videos and my website to learn more about your thyroid.
If at any time you are concerned about your thyroid, please visit your healthcare professional for consultation.
In this video I will discuss the underactive thyroid gland,
looking at the various symptoms that you may suffer from because of this underactivity called hypothyroidism
and how I might diagnose the specific cause and what treatments are available.
Because thyroid hormone controls so many systems in your body,
the symptoms you may suffer from are varied and include fatigue, low energy levels, tiredness, weight gain and memory changes.
Let me discuss nutrition and metabolism first as this is of most concern to many patients.
With an underactive thyroid you can expect your body's metabolic rate to slow down and your oxygen consumption to decrease.
Because your metabolic rate is slow, you do not generate heat and may suffer from cold intolerance.
Even though you might start eating less than your family, friends or colleagues,
you will gain weight because of water and salt retention and the accumulation of fat.
This last fact is because the breakdown of fats are reduced significantly.
Unfortunately this means your cholesterol level rises too.
This brings us to your cardiovascular system.
Your exercise ability will be near zero as your heart rate cannot respond to any increase in demand.
A rise in blood pressure is common and together with a rise in cholesterol levels,
this puts you at risk for more serious heart disease.
Next up is your external appearance and this may suffer because of the lack of thyroid hormones.
Your skin may become dry and pale and you may feel quite puffy.
Your hair will lose a lot of its volume and become brittle.
As far as your nervous system is concerned, many patients suffer from sleepiness and a general slowing of thought processes.
Many other organ systems are affected and complaints of constipation, menstrual abnormalities and even difficulty in falling pregnant are common complaints.
If you consider that you may be suffering from any of the above mentioned symptoms, your doctor should take a thorough history and perform a full physical examination.
And this brings us to confirming that an underactive thyroid is the cause of these symptoms.
Most important of these is a simple blood test where the levels of two thyroid hormones called T3 and T4 will be measured,
as well as a hormone secreted by your brain that regulates the thyroid called TSH.
It is important to add this last test as it may be the first and only abnormality that develops.
If this is the case and it is raised, you suffer from what we call subclinical hypothyroidism.
This means your thyroid is still hanging in there, but you should go for regular follow-up blood tests,
as you are at a great risk for developing an underactive thyroid and may even already have mild forms of some of the symptoms mentioned above.
Once hypothyroidism is confirmed by a blood test, the next step is to find out why.
This involves other blood tests, but because many diseases are known for a changing picture over time,
it is important not to jump to an immediate diagnosis.
Your doctor should take his or her time and see you over the next few months,
re-evaluating your blood tests before confirming a final diagnosis,
as there are some situations in which your thyroid function may return to normal and treatment may not be required.
The vast majority of patients will require treatment though, to prevent all the complications due to an underactive thyroid.
This involves taking thyroid hormone in tablet form.
You will be commenced on a starting dose, but this dose is just an educated guess.
It is very important that you realize that every individual is different and will need a dose specific to them.
This can only be done properly if your blood levels, of especially the regulating hormone TSH,
is measured periodically over the next few months of treatment.
Your doctor should aim to keep the levels of TSH within normal limits.
Even more important is the fact that the residual function in your thyroid may change over time,
and you may have to take a higher dose as the years go by.
It is thus important that once your hormone levels stabilize on treatment,
you see your doctor regularly for a check-up and blood tests,
to confirm that your body is getting the essential correct dose of thyroid hormone.
In future videos I will discuss some of the common causes of an underactive thyroid,
such as Hashimoto's disease.
Thank you.
Thank you.
