In this short lesson I want to talk about Project Jupyter.
Now we have IPython which is a specific version of Python.
It is for interactive computing.
Now we can use IPython just normally in a command line interface
but we are going to use it in a notebook format.
Now it used to be called the IPython Notebook
seeing that it was specifically developed or at least initially developed for IPython
but the notebook or the project behind the notebook has really expanded to include
quite a few other programming languages as well.
Therefore the name was changed to Jupyter that is with a Y and you can see it there.
So when you install the Jupyter Notebooks, when you install IPython
let's call it Python for that matter
we still go to IPython.org and we are still going to click on install.
This is what is going to pop up now
and what you really want to do is just to say that I am a new user.
New to Python and Jupyter.
And still there we find Anaconda just as we had before.
Anaconda is the installation that we are going to use.
It really contains IPython, it contains Project Jupyter
and it contains a lot of added packages that we are going to use in this course.
So if we click on Anaconda we will see that page open from Continuum Analytics
and there we see Anaconda for Windows you can see there
and we also get for Mac OS and for Linux.
We are going to use Python version 3.
It is now up to version 3.5
and depending on your computer it is either going to be a 64-bit or 32-bit graphic installer.
That is what you want to click on and that is what you are going to install.
Now that installation will run automatically depending on your operating system
and once it is installed this is what we are going to get up to.
This is a console.
We just call it terminal in Mac OS.
It is called the command line in Windows.
And if we want to update our installation once it is installed
Conda is the command we are looking for.
We can say Conda update Conda.
That will just update Conda
Conda which is what manages all these packages for us.
So every now and again run that.
We see I am up to date.
No problems there.
And then Conda update Anaconda
and that will update most of the packages that is installed.
Please remember also though to update Jupiter.
Jupiter.
And it is spelled with a Y.
Now initially I think it started off by all the names.
So J-U was for Julia.
P-Y for Python.
And lots of other languages in there as well.
So project Jupiter.
So just update Jupiter as well.
And there we have it.
Now to start Python.
To start the program off as we are going to use in most of this course.
We just type in Jupyter Notebook.
Jupyter Notebook.
There we go.
That is how we are going to launch.
So you have to find the terminal in Mac OS.
The terminal in your Linux operating system.
Or the command line program in Windows.
Once that opens up.
Use the Conda update Conda.
Conda update Anaconda.
And Conda update Jupyter.
Every now and again.
Just to keep all your packages up to date.
And then when you want to run your IPython installation.
The way that we are going to use it.
In a notebook.
In the browser.
We type Jupyter Notebook.
If we hit return or enter.
That launches Jupyter Notebook.
Almost exactly the same as the old IPython notebooks.
That you will see throughout this course.
All the files on Github though.
Have been updated.
For Jupyter.
So when you download the newest version of Anaconda.
That contains IPython.
That contains all the packages.
That contains Jupyter.
To run in your browser here.
All those files will work.
So.
Project Jupyter.
Give it a download.
