In this video I want to show you how to upload a spreadsheet file from your local system into the
Wolfram Cloud and then how to access it inside of a notebook. So I'm on the Wolfram Cloud here,
you can see I'm using Wolfram 1 but you can be using Wolfram Cloud or Programming Lab,
does not matter. And on the top right here I've clicked on cloud files. If I click on cloud files
I can actually see my home directory and what's inside of it. It's very easy to create a new folder
and I would suggest that you do create a new folder to save all your work in. And on the little red
drop down arrow there we can see new folders. You can create a new folder and you can name that folder.
So I've already done so and here it is Coursera. I'm going to double click on it and you can see
there's some files in there. But I want to upload a CSV file, a comma separated value spreadsheet file
into this folder. So if I click on this drop down here we can see from the bottom to the top I'm in
my home folder and Coursera is a subfolder inside of that. On the left here, to the left of this little
red box, there's an upward facing arrow and if I hover over that button it says upload files.
And that's what I want to do. I want to upload a file from my local system into the Wolfram
Cloud. I've clicked on that and I've navigated to my desktop which is where I've saved this file
cloud.csv. So I'm going to click on it and say open. And just like that the file is uploaded and
we can actually see it here cloud.csv. Now in this exact same folder, this Coursera subfolder,
I'm going to create a new notebook. And I can either use this red drop down and say new notebook or just
the shortcut there. I can click on that and say new notebook. So let's increase the screen size here
so we can see everything. So the first thing we want to do is to name this new notebook. So I'm
going to click on that and I'm going to call it cloud. But you see what has happened. Even though
if I go to cloud files, we are inside of this Coursera directory on the right hand side,
it will be saved in the home directory. So it's going to default to that and you have to say
choose another directory. And now I can double click on Coursera again and click choose. It'll
now be in the Coursera sub directory of the home directory or folder. And that is where my data
file is. And that's exactly what I want. So now I can click the little check mark there. The file has
been renamed. And there we go. We can actually see it cloud.nb. Now the first thing we have to do is
exactly the same as in the desktop version. We have to say set directory. We can click on that
and we're going to set it to the notebook directory. The notebook directory. There are no arguments there
and I'm going to close the square brackets. I'm not going to put a semicolon because I want to show you
what the directory structure actually looks like. And then you can see it. It's something that we
can't really make any sense of. But we do know now that our CSV file is in the subfolder or subdirectory
and our notebook is in the subfolder or subdirectory. And we've actually set the directory. Now we can give
our data set a name. I'm going to call my data and I'm going to say semantic import. Before we could not
use semantic import in the cloud, we can now do so. And that is wonderful because we don't have to work
with a normal import and do all sorts of things to create a data set from a normal import. So I'm just
going to now say cloud.csv. That was, remember, the name of our CSV file. And because we've set the
directory, it's not going to look anywhere else. It's only going to look in the Coursera subdirectory.
Shift Enter, Shift Return. And it's going to take a little bit and it's going to import the CSV file
for us as a data set object. And there we can see the data set object beautifully displayed to the
screen there. And now it's very easy for us to do some descriptive statistics. For instance, we see an
age column there. Let's look at what the mean or average age. I want that expressed as a numerical value
or decimal value. Let's just use the square bracket notation for that. I'm going to say data. That's my
data object. And I want the mean comma of what column? Well, I want the age column. And just like
that, I see that the mean age is 47.6579 years. So there you go. Just to recap, when you are inside of
the Wolfram Cloud, create a new folder. And you do all of that by being in the cloud files up here.
Let me click off of it. Let me click back on it on the top right here. And that's going to show the
structure. Remember where you are. You can also use these three little lines here. And that will show
you all your folders. Remember always to go to the home directory. And then you can create a new folder
by this little drop down there. New folder. You can name your folder. If it's named, go to it by double
clicking. And this is where you're going to do your upload. Navigate to your folder structure on your
computer. Find that file and hit the upload. And it's going to upload inside of your subfold or
subdirectory here. When you create a new notebook, though, remember to name it. And remember to specify
where it has to be saved. And save it in that exact same folder or directory in which you have your
comma-separated values file. And that's it. It makes it very easy to use. Last thing, though,
always, always remember to set the directory to the notebook directory. I hope that's helped
you. Let me know in the comment section if there are any other questions or indeed questions
about anything in the course.
