Good quality audio is very important to a video lecture. It is often said that one
can get away with with poor visuals but when the audio is poor it really the
whole product looks amateurish. Now many of the video recording equipment whether
you use the laptop with a webcam or whether you use some video camera have
the ability to record audio together with a video but in the vast majority of
cases this audio is quite poor and you can hear that by the fact that there's a
lot of hums and hisses in the background and it can be difficult to get rid of
these. Some recording devices some laptops specifically Apple laptops actually have
quite good audio recording but you can certainly hear the difference between
recording on a device such as that versus some proper audio equipment and proper
audio equipment can cost a lot of money and in the vast majority of cases it's
just not possible to do. The other problem is the environment in which the
recording takes place. Now I do most of my recordings in my study at home which is
unfortunately a noisy place and there's very little I can do to cut down that
noise and that I just have to accept but it's important to try and record in a as
quiet an environment as possible and for obvious reasons of not being a proper
studio to have heavy curtains or and or heavy carpet just to absorb those sounds,
extraneous sounds. Now the cheapest way to try and do a bit of proper audio
recording is to buy a field microphone such as this. Now it can record very high
quality audio and is very convenient to carry around. Now they are intermediate in
price by that I mean probably depends on what country you buy it in. In South Africa
it's it's about the equivalent of two hundred dollars which is a bit more than
you might find it in in in certain other countries but certainly it has the
ability to record very high quality high bitrate audio in various channels and you
can also set its direction if it just captures in a very narrow direction in
front of it or from a very wide direction and it makes for a much better
sounding audio quality. Comes with a SD card a memory card which you can insert
and it also has this space for a line input in other words you can put a
little lapel microphone in it with the unit actually just in in your pocket so
for mobile recordings in front of a blackboard this would be ideal. Of course
there's one drawback to recording this type of audio in that there might be
synchronization issues in other words you will have to enter this file this audio
file you have to download it to your computer import into your linear and non-linear
editor and you have to lip sync the lip movements or whatever the case might be to
the audio and that means you might have to drag it a bit forward a bit back a bit
back until you get proper syncing. More expensive equipment can obviously do this
for you where there is communication between the video and audio equipment to do
this for you. One excellent way of doing this is just to simply start with a loud
clap of the hands for instance and if that is caught on video and on the sound
and you can look at the waveforms of the sound file as you import it if it's imported into
the non-linear editor you can sync up those too. So think about investing in a proper some
form of proper audio equipment and that can really increase the value or the perceived value
of the video tutorials.
