So we've had this introductory look at vectors and matrices, then we delved in slightly deeper
into matrices, let's delve slightly deeper into vectors and we'll keep on going, we'll
keep on going.
And the thing I want to talk to you about is vector spaces and vector subspaces.
For a moment though I want you just to ignore the word vector.
And I just want us to concentrate on spaces and subspaces.
So spaces, imagine I take all the real numbers in the plane.
So I only have two axes, x and y, any point there can be written as this x and y, this
column vector.
So that whole plane, Cartesian plane and x and y coordinate system, they make up a space.
And we call it a vector space because any point in there, from the origin to that point, is
a vector and that's a vector space.
I can bring up our three, remember when we do this, superscript notation and that would
be three dimensional space.
And I just, before we get to that, let's just carry on.
I can, I can have our four as well.
And that just means I have this, and usually when it gets larger we'll rather write x sub
1, x sub 2, x sub 3 and x sub 4, that will be this arbitrary vector in 4, 4 space.
So we use these terms sometimes, so that will be 4 space, 4 dimensional space, 4 space, we
don't want to use dimension because that refers just to space itself.
Because I want to show you, and that's why I don't want you to use the word vectors, just
the spaces, because if I take all matrices that are 2 by 2 matrices, that is a space.
I'm not talking about the column view of these as column vectors, I'm talking about the whole
metric, the whole matrix, that can be seen as a space, a vector space, okay?
We put the, add the word vector there.
If I look at all functions, all functions, if they can be trigonometric functions, polynomial
functions, doesn't matter, they have function, all the functions form a space.
And something that forms a space obey these eight properties, so I have something and they
obey these eight properties, and we'll get to them, they form a space.
And a space is made up of subspaces.
Now the first subspace that you might make a mistake with, so just be aware, is R2 is not
a subspace of R3.
Now subspace is, as I said, it's any part of that space that will still have, you know,
these properties hold.
So, if I were just to look at, let's just do three-dimensional space.
Three-dimensional space X, Y, and Z, and they're mutually orthogonal there, so there's the Z pointing
out towards you as opposed to down, X pointing towards you as opposed to in the board there.
You can't draw in a flat board three-dimensional space properly, not to mention four and five-dimensional
space, but this notation makes it very simple to deal with very large dimensional spaces.
Anyway, if I take any plane, so a flat sheet of paper, and it goes through the origin, and
I have it anywhere in space.
It's got to go through the origin, otherwise some of these properties won't hold.
So, it's got to go through zero, zero, zero.
Then that is a subspace, and if I have a vector in that subspace and another vector in that
subspace, if I add them, the resultant will still be in that subspace, which is the addition
is one of those properties.
That will still be in one of those subspaces.
Just one, as I say, one little trick.
Remember, the two-dimensional, which in this instance is this flat part lying here, the
Cartesian plane is not a subspace of three-dimensional space.
Because a vector in two-dimensional space will look like this, the plane in three-dimensional
space would look like this, x, y is zero.
It has three components.
So the plane, the Cartesian x, y plane is not a subspace of R3, just remember that.
And neither of R4 or whatever, because that will be another zero.
A subspace of this might be all the diagonal matrices, where I have values there, but these
values are all zeros along the main diagonal.
Those would all be a subspace for any value there and there, that will be a subspace of
all two-by-two matrices.
And if I only look at, say for instance, polynomials, that will be a subspace of the vector space of
all functions.
So once again, be wary of that word vector.
But I think you get a good idea of what a space is and what a subspace is.
So I have something and I want to see if it is a vector space.
And if it is a vector space, I write this with a capital V and I'm going to, so that's
an arbitrary one.
It can be this, it can be matrices, it can be polynomials, doesn't matter what it is.
And I'm going to take two arbitrary vectors in that vector space.
So any two polynomials or any two functions and I have any two two-by-two matrices or whatever,
and we see that the addition on them, so I take two and I add them to each other, that will commute.
So V subscript i, V subscript j, V subscript j, V subscript i.
Also, if I have three of them, any arbitrary three, and I add them, there's this associative
property under addition.
There's also this zero vector, such as if I add it to any of the vectors in my vector
space, it'll be same as V plus zero and it'll still be V. Which brings us to a very important
space which is actually just this zero vector space, which is just zero.
And all of these just being zero.
All of those just being zero.
Or a function that says zero equals zero.
It's all just zeros.
And together with that, I suppose, goes eight here, that there's this unique inverse element
that if under addition I land up with the zero vector.
That's easy enough to see.
And then there's the scalar, which is one, and this is where multiplication comes in.
One times that vector, scalar times that vector, and the scalar being one, just gives me back
the vector.
If I take two arbitrary scalars, c1 and c2, I multiply them and then multiply that by the vector,
that would be the same as taking one of them, multiplying by the vector, and taking that
product and multiplying it by the scalar as well.
And they'll, you know, so there's also that association.
There's also commutivity because I can change these two around.
Then there's this arbitrary scalar, c, such as if I add two of them and then multiply by
c would be to add, to multiply c by each one of them and adding that product.
And then if I have two arbitrary scalars, c sub 1, c sub 2, I add them and then multiply
would be the same as the additional multiplication and then additions.
So for any of these, remember, remember a few things.
That's not the subspace of that, that's a type of vector space, that's a type of vector
space, that's a type of vector space, there's the subspace, the subspace for here at least
must go through zero and very importantly that we have these eight properties that must hold
to make something a vector space.
