So yesterday we discussed the vector inner product, the inner product between two vectors.
Today let's look at the other form of vector multiplication that is the cross product.
Now unlike the inner product which had a result in scalar, the vector product or the cross
product is going to have another vector as its solution.
You might remember from physics where you had say r cross f, the position vector.
In that direction, the force vector in that direction and then by the right hand rule,
the torque vector was pointing in that direction.
So it is another vector and no matter in which direction the two vectors point, they'll always
form a plane and the resultant vector will be orthogonal or perpendicular to those two.
To do the cross product, I have to just talk about something which we haven't discussed
before and it's coming in a future lecture and that's called the determinant.
I just want to show you the determinant.
If I have a vector, 2 by 2 vector and a matrix I should say, 2 by 2 matrix.
So row 1, column 1, row 1, column 2, row 2, column 1, row 2, column 2.
The determinant of A written like that is just going to be, it's got to be a square matrix
and for 2 by 2, it's easy as it gets 3 by 3, it gets a lot harder and we just do these
diagonals.
So it's going to be the product A1, 1 times this one, A2, 1 minus the product of these two.
Done.
Get the order the wrong way around, A1, 2 and A2, 1.
So if I were to have a matrix and that matrix was 3, 2, 4, 1, the determinant of that matrix
A is going to be 3 minus 8, that's negative 5.
That way multiplication minus this way multiplication.
So just remember that's the determinant and we are going to discuss the determinant coming
up.
So let's have two vectors.
I have my vector V and let's make that 3 and 2 and I have my vector W and my vector
W is say 2 and 2.
So if I were just to look at that 1, 2, 3, x and 1, 2, so that one's going to be 3, 2.
That's not going to be my vector V and 2, 2, it's going to be my vector W.
So right hand rule V and then W, the resultant cross product is going to point straight at
you.
Look if I do W times V, it points in that direction.
These do not commute, the cross product of a vector does not commute.
These two lie in the plane so it's going to come out in this direction.
There's one more thing that I just want to remind you of, we spoke about it and that is
the unit vectors.
If I have three axes, mutually perpendicular, let's make that i, let's make that x, let's
make that y and let's make that z.
And if I let these little unit vectors go along these and they are mutually orthogonal, we usually
call this i hat, j hat and k hat or e sub x or e sub i and e sub j, there's various notations
for this.
So here it is these unit vectors, so this vector here, if I put another zero there and another
zero there, it's still the same, exactly the same direction, three in the i hat direction,
so three times this plus two times that is still going to be this very same vector V here,
and then zero in the z direction.
So even if I had, you know, drawn it a different way so that z comes out here towards you, it's
still going to be zero on this z direction.
And the way that we're going to do this vector multiplication, or the vector multiplication
as far as cross products are concerned, we're going to have an i hat, a j hat and a k hat,
and my first vector was three in the i hat direction, two in the j hat direction, zero in the k hat direction,
and it was going to be two two zero for that one, nice little three by three matrix.
And I'm going to use this idea of determinants, and I'm not going to get the determinant of the three by three matrix,
but I'm going to use the determinant.
One thing that I just want to remember is plus, minus, plus, and if it carried on to higher dimension, plus, minus, plus, minus, you'll see now.
Because I want to do something in the i hat direction, and that's always going to be plus,
then there's going to be minus something in the j hat direction, and then plus something in the k hat direction.
And what I do to get this i hat direction is I'm going to close off the row that contains i, and the column that contains i,
and I'm left with this little two by two matrix, and I get its determinant, zero minus zero is zero.
So for the j hat, I remember the minus that must be out there.
It's that row and that column, and I'm left with three times zero and zero times two.
So zero minus zero, zero, and then for the k, I close off the k, and I close off the column of the k,
and I'm left with this little two by two matrix, so I have six minus four is two.
So v cross w is going to equal zero, zero, two.
There we go, in that order, and if I were to swap those two around,
I'm not going to get the same, I'm not going to get the same solution.
If it's w cross v, it's going to be zero, zero, minus two, just going to be into the board.
So any kind of vector that you do, I mean, hopefully in your exams, you'll only get these
multiplication of vectors that are in three dimensions.
So as I say, if this was a four, and that was a one, that would be a four, that would be a one,
and I would have some values there. But that's the easy way to do a vector cross product.
Remember to put those extra zeros in if they just lie in two dimensions,
but remember they're actually in three-dimensional space, there's going to be one coming out.
The result at least. Remember that they do not commute,
and remember this easy way of doing it if you have to do it with pencil and paper.
Let's go to Mathematica, and I'll show you how easy it is to do the cross product over there.
So let's look at the cross product between two vectors. Let's use the proper function,
which is cross. So I'm just going to do the cross product, and I'm going to pass my two vectors.
Let's keep it in a two-dimensional space, 3,2, but remember the solution is going to be in three
directions. So I've got to put that extra zero there. And the other one is 2,2, and I put my extra zero
for the z-axis. And I close that, and indeed I see zero zero two. So that is going to represent
this orthogonal vector. Let's just do that in the other direction. Let's just show, let's just make
sure that we find at least one example where, to show that it doesn't commute, and then we know
the cross product of vectors do not commute. So it's two comma two comma zero for the one, and the other
one is three comma two comma zero, and there we go, and we see the solution, the negative two. So same
magnitude but pointing in the opposite direction. So the vector cross product does not commute. Now
just to show you there is another way to go about this. I'm just going to have three comma two comma zero,
and then I can hold down the escape key, and then write cross and escape key again, and I get this tiny
little cross that is not the same as multiplication. So it's not the star eight, the shift eight to get
the star that is different. So two comma two comma zero, there we go, and I get the same solution zero
zero two. So create your vectors. It's got to be in the same space, and you've got to add the extra zero
because whatever vector you create, it's going to be orthogonal to that, and you can go up to higher,
much higher dimensional space as well. So very easy in Mathematica to get a vector cross.
So it's a whereas product.
