In this video I want to show you how to start thinking about visualizing complex
valued functions. Now a complex variable, a complex number, sits on the argand
diagram which is in two-dimensional space. I can plot it on a flat surface but
now I want to map it in my function to another complex plane. That's also in
two dimensions so if I really want to plot this I need four dimensions and I
cannot do that. So how do we start thinking about plotting complex valued
functions? So I've opened my notebook visualizing complex valued functions
and we're going to do that for a single variable. So you can see the three things
that I want to discuss, the real valued functions of a single variable, just to
remind ourselves this is a bit of school algebra and how we how we plotted those
single variable real valued functions. And then I'm going to look at only two
complex functions, the complex conjugate, so I'm going to say that the f of z equals
z bar, and then the square of the complex number, so f of z equals z squared. It's only
those two very simple functions because they're going to give us good intuition
about how to plot and think about the plots of these functions. So let's just go back
to school a bit and think about a function. We had a function of a single variable and
that variable was usually denoted by a low case x. It's quite a common thing to do for
real valued variables and there's some function of x. You plug in a value of x
and out pops another value of x and that value that pops out, if I can use such
such terms, would be another variable and we just call that y. So I plug in x and I
get y, but I do understand that this value y is actually the output of my function f of
x. So a better way of thinking about this is to think in terms of mapping. You must
have heard that the function is a map. So it's going to map from one set to another
set and here usually we're talking about two ordered sets and usually these two
ordered sets are exactly the same. They're both the set of real numbers. So in the
second line there we can see I'm saying f, this function that I have maps the set x
to the set y and in our instance both of these sets are going to be real numbers. So y
equals x squared, y equals x cubed, y equals some polynomial. It is the input value x that
is going to be a specific real number and the output is going to be a real number. So
I'm mapping from the reals to the reals. I'm mapping from one set to the other set. That's
what my function is doing. So in the third line I've just replaced those x and y's with
the two actual sets that we're dealing with being exactly the same set. So my function f
maps the real numbers to the real numbers. And then the final line you can see what this
function actually really does. It takes little x from the set uppercase x and it maps that
to little y which is just another element of y. So this is a much better way of thinking
about functions as this mapping from a set onto itself or to itself and or to another set in
some cases. So I don't want to go into the detail of this mapping. There are different
kinds of these maps, these functions. We have to think about them being one-to-one, onto,
etc. We don't want to get into that. Let's just think about plotting these things. So we
are very used to plotting a function on a Cartesian plane. I have two mutually perpendicular axes.
But think about that. Each one of those axes are just a set of real numbers. On my whole x-axis
from negative infinity to positive infinity, that's all the set of real numbers. On my y-axis,
I have a set of real numbers. And what we're trying to show here is how we map from an element
in the one set to an element of the other set. It just so happens that they're both real numbers.
So the one that I'm choosing here is this function that takes x, cubes it, and that is the mapping to y.
So both all the possible values that x can take, that is a set, the set of real numbers. All the
possible values that y can take is also a set of the real numbers. So I'm mapping from the real numbers
to the real numbers. You give me one specific real number, I'm going to map it to another real number.
So I'm going to create that function. I'm using the Wolfram language, of course. So I'm just creating
that function f of x equals x cubed. That's what the code would look like. What I'm more interested in
is just plotting this thing, the way that we would plot it at school. And so if you look closely, my
horizontal axis, that's all my x values. But I've actually said that's x an element of the set x,
and y is an element of the set y. So all the values are there, I want you to think about these are two
sets, two sets of real numbers. Well, that's a single set. And I'm going to map from one to the other.
And a very convenient way of doing that is just putting these two sets perpendicular to each other.
And that's exactly in this visualization what we do. And so I've parameterized this actually. So if I,
you know, if I drag it along, we can see y equals x cubed, at least on this domain, this interval that
I've chosen. And this is a good representation in as much as if I plug in x, a value on my one set x,
it's going to map to, for instance, two, that's going to map to the number eight, it's going to map to the
number eight. And so it's a mapping from the real numbers to the real numbers, I take one number in
the set, and I map it to another number. And that's very convenient when we plot these two sets as two
perpendicular lines. But who's to say that's what we have to do? Because that's not what is really
happening. Why are these sets perpendicular to each other? Think about that for a moment. I mean,
these are just two sets, and I'm taking the number two, and I'm mapping it to the number eight,
I would take the number one, and that would map to the number one, I would take the number zero,
it maps to the number zero. So I've got a number in one set, and it's going to map to a number in
a different set, just so happens that, again, they both real. And so let's just think about plotting
this in a different way by thinking about, you know, plotting this as a map. And so I've got two
versions of that for you here, you can see as my blue marker, I'm going to have my input value x from my
set x. And on my output, I'm going to have y, which is an element of another set. Again,
both x and y are real numbers. I think you get that by now. And as I change my input value x,
as you can see, x is going towards one. And of course, if you cube anything that is between zero
and one, you're going to get a smaller value. So this the orange marker is sort of lagging behind.
Once we get to one, they're the same because one maps to one. And then, you know, obviously,
it's going to outpace the y value is going to outpace the the x value. So if I get to two,
then of course, the y value is going to be eight. But here is a for me a better way of thinking about
this as a map by mapping the value of x to the of the set x to a value in the set y.
So let's plot this in a different way. Instead of it all being on the same axis. Now I'm clearly
showing that these are two sets, two sets of real numbers. And again, if I change the value of x,
I can see the change happening in the other sets are mapping a value in the one set to a value on
the other set. So look at that when the input is two for x, my output is eight on the y. So the of
course, the intervals are different for these two. So you just have to be cognizant of that. But look at
that I change, I'm mapping one value in a set to a value in another set. And this is the way that we
want to think about this, because we run into a bit of a problem where we want to plot complex
valued functions. If you think about it, if I go back just to our original plot right there
of y equals x cubed, I've got a single variable. And if I wanted to plot it in this way, I need two
dimensions. If I had a two variable function, z equals the f of x and y, I needed three dimensions.
I needed an x axis, y axis, and then a perpendicular z axis. And if I were to plot a function that has
three variables, f of w, for instance, the f of x, y and z equals w, now I'm in trouble. I cannot,
I don't have access to four dimensions when I want to plot something. And that is a problem for me.
So let's think about trying to plot or a map that goes from the set of complex numbers to the set of
complex numbers, some function x that maps the set of complex numbers to the set of complex numbers.
Now, it's two dimensional, a complex number, I can plot it on the R-Gantt diagram. And I want to
map that to something that's also on a plane, another R-Gantt diagram, two and two is four.
I would need four dimensions to plot this. And that's, of course, that's impossible. So let's
have a look at what we can, what we can do. So the first function that I want to do is just the
function that just turns a complex number into its complex conjugate. And that's what I have there.
The f, it's a function, a map of z, it turns z into z bar, where z is an element of the complex
number, z equals x plus iy. I'm just being pedantic about this. And x and y, of course,
are real numbers, the real part and the imaginary part of this complex number.
So I want to create this function. This function takes in my imaginary part, my real part, my real
part, my imaginary part, and it turns that into the conjugate. So x plus iy will become x minus iy.
And so I'm going to create that function. And let's have a look at visualizing this. So
I want to start by visualizing it as a specific complex number. So let's have a look at this.
I need access to four dimensions, which I don't have. So instead of that, I am just purely going
to plot the two argand diagrams. On the left hand side is my function. It's going to map the complex
numbers to the complex numbers. So on the left hand side is my z value, z equals x plus iy. And on
the right hand side, I have the function, the mapping, I'm mapping an input value to an output
value. So let's just change these things. And of course, if I change in this function, if I change the
real part, I'm going to get exactly the same on the on the function side. So if I just change the real
number, my x value, I'm just changing the real part in the function map, of course, if I can call it
that there's not going to be any change, it's going to map to exactly the same complex number. So if I
plug in this value, that will be one plus zero y, that's going to map to one plus zero y.
And let's just change the imaginary part though. Look what happens. As I change the real part, if it
goes towards the positive side of the imaginary axis, what happens on the function side, that imaginary
part goes towards negative infinity. And that's exactly what's happening. I'm mapping any input number
to any output number. Now it's impossible for me to create just a line graph of this because my input
is this whole plane, I have to color in this whole plane on both sides. Because my input is not only
on a line, my input lies on a whole plane, every point on this plane on the left hand side is a
complex number, I can plug any one of those numbers into my function. And it's got a map to
an element of the complex numbers on the right hand side. So that is sort of impossible thing to do,
I would need access to four dimensions, which I don't have. But I think this is a nice intuitive
way just to think where, where am I mapping every number on the left hand side, I'm mapping that to
the right hand side. And now I have two two dimensional planes. And now I can start thinking
about how I can generate this map. Now one way to do that is to think of a stream plot. So let's have a
quick look at that. And this is what the stream plot, it's just trying to show what happens
to a point in this plane. So I'm seeing that if I have a point, say up here in the first quadrant,
the arrow is trying to show me that what my function is going to do is it's going to send
that point down. And if the point is here in the bottom, the fourth quadrant is going to try and send it
straight up, look on the on the real axis, there's not going to be any change. I mean,
the x stays exactly where it is, there's sort of no change along, along that, that horizontal axis,
my real axis. Now we can also plot it in this in two dimension. And that's what I'm going to do
right here. And now we can sort of visualize this. Now, if I look at this plane on the real axis going
from negative two to two, on the imaginary axis going from negative two to two, every point there
is an impossible input to my function. And what this color is trying to show me, and of course,
it's not only the color, but how light and how dark it is, that's going to show me two different
things. So look at the legend on the left hand side, it's going to say you pick a point on here. So if I,
you know, pick the point one plus zero i would be around about there, and one plus one i would be
around about there. So if I look at one plus one i is over there, it's this kind of pinkish color.
So I sort of have to look at what would happen to the complex conjugate of that number. Now what's
going to happen, of course, the angle is going to change the principal angle, the principal argument,
that angle is going to change from a positive to a negative, because I am talking about negative and
negative pi, all the way to pi, that is going to be the domain of this, of this principal argument.
So if I look at this pinkish color, it's around about there. So I can see what it's going to map to
this one plus one i, if I apply if I as that as an input to my function, which is just the complex
conjugate, then it's got to be some negative angle. This one plus i is going to go down to
one negative i. So it's going to be down here. And then also, I can think about what the
what the modulus is going to be. And that modulus, you can see here on the grayscale here,
well, it's going to be a modulus of the square root of two. If you think about one plus one i,
what is its modulus? Well, it's one square, the square root of one squared plus one squared. That's
that's the square root of two. So here, it's, you know, you've got to kind of think,
what is this shade of gray that we're trying to depict there, which is a little bit difficult.
But you can kind of imagine that's what we're trying to do. So if you look very closely,
there you see it goes from zero up to infinity up there. And that's just telling us, well,
okay, the further away we go, obviously, the modulus is going to increase the further away from the
origin. And we eventually going to get to pure white. And, you know, as we get close and closer,
you know, we're going to, we sort of tending towards pure black there. So this two dimensional
image is trying to tell us, if I take some input value, and you've got to think where on the plane
it is, now I have to look at the color and the sort of shade of black to white, what the, what the,
the principal argument is going to be, and what the modulus is going to be. So can we do slightly
better? Yeah, we can do, we can certainly do this in three dimension. And so what we're using the
third dimension for, as you can see here, I've written the word modulus there. So now,
if I just look at the colors, the color is going to give me the principal argument. And we see we go
from on our interval from negative pi, all the way up to pi. That is how we think about the,
the principal argument. And so that's still going to be the color. So if I look at on this real axis,
one is right there. If I look at the imaginary axis, one is right there. So again, that color right
there is kind of pinkish. And so if I sort of, well, I should say more, more than just that,
but I'm going to go from that angle. And now I've got to look on my color chart to what angle is that
going to be. And now the height, the z axis now is, is now becomes my, my modulus. And so now we can
see, as we move, move further away from the origin, of course, the modulus is going to increase.
And there's going to be no difference in the modulus for the input value z, and the output
value, the complex conjugate of z. So that's all the ways that we can think about visualizing what
is happening to this function. So let's take another very simple function, we're taking the square root
of a, or the square at least of a complex number. So I'm taking any complex number, and I'm squaring that.
So f of z maps z to z squared. And I'm just going to save that function so that I can plot it. That's
how you would do that. So just let's visualize this when it comes to just looking at the individual
numbers. Now, there we go on the left hand side, I have my input value. So any value z can go into
my function. And on the right hand side, the argand diagram, where is this z going to map to? This
function is doing this mapping. And now, let's increase the real part. And as you can see there,
when I get to one, one squared is one on the real axis. So that's not an issue. When I get to two,
of course, two squared is going to give me four. So we can clearly see the effect if I just, you know,
stay with the real numbers. That's exactly what we would expect. And look at that, if as soon as I go
into the negative, it goes back to the positive because I'm squaring. So just look as I go from
negative from the negative infinity side to the positive infinity side on the left hand side.
Look what happens. Look what happens on the on the right hand side. Of course, that's got to be non
negative all the time because I'm squaring. But now let's park this around about 1.0i. Let's start
changing the imaginary value. Look what happens now. Look what happens on the left hand side. I'm just
changing y, just the imaginary part. And look at that sort of parabola that is developing
on my mapping. See that parabola lying on its side? Yeah, of course you can see that. So let's
change this. Let's make this on the negative side, negative one that's still going to map to one.
And then let's see what happens. I have this parabola again right there. And so you can play with this and
you can see where every value where every value is going to map to. So let's change that a little
bit. Let's move that over there. And now you can see I still have this sort of idea of a of a parabola
lying there. Isn't that great? You can play with this. It gives you a real good intuition for where these
values are being mapped to. So let's have a look at this as a stream plot. And it's sort of trying to
give us an indication of where values are going to go. So this is not perfect. It's just trying to show
us, well, you know, a value out here is going to sort of try to try to do a parabola and not not
completely intuitive because it's not trying to show us where an exact value at that point where
it's going to end up to. This is giving us sort of this trend. So let's rather have a look at the
complex plot on two dimensional space. And now you can see things are a bit different. And now you can
really have to work out if I go to one point one plus one I, which is going to be about here,
I see that that argument, which is going to be pi over four, right there, it's going to go to
something that's kind of greenish. So I can see where that is going to go to as far as the angle
of this mapped value is going to be. And if I look at, you know, the sort of going from black
to white, this modulus, we can see it also gets lighter because the modulus is going to increase
as well, except, you know, if we are, of course, less than one on the real axis, less than one on
the y axis, then those values squared are obviously going to be each smaller than zero, both for the
real and the magic part. So a little bit different, difficult, but you can if if you use this often
enough, it sort of becomes a bit more second nature, I would say. Let's have a look at this,
where we are now going to use our three dimensions, we're going to use our third dimension, our z axis
as the modulus. And as again, as you would expect, I mean, the modulus is going to increase the further
away we get from the origin. And then we can sort of look at the colors again. So one plus one I again
is going to be somewhere out here. And that is, you know, you've got to sort of look at the color here,
what is the mapped value, what is its principal argument going to be. And this is how you can
start thinking about envisioning what is actually happening in four dimensions. If I want perpendicular
axes, as I as I did with, which is thinking about real valued functions, I would need access to four
dimensions, which I do not. And so I have to kind of jump through these hoops. I think in the end,
a very nice intuitive way for me is this one where you can just, you know, start looking at,
you know, plot some plot some of these values and see where they map to. For me, this is great.
The stream plot, I don't particularly find very useful. And then when it comes to these,
I think the three dimensional plot sort of gives you an indication of what is happening,
specifically if you get two more complicated functions, and we start talking about poles and
things like that. So hopefully you found this interesting. If you are interested in the code,
leave me a comment. And we can arrange for you to get access to the actual code here in the Warframe
language. But playing around with this, I think should give you a good intuition about visualizing
complex valued functions.
