Now we're going to look at the energy transport. Energy transport in an electromagnetic wave.
Before we need to do that, I need to show you that the energy density of an electric field
equals the energy density of the magnetic field in an electromagnetic wave.
This is a long and difficult derivation. You don't need to know this derivation.
So certainly in preparing for an exam, depending on the type of exam you write, you might want to skip this.
It's long. I've got it written out there on my board on the side.
I'm going to go according to that so that I don't skip anything.
And when we're done, perhaps in the next video, I'll show you why.
Because these two are equivalent in working out the average energy transfer of an electromagnetic wave,
I can only look at the electric field or only the magnetic field.
And we turn out that we only look at the electric side of that field to work out the energy transfer.
First of all, we need to start with the, if we just remember, a plate capacitor.
And we need to look at the potential energy stored in a plate capacitor.
And you'll remember from electromagnetism, we said that that energy, we can see it as being stored in an electric field,
in a plate capacitor.
So we need to start off with the fact that the potential energy, it's electrical, a capacitor,
and then we had two equations for that.
That was a half capacitance times the potential difference squared,
and that was equal to Q squared over two times the capacitance, over two times the capacitance.
Now for C and for Q, we have different equations, we have different equations.
For C, we can say that there's epsilon zero area divided by the distance between those plates.
So what we can see, if the area increases, in other words, a capacitance is proportional to the area,
if the area increases, the potential energy is also going to be sort of larger.
And also D is in the denominator, so the smaller the distance between those plates,
the higher the potential energy source is going to be.
And for Q, we have epsilon zero electric field times the area.
Once again, if the area increases, Q increases, and the potential energy is going to increase as well.
If that is potential energy.
Now, if we look at potential energy, if we look at potential energy densities per unit volume,
where you're looking at lowercase e, and that is just going to be u of e divided by the volume,
and volume is nothing but area, if we think, same two circular capacitors,
that is the area times the distance between them, that is the full volume.
So that is the full volume.
Now, first of all, we can just replace, in this, we can replace u e with half c v squared.
So let's do this, e equals, so u v is going to be c v squared over 2 a d.
Over 2 a d.
And for c, we can now replace this.
So we can have, instead of c, we can have epsilon zero a over d.
So that's the c, so we're still left with v squared, we're left with a, and we're left with d.
So the s are going to cancel.
So here we're left with epsilon zero v squared divided by d squared.
V squared, and divided by d squared, have I got that right?
And times the 2, somewhere I left the 2.
My mom calls, so I have to answer the phone.
So my 2, I got left behind there.
But we also know that the electric field equals potential difference divided by distance.
So if I plug in there, we're going to get epsilon zero e squared divided by, divided by 2.
Divided by 2.
Okay, so we are this far, as far as the energy density of an electric field is concerned.
Energy density of an electric field is concerned.
Now we need to do something with this, with this e.
And we remember from what, a few videos ago, that the speed of the electromagnetic wave equals
e divided by b.
In other words, e equals cb.
And if I plug that in here, I'm going to get epsilon zero, I'm going to get c squared, b squared,
divided by, still, divided by r2.
There's one equation that we haven't looked at before.
There's a lot of difficult derivation for that.
But that boils down to the fact that c equals 1 over the square root of epsilon zero mu zero.
Mu zero, epsilon zero, I think it's usually written.
And suddenly we can put that in for c here.
So we're going to get epsilon zero, c squared, in other words, it's now going to be this squared.
So it's going to be an epsilon zero mu zero.
That's a c squared.
We still have the v squared.
And we still have the 2.
We can get rid of these.
And we see, eventually, that the energy density in an electric field, and we did this for a capacitor,
but that's an electric field, is v squared divided by 2 times mu zero.
2 times mu zero.
And that's the one we want to remember.
So the first one we have, for E, there is going to be, we have v squared over 2 mu zero.
v squared over 2 mu zero.
Now let's see if that is the case for energy density in a magnetic field.
As promised, let's now look at the energy density of the magnetic field.
What we know is that in a, and I'm going to really read this from the book,
because these are equations that for some reason I can just never memorize.
The energy stored in a conductor L, carrying a current I,
so that is the potential energy stored in that conductor,
is equal to a half Li squared.
Half Li squared.
So if I'm looking at UB, the energy density,
it's going to be this half Li squared divided by AD,
so T in B, but, in, in, um, in, um,
uh, this, uh, uh, uh, the length,
it just the length now .
We're doing this in a conductor.
In...
in, uh, in, uh, sort of, uh, for inductance.
We are doing it for inductance.
Okay.
So, um,
I can immediately just put this
half Li squared.
Well, I've done that. Remember, this now is going to be U, capital U, B over Al. So the area of the length of my inductor there.
Okay, now inductance per unit length near the center of a solenoid is one that I can never remember.
So that is L divided by the length, inductance divided by the length in the center of the solenoid is mu zero mu zero n squared times the area.
And that n squared is how many windings there are for that n squared. So I have L over L, so I can replace that L over L with this.
So just let's write that neatly. That is 1 over 2. There's going to be still the A here. There's going to be an I squared there.
And L over L, inductance divided by length, I'm going to have mu zero. I'm going to have mu zero n squared divided by A.
Those A's are going to go, so I'm left with I squared mu zero n squared divided by 2.
Divided by 2. What I can do is just a quick algebraic trick. And I can multiply both by mu zero over mu zero.
So I'm left with I squared n squared mu zero squared divided by 2.
Now, the magnetic field in a solenoid, the magnetic field in a solenoid will remember as i n of mu zero or mu zero i n.
I should draw the right. And that is exactly what we have. Oh, there's a mu zero missing in here.
Because remember if I cancel those out, there's just one single mu zero out.
But I needed the squares so I can look at this. So all of this I can replace by B zero and look at this.
The energy density in a magnetic field is going to be B zero, B squared divided by 2 mu zero.
So you can clearly see the energy density in an electric field equals the energy density in a magnetic field.
Okay, so as I said, I probably don't need to memorize this derivation.
It's quite difficult and I have to read it from the board, many of these equations, because I simply can't memorize all of them.
But you can look back in your textbook at those equations.
This is exactly the equations and the derivations of, for instance, the magnetic potential energy density there.
And these equations, for instance, for solenoid.
Okay, but the point is that the electrical energy density of an electric and a magnetic field,
those potential energy densities are exactly the same.
So we're going to use the equations now for electric and magnetic wave to look at the average energy transfer
in an electric and magnetic wave.
And we only need to look at one of the properties, either electric or magnetic.
We're going to end up looking actually at the electric part.
And in the end, we can say that because the energy densities of both the fields,
the electric and magnetic field are the same, we can work with either of the two.
And that's what we'll do next.
So the next concept we're going to look at is the energy transfer per unit time,
per area, unit area of an electric, electromagnetic wave.
And we're going to denote that by S, actually we're going to denote it by a vector S.
So there's magnitude in direction and that is called the pointing, P-O-Y-N-T-I,
and the pointing vector.
After learning off the physicist.
And what it is, is one over mu zero E cross B.
So you do the cross product of those two first.
And then you'll note that the cross product of the right hand rule is going to give you the direction.
So the direction of the terminal of the electromagnetic wave is going to be the same as the direction of the pointing vector.
So you do that cross product first and you multiply that by the scalar one over mu zero.
And what we are looking at is the power, power per unit area.
And the power is nothing but the energy transfer per unit time, then per unit area.
This is what we're looking at.
This is what we are, this is what we are looking at.
Since E and B, the electric, the direction of the electric field and the direction of the magnetic field are 90 degrees apart,
and we're doing cross product, it'll be E B sine of, sine of angle between and sine of 90 degrees is one.
So the magnitude of our pointing vector is this one over mu zero E B.
That is it, one over mu zero E B.
And if you think about it, we are dealing with two sinusoidal waves.
So at any time T, at any time T, that is going to vary.
I mean it is a function, it is a function or this magnitude of this vector is dependent upon time.
So, so many, whatever the frequency of that wave is, it's going to change all the time with the energy transfer.
So, what we want and what the previous video was about was to show that the energy density of the electric field and the magnetic field are exactly the same.
So, what we're going to try and do is just get rid of this.
And we know from before that the speed of the electromagnetic wave equals E divided by B.
In other words, B is going to be E divided by C.
So, what do we have now?
We have one over, we have mu zero.
And instead, the E we still have.
And then instead of the B, we're going to have another E divided by C.
In other words, we have E squared divided by C mu zero.
By C mu zero.
And that still gives us the magnitude of our pointing vector.
Now, E, remember the electric field is going to be this amplitude times sine of this expression kx minus omega t.
Which we can put in here.
So, we're going to get E in squared sine squared of kx minus omega t divided by C mu zero.
Divided by C mu zero.
Now, this is instantaneous.
So, it's going to depend on t.
What we can look is at this pointing vector's magnitude, the average value of that.
And we call that the intensity of the electromagnetic wave.
And on average, if you take the average of the sine squared of any angle.
And you look at that, you know, on the x-axis.
The average of the sine squared of an angle is just half.
It's just a half.
So, we're going to have E in squared.
And we're going to divide that by 2 times C times mu zero.
So, that is the intensity.
There's another way to express this.
And that is the E r m s.
So, that is the electric field.
But we note the r m s.
The amplitude r m s, sorry.
That is E m, the amplitude divided by the square root of 2.
Divided by the square root of 2.
Or, E m thus equals square root of 2 E r m s.
And if I replace this today, I'm going to get square root of 2 times square root of 2 is 2.
2 and 2 cancel each other.
So, I'm going to get E root mean squared speed divided by C mu zero.
And this is the average of 0.
And this is the average of the point in zero.
And this is the equation that we usually get to deal with in the root mean squared of the
square of the amplitude.
That's the amplitude divided by the square root of 2 over C times mu times mu zero.
And because I showed you before that I could do that, I could replace this with this in
as much as the energy density of those two are exactly the same.
And you might think, well, the speed of light equals this over this.
This is such a large number.
This is obviously going to be a lot more than that.
But it's not so in as much as the energy density of those two perpendicular sets of waves are
exactly the same.
And I can substitute this in here to get to our intensity of an electromagnetic wave equation.
