Let us quickly attempt this problem with the Doppler effect. An ambulance with a siren emitting a whine of 1,600 Hz. So our source is 1,600 Hz. It passes a pedestrian moving at 2.44 m per second. That's a bit fast.
So the observer is moving at 2.44 m per second. When the ambulance has passed this person, he hears a frequency of 1,590 Hz. So the observer hears 1,590 Hz. And we take the velocity of the sound wave through the air, there's 323. What is the velocity of the ambulance?
And the ambulance for the problem here is the source. So we need the velocity of the source. We have our equation for the Doppler effect for mechanical waves there.
Now let's just put in our pluses and our minuses. First of all, let's just draw a picture here. Let's take this to be the observer. Let's take this to be the source.
So the ambulance is now past the citrus. Once again, we just get to draw in our directional vector, which we do need. And it goes from observer to source.
Always from observer. Always from observer to source. Let's look at the direction, just that directional vector, this is not a magnitude vector, of the observer.
So the observer is also moving in that direction. So that will be our observer. And our source is also traveling in that direction.
Yeah, just the directional vectors. So let's do our equation here.
So the frequency that the observer here is, is the frequency of the source. Velocity. Now let's look at the observer.
The directional vectors are in the same direction. So that's positive.
Velocity or speed of the source. And let's look at the observer. And for the source, again, the directional vectors are in the same direction.
So this is also a positive v for the source. We're interested in v for the source. So we're going to get v plus v s equals f of s, v plus v zero.
And we're going to divide by v of the observer. Finally, the source velocity is going to be for the frequency of the source.
Velocity plus velocity of the observer, divided by the velocity. And the frequency of the observer, minus velocity. Minus velocity.
So we need to see, this is going to be 1,600 divided by 1,590. We have 3,43 plus 2,44. And we subtract from it another 3,44.
And we get the velocity of the source. Check when we're calculated. And I didn't make a mistake.
It comes down to about 4.6 wide meters per second. Good. We'll do some more problems.
Next problem for us. Let's do, which one shall we do? A stationary motion detector. Sends subwaves of a frequency of 0.150 megahertz.
So the frequency of the source equals 0.150 megahertz. Okay. Towards an approaching motor vehicle. And that motor vehicle is approaching our motion detector.
So it's sort of like a speed detector. It's traveling towards that detector at 45 meters per second. So the velocity of, we're going to make that the observer equals 45.0 meters per second.
Okay. What is the frequency of the waves reflected back to the detector? Frequency of the waves reflected back to the detector.
Okay. So the velocity of the detector. Okay. So the velocity of the source, it's standing still. It's going to be 0 meters per second. And the velocity of waves, it's going to be still 343 meters per second.
So let's look at this. So let's look at this. There is our source standing still. There's our observer. Observer. We're going to draw our directional vector. Observer to source always. And the observer is traveling in this direction. And the source is standing still.
So let's see. So let's see. What the observer. Out of this frequency of 0.15 megahertz. What is he going to observe? So let's say the frequency of the observer equals the frequency of the source velocity. Let's look at the observer in the same direction. So we're going to have plus the velocity of the observer.
And the velocity there. It's just going to be a negative. So if I put in for the source 0.15 megahertz. I've got at the top 343 plus 45 divided by 343. I think I have done it. I get a frequency of the frequency of the observer.
So the frequency of the observer is 0.170. So that's 6,679 hertz. Okay. But what frequency now? That's the frequency that bounces back. Okay. But this is not the end of the problem because we want to know what frequency of the waves that
that get back to the source. So what happens now, all of this changes around. All of this
changes around. Because these waves are now reflected by this oncoming motor vehicle,
it now becomes the source. And this becomes the observer. And our unit vector is now in
this direction. The source is travelling in this direction. So the source is there and
the observer there is standing still. Nothing is happening there. So you clearly must understand
that they switch around now. This now becomes those waves that bounce off of the motor vehicle
are now the source. So now we're going to have frequency that the new observer detects. The
frequency of our new source, V. What is happening to the observer? It's standing still. So
that's plus zero. And what is happening to the source? These unit vectors are in the opposite
direction. So we're going to get minus the velocity of the source. And the velocity of the observer
in the end, this frequency of the source is now this frequency. And this velocity of the
source now still is now this 45. Okay? Which makes intuitive sense. Our denominator is smaller,
our frequency is higher, there's movement towards each other. And if I plug that in, I got 0.
check on the math, the arithmetic, 0.195 hertz. So clearly see that there are two parts to this problem. Once those waves
have been reflected, it now becomes the source. At this higher frequency, which it perceived because
it was coming towards the original source. Okay? Good problem. The next problem to work at, I think this problem is not clearly stated, or too well stated.
But I think I'll get to the gist of it. I'll explain you the gist of it. The Berger alarm consists of a source emitting waves at 28 kilohertz.
So we're going to have the frequency of a source at 28,000 hertz. And it's obviously standing still. And our source is zero meters per second.
Okay? And what is the beat frequency between the source waves and the waves reflected from an intruder walking in average velocity?
So our observer is going to walk away, directly away from the Berger, from the alarm. At 0.95 oh, this guy is clearly walking at a more human pace than one of the previous colors.
Away from alarm. Now this is, in essence, the same as the problem we had before. Inasmuch as there are going to be two parts to it. Let's have a look. Still we're going to have V equals
400 and, you know, 343 meters per second. Okay, let's have a look. We have the frequency that the observer gives. Let's first of all just draw that for ourselves.
So we're going to have this observer. We're going to have our source. We draw our directional vector. The observer walks away from the source. And there's the source unit vector. It's just zero. The source is not moving.
So let's say. So let's say. So let's say that's the frequency of the source. Velocity. What's happening to the observer? Opposite directions. So we're going to have a negative. Velocity of the observer. Velocity of the source is staying still.
When I plug that in. When I plug that in, I get frequency of the observer. Just check out this. 279.22 hertz. Okay. That's what he observes. But remember now. He now becomes the source. The detector now becomes the observer.
Again, I'm going from observer. Again, I'm going from observer to source. Remember my source is walking away. And my observer is standing still. Okay. So this now becomes the source. That becomes the observer.
a unit vector. From observer to source. And our source is still walking away. Okay. So this now. Frequency of our new observer. Frequency of our source.
Which is now this one. Remember. Let's see. Velocity. What is happening to the observer. Walking in the same direction.
Now walking now in the same direction. As the unit vector. So that's going to be a positive velocity of our. Oops. No.
Observer. So easy to make this. Silly little mistakes. Our observer is this guy. He is standing still. So that's zero. This is now our source. And our source is walking in the same direction. So we're going to add.
Add the velocity of the source. Add the velocity of the source. So this is going to be the 279.22. 343. And 343. And 0.95.
Now I get from the observer about 278.45. And the beats. Is this going to be what it originally said had.
The 28,000. Minus what it's now taking. 278.45. So we need to get beats. Equal. If you subtract this from that.
It's 155. It's 155. To get to 28. It's 155. It's 155. Hertz. Okay.
So again one of those dual problems. They wanted to know. The beats of this original source.
What it had sent out. And what it observes in the end of those. And those reflected waves.
