We've done our preliminary look at waves
and we need to go into a bit more depth.
And we're going to first of all start with the function of a wave.
I've represented a transverse wave again as a sine function.
And we have the same elements as we had yesterday.
We have the amplitude, which is the maximum displacement
in the y direction.
If this is y direction and this is our x direction,
we have the maximum displacement from equilibrium,
y maximum, as our amplitude.
Again, we have the wavelength that is where it has gone
through a complete cycle back to the same spot.
If I started here, this would be my wavelength.
And because we've represented this as a sine function,
we know that this sine function repeats every two pi radians.
It's important to remember for later.
Remember, a sine function and a cosine function for that matter
repeats itself every two pi radians.
So our wavelength is actually going to equal two pi radians,
irrespective of what it is.
And without any further ado,
here is our function of a wave, describing that wave.
It is a function of a displacement expressed in terms of x and of t.
And we'll see how that works.
It equals ym, which is the amplitude.
So if the amplitude is just one, it's a normal sine function.
If I make an amplitude two,
it'll obviously be a taller sine function or cosine function.
Sine, or let's do that, let's just say this,
is a displacement.
Displacement.
And on this side, we have the amplitude.
The amplitude, ym.
And here we have our oscillating term.
The sine function describes this oscillation that we have.
So this whole thing is the oscillating term.
Oscillating term.
Good.
Now we express this sine function as kx minus lowercase of omega t.
And that actually is our phase.
The phase that our sine function is in.
That's our phase.
Now we need to break up this kx and omega t, minus omega t.
And I just want to give you the names for these.
K is the angular wave number.
That's right, the tip.
Angular wave number.
We're going to look at what that is.
X is just the position along the x-axis.
Omega is angular frequency.
And we remember those from oscillations and classical mechanics.
So that's angular frequency.
Angular frequency.
And t is just time.
And t is just time.
So now we have the definition for all these parts of our function of a wave.
The important thing I want to look at to start off with is this angular wave number first of all though.
If I have a sine function, or let's do this.
Let's set time equal to zero.
So t will be zero.
This is going to be equal the sine of kx.
I said that if we add it to whatever x value we are here, if we have x0, x0, if we add to that x a distance equal to the wavelength,
we are going to be back at the exact same displacement.
So here we were at this displacement, a wavelength further, so this was some x value.
So x plus the displacement is going to be exactly the same, ym, if I have the sine of k, and to that x I add another length equal to the wavelength.
Then my y displacement, here it was zero to zero, whatever it was there, on the same displacement.
So these displacements will be the same for t equals zero, and for this next y, it will be exactly the same.
If I multiply this out, I'm going to have the sine of kx plus k lambda.
And we said right at the beginning that the sine function repeats every two pi radians.
So for this to be true, it means k lambda is going to equal 2 pi.
In other words, now for our angular wave number k, we have an equation which says 2 pi divided by lambda.
And the units for k is the inverse meter, radians per meter.
So it's this inverse meter.
This is our angular wave number.
In the next video, we'll start looking at the right-hand side of this phase.
Remember, this is the phase, so that's the phase expression.
We've looked at the left side of this phase expression.
We'll look at the right side of the phase expression.
As promised, let's look at the right-hand side of this expression.
And what I've done here, I've equaled x to zero.
And that is going to leave me with this expression, zero times k is zero.
We know from trigonometry that the sine of negative an angle equals negative the sine of that angle.
So I can bring this negative out.
So we'll have that y equals negative y max sine of omega t.
Now, this is drawn with respect to x.
I can also draw this graph with respect to time.
How the displacement changes with time.
And that, if I, it does not matter how I express the sine curve, it's always going to repeat every two pi radians.
So imagine this was y over t.
Still, or let me put it this way.
From this exact displacement to the next displacement, I'm going to call one period.
The time it takes for one complete cycle to occur.
So from there to there will be t.
Or from there to there will also be t.
This will be some t.
So that will be one cycle takes a certain amount of time.
And because we know any sine in which that function repeats every two pi radians,
we know that if I add t to whatever this t value was,
I'm going to have the same displacement.
I'm not going to change the displacement.
So that's going to be sine of omega any t plus the exact period.
So this was some time t.
And I add to that another t.
My displacement is going to be exactly the same.
There and there is at the same y displacement.
Once again, I multiply this out.
That was my negative, remember.
ym the sine of omega t plus omega t.
Again, we said that this is only true because if, and indeed it does, repeatedly 2 pi radians,
so omega t equals 2 pi.
This has got to be 2 pi for this to be correct, for this equation to be correct.
In other words, the period t equals 2 pi divided by omega.
Or, indeed omega, the angular frequency equals 2 pi divided by t, or radians per second, the inverse second.
We know that frequency equals 1 over t, so frequency, how many per second is going to pass, says it's going to be omega divided by 2 pi.
Omega divided by 2 pi, or on this side thing, omega is going to be 2 pi times the frequency.
And we've seen this before in classical mechanics for oscillation.
Because remember, what is happening here is this oscillation.
If I take this rope that is, I pull tight and I move my hand up and down.
At the middle, I've got maximum velocity.
Then my hand needs to start slowing down because I need to reach zero velocity so that I can start coming down.
I accelerate, I accelerate, I have maximum velocity and I start slowing down, down, down, negative acceleration until I reach zero.
And then I go up again.
The same, if I just have circular motion.
My arm now is at this constant circular velocity.
But if I view this edge on, there will be a maximum velocity.
I'll slow down because I need to reach zero.
I accelerate, I start slowing down, I need to reach zero.
So, viewing it from this side, viewing it from this side, if I just did this constant circular motion.
You're also going to see that if we can draw a piece of paper along with two springs and a spray can moving up and down.
And you could have seen that with Walter Lewin's MIT lecture series.
You'll see that it draws out.
All of these things are connected.
The spring movement, the constant circular motion and a wave.
All these functions are interconnected.
They describe the same thing.
Just to make sure we understand this concept of this angle of frequency, I have here three equations.
And they only differ by negative 2, negative 4, and negative 16.
And if I represented them like this.
So they all have the same amplitude.
Which one is which?
Which one is which?
So this is omega.
Omega, there we have omega, there we have omega, there we have omega.
And we know that omega equals 2 pi times the frequency.
So the smaller 2 is, that's a constant 2 pi, the smaller the frequency must be.
If the frequency is smaller, that means less waves pass per second.
Because it's the inverse second.
So this very long wave, a very slow wave, not many pass through at any one time.
So this will be number 1.
This 4 is a higher number, so this frequency must be higher.
So there must be more waves that pass.
So this second wave, where does it go?
This one will be 2.
And then this very rapid wave, 16 is large, 16 is large.
The frequency must be very fast.
In other words, this quick one has to be 3.
So just so that we understand what this means, as far as this equation is concerned.
The very last thing in this section, quickly, I just want to complete this equation.
It was incomplete.
Inasmuch as we have another expression, phi, plus phi.
Now, the reason for doing that, let me erase this, is that we can have both x and t equals 0, both.
So this will be 0, this will be 0, but it's not necessary for y and y displacement to be 0.
Because I can start, if I had my circular motion, as I've said before, I can start there, I can start there, or that can be my start point.
So my displacement, my displacement needn't be 0.
So I could have started my wave there.
So this would have been my 0 point.
And my 0 point, with both x and t, or both of them being 0,
my displacement, if I just had this, would be 0, but it's not.
I can start at any position, and this is the face angle that we add,
so that we can manipulate this wave depending on what our start position at x or t equals 0 is.
