Next problem. Where are we? We have a stretch string that has a mass per unit length of 5 grams per centimeter. So let's start there. We're just going to change that to SI units.
And the reason why I'm doing that in this example, and it's very important to remember if I said most of the problems will have continuity as far as the units are concerned. But quickly look at the next one. It says 10 newton. And that is SI units. Those are not SI units. So if you have that disparity, please change them all immediately before you get going.
Okay. So we have that 1 kilogram equals 1,000 gram. And 100 centimeters equals 1 meter. So if I do this non-multiplication, my grams are going to cancel out. My first centimeter and centimeter are going to cancel out.
And one thousandths, I'm losing one two zeros there. I can lose one two zeros there. So 5 divided by 10 kilograms per meter. So that is going to be about 0.50 kilograms per meter.
So that's converted. And we told that the tension then there is 10 newtons. A sinusoidal wave on the string has an amplitude of 0.12 millimeters. Again, let's do that. 0.12 and milli means 10 to the power negative 3 meters.
Okay. And the frequency of 100 hertz is set up and traveling in the negative x direction. So the velocity dx dt is less than 0. I have just written it that way. So we know immediately that if we are given this, that the sign in front of omega has got to be a positive because it's traveling in the negative x direction.
So first question. So first question. What is y-max? Y-max equals... Let me just see. Let me just see how long did I get everything from this. Oh yeah, it was set that the amplitude was there. So that equals y-max.
So it's going to be 0.12 millimeters. That's simple. There's a given amplitude and amplitude is y-max. So a bit of a simple thing to ask. Now, secondly, they want the angular wave number k. Apologies. Once the back is flat, then the card is full and I'm going to keep this whole series. I'm going to have to splice all these videos together. I don't exactly know when and stop recording.
We ask for the angular wave number k. And every time, please go back to... There are certain tricks to these waves. Number one is, if you can't solve a problem, see the wave as constant circular motion.
Or remember these equations for angular wave number for angular frequency. And angular wave number is 2 pi over lambda. We don't know lambda as another way to express lambda.
Yes, we can express lambda equals v divided by frequency. We have frequency. Do we know v? No. But we do have something we know for v. And that is the tau divided by mu.
Tau divided by mu. So I can express lambda as the square root of tau divided by mu. The square root of that divided by the frequency.
Divided by the frequency. In other words, k equals 2 pi over 1 times... If you divide this, you multiply it by that. Frequency over the square root of tau divided by mu.
Tau divided by mu. Tau divided by mu. Let's see if we can do that. So that's 2 pi. The frequency is 100.
The frequency is 100. Divided by the square root of tau is 10. 10 divided by mu. And we said it was a half. Divided by a half.
So k is going to equal 200 pi. So k is going to equal 200 pi divided by 10 minus 20. The square root of 20 inverse meters.
You can use your calculator to see. You can use your calculator to see. I'm sure that that is clear.
Next part of the question. So that was k. Next we want omega. We want omega. What do we know for omega?
That equals 2 pi times the frequency. Excuse me if I don't explain anything. If you've gotten to this part of physics,
you don't need all the basics anymore. So some of these things I just go over quickly. I don't explain.
So this is going to be 2 pi times the frequency is 100 in the second. So that's going to be 200 pi in this second.
So you can multiply that out. So you can do that with a calculator. And the correct choice of sign in front of the omega sign.
That's simple. It's got to be positive, doesn't it? Because in the beginning of the problem it said it travels in the negative x direction.
So that's going to be a positive. So all these are easy. One of your fallbacks always is these equations.
And that equation and that equation. Memorize them and also you can look at the videos where we actually derived them.
