Let's continue with the problems. Let's look at this one we have. Which one shall we do?
A 125 cm length of string with a mass of 2 grams.
It's 1.25 meters long and it has a mass of 2 grams.
And the stretch of a tension of 7 newtons between two fixed supports.
And they want to know what is the wave speed for the string and what is the lowest resonant frequency of the string.
So let's see what we have.
We were given a length of 1.25 meters and we were given a mass of 2 grams, which is 0.00200 kilogram.
So we're dealing here with three significant digits.
And both points are fixed and it is under tension of 7.00 newtons, which is kilograms meters per second squared.
And they want to know what is the wave speed.
Let's look at some equations that we might know for this problem.
Since we were given length, mass and tension, we can immediately think of using the velocity equation that contains those.
And we know that velocity equals the square root of tau over nu.
We don't have tau, but we have mass and length.
And we know nu equals mass divided by length.
So we have velocity equals the square root of, we have tau divided by m over l.
L will go in the numerator, so it's l over m.
We have all of those, we can plug them in and we can get the velocity.
And I've done it, I have done it, I think the velocity turned out to be about 66, then about 25 square root of 7.
So about 66.1, 66.1 meters per second.
And they also want to know, where were we, 40?
What, sorry, what is the lowest resonant frequency?
And remember these two, remember these two equations that we had here?
So we're going to have the frequency equals n times v over 2l.
And the first fundamental frequency or the first resonance, so that's just going to be f of 1, that'll be 1.
So now, v, we already know, v was about 25 square root of 7 meters per second, divided by 2 times the length, which is 1.25 meters.
And that gave us the first fundamental frequency of about, I think it was, about 10 square root of 7, which is 26.5 inverse seconds.
So that's quite an, quite an easy problem, quite an easy problem to do.
And if we wanted to know lambda, there was different ways we can use frequency equals lambda times frequency.
Or we could, if we just use that for, for lambda, and remember that will be lambda n is going to equal 2l over n.
So that's a simple problem.
Let's do a slightly more interesting problem, two sinusoidal waves with identical wavelengths.
Let's do that.
So lambda 1 equals lambda 2 equals lambda.
With identical wavelengths and amplitude, so ym1 equals ym2, and that equals ym.
Travel in opposite directions, that is velocity of 10 centimeters per second.
So the velocity of 1, we can write this one 0.0.10 meters per second, and then the velocity
of 2 is going to be in the negative direction, meters per second.
And it says, and now they're going to interfere with each other.
And it says, if the time interval between instants where the string is flat is a half a second,
what is the wavelength of the waves?
And remember, when we drew these waves, so when it was flat, it was from day to day.
That's node, antinode, node.
And in those very first videos, we said that from any node to an antinode equals a quarter
of the wavelength.
So from node to node, this is where it's flat, it's going to be a half a wavelength.
So to travel, a half a wavelength's travel gives us, so the time from node to node equals
a half a second.
So we're doing half a wavelength in half a second, so the time for a full wavelength is going to
be one second.
And that is nothing but the period of a wave.
Period is one second.
That's what they're telling us.
And we know that period equals one over frequency, or frequency equals one over the period.
So one divided by one, so that's going to be 1.0 inverse seconds.
And we also know that velocity equals frequency times lambda.
And so we want lambda.
Lambda equals velocity divided by frequency.
The velocity was 0.1 meters per second, divided by the frequency is one inverse seconds.
So we are left with 0.10 meters.
Just by realizing the fact that from node to node is half a wavelength, the traveling of
half a wavelength takes half a second.
So a full wavelength, a period of a full wavelength, will that be one second?
We know that frequency equals one over the period.
And now through this very simple equation, we can solve the problem.
