Now that we've looked at the energy transport in an electromagnetic wave, we've got to look at the pressure that an electric magnetic wave can generate.
Now this is a very interesting concept because an electric magnetic wave can impart momentum to an object on which it is.
If it's in the form of light, you can say if you shine a light on an object, it will change the momentum of that object.
And that sounds weird because an electric magnetic wave does not have to pass through a medium and it itself does not carry any mass.
If we view an electric magnetic wave as a particle and as much as it is a photon, it is massless.
So how can it impart pressure on an object to change momentum?
And the other thing we must realize is we showed the electric and the magnetic waves traveling in a sinusoidal pattern.
But there's nothing physically that moves. We're not talking mechanical waves in which there's a piece in a rope that moves up and down.
There's nothing in a vacuum, so there's nothing to move up and down.
It is a change in the energy of the field or the magnitude and direction of the field in that vacuum.
So there's only a field change. There's nothing physically that moves in the electric and magnetic sinusoidal wave patterns.
Now to derive, once again, you can just memorize the two equations at the end, but this will be about the derivation of those equations.
And what Maxwell showed us was that the change in momentum, change in momentum, and this is where it all starts, is the change in energy divided by C, the speed of light, the speed of electromagnetic wave in a vacuum.
Now, so a change in momentum equals a change in energy divided by the speed of light.
Now, this is just something that we're going to accept. We're not going to prove this, but if we just look at unit analysis, which I'm not suggesting is a proof for this equation,
but the energy is kilograms meters squared per second squared, which is the joule divided by speed will be meters per second.
And indeed, if I do that, I lose there, I lose there, I have kilograms meter second, which is momentum.
So indeed, at least when I look at the units, I can see that this change in energy divided by the speed of light equals momentum will equal momentum.
Now, this equation is in the following situation. We have an electromagnetic wave, and we have an object, and the object completely absorbs the electromagnetic wave.
If it completely reflects the electromagnetic wave back in the direction from where it came, we have a different equation now.
The change in momentum is going to equal twice the change in energy divided by C, and we did this before in classical mechanics.
We have the ball bouncing elastically off of a wall. Okay, you're going to have twice the change in momentum, twice the change in momentum.
Also in classical mechanics, we have that the force imparted is the change in momentum in a certain time period.
As in momentum, change in momentum equals force times delta T. Force times delta T.
And I think we can, just to look at the units again, a change in momentum is kilograms meters per second.
Kilograms meters per second, and we're dividing by seconds.
So that's going to give us kilograms meters per second squared, meters per second squared, which is just the Newton.
So we deem a force, and that is the Newton.
Now, I just want to show you something. I've got it on the board there, because I don't want to make a mistake.
The change in energy I can write is I A delta T.
I remember from the intensity, from the intensity of the electromagnetic wave.
Now remember, we've got to show that these things are indeed equals.
I'm just saying the intensity shown on a certain surface area in some time T is going to give me a change in energy.
And it's quite simple. Remember, I was energy per unit time, per unit time, divided by the area.
That is what intensity was. That is how we defined, remember, the pointing vector in the previous video series.
So if I just multiply this by A and by delta T, I'm going to get rid of the time, I'm going to get rid of the area on the left with the energy.
So indeed, that is going to impart some energy, transfer of energy.
The intensity shown on a certain surface area over a certain time, that is going to be my, that is indeed going to be my energy transfer.
So now, what I can do, I can write F now, as delta P, which now for me is delta U divided by C.
And F, where are we? F equals delta P divided by delta, by delta C.
And so that is, here is my, here is my delta P, and I have to divide by delta T.
And I can rewrite delta U as well. So for that, I'm going to have I A delta T, divided by C, divided by delta T.
I'm going to lose that, so I'm left with I A over C, for the force.
But remember, this is for total absorption, and there's total reflection.
So let's say this is total absorption, and then for total reflection, for total reflection, I'm going to have 2 I A over C.
2 I A over C.
But what we, so that is the force that an electromagnetic wave imparts on, imparts on an object.
Now that's tiny, inasmuch as if someone shines a light on you, you certainly don't feel, you certainly don't experience that force,
because the value is small, inasmuch as look at what we are dividing by a massive number.
Now the one thing that we are also interested in actually is just the pressure.
So that's P, and for total, let's say for total absorption, remember, pressure equals force divided by area.
So I'm just going to divide these, so I'm just going to divide these by area, which is just going to cancel out the A's.
Now don't get confused, that's pressure and that's momentum, both P's.
Now I'm just talking pressure and force divided by area.
So pressure, if I have total absorption, is just going to be I, we're just going to lose the A's, for example, dividing by A.
So this is I over C, intensity divided by speed of light and pressure.
If I have total reflection, this is going to be 2I over C.
And these are the two equations. As I said, you can just memorize those, but you can also just think about the derivation of how we get there in Sydney.
There might also be two, two that you can be interested in.
Okay.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
