Let's try and tackle this problem. We are told we have a rope, and it is moved up and down, so it's a transverse wave sent in the positive x direction.
And we are told that the wavelength that we create in this rope is of sinusoidal type, and it has a wavelength of 20 centimeters.
Before I forget, what I would suggest when you do problems of sinusoidal waves, where the waveform is described as a trigonometric function, is to not change to SI units.
If it was given as 20 centimeters, try and keep it that way, or if there was a mix, be very careful how you bring them all to the same units.
It doesn't always work, but it's just a point. Try, if you are going to replace these values in your equations, just try and keep the units all the same as you were given.
And then we told that we have this graph of displacement over time, describing a specific spot in the rope, and that is at x equals 0.
At x equals 0, there is this displacement, and it is marked as a maximum of 4 centimeters displacement, negative 4 centimeters on the other side, and it looks like one wavelength takes 10 seconds.
To pass this point x equals 0. And we are also told that this is our function, displacement as a function of distance and time equals y maximum times the sine of kx plus or minus omega t plus phi.
Now, if this goes in the positive, if this wave goes in the positive x direction, the wave itself, not this, not this point, obviously this becomes a negative.
So it's a negative for that sine function. First question, let's have a look. First question we want to know, what is y max?
I think from the graph that comes out very clearly that the maximum displacement of this x, this spot x equals 0 is going to be 4 centimeters. 4.0 centimeters.
Let's see. Let's see the next question. What is k? The angular wave number, k. Remember, in one of the introductory videos, we said that because we use a sinusoidal or cosine function,
that the wavelength, that the wavelength is always going to be 2 pi radians, because the sine and the cosine curve repeat every 2 pi radians.
And remember, we had the fact that k times lambda equals 2 pi. In other words, k was going to be 2 pi over lambda.
And remember also that omega was going to be 2 pi times the frequency over 2 pi over the period, since period equals 1 over the frequency, or frequency equals 1 over the period.
Remember, in the beginning, I said these are two very important equations that you should know, and also remember where we got them from.
So k is going to be a problem. So k is going to be 2 pi over lambda. 2 pi over lambda. And that's going to be 2 pi over what was lambda.
We were given lambda as 20 centimeters. 20 centimeters. And here's what I said. Keep the units as it was given.
So 2 pi over lambda. So 2 is going to go in at 10 times, so that is pi over 10 inverse centimeters. Now, we say inverse centimeters, but that means radians per centimeter.
Okay? So remember now, it's pi over 10 radians per centimeter. If I want to convert that into meters, I know that 100 centimeters in one meter, so that is going to be 100 divided by 10, that's 10 pi over 10.
Inverse meters. Okay? But for this, my suggestion is just please keep this in the units that you were given. It makes things easier, because usually in a problem, the units will remain static.
They're going to give you something in meters and not a value in meters, for instance. So just keep things there.
Okay, so that was easy to get the angular wave number. Next question, I think, is what is the angular frequency? Omega.
We already know. We already know that's 2 pi over the period. 2 pi over the period. Do we know what the period is? Well, we weren't given it explicitly, but we can clearly see that one wavelength is this whole oscillatory movement, this whole wave, and that seems to take 10 seconds.
So one wavelength. So one wavelength takes 10 seconds. So the frequency of the period is 10 seconds. So that's going to be 2 pi divided by 10 seconds, and that's going to be pi over 5 inverse seconds.
5 over 5 inverse seconds. Next question. 5. What can 5 be? Are we going to be able to do that? Can we figure out what 5 is going to be? And yes, we can. Just follow me with a strain of thought.
If I write my equation out. If I write my equation out. Y equals y max. The sine of k, we know what k is. What was k was pi over 10. Pi over 10 times x minus omega was pi over 5.
5 was pi over 5 times t plus 5. I've used my equation that was given, and I've placed in the values that I know now.
Now, what happens at when y is, for instance, at 4. The displacement is at 4 centimeters. Right there. Well, y max is still 4. Still going to be the sine of 5 over 10 times x.
But this whole thing describes the movement at x equals 0. Remember that. So x is 0. So nothing happens there. Minus pi over 5.
As I write my任us pi over 5. So t. At 4 centimeters. If that's 10. We'll英文念 them. If that's 10 seconds. This is 5 seconds.
So that will be 2 and a half seconds. So this is at 2.5. 2.5 seconds. Plus 5. Divide both sides by 4. So 1 x equals the sine of
minus pi over 2.
And what expression of sine
equals 1? Well, the sine of pi over 2 equals 1.
The sine of pi equals 2. So if this was
pi over 2, the sine of pi over 2 equals 1. So pi minus
pi over 2 equals pi over 2. In other words,
pi equals, take that to the other side,
a half pi plus a half pi is going to equal pi.
Pi radians.
And I got that information purely from this graph
in thinking about what happens, what is
taking place at that displacement of 4 centimeters.
Next question.
Let's have a quick look before time runs out.
The sine in front of omega, we said that that goes
in the positive x direction.
So the sine is going to be negative.
Remember, if that was positive,
if this was positive omega t, then it is in the negative x direction.
I think we looked at that before.
If not, it's simple to remember.
If it's minus omega t, positive x direction.
Positive omega t, negative x direction.
What is the transverse velocity of the particle at x equals 0
and t equals 5 seconds?
Transverse velocity.
Remember that that was
dy dy dt partial derivative.
partial derivative of that displacement.
And I think we remember that equation.
That was negative omega y max cosine of omega t.
Oh, kx.
Where am I going to list?
kx minus omega t plus 5.
Let's replace and see what we have.
So u, that's transverse velocity minus what was omega, pi over 5, pi over 5.
Inverse seconds, y max was 4.
Cosine of, let's look, k was pi over 10, pi over 10.
And now we are told of this point, x equals 0.
So that becomes 0.
5 times 10 is 0.
Minus omega was pi over 5.
And we are told at the position x equals 0, we're in t equals 5 seconds.
So times 5 plus another, plus 5.
And we just looked at 5, which is pi radians.
So there we go.
So the transverse velocity at point x equals 0 at time equals 5 seconds.
And just think of what happens at 5 seconds.
It's coming down.
So right there, that's at maximum velocity.
Because there it's going to stop.
Stop.
Move down.
That's maximum velocity.
I think I went over the length of the recording there.
So I'm not sure when it stopped recording, but just let's have a look where we were.
I just replaced all the values in my function for the transverse speed of my wave.
And I got to the cosine of 0, which is 1.
So that's negative 4 pi over 5 times 1 centimeters per second.
And I think that should be about 2.5, somewhere there's centimeters per second.
So all in all, a very nice problem.
And it's quite easy to work out.
I think the only challenging bit, really, is this phi angle.
And you just have to think physically in your head what is happening, what this wave, what
this graph is trying to explain to you.
And if you then replace these values in here, you are left with 100 phi.
And then it's easy.
Phi jumps out of you if you remember that the arc sine of 1 equals pi over 2.
In other words, the sine of pi over 2 equals 1.
So if you equate this to pi over 2, you're going to get pi.
That's probably the challenging question.
And remember, remember the two equations, this and the one for angular velocity.
