Let's look at this lovely problem. I've got two stakes firmly anchored there and I've got a rope in between.
I hope it comes out. This one's orange, that one's green, this one is 3 meters long and they are tied together there.
And that one is 2 meters long. We are told that the linear density of this 3 meter long orange rope is 1.4 times 10 to the power negative 4 kilograms per meter.
And we are told that it's under a tension of 400 Newton.
My green rope on this side is 2 meters long and it has a linear density of 2.8 times 10 to the power negative 4 kilograms per meter.
So if I just divide those two by each other, I see this one has a linear density twice as much as that.
So let me just mention that. The mu2 equals twice mu1.
You can immediately see that they say that this rope here is under a tension of 400 Newton.
That's all that is said. Nothing is said about the tension in this rope.
And we set a pulse. Now pulse means I'm just going to go once.
So I can go just once up. So this is the top part of the curve that will run.
Or I can go up, down, up, down, up and back. So it's the whole sine curve that's going to run.
Exactly the same on both sides. There I go. Which wave will come to the knot first?
Which wave will come to the knot first?
Now we know, we said that the velocity is going to be, you know, in a medium is going to be determined by some aspects of that medium.
And remember we said that the velocity that we write it here. Velocity equals the square root of the tension divided by the linear density.
The square root of the tension divided by the linear density.
So the velocity of the rope on this side. We know the tension. We know the linear density. So we can clearly see what the velocity of the wave is going to be on this side.
But we're missing, we're missing the tension of the rope on that side. And that's so easy. I don't even know if I should mention it.
It's so easy to see what the tension on that side is going to be. Let me just continue with this.
Now we want to know which one reaches there first. So that is going to be a time issue.
It's going to be a time issue. Remember velocity equals distance divided by time.
And so time is going to be distance divided by velocity. And distance on this side was given as L. So it's going to be L over V.
So whichever one has the shortest T, that wave and that one's going to get there first.
Okay. What is the tension on this side? Of course it's also going to be 400 newtons. What else can it be?
If that was 600 newtons, this was 400 newtons. Okay. That means there is a net force net direction and this whole system runs away from us.
Develops little legs and off it goes. And that's not happening. Of course it's standing still. We said that these are anchored in the ground. Okay.
So this one can't have 600 newtons. That's 400 newtons. That means there is a net force in that direction.
Force equals mass times acceleration. So that can accelerate the wave in that direction. It can't be. It must also be.
Tau 2 must also be 400 newtons. It must be 400 newtons. Okay. So let's look at what velocity 1 or the velocity of the wave in 1 is going to be.
It's going to be the square root of tau 1 divided by tau 1 divided by mu 1. Mu 1.
And velocity 2 is going to be. What is velocity 2 going to be? Well, it's also tau 1 because tau 1 equals tau 2.
Tau 1 also. And mu 2. And we just said that mu 2 equals 2 times mu 1. 2 times mu 1. So now I've got them all in the same. You don't have to do this. You can put plug in the values. You can work out the two Ts.
And I think, you know, that's what the example asked for initially. I've changed it a bit. I just want to know who gets it first.
Whose time is the shortest? Okay. So put in the values. Work it out. Then use this because you've got L. You can work it all out. You'll see one is one point. We'll see one is something else.
But this is a neat way of doing it. This is a different way of looking at it. I've got all of these the same.
So if I take velocity 1 divided by velocity 2, I'm going to have the square root of tau 1 over mu 1 divided by the square root of tau 1 divided by 2 times mu 2.
That is going to equal. Those will cancel. Those will cancel. The mu's will cancel. So that's going to be left with the square root of 2.
Because that's in the denominator. And dividing will bring it up into the numerator. So I'm left with the square root of 2.
So velocity 1 equals, let's make it velocity 2.
Velocity 1 equals the square root of 2 times velocity 2. Or velocity 2 equals 1 over the square root of 2 times the velocity of 1.
Okay. Now I said time equals length divided by velocity. So time 1 is going to be L1, which is 3 meters, divided by V1, divided by V1.
And V2 is going to be distance, which is 2 meters, divided by V2. And V2 is 1 over the square root of 2, 1 over the square root of 2 times V1.
Okay. So if I say V1, okay. So if I say V1 over T2, that is going to be 3 over V1 divided by V1 over the square root of 2, over the square root of 2, have I got that right? 2 times.
Sorry. T2 is 2 times. I'm going to bring this into the, let me do it properly. T2 is going to equal 2 times square root of 2 divided by V1. That's it.
Okay. So it's 2 times square root of 2 divided by V1. The V1's cancel. So I am left with T1 over T2 equals 3 over 2 square root of 2. In other words, T1 equals 3 over 2 square root of 2 T2.
And that fraction is less than 1. And that fraction is less than 1. So T1 is, is that right? 2 times, um, um, uh, let me see. I don't want to make a mistake here.
In other words, T2 equals 2 square root of 2 over 3 T2. So, uh, T1.
Ooh! I'm messing this up for you beautifully. Am I not? Anyway. Do that, you'll see, you'll see this is what you get too.
So 2 times the square root of 2, 2 times the square root of 2 divided by 3, I think, will be in the order of about 0.9.
Let's say 0.9 T1.
T2 equals 0.9 of T1.
T2 equals, yeah, it's about 0.9 of whatever T1 is.
So T2 is actually smaller than T1.
So T2, the time it goes from there to there, is smaller than T1.
In other words, this one is going to get the time to get there for this one is shorter than the time for T1.
So this way is actually going to reach, this way is going to reach first.
Okay, it's slightly a different way of looking at it because I'm just making all these equal to each other.
But as I said, the easier way probably is just when you get to this state is just to put the values in.
Just to put the values in and then work out exactly what T1 and T2 is going to be.
You'll see which one is shorter.
So I'll just show that T2 equals a fraction of T1.
So T2 is, in actual fact, smaller than, it's 0.9 times the value of T1.
So if that is a smaller time interval to get to that point, it will be shorter than for this wave to get to that point.
Let's look at this very short and interesting little problem, quite easy.
I'm given the linear density and the strength.
1.6 times 10 to the power negative 4 kilograms per meter SI units.
And I'm given the standing wave equation.
That the displacement Y equals 0.021 meters times the sine of 2 inverse meters times X plus,
so it's going in the negative X direction, 30 inverse seconds times T.
There's no phi.
I want to know what the velocity is in this medium.
And I want to know what the tension is in this medium.
And let's say this medium is a row.
Velocity, velocity, velocity.
It's very easy.
In as much as, we basically, for now, I know two equations for velocity.
Let's put that up.
We'll use color code.
Velocity equals, I hope you can see the green, I hope it comes out.
That equals frequency times wavelength.
And that equals, we're writing it in the new notation, tau over nu.
Tension divided by linear density.
So what do we have?
We have linear density.
We don't have tau, we don't have F, or lambda.
We know none of that.
But, remember, beginning with four authentic equations that we talked about.
K, why am I writing it in yellow?
Let's put all our definition, all our, everything that we need to memorize, maybe.
We know how to derive it, we know how to derive it, that K equals two pi over lambda.
And we know that omega equals two pi times frequency.
And look at this, what do we need?
We need lambda, and we need frequency.
Okay, so lambda, lambda is going to be two pi over k, and that's going to be two pi over k.
Do we know what k is?
Exactly we do, divide by two.
So that's going to be pi, meters.
And frequency is going to equal omega divided by two pi.
Do we know what omega is?
It's 30 inverse seconds, divided by two pi, inverse seconds.
Okay, so that is going to be 15 over pi.
15 over pi, inverse seconds.
So can we do velocity?
Yes.
Frequency times lambda, so it's going to be 15 pi, inverse seconds, times pi, meters.
And we're going to be able to 15 meters per second.
15 meters per second.
15 meters per second.
Now, very easy for us to do this.
Very easy for us to do this.
There's a piece of white chalk left.
So we're going to have the fact now that V squared is going to be...
Where am I going with that one?
It's going to be tau over mu.
And we want to know what tau is.
So tau is for us is going to be mu times V squared.
Mu we were given, 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 4.
So we just need to do V squared.
We can do that.
What's 15 times 15?
5 times 5 is 25.
7 plus 0.
1 times 5 is 5.
1 equals 1.
So we left with 5 to 2.
So that's going to be 2 to 5.
That's going to be equal 2 to 5 times mu is 1.6.
So 2 to 5 times 1.6.
So 0, 30, 15, 13, 0, 5, 2, 2, 0, 0, 1, 6, 3.
So it's going to be 360 times 10 to the power negative 4.
So it's going to be 360, 1, 2, 3.6 times 10 to the power negative 2 newtons.
There we go.
It's going to equal 3.6 times 10 to the power negative 2 newtons.
Easy trouble.
