We're now going to move on to particles and waves.
We're going to look at wave-particle duality to start off with.
And first of all, I'll just give a quick mention, you can read this in the textbooks, as to where the problem came in.
We thought, at least, that light was made up of waves, electromagnetic waves.
And if I say light, I mean all the way from radio waves all the way to gamma rays.
Then, we knew that because, with a double-slit experiment, which we've done before, giving us the interference pattern.
And interference is a good method of showing what something is made of as much as the waves undergo interference.
But then came a problem, two problems.
One was the photoelectric effect.
When light, and I mean the electromagnetic spectrum, was shown onto a metal, it was noted that a certain kinetic energy electrons came off of that metal.
And it could either be in a current or in an evacuated tube to a positive detector on the other side.
But it was noted that light could give off, when it shot on metal, some electrons.
And what was noted though, that the kinetic energy with which those photons came off, was not dependent on intensity.
And it was thought that if light was indeed a wave, a brighter intensity of light would give off higher kinetic energy.
Certainly there's more electrons coming off, but they have the same kinetic energy as a very light, very weak light.
I'm talking light at the same frequency.
So say we have 555 nanometer frequency light, and we're showing it very weakly.
The electrons that came off had the same kinetic energy as very bright light at 555 new.
Certainly more electrons came off, but they had the same kinetic energy.
And that did not make sense as far as waves were concerned.
Something else was going on.
And that is when the idea of which Albert Einstein won the Nobel Prize for the photoelectric effect showing that light is indeed not only a wave,
as we see in the double slit experiment, but also a particle.
Then the opposite was also true.
So when a beam of electrons were shown, shown at a double slit, and the device on the other side to capture those electrons,
making fluorescent light, it was noted that there was also an interference pattern.
So here was something that was always thought to be then, or by then at least as a particle, having wave-like properties.
So an electromagnetic wave had particle-like properties, and a particle like an electron had wave properties.
And hence we have the wave-particle duality.
And we'll look more closely into this in the next few videos.
Now we have to say a few words quickly about the black body radiator.
Now a black body radiator is an object in the beginning of say the early 1900s.
It was an oven, black, black oven, and it's an idealized object that absorbs all electromagnetic waves that falls onto it,
and it radiates away electromagnetic waves because of heat energy in the object.
So it's only idealized.
What we have here though is a representation on the y-axis here is radiation intensity per unit wavelength, and wavelength on the x-axis.
So what we note is we have a black body radiator.
Let's take for instance the sun.
The surface of the sun at about 6000 Kelvin.
Now what we'll note is that this is wavelength, there's 500, so this is around about the visible spectrum.
So we'll have ultraviolet there, x-rays, gamma rays to that side, infrared radio waves to this side.
And we'll note that there's a large number of wavelengths are emitted by a 6000 Kelvin black body radiator.
But the largest intensity of it would fall here by the orange, red, yellow, I should say orange-yellow actually, wavelength will be its greatest intensity.
Hence we see the sun as this orange-yellow.
At 4000 Kelvin, we'll see obviously we're never going to get this high intensity and the vast majority is just here by 700 or so, just past 700 Kelvin nanometers for 4000.
So just look at this carefully, it just means that a body at 6000 Kelvin on any temperature is not going to just emit a single wavelength.
Okay, it's going to emit a whole spectrum of wavelengths, but it's going to peak at some intensity.
So, why is my tie, I hope you can see it's yellow.
It's not yellow because it emits electromagnetic waves in this spectrum, not at all.
It is just reflecting light, light that comes from the sun through the weather and from the light bulb up ahead, light bulbs up ahead.
So it's only reflecting, it absorbs some of that light and it reflects some and it reflects in the yellow spectrum.
So that's not a black body radiator, it has not absorbed all the electromagnetic waves that falls upon it.
It has radiated some, hence my tie is not a black body radiator.
It is going to emit, it is a lot less than 400 Kelvin, it will be even cooler than my body temperature.
So it's a lot, so it's going to have this tiny little peak somewhere that will be way beyond the visible spectrum.
You might notice a bit of infrared if we had an infrared camera.
Okay, so there's a difference between the color that you see all around you.
That's just reflected light because nothing around us is a black body radiator.
A black body radiator would have absorbed all the electromagnetic waves that falls upon it and everything here reflects light and thus has color.
So, please make that distinction between reflected light and electromagnetic waves in certain wavelengths that is given off by or radiated by a black body radiator.
Even down to ultra-low temperatures, so cosmic background radiation at somewhere around 2 Kelvin still gives off very long wavelengths which we can detect.
And that is different from reflected light which gives us color.
So don't make that, don't make that, don't, don't get confused with those two concepts.
Then Max Planck came along and he noticed that if he saw each element in a black body radiator as an electric, as an oscillator, as an oscillator,
he noted this equation.
The energy of that oscillator equals n, where n is zero in the positive integers, times h, which is Planck's constant.
And we see the value of Planck's constant here, 6.626 times 10 to the power negative 34 joules seconds, times the frequency.
So, the electromagnetic waves that came off of the black body radiator could not have any value that it wanted.
It came in these discrete levels.
If you multiply by one, then you jump to multiply by two.
There was nothing in between.
There was nothing multiplied by one and a half.
Now, these electromagnetic oscillators, this is the actual, we now know it's n plus a half hf.
Don't worry about that, n is still zero, one, two, so it still jumps by one integer at a time.
There's nothing in between.
That quantizes, it makes little quantum packets.
Nothing in between, so it's like steps.
There, or there, or there.
It's not a smooth, smooth curve.
It jumps up.
It jumps up.
It's not a smooth curve of increase.
That's what he realized.
And this brings us to this equation, which is the energy in a photon.
And this is where particle wave duality comes from.
We're going to see light now, not as a wave, but as a particle.
And that particle is called a photon.
And that photon, a photon can only exist at the speed of light.
It has no rest energy.
So, it will have an energy of hf.
Planck's constant times the frequency.
So, the higher the frequency, in other words, the shorter the wavelength, the more energy that photon is going to have.
So, if we just look at energy equals mc squared divided by 1 minus v squared over c squared.
And we just said that a photon cannot exist at rest.
It only exists at the speed of light.
So, v equals c.
If I then just look at mass, mass is going to equal e times 1 minus v squared over c squared divided by c squared.
But v squared equals c.
So, that will be 1 minus 1, which is 0.
So, e times the square root of 0 over c squared.
So, that's 0.
So, the mass of a photon is 0 kilograms.
A photon does not have mass.
Hence, it can travel at c.
Whereas, any mass can approach c.
But, there's not an infinite amount of work that can be put into a system to make a mass travel at c.
But, certain photon, here, as you can see, it is massless, can travel at c.
Now, we're going to start off with this example.
But, I don't want this example to confuse you inasmuch as we want to know from a 60 watt light bulb, learning a 2.1% efficiency.
And, for a very special light bulb, it gives off monochromatic light at 555 nanometers.
How many photons come off per second?
Okay.
So, we're talking about the intensity of it.
But, don't get confused with future problems or don't let this problem taint the future problems that we're actually going to deal with in this chapter.
And, that is the kinetic energy of the photons that do come off.
Okay.
We're only talking about the number of photons per second.
Later on, my statement now will make a bit more sense.
So, running at 2.1% efficiency.
So, we are saying that the power of this equals 60.0 joules per second.
But, we're only multiplying that by 21 over 100 because it's only 2.1 over 100.
It is only 2.1% efficient.
That gave me, I think when I did it, let's see, 1.26 joules per second.
Okay.
That's what comes off.
Now, we need to figure it out.
We have 1.26 joules that come off per second.
But, we want photons per second.
So, I want to know and I know what the energy of a photon is.
I know that equals hf and I need to know if I get the energy of one photon, so many joules, how many of those can go into that 1.6 joules per second.
Well, I wasn't given f, I was given lambda, but I know c equals f lambda.
In other words, lambda equals, f equals c divided by lambda.
So, I can certainly have here E equals, E equals hc over lambda.
So, I can work out at 555 nanometers, how much energy each photon has.
And then, I have 1.26 joules to play around with.
So, how many photons would that take to make up 1.26?
That's the concept that I'm trying to do.
I can also just do it mathematically in as much as power equals energy divided by time.
I didn't want time.
I want 1 over time.
I want not seconds, but per seconds.
So, 1 over t.
1 over t equals p times E equals power times E and my E was that.
So, 1 over t is what I'm looking for equals p and E equals hc divided by lambda.
And that is going to give me photons, which is not an SI unit.
That's the per second that I'm concerned about.
The photons per second.
And if I solve that problem, you can do it for yourself.
I get about three significant digits.
3.52 times 10 to the power 18 photons per second.
3.52 times 10 to the power 18 photons come off every second.
Phenomenal amount.
2.9% efficiency in a 600 watt light bulb.
This is more important to understand.
I know what the energy of one photon is in joules.
And I have 1.26 joules to play with.
So, if I divide this into there, I'll also get 352.18.
But this is just a mathematical way knowing the units that I'm after.
I can give it all my time to fill with.
