Now things become a bit more interesting but still in essence this problem is very simple.
We told we have the same magnitude, same frequency, angular wave number, in other words, same
angular frequency, same period, same velocity, two waves we send down the same row.
They do have different amplitudes though so we know we've got to reconstruct phases and
we told that the maximum, the amplitude of the first wave is 5 mm, the second one 7 mm
and we have a resultant wave of 9 mm and we are told that the phase angle of our first
wave there is zero radians, what is the phase angle of the second wave?
I'm writing phi here but it's actually, well it's phi, let's keep it like that.
And this is a real simple, simple geometry and trigonometry in as much as.
We have 5 mm for the first one at an angle of zero degrees.
So let's draw that as my 5 mm wave and I have a 7 mm wave, I don't know what the angle is
between these two, but remember I'm going to add them vectorially, so that's going to be my 7 mm wave
and I have a resultant 9 mm. 9 mm. In other words, this is going to be my angle phi, which is actually
this phi 2, remember. So that's 5 mm, that's 7 mm, that's 9 mm. What is phi?
Well, we can do something. We can deconstruct the resultant amplitude and we know that it should
equal 9 mm in as much as y resultant in the x direction. It should be 5 mm plus this 7 mm cosine of phi.
And we know that yr in the y direction should be 0, the component of phi along the y axis is 0 mm plus we're going to have 7 mm, 7 mm times the sine of phi.
Just a deconstruction of this 9 mm. We know that yr, which is 9 mm, should then equal
the square root of the square root of yr x the square plus yr y squared. So let's just make some space.
Think about it, to square both sides, so we're left with 81 mm. I'm just going to drop,
so we're not going to do any calculus and everything's going to stay millimeters and the radians we know
doesn't, it doesn't really count. So I'm just going to leave it as that. Is this going to be
yr squared in the x direction, which was
5 plus 7 cosine phi squared plus 7 sine phi squared, right? 81 is going to equal, let's just solve for phi, shall we?
Let's solve for 5. 5 times 5 is 25. 7 times 5 is 35, times 2 is 70, times the cosine of phi, plus 7 times 7 is 49, times the cosine squared of phi, plus 7 times 7 is 49, times the sine squared of phi,
7 times 7 is 35 times 2 is 70 times the cosine of 5 plus 7 times 7 is 49 times the cosine squared of 5 plus 7 times 7 is 49 times the sine squared of 5.
That's easy.
81 equals 25 plus 70 cosine of 5 plus I'm going to take 49 out as a common factor.
The cosine squared of an angle is the sine squared of an angle as just 1.
I'm left with that.
81 minus 25 minus 49 is 7.
7 is equal to 70 times the cosine of 5.
So the cosine of 5 equals a tenth.
And that means 5 equals the arc sine of a tenth, which I think I got is 1.5 radians.
1.4706 would have 1.5 radians.
And let's see how very simple that was.
Just because we know that this line is deconstructed as the addition of those two.
And that's so very simple.
That is so very simple.
And if we wanted to, we could also work out beta.
Yeah, because now I can replace phi in here.
I can replace phi in my y direction and my x direction.
And the tangent is this.
It's going to be y divided by y divided by x.
The arc tangent thing of that divided by that is going to give me beta.
So easy to phrase constant of the second if the first one was a zero.
Now for the next problem, which is just as simple,
imagine again I had my two waves on the same string, on the same row.
In other words, the angle of wave number and the frequency are exactly the same.
But I have that the amplitude of the first one equals, say, 5 millimeters.
And the second one is, say, 8 millimeters.
What must be the phase angle of the second one?
If we take the phase angle of the first one to be set at zero radians,
what must the phase angle be of the second one to have y resultant at a minimum?
At a minimum.
The smallest resultant amplitude.
Well, think about it.
What happens?
Let's think, first of all, what would be the largest?
What would phi to be for the largest?
Well, if I had one and I add them victorially because I'm dealing now with phases
because my amplitudes are not the same.
If I have 5 millimeters and I add another 8 millimeters,
that's going to have a y resultant of 13 millimeters.
That's the maximum I can be.
I mean, I can't go more than 13 there.
In other words, phi 2 here is pi radians.
In other words, the angle here between them is pi radians.
That's going to be the maximum.
So what's the minimum going to be?
Well, well, look at this.
That is just silly.
Remember, there's one and then there's the other one
and I'm adding those two victorially, the zero radians.
So that'll be for max.
That'll be the y r at maximum.
But if I do that and then the 8 on this side,
then I have pi.
Then I have pi radians between them.
And if I have 8, 5 on one side, 8 on the other side,
the difference is going to be negative 3 or the difference is going to be 3.
3 is going to be my minimum.
Y r minimum is going to be 3.0 millimeters
and that is with a phi 2 of pi radians.
Of pi radians.
And what if the face angle of the second one was 90 degrees?
Well, that's very simple.
What we're just going to have here is Pythagoras
and as much as we're going to have 5 squared plus 8 squared
is about the square root of 89,
something like 25 plus 64.
Yeah, that's 89.
So it's about 9 point something.
Yeah, about 9 point something something.
Millimeters, if that was a half.
So let me not confuse you.
Just think about it clearly.
That if you have an angle between them,
there's the 5 millimeter, there's the 8 millimeter.
And if I add them victorially
and the angle between them is 0,
then you're going to get maximum.
Then you're going to get maximum resultant.
If you want minimum resultant,
it's actually if you have the face angle between them
of pi radians.
Then we have minimum.
And for maximum, we have 0 radians.
Well, I tried my best there to confuse you, didn't I?
But it's easy to figure this one out.
Really easy problem.
Now, we've added two waves.
Let's add four.
And here is the four wave equations
as far as the Y displacement is concerned.
They all have the same amplitude,
angular weight number, angular frequency.
And you can see they differ by a phase constant.
Now, if they all have the same,
I mean, this is so easy.
This was just, I think, jump out at you.
So if they're all the same,
we know that that's equals two times the cosine of phi.
But now, how do we do?
So we don't have to use phases.
And as much as the amplitude is the same,
this means the wavelength is the same.
This means the frequency is the same.
In other words, the same velocity.
Obviously, they're on the same string.
The same linear density.
The same tension.
So the velocity is all going to be the same.
So we can use this.
But there's just a trick to this.
If you just look at it carefully,
what is the difference between these two, one and three?
Well, the phase angle between those two is pi.
So if I just had those two,
I'm going to have pi over two,
which is 90 degrees cosine,
90 degrees is zero.
So these two are going to result in a Y resultant of zero.
And if I look at what the difference in phase angles
is between these two,
1.7 pi minus 1.7 pi is pi.
Again, the cosine of pi over two is again zero.
So Y resultant of one plus two plus three plus four
can be equal zero meters.
It can be zero.
These four just all cancel each other out.
The biggest thing is maybe to an interesting question
is what if we just had three?
What is silly?
These three,
and two of them,
they all have the same amplitude
and they just differ as far as this is concerned.
Well, if this was pi,
obviously these two cancel,
and we're just going to be left with 0.7.
As our phase angle,
which we can put in there,
he says 0.7 divided by 0.35 pi cosine of that
times two times this Y max.
But what if this was not pi,
what if this was 2 pi?
Now it becomes difficult.
Well, first of all,
you can do the first two
in this fashion
inasmuch as they have the same amplitude,
same k, same omega,
and you're going to get some resultant.
And this resultant is going to have
a Y max that is different from this one.
So then those two,
you'll have to add by using phases
for the third one.
