Let's do one more problem with these interference of waves.
We have a rope and we are told it has a certain linear density and it has a certain tension
in it.
And we are told we send a single wave, we send a single wave along that rope at an angular
frequency of 1,200 inverse seconds and it has an amplitude of 3 millimetres.
What is the average power, what is the average power that we send along that rope?
We know an equation for the average power and that is a half times mu times v times omega
squared times the amplitude squared.
We have all of those except velocity but we know an equation for velocity so this is not
going to be difficult for us, inasmuch as that's the square root of tau over mu times omega
squared times y max squared.
So the average power is going to equal a half times what is mu, 0.0020 kilograms per metre
times the square root of tau is 1,200 newtons divided by 0.002 kilograms per metre times
omega is 1,200 squared inverse per second squared.
And then omega was, was that right, was that right, yeah and y max is 0.003, 0.003 squared metres
squared.
And if we do that, and I did that on the calculator before, it's going to be about 10, 10 y.
Now an interesting twist to this question, they say, now between those two points you have
one, two loops and you send along each one this way, how much power are you transferring
to the other side?
Well along two separate ones, this is going to be 10 plus 10, so now your p average for
the two of them, so now we're going to be about 20 watts.
So two ropes, each for that wave, so the total amount of transfers is going to be double that.
But now they ask a question, instead of sending those two waves, one on each, on the two ropes,
transferring 20 watts, what power are you, what total energy are you transferring if you
put both of those same waves, not one on each, but two of them on the one rope, should that
also be 20?
Because if you're sending along two separate ones, they're 20, but no they're not.
And why not?
Because what changes in our equation here, half stays a half, then one rope stays that
one rope, the velocity stays the same, omega stays the same, but this is now going to be
a half mu v omega squared y resultant squared.
And we know that y resultant equals two times the amplitude times the cosine of half of phi.
Now, let's say for instance that phi is zero.
You send both of them together.
That'll be the cosine of zero is one, so that's just going to be two times ym.
So over here I'm going to have two times ym squared, or two squared ym squared.
And two squared is four.
So that's going to be four times more than this one was.
So the p average, if you send both of them to the same one, is going to be double.
That's going to be 40 watts, not nearly.
So you're going to send a lot more energy along that one rope with the two waves, double the
amount as what you would have done with two ropes.
That's quite interesting, all flaked on this way.
What if they are, the phase angle between them is pi radians.
We don't even have to do this.
We don't even have to do this.
A wavelength is two pi radians.
So if they're half a wavelength as a phase angle apart, this is going to be a resultant of zero.
And that's because if we put pi in there, pi divided by pi 2 is 90 degrees closer than 90 degrees is zero.
So y resultant is going to be zero.
So p average there for us.
It's going to be equal to zero watt.
So that's quite an interesting result to think about.
If you send the two same waves across the same rope with a zero radians phase angle between them,
you're going to send along twice as much energy as whether you send those two waves on two separate ropes.
And that concludes the problems for interference which as you can see is really, really simple algebra.
We haven't even really done any calculus for these.
It's really simple.
Zoom Zoho cas72.
Zoom Zoho cas83
Zoom Zoho cas83
Zoom Zoho cas83
Zoom Zoho cas84
Zoom Zoho cas83
miraculous
Zoom Zoho cas53
Zoom Zoho cas ta
Zoom Zoho cas thieves
Zoom探 agricultural
Zoomія
