Good, what we also want to look at is just how this intensity changes over distance.
And we're going to idealize that by looking at a point source of an electromagnetic wave,
radiating the electromagnetic energy in an isotropic function,
meaning in a three-dimensional spherical volume around this,
that radiation is equal. And if we look at a radius r, what is happening,
we are going to say that the intensity is going to equal the power divided by this surface area,
the surface area that we are dealing with of this sphere.
Because all of the energy that gets emitted has to pass through that surface.
And we know that intensity, or the surface at least, of a sphere is 4 pi r squared.
So we can see that under ideal circumstances, the intensity varies as 1 over the square of the distance
away from that isotropicly emitting point source.
So this is another equation that we'll do some, I'm sure we'll do some problems on.
As promised, a quick problem.
We have the power rating of 250 watt-tape of a point source of an electromagnetic wave
that it can emit isotropically, and we're standing 1.8 meters away.
We want to know the root mean square electric field and the root mean square value of the magnetic field.
But as far as the average pointing vector or intensity is concerned,
we now know that it equals the power divided by 4 pi r squared.
And we also know that that is E, the electric field, the rms value of that squared,
of that squared is divided by c mu zero.
So now it becomes easy.
We can certainly get one of these in as much as E rms.
For us, it's going to equal c mu zero p divided by 4 pi r squared.
And we're going to take the square root of that as we have the square there.
So if you plug in all of those values, I think you're going to get about 48.1 volts per meter.
And you might wonder how we get the magnetic field.
We haven't looked at a, explicitly looked at an equation before that.
That's not too difficult in as much as still c is going to equal E rms divided by b rms.
Same thing, in other words, b rms is just going to be e rms, which we've just done there,
which we've just done there, divided by c.
Divided by c, and I think the answer to that is going to be about 1.60 times 10 to the power of negative 7 tesla.
So check that on your calculator.
Now let's do a few problems as quickly as we can.
I'm going to read them to you off camera here.
First one, a plain electromagnetic wave.
So that is how we had it with the AC current through the inductor there.
Okay, so a plain electromagnetic wave has a maximum electric field magnitude of 3.2 times 10 to the power of negative 4 volts per meter.
Find the magnetic field amplitude.
So that's very easy.
Let's start with that one.
So we were given, I'm just going to read it off there, we were given em as 3.20 times 10 to the power of negative 4 volts per meter.
And we want to know what b, the bm is.
So the maximum electric field, remember that's the amplitude, we want just one bm.
And we know c equals em divided by bm.
In other words, bm is going to just be em divided by c.
And do that, I get 1.07 picotesla.
1.07 picotesla.
Let's read the next one.
A plain electromagnetic wave traveling in the positive direction of the x-axis in a vacuum has the following components.
The electric field along the x-axis is zero, along the y-axis is zero,
and along the z-axis is quite complicated.
Let's just do that one.
So I've got it on the board there.
Along the z component, we have 2.0 volts per meter.
So that's our em.
And we have the cosine of the following pi times 10 to the power of negative 15 inverse seconds times t minus x over c.
Okay, we have that.
And I think they want to know what is the value of bm.
What is the value of bm?
Remember now still that it's just going to be em divided by c.
There's your em.
So that's no problem.
Now they also want to know when this component points in the positive z direction,
in what direction is the magnetic field.
So remember, the direction which it's going to be traveled is going to be e cross b.
So if e is positive in the positive z direction, I'm going to take the z towards u.
That means I call my fingers down so that the velocity is in the positive x direction.
So it's going to be in the negative y direction.
Okay, that's this e cross b.
Very simple.
Let's just do one more for this video.
Let's do this one.
Some specific laser can produce 100 terawatts of power in a 1 nanosecond pulse.
So it has power of 100 terawatts times 10 to the power of 12 watts.
And it takes a certain time.
It can do that every 1 nanosecond.
Over 1 nanosecond.
The pulse, it says, of power in 1 nanosecond pulses.
And it has a certain wavelength of whatever.
Wavelength of 0.26 micrometers.
And what they want to know from us is how much energy is contained in a single pulse.
Energy in a single pulse.
Power equals energy divided by time.
Energy equals power times time.
100 terawatts times 1 nanosecond is going to give you...
That will be about 0.1 megajoules.
Okay, just do that on your calculator.
That times that.
This is times 10 to the power of 9.
So there will be 3 left.
That's 100,000 watt.
0.1 joule.
0.1 megajoule.
So that one's also easy.
In the next video, let's do some more quick ones.
Let's have the next one.
Let's see.
Say a TV station acts as a point source broadcasting isotopically at 1.0 megawatt.
That's not very realistic.
It says a power equals 1.0 megast times 10 to the power of 6 of 1.
We want to know what the intensity is of this electromagnetic wave at a distance to the nearest star.
And let's take that distance to be, which will then be a radius for us, equals 4.3 light-years.
Now, how do we convert light-years to distance?
Because what we ideally want is P as I equals P divided by 4 pi r squared.
And so we just need to convert light-years.
So that's 4.3 times 299, 792, 458 meters per second.
Now, we just need to multiply that by the seconds.
And that's 365.25 days times 24 hours times 3,600 seconds.
So that's going to give you, I think, oh, it's about 51 million and something seconds.
53 million and something seconds, which you just multiply out by that.
And then you have the meters, which you're just going to plug in there.
And I think the intensity comes out to, oh, I think I've got 4.8, 4.8 times 10 to the power of negative 29 watts per square meter.
That's a minute, a minute amount.
I mean, they'd have to have radio antenna dishes, massive watts, just to get a few, some recordable watts on there to detect our radio station signals.
So let's do a next one quickly.
We have, what is the intensity of a traveling plane electromagnetic wave if BM, the maximum magnetic field, is 1 times 10 to the power of negative 4 tesla?
What is the intensity of the traveling wave?
Now, once again, the intensity of the traveling wave is going to be EM squared divided by 2 mu zero, mu zero C, remember?
And we also know that EM equals, as C is, C equals E, so that's going to be C times, that's not what we want, yeah.
So, it's going to be, let's do that properly, C equals EM divided by BM, and so EM is going to be C, CBM, so I is going to equal,
I is going to equal C squared BM squared divided by 2 mu zero C, that C will go, that C will go,
so if we just want, what, if we, what were we given in this problem, let me see, we were given BM,
so we just wanted intensity, so we can put it on our BM squared over 2 mu zero, we'll get the intensity.
Okay, that's easy enough.
Let's do a last one quickly.
In a plane radio wave, the maximum value of the electric field component is 5 volts per meter,
so here we're going to have an EM of 5.0 volts per meter, and the question is, I think,
what is BM and what is the intensity?
Very easy then to get BM.
BM is just going to be EM divided by C, and intensity is just going to be,
whichever one you want to use, let's use EM squared divided by 2 times mu zero times C.
Okay, so just don't get confused between this maximum and the root square,
root mean square, and the difference between that,
if that was root mean square, this 2 would have disappeared,
if it's just the maximum, the 2 has got to be there.
So quick problem, sorry it's so quick, but these are really, really simple ones to solve.
