Now let's have a look at the Doppler effect again.
Let's just remind ourselves of the equation.
It says that the frequency that the observer hears is the frequency of the source
times the velocity plus minus the velocity of the observer
and the velocity, remember we said minus plus the velocity of the source.
So what we're dealing with with the Doppler effect is the change in observed frequency
that is now different from the source if there is a relative motion between the source
of the sound wave and the observer.
Now the Doppler effect not only holds for mechanical waves but also for electric magnetic waves
but here we're going to deal with mechanical waves so there is a medium involved.
And the reason why I say that is this V, VV, and that means the velocity through the medium
and we necessarily take the fact that the medium is at rest or at rest at least as far as the
ground is concerned.
So that's the velocity of the wave through the medium and that will be the velocity of the
observer and the velocity of the source and that is relative to each other and the only
ones that we are going to consider is if the movement is the way or towards each other but
all only in that one dimension so we're not concerned with movement in an angle in another
dimensional direction.
So I just want to remind us quickly of what the rule was, when to make that positive or
negative, when to make that negative or positive and it boils down to the fact that if the relative
motion is towards each other the frequency goes up and if the relative motion is away from each
other whether one moves or the other one moves or both move the frequency goes down and how do you
get this to go up? That means your numerator has to enlarge or your denominator has to get smaller
and if you want this to be smaller that means the numerator has to be smaller or and or the
denominator has to get bigger. So what we do remember we just draw a directional vector from the
observer to the source. From the observer to the source and that will be my directional vector there and it's only for directions so let's make it D roof or D hat or whatever you want to call it.
Okay? And it states that I've got four situations here. My source is standing still, the observer is moving towards. Now my observer is standing still and the source is coming towards the observer.
My source is moving away. And all you do is the following. If the source velocity is zero, this just becomes a zero. If the observer velocity is zero, the observer velocity just becomes zero. So what happens in this first instance? Well the frequency that the observer is is the frequency of the source and the velocity of this
velocity of this arrow. And then velocity is in the velocity of this arrow and the direction of this arrow. This arrow is in the direction of the directional vector. It's in the velocity of the
of, this arrow is in the direction of the
directional vector. It's in this, the
velocity or the relative motion of the observer is in the same direction
as this directional vector. So I'm going to put
a positive for V observer there. V and V for source
is nothing. Zero, so it's plus zero.
Now, look, my numerator is getting larger
in other words, I'm going to hear a larger number on this side
a higher frequency, which indeed intuitively makes sense. If they
move towards each other, you will hear a higher pitched sound, okay?
So frequency of observer here is going to be frequency of the
source. And now we're going to have velocity is plus zero because
the observer is standing still. Now the motion
the direction of motion is against
this directional vector. So I'm immediately going to put a negative
negative for the source.
So making my denominator smaller,
hence again my frequency will be a larger number
higher frequency. And for this side,
putting the observer frequency of the source
velocity, now my observer is moving
but his arrow is in the opposite direction of the directional vector
so that becomes a negative V for the observer and my source will
stand still, so it's just V. So I'm making my numerator smaller. I will have a lower number here,
a smaller number, so the frequency will be lower. And again intuitively that makes sense. They're moving away from each other relatively speaking, relatively I should say, and so the frequency is going to be lower.
So the same here, it's going to be the frequency of the source, velocity, that is zero.
So velocity now, these directional vectors are in the same direction, so that will be a positive V of the source.
Again I'm making my denominator larger. This will be a smaller number, a lower frequency, and again it makes intuitive sense.
So it's all about just drawing this directional vector from observer to source, and then just drawing in the relative directions, or the directions of these, of the movement.
And if the arrows are with each other, that's a positive, and when they are against each other, as far as 180 degree change in directions, it becomes a negative for that particular observer or source.
Let's deal with this problem quickly. We have a source traveling at 242 meters per second relative to some still standing medium.
We have it emitting a sound of 1250 hertz, and we say this is towards the observer standing still, and then the velocity of sound through that medium, through this emitted sound, 743.
Ok, so first of all we have a source, we have an observer, we draw a unit vector, just for direction, from observer to source, and we note that the source is traveling towards.
So if we have frequency that the observer is, through the Doppler effect, this frequency of the source velocity, that's going to be plus zero, because the observer is standing still.
And then V now must this be negative or positive. Without looking at this, we know that if it moves towards, we need a higher pitched sound.
So we need an increased velocity. So we need increased velocity. So we need the denominator to be smaller, so we really know it's negative.
But if we look at this as well, these directional vectors are pointing towards each other in opposite directions, so it's also going to be negative.
So that's for minus the velocity of the source.
So if we add all of those together, I think we get to 4, 2, 5, 0. We've got 4, 2, 5, 4, 2, 4, 5. So 4, 2, 4, 5 in those seconds, you can do that in three significant digits.
Now there's a second part to this problem. Let's get back to it.
The second part of this problem now says this reflected sound back towards the source, what frequency will it have.
Well, what's happening now is that the observer now becomes the source, and this observer is now traveling towards the source.
The sound that was reflected at that frequency now comes back, so this becomes the observer.
So now I draw my unit direction, unit vector direction in that direction, and the observer now is moving towards that.
So now we're going to have F, the new observer, yes, it's the frequency of the source, which is now that frequency.
And now we can have velocity, what happens to the observer? It is moving, same direction, which makes sense because we want the numerator higher.
And the velocity of the source, the source is now standing still. That observer was standing still, which now becomes the source as the sound waves reflect.
And if we add that, we're going to get to about, I think, 7, 2, 4, 0, somewhere there. In those seconds, please just check out my math.
It's this rough work. But you see that you just have to swap around what becomes the source and what becomes the observer.
And when you deal with a problem where the sound is now reflected back at the original source.
The raw chip can stand perhaps.
Now, in the explosion is when you gilt for a lot of Spencer,prowad nodes force in the approached, début of the action.
And it seems to be completely developed by the thought.
So now, it turns out torios from a few specific levels to an understanding of theτό 앞.
But for that information, what can be a littlerett is about to you.
I hope you want more about this process and what you want to—
I hope you want to bring the dopvereERE into one by —
How to do anything and what you want to do when I think it's ahead of what I'm doing.
You know, one of the fastest time, is the tool that you wanted to share in there.
So that I've been able to cut it from the first place to start off next.
Point of chase one while it has picked out the truth here.
Now I think it seems toком, but it's easy..
