Now that we've dealt with mechanical waves, we've got to start looking at electromagnetic
waves. That's waves in a vacuum. And for us to do that, we just need to revisit, I think,
Maxwell's equations. And they were Gauss's law of the electric field, Gauss's law of
the magnetic field, Faraday's law of reduction, and then Ampere's law, or the Ampere-Maxwell
law, if you put the displacement current together with Ampere's law.
Now let's start quickly with Gauss's law of the electric field, which states that electric
flux equals the integral over a whole surface of the dot product of the electric field and
the area vector. And the area vector, and what we will see is that equals q enclosed, or then
epsilon zero, q enclosed. Enclosed charge, enclosed in that surface. Let's quickly look how we
derive, how we derive this. We looked initially at air going through a, say, an empty photo
frame. And if we had, if we had our photo frame there, and the air going through it, and we
could change this, just the, the view that we have to side on. So I take this frame and
I, and I turn it side on. That was the frame, that was the air moving through it, perpendicular
to this area of mine. I draw an area vector. So that was my area vector. That was the velocity
of the air or any kind of fluid that was moving through that specific square. And if I wanted
to know what the flow rate was, remember flow rate, think about it, that would be cubic meters
per second. All I did is I multiplied those with each other and I said Va, which in unit notation
was meters per second, times square meter. In other words, we were going to get cubic meters
per second flowing through there. Another thing we looked at is, say for instance, this flow
is not perpendicular to the side down view of the area. But say for instance, I'm moving
this from the top. Now I'm moving from the top. And there is my area vector. But I noticed
that my velocity, my flow is now in this direction. In other words, let's say that that is now
my, that is now my velocity vector. So magnitude and direction. If the angle between these was
theta. And that was the angle between them. And I wanted to look what the component is of
my velocity vector along A, that will just be V cosine of theta. V cosine of theta will be
this component here. And if I multiply those two with each other, it would be V A cosine
of theta. And we know if that's magnitude, that's magnitude. If we change that into, into vectors,
that is just going to be the velocity vector dot product with the area vector. And all we
did here was to say, look, let's not make this flow rate, velocity of a fluid. Let's make
that the electric field. Let's make that the electric field. So we were just going to get
the electric field dot product with the area vector. Well, I should just say E dot A. Okay.
So what we did as well as just look at, let's just look at any surface, not just a rectangular
surface. But let's enclose a charge. We enclose a charge by an imaginary surface. And because
we are dealing in electricity with monopoles, in other words, any point particle I have, electron
or proton for our purposes, is a point charge, say the electron there. So it will, around it,
it will have an electric field. And the electric field lines, well, let's make it easier. Let's
make this a proton. Let's make this a positive charge, a proton. And anywhere in a three-dimensional
sphere, around that, is going to experience these vectors going outwards, which is the electric
field. The electric field goes out from the point of charging goes through our imaginary
surface, just as much as the air was flowing through our frame there. And what we did is,
we can just take a small area there, and we'll call that delta, and we can make small areas
out of this whole thing, out of this whole thing. And they each have a small little area
we'll call delta area, so we'll just sum up all of those, so that they'll just be the
sum of the electric field dot product with delta A. Our small, these are our small areas. And
we know we can go from this to an integral if we just let delta L get smaller and smaller
and smaller and smaller, so we're looking at the integral going through the whole surface
of E dot dA. Okay, so now we're at least at this part, and we call this flux. Flux. Electric flux.
The amount of cubic meters per second, but this will now just be electric field going through
that area. Okay? And we call this the flux. The amount of electric field that flows through,
if you can think about it as a flow, but remember there's no flow, it's a field, a vector field.
And what we noticed, what was noticed, what we need to take cognizance of is the fact that
this electric flux is proportional to the enclosed electric field. The enclosed charge, I should say.
So if I had one proton there, there will be a certain flux through the surface. If I put two protons there,
the flux will immediately be double. There's a proportionality in it, and the constant of proportionality
is the permittivity constant, epsilon zero, q enclosed. In other words, here we have Gauss's law of the electric field
that the integral to the whole surface of the dot product of the electric field in the area vector
equals the permittivity constant times the enclosed charge. Okay, so that's a short summary then of the first law,
Maxwell's first equation, Gauss's law of the electric field. We'll go through all four of them.
In a similar vein, let's now quickly look at Gauss's law for the magnetic field,
and that is also about flux of a magnetic field now, is also an integral over through the whole surface,
so exactly the same concept as the electric field. Now we're just going to have the magnetic field
dot product with the small differential areas. And what we will notice is that that has got to equal zero.
That's got to equal zero, and the reason being is, in electricity, we have a point charge, an electric monopole.
It's not really a pole, it's an electric monopole charge. It's positive or negative. And we're not talking about a neutron
inasmuch as I can isolate a negative charge and a positive charge. When it comes to a magnet though,
I cannot isolate a north pole or a south pole. If I have a bar magnet, north pole, south pole, and a south pole,
I break it in two, each piece will have a north and a south pole. So we're talking about magnetic dipoles here.
So when I do have my little magnet, I have these, this is north and south, I have these emanating magnetic field lines.
And now, if I draw a Gauss surface here, just as many lines will go out as they come back in.
The net flux through that imaginary Gauss surface, the net flux through that has got to be zero.
Even if I draw a line here, and you'll think, well, there's a lot of lines going out of it.
But just as many are coming back in. Okay, so even through that, just isolating the north pole there.
And in that isolation, there is a south pole as well. And as much as the field lines, the magnetic field lines
will enter my surface again. So the net flux through any surface is zero, purely because I cannot isolate a pole.
There's always a magnetic dipole in any Gaussian, imagine a Gaussian surface that I draw around a magnet,
whether that's a bar magnet or a current carrying coil or whatever the arrangement might be,
electromagnet or bar magnet. The flux, and there's my integral for it, has got to be zero.
Zero.
