Now here's a lovely problem for us. Imagine I have a very intense light source and it radiates electromagnetic waves isotropically and I have a tiny little black sphere that I want to balance half a meter from that source.
I want to know what power must that source have for the intensity of the electromagnetic wave coming from that source to balance with gravity this tiny little sphere so that it just stays at that point. Obviously it's not going to be stable because any little movement is going to drop it off.
But let's see what the power output of my electromagnetic wave source must be. I have a radius of my little black totally absorbing sphere of 2 millimeters. As I say I want to balance against gravity at a half meter from that source and I'm given the density 90 grams per cubic meter of that.
So what I'm saying in essence I want the force of gravity to equal the force of total absorption there that absorbs that electromagnetic energy.
Okay so what is the force of gravity? That is mg and total absorbing there is I times the area divided by C. I don't have I, I don't have this area, I don't have the mass.
Let's just get the mass on that side. Remember that density equals mass divided by volume and then volume for a sphere is 4 thirds pi. Now it's capital R cubed. Capital R is the radius of my little black sphere.
So I'm going to be left with mass equaling. So I'm going to be left with mass equaling, mass equal to rho times 4 over 3 pi capital R cubed. So I can write the left hand side of my equation as rho 4 over 3 pi R cubed G.
So that's mass equals. Now what can I do about I? Remember the intensity, the distance away from the source is going to be the power of that source divided by the area.
Now what is the area? Now what is the area? It's power at a certain area. Remember from the point source the electromagnetic wave, the intensity of it will fall off. Remember it's 1 over R squared away from that point source.
So we're talking about here the area a half a meter away from this point source, this imaginary sphere a half a meter away. In other words this area, this area is the surface of this large sphere half a meter away from the point, half a meter of the point source.
And the surface area is 4 pi R. Now it's lower case R because I'm a half a meter away squared. So here I'm left with intensity equaling P divided by 4 pi lowercase R squared.
Now what about this area? Now what about this area? The force is going to be the intensity at that distance times that little small area that I'm dealing with divided by C.
So this A is something else. Now again the light source will see my little sphere not as the half the surface of the sphere but just as a cut surface. So it's just the surface of the area surface of a circle which is pi in our instance capital R squared.
So on this side I'm going to have I which is P divided by 4 pi R squared. A which is pi capital R squared and C. Let's get rid of a few things. I can get rid of this whole R squared with that R cubed. I can get rid of this pi with that pi.
So what am I left with? A very long equation for P. If I take that up to the other side what I'm going to have for instance 4 times 4 is 16 over 3. I'm going to have a pi. I'm definitely going to have a rho.
I'm going to have a capital R. I'm going to have a lower case R squared and I'm going to have a C. I've done this one before. Let me see if I'm correct. 16 over 3. Rho by R squared R and the G. I forgot the G. I knew I was going to forget something. G.
So I can plug in all of those things for the power output. So the important thing here. This was just a little side trick how to get the mass. You know like my dog is giving you the mass. It can irritate your life by just having to do that.
The important bit here first of all is to realize this. You're balancing mass and force of G. It's going to equal this. And the trick now comes in which A is which A. This area is at the intensity is at a distance R away from.
Now all over that sphere and that radius will have the same intensity and that intensity falls off as 1 over R squared, the distance squared. But when it comes to this area in the force, it's only that tiny little area that receives this intensity. That receives this intensity divided by C. So this area is quite different from that area. Don't make that mistake.
Okay. Okay. You might get a problem like this and you should not be taken in by a graph like this. It states, the problem usually states that intensity is inversely proportional from an isotropically radiating point source is indirectly proportional to the distance squared, inversely proportional, so 1 over R squared.
So you're given here. So you're given here intensity on the y-axis and inverse R to the power negative 2. And they ask you what is the power output of the light source based on this graph.
So we'll know that P, I equals P divided by A, and A is 4 pi R squared. So in other words, we are saying that R equals intensity times 4 pi R squared.
But here you are not given R squared. This is not R squared. Read carefully there. This is inverse.
You are given the inverse. You are given the inverse of R squared. So if you're going to take 200 for your point there, so power is going to equal 200 times 4 times pi.
But now what you multiply this with, this is R to the power negative 2 equals 10. But that's not what I need. I need R squared. I need R squared.
This is R squared. This is for inverse. This is for inverse. Or what you can just do is just do this 200 times 4, but then divide by this 10. Divide by this 10. It's not multiplied here by 10 on this side.
So that's going to give you 85. So that's going to give you 85 watts. Okay. So don't be taken in by clearly what the dimensions are, what the units are of your two axes.
This is not R squared. This is inverse R squared. Okay. Another interesting problem. If I have a spaceship and it has a mass of 1,500 kilograms, 1,500 kilograms, and I attach a massive sail to it, so sail plus the mass of the spaceship.
How large was that sail? How large was that sail be? What was its surface area be? If it is not in orbit around the sun, it's stationary, so there will be a gravitational force towards the sun, and there will also be a force due to the electromagnetic wave on the sail towards the other side.
Now obviously the sail is quite 100% reflective, so for instance. How large was it be so that there's balance between those nodes? In other words, any larger than the spaceship will move away from the sun.
So what we're asking is that the force of gravitation is now going to be the force, but it's now totally reflective.
Force of gravitation is the gravitational constant times the mass of the two objects, which will be the mass of the sun times the mass of the spaceship, and then the distance squared away from between the center of the sun and the spaceship.
And on the other side, I'm going to have 2ia divided by c. Remember, it's totally reflective, so I have that.
But I want to know the area, and from this equation, remember this is going to be, that is going to be the area, because it's intensity at a certain radius, but then times the area on which that intensity, if I can say, shines.
Okay, so this is the area we are going for. So we're going to have a equals g c, m sum, m divided by r squared, and then times these, times 2, times i.
Now I just need to work out what the intensity is, because I don't know the intensity. Remember, intensity equals power divided by the area.
And now this area is not the area of the sail, it's the area of the sphere around the point source.
Okay, so this is going to be of the sun, and of the sun, and the area for us here is just going to be the area of the sphere around the sun, the distance r away from the center of the sun, and that's 4 pi r squared.
So I'm going to have the intensity of the square, so I'm going to have the intensity of the sun equals the power of the sun divided by 4 pi r squared.
So here I'm going to have, this is like this little bit better, I'm going to have c, I'm going to have g, I'm going to have the m of the sun, that m divided by 2, we have r squared.
And then for i, I'm going to have p of the sun divided by 4 pi r squared, r squared can go, the 2 will go, and that will become a 2, so this is going to equal speed of light times the gravitational constant times the mass of the sun times the mass of this little, of the, of the, of the spaceship,
times 2, and we have a 2 there, and we have a 5 there, all divided by the power output of the sun.
So you know the sun, 1.99 times 10 to the power of 30 kilograms, I can't remember exactly what the, what is the power output of the sun.
It is a 3.9 times 10 to the power of 26 watt.
So there is your, I think I didn't make a mistake there, just put these in and just do it for yourself, but I think that should be the equation which is going to come out to just under I think a square kilometer.
Just under a square kilometer that you need to sail to be, and obviously it's not that easy because it's not 100% reflective.
It's going to be slightly between absorptive and reflective, but you can see a square kilometer for sail and keeping it under one and a half tons, it's quite a thin sail.
And together with a spaceship, but you'll still need something larger than a square kilometer to have any kind of propulsion away from the center of our, of our solar system.
All right, that's solar system.
