This is an important problem in as much as nothing that I've said so far explicitly tells you what this answer is going to be.
And that is what textbooks do. They'll give you, you know, some detail in the chapter.
But when you get to the problems or the examples or the exercises, they'll ask you a question which you sort of have to figure out.
It's not explicitly stated in the chapter. And this is one of those. Fortunately, it's not too difficult to figure out.
If I have a length of string, so it's closed on both ends, and it's 15 centimetres long, and we're dealing with the first harmonic or the fundamental wave,
and we set up that wave and we note that the speed of the wave is 250 metres per second in that string of glass.
But the speed of sound, in our experiments, say for instance 1048 metres per second, what is the frequency that you're going to hear,
and what is the wavelength that you're going to hear. Well, first, let's just deal with a string.
And we know that if n equals n v over 2 l, because it's closed on both ends, we're dealing with n as 1.
And in the string, we're dealing with a velocity of 250 metres per second, and two times the length, two times that, is going to be 0.30 metres.
Meters will go. So we're dealing about 833 in a third. I think it was 2,500 divided by 3.
Let's keep it 2,500 divided by 3 in those seconds.
So that's going to be the frequency. That's going to be the frequency of the wave in our string.
And I can also now work out what the wavelength is going to be, what is the wavelength going to be in this string.
But what happens, this string is vibrating now, this gets transferred to the air.
What gets transferred? Is it the frequency or is it the wavelength?
As I say, I can just say wavelength here equals, in the string, equals velocity divided by frequency.
I know the velocity, and I now know the frequency, 833 in a third inverse seconds or hertz.
So I can work out the wavelength. Now I'm just given a velocity.
And velocity equals frequency times wavelength.
But which of these is the one that's transferred?
And it's quite simple to, or logical to think about this.
It's the frequency that gets transferred.
The frequency is what you hear, and it's that exact same frequency.
So for us here, the wavelength that is going to reach our ears is not going to be the wavelength that's in the string.
But that is going to be the velocity now through the air, velocity through the air, divided by the frequency.
And that is the same frequency in the air as the frequency that we set up in the string.
So 883 or 833, I can't remember.
But 2500 divided by 3.
And that's going to give us a wavelength of about, I think I did it before, 0.418.
0.418 meters.
Okay.
So as I said, listen now.
I think it was part of the lecture that the frequency that comes off of that fundamental wave in the string that reaches your ear.
The wavelength is going to change because the speed of the wave through the string and through the air is not the same.
Okay.
Let's look at this problem.
We have a string closed on both ends.
At the first harmonic, it is 920 hertz.
It has a length of 22 centimeters and it weighs 800 milligrams.
So that's 800 times 10 to the power of negative 6 kilograms.
Now, what is the velocity of this wave in our string?
Well, we know that that equals frequency times lambda.
We know frequency at 920, but we don't know what lambda is.
We certainly don't know what lambda is.
But if it's the first harmonic and it's closed on both sides, we know that in that length, we'd fit half a wavelength, half a wavelength.
In other words, wavelength equals 2 times L.
So I can immediately say frequency 2 times L.
And if I plug that in, 920 times 2 times 0.22, I get 404.8, which is 405 meters per second with three significant digits for 4.8.
Now, I want to know what is the tension, and I can really easily do that, because I know velocity squared has got to equal tau over mu, and that equals tau over mass divided by length.
Length goes up there.
In other words, tau is going to equal velocity squared M divided by L, M divided by L, and V, remember, is F to L.
So that is just going to be frequency squared 4, and then L squared divided by L.
This is going to be L times M, and that's there.
And if I plug everything there, I get to 595.87.
That's 596.
That's about 596.
596 newtons.
Okay, and we want to know what is the wavelength.
What is the wavelength of, what is the wavelength?
Well, we can certainly see this is going to be 2 times L.
So the wavelength inside the string is going to be 0.440 meters.
That's 44 centimeters.
And lastly, what is the wavelength if the speed of sound is 343 meters per second?
What is going to be the wavelength of the sound that we hear?
And as we said before, remember, that's the frequency that gets transferred from the moving string to the air.
So we're just going to have lambda equals that velocity divided by this frequency.
And if we do that, we get about 37.3 meters.
37.3 meters.
So all in all, not a difficult problem.
Now, let's have a look at this problem.
I have a column that I can fill with water, and it is 1 meter maximum.
And I put a tuning fork here, and it has a frequency of 686.
And I note that at a certain height, I set up the first harmonic in this system.
Now, what I have to realize about this system is that this is close on one end and open on the other.
And I want to know how many lengths, by dropping this water, can I place fundamental waves or resonances,
I should say resonances, in this one meter.
Now, we know velocity equals frequency times lambda, so we know lambda equals frequency times velocity.
So our fundamental here is going to be 343 divided by 686 meters, and that's just a half a meter.
A half a meter.
But remember, with open-closed systems, we're going to have L equals, we're going to have lambda over 4.
But that's actually N and N, if you think about it, because remember, that's 1, 3, 5.
So I put 1 N equals 1, 3, 5.
And that's what I'm dealing with, as far as open-closed systems are concerned.
So my first length is going to be N, which is just 1.
Lambda, we know now, is a half a meter divided by 4, and that equals an 8th of a meter.
So if this is an 8th of a meter, if this is an 8th of a meter, I set up this first fundamental wave
or first fundamental frequency or the first harmonic.
Now, I've got to jump to L3 for my second harmonic, because remember, it's open-closed.
So that is going to equal 3 times a half divided by 4, and that is going to give me 3 over 8 meters.
3 over 8 meters.
So if I drop this water level, and this is 3 over 8, so almost half of this, I can put in my second harmonic.
Let's look at my third harmonic, that is going to be 5 times a half divided by 4 meters.
And that is just going to give me 5 over 8 meters.
And if I put the first, second, third, fourth harmonic, that is going to be 7 times a half divided by 4 meters.
And that gives me 7 over 8 meters, and I think that's where we can draw the line, obviously,
because if I go to the second, third, fourth, fifth harmonic, that's going to be 9 over 8 meters,
and I only have a maximum of 1 meter.
So I can fit in 4 harmonics in this.
So what is going to be the water level for this lowest one I can do in fourth harmonic?
Well, if that is 7 eighth of a meter, that's just going to be an eighth of a meter, doesn't it?
So that length for the lowest one, the column of the water now, of the water column,
is just going to be 8 over 8 meters minus that 7 over 8 meters.
And that equals 1 over 8 meters, which is 0.125 meters.
And then the second one will be there, 3 over 8, which is 0.375 meters.
Okay, so all in all, not too difficult.
Good, let's look at this problem.
I'm setting up an open-end, open-open system, open on both ends,
and I see that I have some harmonic at 325 hertz.
The harmonic, just one up from there, will be 390 hertz.
And lower down the list, I'll just say x minus p, I don't know what p is.
I have 195 hertz, and I want to know just one up from that x minus p, so plus 1, 95 hertz.
What is that?
And what will this, what will this n and number p, can I do that?
Well, remember that the f of n is just n times some constant.
And that constant for us is going to be velocity divided by 2 times the length.
So I'm just going up by this positive integer value.
And if I do that, I can say that f of x plus 1 minus the f of x is just going to be 65 hertz.
I'm just jumping up.
I'm just jumping up in multiples of this.
This is not n squared or the square root of n.
Nothing funny.
This goes up by multiples of n.
So the difference between the two is just going to be that straightforward n.
In as much as here, I will have n plus 1c minus nc.
So that constant stays the same.
The only difference there is just that plus 1.
So they only differ by if I take out, if I take out the c here, I'm going to be left
with n plus 1 minus n.
And that is equal to 1.
Okay.
So I'm just going up by 65 hertz.
I can add 65 to this.
So that's going to equal 995 hertz plus 65 hertz.
And that's going to give me 260 hertz.
And what will be the n value of this because we don't know v, we don't know l.
It's simple to do that because let's just see how many times can I go down from 260 dividing
65 every time.
I can't go to 0 or less than 0.
It's going to be larger than 0 for obvious reasons.
If I just, for instance, take this 195 and I divide that by 65, I get 3.
So it looks like we can go up to 3 for that.
So that will be number 4 because, watch this, if I make n equals 1, it's 65.
So n equals 2, I just add another 65 there, I get to 130.
n equals 3, I just add another 65 there, I get to my 195 there.
And if I go n equals 4, n equals, equals, equals 4, just another 65 to that.
It's going to give me the 260.
So n equals 4, so this is the 4th one.
Okay, that's fair enough.
What if, what if we say the following?
What if we say the following, let's make this, I've got the problem here, let's make this
1080 ohhertz and we're making this one, one, three, I think it's 25 hertz and I say that
this is an open, oh, it's that system.
Or the fundamental way will be that.
Okay, so we're dealing with this.
We're dealing with that.
Open on one side, close on the other side.
Still, remember, frequency n equals n times v over 4l.
So there's still n times some constant c.
Nothing's going to change as I change my frequencies.
Okay, so yet again, I can just subtract these two.
So f of x plus 1 minus f of x.
And that leaves me 1, 3, 2, 5 minus 1, 0, 8, 0.
I think I've got 240.
240.
So that was 1, 3, 2, 0.
Okay, 1, 3, 2, 0 inverse seconds there.
So that's 240 inverse seconds.
240 hertz for that one.
So I'm jumping in.
And if we make this one 600, we just need to add 240 to that.
So we're going to get 600 is 240 equals 340 hertz.
And now we need to work out what is this going to be.
Again, I can just look at multiples.
Again, I can just look at multiples of that 600.
So let me take 600.
It's the lowest one I have.
And I'm going to divide it by 240.
And I see I get no more than 2.
I get no more than 2.
So my n equals 1 is going to be...
I can go down 600.
I can go down 240 and 240 twice.
So the lowest one I'm going to get to is 120.
Okay, so n1.
Okay, n2.
I just add 240 to that.
And I get 360.
It's n3.
Sorry.
Remember?
We're dealing with this.
Open, closed.
So n is just 1, 3, 5.
Okay.
So n3 is going to be that.
n5.
5, I add another 240 to that.
And then I'm going to get to my 600.
n7.
n7.
I'm going to add another 240 there.
And I get to 840.
And 40 turns.
You see that unlike the previous problem,
it wouldn't divide in properly.
If you divide that, that's 2.5.
Whereas the previous one was exactly 3.
So I could start at the 65 level.
You have got to start at 120.
And then 3, 5.
So my n value, our selection number there
is going to be n7, which is still the second, third, fourth,
which is still the fourth harmony for this 840.
So clearly you see you need to subtract these from each other.
If you want to know by how many frequencies,
how many milliseconds it jumps,
you need to subtract two subsequent ones from each other.
So f of n and f of n plus 1.
And that will always be the same.
But you don't necessarily always start at,
if the difference was 65 in the previous one,
your n1 is not always going to be the exact difference.
And this will be a half of 240.
So your n1, you're going to start with,
because you only have a quarter of that wave thing.
And then you can just add multiples.
You can just add 242 at each time.
