Let's take a look at slightly more difficult examples and we'll do it a bit slower.
What if you are told that the intensity of sunlight just before it reaches the earth
is, I think it was 1.4 kilo, so times 10 to the power 3 kilo watts per square meter.
We want to know what the maximum electric field is and what the maximum magnetic field
is.
Once again, all we need is just our equations, we know one equation for the intensity, the
average pointing vector is Em squared divided by 2C mu zero.
In other words, Em is just going to equal 2 times C times mu zero times I and we take
the square root of that, and since we know that C equals Em divided by Bm, we know that
Bm is now going to equal for us the square root of 2C mu zero I, all of that divided by C.
I like to do things this way.
You might just see this happen all the time, but instead of using the value that I have
there and dividing it by C, I might make an error while I enter these values in my calculator.
So I like to get the expressions complete in as much as on the right hand side, I have all
known values.
I know what 2 is 2, C is C, mu zero is mu zero, intensity I was given, and C I was given.
I don't need to rely upon a previous, I don't need to rely upon a previous answer to get this
answer.
So I just test myself the other way around, so I like to get these equations finished,
and then get the results as opposed to get this, and use this result in this equation here
to get this value.
I just rewrite another equation with all the knowns on the right hand side, and then get
the answer.
I think if you plug in your calculator, oh I didn't do the values there on the board,
but certainly those are the 2 equations for those 2 answers, if you are just given the
intensity.
If you just give them the intensity.
If you just look, I might have the answers here now.
Yeah, it could be about 1.03 kilovolts per square meter, and about 3.3 micro, micro tesla.
Let's look at this interesting problem.
If we take that the diameter of the Arecibo telescope in South America is a diameter of 300 meters,
a radius of 150 meters, and we are told that it is so sensitive that it can pick up, that
it can pick up, I wanted the power falling on the whole surface of the Earth of 1 picawatt.
1.00 times 10 to the power negative 12 watts on the whole surface of the Earth.
The radius of the Earth we are going to take as 6.37 times 10 to the power 6 meters.
So it can pick up, it can pick up that kind of intensity of 1 picawatt falling on the whole
surface of the Earth.
Let's look at what the intensity of that is.
Remember that intensity equals power divided by area.
The power we have, the area of a globe like the Earth, is a sphere which is 4 pi r squared,
and this is now going to be the surface of the Earth.
Surface of the Earth, and if we take 1 picawatt and we divide it by 4 pi times the squared,
I get something in the order of 1.96 times 10 to the power negative 27 watts per square meter.
That's the intensity that this Areciva telescope has in our problem.
I don't know how accurate that is, but in our problem.
So what power does it actually detect?
So if this is our watts per square meter, we just need to work out what square meter
does the telescope have.
The telescope has a radius of 150 meters, and the surface area of a circle is 4,
it's pi r squared, so I just need to multiply this by pi times r squared,
which is 150 square meters squared.
So those will go, and I'm left with how many watts it will detect.
So the power that it will detect there, at that, since this times pi times 150 squared,
which I get to about 1.4 times 10 to the power negative 23 watts,
which is a minute amount, a minute amount.
Now we want to know if we can pick up this intensity,
if we can pick up this intensity,
what is the power output at the center of our galaxy?
Sagittarius A star, the supermassive black hole at the middle of the galaxy.
What is its power output if it is a distance away of 2.2 times 10 to the power of 4 light years?
So how do I convert light years to distance?
It's easy, if you think it's 2.2 times 10 to the power of 4.
Now it travels at 299, 792, 458, around about millimeters per second, times.
I need to convert that second, how many seconds are there in a year?
So that is 365.25 times 24 times 3600, times 3600.
That's going to give me the distance in meters.
That's going to give me the distance in meters.
And what I'm going to have, so I have the intensity now, and I have the distance.
So I know that I equals P divided by 4R squared.
R squared, so for P, I'm just going to have I times 4 times pi times R squared.
And my R squared is this massive number here, squared times pi times 4 times the intensity,
which we calculated from this 1 picawatt falling on the whole surface of the Earth.
So if I multiply all of that, I think I get about 1.1 times 10 to the power of 15, 15 watt,
which is an enormous, an enormous, 1 times 115, this is 15 there, 15 watt,
which is an enormous power output as far as joules, 1.1 times 10 to the power of 15 joules per second, massive output.
