Now here's one of my favorite problems. We have this pipe and then a semicircle pipe there as well with the radius r and we have a detector here and we have a sound source on this side.
So we want to know what is the minimum value of this radius if we want to here total the least intensity sound wave here so we want total destructive wave exactly on this side.
So what we are saying is that this distance minus this distance L2 minus L1 the length of that has got to dissolve in a destructive wave and we know from zero the first destructive wave we're going to get is a half a wavelength difference.
And to see though why that is so to make sure that we're not telling a lie that we're not thinking incorrectly divided by lambda and divided by lambda we want a phi to be destructive.
In other words we want a phi to be 2N plus 1 times phi.
Now the smallest would be m equals zero so the smallest angle we're looking at is phi.
The smallest angle we're looking at is phi.
So if we get delta L on its own there.
So if we get delta L on its own there.
That is phi lambda divided by 2 pi.
So delta L.
So delta L there for us is going to be phi which is just pi lambda divided by 2 pi.
Pi is cancelled.
So the smallest distance difference we're looking at is indeed lambda divided by 2.
So half the lambda is indeed the smallest because zero is the smallest m value that we can choose.
So our thinking was indeed correct which is quite obvious.
Okay but I just proved the 2 there.
Delta L is going to equal a half.
So this distance, this distance and what is that distance and what is this distance?
Has got to equal delta L.
Delta L has got to equal for us lambda over 2.
What is delta L?
Well it's the difference of the arc length and what is arc length?
Remember the angle equals the arc length divided by the radius.
So the arc length equals the angle times the radius.
And what is our angle here?
It's 180 degrees which is pi radians.
So pi radians times the radius minus what is this distance?
It's 2 times the radius.
This is the diameter.
It's going to equal lambda over 2.
In other words I can take pi out here.
I can take the radius out as a common factor.
So that's going to be lambda divided by 2.
And I'm just going to be left with pi minus 2.
Pi minus 2.
So for lambda I have 0.4 meters.
2 times pi minus 2.
And if I think I've done it there, if you put that in you're going to get to about 17.5 centimeters.
So the radius, the minimum radius for total destruction there is going to be 17.5 centimeters.
Very good trouble.
Now let's look at this very interesting problem.
I have two speakers.
They are emitting sound at the same phase.
They are 2 meters apart.
And at a 90 degree angle, opposite speaker 2, I stand at 3.75 meters.
If I take the velocity of this in-phase sound wave, and I'm saying that they travel directly, of 343 meters per second.
And my hearing is audible on frequencies from 20 hertz to 20 kilohertz.
I want to know what is the minimum frequency that these speakers have to admit for me to hear the minimum intensity sound.
So I'm looking at the destructive wave pattern there.
If I'm looking at the destructive wave pattern, the immediate thing I'm looking at is phi equals 2m plus 1 times pi.
And the minimum value of m, remember, m is a sequence starting at 0, then 1, 2, all the positive integers.
The minimum of my, the minimum value of my set of values there is 0.
So immediately I'm looking for a phase angle of 2 times 0, 0 plus 1.
So I'm looking at a phase angle of, I'm looking at a phase angle of, of pi.
Now let's just look at what is the delta L difference between this length and that length.
Well, this length, it's the right triangle.
This is going to be the square root of this square plus that squared.
And I've done that before, I think it's 17 over 4, yeah, 17 over 4 meters.
It's that length, so that minus that.
I've done that before.
And that gives me a delta L of half a meter.
Delta L of half a meter.
Okay.
Now I know that phase angle equals delta L times 2 pi divided by lambda.
In other words, so I can just rewrite this length, this thing going to be delta L 2 pi over pi.
So the minimum, the minimum phase angle that I'm dealing with here is pi.
So let's do this.
So let's do this.
So the minimum, the minimum I'm going to deal with there is going to be delta L times 2 pi divided
by pi, divided by pi.
And I know that frequency equals velocity divided by wavelength.
So I'm going to have frequency equals velocity divided by delta L 2 pi divided by pi.
And what's that going to give me?
This is going to give me 343 meters per second divided by, my delta L is a half.
A half times 2 is 1.
So it's pi over pi, which is just 1.
That is 1 meters.
So my minimum is going to be 343 in the seconds.
343 hertz.
And that falls within my range of 20 hertz to 20 kilohertz.
So that is going to be the minimum frequency for a destructive wave pattern there.
Next question, what will be the second dose frequency that will give me a destructive wave
pattern there?
And that is, we're just going to bump up one there.
So now we're going to get to m equals 1.
So that is going to give us pi angle of 2 times 1.
So 1 is to 3 of 3 pi.
And if I substitute all of that in there, if I substitute all of that in there, I'm going
to get frequency equals 343 divided by, what's going to happen here?
Delta L is still a half, times 2 pi, that's still pi, divided by, divided by 3 pi.
So these two will cancel out, so I'm left with a third.
343 divided by a third is just 343 times 3.
So for the second largest one, I'm just looking for 3 times, for 3 times f1.
3 times f1.
And I think you'll notice very quickly, if you put in m equals 2, if 2 times 4 plus 1 is 5,
you're going to have to multiply that by 5.
So it's going to be times 5, times 7, times 9.
It's going to give you destructive patterns here.
What about the constructive pattern?
What about the constructive pattern?
Immediately I'm dealing with pi equals 2, pi equals n times 2 pi.
Now, can zero be my lowest one?
Can zero be my lowest one?
Not really, because then I'm dividing by, I'm dividing by zero.
Okay, so my lowest one is actually n equals 1.
That gives me a phi equals 2 pi.
Phi equals 2 pi.
And if I now look at the frequency, frequency is going to equal velocity, which is 343 divided by a half.
Still a half, half times 2 pi is pi, divided by my phi angle, where my lowest pi is 2 pi.
So I'm looking at 343 divided by 2, and that is 343 times 2, that's 686.
686 inverse second, 686 hertz.
That's going to be, that's going to be my lowest one.
Remember, zero cannot be, because I can't divide by zero.
And if I just have, if I just have phi divided by 2 pi equals delta L divided by lambda.
For phi to be zero, delta L has got to be zero.
You'll agree with that.
If phi is zero, delta L is zero.
Because 2 pi is sitting on zero, and we do, we're not, we're not talking about dead silence.
There's no wavelength.
There's no wavelength.
There's some wavelength.
So this is zero, that's going to be zero.
And in our instance, we're not dealing with a zero delta L. There is some delta L.
So immediately delta L is not zero, phi cannot be zero.
I mean, this is practical with what we're dealing with.
We're not dealing with silence.
So for that reason, and for not being able to divide by phi, phi is not the thing that
becomes zero in these instances.
It's delta L that becomes zero.
OK.
And certainly lambda is not going to be zero, so we're not dealing with silence.
OK.
So M1 is going to be our first one.
If we just quickly look at M2, M2, 2 times 2 is 4 pi.
So phi is going to equal 4 pi.
So our frequency here, for the second lowest frequency to give us maximum or constructive wave
pattern there, I should say it's going to be 343 divided by still half times 2 pi is just
pi.
Divide by we're now dealing with 4 pi.
So that is going to be 343 times 4.
If it's going to be 343 times 4 inverse seconds.
And this was times 2.
Now I'm jumping into times 4.
So my next frequency is just going to be 2 times frequency, the original frequency,
the original lowest frequency to give me constructive wave pattern.
So the next one is going to be 4 times f1, 6 times, 8 times f1.
So this is actually a very neat problem.
