Now we're going to start looking at longitudinal compression waves.
And that is, waves through a medium can be a steel bar, which is through air,
and most they will deal with sound though, at least in these introductory notes.
There are two equations that I want to show immediately,
and that is for velocity of a longitudinal wave of compressions and rarefactions.
And the first one states that the velocity of that wave is going to equal the square root of gamma times r times t divided by m.
This we will know from heat in as much as heat capacity at constant pressure divided by the heat capacity at constant volume.
And you will remember for those, for monatomic, diatomic, and polyatomic gases, r is just the gas constant at 8.341 joules per mol per kelvin.
Temperature in kelvin, and then molecular mass, kilograms per mol.
It gives you the velocity.
There's another equation that we're going to do some problems in, and that just says it's the square root of the modulus divided by density.
If it's steel, for instance, we use Young's modulus.
If it is a liquid, we can use the bulk modulus.
But certainly these two equations that we will deal with first.
Now sound, as those compressions and rarefactions hit your eardrum, it'll be at a certain frequency.
Human beings can hear probably from about 20 hertz to about 20,000 hertz.
And any sound below 20 hertz is usually called infrasonic sounds, and sounds above 20,000 called suprasonic sounds.
And this is because the eardrum of the human being are set to respond in those frequencies.
One thing that we also need to look at together with these two equations is the speed of sound through air.
And we'll usually take the speed of sound at zero degrees Celsius to be about 351 meters per second.
It's most notably going to change due to temperature, though.
And the one equation that we do want to know is that the velocity that we're looking at divided by velocity zero,
it'll be our velocity zero equals the square root of the temperature we have divided by temperature zero.
And this temperature zero is 273 Kelvin.
No use putting zero degrees Celsius there because then you're dividing by zero, which is undefined.
So this is the relationship of the velocity of sound, and you'll see many of our problems.
The states of velocity are about 340 meters per second.
And if you plug that into the equation here, you'll say that's about 15 degrees.
About 15 degrees Celsius for this will give you about 340.
So going from the freezing point at zero degrees Celsius, freezing point of water,
if that's your air temperature, you can get about 331.
15 degrees Celsius, you're already getting to 340 meters per second.
But certainly that's the equation for you to work out the velocity that you want at a certain temperature
in the relationship to the velocity at 273 Kelvin or zero degrees Celsius.
The next concept we need to look at is just intensity of a longitudinal wave.
intensity we denote usually by I.
And that is the amount of energy, the amount of energy that travels through a certain area
perpendicular to the wave in a certain time.
So it's the amount of energy, so if our longitudinal wave of compression,
refraction, compression, refraction.
If that goes through a certain, if that goes through a certain area.
And this looks funny.
A little better.
Yeah.
So the amount of energy that is transferred through that area, which is perpendicular to
the direction of travel of the wave per second.
And we can also rewrite this as energy per time unit is average power.
So this will be power average divided by area.
Energy per unit area per unit time.
But there's another equation and this is the one that we'll deal with usually in problems
and that states that the intensity equals two pi squared, frequency squared, rho, velocity, and amplitude squared.
And that gives us the intensity for the energy transfer per unit, energy transfer power per unit area.
Two times pi squared, the frequency squared.
rho is the density of the medium, say a steel bar, the velocity of the wave, and then it's amplitude squared.
Some textbooks will use a zero squared instead of our previous friend y max, the maximum y displacement.
I think most textbooks will use a zero squared.
So certainly these three, but especially this one, is the equation of note that we'll use in most of the problems.
Now together with this intensity, we want to look at something that is, different terms are used.
This is called loudness.
How loud do you experience the sound to be?
Now there's not a linear relationship between intensity and loudness.
And for those people who love music and sound, this is the decibel that we're talking about now.
Decibels is a dimensionless unit.
I'll show you the equation now.
It's dimensionless.
But decibels is what we call that loudness or the intensity of sound.
And it's not linear, not linear to this intensity.
In actual fact, what we are looking at is beta, which is what we call loudness in decibels, equals 10 times the log 10 of the intensity of the sound divided by this base intensity.
This base intensity.
And this has a value by zero of 1.00 times 10 to the power of negative 12 watts per square meter from this equation.
Watts per square meter.
So it is a human audible thing for our mammalian eardrums, obviously not as good as other mammals such as dogs, etc.
But the intensity of the sound, which you can use one of these equations depending on what your problem states divided by this base intensity.
And many times they give you in problems the decibel and they want to know the intensity and we need to get rid of this base logarithm.
So another way to express this and perhaps a better way to memorize this equation, we can divide both sides by 10.
So that is going to be the logarithm of this.
But we like to deal with natural logarithms in mathematics and physics.
And here's a quick reason why we do that.
And remember the log base 10 I can restate as i over i zero divided by the natural log of this base here, 10.
So if I do that, I deal with exactly the same, I'm dealing with exactly the same expression as I have on this side.
The log base 10, or log base anything, you can re-express as a log with a different base.
This is log with a base weightless number.
And as long as I put this base down there, I haven't changed anything.
So look at your, review your transcendental functions again, you'll see this.
Now I can multiply both sides by the natural log of 10.
And if this is a step in front of the natural log of 10, I can take this up into the exponent.
So I'm left with the natural log of 10, beta divided by 10 equals the natural log of i divided by i zero.
So I've got the natural log of this, the natural log of that.
So I can just write e to the power of this, e to the power of this, or I can schedule both natural log on both sides.
So now I'm left, and if I take the i zero across to that side, I'm left with i equals i zero times 10 to the power of beta divided by 10.
So that's another way to express this equation, which is sometimes the better, especially if you are given the loudness in decibels that you need to work out.
And the intensity rather than this, rather than this equation.
My board's getting a bit full. The next thing I just want to mention quickly is beats.
I'm going to have a better look at beats later. So this was loudness for beats.
If I have two sound waves and they are a slightly different frequency, they're going to interfere with each other.
And that difference in frequency, frequency of B minus the frequency of A equals the beats.
Beats per number. And that is going to give you the alteration between minimum and maximum loudness as those waves interfere.
So the difference in frequency equals beats. It doesn't make a lot of sense now.
We'll just do one or two easy examples before perhaps later we have a deeper look into it.
So the difference in frequency of two waves gives you the beats per minute.
