And now we're going to interfere two waves with different amplitude.
And we do that by what I've drawn here and these are called phasols.
Phasols.
And it's a bit difficult to understand.
It's quite a careful concept.
So we're still sending two waves along the same rope.
So the angular frequency is going to be the same.
The angular wave number is going to be the same.
And then obviously the velocity is going to be the same.
But what is not the same is their amplitudes.
Y max 2.
They're not the same.
So how can we add those together?
And the clever way of doing that is to represent the travelling wave as a vector.
And this vector has magnitude of the amplitude.
And it goes around our coordinate system here.
In a clockwise direction at the angular frequency of omega.
And what we've done here is I've drawn two of them.
And they are separated by phase angle phi.
Right there.
And if you want to combine them to see what the resultant new y of r is.
Remember if they both had the same y max.
We said that that was two times y max times the cosine of half of phi.
We can't do that anymore because the two individual ones are not the same.
So we represent them as phasals.
And as I've shown you, you can draw the two of them.
And they are separated by the phase angle.
If the phase angle is positive, that means y lags.
This vector 2 lags vector 1 as they move in a clockwise direction.
If it's negative, if phi is negative, it means vector 2 is leading vector 1.
And all we do is we add them vectorially.
So we've got 1 here.
We put the leading one first.
There goes the second one.
And we have a resultant vector here.
And that resultant vector now also goes around.
And that is our y r.
This is y max of 1.
And this is y max of 2.
And then there's an angle between the leading vector and the resultant vector.
And we call that beta.
We call that beta.
And how do we get that?
Well, we look at a problem as to how to get that.
So this new resultant vector is the one that is going to go around.
And that is now a way to represent the new amplitude.
Now let's look at an example which will, I think, much better illustrate the concept behind the phasor as I've just explained it.
We have two waves set along the same rope.
One has got an amplitude of 4mm.
The second one of 3mm.
And now phase angle, I think, pi over 3.
A third pi.
Let's have a look.
Yes.
Apart.
So when one is ahead of phase 2 and as much as the phase angle is positive.
We want to know what the resultant amplitude is going to be and what this angle beta is going to be.
And let's have a quick look.
Let's represent this vectorially as we do with phases.
So our coordinate system.
And because 1 leads 2, let's draw 1 first.
And the best way to do that is to take a snapshot because remember that's a vector that goes around.
Take a snapshot exactly when it is at the x axis.
So there we have a 4mm, for instance.
So that is our ym1.
And then an angle, pi over 3, we have a second one.
And that is ym2 at 3mm.
And the angle between them is pi over 3 radians.
Pi over 3 radians.
And I'm just going to add them vectorially.
So I'm going to just bring this one's tail to the head of that one.
And if I get this resultant line here, if I get this resultant line here, that is going to be our y resultant.
And how are we going to do that?
Well, we'll just decompose.
We'll just decompose these two vectors.
So let's add them on the x axis.
So y resultant in the x direction.
In the x direction is just going to be 4mm because this one is flat.
4.0mm plus this one.
Now remember this angle here is also pi over 3.
So that is just going to be the cosine of 3mm times the cosine of pi over 3 radians.
Pi over 3 radians.
And so yr in the x direction is going to be, let's check that on the calculator.
It's going to be about 5.50mm.
Let's do y resultant in the y direction.
The first one has no y component.
So it's going to be 0mm plus it is going to be 3mm times the sine of 5 over 3 radians.
And let's see.
So yr in the y direction is going to be, on my calculator I did it, that was about 6.1mm.
6.1mm.
So I've added that.
So what we have here is the decomposition now of this vector.
I'm not going to explain why we do cosine and sine there.
By now you should know that.
So y resultant is going to be the square root of yr in the x direction squared plus yr in the y direction squared.
So y resultant is going to be in the order of, I think when you just add them, this is 2.6, what am I talking about?
Sorry.
That's all wrong.
I hope you caught that.
It's about 2.6mm.
I was just carefully checked because I wrote it so small.
It's 5.5, 2.6 as the resultant is 6.1mm.
6.1mm.
And how do I get this angle?
Remember this angle is now beta.
Well, I know what this length is.
I know what this length is.
I know what that length is.
And the tangent of beta, the tangent of beta equals, it's going to be a y resultant in
the y direction.
divided by y resultant in the y direction, divided by y resultant in the x direction.
In other words, we're going to write beta, it's going to equal the arc tangent, by y resultant
in the y direction, divided by y resultant in the x direction.
In other words, we're going to write beta, it's going to equal the arc tangent, for us
of, in the y direction we said was 2.6, of 2.6 divided by, in the x direction was 5.5.
5.5 and that angle worked out to about, and 0.44 radians.
0.44 radians.
So now I think it becomes much clearer, what we mean by, what we mean by, um, what we mean
by beta, and how easy it is if you just put the leading vector on the x axis, and then
adding the phase angle is so simple, and just a vectorial addition of those two's, and you
are then left with the resultant already in the component form as far as y and x values
are concerned, and then it's very easy to get, then it's very easy to get, um, to get beta.
And then just lastly, the way that we do write this final answer, the way that we do write
this final answer as y resultant, for those two waves, um, uh, for those two waves in x and t,
is going to be, okay, let's stop there, I'll do that one in the next video. As promised,
the next, or the final part, is there is a standard way of writing these, uh, the new equation
in x and t, this placement in x and t, and that is going to be your y resultant now, which
we just calculated, and still the sign, they both have the same k, they both have the sign
omega, and then this is going to be plus beta, and that beta is what we get there. So, once
you've calculated this, this is the standard form in which to write this resultant equation.
