Now in the previous video we looked at a graphic displaying to us nicely what happens to two ways that interfere moving in opposite directions.
And we clearly saw that for each specific spot in our medium, which is a row, for that x value there's going to be a different amplitude.
And it's not going to be simply two times the amplitude of our initial waves.
And there is an equation for that and let's have a quick look at it.
If we take that the y of x in x in t equals y max the amplitude times the sine of kx minus omega t.
Let's make this our first wave traveling in that direction.
And let's make our second wave now traveling in the opposite direction.
And we know how to do that.
x plus omega t.
So our two waves here have the same amplitude and they have the same angular wave number.
And they have the same angular frequency but they're traveling in opposite directions.
And through the principle of superposition we can now just look at y1 plus y2 which is going to equal the sum of those two.
If I add these two to each other I can take out the amplitude as a common factor.
And I'm going to be left with the sine of kx minus omega t plus the sine of kx plus omega t.
Now there is a trigonometric identity which you should never forget.
And that states that the sine of an angle plus the sine of another angle equals.
Need a bit of space because it's a long one and I've seen it before.
It's two times the sine of a half of a plus b times the cosine of a half times a minus b.
So that's the trigonometric identity which we should remember.
And if we do this, if we say that kx minus omega t is a and kx plus omega t is b.
So minus omega is a plus omega is b.
We are left with ym.
I'm going to bring that two out.
So it's two y maximum times the sine.
And what are we going to have?
A.
Excuse me.
I'm going to have a plus b.
So it's going to be kx plus kx.
First of all there's going to be a half.
Then kx plus kx is two kx.
And minus omega t plus omega t is zero.
And I'm going to have the cosine of a half.
And I'm going to have kx minus kx.
I'm going to have negative omega t negative.
So that's negative two omega t.
But remember the cosine of negative of an angle is the same as cosine of a positive of that angle.
So it's also going to be two times omega t there.
So I'm left with two ym sine of kx.
And I'm going to put these in brackets like that times the cosine of omega t.
So this gives us now what we're showing in the previous graphic, a standing wave.
And it just, in any position x, in any position x, this term, this term here is going to give us the amplitude.
And that's why we see the amplitude is going to vary.
The amplitude is going to vary according to what spot in the robot x position you are looking at.
And it's also going to oscillate as far as that's concerned.
This is not a travelling wave.
It is not in the form of, it is not in this form.
And that's why we call this a standing, a standing wave.
So in any position x, we can see what the amplitude is going to be.
And as you travel along, it's obviously going to do that.
So if you're given a problem, and just a quick one, if you're given a problem,
where you're given some y max value, and then the sine of kx minus omega t,
and there's some values in there, and that's the resultant wave after interference,
remember that means that these two waves are travelling in the same direction,
interfering with each other.
And I want to put values in there, say that's four, and that's five, and that's two.
So this two together will say four.
If you were given it as four times the sine of four x plus, say, five t,
I'm just using examples.
If that's all you're given, and a plus z, that means those two waves are travelling together
in the negative x direction.
And that's what we looked at before.
Remember, same amplitude waves.
Before we looked at phases where the amplitude of the two waves differ,
but they're still travelling together.
When two waves travel together, same amplitude, the same wavelength,
the same frequency.
If that is a negative, it means they were travelling in a positive x direction.
If that was positive, it means they're travelling in a negative x direction.
And if you're given an example, say for instance, the sine of four x plus five t times the cosine
of whatever amount of t.
Now that shows you that these two waves were travelling in opposite directions.
So just note clearly, when you are given examples of resultant waves, this is all from interference.
In this, they were both travelling positive.
In this, they were both travelling in the negative.
This means they were travelling in opposite directions.
If you get a result in this form, those waves were travelling in the opposite direction.
My plan is to do a few examples with staining waves and resonance.
I do not want to go back into the explanation of resonance as we did those in the introductory
videos and please look at those again before you attempt some of these examples that I
hope I get some time to do in the following videos.
There's just one thing that I just want to make very clear.
Remember we said if we had it closed at once with this, closed at both ends and as much
as we had a node, anti-node node, that that was our fundamental, fundamental wave.
That with two ends together and if we did, if we did this, if one end was open and the other
end was closed, remember we were going to get this.
Oh, my drawing skills are really bad today.
There we go.
This obviously should just be long ago.
Okay.
Sorry about that.
So that's node, that's anti-node, that's node, that's anti-node.
If one end was open, then this was our fundamental wave.
And if both ends were open, if both ends were free to move, this was our node, this is anti-node,
this is anti-node.
So these were in the three situations, this was our three fundamental waves.
And some textbooks will then call the first harmonic on top of that the first harmonic.
Other textbooks in which I do prefer is to call this the first harmonic.
First harmonic.
And the second harmonic.
And the first harmonic for this situation, and the first harmonic for this situation.
So this fundamental wave in our three situations is called then the first harmonic, and then subsequent
ones will be the second harmonic.
So don't get confused between the first videos where I call this the fundamental wave and then
one on from the first harmonic.
I think most textbooks will call this first harmonic, this first harmonic, and this first harmonic.
So don't get confused with those.
