In this section I want to look at the polarization of light.
What we need for that is just to remind ourselves of the equations of intensity of light
because light that is polarized will have a lower intensity than unpolarized light.
And remember we said that that was the average of the pointing vector
and that was the amplitude of the electric wave square divided by 2c mu zero.
And if we used E the root mean square there, remember that 2 disappeared.
So what we're dealing with with the polarization of light is the axis of the electric wave.
So if I have the electric wave going in this direction and it is in a certain plane
and if it goes in this direction and I view it directly from here, in other words,
and at that point the wave is coming directly to me, the electric field oscillates.
The electric field will oscillate up and down.
So it will be coming at you in this direction.
And E in that end, but remember it's a sinusoidal wave so it comes down as well.
So this would be the axis of polarization.
When unpolarized light shines at you though, I mean there's light coming at you
and they point in all sorts of directions.
All sorts of directions.
Okay.
And what we can do is we can just deconstruct all of these into a y and z component.
Remember the x direction is now coming at you.
So this will be the y axis and this will be the z axis.
The z axis is actually negative on that side.
Okay.
For a right-hand coordinate system.
So we can deconstruct all of those into y.
There will be a y component and there will be a z component.
Or a z component.
There's a y component, there's a z component.
And I can now pass this unpolarized light, which I have deconstructed into these vectors here.
I can pass that through a polarized filter, which is this long chain of molecules.
And those slits, for instance, will then just allow light along a certain axis.
So if this light came through, this polarizing filter, these will be taken away.
The z axis will be taken away and will only have along this y.
And what will happen, what you do have to realize, the decomposition of this, this is em.
All of these have length em.
So in the end, there is em along the y axis and this is em along the z axis.
But they're equal in size.
So what we in fact are losing is half.
What we are losing is half.
So if I look at the intensity of the light after being polarized from unpolarized light,
it's going to be my initial intensity just divided by 2.
And this is called the one half, it's more chalk, this is the one half, one half rule.
Okay, so that is coming from unpolarized, from unpolarized light.
Now, what if the light that comes to me is already slightly polarized,
is already polarized, and, but this was not the direction,
imagine this was the direction of my polarization filter.
So all those long molecules were now in this direction.
The light that comes to me was in this, was polarized in this direction.
Well, there will be an angle between them.
There will be an angle between them, and then the component,
remember this is em along the y axis.
So the component of em y along this axis here,
along that x axis is going to be em along the y axis of my component,
is now just going to be the em y cosine of theta.
The cosine of theta.
Remember, this is my axis, this is perpendicular to my axis,
this is my angle, so this is my hypotenuse,
and this cosine of the angle is adjacent divided by hypotenuse.
So that certainly is, and I should say this is this component,
this component along that axis.
So now, what happens if I take i,
which is now, not this unpolarized light,
it's already polarized in this direction,
okay, divided by,
um, um,
divided by i zero.
Now what was i?
Remember, it was this.
So my incident light was going to be dm,
the light that,
they get confused.
i zero is this what comes in,
the intensity of this polarized light that comes in
that makes an angle of my polarizing filter now,
that's the i.
And that is my em y cosine of theta.
That is the intensity of the light that comes in.
It is only the component of em y
along this mu axis of mine,
and what was my original intensity that came in?
It was just this em y zero.
So em,
that's squared, remember?
Squared,
em squared,
divided by 2 c mu zero.
Okay, let me confuse you by this one.
I made a few mistakes.
Okay,
so the light that comes in
is already polarized
along this em y component.
And it has a component
along this axis
of em y cosine of theta.
Okay,
that is the light that comes out
divided by the original light that came in
is just this full,
the full light that came in,
not the component.
The component is the part
that's going to come through.
The component is the part that comes through.
I can say finally here versus the initial.
And all of these all cancel out.
These all cancel out,
and I'm left with the fact that
i equals i zero
times the cosine of the angle between them squared.
And that's called the cosine squared rule.
Cosine squared rule.
So that's my wonder rule.
Here's my other one.
These are the two
that we are interested in.
I'm just going to iterate some in.
There's no ambiguity here.
This was unpolarized light.
I deconstructed all these vectors
along two axes.
These are both the same magnitude.
So if I take them away
by the polarizing line of polarization
being in the same axis as the y-axis,
I'm losing half of my light intensity.
So what comes out,
the final,
after going through the polarizing,
is going to be half of what goes in.
Here I've already got
my polarized light,
but my filter makes an angle of theta
with that line of polarization.
Okay, so only that has come through.
Now, it has a component.
Only the component,
if I deconstruct this vector
along this new line of polarization,
which is E and y cosine of theta,
comes out.
And that's why I have here
E and y cosine theta,
but remember it's going to be squared.
So the squared divided by what came in
was this E and y.
E and y that came in
divided by 2c mu zero.
Everything cancels out
one left to the cosine of zero.
So this is the intensity
that's going to come out
of a polarizing filter
if the light that came in
was unpolarized.
This is if the light that came in
was already polarized
and there's an angle.
And think about it,
if the angle between them was zero,
the cosine squared of zero
is still zero.
Oh, this is y.
In other words,
the light that comes out
will be the same intensity
as that that came in
because the angle is exactly the same.
If it was 90 degrees
opposed to that,
the cosine squared of 90 degrees
is zero.
So the light,
no light will come in
and that is why
if you have the two polarizing,
we've all played with that.
Opposing each other,
the axis of polarization,
it'll be black.
You won't see anything.
Nothing comes out
because the cosine of 90 degrees
is zero.
And remember,
you are playing with two of them.
So the light that comes through one
from my second instance
to you is already polarized.
So the light that comes
to the second one
is already polarized
and we use that equation.
