Now let's consider the electromagnetic wave more carefully.
Now there is an electromagnetic spectrum, we go from long wavelengths to shorter wavelengths,
which is the radio waves, microwaves, we get to infrared, we get the visual spectrum,
we get ultraviolet, we get x-rays, we get gamma rays, we all know that spectrum.
And at the subatomic particle level, under the laws of quantum physics,
these electromagnetic waves can get generated.
What we want to look at though is something a lot simpler,
and when we are generating the electromagnetic wave here,
I think we will stick with wavelengths of about a meter and we'll simplify things greatly
so that we can understand what's going on here.
So this is done by, this electromagnetic wave that travels out here is done through,
we have an AC generator, alternating current generator,
we have a capacitor, an inductor there, a resistor there.
Same on this side inasmuch as this forms a transformer, with the wires going out,
and then this is what is called an antennae, so these are just solid conducting rugs.
Now, what we will create here is our waves, these are the wave fronts,
and these will be generated at an angular frequency of one over the square root of the inductance times the capacitance.
So we can work out what the frequency is inasmuch as omega equals 2 pi times the frequency.
2 pi times the frequency.
Now, what happens in these electromagnetic waves?
What we do see is that we get an electric wave, an electric field, sorry,
that we are visualizing as a vector in this direction and a magnetic field perpendicular to it.
Remember, through, we have Faraday's law of induction, we have Faraday's law of induction, which we have there.
But we also have Maxwell's law of induction.
Let us just write it here, Maxwell's law of induction.
Maxwell's law of induction.
Now, where is Faraday's law of induction?
Remember that we said Faraday's law of induction.
Through a change of magnetic field, over time I am creating an electric field.
And with Maxwell's law, I am creating a, through a change in electric field, I am creating a magnetic field.
So we are going to have B dot ds.
And that is going to equal, I am going to copy from there, so I am making a mistake.
It is mu zero, permittivity constant, change in electric flux, change in electric flux, dt.
Yes, I have got that right.
Okay, so Maxwell's law of induction, change in electric field,
and give electric flux, giving us magnetic field change in the relative change of the flux.
A magnetic flux equals an electric field.
Okay, so one generates the other.
So from there, I am going to go to a point where this gets smaller and this gets smaller.
Eb.
To a point, perhaps, where there is nothing.
To a point where this now changes around.
E is in that direction.
B is now in that direction.
B and E.
And to a point where, say, B is there.
E is there.
I don't know if you can see down there.
E is there.
To a point, perhaps, where this guy gets smaller again.
This gets smaller to a point where there is nothing.
To a point where it will be smaller on this side, smaller on this side.
B and E.
Getting a little crowded.
But what you can see, just look at the E at the electric field.
Large, smaller than nothing.
Smaller than large.
Smaller than nothing.
You can see clearly that there is a sinus, a sinusoidal wave going on there.
So, on some axis, so the x axis, we're going to get this, we're going to get this electric
field doing this.
Nothing.
Nothing.
Nothing.
So that we have, so that we have this, oh, that's terrible.
So that we have this wave pattern.
That's terrible.
Okay, so that is what happens to our electric field.
But perpendicular to that, we're going to have this magnetic field sticking out, perpendicular
to this, and nothing.
And then there, and there, and there, and then nothing.
And then again there, and there.
So what I was trying to show is that these are perpendicular to each other.
So we have this wave going like this.
It's difficult to draw.
So those, these two are perpendicular to each other here.
So one induces the other.
And then there's this continuous induction of each other through Maxwell's law of induction
and Faraday's law of induction that we get this alternating electric magnetic fields.
Because they are in phase, they are always in phase as you can see.
That's one thing.
And we can write both of them.
It's reverse.
We can write both of them.
This then is e equals, which is the amplitude, the sine of kx minus omega t.
And we can have the magnetic field equals, as well, the amplitude of that wave times the sine of kx minus omega t.
And what we'll see later is that the speed of light, or not speed of light, speed of all electromagnetic waves through a vacuum
is this em divided by bm.
And if we just divide these two into each other and we replace that, we'll also see that that equals e divided by b.
Okay.
It's very important to note that this, that this is always, this is a constant.
The speed of the electromagnetic wave is a constant.
Okay.
This is not so well drawn, obviously.
As I said, difficult for me to draw on the blackboard these things in three dimensions, but you can see what is happening.
One last thing that I want you to say, e cross b, e cross product b, is always going to give you the direction of, the direction of the magnetic wave, electromagnetic wave.
So that's the e field, and this is the b field, that's e cross b.
So my, so the direction of this alternating electromagnetic fields, the electromagnetic wave, is in, is in that direction.
And these are always, these are always perpendicular to each other.
And they're always perpendicular as well to the direction of the velocity of the electromagnetic wave.
Let's do a very quick problem.
If we use that same electric, electromagnetic wave generator as we had in the previous video.
And let's say we have, let's see there, a capacitor in it with 17 pico farad.
So that 17 pico is 10 to the power of negative 12 farad.
And we want to generate waves or wavelength 550 nanometers.
Nano is 10 to the power of negative 9 meters.
We want to know what inductance, what is the magnitude of the inductance of the inductor that we have to put in that system to give us this wavelength.
And that's quite easy, I think, if we just look at a few of the equations that we do know.
We, for instance, know that omega equals 1 over the square root of L times C.
We know that this also equal to 2 pi times the frequency.
We don't know what the frequency is, but we suddenly know what the wavelength is.
And we know we are dealing with electromagnetic waves, so we're dealing with a constant velocity.
C is now going to equal pi times the frequency.
So this frequency we can replace with C over lambda.
So we're going to get 1 over the square root of LC equals 2 times pi times C.
The speed of the electric wavelength waves divided by lambda.
Divided by lambda, we can square both sides.
So we're going to get 1 over LC is going to equal 4 pi squared C squared divided by lambda squared.
And now we just have to get L on its own.
So if we take that up to the other side, we're going to get L equals L up to the other side.
We're going to get lambda squared divided by 4 pi squared C squared.
And that will give us so much Henry.
And I've done it before.
Just check your answer.
I got to, let's see, 5, about 5.0 times 10 to the power of negative 21 Henry.
So just check on that result.
If you get the same on your calculator.
So this was basic manipulation, algebraic manipulation of these 1, 2, 3 equations.
Okay.
