Here's a very good problem. We do x-ray scattering of an electron, still standing free electron, so it's not photoelectrically big, at 90 degrees.
So if we have our incoming electromagnetic wave, okay, this is the direction of it, it hits the electron, and it's now going to scatter off in this direction.
So it scatters off in this direction, the electron is going to scatter off, the electron is going to scatter off, here's my electron, here's my lambda, here's my lambda prime, it's going to scatter off.
And I want to know what is the electron scattering velocities along the x and y direction.
Now we haven't looked at, we say that the momentum, the momentum of a photon equals h over lambda, but for a particle non-relativistically, it's p equals mv, these are vectors.
So, the books don't do this, and please don't do this, but just think about these as being vectors as well.
Please think of those as being vectors as well, and then do it on paper.
Anyway, so we've got to break this up along the x and the y-axis.
But first of all, what we've got to say to each other is that p equals p prime, as far as these vectors are concerned, we have conservation of a linear momentum here.
So, what is my momentum initially? My momentum initially is just the momentum of the x-ray.
Nothing happens there, but let's break it down into the x-axis, and let's do the y-axis separately.
What happens in the x-axis? Initially in the x-axis, we have momentum, we have momentum of the x-ray.
So that's going to be h over lambda, there's no momentum of the electron, it's standing still, and that's going to equal, that's going to equal momentum after the collision, p prime.
So what is that going to be in the x-axis? Well, as far as the x-ray photon is concerned, it's going 90 degrees down, so there's nothing there in the x-axis.
And then we're going to have mv in the x-axis, as far as the momentum of that electron is concerned.
What happens in the y-direction? Well, initially there's no momentum in the y-direction initially, because that's standing still, that's moving in the x-direction.
So that's going to be zero equals. What is momentum in the y-direction? In the y-direction. Now we've got to choose a coordinate system here, and let's choose a coordinate system like this.
positive y-positive y-positive y-positive x. So it's moving, I should have said that in the negative y-direction, problems in the negative y-direction.
Okay, so it is going to have a negative, we can call it a negative h over lambda prime, plus, we're going to have mass times velocity in the y-direction for, mass times velocity in the y-direction for the momentum of the electron.
Now it's easy to solve, mv in the x-direction, mv in the x-direction equals, well that's this h over lambda, and for that I get about 7.37 times 10 to the power of negative 23 kilograms meters per second.
And for mv in the y-direction, and for mv in the y-direction, I'm taking this negative h over y-prime to the other side, and then I get an answer for mv in the y-direction of about 5.8.
Well, I didn't do the rest, but check in your calculator exactly how much it is, 23 kilograms meters per second, and obviously I don't have y-prime, I don't have y-prime, but I know that lambda prime, I know that lambda prime is lambda equals h of mc, 1 minus the cosine of theta,
which is 90 degrees of, 90 degrees of zero, so this is the one. So I can just solve here for lambda prime, which is going to be lambda plus h over mc.
So for lambda prime here, for lambda prime here, I've got to put, I've got to put this value for lambda prime in the, good.
In 1923, Louis de Broglie suggested that if a massless, if massless light has momentum, in other words, we are seeing it as a particle, can't a particle have wave-like properties?
And if the momentum of this photon is that, can't we say that, well, its wavelength is going to be Planck's constant divided by its momentum?
And certainly if we're dealing with non-relativistic momentums, we can say that that equals Planck's constant, I should say, divided by mass times velocity, for non-relativistic momentums.
So if we have the mass of an electron as 9.11 times 10 to the power of 300 kilograms, and it travels at this non-relativistic speed of 6 times 10 to the power of 6 meters per second, does it have a wavelength?
And yes, we can say the wavelength. And yes, we can say the wavelength, then, is going to equal Planck's constant, divided by this mass times velocity, and for that I get an answer of 1.2 times 10 to the power of negative 10 meters.
That is the wavelength. Here's an electron, and it has a wavelength. It looks like a wave instead of a particle, if we look at it this way.
And is that so? Yes. Davidson, American, Goerner, British, they took beams of electrons, and they put it through nickel crystals, and they saw a diffraction pattern.
And later on, in the previous century, we had the diffraction, double-slip diffraction experiments with beams of electrons, and indeed, they show a diffraction pattern on a screen.
We've discussed this before, and that means, indeed, the electron has, or does behave like a wave.
And there we can work out its wavelength.
So, indeed, this suggestion was quite correct.
Now, let's take some kind of ball with a mass of 0.15 kilogram, and we throw it at a velocity, say, of 13 meters per second.
What is its wavelength going to be? Certainly, that's not a relativistic, so we can just plug it in there.
So, for that ball, baseball, trickle ball, whatever ball, we get a wavelength of, I get 3.4 times 10 to the power of negative 34 meters.
Now, there was diffraction here, because between these nickel atoms, there is a space that is comparable to this wavelength.
So, it's the same as we did with light, with a diffraction pattern, and as much as the width, or the distance between the two slits, was comparable to the wavelength.
So, because those spaces between the nickel atoms and the crystal are comparable to this wavelength, indeed, we are going to get diffraction.
But now, we have for a baseball this wavelength, and if we remember, if we remember that theta, that angle of sketching, equals the arc sine of M times, what is it, lambda, divided by width.
And we say, well, the width of an average window, say, is a half a meter window, so if I throw that baseball through the window, look at this.
This is nothing. Remember, M is 0, or 1, or 2, or 3, for the bright bands.
This is nothing, absolutely nothing, came to the power of negative 34, that is so small, divided by half a meter, times whatever M.
The arc sine of nothing is 0, so that's why we don't see, for macroscopic masses, we're not going to see any diffraction happen as it moves through, as it moves through a window.
We're not going to notice, certainly, a mass of a wavelength of this chair, or my wavelength, as I move along the hospital corridors.
You're not going to see my wavelength, and I'm not certainly going to diffract when I walk through the theater doors.
So, we're dealing with very small, we've got to do with a very, we have to deal with very small masses here, to see the wavelength of a particle.
Good, so in these problems, we're only dealing with monorelativistic speeds, so we're just going to plug in MV.
So, lambda is going to be equal, plug's length, divided by mass, times velocity.
And if we're talking about diffraction, we remember, the single slit diffraction, the angle is going to be the arc sine of M, ending 0, 1, 2, 3, of the wavelength, divided by the width of that slit.
Um, okay, so let's, look, look, if we remember those things, let's look at four quick five problems.
We have a stone that falls from a height and it elevates at g.
Now, is its wavelength going to increase or decrease as it falls?
Well, its velocity is going to keep on increasing, making the wavelength decrease, decrease as it falls.
Can an electron and a neutron have the same de Broglie wavelength?
Well, their masses differ completely, but yes, they can have the same if we just change the velocity so that their momentums are equal.
Okay, they can't have the same, um, um, as, as, they have different masses, they have to have different velocities to give us the same momentum, to give us the same wavelength.
So, does this angle of diffraction, increase, decrease, will stay the same for a proton in Young's double slit experiment?
Um, so I'm just, I'm just mixing and matching this, this equation here, but if you watch those videos, you'll know, uh, exactly what we're talking about.
So, for a proton weighs a lot more, so this mass is going to be larger than the denominator, so the wavelength is going to be smaller, so the angle is going to be smaller, so it certainly decreases.
An electron through a single slit, an electron through a single slit, the proton through a similar slit, which has the greatest diffraction.
So, the largest angle would require the largest wavelength, and the largest wavelength requires the smallest mass, smaller denominator, larger fraction.
So, the electron will have the largest angle of diffraction.
St contracting.
And if you want to see that one fully whipping one, you'll see that the temperature is going to be smaller.
As, you can see, roadblocks, you'll see it.
So, upstart side and sole comfort.
Now, I don't see a lot more time within just before placing my отделon side or whatever encouraging one.
And I want to actually "'your Virginia positions'.
So, I'm doing well dimension like square.
So, that's about this one that is going square right forward.
That's the probability that should not be able to cover this, in my opinion.
And that's a lot more momentum will forcément force as well on the entrances.
And that's practicing.
