And now for a very important topic. Very quickly, the Doppler effect. Doppler effect. And it states that if there is a source and an observer and there is longitudinal waves traveling between them and there's relative motion, one moves, both can move, one can move, the other one can move, they both can move together.
They're in opposite directions. The frequency that the observer observes, if this relative motion is going to be different than the frequency at which the source gives off that sound wave.
And this is the all-important equation. The frequency that the observer is equals the frequency of the source times the velocity of the wave, the velocity of the wave, plus or minus the velocity of the observer, divided by the velocity of the wave, plus or minus the velocity of the source.
Immediately get to ask, when do I use positive and when do I use negative? Simple rule, if this is the source and this is the observer, we draw a vector or a line pointing from the observer to the source.
If the observer moves as a velocity in the direction of this arrow, this is positive. If it moves in the opposite direction from this vector pointing in this direction, it is negative.
The exact same for the source. If it is the source. If it is the source that is moving against this arrow, it will be a negative. And if the source moves in the direction of this vector, it is positive.
So you'll see many times that this equation is written as fs times v plus minus v zero and v minus plus v source, velocity of source. And this is just the velocity of the sound wave.
So you'll see the velocity, the frequency that the observer is going to be different except that these two are standing still and these two are both zero.
Then obviously the frequency that the observer is going to be exactly the same as the frequency.
Okay, so let's just look at it for instance. Say for instance this is zero, the source is standing still.
And the observer is rushing towards the source. Now think about it, if you're running towards it, that means you're going to hear, there's going to be bunching up, you're going to hear a higher frequency.
And as much as the per second, waves per second are going to increase. And that is why if you move in the direction of this vector, this will be a positive.
So the numerator is going to be higher than your denominator. So this will go up. Conversely, if it moves away, this is going to be a negative numerator smaller than the denominator.
So this is going to be the frequency of observed sound is going to be less. So this is the all important, and I think we're going to deal with it a lot more, all important equation of the Doppler effect.
