Let's deal with this very good problem.
I have a plane electromagnetic wave transmitted isotopically from a point source at 4 times 10 to the power of 14 inverse seconds hertz.
At time equals zero, the electric field component, we told along the positive y-axis,
is a quarter of the amplitude, a quarter of the maximum, and it is decreasing.
And they want to know, in the negative and the positive x-direction, how far from this time t0, the x-value at time t0, is the electric field component zero.
Let's figure that out.
I have an x-axis.
At a certain time t0, at a certain time t0, I am at a certain x-value.
And I'm told at that time, the electric field, which is in the y-direction, is at a positive, a quarter of, so say that's a quarter, say that's half, three quarters, one, so em, this is going to be my e-maximum.
It is at a quarter and it is decreasing.
So it's going to go something like this, and then it's going to go something like this.
So they want to know, from this x0, how far in the negative x-direction, so let's mark the spot x-negative, and then in the positive x-direction, x-positive, so what is that distance, what is that distance, where the electric field is zero again.
I might read it to you, because even that is a bit of an explanation.
An electromagnetic wave with a frequency of 4 times 10 to the power of 14 hertz travels through a vacuum in the positive direction of the x-axis.
The wave has its electric field directed parallel to the y-axis with amplitude em.
At time equals t0, the electric field at point p on the x-axis has a value of a positive em divided by 4, and is decreasing with time.
What is the distance along the x-axis from point p to the first point, e equals zero, if we search in the negative direction and in the positive direction of the x-axis?
With only that tiny bit of information, how are we going to do that?
Well, e equals em sine of kx minus omega t, but we're dealing with t0, so time is zero so I can stop it there.
If I have k, if I have frequency, do I know k, because I know at time equals zero, time equals zero, this is also time equals zero, hence I don't have the minus omega t, omega times zero is zero.
So still at time zero, I know e equals em divided by 4 equals em, the sine of, now I need k, because if I have x, x is the only variable I have and I want to solve for x.
Well, I know that k equals 2pi over lambda, I don't have lambda, but I have frequency, I know c equals frequency times lambda, in other words lambda equals c divided by frequency, lambda equals c, so k equals 2pi divided by c divided by frequency, or I can put the frequency up there.
Okay, so I'm going to have 2pi, okay, okay, so I'm going to have 2pi, frequency divided by c, because I'm told it's an electromagnetic wave, x.
So, this is going to cancel out, so I have a quarter equals the sine of 2pi times the frequency divided by c, x.
I can take the arc sine on both sides, so I'm going to be left with 2pi times the frequency divided by c, x, equals the arc sine of a quarter.
remember to put your calculator in the radians here
ok so x is going to equal
c times the arc sine
of a quarter divided by 2 pi times the frequency
times 2 pi times the frequency
and if I work that out I'm going to have an x
and this is my x0 because it is at time t0
so I can work out my x0 and I work it out I get 3.01
3.01 times 10 to the power of negative 8 meters
so I know where this is
ok I know where that is
now
now
we need to work out these other two
so from e equals
still at time equals 0 that hasn't changed
em sine of kx
I now have e equaling 0
so now I have 0 equals em sine of kx
and I know what k is
I can divide both sides by em
so I'm just going to have the sine of
what was kx
what was k
k is 2 pi frequency divided by c
2 pi frequency divided by c
x equals 0
and it is going to equal 0
when the sine of what the arc sine of 0 is 0
so when this is 0 so when 2 pi frequency over c
x equals 0
ok when that is 0 the sine of that equals 0
so what is x going to be well x is 0
so it is going to be right there x equals 0
so x negative is x 0
so this distance
is that minus 0
is that minus 0
is this going to be my answer here
so going in the negative direction
the first time I have my electromagnetic wave 0
is going to be there
where is the next one going to be
well
where is the next one going to be
well I suppose there are different ways of looking at this
but when is the sine of
sine of what
when is it 0
let me put it this way
I still have now that the sine of this has got to equal 0
and that will be when this is 0
or when this is pi
because the sine of 180 degrees
or the sine of pi is also 0
so from there I'm just going to go to
a half a wavelength
that's the other way to look at it
I'm just going to go from there
half a wavelength over
and that is going to give me 0 again
because
I'm still stuck with this
sine of 2 pi frequency
divided by c times x
has got to be 0
that will be when this is 0
or when this is pi
so I now have this equals pi
so I'm going to be left with
x equals c pi
divided by 2 pi times the frequency
so that is equal to c
divided by 2 times the frequency
and for that I got
3.75
3.75
times 10 to the power
negative 7 meters
and if I take this now
I have this x positive value
I have this x zero value here
so if I subtract those two
from each other
I get
I've got to go across
I've got about
345
345 nanometers
across to that side
so it's an excellent problem
you've got to really think this through
of what all of that means
but if you've got a graph like that
it is actually so easy
and if you don't
if you just take your equations
and just think about what they mean for you
especially here
it's quite easy to solve
thank you
