Now let's do those quick fire questions so that we just see that we do understand the concepts that we're dealing with here.
If I do an experiment and the kinetic energies of the photoelectrons that come off have different kinetic energies,
did I use monochromatic light?
No, I did not because monochromatic light would have given me a single frequency
and a single frequency in as much as Ke max is going to equal HF minus WO.
It's the same metal. That doesn't change. H doesn't change.
So for me to have different kinetic energies of those electrons, I've got to have different frequencies
and that means I cannot have monochromatic light.
Second quick fire one, I have different light bulbs.
One gives off red light, the other one gives off green light, the other one gives off violet light.
Which one will have, which one will have, if all of them have more energy than the work energy of a metal that it shines on,
which one will give off photoelectrons with the highest and which one with the lowest kinetic energy.
Obviously the violet is going to have a higher frequency, so it's going to give off higher frequency,
higher kinetic energy of photoelectrons and the red light is going to give off photoelectrons with the lowest kinetic energy
because it will have a lower frequency than violet light.
Next question, if I have two red light bulbs, the first red light bulb has a power of 100 watt
and the other one has power of 10 watt, will there be a difference in the kinetic energy
of the both at the same frequency red light?
Will one have a higher kinetic energy photoelectrons?
No, indeed not, because kinetic energy depends only on the frequency there.
If each day is a constant, and I'm showing on the same metal surface with the same work function,
it does not matter of power, so it does not matter what intensity this light is.
If they're both at the same frequency, the same wavelength, they're going to have photoelectrons at the same kinetic energy.
Okay, second last one, I want to increase the kinetic energy, the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons
that are ejected from a metal.
Do I, which one of these do I do?
Do I increase the frequency of the incident light?
Indeed, if I increase this, this will be higher, so that one's correct.
The number of photons per second, that's not going to help me anything.
There's no number of photons per second.
Use photons with energy less than the work energy divided by H.
Well, if I use photons with work energy less than it's required, then that's not going to help me.
And then select metal with a higher work function, and this increases, this is going to increase,
and that doesn't work.
So it's only by increasing the incident light frequency.
Here's the most important, and the last of these quickfire problems.
If I take light and I increase its intensity, but I keep the frequency the same, what's going
to happen to current?
Now, you can construct a vacuum tube, and we have our metal here, and we have our detector
there, and we're going to strike this with some light, and we can measure the current in here,
or we can have a wire along which the current runs.
So I increase the intensity, but I keep the frequency constant.
What's going to happen to the current?
Well, it's going to increase.
What's going to happen to the number of electrons per second that I eject?
It's also going to increase.
Okay?
With the intensity increases.
What's going to happen to the kinetic energy of these electrons with a constant frequency,
even though the intensity increases, that's not going to change, and neither is the momentum.
The momentum is also going to stay exactly the same.
Before we go on to some more problems, let's just look at a particle versus a photon as far
as it's equations for energy and momentum is concerned.
So for a particle, the total energy is going to be kinetic energy plus potential energy.
And if it's not non-relativistic velocities or speeds, I'm dealing with half mv squared.
And what is the momentum?
Well, again, non-relativistically, it's going to be mass times velocity.
What about a photon load?
The energy in a photon is hf, plus constant times the frequency.
And what is the momentum?
Well, that's h divided by lambda.
h divided by lambda.
Let's probably start with the problems.
We are told that the dissociation energy for the molecule cyanogen is 1.22 times 10 to the power 18 joule.
Now, the dissociation energy is the amount of energy required to break up a molecule into its constituent atoms.
And the question is, say, for instance, it takes one photon to dissociate that molecule.
What must be the wavelength and frequency of that molecule?
And what part of the spectrum, electromagnetic spectrum, is that photon going to be?
Well, the main idea, the key idea here is that if it breaks up the photon, it is the minimum amount of energy required.
In other words, there should be nothing left for kinetic energy.
It's just about breaking it up.
So, our kinetic energy max is going to equals, well, equals 0 in this instance.
And we know that ke max equals hf minus the work energy.
And this work energy is going to be this breakup energy there.
Seeing this is 0, we're going to have hf equals w0.
And we're just going to have that f equals w0 divided by h.
But we also know that hc divided by lambda equals w0.
So, I'll just replace that f by c over lambda.
And if I get lambda on its own, it will be hc divided by w0.
So, for frequency, for frequency, I get 1.84, 1.84 times 10 to the power of 15 hertz.
And for lambda, for the wavelength, I get about 163 nanometers.
And that is certainly in the ultraviolet light part of the spectrum, ultraviolet light.
In this problem, I have a certain metal with a work function of 4.8 times 10 to the power of negative 19 joule.
And I shine two types of light on it.
One with wavelength A, one with wavelength B.
When I shine the light of wavelength A on there, I get photoelectrons injected at 7.3 times 10 to the power of 5 meters per second.
And if I shine light with wavelength B on it, I get the electrons injected at a velocity of 5 times 10 to the power of 5 meters per second.
What is the wavelength of light A and B?
So, certainly here we will have some kinetic energy as much as they have, as much as they do have.
I don't know what that was.
So, if I do have a kinetic energy, I'm going to have some mass of the electron.
Remember, that's 9.11 times 10 to the power of negative 31 kilogram.
I also know that kinetic energy for these particles, remember, it was half nearly squared.
We're not dealing with relativistic velocities here.
So, certainly we can just use that.
We also know that kinetic energy max equals HF, or we're dealing with lambda here.
So, it's going to actually be lambda minus the work energy.
I'm interested in lambda, so that's going to be easy.
I'm going to have HC divided by lambda is going to equal ke max, ke max plus W, take it to the other side.
And then lambda, then it's going to be HC over ke max, it's going to be a half mv squared, mv squared plus W0.
That is going to be that.
So, for lambda A, I'm going to plug in velocity A there.
For lambda B, I'm going to plug in velocity for B there.
So, lambda A, for my answer, plugging in 7.3 times 10 to the power of 5 meters per second squared day.
And as much as everything else, it's the same.
I'm going to lambda A of 275 nanometers.
And the lambda B, check on your calculator, 355 nanometers.
Now, let's do this problem.
I have sunlight shining perpendicular on the surface of the earth at an intensity of 680 watts per square meter.
If, for instance, all that light had the same wavelength, which is able to roll out to the same wavelength, 715 nanometers.
How many photons per second per square meter strike the earth?
Now, imagine this problem I want to tackle is, imagine I can't remember any of the equations for intensity.
I'm not quite sure.
We can always fall back, not always, but instead of 715, we can fall back.
And I'm just using I for intensity.
But it certainly says it is watts per square meter.
And watts is energy, joules per second, energy per time.
And then A for area, because it's per square meter.
And area is square meter.
So that certainly is an equation there for intensity as far as those units are concerned.
Okay?
So that's not a proper way of solving this problem.
But certainly, say, for instance, we are stuck.
Can we figure this one out?
Well, so the intensity is going to be the energy of those photons.
And I know what the energy of photons are.
That equals HF.
And I'm dealing here with lambda.
So we're going to be HC divided by lambda.
So I'm going to have that intensity now.
It's going to be HC lambda T8.
Lambda T8.
And what do I want?
I want photons, which is not necessary.
I want per second per square meter.
So what do I want?
Per second is one at a time.
Per square meter is area.
So I have that day.
If I keep that day, I'm going to have lambda on that side.
The lambda is going to go up.
Together with the intensity, lambda goes up.
And HC comes down to this side.
So I have intensity times the wavelength divided by planks constant divided by times C.
And if I plug those in, I have 730.
I have 680.
I have 6.63 times 10 to power negative 34 joules per second.
Joules seconds, I should say.
And 3 times 10 to the power 8 meters per second.
If I plug all of those in, I get 2.50 times 10 to the power 21 photons.
And that'll be per second per square meter as far as area is concerned.
And I was given this, I'm using this, this unit, this unit, say per second, per second.
Okay.
