Okay, let's start off by looking at this problem. Now we're going to look at a 60 watt light bulb running at 2.1% efficiency. It gives off monochromatic light at 545 nanometers. And I want to know how many photons come off per second.
Now this whole chapter is actually going to be, or at least the end of the chapter is going to be about the kinetic energy of those photons that come off, not the number of them. So this is going to give me some indication of, or it's going to give me an indication of the intensity. But don't let this problem change you with what we're really going to be after in the next, in the next sections at least. But anyway, let's do this problem.
So we're saying we have a certain amount of power, which equals 60.0 joules per second, but it's only running at 2.1% efficiency. So I've got to multiply it by 2.1 over 100, and that gives me 1.26 joules per second. But I don't want joules per second, I want photons per second.
I have 1.6 joules per second. I have 1.6 joules to play with, and I do have an equation for the energy of, so that will be in joules, of a photon. And that is H, Planck's constant times the frequency.
So if I know what the energy then of one photon is, I have so many to play with. So if I just divide this in there, I'm going to get so many photons per second.
OK. We don't have F, though, but we know C equals F over lambda. In other words, F is going to be C over lambda. In other words, energy is going to equal Hc divided by lambda.
H times C, speed of light in a vacuum, divided by lambda. OK, so that's the energy for one photon at this wavelength.
So that's for one photon, but that's going to give me 10 to the power negative of whatever joules. For one photon, but I have 1.26 joules to play with, so if I just divide this in there, I'm going to get photons per second.
Another just more algebraic, mathematical way to look at it is that power equals energy divided by time.
I didn't want how many seconds. I didn't want how many seconds. I want to solve for T, but I want photons per second. Photons are not an SI unit, so I'm actually off the per second.
So I'm going to have 1 over T is going to be P divided by E. OK, I want per second.
And E, we know what that is. So 1 over T is going to equal P over E is Hc divided by lambda, so the lambda goes up there.
And if I plug in my values there, see that you get the same answer. I get 3.52 times 10 to the power 18 photons per second.
3.52 times 10 to the power 18 photons per second. But the concept which we're after is, this is the energy of one photon.
And so many joules, I have 1.26 joules to play with, so if I divide this into there, so this divided by this, is going to give me joules, photons per second.
Now, as I said, it's not that problem that we just dealt with. Let it not derail us, because this is the work that we're after.
And this is from the photoelectric effect, as per Albert Einstein.
So on the x-axis we have frequency, and on the y-axis we have the kinetic energy of the ejected electron.
So this is the concept. Now, this is not how a real atom would look, but certainly here we'll have the nucleus positively charged
due to the protons, and then the neutral neutrons, and in the cloud around it, but let's make it orbits, we're going to have these electrons.
Now, an electron that is furthest away in a certain orbit, let's call it orbit or something like that, is going to be the least bound to this.
An electron here will be more bound than an electron out here.
So we will certainly have in every atom, except in just a hydrogen positive, just a proton.
So in any atom, we're going to have this least bound electron. We're going to have the least bound electron.
Now, a photon is going to come along, and it's going to do some work on that electron.
And that electron will have a certain amount of work, we call it W0, that has to be done on it to eject it out of its orbit.
And this is where the particle-like nature, which I alluded to in the first video, comes from.
If this was just a wave, we would have thought if we give it a higher, same frequency, same wavelength, but higher intensity,
certainly after some time, it will transfer enough energy to that electron to eject it.
What was noted, though, that this is not so, that this is not so, that at a certain frequency,
that certain frequency from E equals HF, so that will give this photon a certain amount of energy,
or that's also equal to the number Ht divided by lambda, is going to give it a certain amount of energy.
That energy will do work on this electron, which will eject it.
And the minimum amount of work that needs to be done on this electron to eject it is called this work function W0.
That's the minimum amount.
So your photon better be of sufficient energy to eject this electron, to eject this electron.
If it has less energy than this minimum work function requires, it's not going to eject that electron.
In other words, I need a sufficiently small wavelength or higher frequency.
In other words, I'm going towards ultraviolet, going towards that side of the spectrum, to eject this.
Okay, and if I have an excess amount of energy, this electron is not only going to come loose,
because with the work, if my energy just is enough to do this work, it'll just come out of its orbit.
It'll just be ejected, but it'll have no kinetic energy.
If it has an excess amount, certainly this electron will come off with a certain amount of kinetic energy.
Okay, and that is also quantized inasmuch as we will also have this oscillator story that we had right in the beginning.
That if it comes off with energy of HF and it required 3HF to do, it's still going to be left with 2HF.
Let that not confuse you at the moment. We'll certainly get there.
Okay, but what we're dealing with is this equation here.
So the kinetic energy with which it comes off, which is then going to be the maximum kinetic energy,
is going to be the energy of this electron, the energy of this electron minus this minimum work that needs to be done to eject that electron.
Okay, so this is the equation that we're after in the next section and set of our problem.
Let's start this problem, do this problem, but before I start, let me just say again,
the kinetic energy of that ejected electron, which was initially called the photoelectron or the system electron,
ejected because a photon interacted with it.
That kinetic energy is only dependent upon the frequency or then the wavelength of that photon that interacts with it,
not on the intensity.
the intensity is not going to make a single bit of difference to the kinetic energy of the photoelectron.
So now we have a metal with a work function of 4.73 electron volt,
and I want to know what is the minimum frequency to eject the least strong electron that is bound to the nucleus in that metal.
So what am I saying here? I'm actually saying that the kinetic energy max has got to equal zero.
The least frequency. So the least frequency is going to give me the least amount of energy,
which means it's just going to eject. There's going to be nothing left for kinetic energy.
It's just going to be ejected. And I know ke equals hf minus the work function.
This is zero, so I have hf equals w zero. In other words, f equals w zero divided by h.
w zero is 4.73 electron volts. We'll remember how to change that to SI units, which would be joules.
And we know that 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 joules is 1 electron volt.
So if I multiply those, I lose my electron volt, and I have 4.73 times 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 joules
divided by Planck's constant, 6.63 times 10 to the power negative 34 joules seconds.
And that will give me a frequency, in other words, per second or hertz of,
look at your answer, but it's 1.14 times 10 to the power 15 hertz.
This is the f minimum, the lowest frequency that I require to just eject an electron.
The electron will have nothing left for kinetic energy.
And just for interest's sake, if I use lambda equals c divided by frequency,
that gives me 263 nanometer photon, which is another short wavelength,
so it's certainly going to be less than the visual spectrum.
We're going to require ultraviolet light to eject this electron
because of the work function of the specific metal that I'm dealing with.
Once again, even the most minimal amount of weak, weak, weak ultraviolet light at this wavelength,
that falls on there, is going to eject an electron.
Okay.
It is not about the intensity.
The intensity is not going to change this.
It's not going to change that.
Okay.
Now, we have a 95 nanometer electromagnetic wave shines on a selenium surface,
and that selenium has a work function of 5.9 electron volt.
We can change that to 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 joules per one electron volt.
So we can certainly get that answer for its work function in terms of joules as opposed to electron volts.
It ejects some electrons and they have some kinetic energy.
What is the maximum velocity of those?
Now, I can tell you now these electrons are not going to have a velocity that is anything near 0.1c.
So it's not going to be any significant fraction of c.
So we don't have to use relativistic equations here for kinetic energy in as much as kinetic energy equals half times mv squared.
Half times mv squared.
We don't have to use relativistic mc squared divided by or gamma, which is the Lorentz factor times mc squared.
We don't have to use that equation.
It's not going to be a high enough velocity.
So we can use that.
In other words, 2k kinetic energy equals mv squared.
So we're going to have v equals the square root of 2 times the kinetic energy divided by mass.
That means we need the mass of this electron.
And we know electron is 9.11.
But it's two significant digits.
I'm going to stick with 9.1 times 10 to the power of negative 31 kilograms.
I'm going to stay with that.
We know our equation for kinetic energy.
Max of this photoelectron, and that is hf minus, hf minus w0.
We don't know what that, we don't know f, but we know that that is hc divided by lambda minus w0.
That is my kinetic energy, which I'm going to plug in there.
In other words, velocity is going to equal two times.
We're going to have hc divided by lambda minus w0 divided by the mass.
Let's see.
And then that means I get a velocity of 1.6 times 10 to the power of 6 meters per second.
1.6 times 10 to the power of 6 meters per second.
So it's sitting up high enough for me to use a relativistic equation there.
So let's stick with the normal kinetic energy equation for, kinetic energy equation for,
for non-relativistic velocities.
