In the introductory videos on waves, when we talked about standing waves, I said it's very difficult sometimes to interpret this n value which you'll see in some of the equations.
And if you thought about it just in a pattern of drawing it on paper or in your mind, I said that it's easy then for you not to make a mistake and work out the problems.
When I want to do that for completeness sake, sometimes you can be told in a problem n equals 4.
And I don't want you to be concerned about that and not know what's going on.
So what I've done here is an example where we have fixed n's on both sides.
So we're going to have node, anti-node, node which is our fundamental wave.
And we now call this, so that we don't get confused, the first harmonic.
Now what have I done to go from here to here?
I'm going to look at this shortly.
I've added another, this is what I had before, and I've added another half a wavelength.
I've added another half a wavelength and I got to this picture which will be our second harmonic.
Our second harmonic.
So from that picture I now have there, and once again I add another half a wavelength.
It's a full wavelength.
So I've just added another half a wavelength.
And now I've got three of these sections.
One section, two sections, three of these sections.
And this will call our third harmonic.
And this one we're going to call our fourth harmonic.
And once again from this then I've just added another half and now I get four sections.
So look at the wavelength of our first harmonic.
Seeing that that's only half a wave, one whole wavelength would have been two times L if this is my distance L.
If this is my distance L you'd have been.
I want to write a slightly different form here.
And I'm going to write lambda equals two over one L.
I haven't changed anything.
Now by adding another half a wavelength I'm making my wavelength now exactly equal to L.
Once again I just want to write it in a different form.
It's going to be two over two L.
Let me do this.
I've added another half a wavelength.
And now I have that if I take this whole length L and I divide it into thirds.
Two thirds will make up one wavelength.
So lambda equals two over three L.
And lastly you see where we came with this.
There's a whole wavelength there.
So the whole wavelength makes a path of L.
Which I can write as two over four L.
And this for obvious reasons this is where N comes in.
This is where N comes in.
So we can write lambda equals two over N times L.
For N equals one, two, three positive integers.
And this is going to be my harmonics.
First harmonic, second harmonic, and third harmonic.
So it becomes easy for us now to incorporate N.
If you want to and you have problems do state that.
But whatever harmonic lambda is going to be there.
And we know that frequency equals velocity divided by lambda.
So frequency is going to be velocity divided by lambda.
Which we now know is two L over N.
In other words we can take V times N over two L.
For frequency for each of our harmonics.
Harmonic one, two and three positive integers.
So the two equations with N.
It's quite easy to understand if you look at it this way.
Now let's do a problem where we have this N.
The fourth harmonic.
And remember we've just looked at these two equations here.
And I've explained to you how we've got to them.
And remember this is only for fundamental waves of this nature.
And its harmonics.
Not open on one or both sides.
That's all we're dealing with here.
So we set up this scenario.
This rope.
It hangs over Puglia with a certain mass.
It is 1.2 meters long.
The linear density of the rope is that.
0.0016 kilograms per meter.
It resonates at a frequency.
Setting up a fourth harmonic of 120 in a second.
We want to know what mass must be there.
Immediately when we deal with waves like this.
We're looking at velocity.
We know velocity equals frequency times the wavelength.
But we also know that it is tau divided by mu.
And because the tension of this rope is the same as the force of gravity in this instance.
Which is mg.
We're going to have that equal tau.
So we know the velocity equals mg over mu.
That's going to be the velocity in the rope there.
Because if we look at this equation that we have.
If we look at this equation that we have.
Inasmuch as frequency equals n times velocity divided by 2L.
Inasmuch as we can say frequency equals n times.
This is going to be mg over mu.
Divided by 2L.
Divided by 2L.
We're going to have 2L if equals or divided by n equals mg over mu.
We're going to have 4L squared frequency squared over n squared equals mg over mu.
And very finally we're going to have n equals 4L squared f squared mu divided by n squared times g.
A very simple problem to set up.
And we now know how to use n as a harmonic number to solve this problem.
Now let's use n again as an example.
And this is a very easy example.
Although I think I should call it an acute little problem.
We are told we have 2.
We take the same piece of rope.
So it has the same linear density.
And one we make length L.
And we cut another piece of that same rope off.
And we call this 4 times L.
And I put them under the same tension.
So tau 1 equals tau 2 equals tau.
And they have the same linear density of course.
Linear density equals the linear density.
And I set up and I call this first situation A and I call this situation B.
And I set up a harmonic series.
And I want to know for string A which is now length L.
In the first 8 harmonics.
So n1 to n8.
So we are going to have F1 all the way to F8.
That's for A.
For A.
So F1 to F8.
And I look at FB1 to F frequency B8.
Because n is now 8.
Look at the first 8 harmonics of A and the first 8 harmonics of B.
Which if any of the frequencies of the harmonic B are going to equal some of the frequencies on the left hand side as far as the first one, the second one and the third harmonics concerned.
So it will have a certain frequency, it will have a certain frequency, it will have a certain frequency.
So which of the first 8 harmonics, if any, will equal the frequency of A first, second and third harmonic.
Now we know that F equals, and I want to make a mistake, nv over 2L.
So let's look at F of A.
It's going to be, oops, oopsie, it's going to be n of 1 times B divided by 2L.
And if we look at F of B for some certain n is going to be n of 2.
Same velocity, remember it's the same row.
Over 2 times L is now 4L, so that's 8L.
So that's now 8L.
So if we just look, the velocities are the same for these two.
So if we just look at this.
If we just look at this.
So for these two to be the same, those two are the same, that means these two have got to be the same.
So I'm left with n1 over 2L equals n2 over 8L.
In other words, n2L is going to be n1 over 8L divided by 2L.
And that means n2 is going to equal 4 times n1.
So for my first one, so for some of these two equal that, I'm looking at n2's equaling 4 times n1.
So if n1 is 1, I'm looking at harmonic number 4 in the B situation.
will then equal 1.
If I'm looking at n2, if I'm looking at n2, 4 times 2, that's going to be 8.
8 times n1.
Where are we now?
So for harmonic 1, this will equal 2.
That equals 4, sorry.
So the fourth one here equals 1.
The eighth one here, the eighth harmonic will equal the harmonic 2 here.
And then the third harmonic will be harmonic number 12 on our list, but we're only asked to consider the first 8.
We only consider this.
So 4 times number 3.
We want to make 1 that's equal to 3, will be 4 times 3, which is 12, which is not on our list.
So it's only harmonic 4 and 8 in this series of B that will equal 1 and 2 on this side.
