Now we're going to talk about the intensity of sound. Now we did that in the introductory videos
and what we mentioned was if we have a point sound source
and from that comes what is called an isotropic sound wave
and all that means is that in all directions the intensity is the same.
So in a three-dimensional surface around that and a sphere around that, a certain amount of energy per unit time,
in other words power, will pass through some, it's going to be round, some spherical surface.
So we said that intensity according to this was dE, delta E, delta T, so energy per unit time or power per unit area.
So that was p average per unit area.
And we actually also had an equation for that.
We said that intensity equals two pi squared, frequency squared, rho, velocity, and we had a zero squared.
But seeing we're now using Sn for our amplitude, that's amplitude squared.
Another way to express this is just to remember that omega equals two pi times the frequency.
And there I have pi squared, frequency squared.
So if I square all of this, I will have that pi squared, frequency squared equals omega squared divided by four.
And if I substitute that in there, I'm going to get intensity equals, intensity equals, where are we, two.
And that becomes omega squared divided by four.
And we'll have rho, V, S, M squared.
So we can get equals a half.
And it's usually written a rho, V omega squared, S, M squared.
So from this equation that we have in the introductory notes, we can also express it in this way.
Now we need to derive this equation.
Once again, with this video, you can memorize these equations or you can derive them.
And we're going to derive them very simply by looking at the following effect.
That some differential kinetic energy is going to equal a half times differential mass times velocity.
I'm going to put a little S squared.
Because, remember, in our tube, filled with air.
Oh, wait.
Here we go, filled with air.
Remember, here's our sound wave.
And we took this delta x, this delta x, just a small sliver, the differential sliver there of, of, um, of air there.
In our compression, compression of air affection compression in our sound wave.
And we will note that then velocity equals area times dx.
So that's area times dx.
And that's going to give us the volume, um, of our tiny little section there.
So when we talk about the kinetic energy of any point particle in here moving,
we're not talking about the velocity of the wave.
We're talking about the velocity back and forth of that little element in that amplitude there.
Okay.
So that's why it's not the velocity.
If I'm talking about the kinetic energy of that little point there, the kinetic energy of that little point,
I'm talking about its oscillating motion.
I'm not talking about the velocity.
It's not the velocity of the wave.
Okay.
So, so, so, so.
We can also express dm in another way in as much as density equals differential mass divided by volume.
And we've just seen volume as a dx.
So, rho equals dm divided by a dx.
In other words, dm, dm is going to equal rho a dx.
Rho a dx.
Let's substitute that.
Let's substitute that.
So, I'm going to have dk equals a half.
Now, I'm going to have rho a dx.
Rho a dx.
Dx.
And I'm going to do something with this vx.
Now, remember, we said that it's just this displacement here.
And that displacement, we said s equals sm times the cosine of kx minus omega t.
Okay.
And for us to get velocity, for us to get velocity just of that is going to be di s di t, ds dt,
or partial derivative of s with respect to t, in other words, k is a constant.
And that was, remember, negative sm omega sine of kx minus omega t.
Remember that from the previous one.
And you can all do this first order derivative.
And that's squared.
So, I'm going to have omega squared, sm squared, and then sine squared of this.
And remember, the average, because we're only dealing with averages here, not specific.
The average value of the sine squared of an angle equals a half.
So, this squared, if I square everything, this was squared, which I put in there now,
it will be sine squared.
And the average value of sine squared of anything is a half.
Is a half.
Okay.
So, now I'm left with dk equals a quarter rho a dx omega squared sm squared.
And now I'm just going to divide both sides by dt, which is quite legal to do.
So, now I'm talking about the average power here.
This is all average because I made this into a half.
dx dt.
This is my dx, and it is moving along.
It is moving along.
So, dx dt here, that is the velocity of the wave.
It's not the same as this velocity here.
So, I'm saying that dk dt, and this is average, equals a quarter rho a b omega squared sm squared.
Now, we said intensity is this p divided by the average.
But this is only the average kinetic energy.
There's also potential energy in this movement.
And to average things out, and you look at, just watching Dr. Degas again,
we're just going to call that total two times this.
That potential energy, that average potential energy is equal to the average kinetic energy.
And those two are additive.
So, I'm multiplying both sides by two.
Okay?
So, I'm going to get a half.
I'm going to get a half.
And intensity is then this 2 dk dt divided by that area there.
Two times this.
So, that's going to give me a half there.
And I'm just going to cancel out the areas.
So, I'm going to be left with a half rho v omega squared sm squared.
And what do we have?
A half rho velocity omega squared sm squared.
Then you have the derivation of these two equations, should you be interested, as opposed to just memorizing them.
Now, we need only beginning with a point source.
Here's the problem that you have a spark that jumps a gap of 10 meters.
And then it emits sound energy of a power of 1.6 times 10 to the power of 4 watt.
Over this whole 10 meter line.
So, that's not a point source of sound, but a line source of sound.
And we want to know what is the intensity radius 12 meters away.
12 meters away.
What is the intensity 12 meters away?
What we can construct is a cylinder.
So, we can construct a cylinder with open ends.
And if we take it that this line source of sound is isotropic as well, so the intensity everywhere in the outer direction is going to be the same.
It doesn't emit more here than it does there.
And we take the fact that intensity equals the average power divided by area.
So, we have just got to divide this by, now it's not the surface of the sphere, but it's this surface of, not the end caps, the surface of, because the sound, we're just taking for granted that the sound comes out in federal lines, if I can call it that.
And the surface area of the cylinder, just the side wall of the cylinder, is going to be this length, length, divided by this circumference here, which is 2 by 1.5.
So, we can divide, divide by 2 times pi times r times the length.
And if I do that, I get, let's do that, I haven't done that, let's do that on the calculator quickly.
I'm going to get, I'm going to get 1.6, 1.6 times 10 to the power of 4, divided by 2 times pi, times the radius, which is now 12 meters, times l of 10 meters.
So, I'm going to get, I'm going to get about 21.2 to 1 watts per square meter.
So, that's roughly 20, how many significant digits?
I think that's probably 2.
So, that's 21 watts per square meter.
21 watts per square meter.
Now, we want to know, let me keep my calculator handy.
If I put a little detector here, which has a surface area of 2 square centimeters, what, let me just make sure what is the question.
We also want to know, we want to know, we want to know p, we want to know p for this small little area here.
So, we already know that i equals pa over a.
We want to know pa now, so that's i times a.
And we have a value for i, which is in watts per square meter.
We just need to change this to square centimeters.
So, let's do that.
So, that is going to be 1 square meter equals 100 square centimeters square.
So, that is 10,000.
Those will cancel out.
10,000.
It's going to bring us to 0.0021221 watts per square centimeter.
So, here I'm going to have 0.0021221 watts per square centimeter times.
It is 2 square centimeters, I think.
Yeah, 2 square centimeters.
Times 2 square centimeters.
Those go.
So, I'm left with the kinetic or the energy per time unit or power of my little 2 square centimeter surface there.
This is going to be 0.004144 watts.
And it's 1, 2, 3.
So, that's going to be about 4.1.
About 4.1 milli watts.
4.1 milli watts.
So, not only can we do a sphere around a point charge, but we can also do this cylindrical service, not charge, but sound source around this linear sound source.
So, not charge.
So, maybe that's not usually.
Too bad.
Go to back to the air station.
Yes, that's not usually due.
I mean it principle.
That's right.
Too bad.
Thank you, sir.
You just Spam.
Correct.
Sorry.
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.
But I'm sorry.
We didn't fancy a measurement leader originally happened to them.
I, that's the point.
I will sit.
I think that it's better and be эффclamation cheerers evolved with than any other paranormal radiation.
It is good.
I could not show you anything with that guy and I can comment the guideload.
Det道 high floor here.
And to mention the鏡bild link.
So, I don't know that.
