Good, let's get to the third Maxwell equation, Faraday's law of induction. I'm just going to write it here. We also have this surface integral, the electric field dot product, some length equals negative the rate of change of magnetic flux.
In other words, with respect to time. And how does this work? How did we get to that? And it is basically from, or remember from electromagnetism, that if I have a changing magnetic field, I induce an electric field.
And there were certain ways to look at that. Let's say for instance, I have this cylinder of magnetic fields, and they're all going into the board.
So it's uniform. And it's magnitude and direction, so it goes into the board. And I change the magnetic field strength, either increasing it or decreasing it, say with an electric electromagnet.
And I have that. And I have a copper wire inside of this. I am going to induce current in this copper wire, not merely at all being static with the magnetic field there going into the board.
So if I change the strength of that magnetic field, if I change the strength of that magnetic field, I increase it or I decrease it, that change will induce.
That change will induce. We also think at that experiment if you just had this two copper wires, and then this one I can attach to some meter reading, and this one I bring further and closer, and it's got a current going through it, that will induce a magnetic field.
And if that magnetic field strength changes, I induce a current in this loop. Or just when I switch it on or off, that sudden change in the current will induce a changing magnetic field and induce a current in this.
And through Lenz's law, you can work out, you know, which direction that current flows. But what is amazing is this copper wire needn't be there.
First of all, first of all, I can have a smaller, larger, larger, larger copper wire. No matter where the radius of this copper wire is, I will induce a current.
And to have an induced current, remember, something drives those induction electrons in that current, and that is an electric field.
Actually, so everywhere along this, along this tangent to this, there will be an electric field driving those induction electrons.
So I'm inducing an electric field by creating an electromotor force driving my induction electrons.
Now, as I said, we don't even need the copper wire there to have this induced electric field because of the changing magnetic field.
I need nothing there whatsoever. That will happen in a vacuum as long as I change the magnetic field.
So that's what it will down to. I'm going to have an electromotor force that's going to be negative, this change in magnetic flux.
Because remember, I can draw an empyrean surface there, and I will have a change in the magnetic field due to Gauss's law of the magnetic field.
So this change in magnetic field, and remember that minus sign is going to be negative.
This change, the rate of change in the magnetic field gives me an electromotor force.
Okay, and there need to be that wire there. Now, the next thing we need to remember is that work equals the integral of force times distance.
Force times distance. What we also remember from electromagnetism is that the electromotor force is equal to
is equal to the energy per unit charge that I'm driving. So if I'm driving electrons there, it is the energy per electron there that I'm driving.
In other words, work equals electromotor force times that. Force, on the other hand, remember that electric field equals force divided by charge.
So force equals force equals eq0. So for this I can write eq0 ds. And the q0, remember that's our unit charge.
That is a constant that can be brought out of the integral sign. So I can just cancel those two out.
So I have the electromotor force equals eq0 ds. But it also equals this. So there we go. The Faraday's law of induction, inducing an electric field in a changing magnetic field.
And that's the integral of this dot product through the whole loop. And through this whole length of this loop.
Okay. Equals negative the rate of change of the magnetic flux. Negative the rate of change of that magnetic flux.
We can just go a bit further. Remember that will give us, if e, if that electric field is constant, at least the magnitude throughout,
the integral of the integral of the integral of ds. And remember that this whole s, this whole length of the circle equals 2pi times the radius.
In other words, ds equals 2pi dr. And if I fit that in there, I get e, electromotor force equals e, 2pi dr. So 2pi comes out. And the integral of dr is this r.
So that e equals 2pi r times the electric field. So I can work out exactly what this electromotor force is at whatever radius I'm dealing with.
Or if I know the radius and the electromotor force, I can work out the electric field.
Again, that's inconsequential. We have the max third Maxwell equation.
Okay. The last of the Maxwell equations we need to look at is the Maxwell and Peel law. And that's a bit more involved, so we'll just briefly go over it.
And what we're dealing with here, let me write it here, is we're integrating through a whole loop this time of the magnetic field,
dot product with the length of the loop that we are creating, equals mu zero, I enclosed.
That is the enclosed charge, plus we're going to have mu zero, plus I displacement. And we have I displacement there.
It's epsilon zero times the rate of change of electric flux. So let me write it here so we can have the full law here.
For you to memorize d flux e dt. So there's the Maxwell and Peel law. Let's just run through what these mean quickly.
Remember, if I have a charge carrying wire, so that's my wire and the charge is coming straight at you, and I draw an empyrean loop around it,
and I integrate over this whole loop. Remember this curve will induce a magnetic field, say for instance at this distance r away that I've done here,
and I take small little differential lengths there, okay, if I have more than one say, I have another wire going there.
But I don't know what direction my magnetic field is, imagine it's in that direction, at that specific spot.
And it'll be the cosine, the component of b along ds is just going to be the cosine of b, the cosine of the angle of b times b, so that's a dot product b dot ds.
Okay, and if I go along the whole loop, I'm integrating over the whole loop, so I'm summing all of those,
and that is going to be proportional to the enclosed current with this constant of proportionality.
When it comes to the second part, we're dealing with an LC circuit, so I have a capacitor, an inductor, and a plate capacitor,
in my resistor, and then my, there we go. So, as we remember, or just watch the videos again, of inductance capacitance circuits,
what happens is, as the one builds up, the other electric field dies down, and vice versa.
But there is what is called a displacement, a displacement current running there, which is an imaginary current.
So, displacement is actually a poor term for it, but anyway, there's a displacement current,
which, if you watch those videos, this equals the current that is flowing in the circuit at that specific time anyway.
So, and look at those videos, how to derive this displacement current equals the,
to a permittivity constant times the change in electric flux across this capacitor.
So, we've got to add both of those in this loop integral of ours for, for Ampere's law.
So, that's Ampere's law, and we have to add the induced current there as well.
So, that is known as the Ampere Maxwell, Ampere Maxwell law.
We might have a better look at this a bit later, but watch the videos on, on the displacement current,
to work out Ampere's law, to look at the derivation, especially of, of this, of this equation.
All right.
Thank you.
