Now the problem that we just did follows on to this, as a very generalized form of the
problem we had before. We're given the equation of a wave where the displacement in the y
direction of any specific point, any specific time, so with respect to x and time is given
as some constant in meters, which is my ym, and some function of h, which is also a function
of x and t, and in this instance it's a, which is a constant, per meter x, plus b inverse
seconds, which is my omega t. And I'm told to use the general differential equation for
a wave, which is going to be v equals the square root of di squared y over di t squared
divided by di squared of y over di x squared. The square root of all of that to get to the
velocity. And we've been looking at the sine curve all along, but in one of the very first
videos I mentioned that you need to use the sine function. Here we just have some other
function, we just call it h, as long as this is not x squared or the square root of x and
that is t to the power 5 or whatever. As long as we have it in this form, this still describes
a wave. And does this generalized form hold to calculate the velocity using the general differential
equation. Let's have a look. So first of all I need, I need di square, di, di y, di t. In other
words x is a constant. So I'm still going to have, now remember we have a little trick again.
To save time, I'm going to call this, let's do it. I'm going to call, still in my phase here,
let's call it epsilon. Epsilon equals a inverse meters x plus b inverse second t. And what I'll
do here, let's take di e, di t. In other words x is a constant, so I'm going to be left with
b inverse seconds. And if I take di e, di x, in other words t is a constant, I'm going to
be left with a inverse meters. I'm going to be left with a inverse meters. Okay, so let's
go, di y, di t. So that is still going to be c meters. Now I'm going to have the h prime
of epsilon, the first derivative of that, times the derivative of the inside, but partial derivative
with respect to time. So that is just going to be b inverse seconds. b inverse seconds.
So I'm going to be left with cb meters per second times h prime of epsilon. I've just
used epsilon in the previous example, I used p. If I take the second derivative with respect
to time, what am I going to have here? I'm going to have cb meters per second, cb meters per
second, times the second derivative of epsilon, times again the partial derivative with respect
to time of epsilon because remember x is a constant, so that's still going to be b in the seconds.
And I'm going to be left with cb squared, cb squared. I'm left with meters per second squared,
h prime prime of epsilon. Okay, and if I do di y di x, t is now a constant from this. I'm
still going to have c meters. I'm going to have the h prime of epsilon, and now I'm going
to have a, a inverse meters, because I'm differentiating partial derivative of this with respect to x and t
being a constant, which we've done there. So that is going to equal c, a, and the meters
are going to cancel out. So I'm going to have c, a, and I'm going to have h prime of epsilon. And if I take the
second derivative now, like x, I'm going to be left with again, I'm going to be left with c, a, h prime prime of epsilon, again, times a in those meters. So that's going to leave me with a c, a squared, and I have in those meters, and I have h prime prime of x, h prime prime of epsilon. So, and all that remains now, I have a
c, a cross-p m is just what I wanted to plug me in to my equation here, so what could I get?
and I have h prime prime of x, h prime prime of epsilon, sorry, and all that remains now
is just for me to plug this into my equation here. So what will I get? I'm going to get
the square root of, I'm going to get the square root of cb squared meters per second squared
h prime prime of epsilon. Can you still see there in the corner? No. But anyway, divide
it by this one here, which is ca squared, which is ca squared, and has meters, inverse meters,
and again, h prime prime of epsilon. Those will cancel, c's will cancel, and I'm going
to be left to the square root of b squared minus a squared, which is just going to be
b divided by a, which is just going to be b divided by a, which is going to be the velocity,
and remember what we said as well, with b equals frequency times lambda, that was going to be
frequency, was going to be frequency, omega equals 2 pi times the frequency, that's omega
divided by 2 pi times 2 pi divided by k. Those cancel out, so it's going to be left to
b equals omega k, and omega is b, that's omega, and k is z, angular wave number, which is a, and
look at that. Now isn't that a thing of beauty? Generalized form, any function, as long as in
x and t, as first order variables, there's no problem in as much as what we use here for h. I mean,
we can probably have a video as to what form this can take, like the sine, the cosine, or just
this journal h, in which it cannot take. I mean, that's, that's a bit of mathematics, but look
how wonderful, how wonderful this works out. This is fantastic, isn't it?
