Let us look at this problem. I'm accelerating an electron through a potential difference of 418 volt and I want to know what its final de Broglie wavelength is going to be.
You have to remember from electromagnetism, when we did electricity and magnetism.
So if I accelerate an electron through that voltage, I'm going to have its energy as one electron times 418 volt.
One electron comes 418 volt. That's going to give me 418 electron volt.
I've got to change this into joules in as much as 1.60 times 10 to the power negative 19 joules is one electron volt.
Okay, so the electron volts will go and I'll get an answer as far as this is concerned.
I can also just write this as, this energy as, as the absolute value of the charge of an electron times the potential difference.
Charge, the absolute value of that times the potential difference is going to give me the energy.
So all of that is now kinetic energy because I've accelerated it through that potential difference.
But I know kinetic energy equals a half mv squared in as much as, remember for all these problems I said we're dealing with non-relativistic, relativistic velocities.
You can certainly do the relativistic equations for energy there.
mc squared over 1 minus, the square root of 1 minus v squared over c squared.
But all these answers are going to be non-relativistic, they're going to be less than 0.1c, the final velocity.
So we can just do that.
So this equals all of this energy.
In other words, a half mv squared equals the absolute value of q, the charge of the electron, times the potential difference.
Now, that will give me the final velocity.
If I get velocity on its own, it's going to be the square root of, it's going to be the square root of 2 times q delta v divided by m.
Is that correct?
Let me just cheat off of my board quickly because I don't want to make a mistake in simple algebra.
Okay, that's going to be the velocity of that.
But we want, what is this final wavelength going to be?
And we know that the Broglie wavelength equals plums constant divided by mass times the velocity.
So we're going to have lambda equals h divided by m.
And for v, we have the square root of 2 times h to the value of q delta v divided by m.
So there's my final equation for lambda.
It would have been easier in your mind if you started with this.
This is what I want.
I do know h.
I do know m.
I don't know what v is.
Well, I can get v from the fact that that is going to equal kinetic energy.
And I know what the energy is going to be if I accelerate an electron through that potential difference.
And that gives me a wavelength of about 6.01 times 10 to the power of negative 11 meters.
Put it over one more.
So it's going to be about 16.1 picometers.
Okay, to solve this problem, we have particle B strikes and still standing particle A.
And they have different masses head on in a totally inelastic collision.
That the Broglie wavelength of particle B is initially 2 times 10 to the power of negative 34 meters.
And calculate that the Broglie wavelength of the new combined particle after the collision.
So totally inelastic means this one's standing still.
B hits A and then they move on together.
Now, you can just look at dead words and you'll know exactly what the answer is.
The answer is going to be exactly that.
There's going to be no difference.
Why is that so?
So I can calculate that for you.
Remember that we must have momentum before must equal momentum after.
Totally inelastic meaning we're going to have two separate momentums here.
And we're just going to have a single momentum there.
It's going to be non-relativistic, but even if it was, we're going to have P equals N V.
You can do the relativistic one as well.
But these troubles are non-relativistic, so let's keep it there.
The mass times velocity, now A is standing still, so it will have no momentum.
So all the initial momentum, all the initial momentum is going to be the mass of B times the velocity of B.
Afterwards, the only momentum is going to be the mass of AB together times this velocity of this combined, this velocity of combined AB.
Now that's one way to look at the momentum, but we also know that lambda, the De Broglie wavelength, equals H over P.
In other words, P equals H over lambda.
P equals H over lambda.
So what we're dealing with, this particle initially, is going to be H over its lambda, that's the lambda of B we were given, has got to equal, well this thing still has to be H over, now just this new particles, this new particle AB, afterwards, this AB.
H and H is the same, so those two have got to be exactly the same, so the Broglie wavelength of the new particle has got to be exactly that.
