Let's have a quick look if we understand velocity and transverse velocity of a transverse wave.
I've got three functions of the displacement.
There's a function of x and t.
So what we have here is y equals y max sine of kx minus omega t.
Minus omega t.
We're going to rank these three according to the velocity and the transverse velocity.
First of all, v.
What do we know about v?
Well, we know it equals the frequency times lambda, the wavelength.
And to remember those, I don't know if you can see them in the corner here.
Remember, we know what lambda is and we know what the frequency is.
So first of all, let's do number one.
Let's do number one.
So for lambda, we're going to have 2 pi over k, which is 4.
That equals the half pi.
And that is frequency.
And for wave length, that's not frequency, that's wave length.
For frequency, sorry about that.
For frequency, we're going to have omega.
Then we have omega, which is 2 in this instance.
2 divided by 2 pi.
So that is just 1 over pi.
And if I multiply those two with each other, I'm just going to get a half.
So velocity, that's going to be a half.
And we can see, very simply again, this is going to be 2 pi over k.
And k here is going to be a 3.
It's going to be 3.
So that's 2 thirds pi for the frequency.
For the frequency, we're going to have omega, which is 4, divided by 2 pi.
So that equals 2 over pi.
And if I multiply those two with each other, I'm going to get 2 times 2 is 4 over 3.
Just check on these.
I'm doing it very quickly.
I might make a little mistake somewhere.
And here we're going to have 2 pi over 3 again.
2 pi over 3.
And for frequency, we're going to have 3 over 2 pi.
If I multiply those two, 3 and 3 cancels, 2 and 2 cancels, pi and pi cancels.
So that equals 1.
So this one's going to have the largest velocity, then this one, then this one.
Just check on that if I made a simple, if I made a simple mistake somewhere.
Let's do the first derivative with respect to the first derivative of y with x being a constant.
Remember, that's what we said, what the transverse velocity is.
So if we take here, die f, die t.
So x is now a constant, and we're differentiating with y with respect to t.
2 is a constant, we're going to have the sine, we're going to have the cosine of 4x minus 2t times negative 2.
So we are left here with negative 4 cosine of 4x minus 2t.
Minus 2t.
And the last one is going to leave us with...
It's going to leave us with...
F like t, and that is going to equal, again, for us, the cosine.
So that's the cosine, and that's going to be a negative 4.
Negative 4.
4x minus...
3x.
3x negative 4t.
And the last one is going to leave us with...
It's going to leave us with a negative 3.
So that's going to be a negative 6 times the cosine of 3x minus 3t.
So that this is going to be, for us, what the three transverse velocities are going to be.
As I said, just check on that if I didn't make a small mistake somewhere along the line.
I've just looked at this problem now, and I'm thinking, thinking, thinking how to solve this.
We have a function of a wave.
We told it's 6 millimeters times the sine of kx plus 600 radians per second times time plus phi.
And we want to know, the question asks, if you go in widest placement from 2 millimeters to minus 2 millimeters,
how long is that going to take?
And we're standing here thinking how velocity equals frequency times lambda.
And remember these, the sapiens, to know how to get to them and to memorize them.
We can get to frequency inasmuch as that is 2pi divided by the angular frequency.
And we are given the angular frequency, so we can get v.
But we can't get lambda, because lambda is 2pi over k.
And angular wave number, we don't know the angular wave number.
We're just giving k.
So that's not going to help us inasmuch as we could have then used the fact that v equals distance divided by time.
Maybe something like that.
So we have to think of something else.
And the only thing I can think of now, seeing that we were given the angular frequency,
is to consider this wave motion as uniform circular motion.
We know that the amplitude is 6 millimeters, because we are given y max is 6 millimeters.
In other words, our radius is going to be 6 millimeters.
Our radius is going to be 6 millimeters.
And we're going at 600 radians per second.
So in one second, we move 600 radians.
600 radians per second we are going.
Let's see how many circumferences that is.
Inasmuch as one circumference equals 2pi radians.
2pi radians.
So 600 radians is how many circumferences?
600 divided by 2pi.
So that is 300 divided by pi, circumferences per second.
That's what we're going at.
Do we know how long the circumference is?
Yeah, it's 2pi times the radius.
2pi times the radius.
So this is 6 millimeters, so that's 12pi millimeters per circumference.
Per circumference.
So one circumference, so in other words, one circumference,
is going to equal 12pi millimeters.
12pi millimeters.
And that, but I'm going at, not at one circumference, but at 300.
So 300 over pi, sorry, circumference is 300pi divided by 1 times 12.
So that's going to equal 3600 millimeters per second.
That's what I'm doing.
3600 millimeters per second.
But I want to only know from 2 millimeters to negative 2 millimeters.
So that's just 4.
So how long is 4 millimeters going to take?
Millimeters.
So 4 millimeters divided by 3600.
Do I have a calculator?
4 divided by 3600 is going to be 1.1 millisecond.
1.1 millisecond.
It's going to take me to travel from 2 millimeters to negative 2 millimeters
and the Y displacement.
So all I did was just, I just equated a sine wave or wave,
a function of a wave in the form of a sine function to uniform circular motion.
I know how long the circle is because I know that my radius is 6.
My maximum displacement is 6.
And because I know that that circumference is in 12 pi millimeters,
and I know how many radians per second I'm doing,
I can convert that into millimeters.
And I can see how long 4 millimeters is going to take me.
What I would like to do in this short video is discuss the concept of this phase angle.
You might be given a problem that you're given some velocity and you're given some frequency.
And you are asked how far apart are two spots in that wave that has a certain phase angle difference between them.
What does that mean?
What does that mean?
What does that mean?
Let's put some values in here.
I've got a wave traveling at 350 meters per second.
And it has a frequency say of 500 inverse seconds.
How far apart are two spots with a phase angle difference say of a third pi radius.
The crucial bit in understanding what this phase angle is, is the following.
It is very, very simple.
If you don't already see it, after this video you will know it and you'll never forget it.
Because we haven't dealt with it before.
There's my wave.
And fortunately for us, in choosing a wave equation as h of x and t and we chose the sign.
It repeats every two pi radians.
Every two pi radians.
Let me get another piece of chalk.
Every two pi radians.
In other words, one wavelength equals two pi radians.
You might be given, you might be given the wavelength or if you were given this scenario, very easy in that wavelength is going to be the velocity divided by the frequency.
Whatever, in some form or fashion you're going to be able to get the wavelength.
So if the wavelength is a certain length in meters, we know that one whole unit of it is going to equal two pi radians.
In other words, a pi over three radians is very easy.
This divided by that times this side is going to give you some fraction of.
Let's see if we can work out what the fraction of this instance is going to be.
That is going to equal 350 over 50.
That's 35 over 50.
That's 7 over 10.
7 over 10 meters.
So we have that 7 over 10 meters.
0.7 meters is equal to pi radians.
That is the conversion factor between radians and meters in this specific instance.
Okay, but we don't have two pi radians.
We only have the third pi.
The third pi radians.
So it's going to be a third pi divided by a third pi divided by 2 pi.
But divided by 2 pi is the same as multiplying by 1 over 2 pi.
Pi squared is 1 over 6.
It's going to be a sixth of 7 over 10.
And then it's 7 over 60.
That equals 7 over 60 meters.
So this phase angle equates to this distance, 7 over 60 meters.
Okay.
And remember, the way that I do that, the way that I equate it, because fortunately we chose
the sine or cosine function, is that one wavelength is exactly two pi radians.
Why?
Because the sine function, the cosine function, repeats itself can be two pi radians.
So I can convert a phase angle to a distance.
We can also equate time.
We can also equate time to, not only the distance of meters to radius, but also time to radius.
Because we can be asked, what phase angle are two sections of the wave apart if the time period
between them is some delta t?
Let's use one millisecond.
How am I going to convert milliseconds to radians?
I'm going to say this once again and you'll remember, if you haven't already figured it out,
it's so easy.
I can go from time to distance.
Why?
Because velocity equals distance divided by time.
In other words, distance equals velocity times time.
Distance equals velocity times time.
I was given the velocity and you might have a different problem where you only get the frequency
and the weight length, but we know velocity equals frequency times weight length.
Okay, in this instance we do have velocity and we were given the time.
So one millisecond times 350 is 0.35.
0.35.
Yeah, it's 0.35 meters.
0.35 meters.
And we've just seen how to go from meters, from radians to meters, so I can go from meters
to radians because I know now that 7 over 10 meters equals 2 pi radians.
So 0.35 meters is going to be how much?
Which is going to be a half.
Let's see.
Let's do that properly.
Well, I don't want to go to the calculator.
But we know that 0.7, 0.7, 7 over 10 meters equals 2 pi radians.
So, let's do that.
Let's do that.
I don't need a calculator for that.
0.7, 0.7 meters is equivalent to, 0.7 meters is equivalent to 2 pi radians in this instance.
So, 0.35 meters, which I've gone from seconds to meters, is 0.35 to minus my second is a half.
Half times 2 pi is pi.
That is going to be pi radians.
So that being one millisecond apart equates to the phase difference of pi radians.
Or, or because I remembered the very first video that said that 2 pi radians equals one exact wavelength.
In this specific instance, we can work out the wavelength so I can go from wavelength to radians.
I can go from radians to wavelength.
And because I have velocity, I can very quickly go from distance from velocity and time to distance.
Or any other way, using that simple classical mechanics, one of the first equations you ever learn in physics.
