Now let's have a look at supersonic speeds through these pictures.
Now what I'm trying to draw here is imagine I have the aircraft standing still there in the air.
If I could do that.
And it is now point sourced emitting sound.
That sound is going to travel as a wave front in three dimensions,
which we draw here as two, so it's spherical.
And it moves at a certain time t and it's going to be this radius away from.
Now though my aircraft is moving at a certain speed,
and in this drawing it is moving at the speed of sound.
So as it tries to, the sound tries to be emitted,
it can't because the aircraft keeps up with it all the time.
Now what happens is we break the sound barrier and now we are supersonic.
So as the wave tries to expand from the source,
its forward velocity of the three dimensions,
its forward velocity is slower than velocity of, or the speed of the aircraft.
So at any time t, I mean it was, it's moving along.
So time is fast as it moves on our x-axis here.
So this wave height is that time to expand.
But we can draw a tangential line across this,
which becomes a code because we're in this three dimensional.
And we call this angle theta here.
Now what we can do is, let's draw from the center of the circle.
Imagine that's the center.
Let's just draw a line that is perpendicular to a line there.
If I now look what the sine of theta is.
The sine of theta is going to be opposite divided by hypotenuse.
This is the hypotenuse.
This is the opposite.
What is the opposite?
This is the radius of the circle.
And if velocity equals distance divided by time,
that means distance equals velocity times time.
So this is the velocity at which the sound wave travels.
Times time is going to give me this distance here.
So that's velocity times time.
And this is the hypotenuse.
Again, distance equals velocity times time.
But now we're talking the velocity of my aircraft.
So the velocity of the source in the same time t.
We can cancel that out.
So that's v divided by v s.
Then we have the Mach number.
And then it's just v s divided by v.
So the v of my source, my aircraft, is faster than or equal to the speed of sound.
That's Mach 1.
If it's twice, it's going to be Mach 2.
Let's just have a look.
We'll do, we'll do one of, just a problem or two maybe on, on this angle.
Okay, let's have a simple problem.
We have the Mach cone angle.
Let's make it 60 degrees.
What is that?
It's 5 or 3 radians.
We want to express it like that.
And we say that the aircraft is traveling at the velocity of our source equals 1,350 km per
hour.
So what is the speed of sound when an aircraft was traveling?
Simply that the sine of the Mach cone angle equals velocity divided by the velocity of sound
divided by the velocity of the source.
So velocity is going to be v s sine theta.
So that's going to be 1,350 km per hour times.
The sine of pi over 3 is the square root of 3 divided by 2.
So it's going to be about, I did it and it's about 1,169, 1,169 km per hour for two significant
digits as here.
1.2 times 10 to the power, 1,2,3, 3 km per hour.
Okay, so it's relatively simple.
Now this is a fundamental problem.
Once again, most experts will not explicitly explain the answer to this problem.
You've got to suffer with it, suffer with it, suffer with it.
And this is what it boils down to.
We have a supersonic aircraft flying at Mach 1.5 and it goes directly over your head at a
height of 5,000 meters.
If we take the average speed of sound to be 331 meters per second, what is the Mach cone
angle?
That's simple enough.
As much as the sine of the Mach cone angle equals velocity divided by velocity of the source.
So the Mach cone angle is going to be the arc sine of v divided by v s.
We are given, we are given, we are given the Mach angle which is v s over v.
So v over v s, v over v s is just going to be 1 divided by 1.5.
So theta equals the arc sine of 1 over 1 over 5.
And I think if you plug in your calculator, you're going to get about 42.
You're going to get about 42 degrees.
So that's easy.
That's the easy part.
So let's have theta equals 42 degrees.
So now the difficult question.
How long from the time that you observe it directly overhead 5,000 meters does it take for
that wave front to hit you?
And I'm going to explain it to you.
Imagine it like this.
That's exactly where it is now.
Let's draw its angle theta is there.
So it has these, these curves.
And you are directly at 5,000 meters below that point.
What you are looking for is when it passes over you and it's flying at more than the speed of sound,
you hear nothing.
You don't hear any sound emanating from the aircraft down.
Its source is not where the plane is.
Its source is well behind it.
Okay.
So you're looking for a bit of this distance here.
Okay.
And what you've got to do is just draw an angle that is 90 degrees from this tangent line.
Think about it.
Because when it is here, its source is actually still behind it because it's flying faster
than the sound emanating from the source.
But when it's here, it's traveled this distance.
And in that time, the wave front had some time to move down.
Okay.
Think about it.
It was here when it emitted the sound.
It is there but its source is still here because it's flying away from its source if I can say that.
And in the time that it has had to move from there to there, the wave front has had time to move.
So I want that 90 degree angle.
This theta down here is still the same as that theta down there.
And that's easy to understand.
All we've done is we've just taken this and we've sort of flipped it down on itself.
This is still theta.
But that's theta and this is 90 degrees.
Remember this is adjacent.
This is opposite.
That becomes opposite and this is hypotenuse.
So if we take the cosine of the angle here, this adjacent, which is this height that we do want, divided by hypotenuse, which is 5000.
So we get this length that we do want equals the cosine of 42 degrees times 5000.
And if you do that, you're going to get to a diploma.
Let's say the cosine of 42 degrees times 5000.
It's going to equal about 3715, 3715.7 meters.
And from velocity equals distance divided by time, time equals distance divided by velocity.
So we have this 3715.7 meters divided by the velocity of the sound wave.
The velocity of the sound wave is still.
And we're given 331.
So divide that by 331.
And this is meters per second.
Where are we now?
Meters.
And this is meters per second.
So we're going to need seconds.
And this is about 11 or two significant digits, Mach 1.5, two significant digits, 11 seconds.
So if it's going at Mach 1.5, from the time that it's there, it starts moving past you down,
it's going to take 11.2 seconds for you to hear this shock wave coming towards you.
But the crux of the matter there are two, is that when it is there, its source emission is still back there somewhere.
And not at the center of this specific circle that I've drawn here because in that time, it is that time to spread.
Okay.
But its source emission, it's still behind it in actual fact.
And you've got to understand, when you flip this down, when you make this 90 degrees, and that was 90 degrees,
this remains, this remains steppered down here.
That's a very good problem.
There's a similar sort of problem just to, to bring the point over.
The velocity of the sound weight we're taking at 331 meters per second.
We give them Mach 1.25.
So that's the velocity of the airplane divided by the velocity of the sound is 1.25.
And we say that the plane passes directly overhead.
From that time, a minute, 60 seconds goes by before we hear the boom.
What is the height of the plane?
Okay.
First of all, let's just draw that again.
So it is right there, above us, this height, we don't know.
Okay.
It has made, through some angle, all its wave frames.
All its wave frames.
A minute goes by before we hear it.
That is our Mach 1 angle.
And what is going to happen, again, we're going to draw a perpendicular line to this tangent line,
making this theta as well.
And this makes this, for us, the adjacent.
That line is the opposite.
So what we want is we get the cosine of theta equals adjacent divided by hypotenuse.
In other words, hypotenuse that we want equals adjacent divided by the cosine of the cosine of theta.
Now do we, can we, can we, can we, um, do we know what a is?
Do we know what theta is?
Theta we can get easily in as much as the sine of theta equals v divided by v s.
So in our instance, theta is going to be the arc sine of v over v s.
And we know v s over v is 1.25, so that's going to be the arc sine of 1 over 1, 0.25.
And that, I think, works out to about 42 degrees.
So we know this, do we know that?
Indeed we know, because we know, we do know a minute has passed, 60 seconds has passed.
What happens in 60 seconds?
Well, velocity equals distance divided by time.
In other words, distance equals velocity times time.
The velocity of the sound wave is 331 meters per second.
The time that's passed is 60 seconds.
And if you multiply those two with each other, you get the distance.
So from this, it will travel a distance.
In the opposite direction, the opposite is coming down.
But what I'm saying is, I think, I've got 19,860, 19,860 meters.
So in 60 seconds, the sound wave will travel 19,860 meters.
And that's this distance.
At 321 meters per second, this is just the radius from that specific point out.
Okay.
So we have a, and we have theta, so we can just get h.
And if we divide 19,860 by a cosine of 40 degrees, we get this height as being 53 kilometers.
53 kilometers.
Okay.
This is working from the problem the other way around.
But it's still the same concept applies, the two concepts.
So that's theta.
That's theta.
You've got to understand why.
From the picture, it's easy to understand.
And another thing is, a minute has gone by, but when it is here, its source emission is still,
sound emission, sound source is still at the back here.
And that's why we draw from this tangent angle to the code, a right angle, a perpendicular line
towards the observer here at the top.
Okay.
So, it's not so simple.
If you see the problem for the first time, you might scratch your head a little bit.
But it's fantastic.
If you do see these planes, the sonic planes fly overhead, you can work out all these sort
of things if you know, if of course someone tells you what the speed of the aircraft is.
So, we are just gonna roll out this one.
I see.
But it's that it's cold.
Now, don't get through is from the expansion area, because no cost, illy, healthcare and
all others.
Somalis is alive.
I have to do is to call it.
It's a good thing.
Yeah!
I think it's good enough guys.
It's that good.
And I guess, are a lot of people in San Francisco, take out the business of the
disruption.
TEST, and I'm different from there to get across issues.
In this situation, it's the Kaique-V Parker Caltech.
