During the introductory lectures, I thumb-sucked an equation.
Velocity equals frequency times lambda the wavelength.
I've got to derive this, so I'm going to show that this is indeed true.
Now if I take a piece of rope, pull it tight, and I make my first up and down move, up, down, up, and back,
you will see that sine wave travel along the rope.
We've all done it as children with a garden hose.
We know how that works.
Then wave travels, but any particular spot in that rope or garden hose moves up and down stop.
So I just meant for Ys.
Okay, so that just moves up, and the wave is going to travel, if you watch the video recording of it, it's going to travel.
So this is exactly what I have here.
I have marked Y maximum of A and B, so this is this wave traveling along.
And I've taken a photograph and another photograph, and I've overlaid them so you can see this wave actually moving along.
So I know that Y equals Y max, the sine of Kx minus omega t.
I started at 0, so phi is 0, so I can just add that.
Now, for this Y of A to equal Y of B,
remember that Y max is the same for both of them.
I'm not changing the amplitude.
So this better be the same, because it's the sine of both sides.
So what I'm saying here, in actual fact, is that Kx minus omega t has got to equal some constant c.
It's going to remain constant at the peak here, or any other value that I took.
If that Y value has remained the same, this means this expression has got to equal some constant c.
Now, I can take the limit of this as delta x gets smaller and smaller,
and we know that dx dt, for classical mechanics, equals velocity.
We don't have to prove that again.
Change, rate of change of distance over time.
Distance over time is velocity.
That's how we define velocity.
So let's take the first derivative of this equation with respect to time.
Now, K is a constant.
I'm going to have dx dt.
It's going to equal this with respect to minus.
First derivative of omega t with respect to t is going to be omega.
And the first derivative of a constant with respect to anything is 0.
So I'm going to be left with dx dt, which I know is velocity,
is going to equal, I'm going to take omega over to the other side,
and divide both sides by K.
And remember this, we showed that this angular wave number is 2 pi divided by lambda,
and we also showed that omega equals 2 pi times the frequency.
So let me put that in, 2 pi of the lambda,
divided by 2 pi times the frequency.
And my right here is 2 pi, what am I doing?
Let's just look odd, didn't it?
So that's 2 pi times the frequency,
divided by K, which is 2 pi over lambda.
Going to cancel, going to cancel,
from the denominator up to the numerator,
frequency times lambda.
And I've showed you that velocity equals frequency times wavelength.
The thumb-sucked initial equation we started off with.
Beautiful.
Let's use this example to see if we understand what's going on here.
We're given this wave, this function of a tregling wave.
0.00327, which is a meter, equals the sine of 72.1x minus 2.72t.
And we want to know, as we always do with waves,
what is the wavelength and what is the frequency?
We know that y equals ym times the sine of kx minus omega t, then plus 5.
Not so important for these problems, plus 5.
So do we understand what is going on here?
Yes.
This is k, which is the angular wave number,
and this is omega, which is the angular frequency.
And together with the previous v equals frequency times lambda
and velocity equals t times the length divided by the mass of the rope,
these two are the equations that you should memorize,
that you should know by heart.
And how did we get them?
Well, we said, first of all, when we put x to 0, or t to 0, sorry,
we were left with kx plus k lambda was going to equal 2 pi.
Remember, we said that if a sine wave of personal wave repeats, it would be 2 pi.
So if we added another lambda to x,
remember, sine of kx, and with sine of k,
we just added another lambda to that x,
which would have given us the same.
So that is sine of kx plus k lambda,
and that would only be true if kx equals that.
So in other words, k was going to equal 2 pi over lambda.
Remember, that's how we did that.
And the same thing, we put x equal to 0,
so we had this negative sine of omega t,
and we had the t plus the period t,
and we got the fact that with t being 1 over the frequency,
that the angular frequency is going to be 2 times pi times the frequency.
So it's so simple to do this problem.
In other words, 72.1, which is k,
0.1 is going to equal 2 pi over lambda,
or lambda is going to equal 2 pi then divided by 72.1.
And the same for that side, omega, which is now 2.72,
is going to equal 2 pi times the frequency.
In other words, the frequency is going to be 2.72 divided by 2 pi.
So we understand what is happening here.
So, know how you got to these.
Much more important, because you can always print this down,
put it up in your office somewhere,
instead of memorizing them, or you can memorize them,
but much more important, remember where we got them from.
Simple terminology of the sine function.
Simple, simple, simple algebra, I should say, of the sine function.
Okay, so what indeed we have here is that y equals some function of x and t.
That is what we have.
So we can indeed have sine, we could use as h, as a sine function.
We can have h as a cosine function.
We can have it as a square root function.
Yeah, kx minus omega t.
That's going to be a very, very, very, very weird wave.
But it's possible.
What we do have, though, is that these,
we can't have, for instance, kx squared minus omega t cubed.
That is never going to give us, that is never going to give us a traveling wave.
Okay, so it's sine and cosine most definitely.
We can have sort of weird functions.
But we can't have an x squared and a t cubed or something like that.
That's never going to give us a traveling wave.
So this is what we're looking at.
And one last thing, if this was positive and we had that kx plus omega t was some constant,
we took the first derivative of that, dt,
and was going to then equal negative omega.
So dx dt, dx dt is going to equal negative omega over k.
And if we substitute that, we're going to have the velocity equals negative that.
Which just means if this is a positive,
that wave is traveling in the negative x direction.
Okay, so just something to ponder.
Not too important for what's going on or what we're trying to learn here.
Just some interesting things to ponder.
We have looked at what the longitudinal velocity of our wave is.
And it's a constant.
Once it's set up that wave, it has no acceleration.
It just travels at constant velocity.
But if we look at any one particular point in our rope there,
it's going to move up and down.
It will have a specific velocity at any time t.
It will have a velocity.
And that's what we call the transverse velocity, or u.
It's the transverse velocity.
And obviously it'll go slower, slower, slower, slower, slower, stop.
Faster, faster, faster, maximum velocity.
Slower, slower, slower, slower, slower.
Zero velocity.
Accelerate, maximum velocity.
Decelerate, zero velocity.
Can we work that out?
Well, this velocity in the y direction is just going to be the derivative of,
the first derivative with respect to time of y.
But this x stays at the same position.
It doesn't move.
Remember, we said that that specific particle does not move in the x direction.
It just moves up and down.
So if we start with y equals y max,
the sine of kx, the angular wave number,
kx minus omega t, let's take phi to be zero.
I've heard to take the rate of change of y with respect to t,
divided t for y velocity at any specific time t.
And x remains a constant.
It just stays in the same spot.
So I'm actually taking the partial derivative,
di y, di t, dy, dt,
with x now a constant.
So let's do that.
ym is a constant.
That's going to stay.
The first derivative of a sine function is a cosine function.
This is the cosine function.
kx minus omega t plus the first derivative of this.
of the inner function.
Now, k is a constant.
x is also a constant.
So that's going to be zero.
And the first derivative of a negative constant times t
is going to be negative that constant.
So we're left with u,
which is this partial derivative,
is going to equal negative ym omega cosine of kx minus omega t.
Now, we said there's constant acceleration and deceleration
as it moves along.
So we can get the first derivative of this.
In other words, di squared y di t squared is now going to be the first derivative of u.
That's going to be acceleration.
Acceleration in the y direction.
So let's take the first derivative of this.
We're going to remain with the negative y max.
The derivative of the cosine function is negative the sine function.
So that negative will cancel out.
The sine of the inner function minus omega t plus the first derivative of that.
Remember, x is still a constant partial derivative.
So that is, again, going to be negative omega.
It's going to be a negative omega.
So I left out this omega, didn't I?
Plus y max.
I left out that constant as well, omega.
So now I've got two omegas and the negative comes forward.
So acceleration in the y direction is going to be negative y max.
We're going to have...
Well, let me put the omega squared first.
So I'll show you down the y.
We're going to have y max, the sine of kx, angular wave number, minus omega t.
And this part is just our original y, isn't it?
Exactly.
So a in the y direction.
Acceleration in the y direction is going to be negative omega squared y.
Absolutely beautiful.
Simple calculus.
Excellent.
Excellent.
