Now I want to carry on with some more de Broglie wavelength problems, but I want to reiterate something because we will, it's fundamental for continued studies, and this is looking at probability wave, probability wave.
Inasmuch as remember, I'm repeating myself but it's important, light and for that matter also matter, so bosons and fermions travel as a wave, can travel as a wave but it will hit the screen some way, it transfers momentum and kinetic energy to other matter which we can then, that interaction we can then detect.
The waves interfere at some places and if there's constructive interference, nothing, that wave is gone, there is no wave where it, where there's constructive interference, destructive interference I mean.
In other words, as a photon, a boson or as a particle, a fermion, there's nothing that registers there so the probability that something strikes there is low.
When there's constructive interference, something will strike, a photon or some atomic particle will strike so there's a high probability in that bright fringe.
So because I can see this all as a photon or a photon or a particle hitting, I can call my wave a probability wave.
So we looked at the different experiments but then even in 1994 it was extended to iodine molecules, I2, they are 500,000 times heavier than an electron and still you've got an interference pattern so still there is a probability wave.
Then in 1999, then in 1999, carbon 60 or carbon 70 molecules, so it's a ball of molecules called a buckyball you must have heard of or fullerene after I think Buckman's the fuller, anyway, not important.
So that's even larger than an iodine molecule, even larger than an iodine molecule, so a lot heavier than an electron.
These buckyballs of 60 or 70 carbon atom molecules also cause an interference pattern.
But you can think that the matter wave is going to get smaller and smaller because in the denominator we have momentum, mass times velocity.
So the mass is increasing, the matter wave, and eventually we'll get to macroscopic, even though I can work out my body's matter wave.
Eventually we leave the real of these, of that very small quantum world into more everyday world where we don't notice as we set these de Broglie wavelengths.
Okay, so much then for just reminding us how we're going to get from matter and photon electromagnetic waves to probability we'll get there.
First of all, we're going to just do some problems as far as de Broglie wavelength is concerned, so more problems.
Good.
Let's do this problem.
We want the de Broglie wavelength of 100 kilo electron volt electron, a 1 kilo electron volt electron, a 1.00 kilo electron volt photon, so a 1 kilo electron volt proton.
So we have to convert this into energy as far as joules are concerned, so we know we're just going to multiply all of these by 1.6 times 10 to the power negative 19 joules per electron volt, so we can work out what the energy is going to be in joules for all of these.
But now we want the wavelength, the Broglie wavelength.
We know that the wavelength equals h divided by p, the momentum.
We have the energy, we certainly don't have the momentum.
We do know that the momentum for non-relativistic momentum at least is mv, these are not going to be relativistic problems, p equals mv.
So that will leave us lambda as h over mv, but we don't know what v is, but we can express v if we do know the energy, and we certainly do know the energy, and the energy is going to equal a half of kinetic energy, at least half mv squared.
In other words, v is going to be the square root of 2 times kinetic energy divided by mass.
And if I plug that in there, I'm going to have h divided by m times the square root of 2 times the kinetic energy divided by mass.
So I had just better plug in the kinetic energy 1 times 10 to the power 3 electron volts times this.
So I can just get rid of my electron volts and express that joule.
So for the electron, the mass of the electron is 9.11 times 10 to the power negative 31 kilograms, I get an answer of 38.8, put it here, 38.8 picometers.
For the photon though, we've got a problem, and it's massless, there's no mass there, so I can't go there, but I know energy equals hf, which is hc over lambda.
In other words, lambda equals hc divided by e.
I know e, I just have to convert the 1 kilo electron volt into joule.
I know a constant, I know the speed of light in a vacuum.
So there I get 1.24, I think 1.2, just check on your calculator, 1.24 nanometers, but certainly easy to do.
And then lastly, proton, we just need to talk about the mass of the proton, which is of course 1.67 times 10 to the power negative 27 kilograms.
Remember the mass of the neutron, remember the mass of the neutron is slightly different than the proton, and there's two down quarks instead of an up quark, so there's 1.68 times 10 to the power negative 27 kilograms.
But this is a proton problem, so I get about 907, 907 femtometers.
Just check on your calculator, I think these rather quickly, I might have made it on the calculator, so let's check that out.
But certainly the problems themselves are quite easy.
Okay, as per usual on all these physics problems, you know your equation, they're just going to give you different values, so you just have to play with the equation,
at least here we're going to play with them algebraically, as opposed to using calculus, from calculus not to quider.
So we have the Broglie wavelength of a proton, it's measured as 100 femtometers, that's 10 to the power negative 15 meters.
I want to know what velocity does it have, what velocity does it have, and through what potential difference does it have to be accelerated to get the Broglie wavelength of 100 femtometers.
Now, we do know, so we do know lambda, we do know that the Broglie wavelength equals plums constant divided by the momentum.
We know momentum equals mass times velocity, we're getting the number relativistic velocities here.
In other words, in other words, we're going to get h over mv, but we want to know the velocity, so if we just solve for velocity here, we're going to have h,
we're going to have h over m lambda.
And if I solve for that, I certainly do know the mass of a proton, that's 1.67 times 10 to the power negative 27 kilograms,
and that plus constant, I was given the wavelength, and I get an answer of about 3.97, 3.97 times 10 to the power 6 meters per second, meters per second.
Now, what energy would be involved, what energy is going to be involved here?
In as much as, remember, potential difference accelerating one proton, a proton has a charge of plus 1,
so it's the absolute value of the charge of an electron, so what I'm asking is to express, actually, to express this as electron volts.
But, of course, it's a proton, but the absolute value of the charge is thought positive 1.
And the absolute value of this charge is going to be 1.60 times 10 to the power negative 19 joules.
So, kinetic energy is at least going to be half mv squared, and I know what v is now,
so I'm going to be left with v equals 2 times, well, I'm solving for kinetic energy, sorry.
So, I'm going to put in this here, so it's going to be half times the mass of the proton times this square,
so it's going to be h over m lambda squared, and that's going to give me kinetic energy in joules.
And then, I'm just going to divide the joules by, or multiply it by 1 electron volt divided by 1.60 times 10 to the power negative 19 joules,
which is going to give me electron volt.
But the charge, the absolute value of the charge of an electron is plus 1, as with the program,
so I'm actually solving them for, I'm actually solving them for potential difference.
And I get a potential difference of 82.3, I think it's a 3 that I wrote there, kilo electron volts,
or kilo volts then, as this problem requires to accelerate my proton with 82.3 kilo volts.
Okay, good, now I'm going to accelerate a sodium ion charged at positive 1, so it's lost 1 electron, so 300 volt.
I want to know what is the momentum of this ion going to be, and what is the Broglie wavelength going to be?
Well, if I'm accelerating, the charge is plus 1, so that's the absolute value of the charge of an electron,
so it's still going to be 1, so I'm charging this, you can say, through, and accelerating through 300, I can say, electron volts.
I need to multiply this by 1.60 times 10 to the power of 19 joule per electron volt.
This is going to give me the kinetic energy of this ion.
And I know that momentum, momentum is going to be mass times velocity.
I want momentum, I don't have velocity, but I do know that kinetic energy, which is what I do have now,
for this accelerated ion, is going to be a half mv squared, a half mv squared.
And so if I solve again for v, I'm going to get, we know this by now, two times the kinetic energy divided by mass.
So my momentum is going to be mass again, times two times kinetic energy divided by mass.
Now I just need to be concerned, I know kinetic energy now, I just need the mass of this sodium ion.
Now sodium, sodium has 11 protons and 12 neutrons.
And I do know the mass of the proton and I do know the mass of the neutrons.
So the mass, the mass of my sodium, those masses are a lot more than simply the electrons,
I'm not going to count.
And I should add the mass of 10 electrons as well, but they are so much lighter than,
so all of the mass basically is in the nucleus.
So I'm going to have 11 times 1.67 times 10 to the power of negative 27 kilograms,
plus 12 times 1.68.
So this is one way to get the mass.
You know, you can use other methods as well, but I mean this will be accurate enough for our purposes.
So if I add these two together, I'm going to get the mass of the sodium ion.
You can, as I said, you can add the 10 because there will be one missing,
because it's sodium plus, one plus.
You can add the mass of the electrons there if you want to.
So you have mass, you have kinetic energy, and that gives me a momentum of,
see if you get the same 1.92, 1.92 times 10 to the power,
oh, what did I write there?
Negative 21 kilograms meters per second.
And then we also want to know the de Broglie wavelength.
Well, the de Broglie wavelength is just going to equal H divided by P.
And we know what the momentum is now.
So solving for that wavelength, I get a wavelength,
the Broglie wavelength of the sodium,
an ion of 3.45 micrometers.
Okay.
So not a difficult problem to solve.
The only issue is working out the mass, certainly, of a sodium ion.
