Now we're going to have a quick chat about the equations with, we've spoken about it many times in the harmonic number.
Harmonic number.
And we looked at what happens if both ends are closed, doesn't it?
Now for certain wind instruments for instance,
and we looked at this before where both sides are open versus where one side is open, one side is closed.
Let's start with the open, open.
This is what we said was the fundamental wave.
And we can clearly see that if this is the length L of our instrument,
then obviously this is half, this is half of a wavelength.
So the full length L is half of a wavelength.
The next standing wave, or oscillation that I can put in place by increasing the frequency,
is that you can see clearly here we'll have anti-node, node, anti-node, node, anti-node,
versus anti-node, node, anti-node.
And this is a full wavelength.
It's a full wavelength.
So the second harmonic is where L is going to equal the wavelength.
The next we can set up, there's one and another half.
So it's three over two times lambda.
So let's just look at that.
Let's get lambda on its own for the first situation.
And this is for open, open, open, open, open.
So we're going to have lambda equals two times L.
And we also know that, we also know that frequency equals velocity divided by lambda.
So for frequency, frequency we're going to have velocity divided by two L.
So we're going to have situation two, where the length equals the wavelength.
We're going to have lambda equals L, and F equals V over L.
And the third instance, let's look at that.
Lambda is going to be two over three times L.
In other words, frequency is going to be V over this, or three L over two V.
And what we can do in this instance, this is multiplied by two over two.
And we can put a one there as well.
So we can clearly see what happens to frequency is one over two V over L, two over two V over L,
three over two V over L.
So we can clearly see this sequence here, a sequence of positive integers, one, two, three, one, two, three.
So in general, we can say frequency equals N L over two V.
Maybe I should just put this N a bit higher, so you can see it's clearly in the numerator.
So for open-open, we see, with the harmonic number, we see for frequency an equation similar to what it was for,
so for instance the string instrument, where both ends were closed.
Let's look at open-closed on this side.
And that's the one that's going to be a bit different.
So for situation one, we're going to see that lambda equals four L.
And for situation two, we're going to see lambda equals four over three L.
And for situation three, lambda equals four over five, four over five L.
And we can put that over one, I suppose.
So we're going to have frequency being velocity over lambda.
We're going to have velocity over four L.
That's going to be a one.
And now we can have frequency equals three V over four L.
And here we're going to have frequency equals five V over four L.
So you can clearly see we're not dealing with positive integers in a sequence increasing by one,
but we're going from one to three to where?
From one to three to five.
It was end of the memory card, so let me just do this.
So that is going to be F equals N, again, V over four L this time.
But where N is the sequence of positive integers here, we have to mention clearly N equals one, three, five.
So it's all the odd positive integers that we're dealing with.
So for open closed, we have this slight difference in as much as four as in the denominator.
And we're only dealing with odd positive integers for our harmonic number.
Let's have a quick look at what the length of the pipe, what effect it has on the frequency range.
If I have, I think, yeah, I have two pipes, length A equals L and length B equals two L.
So length B is exactly twice as long.
Let's look at the fundamental frequencies.
So the fundamental frequency of A, the first harmonic, will be, from our equation would be, remember,
F equals N and V over two L, that N is going to be one.
So our first harmonic of V over two L.
If we looked at B, we're going to get also one and we're going to get V over two times two L.
Because L for B is two L.
So that's a quarter, so that's a quarter of the fundamental frequency in A, the shorter pipe.
So if the denominator is larger, the frequency is, for us, is lower.
So let's look at fundamental frequency for V, or the second harmonic, that's going to be two times V over two times two L.
And these will cancel out, and that means V over two L.
In other words, the second harmonic of the longer pipe is going to equal the fundamental frequency,
or the first harmonic of the shorter, of the shorter pipe.
So you can clearly see here, that because the denominator is larger, this number is lower.
So the fundamental frequency, the fundamental frequency of the longer pipe is lower than the higher,
than the shorter, open-ended instruments, say for instance the two ends are open in some winded instrument.
In other words, the shorter, the shorter that open-ended pipe is, if I call it a pipe,
that means they're going to set up a range of very, of much higher frequency than a longer,
uh, uh, instrument.
I'm not into music, uh, musical instruments at all, but you can think of a long, big,
uh, big, uh, winded instruments, you know, playing very low, low sort of notes,
because the frequencies are a lot lower than, say, smaller instruments.
If we take closed, closed, you know, we're going to have the same equation.
So a small little violin is going to have higher frequencies than some longer, uh, instrument.
I'm not into music, uh, musical instruments at all, but you can think of a long, big, uh, instrument.
The longer they are, the lower the frequencies are going to be,
versus the range of a shorter instrument that is going to have higher frequencies.
Let's have an easy example just to illustrate this problem.
If the velocity of a sound wave is 343 meters per second,
and I'm listening to the fundamental frequency, or the first harmonic,
in an open-ended, in an open-ended tube with a length of 0.6 to 0 meters, for instance,
if both ends are open, what is the fundamental frequency I'm going to hear?
Well, fundamental frequency equals N times V over 2L for, for open-open situations.
So the fundamental frequency would be N equals 1 is going to be 343 divided by 2 times 3.76 meters,
and that is about 256 hertz.
And if, say for instance, you're listening to this with your ear, um, uh, you know, away from that,
from that two, that open-ended pipe, um, in actual fact what happens is the two open nodes on the side,
it's actually somewhat outside of the pipe, but that's a bit of detail that we won't go into.
And now suddenly, say for instance, you press your ear on one side,
and otherwise you actually close that one side off.
And now if N equals V over, that's not V, that's N,
N over V over 4L, with N equals, we just have to, um, state clearly that it's the odd integers that we're dealing with here.
So F1 is going to equal V over 4L, so that is going to be just half, 4 and 2 is going to be half of that,
which is 128 hertz.
Now, the second harmonic is going to have a harmonic number of 3,
but I think most experts will still call that then the second harmonic, even though the harmonic number,
the next one in the sequence is going to be 3.
Let's have a look at this problem where we have superfluous information that should not distract us.
We're told that we have a medium, a fluid medium, so the velocity given is 1,500 meters per second for sound wave,
and it is reflected off of a barrier.
In other words, the one side is closed and the other side is open.
And we are told that a staining wave is generated in this water medium,
and that from node to node, we measure 3.8 centimeters, 0.038 meters.
What is the, what is the frequency?
The clue lies in node to node.
Remember we said node to anti-node, or anti-node to node is a quarter of a wavelength.
In the very first lectures we said that, never ever forget that, that is such an important thing.
So node to node equals 2 times a quarter, 2 times a quarter wavelength.
So that equals a half a wavelength.
In other words, if 0.038 equals half a wavelength, that means wavelength equals 0.176 meters.
And we know frequency equals velocity divided by lambda.
And if you divide 1,500 by 0.076, I think you get about 19,700 and something, I think.
But for two significant digits, that's going to be about 20 kilohertz.
20 kilohertz.
So the fact that they mention that one end is closed, it's affected off of a barrier,
has nothing to do with this problem.
A fundamental part of this problem is to always remember,
node to node is a half a wavelength, or node to anti-node, or anti-node to node is a quarter wavelength.
And that's the important thing to always remember.
Thank you.
Thank you.
