Let's start with a very simple problem. We are told that two identical sinusoidal waves
are travelling along a rope and they have a maximum, each one of them separately has
a maximum wide displacement of 9.8 mm but they are at a phase difference of 100 degrees.
What is the resultant amplitude? And for that, remember from the previous video, we have an equation, we'll call it y mu, the combined, or the total of the two waves, and we say that that is twice times the y max of, or the amplitude of those waves, times the cosine.
of half of the phase angle. So let's have a look at that. The resultant is going to be two times 9.8 mm times the cosine of 50 degrees.
And I think that works out to about, let me just see, on the calculator, that works out to about 13 mm.
Yeah, that works out to about 13 mm. So that was quite, that was quite an easy problem. Now, also look at the fact that this is an intermediate interference, in as much as, it's not 0 mm, where they're completely
cancel, or they're completely additive, 9.8 plus 9.8, would be 19.6, 19.6 mm. So this is an intermediate type of interference.
In the next part of the problem, we want to know what phase angle will give us a resultant, a resultant amplitude of 4.9 mm. And again, that's very simple. We have just got to get, from that equation, we just have to get phi on its own. So we're going to have that divided by 2y max. And that's going to equal the cosine of half of phi.
In other words, the cosine of y new over 2x, in other words, the cosine of y new over 2 times y max is going to equal half of phi, or phi is going to equal, phi is going to equal two times y max.
times y max is going to equal a half of phi, or phi is going to equal two times the arc
cosine of yn divided by 2 ym. And that will, depending on how you set your calculator,
it's best to do these in radians. I don't like the degrees, because if you do any kind
of calculus on these problems, obviously it's got to be in radians. So that will give you
phi, and if they want to know, also want to know how many, so this will give you, say,
phi radians as your answer, how many wavelengths, how many wavelengths would that be? And that
is just as simple in as much as one wavelength, one wavelength, because these are sine curves,
is one wavelength equals two pi radians, two pi radians, so those will cancel out, and
I'll get my answer in wavelengths. Remember that this will be positive and negative value in
as much as the cosine of an angle equals the cosine of negative that angle, and that means
with that phase angle, the one wave can be in front of the one wave, and also it can just
be behind. That will give the same resultant new amplitude. Okay, in this problem we want
to know what the ratio is of the resultant amplitude to the original amplitude in two identical waves.
Remember, until the next section, we're talking about identical waves. In other words, the amplitude
is the same, they're obviously travelling in the same medium, so the velocity is the same,
it's not negotiable. And they're otherwise identical, so the frequency and the wavelengths are also
identical. And we want to know what this ratio is, say for instance if the phase angle, if the
phase angle is 90 degrees, it is 90 degrees, in other words pi over two radians. And we know that the resultant
amplitude equals the original amplitude, sorry, two times the original amplitude times the cosine of half
of the phase angle. So that makes it quite simple. We're going to just have the resultant divided by the
maximum is going to equal two times the cosine of a half times pi over four times pi over four radians. That
equals two times the cosine of pi over four radians. And if we just remember trigonomically, if I have a right
triangle, I have a right triangle, and this is pi over four, that will be pi over four, that will make this one
one square root of two. I'll get that now. So that's going to equal two times one over square root of two radians.
Multiply that by square root of two, or square root of two, that equals two square root of two over two, that equals
square root of two radians. The next problem, for instance, we want to know what the
phase angle be, the difference of phase angle between two waves. Well, the first wave will always be a phase angle of zero,
because it's just the relative change between them. If, for instance, the ratio of the resultant amplitude to the
maximum amplitude is, for instance, 1.5. These are very, very simple problems, and I doubt you get these sort of things in the
examples here, they are really too simple. Remember, y-resultant equals two times y-max times the cosine of
half the phi angle. And so we're going to have y-resultant divided by two times y-max. It's going to equal the
cosine of half of the phase angle. And we're going to get that the phase angle then is going to equal two times the
arc cosine of y-r over y-max, two times. And we know that y-r over y-m is now 1.5. So we're looking at phi
equaling two times the arc cosine of 1.5 times a half, that's 3 quarters. So we're looking at a phase angle. I think I did, yeah, well I didn't do it on my calculator.
Anyway, do it on your calculator. That's the answer. Remember, it can be in shudder or behind. And if that is phi
radians, remember to convert that to the wavelengths. It is that one wavelength, one wavelength is 2 pi radians. So if I just divide this by 2 pi radians, I'll get the
wavelength that they have to be apart to identical waves for the ratio of the resultant to the original amplitude of the two waves to be 1.5.
Now, as I said, these problems are quite easy to do. They're quite simple. And, you know, to increase the difficulty of it, we can just draw things out a bit.
We are told that two identical waves, and before we do the next section, we are always dealing with identical waves,
are traveling, and what you might get in the problem is that they actually draw an x and a y-axis and they draw the sine curve,
and then another sine curve to show that this resultant wave, they'll usually draw the resultant wave,
not the two individual ones, it's just moving. And they'll make little marks on that just so that you have to,
so that you have to look at, you know, for instance, what the wavelength is according to the marks that are made
on the little graph, and you might have to figure out, for instance, what the resultant, because they tell you
that's the resultant wave, what the amplitude of that resultant wave is. But you can get all of that information
out of the graph that they do show you. And they'll also show you that that graph, or that wave,
it travels a certain distance in a certain time. So it's very easy for you to do. Now what they might say is
that this wave, in this problem, let's say that the wave traps in the negative x direction. So what you're actually going
to get a delta d distance here as being negative. Okay. And what they would like to know in the end,
what is the phase angle, and what must the sine be in front of omega there? In front of omega. So if we just look at velocity,
and we've done problems before now, we know how to get, this is going to be the arc cosine of the equation
that we did in the previous problem. But you won't have all the answers to put in, you won't have all the answers
to put in unless you go, you go through all of this, because they might also want to know then from the
second wave, what is, what is k, and what is omega. So certainly you can do this part,
but if you need to do k, you need to do omega. You've got to go through that whole orbit. So that just
adds a bit of length to this problem. Let's do the velocity. So that's going to be negative 0.5,
6 meters divided by 8.0 times 10 to the power length of 3 in the seconds. And I did that before.
It works out to about 70 meters per second. So I have velocity. I do know that velocity equals
frequency divided by lambda, times lambda. In other words, I can work out the frequency. In other words,
I can work out the frequency as being velocity divided by the wavelength. Velocity I now have
is 70 meters per second. And my wavelength I worked out on that graph because I made nice markings
on it, 0.40 meters. So I'm left with, I think it was 175, 175 inverse seconds. 175 inverse seconds.
That's very easy for me to do k and the angular wave number and the angular frequency. And as
much as k equals 2 pi divided by lambda. So I'm going to have 2 pi divided by lambda, which
was 0.4, 0.40 meters. Oops. And that gives me a k value of 5 pi inverse meters. And I can do
omega. And as much as that's 2 pi times the frequency. So that's 2 times pi times 165. That
equals 350 pi inverse seconds. So I've got that now and I've got that. Now remember my velocity
is actually negative. I just want you to look at something. Just don't be fooled sometimes
by, when I ask the direction, the sine of omega, what must the sine be a plus or minus.
The data set the sway travels in the negative x direction. Just be very careful. When I have
travels in the negative x direction, we put kx plus omega t. But remember, I suppose it's
not that important. We all know if it's negative, it's in the positive x direction, the positive
is negative x direction. But if you just work through this problem, this v is going to be a
negative v. In other words, that's going to be a negative. And we're going to get a negative there
and we're going to get a negative value there. And if omega there is negative, that means the
sign here has also got to be negative. Because a negative times a negative is a positive.
OK, because we want a result in positive omega so that the wave travels in the negative x direction.
So the sign in front of our omega here, as the problem stands here, has got to be negative.
So now I have k, I have omega, I have the sine, and all I need now is the phase angle. And we did that before.
Remember this from y resultant equals two times the original amplitude times the cosine of half of the phase angle.
And I'm not going to go through that whole step again, how to just get the phase angle on its own.
That should be simple enough for you to do. So you can just draw out this problem a bit by asking a few more things.
And seeing if you can read from a graph exactly what was put on the graph.
Still though, these problems remain very simple.
