Now this is a very simple problem. It's just about not getting confused with what is longer
than the other thing. Say for instance we have a metal rod. Someone strikes the metal
rod on this side and someone is listening on this side. We'll say that the velocity
of the sound wave through air, let's call that velocity 2, equals 343 meters per second.
And we'll say that the velocity 1 through the rod of that sound wave is 15 times faster,
15 times 343 meters per second. And we say that the person on this side here
has two sounds. One sound is obviously coming through the rod 15 times faster than the one
coming through air and the difference between those two is 0.12 seconds. What is the length
of the rod? Which one is going to be longer? The equation we're obviously going to use
is velocity equals distance divided by time. So distance or time, let's say then time is
going to equal distance divided by velocity. It's going to be time n and velocity n inasmuch
as the two times and the two velocities are different, but the d for both of them, they've
got to travel the same distance. So if we look at t1, it's going to be a distance divided by
velocity 1 and velocity 1 is going to be 15 times 343. I'm just leaving the units out. I mean,
this is such a, such a simple problem. We don't have to be too concerned about that. T2 is going
to be the same distance. It's going to be the same distance divided by now velocity 2 which
is 343. 343. Now is it time 1 minus time 2 which is 0.12 or time 2 minus time 1? Which
one is the largest? Clearly time 2 is the largest one. It takes longer to go through air than to
go through the metal rod. So we're talking about t2 minus t1 and that's the only trick in this
problem. It's going to equal 1.2 and that's going to equal d over time 2, 343 minus d over
15 times 343. Let me just get a new choke. So what are we going to do on this side? 0.12
is going to equal 15, 343. And so on this side we're going to have 15d minus d. It's got a
common denominator now. So that's going to equal 14d divided by 15 times 343. And what do
we get? We get that 14d is going to equal 0.12 times, oh where are we, where are we, where
are we, where are we? 14d times 15 times 343. And eventually d is going to equal 0.12 times
1.12 times 15 times 343 divided by 14. Simple as that. And if you put that in the calculator
you will get, what did I get? 44.1. And we are dealing with two significant digits so that's
about 44, 44 meters. And I got 44 indeed 44 meters. So this is such a simple problem the
only thing that you have to not get confused with is this. If you do it the other way around
you're always going to get a negative. It doesn't very matter. So all in all quite a simple problem.
Okay, apologies. I went to theatre for a stabbing to the heart. We're going to now look at the
travelling sound wave. And we've got these three equations which I've jotted down because
they need to be memorized. In some textbooks you will get the derivation. The derivation is
not as intuitive as it was for transitional waves. You must remember if we have a thin
tube with air, with the air uniformly distributed and then you are going to get these zones of
higher pressure. And from any specific point to the next point that is going to be your wavelength.
And we are going to get an element in here. An element at some x position that moves back
and forth some maximum distance. Is max displacement max back and forth. And the movement is very
small compared to the wavelength. Otherwise these equations don't really make sense. The next thing
that you must remember is, and if you look at these, these are trigonometric functions. If I have
a time equals zero, a time equals zero, and this is the x-axis and this is now our, we see our displacement back and forth as displacement here. And we go on to pressure as a function of x and t. Please remember what you are going to do.
is just move the graph to the right. So exactly that. Now this is going to be probably a bit bigger. But with the same wavelength. But it's just shifted. If this is a wavelength, if that is a wavelength, it's just shifted over a quarter of a wavelength there. A quarter of a wavelength there. Okay so remember if this is a
delta delta S, this might it might might delta P. This might have delta P it might send delta S to the right
If this is a wavelength, if that is a wavelength, it is just shifted over a quarter of a wavelength
there. A quarter of a wavelength there. Ok, so remember if this is delta S, delta P, delta
P and I should just actually say S there. And then this is going to be our delta P max.
And this is going to be our S max. And the reason why we do that is you are going to get questions
where we say if this element here is just starting to move to the right, if it's just starting
to move to the right past the equilibrium position, what is happening to the pressure? So you
can read this off if these were drawn to scale. So basically just there, it means there will
be a decrease in pressure. As it just starts moving to the right, ok there's going to be,
that will correspond to this point. There will be just a start of a decrease in pressure.
Anyway, let's look at these two. Let's look at these two equations. So displacement in the
left and right position. So the function of x and t equals sm, which we now say is this
maximum displacement, this maximum displacement there, or then this maximum displacement as
we can see there, times the cosine of still the angular wave number times x minus the angular
frequency times t. And as I said, you can also look at the change in pressure, which here
is going to be also a function of x and t, and that will be this amplitude here times the sine of
kx minus omega t. And delta s and delta pm, or sm and delta p max are related, and this is how
they are related. I'm not going to derive this, it's something to memorize, that the change in
the amplitude of the pressure there is velocity times rho times angular frequency times sm. So that is the
relationship between delta pm and sm. So these are, these are our equations. Now let's look at a very
simple algebraic problem. On the corner here I've written out three equations for the
traveling sound wave. And here we are told that the maximum change in amplitude that the human
ear can handle is about 28 pascal. Which is, if you think about it, atmospheric pressure is
1 times 10 to the power 5 pascal, so it's a lot less. But that's simply the maximum your ear would be able
to handle. If we then say that the density of air is 1.21 kilograms per cubic meter and we have a sound
of a frequency of a thousand hertz, and we're taking the velocity of 343 meters per second, we want
to know, we want to know what sm is. Now there's our equation. On the right hand side we have the equation
for that, for the relationship between these two. And we say delta pm equals, it was V rho omega sm
So sm, so sm is going to equal delta pm, which we have. We have V, we have rho, we don't have omega.
How can we get omega? And this is one of those equations that if you've woken up in the middle of the night
you should just know, and it's very simple, omega equals 2 pi times the frequency. So here we're going to have sm
is going to equal delta pm divided by V rho. And instead of omega we're going to have 2 pi times the frequency.
2 pi times the frequency. And if we substitute all these values in, the answer that you are going to get
is about 1.1, yes. 1.1 times 10 to the power, negative 5. 1.1 times 10 to the power, negative 5 meters.
So a very simple algebra problem, with the one little twist in that you have to know the equation of the
relationship between angular velocity and frequency.
