To explain these two equations that we just had, that the intensity of light that came from an initial unpolarized light was just going to be a half I0, and if the I0 was already polarized, we're going to have I0 cosine squared of theta.
And what happens now if I have three filters? So imagine that the light comes into the first filter, and it is totally unfiltered. So through the first filter, what is going to come out? What is the intensity of light after the first filter?
Let's call that I1, that this is going to be half of I0 if I let the light that comes in initially unpolarized. I call that I0, so that's going to be...
What will happen now if I2, if the light that comes through the second one now, after passing through that, makes an angle of 60 degrees, the axis of polarization, 60 degrees with the first one?
So now we're dealing with light that comes in that has already gone through a polarizer, so now we're dealing with this I0 is now this. So we're dealing with a half I0, this is now what's coming into the second filter, times the cosine squared, times the cosine squared of, say, for instance, it's 60 degrees.
60 degrees is pi over 3 radians, and that is a half, a half squared is a quarter, a quarter times a half is an eighth. So now we're already down to an eighth of I0.
Now what if there's now a third filter, and that third filter is along the x-axis, so 90 degrees from the first one, okay? And so what comes out that, let's call that light 3, again, it is getting light that's already polarized, so we're going to use this equation, and the light that comes into it now is this eighth I0.
Now think carefully. If it is 90 degrees against this one, this one was 60 degrees against that one, and another 30 degrees is making 90 from the first one, 90 from the first one, but it's 60 degrees from the previous one, 60 degrees from that, so that's going to be the cosine squared of pi over 6.
And if you do that, and if you do that, you're going to get to about 0.09 I0. Now that's very, that's very interesting, because if you think, if you think these two, these two are 90 degrees apart,
the axis of polarization is 90 degrees, and if you just had those two from unpolarized light, nothing whatsoever would have gone through, but now I put a second one in between those at 60 degrees from the first one, and indeed there will be some light at some intensity, very little, but there is still some light from the original that comes through because of the presence of the second one.
Let's do another problem. Let's do another problem. We are told that the incident light, or I shouldn't call it, I shouldn't call it that, the light that comes towards a polarized filter has an intensity of 43 watts per square meter, and it strikes the first polarizer, but this light, we say it's already polarized, it's already polarized in the Y direction, let's say it's in the Y roof.
It's just an annotation I'm going to use to say it's in the Y direction, K roof. So it's already polarized, if it's already polarized, remember we're going to use I equals I0 cosine of the angle squared.
Now it goes through the first polarizer, which is at a 70 degree angle to this axis, and then through a second one which is at a 90 degree angle with this axis, what is going to be the intensity of the light after it passes through.
So the intensity of the light that comes out after the first one is going to be whatever falls into the first one, I0 times the cosine squared of, well the first one makes an angle of 70 degrees with this one, so that's going to be the cosine squared of 70 degrees.
And what comes out of 2, well it's now going to be, this is now going to be my I0 that falls in, so that's I0 cosine squared of 70 degrees, times the cosine squared, now don't be caught out, it said at a 90 degree angle from the original light that comes in, but I'm not going to put 90 degrees there, it makes a 90 degree angle there, but it is the angle between the new,
polarizing direction, polarizing direction and whatever the light that falls in on it, so the difference between, that's going to come out at 70 degrees, and the difference now from 70 to 90 is this 20 degrees, so this is 20 degrees, and if you multiply those out, I've got 4.4 watts per square meter.
So if I make the mistake of now putting 90 in here, the curse of 90 is 0, but certainly it's not 0 that's going to come out, we already showed that at the previous one, we had unpolarized light passing through three filters, this is just a problem, this has already gone through the first filter, if you can imagine that.
Okay, so this is the angle between the polarizing axis of that filter, and the angle of the light that comes in, okay, so that's just 20 degrees.
Now here's a problem that we have to be very careful with the angles, first of all I'm going to have unpolarized light fall in to a first polarizer, making an angle of 90 degrees, 50 degrees with the horizontal,
so if I'm looking at the vertical, so if I'm looking at the vertical, my first angle is going to be 50 degrees, but it's unpolarized light coming through, so through I1, and it's going to go through three filters each at 50 degrees, but watch out.
So that is just going to be a half of I0, it is unpolarized when it comes in, so immediately we're just going to lose half.
Now we are told that the second filter makes an angle also of 50 degrees with this, but in this direction, 50 degrees in this direction.
Now be very careful because the difference between these, 50 and 50 is 100, but you are not looking for the largest angle between them, you're looking for the smallest angle.
Now, okay, so this is going to be 40, so this is going to be a half of I0, which now comes in cosine squared of 80 degrees, of 80 degrees, okay?
And we're told that the next one is also, okay, so what is now left, now we have this one, again, this is now what we have left, now it comes through again, and this one also makes an angle of 50 degrees,
but now 50 degrees here, but now 50 degrees here, again, it's the smallest angle between them, not 50 and 50 is 100, but 50 minus, 50 minus 90 is 40, so that's 40 and 40, again, that's 80 degrees.
So, again, we're going to have, so I3 is now just going to be half I0 cosine squared of 80 degrees, and times another cosine squared of 80 degrees, and that's going to work out, I think, to about 4.5 times 10 to the power of negative 4 I0,
or, or, yeah, times I0, you can express this as a percentage of I0, or just as a fraction there of I0, so don't make a mistake, when the angle between them is now more than 90 degrees, look for the smaller angle between them, look for the smaller angle between them, and it's not 100 minus 90, it is each individually minus 90, 90 minus 50 is 40 left for the one,
and same 40 left for the other one, and 40 and 40 is 80, and that's how you get to that.
Another problem for us, if I have unpolarized light with an initial intensity of 10 milliwatts per square meter, I send it through a polarizer, and I want to know the light that comes through the polarizer, what is its electric field amplitude,
it's electric field amplitude, we know we're just going to be left with a half, because there's unpolarized light coming through, so that coming through is a half of I0,
is a half of I0, I also know an equation for, sorry, half, I also know an equation for I, inasmuch as that equals Em squared, divided by 2 C mu zero,
remember this is not a half of I0, remember this is not a half of I0, so I need that little 2 there, in other words Em, is going to equal the square root of 2 times I,
and what is I? It's a half I0, a half I0, times C times mu zero, so that is just going to leave me as the square root of I, C,
of I, C, um, I, O, incident C mu zero, and after that I got about 1.9, there's 1.9 here, 1.9 volts per meter,
and now we know what is the pressure, the pressure on that filter due to the light that's absorbed,
well, remember pressure, if it's totally absorptive, is this going to be I divided by C, I divided by C,
so nothing is reflected when half of it goes through, so half of it that is lost due to this equation,
is this, that, and I equals a half of I0, so I'm looking at I0 divided by 2C,
and for that I got an answer of about 17 picopasca, 17 picopasca,
see, with your calculator you get the same answers.
