Here's a very interesting problem. We're told that we're in a room and there's a typist and he or she types away furiously and we measure a sound level of 60 decibels for that one typist.
Now we put three typists in that same room and they each type at a 60 decibel. One is the total decibel, one is the total sound level.
Now we said these are on a logarithmic scale so there's no superposition of sound levels. So you can't just say it's 180 decibels. Not at all.
You have to work out the intensity of each. So that's going to be I0 times 10 to the power beta divided by 10.
So we are left here with 1.0 times 10 to the power of negative 12 watts per square meter times 10 to the power of 60 divided by 10 is 6.
So that's 6 million. So we're left here with an intensity of times 10 to the power of negative 6, positive 6 minus 12.
So we're going to be left here with 1.0 times 10 to the power of negative 6 watts per square meter, square meter, sorry.
And if we do three of them, we're going to get 3, 3.0, 3.0.
Now we need to work out the decibel level of that.
So beta total for us, that's going to be 10 times the log base 10, log base 10 of 3 times 10 to the power of negative 6 watts per square meter, divided by I0, which is 1.0 times 10 to the power of negative 12 watts per square meter.
And that's going to be 10 times 10 times 10 times 10 to the power of negative 10 to the power of negative 10 to the power of negative 10 to the power of negative 10 to the power of negative 10.
Log of 3 million.
And it's dimensionless, remember, sound level is dimensionless.
I haven't done this one.
Let me just check on the calculator.
So the log of 3 million.
Well, you should know that the log of 3 million is just times that, times 10, times 10, you're going to be left with about 65, about 65 decibel.
And isn't that interesting, showing you that intensity, sound intensity is additive, so you can do a sort of superposition, if I can call it the intensities, but not sound levels.
You can't just add these. Three types of typing away is going to give you, at 60 decibels, it's going to give you a total of about 65 decibels.
Now let's have our first look at a Doppler shift problem.
We have told that an observer drives towards the source at 30 meters per second.
The source emits a sound at a frequency of 500 hertz.
The velocity of that sound wave is 340 meters per second, so it is about 15 degrees Celsius.
What is the frequency that the observer yields?
Well, the source is standing still, so the velocity, the velocity of the source equals 0 meters per second.
Now we know that the frequency heard by the observer equals the frequency by the source,
times velocity plus minus velocity of the observer, divided by velocity minus plus of,
minus plus the velocity of the source.
Now imagine that this is our observer, this is our source, and he drives towards the source, observer to source.
And we draw a line from observer to source.
And he is driving towards the source, in the same direction, so v observer there is going to be positive.
So we are left with v source times velocity plus velocity of the observer, divided by just the velocity,
because the velocity of the source is negative.
And if you plug in those values, you are going to get to, I got to 544 hertz, 544 hertz.
Indeed, if observer and source are coming towards each other, obviously you are going to hear higher frequencies.
If the car is driving away from the source, so still I have my vector from observer to source, the displacement is away from that vector there,
so this would be negative, and then I get, I got 456 hertz, if he drives away.
Okay, now we have two cars driving, in the same direction.
The one behind is going at 30 meters per second, the one in front of him only at 20 meters per second,
and the chasing car blows the horn to the front of him, because he needs him to move away.
So he can pass, presumably, some South African, good old South African driving.
Now that horn is at a frequency of 1200 hertz, as I said, the source car blowing his horn,
driving at 30 meters per second, at 30 meters per second, and the observer car is going at 15, sorry, 15, not 20 meters per second.
Was that the problem?
Was that the problem?
Is it 20, it was 20, it was 20, 20 meters per second, and 15, sorry, 20 and 50.
Otherwise, I'll give you the wrong answer.
And we notice that the speed of sound now is 340 meters per second.
Now let's do that.
So the chase car is now the source.
The observing car is here.
We draw a line from observer to source.
That is our direction.
And we note that the observer is moving.
Now the observer is moving in what direction?
Is he now moving in the positive or in the negative direction of this?
You might say relatively to, relative to each other, this observer is going to get closer and closer to the source.
So that has got to be a positive.
But let's have a look.
Let's have a look.
The frequency of the observer is going to be the frequency of the source times velocity plus or minus velocity of the observer divided by velocity plus or minus the velocity of the source.
So which one is positive and which one is negative?
I just want to make sure how I did it.
I just want to make sure how I did it.
The way that you look at this is don't be concerned about the relative distances inasmuch as this one is going at 30 or at 20.
This one is going at 15.
So they are going to get closer and close to each other.
So relatively speaking, the observer is getting closer too.
But do not be concerned about that sort of relativity now.
You draw from the observer to the source a line and then you look at the movement.
The observer is going in, let's say for instance they are now driving in that direction.
They are driving in that direction and we said this one is chasing that one.
You draw a directional vector, a unit vector, say U roof or U hat, whatever you want to call it, is in this direction.
The observer is traveling in that direction.
So that's going to make this a negative, a negative.
In what direction is the source going?
It's also turning in that direction opposite from this unit vector, the direction opposite.
So this also becomes a negative.
So that's all that you should do.
Don't make it too fancy.
It is just the direction of the arrow in the real direction of movement, not the relative movement.
Okay.
So we're going to have 1,200 in those seconds.
And we're going to have 340 minus, the observer is traveling at 15, and 340 minus 20.
So the numerator is going to be larger than the denominator, which means this 1,200 is going to go up.
So now I've got 1.22, 1,220 inverse seconds or 1.22 times 10 to the power of 3 inverse seconds.
So from 1,200 we're going to 1,220.
Indeed, because relatively speaking, getting closer to each other, there's going to be bunching up.
We're going to see more ways for the second travel, the frequency is going to be up.
So that's very satisfying for us getting a higher frequency.
But as I said, look closely.
That will be negative.
That will be negative.
Because in reality, they are both traveling opposite the direction of the unit vector pointing from observer to source.
That will be negative.
That is strong.
So once again, we're going to be in person direction, the disconnect occurs.
That's kind ofidade of tricking around the neck andsy on the head.
Bye bye bye bye!
We've got to be political заг ok.
I want to know someof theur 서로 on the right of the shoulder.
I'm not just going to see which consortium goes on.
again I want to out our side of our side of the cyst.
