Now I want to move on to the next equation, so we're going to do a simple problem with that.
We are given the intensity of a sound wave in air of just over half watts per square meter,
so that's quite a high intensity, quite painful, that sound.
We want to know the amplitude, and remember we like A0 and not tell you why that,
because this is a longitudinal wave of compression, rarefaction, compression, rarefaction,
so any molecule of air is going to have a transverse movement in the direction of the propagation of the sound wave.
Back and forth, so at a frequency of 800 hertz, the density of air being 1.29 kilograms per cubic meter,
and the velocity being 340 meters per second, so we know that's roughly 15 degrees Celsius.
We just have to remember the equation for density, which is 2 pi squared, frequency squared,
rho, velocity, A0 squared, this is what we want.
A0 is going to be the square root of I divided by 2 pi, frequency squared, rho, velocity.
And if you plug in 2 pi squared, don't make a silly mistake like that, don't forget the V for velocity.
If you plug in the values, I think I got around about, I think it was 9.9 times 10 to the power, 6 meters, 9.9,
and negative 6, 9.9 micrometers.
That's the maximum displacement amplitude of a molecule of air as that wave passes through.
Let's look at a problem with sound level.
We're given an intensity of, our sound is 3 times 10 to the power negative 8 watts per square meter.
See, that's a hell of a lot less than the previous problem, which was just over half, which is very high intensity.
What is the sound level? So sound intensity and beta sound level.
We know that beta equals 10 times, do not forget that 10, times the log of base 10 of intensity divided by the base intensity.
Now the base intensity is sort of the lowest intensity of sound that you will be able to hear.
So if your intensity is the same as this lowest audible, this will be 1, and the log base 10 of 1 equals 0,
so your sound level is going to be 0 decibel.
So this is where this I0 comes from.
And we might just fill in I0, and remember that's 1.00 times 10 to the power negative 12 watts per square meter.
So this is simply going to be beta equals 10 times the log base 10 of 1 of 3 divided by 1.
So that's going to be 3 times 10 to the power, what are we left with there, negative 4.
And 10 to the power 4.
Okay, let's see.
Is that right?
Let's just check on the calculator.
Let's do the 10 times, sorry I haven't done these, times the log of is 10 of, let's do that properly, 8 minus 8 over 1 to the power negative 12.
And that's going to be about 44.8.
It equals 44.8 decibel.
44.8 decibels.
Okay.
Okay, if you're wondering about all the ambient noise today, is that the window is stuck open,
so you're going to hear all the sounds outside, and obviously the sensitive microphone is going to pick up all of the sound.
But we want to know this problem, what is the sound intensity of a sound level of 85.0 decibel.
And remember, I think I looked at that before, now to use the natural log to change our equation.
Let's do that again, because you don't see that video and you can't remember.
Remember that beta equals 10 times log base 10 of the intensity we're looking for divided by the lowest intensity.
So we're going to divide both sides by 10, let me just get some chalk.
We're going to divide both sides by 10, so we get beta divided by 10 equals.
Now remember how to change natural log, how to change the base.
If I want to use log base e, or just the natural log, that will be i over i0 divided by the log, still base e of this base there, log 10.
So this log base e is the natural log, so I'm going to take natural log of 10 to the other side.
So I'm left with beta divided by 10, natural log of 10 equals the natural log of i divided by i0.
And remember the law of exponents of the logarithm.
So I can rewrite this as the natural log of 10 to the power of beta divided by 10 equals the natural log of i divided by i0.
So the natural log of something equals the natural log of something.
So that means the something has got to be the same.
And so I can get rid of these natural logs.
I'm going to multiply both sides by that.
So I'm going to get that intensity equals intensity 0 times 10 to the power of beta divided by 10.
So I can put in 1 times 10 to the power of negative 12 watts per square meter there.
And I can put 85 there, so 85 divided by 10 is 8.5.
And if I get the intensity of that.
That one I've done.
The intensity of that is going to be 3.16 times 10 to the power of negative 4 watts per square meter.
Let me just make sure I've got the right one for you.
Yes, indeed.
For 85 decibels, we're looking at 3.16 times 10 to the power of negative 4 watts per square meter.
Easy.
Okay.
I love this problem because this problem is going to show us a new equation, which we
haven't dealt with before.
And it's an equation you can also memorize.
I have two sound intensities.
They differ by 10 to 500 times 50 watts per square centimeter, watts per square centimeter,
so those are not SI units.
We can convert that to SI units.
And we want to know what is the difference in the sound level between these two.
The difference in sound level means we're going to have beta 2 minus beta 1.
And that equals, remember what beta is, that's 10 times the log plus 10 of I.
So we're going to have I2 first, divided by I0, minus 10 times the log of, now you have
I1 divided by I0.
Okay.
I can bring 10 out as a common factor.
So I'm left with a log base 10 of I2 divided by I0 minus log base 10 of I1 divided by I0.
Now remember the log of a value minus the log of another value is just equal to 10 times
the log base 10 times the log base 10 of these two values divided by each other.
Remember, still the law, left to right, or rules of, of transcendental functions.
So I'm going to have I2 divided by I0 over I1 divided by I0.
I0s are going to cancel out.
So the difference in sound level between two intensity values is going to equal,
equal, it's going to equal 10 times the log base 10 of I2 divided by I1.
So whatever the one is that is subtracted from the other one will be in the denominator.
So that's a new equation.
Let's write it like this.
Beta 2 minus beta 1 equals.
So at us jumps a new equation that we haven't seen before.
So if you want to know what the difference in sound level is for two different intensities.
And just to give you the answer so you can check that there's no single state today.
It's going to be about 17 decibels.
17 decibels only for a difference that is 50 times higher intensity.
So you can see that intensity is not linearly proportional to the sound intensity that we hear, the sound level.
Some books say sound intensity and sound intensity.
Use intensity and sound level.
Sound intensity, sound intensity, sound level.
Okay.
So the difference of 50 is only a difference of 17 decibels.
So it's on a logarithmic scale that there's a proportionality between sound level and sound intensity.
Now these problems are becoming a bit redundant in that they're so easy and then one just builds on the other one.
So they want to know if two sound levels are eight decibels.
There's an eight decibel difference between two sound levels is eight from zero decibel.
What is the ratio of the intensities?
Now we just saw that beta 2 minus beta 1 equals 10 times the log of i2 divided by i1.
So they want those ratios.
So now we just have to get, now we just have to get, let's call this delta beta, delta beta.
Now we just have to work out those.
We just have to work out those.
And then you can take what is called the anti-log and you can make it a bit easier but just to stick to our convention here.
So here as we're going to say the delta beta is going to equal 10 times, or delta beta divided by 10.
Divided by 10 is going to be for us the natural log of i2 over i1 divided by the natural log of, that would place 10 of 10.
So we're going to have the natural log of 10 to the power delta beta over 10.
This is going to be the natural log of i2 over i1.
We're going to get rid of these two.
So we're going to say that the ratio of i2 to i1 is going to equal 10 to the power delta beta, which is 8.
And in our instance, divide it by 10.
So you get the ratio of the intensities.
Okay, let's do this interesting problem.
We have a distance of 2 meters away from a small sound source.
The distance 2 meters away, we measure 100 decibel.
That's certainly a lot of noise there.
100 decibel sounds, we hear 2 meters.
What is the average power output of our tiny source?
Now right in the beginning, we said that intensity equals change in energy divided by change in area, change in time.
And energy being the time is going to be power average divided by change in area.
In other words, p average is going to be intensity times area.
We were not given intensity, we were given level.
So we know we can replace i by i0 times 10 to the power beta divided by 10.
And area, remember, it's in three-dimensional space.
It's a sphere that expands from the central little source in the area of a sphere.
At that distance, a radius of 2 meters is 4 pi squared.
So 100 divided by 10 is 10.
So it's 10 to the power of 10 times 1 times 10 to the power of negative 12 times 4 times pi times 2 squared.
And I did it before, I think I got, just check on your calculator if this is correct, I've got a doubt.
Half a watt of average power by a tiny little way in sound source.
Over there.
Sure.
Peace.
Axis.
со- 예쁘 tuned
Poppy,
