Now, just as we had interference with transverse waves, we can also see interference in longitudinal waves.
And the way that this is usually shown is if I have an observer here,
and here I have my first source, and I have my second source here,
this distance is L1, and this distance is L2.
Now, if I make this distance L1 and L2 appreciably larger than this distance S1 and S2,
I can view these sound waves as travelling in these two straight lines to P,
and we can get interference.
The two main types of interference we're obviously talking about is constructive, constructive, and destructive, and destructive interference.
And when will that happen?
Obviously, the constructive is going to happen when the waves completely coincide.
So if we have the same displacement, so in other words, the same amplitude and the same wavelength,
source wave generators here, and we look, then we're going to look at the following situation.
If we say delta L equals the difference between L1 and L2,
the difference between L1 and L2, we are going to call that the phase difference.
We are going to call that the phase difference between these two.
And what we can say is the phase difference over a complete, over a complete wave, remember,
as sine and cosine functions, so they're repeatedly two pi radians,
that is going to equal the difference between those two divided by a full wavelength.
So that's a full wavelength, that's obviously one wavelength.
And these two are, we equate to each other.
Meaning that we're going to get an equation that states phi equals delta L times 2 pi divided by lambda.
That is an equation for the phase angle, or the phase difference between these two waves.
And if we think about it, if we're talking about fully, if we're talking about fully constructive waves,
the equation that we're going to get here is equals M 2 pi, where M is 0 plus all the positive integers.
So M equals 0 comma 1 comma 2 comma 3, and we'll have that sequence.
And for them to be fully destructive, we're looking at half of 2 pi.
In other words, pi, pi is going to give you half wavelengths.
And if they're half wavelengths separate from each other, which is what this phase angle denotes,
we're going to have 2 M plus 1 pi.
2 M plus 1 pi.
In other words, if we make the phase angle 0, the phase angle 0, which means the difference is 0.
In other words, S1 and S2 coincide.
If the phase angle is 0, there's going to be complete constructive interference.
So the amplitude is going to double up.
And destructive are all the half angles apart.
Say, for instance, 0, that'll be 1 pi.
It's 180 degrees, which is half a wavelength apart.
In other words, they're going to completely destruct.
That's a destructive interference.
And then, obviously, anything in between is going to give you a pattern, an intermediate pattern.
These are good equations to remember.
2 M plus 1 pi in M.
Pi, some textbooks will put M there instead of M.
But certainly, you'll see there the pattern of constructive and destructive.
If they are, if M is 1, that's exactly 2 pi radians.
And then, you can work out from this equation what the difference in length will be.
So instead of delta L, and finally, you can get delta L on its own.
You can see what the length difference between these two must be.
Next video, let's look at a problem to illustrate these equations a bit.
Let's illustrate those equations with this example.
So we are told that the difference between source 1 and source 2 is 1.5 times the wavelength.
So we have half there, half there.
The bisector of this distance goes to P1.
So this is L1 and L2.
And we have P2 down here.
Now, we remember our equation.
One thing I just want to mention.
Remember always, the problems will state that this distance is a lot more than the distance between the two sources.
Anyway, we remember that phi equals delta L and 2 pi equals a wavelength.
So we can clearly see here that the difference is delta L, remember.
Because L2 minus L1 is length.
And if this is the bisector, that means L1 and L2 are obviously exactly the same.
So this is zero.
So the phase angle between them is zero.
So the phase angle between them is zero.
And we remember that phi equals N times 2 pi.
And the phase angle is zero.
And the phase difference is zero.
Obviously, this can be constructive interference.
Constructive interference at this point P1.
What about point P2?
Well, we'll have one distance and we'll have a distance of half pi, half pi difference.
So if we look at phi now equaling delta L times 2 pi divided by lambda.
So it's going to be lambda.
And we know delta L, the difference between these two is going to be d here.
So delta L for us is going to be 1.5.
So phi is going to equal 1.5 lambda times 2 pi divided by lambda.
Lambdas will cancel out.
One and a half times 2 is going to equal 3.
So phi is going to be 3 radians for us.
So that will fall in this category of phi equaling 2N plus 1 pi.
That's the only one that can give us there.
If we make N equals 1, that's 3.
That is, sorry, 3 pi.
That is 3 pi radians, which means it's one of these with N equals 1.
And that means there's total destructive interference here.
Destructive interference on this one.
So these problems are very, very, very simple.
And you're invariably going to get an issue whether either totally constructive or destructive.
We'll look at some more examples maybe in which we get some intermediate interference.
But certainly constructive and destructive quite easy to see why.
Let's do another problem.
We say it's quite easy.
Two sound waves from two different sources with the same frequency of 540 inverse seconds.
And travel in the same direction at 330 meters per second.
And the sources are in phase.
We should always know that for these problems.
What is the phase difference?
So we're looking for the phase difference.
Of the two waves at a point that is 4.4 meters from the one and exactly 4 meters from the other.
Now that is quite simple.
We do know an equation for the phase angle.
Remember, or the phase difference.
That is going to be delta L times 2 pi divided by a full wavelength.
And delta L we know is just the absolute value of L2 minus L1.
So that length times 2 pi divided by lambda.
We don't know what lambda is.
We were not given lambda.
But as I said, this is a very easy problem.
Velocity equals frequency times lambda.
And lambda equals velocity divided by frequency.
So for our phase angle, we're going to have L2 minus L1 times 2 pi divided by velocity
over frequency.
And if you plug all of those in, so 4 meters minus 4.4 meters is negative 0.4 meters.
But it's the absolute value, the length of that.
So it's 0.4 times 2 pi times the frequency of 540 divided by velocity, which is 330.
And you should get an answer of about 4.11 a radius.
4.11 a radius.
It's a very simple problem.
Eventually we get to a nice problem, a good one.
We have two sound sources.
And they are in phase, and they are a distance, delta L or D, 1.75 meters, 1.75 meters apart.
If I take the half of this, I'll do this 87.5 as a center point, and I draw an enormous circle.
I draw an enormous circle around this midpoint, and I take a detector and I move all the way around.
And at how many points will I get a completely constructive and completely destructive wave?
Now, from one of the previous problems, I think you will agree that if I go down the middle, this distance and this distance will be exactly the same.
In other words, delta L is 0, so over here I'm going to have 0 pi radians.
That's going to be my phase angle.
And through symmetry, exactly on the opposite side, I'm also going to have 0 pi radians.
But what's going to happen on these two sides?
What is phi going to be there?
Well, remember phi equals delta L times 2 pi divided by lambda.
Delta L for these two points is 1.75 meters because they are 1.75 meters apart.
And this distance minus this distance leaves us that distance.
So that's 1.75 times 2 pi, that's 3.5 pi, is it? Yeah.
Divided by a half, so that's times 2, that'll give us 7 pi.
So that's going to be 7 pi, and that's going to be 7 pi.
Now just look at the circle, if this is 0 pi, and that's 7 pi, I have to go 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
So that's pi, 2 pi, 3 pi, 4 pi, 5 pi, 6 pi to get to 7.
The same is going to happen here, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 6 pi, 5 pi, 4 pi, 3 pi, 2 pi, and pi.
The same is going to happen there, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2.
Okay, so it's 1 pi, 2 pi, 3 pi, 4 pi, 5 pi, 6 pi.
This is easy, you see the answer now.
1 pi, 2 pi, 3 pi, 4 pi, 5 pi, 6 pi.
Okay, let's go counting.
Which ones will be constructive?
Remember, constructive ones are going to be n, which is 0, plus all positive integers, 2 pi.
So I'm looking at 0, and I'm looking at 2, because if n is 1, it's 2.
So let's count it.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 constructive points.
14 points around the circle, we're going to be a constructive wave.
And I could also just do half and just work it out by symmetry.
Okay, because on opposite sides, on opposite sides, we'll get exactly the same.
Okay?
And for destructive, it's obviously going to be the same.
Let's count them.
Let's count them.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
I counted that one.
So 14 points constructive, 14 points destructive.
So far.
What 먹 something that comes from you.
And in that extra nihilism,
that's obvious what happened?
We have to accept the penalty.
What are the twoanciesbreaking key?
That's right.
Is that dehydrated?
