I want to run through this problem. Remember, just the other side, I have my force for total
absorption, my pressure due to total absorption. If I change the area, the size of the area,
it's going to be directly proportional to the change to the force. If I change the area
in a problem, there's going to be no difference in the pressure, because pressure is already
defined per unit area. So it's not going to make a difference to the pressure, but it
will make a difference to the force. Please remember that. So now, we're going to deal
with the problem of the comet's tail, where we have the sun, we have a comet, and it has
two tails. One is the ions, which are charged particles, which float directly away from the
sun. As the charged solar wind radiates away isotropically, let's call it isotropically as
well, from the center, but we also get this curved tail, and that's of dust particles, and
those tiny little particles experience a force and has some pressure on it due to the electromagnetic
waves. And what we want to know is if those tiny little dust particles, the comet gets heated
by the sun, and those particles evaporate with the ions, if we take that the density of these
dust particles are such 3.5 times 10 to the power 3 kilograms per cubic meter, and we give
those little dust particles a radius of R, I basically want to know, at what distance is
there a balance between, what distance, what size, what size of a radius, I should say, is
there a balance between the gravitational force on that particle and the force in the opposite
direction due to the electromagnetic waves. And let's say, for instance, let's take for granted
that there's total reflection on these little dust particles. So what we are saying is that
the force of total, of total, let's say, let's use absorption, let's say they totally absorb,
they don't reflect, let's say they totally absorb, it's got to equal the force of gravity. And
equal and but in opposite direction, so they balance out. We said that there's total absorption,
we're talking about I, now this is the intensity of our point source, let's see the sun as a
point source with isotropic radiation around this, so let's say that this is from the sun.
Area is going to be the area of my little particle, the area of my little particle, divided by C, and on
this side, remember Newton's, Newton's equation for the gravitational force, G, the mass of the sun, the mass of my little particle, divided by the radius, the radius squared. Now this is the radius between the little mass and the mass of the sun, so let's not confuse that with this radius. This would be the radial distance from the sun to the particle. Okay, so let's not confuse those.
This will be, that will be, let's take that lowercase r, and then the radius of this little particle, let's make that capital R. So let's not get confused. Now what we want to know is the radius of this little particle, and nowhere in this do we have capital R even. So we have to do some things. What about the intensity of the sun? Remember intensity is going to be power, so that's of the sun, divided by the distance
distance away from if we see that as a point source, and not distance, but the surface area of, at a certain radius, remember? So that's going to be 4 pi r squared, and now we're dealing with this little r of how far away it is.
Now the area is the area of our little particle. Now if the light, if the particle is there, and I see the particle, if we just see the particle, we're just seeing it end on.
So the surface area is not half of the sphere, it is just the cut surface, what the area of that cut surface is, and the area of, the area of a circle is this pi. Now we're talking capital R squared. Capital R squared, and we should not forget our C there.
On this side, on this side g is g, the mass of the sun is the mass of the sun. And what is the mass of the little particle? We don't know what its mass is, but we do know what its density is.
And density equals mass divided by volume, and otherwise mass is going to be density times volume, and the volume of our little particle will be, our dust particles is going to be 4 over 3 pi capital R cubed.
So mass is going to be rho, and then V is going to be 4 over 3 pi R cubed.
Let me get some chalk. So for my mass of my particle, I can now put in 4 over 3, and I can put in rho, I can put in pi, I can put in R cubed.
And R squared is now again the distance between those. So, I think that's a good one. We can get rid of the R squares.
So you can immediately see the radius of this particle, or the force on it's really not going to depend on, there's not going to be no dependence on the distance from, the distance from the sun.
We can already see that. Let's see, I can get rid of this pi and that pi. What else can I get rid of? What else can I get rid of?
Well, let's see. There's an R squared, so I can get rid of that cubed. Alright, so let's just get R on its own. So R is going to equal, nothing is left there except the power of the sun.
Power output of the sun times 3, divide pi over 3, and then now we're going to bring all this down. There's a 4 and a 4, so that's already 16.
16. I'm going to be left with pi as well. 16, a pi. I'm left with a rho. Rho. And I am left with G. I'm left with the mass of the sun. And the last thing I'm left with is C.
That's it. So the radius is going to be 3 times the power of the sun divided by 16 pi, the density that we were given, the gravitational constant, the mass of the sun times C.
And all your textbooks will give you values for the mass of the sun and the mass of the power output of the sun. If I use those that are my textbook to see that you get to about the same thing.
I think my answer was about, let me just see, 1.7, 7 times 10 to the power output of 7 meters. And you see that it is independent of the distance between the sun and the, and this particle of ours.
So it's a, it's a nice problem. And the best part of this problem obviously is to get to this equality, to get to this equation. But once you realize this, there shouldn't be a problem.
Just make sure that this is the intensity of the sun and that's the area of the particle. Don't get confused. Don't get confused by what each element in my equation, what each element in my equation means,
especially the radius, the radial distance between the sun and the particle and the radius of the little particle itself.
