Okay, I have light of 221 nanometers, so certainly there by an autoviolet, shining on a metal surface, and that gives me a maximum kinetic energy of the ejected electrons of 3.28, 3.28 times 10 to the power negative 19 joule.
And I want to know what wavelength of light will I need to double the maximum kinetic energy of the ejected electrons?
Well, I know that the kinetic energy, maximum kinetic energy, is going to equal, now I'm dealing with wavelengths, so that's going to be hc divided by lambda minus the work that needs to be done on the egg to eject those electrons.
Now, to think about it, I'm going to use the same metal, so let's get it to stay the same, this is going to change, those two are the same, and all I want to do in situation number 2 is I'm going to have twice that.
So, if this was what I used for kinetic energy maximum, if I now have twice kinetic energy maximum, that's going to be hc divided by, I'm going to use a new wavelength there, and I still have the same metal, still shining on the same metal.
As I said, apologies, the card was full there, and it doesn't give me warning, so I just carry on not knowing that it stops recording.
We were left with the fact that we've got these two situations.
We're using the same metal, we're using one twice the kinetic energy maximum, and the only difference is going to be the wavelength there.
I can solve, as I said, both for w0 inasmuch as it is going to be hc over lambda minus the kinetic energy max for both.
So, for the first one, that will be 1 and 1, and this one will be 2, lambda 2 and 2 times that, so I can just equate those two to each other as much as they're both going to equal that.
So, lambda 1 minus kinetic energy max, if you equal hc divided by lambda 2 times 2 times, minus 2 times kinetic energy max.
And I just need lambda 2 on its own, so hc divided by lambda 2 is going to equal hc over lambda 1, and I'm going to have negative kinetic energy plus 2, so that's going to give me plus kinetic energy max.
Okay, so lambda 2 is going to equal, lambda 2 is going to equal hc divided by hc over lambda 1, plus kinetic energy max.
So, lambda 2 for twice the kinetic energy, remember my lambda 1 was 221, let me just see, I get 162 nanometers.
See if you get the same answer, 162 versus 221, just to double the maximum kinetic energy of the ejected electron.
Okay, the last two problems, it's quite easy, they just make use of knowledge that you should have had in previous modules or physics courses and as much as you're going to do with heat.
So, I've got a glass plate of half a kilogram and it's got a specific heat capacity of 840 joules per kilogram per Kelvin.
So, it's going to take 840 joules of heat energy to be transferred to that glass per kilogram to raise the temperature by 1 Kelvin.
Per kilogram per Kelvin, I'm using infrared light at 6.0 times 10 to the power negative 5 meters, and I want to raise that temperature by 2.0 Kelvin.
How many electrons is that going to take?
Well, it's quite simple to do.
I know what the one infrared electron is going to be hc divided by lambda.
That is going to be the energy per one photon at that infrared wavelength.
But, I don't need just one photon, I don't need that amount of energy, I need much more.
I need much more.
And, I know that Q equals Cm delta T.
So, the heat transfer, heat energy transfer that I need is going to be Cm delta T.
840 times a half times 2.
That just leaves me 840 again.
That's going to leave me 840 joules is what I require.
So, I've got 840 joules and each of these photons is just going to give me this amount of energy.
So, if I divide this into there, I'm going to get this.
840 divided by this gives me the number of photons for infrared and that gives me 2.5, 2.5 times 10 to the power 23 of those infrared photons.
So, this is the equation that I would have had to remember from previous courses in physics as far as heat is concerned.
In the next problem, I'll quickly run down it.
I want to melt ice.
I want to melt ice at zero degrees.
So, I'm not changing the temperature there at zero degrees.
And I am using mass of 2 kilograms of water.
And I want to know if I use wavelength of light 620 nanometers.
How many photons is it going to take to do that?
Once again, I know what the energy is going to be per photon.
He divided by lambda or HF.
But it was even lambda, so I'll use lambda.
And how much energy do I need to melt this ice?
So, remember that equation Q is going to be LF subscript Fm.
That is the specific heat of fusion.
Remember at ice, around zero degrees is fusion and 100 degrees is vaporization L subscript to V.
Now, LF, I have to look that up.
If you can't remember, and it's not as loud when you are using this, you can look this up.
It's going to be 33.5, 33.5 times 10 to the power of full joules per kilogram.
I'm going to multiply that by my 2 kilograms.
And that gives me a Q of whatever, this times 2.
66, 67 joules. 67 joules.
But I never know how much energy there is in one photon.
So, once again, if I divide this by that, that is going to give me the number of photons.
And I get 2.1 times 10 to the power of 24 photons.
Easy enough to do.
Once again, that equation you would just have to have known.
Have to have known.
Okay.
Okay.
Thank you.
