Right, in this video, I want to have a look at the velocity of a transverse weight in
a medium. Remember that we said velocity equals frequency times lambda. In the very first
videos, I just thumb sucked at one. In the second set of videos, I explained to you how
we derive that, how we derive that equation from y equals y max times the sine of kx minus
omega t. And in the very first videos, we also looked at the fact that this equals tension
divided by mass over length. And in this video, I want to explain how we get to this equation.
Now, if you are studying for the exams, you can just learn this by heart, memorize this
and carry on. So this video is not essential for you to be able to do this work. So this
is one of those videos and I want to try and mention this as I make this new set of videos
on waves. If you want to know how to get to this or interesting for you to understand
some physics and mathematics, this is the video for that. But it's not essential for you
to be able to do the work in as much as you can just memorize those. But here is the interesting
bit. Here is my sinusoidal wave traveling along in a medium, which is a string. Now, if I move
that string up and down, I am setting the frequency. But there's some inherent properties in that
rope that's going to determine the velocity at which this wave goes. Hence this. Hence this.
But because now the physical properties of this rope are setting the speed, and I am setting
the frequency, that means some wavelength is going to develop. So the wavelength is just
a result that flows from the fact that my rope, my medium has certain properties and I'm setting
up a certain frequency in there. And that's why there's this relationship. That's why this
is sort of nothing magical. It's just a function of the fact that there's some physical properties
in my medium, and I'm setting up a frequency. Out jumps the specific wavelength for that frequency.
But it's not the frequency in the wavelength itself in a medium that sets up the speed. It's the physical properties
of that medium. So if my medium is a rope, and it's going to depend on certain things. If that one spot in the rope moves up and down,
that oscillatory movement is, for instance, going to depend on the mass. The heavier, that specific mass, is the slower it's going
to want to move. Okay? So the wavelength is going to be slower. Something else, that sets kinetic energy. For instance,
kinetic energy is half times mass times velocity squared. So that mass is going to influence the speed of this wave.
And then also, for instance, the potential energy, which we're going to see in a rope, for instance,
in the form of elasticity. If that specific spot moves up, how much elasticity is there to pull it down?
So that is going to be potential energy. So it's about kinetic and potential energy. So those physical properties,
those physical properties, going to determine with what speed the wave can travel through. And if that
physical properties is there, instead of I set the frequency, I jumps the wavelength.
So here's my representation of my sinusoidal wave, green. And I'm running with this wave. So my constant
velocity, so my frame of reference, is with the crest of this wave at all times. That's my frame of
reference. In other words, it looks to me as if the rope is going in this direction. Because I'm
standing still in my frame of reference, even though I'm moving relative to the ball. But my frame of
reference, I see as completely stationary. That means the rope is moving in this direction with a certain
velocity. So this is what's happening here. And at this crest, I've drawn a circle. I've drawn a circle.
Now this wasn't drawn very properly in as much as, well, it's schematic and it's not to scale. What is
important though is there's some arc length, delta L. My arc length, delta L, is in contact here,
exactly over that part of my sinusoidal wave. And if I have a radius of R here, it touches there, it touches
there. So it's two phi angles. It's theta angles. Theta and another theta. Okay? Theta and another theta.
Now, in this rope, there's tension. Tension pulling in this direction. Tension pulling in that direction.
And that's what's going to bring the rope down. So if I deconstruct this, obviously, the x components
are going to cancel out because they point in different directions. So that's theta. Remember,
this is theta as well. So I'm just interested in the two, in the two y components. And if I look at
the force there in the y component, just for one of them, that is going to be, if I call this tension
in this thing, if I call it tau, that is going to be tau times the, remember, I'm only interested in this
picture. So that's the sine, the sine of theta. But I've got two of them. So one component down,
the other component down. So I'm looking at two tau sine theta. And if I make use of a small angle
approximation, because I'm just using a very small, as the angle gets smaller and smaller, the limiting
factor there, the sine of theta equals theta. So this is going to be approximately, approximately
two, two tau theta. Tau being the tension in my string. It's tension there and there's tension there.
Okay, I'm using small angle approximation. But if I look at arc length, my arc length delta L,
remember arc length, remember the angle equals arc length divided by radius. Okay? What is my angle
for that specific arc length? It's two times theta. Okay? And my arc length is delta L divided by R.
So two thetas, remember this is going to be two thetas times tau. So that's going to be tau. And my two
thetas are delta L over R. And this is the force with which this specific bit here is going to be pulled
down. Now this video is going to be live. I'm just going to stop it. But I'll put the two together
because I don't want to have the recording stop while I'm busy again. So let me just stop it and I'll
carry on. There we go. Let's just carry on. I hope you are following along with me. At the moment I've got
the force with which this delta L has been pulled down. I just want to express this arc length as
something else. This physical small piece of rope. And I'm going to express it in the form of
its linear density. Its linear density.
Its linear density. Let's call that linear density mu.
linear density mu. So that is the length of rope divided by its mass.
So the specific rope of mine. I can use a thick rope, a thinner rope, all sorts of different ropes.
But it has a linear density. What am I doing there? Mat kilograms per meter.
Delta M divided by delta L. There's a linear density of so many kilograms
per meter length. So if I had a hundred meter long rope, it would weigh a certain amount of mass.
That's kilograms per meter. In other words, I can express delta L as delta M divided by mu,
by linear density. So I just want to replace that in here. So that's going to be the tension in the rope
times the mass of that small little bit divided by the linear density. By the linear density.
Now this circle, as my reference frame is moving along, this piece is going to come down,
well it is going to come down around the circle. The point is that I'm dealing with
centripetal, that I'm dealing with centripetal acceleration. And we'll remember from classical mechanics,
centripetal acceleration equals velocity squared divided by velocity squared divided by the radius.
And what I want to use now is this Newton's second law. Force equals mass times acceleration.
What do I have for force? I have tension changing the mass of that little bit divided by the linear density.
And that equals mass again. Mass times acceleration centripetal, v squared divided by r.
V squared, v squared divided by r. I think I lost the r here, didn't I?
Hope you picked that up, I lost an r there. So it's only delta L that is, delta M, delta L is delta M divided by mu,
but I still have that r there. Okay. So the r values are going to cancel, delta M are going to cancel.
So I'm left with tau over mu equals v squared or v equals the square root of the tension divided by the linear density.
And this is exactly this. Tension divided by linear density. And I think right in the beginning I also showed you,
I think some textbooks will also do that. If you just wanted to look at a dimensional analysis,
you're actually going to get that velocity equals some constant times the tension divided by the linear velocity.
If this is just some constant. We don't know what that constant is, but if we do it this way,
we actually see that this constant equals just a positive one. Okay. But again, with
dimensional analysis, we need to get the square root of tension.
The tension is kilograms meters per second squared divided by, and that's kilograms per meter.
I'm sorry, kilograms per meter. Kilograms are going to cancel, so we're left with, if we bring that into
the numerator, that is going to be the square root of meters squared per second squared. And that will
give us meters per second. Okay. Sorry, that's a bit ugly. But if you just do dimensional analysis,
you'll see that from this, we do get meters per second with velocity, which we just didn't know,
you know, if there was a constant in front of that. But if we do it this way, we'll see that the
constant equals just one. So I'm stretching a bit there, I'm stretching a bit there. There's actually
a beautiful way of determining what physical properties of my medium
is going to influence and determine what velocity a wave is going to be. Okay. So I'm going to have,
no matter what frequency I put on it, on that specific medium, I'm always going to have the same
speed. I'm always going to have the same speed. And because I put that frequency and that very constant
speed, out is going to jump the wavelength. So it's not magically that the frequency in the wavelength
gives you a velocity. It's that these two are related by the fact that I'm using a certain medium.
And these are the properties of that medium that is going to set the velocity. Once again, I want to
reiterate, not for examples. You don't need to understand this derivation, okay, to get to these
two equations. You can memorize those equations. You can just use them. Okay, this is one way of
writing it. This is just using different terms. Tau, mu, to write it. But it's tension divided by
linear density. And you're not going to be given mu. You're probably going to tell that the whole
rope weighs so much and it has that length. So you can work out the linear density. Okay.
But it's good to look at these sort of things because if you want to advance physics, you've got to
understand how people, what physicists did, what the thought process was to determine these equations
that you just try and memorize. So these are good, but it's certainly not required for you to know
all of this. If times are short and the exams are near, then don't waste time on these. Just memorize
this and know where they come from, know what they mean, and do your problems. But to be a complete
physicist, it's interesting and important to understand these derivations. Okay.
