Let us look at the energy that a wave transports along the medium.
We're looking at a transverse wave and the medium we're looking at is a rope tight between two ends.
As I move this side up and down, a transverse wave is sent across the rope.
But this takes energy and that energy is transferred down the rope.
It is transferred in two ways, one by kinetic energy and one by potential energy.
Now, the textbooks don't explain things too well.
I haven't found a textbook that does that.
But what it boils down to is the following.
If I have my sinus wave and I have one wavelength there,
remember that at the equilibrium position, at the equilibrium position there,
we have maximum velocity.
I'm just looking at transverse velocity now.
It moves up and down of one single, let's say, some differential mass in that rope moves up and down.
So there it has a transverse velocity of zero.
Here it has a transverse velocity of zero.
This is time.
And here it has maximum velocity.
And we know that k equals a half m e squared.
And here the v, we're only talking about one element that moves up and down as the wave goes through.
So what we're talking about here is some differential,
kinetic energy is going to be a half dm.
So differential mass times the transverse velocity squared.
And we're going to expand on this equation.
And just as far as potential energy is concerned, if I take a differential length, dx, dx of a piece of string.
Here it is at normal length and here it is stretched to its maximum.
So where kinetic energy is maximum, potential energy is also maximum.
Because this rope stretches and recoils, stretches and recoils.
And through this kinetic energy, as I explained here,
and through potential energy, which is a spring-like lengthening here,
it stretches here and it's back to normal length.
And it stretches here and it's back to normal length.
So at that spot, we're going to find maximum potential energy as well.
Let's just look at mu, the linear density.
Remember that that is going to equal mass, some differential mass times some differential length, dx.
So it's mass divided by length.
So dm equals mu dx.
And we remember our equation for a wave and a medium y max times the sine of angular wave number times x minus angular frequency times t.
And for transverse, transverse velocity is going to be dy dt.
And it's partial derivatives with x is constant.
I'm staying at the same x position.
And remember that that was equal to negative omega y max cosine of kx minus omega t.
Remember that.
Now let's replace that up there.
So we're going to get that sum differential kinetic energy there.
It's going to be a half.
dm is now mu dx.
mu dx, as we've shown there.
And then u squared is going to be all of the squares.
So it's negative y max times omega squared.
And we're going to have cosine squared of kx minus omega t.
Now, what the books do here, most of them don't explain very well.
We're going to just divide both sides by dt.
Divide both sides by dt.
And energy per time unit limit as power.
So power is going to be a half.
And mu dx dt.
dx dt is the velocity of the wave.
So that's going to be v.
So that's going to be v.
And we are going to get here.
We're also going to get omega squared from there.
And negative y max squared is going to be a y max.
And then we're left with this cosine of kx minus omega t.
And the books will show you that if you take cosine squared of this phase here,
and you take the average over an integer number of wavelengths,
you'll notice that the average of this cosine function is going to be a half.
The average of the square of a cosine function over an integer number of wavelengths is a half.
So all of that becomes another half.
And we are left with the power here for kinetic energy.
Power for kinetic energy.
Kinetic energy average is going to be a quarter mu v omega squared y max squared.
And remember I said that there will be zero here.
And the potential energy is zero here.
Kinetic energy is zero.
Potential energy at a maximum.
Kinetic energy at a maximum.
So according again to the books, these things are additive.
So as the wave travels, the energy is transferred from one differential mass,
one differential area of length of the rope, to the next bit that has zero energy.
So that energy keeps on being transferred.
So it is actually just twice this value for the average energy transfer or the power.
So it will be two times on this side.
So we left with our equation for the average power,
that is the average energy transferred by a wave in a medium,
is going to equal a half mu v omega squared y max squared.
And that is the derivation of our equation.
You don't have to memorize this derivation as I said.
You can memorize the equation there.
And we can just do some problems with the equation.
But if you're interested, this is how most textbooks derive this equation.
Inasmuch as this is never completely explained in the books,
and then just dividing both sides by dt might seem illegal to you,
but it certainly is not.
And that is how we get the velocity,
because this dt, if we just divide this,
that is going to be velocity.
Now that we know and understand the equation for power,
the energy that is transferred by a transverse wave in a medium,
let's have a look at this problem.
We told the string along which a wave can travel is 2.7 meters long.
It weighs 0.260 kilogram.
And we stretch it between these 2.7 meter points
at a tension of 36 newtons.
And they want to know what must the frequency be of a traveling wave.
So the frequency we don't know of a traveling wave.
If we give that wave an amplitude of 7.7 millimeters,
and the average energy transfer is 85 watts,
what must the frequency be?
So I must move this up and down at a certain rate
to give me all of these values.
Now these are really one of those.
You don't have to understand what's going on.
You don't have to think about it.
We need the equation, which is very simply p average.
It's going to equal a half mu v omega squared y max squared.
And we need frequency out of that.
And we were not given.
But we can rewrite this equation.
We know p average is on this side.
A half says a half.
Mu plus is this going to be kilograms per meter.
So that's going to be mass divided by length.
Other equations we know for velocity.
Certainly we do.
That is going to be the square root of the tension divided by mu.
And mu is kilograms per meter.
So that will be meter there and length there.
Remember, it's this mass per length in the denominator.
And I've just changed that over.
That's really easy stuff.
Times omega squared.
What do we know for angular velocity?
Well, we know that will be 2 squared pi squared times the frequency squared.
times y max squared.
And lo and behold, we have all of this.
Let's have a look.
Do we?
Do we?
Do we?
Do we?
We know p average.
We were given that.
We know what a half is.
We were given mass and length.
And length.
We were given tau.
We were given length.
We were given mass.
2 times 2 is 4.
We know that.
Pi squared.
So this is what we want.
And we were given y max.
So very simply, we're just going to get f on its own.
So it's 2 times p divided by all of this.
And the square of that because this is frequency squared.
Flagging all of those, I think I've done it before.
It's about 198.
So you deal with three significant digits in those seconds.
Very simple, these problems.
I don't think we're going to see very difficult problems as far as the energy transfer is concerned
and these sort of wave problems.
once like 15 and 2 Schmidt.
And doubleolutions.
Of course.
And then we're going back once and then to the third phase.
And some of our problems are dropped, isn't it?
Well done.
They're not really supposed to be far enough.
The rebel성이 need to move into those.
Im muchos.
