In this video series I will discuss the management of a patient presenting with a thyroid nodule.
Patients will present you with a self-evident mess in the thyroid
or with an imaging report that incidentally found a nodule in the thyroid
or demonstrate a prominent nodule in a multinodular goiter.
The management of these patients is based on the need to distinguish between those that require surgery
and those that require only follow-up.
Various guidelines have been published by various North American, European and British groups
and in this series I will present an algorithm for you to follow on seeing a patient
that is based on these guidelines.
It must be remembered though that there is a lack of level 1 evidence.
Non-medullary, well-differentiated tumours are slow growing and the 5-year survival reaches 97%
making prospective randomized control trials all but impossible.
There is enough evidence out there in the published literature though to put guidelines on a strong academic footing.
Furthermore, there are various staging and prognostic systems in existence such as the TNM classification
and Ames, Aegis and Macy's criteria.
I find though that they do not provide a rigid enough structure to be of enough help when attending to a patient.
Instead, I will present to you a set of risk factors in this algorithm that decisions can be based upon.
Here we have the management algorithm.
Once a patient presents with a clinical nodule or one discovered on imaging,
a thorough history is taken and a clinical examination should be performed.
From the history, you need the following confirmed or excluded.
Age of the patient, especially note if younger than 20 or older than 60 years.
Sex of the patient, especially note if male.
The presence of mass effects, dysphagia, dyspnea, voice changes, coughing or choking.
A sudden increase in size.
A history of exposure to ionizing radiation.
And a family history of thyroid or parathyroid malignancy.
Clinical examination should note the size of the nodule, especially if larger than 4 cm.
The consistency of the nodule, especially if it is hard.
Fixation to surrounding structures.
And the presence of cervical lymphadenopathy.
Make a note of these as they will form the basis for decision making later in the workup process.
The first special investigation is a thyroid function test.
A thyrotoxic patient requires a different workup before the need might arise to return to this algorithm.
The risk of malignancy in a thyrotoxic patient with a nodule is very low.
In a U or hypothyroid patient, the next step is to look at the clinical checklist that I have just set out.
If two or more of the factors listed above are present, surgical excision for histological evaluation should be advised.
If one or none of the criteria are present, the patient requires further workup to decide between surgical excision and follow up.
The next special investigation is ultrasonography.
Ultrasound cannot distinguish between benign and malignant disease, but will note the size and differentiate between cystic and solid nodules,
as well as have the added benefit of better delineating the number and position of nodules.
And very importantly, note any lymphadenopathy which presents, if not detected clinically, must be added to the criteria above.
And may then change the decision process based on the number of criteria that are now present.
Based on the ultrasound results, there are three arms in the next decision process.
And I will go down each of these separately.
First, the lesion may be less than one centimeter in size.
Upon discovery of which, the patient can safely be followed up in three months.
Secondly, the lesion may be more than one centimeter in diameter, but be cystic.
If so, it needs aspiration.
If the cytological report states the presence of macrophages and colloid, the patient can be re-evaluated in three months.
If the cyst does not repeat, the patient can be seen every six months thereafter.
But if it does repeat, surgical excision is advised.
I must note that there is a gray area in this part of the algorithm, and that pertains to complex cysts.
There is a tendency towards false negative cytological reports.
And if you are at all concerned about a patient with a complex cyst, surgical excision is advised.
This must not be confused with a multinodular goiter.
Otherwise, all patients with a mix of nodules and cysts will be subjected to surgery.
It refers to a clearly demarcated complex cyst.
If the cytological report states the possibility of papillary, medullary, anaplastic or lymphomatous malignancy, surgical excision is obviously advised.
Although this rarely occurs in the setting of a pure cystic lesion.
Lastly, if the lesion is solid and more than one centimeter in diameter, fine needle aspiration cytology is again advised.
If the suspicion of papillary, medullary, anaplastic or lymphomatous malignancy is raised, surgical excision is advised.
A problem arises with a report stating the presence of follicular cells.
Cytological investigation cannot differentiate between a follicular adenoma and carcinoma.
Only histological examination of an excised specimen showing the presence of extra capsular spread or invasion into blood or lymphatic vessels can confirm malignancy.
Many pathologists will comment on the benign feature of the follicular cells that they see under the microscope.
But this is no proof of the benign nature of these cells.
On the other hand though, follicular cells are native to the thyroid.
This certainly leaves you facing a problem and this must clearly be explained to the patient who must ultimately make the decision.
I tend to suggest short interval follow up if the lesion is between one and two centimeters in size
and the report states a scattering of follicular cells in a sea of colloid.
If the lesion is larger than two centimeters or there is an abundance of follicular cells, I will lean towards advising surgery.
The patient must clearly understand though that in these cases we do not have all the answers and after explaining the risk of malignancy and the risk of surgery to them, they have to make the decision.
To a great extent, the same problem exists with the presence of hurtle cells.
Hurtle cell carcinoma is seen as a subtype of follicular carcinoma and again a confirmation of malignancy cannot be made on cytological evidence alone.
They do also occur in multinodular goiters and this can confound the issue if the FNA was done on a clearly dominant nodule in a multinodular goiter.
Again these problems have to be discussed with the patient and armed with all the information and knowledge about risks, they have to make the ultimate decision.
The last problem deals with an inadequate result.
In this case the FNA must be repeated, but if two consecutive reports are inadequate, surgery is advised.
This concludes this video on an algorithm for working up a patient with a thyroid mass
and I hope that you will find it helpful in your practice or during your exams.
A
You
Can
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By
By tap
