I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby, I
want you, baby, I want you, baby, I want you to, baby, I want you, baby, I want you, baby,
baby, the baby.
Okay, great. I'm glad you can hear me. So I'm going to bring her right on. So there
we go. Thank you so much for coming.
You're very welcome. Thank you for inviting me.
So if you could give a little bit of the audience your background, what do you do and what is
your field of expertise?
Well, my background is I actually started out in physics. I was pursuing a higher study
in physics and I got to the master's level and I started getting very interested in non-locality
and these kind of puzzles with the Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen experiment, which is the famous experiment
where you have correlated particles like electrons and you send them off to opposite
ends of the galaxy and you're making measurements on them individually and they seem to be correlated
in this very non-local way. So that really caught my interest and I realized that the
people that were really looking into that and investigating those issues were in the
philosophy department at the time I was at the University of Maryland. So I switched
to my major for my PhD study program of study to philosophy of science and after that point
I ended up at that time the group was called the committee on the history and philosophy
of science. So we were the group studies the whole history of thought and in the physical
sciences and that was one of the areas they were studying. So that's kind of my background
and kind of came at it from the straight physics background and then got kind of captured by
the implications of quantum theory and wanted to study that in more detail.
What would you say are some of these implications philosophically speaking?
Well, I mean one implication does seem to be this non-local quality to quantum systems,
this idea that they are for these kinds of states where we have different numerically
more than one system that is described by this collection of systems is described by
an overall state that has this holistic character that is very hard to understand in terms of
just separate systems that were used to identifying in physics. So they have these non-local correlations
that seem to be in tension with relativity which tells us that information you know energy
and signals and so forth cannot exceed the speed of light and yet we have these mysterious
correlations that seem to be influences that exceed the speed of light.
So that's one of the puzzles and of course the challenge is figuring out well what are
the implications, how should we understand reality in light of these kinds of puzzles?
And I've argued and we might get into that later but I've argued that possibly one of
the implications of quantum theory is that our world, our reality has an element of possibility
that kind of goes beyond our usual empirical space-time realm and that's what the quantum
theory is describing. So that's one of the implications that I'm finding from quantum
theory.
Could you elaborate on that one specific, I find it interesting, you're saying an
aspect of possibility.
So we know we think of our everyday experience, we have phenomena that are very concrete you
know and we can really put our finger on everything and say okay I know how fast something
is going and I can see where it is and so on and that kind of information doesn't seem
to obtain at the quantum level, we have Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
So the idea of possibility comes in when we're dealing with quantum systems such as atoms
and electrons and so on and photons that seem to have a potential for different outcomes
if we're doing a measurement, if we're going to observe them, say we have a system that's
prepared in some state and we want to find out where it is, so we do a measurement to
try to figure out where it is, it actually has probabilities for being in a bunch of
different places and yet you know at the end we do find a concrete location at the end
of our measurement but all of these possible outcomes I see as a feature of the world at
a subtle level so that I think of the quantum states as basically kind of giving us information
about a level of possibility that is nevertheless real and it clearly is consequential because
we can prepare these quantum systems and we can interact with them and so on, it's not
like they're figments of our imagination and we always find one of the outcomes of, one
of the possible outcomes of a measurement with a probability that quantum theory predicts
that it will have.
So I like to think of, I think the most natural way to interpret that is the idea that quantum
theory is really pointing to this level of real possibility that's kind of in play beneath
the phenomenal level of our world.
I understand.
Yeah.
One question that I, that I've been meaning to ask, do you feel like there is somewhat
of a miscommunication between physics or physicists and those that are doing philosophy
of science?
Like is there a conflict there in the way that these things are talked about or is it more
harmonious than maybe it appears to me?
Well, it's kind of gone through an evolution.
I mean, you know, back in the previous century when Einstein and Bohr and so on and the pioneers
of quantum theory were coming up with this theory, they were very comfortable with addressing
philosophical questions and philosophical issues.
And they considered that part of, an important part of theorizing in physics.
So that tradition has been there.
More recently, I mean, things kind of went through an evolution where towards the middle
and latter part of the preview of the 20th century, when people started realizing how
strange quantum theory was, there came about kind of a division where, where most physicists
got into this approach of basically what I would call instrumentalism, which means
using the theory as just an instrument or tool for prediction.
So they just wanted to be very pragmatic about it.
They, they, they were frustrated by, by the quantum puzzles and things like there is something
called the measurement problem, which is the fact that in the standard way of formulating
the theory, there isn't really a good way of, of representing the measurement process
and of explaining why you get outcomes and that kind of thing.
So that's become known as the measurement problem and that's represented by Schrodinger's
cat, you know, Erwin Schrodinger was, was upset about that too.
So the response has, has largely been on the part of physicists to kind of say, okay, we're,
we're not going to worry about that, you know, that's a dead end and we're going to just
apply the theory.
On the other hand, most, there are some philosophers who have kind of gone that route and are being
more instrumentalist about the theory, but there are still some philosophers who are
trying to understand the meaning of quantum theory and, and come up with a better way
of, of accounting for, you know, measurement and so on and, and understanding the implications
of quantum theory for, for physical reality.
So I, you know, it's, it's kind of something that keeps evolving.
There is some tension there, there is some tension there and there's just a lot of controversy
all around.
I mean, even among philosophers who have very, very, very different ways of, of approaching
the theory.
So it's kind of, kind of all over the place in that way.
How do you feel about kind of the movement away from falsification as, as being a fundamental
pillar of the way in which science is done?
Do you agree that that is happening?
Do you think that it makes sense?
Or do you think that it's problematic?
Well, yeah, I think that I'm kind of have mixed feelings about it.
I think that you, Popper was certainly onto something when he noted that, you know, logically
if you can, if you're kind of going out on a limb and saying, here's a prediction, here's
what my model says, here's what my theory says, go ahead, you know, I'm willing to be
shown that I'm wrong.
And then you do observations and you, you, you come up with some results that really
kind of cast out on the theory, that's, that's good if you can do that.
That is very good because it's really in a way what differentiates science from, you
know, other forms of thought where you just can go around in endless speculation and so
on.
Having said that, it's a very kind of well-known point that throughout the previous century,
people were trying to use that, you know, the kind of falsification criterion to demarcate
science, you know, good science from pseudoscience and good science from, you know, other phony
kinds of things.
And it's really very hard to do that in real life.
And in fact, there are, what you find is, you know, technically you could say, well,
Newton's theory has been falsified, you know, if just simply because it's, it's a good,
it's a good first approximation to nature.
But on the other hand, it doesn't quite get all the details right at the relativistic
level and so on.
So we really have to be careful about, you know, we obviously don't want to throw out
a good theory simply because we're getting observations that are a little inconsistent
with it.
So it's a very subtle issue about, you know, what counts as a falsifying instance or observation.
But you know, in terms of things like string theory, where you're getting, you're getting
whole theoretical constructions, that even in principle, there's no way to test them,
you have to be a little careful, you have to use other, I mean, I have mixed feelings
about that.
Again, we can't just demand, it's not realistic to demand that any good theory be falsifiable.
We know that that's true from looking at the history of science.
So we can't just say, well, that's no good because you can't falsify it.
But we do have to be very careful to not be engaging in kinds of ad hoc maneuvers to keep
a theory of flow when it's really not being fruitful.
Yeah, I guess that's my question too.
If falsification, it doesn't matter as much as I think it does, then what tools do we
apply to say, well, this theory is better than another one, how do we not fall into
now accepting pseudoscience or other, like you said, post hoc explanations that aren't
actually getting at anything?
Yeah, that's a great question.
And I do think we can do it by looking at anomalies.
So when we have, an anomaly is a situation where we have some theories that seem to work
pretty well, but we've got these anomalies.
And a case in point is the phenomena that have been usually attributed to things like
dark matter and dark energy, which are observations of the large scale universe and the rotation
rates of galaxies are deviating from so far our best theory of gravity.
So they're deviating from that.
That's an anomaly.
So what we have is those galactic rotation, what they're called rotation curves that are
basically graphs that where the periphery of the galaxy seems to be going way faster
than our theory says it should.
So that's an anomaly.
And it means that either that there's something wrong with the theory, or maybe there's some
stuff out there that we can't account for that where the theory would still be right,
but we're just missing some mass, which is what dark matter is.
Now, I consider the dark matter hypothesis as just one of those sort of post hoc kind
of bandaid things where you want to keep, wait, wait, we like our gravity theory.
So maybe it's right.
And there's just some missing little element out there that we don't know about.
But in fact, and I've been pursuing, this sounds self-serving, but it's not just me,
but others have been pursuing a different formulation of gravity, of general relativity
that's a more general formulation that in fact does accommodate, does or predict just
what's considered to be an anomaly in the current theory.
So that's a really good, if you have kind of a prediction of a model that predicts
what now seems to be an anomaly for your current theory, then that's kind of a good way
of corroborating this candidate theory where it's actually supporting the phenomena you're
seeing that don't fit into your previous theory.
So I think that that's kind of a powerful testimony for a candidate theory.
I guess it's a good segue to ask you specifically what it is that your contribution has been
in the field and where does it differ from some of these other theories?
Well, my research has been on the transactional interpretation of quantum theory, and that
has, I mean, it's called interpretation technically really, it's a slightly different formulation
of quantum theory, and it's based on a different understanding of the way fields work.
So it's a bit of a kind of a radical departure conceptually from the way physics views
field behavior, and it was originally based on, it was originally proposed by John Cramer
in the 1980s, that's how it got the name transactional interpretation, and it was based on the so
called absorber theory of radiation.
So that theory, that was developed by Wheeler and Feynman in the early mid 20th century,
and it was also explored by others as well, Paul Davies explored that.
And the absorber theory says that when fields, when charges like electrons, any kind of charged
particle, a charged particle is basically a source of the electromagnetic field.
So it has kind of an interaction with the electromagnetic field, which is our photon,
our light and light energy and that kind of thing.
So the absorber theory proposed that there's this time symmetry going on, and that any charge
is actually not just kind of sending out a field that goes in the future direction or
directed towards the future, but it also has a component that is past directed.
These are called advanced fields.
Now, as you might guess, that's a very strange notion.
If we think that everything happens in our usual space time container, which is another
thing that I question, but our usual idea as well, anything that generates a field has to be
causal in the sense that it's got to generate something that goes from a certain time into
directed into the future.
But according to this theory, charges actually generate a field that is time symmetric, and
they and it's also kind of non local.
So it's not like the usual field that we have in standard quantum theory, which is considered to
be sort of a freestanding mechanical system.
But instead, this absorber theory has an emitter and an absorber kind of directly connected by a
non local kind of field kind of an influence.
So we also we not only do we have that, but we also under certain conditions have an active
participation by the absorbers.
So we have emitters and absorbers, and we can go into more detail about what do you mean by
emitter and absorber?
Yeah, I think of them as charges, right?
And they can either give away energy or they can accept energy, right?
So but you can have a kind of a collaborative situation where the absorbers will will respond
in a way that is perfectly in sync with the field generated by the emitter.
And that's actually how you get a what's called a transaction, which conveys real energy at the
quantum level of real photon from the emitter to the absorber.
So that that procedure, what basically, you know, as a shorthand, you could say, you have an
emitter, absorber transaction in which the emitter generates and a bunch of absorbers
usually will respond.
And they respond and the emitter gets this past directed, advanced kind of influence from
the absorbers, which is called a confirmation in the usual way of talking.
So we have like an offer and a confirmation.
And we can have many confirmations.
Those, again, are kind of the possibility.
So those you have many different absorbers to which a single photon could could go and they
can't all get this single photon.
So that's where you get kind of a symmetry breaking and you get the actualization of this real
photon that goes from then from the emitter to the absorber.
And that at that point, you have a kind of a local process.
But at the quantum level, at the sort of more subtle level, everything that leads up to that is is
a kind of a direct connection that has this non-local character.
So that's what I've been working on.
Yes, it sounds radical and so on.
But what you get from it is you get a good account of what is measurement and the standard
theory really cannot explain to you, you know, what are you doing when you're doing a measurement?
What is the physical interaction that constitutes measurement?
And the technical term for this is it's non-unitary.
So that that's just a fancy word that basically means it's there's there's a kind of a collapse
or an actualization of one of these possibilities out of a whole set of them.
And if you don't have that, if you don't have this real non-unitarity that you get this this
direct kind of absorber response, this interaction that you only get in this transactional picture,
if you don't get that, then you end up with Schrodinger's Cat and those kinds of things
because you have no way of explaining, you know, what what is it that that's making?
What what is it that's precipitating a measurement result?
So that's what you get with with the transactional picture.
And you also get an account of the probability rule from quantum theory called the Born Rule
is named after Max Born, which up till, you know, before the transactional picture,
that was just kind of a recipe that a mathematical recipe that people would apply
and they didn't know where it came from.
So you can very clearly see in in the transactional picture in a mathematical way
where that expression comes from.
So let me see if I'm following this because there's a lot there.
My field is philosophy, not science.
So is the is the claim here that there is a relationship between the past and the future
where they are interacting with with each other
in some sense to actually give rise to the reality that then we experience?
You could say it that way.
I think of it more in terms of there are relations interactions among these quantum systems,
which are, in a sense, kind of forms of physical potency.
And when they're interacting, they're not really in the past or in the future.
I actually think of them as kind of in an eternal present.
They're in a timeless, they're sort of in a timeless, I call it a quantum substratum.
So they're, you know, they're kind of in this timeless domain that that is not part of
the space time construct there that are at a pre space time level.
So I think of them as possibilities, but they out of that interaction,
we do get a temporal orientation.
We do what we get is basically events.
We get an emission event and we get an absorption event.
And if you like, you know, if you think of it in terms of, say, there are absorbers
in our eye, in our sense organs, in our eyes and so on.
So if we are absorbing a photon in our eye, then at that moment of that absorption,
we are basically kind of helping to bring about the past that we're participating
in this, this transaction that in a sense is bringing about these events
and and part of that is bringing about the past.
I guess the one point that of confusion for me is maybe it's me struggling
with my intuitions and not knowing how to move away from that.
Mm hmm.
But when I think of the notion of existence, like, what does it mean for
something to exist?
Mm hmm.
I don't know what it means to say that something can exist outside of time.
Yes, great question.
And in a sense, the at the level of possibility, we really do.
It's not like you lose time, but there's a form of time that is more
of an internal kind of time.
It's not the temporal, the metric time interval that you by which you
measure, you know, events in space time.
And in fact, there's a physical counterpart to it.
So the physical counterpart would be, you know, we're composed of matter systems,
systems that have an amount of rest mass.
And this is in contrast to photons, which are massless.
They have no rest mass.
There's they there's no frame in which they are at rest.
So but but for ordinary matter, which has this rest mass, those types
of matter have a kind of an internal periodicity.
So and in a technical sense, you can relate it to the spin, to the spin
one half, what are called fermions, objects such as electrons and protons
and neutrons and so on.
And they they can almost be thought of as kind of forms of trapped light
that that are not really explicitly space time objects.
But they they, you know, they kind of carry with them what we would call
an inertial frame and an inertial frame.
That's kind of a way a coordinate system, if you will, that you can sort of
use as a map to describe events that you experience.
But it's not really part of.
It's not like a space time container.
It's really an internal clock, if you will.
So it's it's it's I'm not sure that helps at all.
But but it's not we're not doing away with time.
It's but it's a kind of a time that's really more of an internal reference
for for these matter systems.
So they they can be thought of as evolving, but at the level of possibility.
And they and their interactions give rise to space time events.
So these these events are kind of then the events, which are parts
of the transactional process, the emission event, the absorption event.
Those are simply, you know, we call those are elements of space time,
but there's not really a whole lot to space time.
It's it's basically just a set of actualized events that have a certain
kind of relationship to among one another.
So I'm not sure that helps, but yeah, I'm not sure.
I'm trying I'm trying to kind of process.
Yeah, we were saying I think maybe I'm a little bit ignorant
of some of the terminology like I don't know.
How would you I mean, maybe let's go as basic as we can.
Like, how do you define a field for those that are watching
who are not who don't know anything about science?
Mm hmm. Well, a field.
It depends kind of which level we're talking about.
A a quantum field
is actually a mathematical construct that is is very abstract.
And it really just refers to the possibility of of say,
if you're referring to like the electromagnetic field,
the quantum form of the electromagnetic field,
it's the the the orthodox way of representing that would
but would say would would say that it's a bunch of operators
associated with every space time point.
Well, well, I don't think space time is a container,
you know, that is characterized by a bunch of points
that may or may not be occupied.
But that's kind of a standard way of thinking that that's the orthodox picture.
Now, what is an operator?
OK, it's creating can create or destroy
a so-called quantum of the field.
So this is all very abstract.
And it's it's a picture that I'm just trying to the term field
is just a very fraught term.
But it's it's kind of it's a on one level.
It's a mathematical construct that can stand for
that can represent certain kinds of physical interactions and so forth.
What the way the better way that I think we can we can deal
with the concept of the field is by thinking of it as a relational entity.
So that, for instance, in this absorber theory in the direct action picture,
the electromagnetic field is really kind of a connection
between between these charged particles so that you can have,
you know, these these different charged particles
and you can quantify their relationship in terms of an interaction.
How likely is it, say, you know, that that some atom will emit
a photon to some other atom and so on.
So in quantifying those things, we we are dealing with the relationship
between those sources, we can call that a field.
And and there and it has a different kind of mathematical representation,
usually using space time parameters, but not always,
sometimes using momentum and energy to characterize it.
But as you can see, I mean, it really depends on the context
and there there is disagreement about what counts as a field.
You know, do we really have this notion this this thing that we call
the quantum electromagnetic field?
Is that really a a freestanding system?
And again, I think it isn't.
So it depends on what kind of theory you're using.
But in general, I guess one one could say, well, a field is a kind of a spread out
object as opposed to a localized object.
So they're an extended kind of objects are different ways of characterizing
and quantifying what what how in what way is this an extended kind of entity.
So I have some questions from from the audience.
But before I get to those, I want to try to ask one one other thing.
My standpoint, because you you were talking about this idea of.
Almost.
Reality on some operating outside of what we call this kind of timeline.
So is the idea that.
The timeline is more of like an emergent
feature that's kind of not looking at the whole picture.
And so it's almost like if we step back far back enough.
Then we see that I forget the exact term we use it.
Was it almost like a present, like an eternal, like an eternal present?
Yes. Yes.
And so why does.
A sense of passage of time arise from this eternal present.
And and in what sense does it make to what sense does it make to talk about.
Causes and effects and relationships among phenomena.
If.
We are removing those things from a notion of.
Past towards future.
OK, so I guess I should clarify that strictly speaking, the the transaction,
the the time symmetric form of the field only applies to photons.
But that only applies to the again, the massless photon in which we have this kind
of a time symmetric sort of no arrow of time applying at the level of that's
at the level of the of what's called virtual photons.
So so it's at a very basic level.
It's it's a form of a relation among these charges, which are do have rest mass
and they do actually have an intrinsic arrow of time.
They do have a clock.
So they have a kind of a sense of flow on their own level.
They do have a sense of flow on their own level.
So so objects with rest mass, non vanishing rest mass do kind of carry
with them a form of temporal flow by virtue of their internal clock.
But photons don't have an internal clock.
And the way you create a photon is through this this sort of time symmetric field.
So the time symmetry really applies to the the creation of what of what we call
space time events.
So at the at the level that's beneath that at the level of possibility,
the rest mass systems actually do kind of bring with them this intrinsic
arrow of time.
So they do carry that, but but it's not that.
But but they're not that's a separate issue from events is events or actualizations.
And these are possibilities.
So you can think of it as like possible time.
So it's it's kind of a template for, you know, time for causality.
But there's nothing actualized yet at that level.
The actualizations involve these transactions, which then give rise to events.
And it's actually the set of events.
The only thing that the irony here is what we call space time has in it neither
space nor time in any fundamental sense.
All it is.
And this is Einstein actually said this, he said, the space time manifold is
simply a collection of events and their connections.
OK, and you can and the whole point is, you know, you can pick different
reference frames and have radically different ideas about how much time has
passed between two events and so on.
So time is really, you know, it's not neither space nor time are really their
concepts that we use to coordinate our experiences of events and to be able to
communicate and corroborate that event and say, yes, we we all agree this event
happened and we can corroborate it because itself it's invariant and it's
connection between the other events.
Those are invariants, but our descriptions are radically different and those
descriptions are based on this internal kind of reference that we bring with us.
As at the level of possibility.
Let me read you some of the comments.
OK.
What does Dr.
Kastner think about the very recent EPR or ideas?
Let's see, I think that's the idea that that the EPR correlations are carried
out by way of these Einstein, Rosen bridges, which are supposed to be like
wormholes and so on.
And I actually I don't think we need that because I mean, I think that the idea
of a wormhole is invoked to try to explain the non-local interaction.
But that's from the usual viewpoint that we are that we live every that
everything is in a space time container, that everything real is in space time.
And so and what I do, I question that I say, no, I don't, you know, real things
are not, you know, space time is simply this emergent kind of tip of the iceberg
actualized events, structured actualized events.
And a lot of what goes on physically is happening at the at this level
pre space time quantum substratum.
And so if you allow for that, then these non-local that the EPR, the Einstein,
Pradovsky, Rosen correlations are simply natural, instantaneous
relations, you know, communications among possibilities because that's the way
possibilities are.
They have this relational quality and they're always always in contact, in a
sense, in a broad sense, they're sort of all in the same place at the same time.
So there's no remote kind of, you know, you don't need to worry about
sending a light signal because that's not what you're doing.
So that that's what I would say.
I don't think we need the Einstein-Rosen bridge.
Next one, is Heisenberg's probability problem due to the inability
to measure without changing the measurement?
So with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle does reflect that.
Yes, the idea that when that that possibilities that quantum systems are
because they are possibilities, they have, you know, propensities to to have
different kinds of outcomes and so on.
And really at a fundamental level, the more the more basic property properties
are things like momentum and energy.
So when when you want to measure what you're calling position, you are
definitely going to be interfering with, you know, the system's momentum because
you're going to be interacting with it and catching it and and, you know, either
speeding it up or slowing it down and so on.
So there is interference in that way.
But it's a broader it's a broader issue.
It's not so much that simply that we're disturbing something.
But but these these kinds of objects do not really have determinate properties
for for different kinds of observable.
So what we're calling an observable is a mode of interaction with the system
that will generally tend to localize it.
And because quantum systems are not naturally localized, when we want to go,
you know, we want to answer a question like, where is this thing?
Well, it's actually all, you know, it's in a lot of different.
It's it's not doesn't have to commit to being localized because in quantum,
in the quantum substratum, things aren't localized in that sense
because they're not events, they're not actualized.
I mean, these potentialities are kind of much more expansive than
then can be manifest that we can't.
It's sort of like trying to to look at both sides of a coin at the same time,
you know, clearly a coin has two sides.
But if you want to pick if you want to, you know, toss it,
it's always going to land one way or the other.
And that's kind of what we're doing with these measurements.
All right. I guess one of the questions that always arises is like,
in what sense doesn't, you know, what does it mean to say that these things
are real, that these possibilities are real?
If it seems to me like what is real is the actual event that's actualized.
Right. So that's yeah, that's a great question.
I mean, it challenges our ideas of, well, what does it mean to be real?
And that that's a very big issue.
And what I, you know, I like to kind of remember, well, you know,
Boltzmann, Ludwig Boltzmann, way back, you know, and I'm not good with dates,
but when he was developing the kinetic theory of gases,
he proposed that, you know, maybe we've got these little things called atoms
that are unobservable, OK, they're in principle unobservable.
And so empirically, they were suspect, you know, that this goes back to the idea
that, you know, to be a respectable concept in physics,
we want we want things to be empirical.
We want and that's that's a noble, that's a laudable approach.
We we don't want to go off in flights of fancy,
but you can go too far with that.
So the tradition back when when Boltzmann was was proposing atoms was very much,
you know, if you can't tell me how to detect this atom,
then you shouldn't be talking about it.
And, you know, it's not a real real thing.
But in fact, the theory that that he came up with, based on proposing
that atoms were real, just open, it was incredibly fruitful.
And we wouldn't have modern physics without it.
So the idea is that sometimes it's worth allowing that an entity could be
physically real if if you can show based on a theory or model that that it
predicts empirically corroboratable results.
And so it's fruitful in that sense.
It's it's yielding fruit.
And and it's kind of, you know, you could say, well, I don't consider that real.
But then you have the problem where, well, if it's not physically real,
then why is it giving rise to concrete experiences and phenomena that we can corroborate?
So then you have to say, you know, OK, well, how come just some dumb idea
in your head is doing things in the world and actually that actually have
an empirical basis? That's right.
So so indirectly, so indirectly, we're we're seeing that, you know,
saying that these things are real and saying, here's how they behave.
Here's my theory that it's getting dark here.
So my light's going down.
But here's my theory of how these things behave.
Well, they're they're kind of strange because they they're fit.
Their mathematical character doesn't seem to fit into space time
because the other issue is that these quantum states are complex.
They have a complex mathematical character, means they have an imaginary
so-called imaginary component to the the state that that describes them.
And they're many dimensional.
If you have more than one quantum system in one of these correlated states,
then you you don't have you have far more dimensions than three, you know.
So so if if if these quantum states are just are describing something real,
well, they must be kind of something strange, you know,
that doesn't fit into space time.
But nevertheless, it doesn't mean they're not real, you know.
So that's kind of the approach I take.
Is it becoming more acceptable to
philosophize about quantum theory in recent times?
Are we beyond the shut up and calculate approach?
I would hope so.
I think kind of depends who you ask.
There still is a lot of I think once again, the physics community,
I feel is is somewhat reluctant in general, not everyone by by no means,
but but in general, there is a sense of fatigue with, you know,
trying to understand quantum theory and so on.
Very much so with philosophers, philosophy of physics is still
trying to understand it and, you know, get get a get an idea of
well, what are the implications for our understanding of reality?
OK, here's the next story.
The wish of consider as real fields of travel backwards in time
seems more like the purview of a magician and a scientist.
In what sense is backwards causation physics compelling?
So, yeah, there are a lot of terms here that maybe I need to disambiguate.
So so these these time symmetric fields that, you know, are seem
kind of bothersome when we're we're all kind of used to, you know,
thinking of having a certain concept of the way things work.
They they aren't again, these are influences that are not in space time.
So they're not literally traveling backwards in time.
They're they're kind of they the the time symmetric.
We have our language is kind of limited.
Here's where we arrive at a limitation of language.
It has a particular mathematical quality
that the best thing we can come up with for this that the object
is called the time symmetric propagator.
And if you if you kind of look at it in in mathematical terms,
it doesn't say doesn't say hi, I'm going back in time
and I'm going forward in time.
It doesn't really have that, you know, that's kind of verbiage
that is a way to kind of gesture at well, what are these fields doing?
But it's not really all that accurate.
And it's it's not the usual.
I mean, and a lot of people think of the transactional picture
that way where, you know, that that supposedly the future
is sending signals back to the past.
And no, that's not happening at all.
And in my development of of the the interpretation,
I've tried to be a lot more careful about that.
So so we have so-called advanced solutions,
but they really describe the relationship of the the energy
energetic quality of the field with the other with the objects
that it's interacting with.
And really, the basic point is that when you've got this connection,
what's what they call a time symmetric field between two charges?
All it really means is there's no fact of the matter
about which charge generated it and which charge received it.
It's mutual.
So that's really the the quote time symmetry.
That's really all it means physically in this in this formulation
that as I've developed it.
I mean, I think the original Kramer version
what had the language about the the stories
about things going backward in time.
No, that's not what's going on at all.
So it's it's at the level of of the quantum substratum.
And in a very real sense, these virtual these are virtual photons.
Only virtual photons are the ones that have this purely time symmetric character.
And again, all it means is there's no fact of the matter
about which ones generating which one it's it's mutual.
And that we even have that with standard quantum field theory
with the Feynman propagator where we have that you don't you don't want to say
for virtual photons, you're not allowed to say which ones which direction it's going.
So we even have that in standard quantum theory.
And it's really something that applies at the virtual level.
So I would I would urge this reader who's clearly got some background and some concerns.
I do have my my book that was the first edition came out in 2012 on this formulation.
And I just now have the second edition that came out from Cambridge University Press.
And that's available widely now.
So it's called the transactional interpretation of quantum theory, a relativistic treatment.
And I think if you look at that, you'll see all these details spelled out.
So we're not we're not having reverse causation or anything like that.
That's true.
Next story.
So the space time of general relativity emerges from the transactions in the T.I. approach.
Exactly. That's what I'm proposing.
And I am working on on what would be essentially a form of quantum gravity
that that spells this out in quantitative terms.
And of course, it's a different understanding of the idea of quantum gravity,
because in this picture, gravity is not a quantum field.
It's simply a process by which these events emerge from the quantum level
and then have that the structure of the events is what's character
is what's described by general relativity.
So that's exactly right. Yes.
Someone commented, I don't think the doctor could falsify and actualize events in her hypothesis.
How do you respond to that?
Yeah, this isn't something that you know, you can't say,
hey, you know, here's how we would detect an unactualized event.
You know, so clearly there are things you can't detect.
But again, this is where I go back to the idea of
you can judge a model by how well it can explain anomalies.
And so what we get from the transactional formulation is a lot of anomalies
of the current physics get resolved, anomalies such as the measurement problem.
We have a bunch of other anomalies.
We have, again, things like dark matter and dark energy,
which are also resolved in this this this approach
in which you get space time as an emergent construct from this actualization.
You don't you don't need to postulate dark matter and so on.
So those anomalies are resolved and we have other anomalies such as the
there's supposedly infinite vacuum energy
in standard quantum field theory that's problematic and kind of embarrassing.
And we we get rid of that also in this approach
because we don't we don't really have this existing
field structure that's sitting there that gives you infinite vacuum energy.
So the so-called zero point energies that that's actually doesn't happen in in this picture.
So there are a lot of anomalies that get resolved.
Um, these comments, accurate, they're saying you're referring to Koi.
So again, I I oppose the idea of a block universe.
So so what in this in the picture that I'm offering,
the space time manifold is actually growing.
So it's it's growing in that in the sense that you would see on Wikipedia for growing universe.
But but it's not a static block world.
In fact, the the the the notion of of an eternal realm
does not apply to the space time construct,
but rather to the dynamic quantum substratum that doesn't really have
a space time actualized
temporal doesn't doesn't have temporal relationships
with other events because they haven't been established yet.
So that's that's kind of the way I'm using the word eternal.
So so yeah, I'm not the the whole Minkowski
direction was kind of a way to be able to draw space time diagrams
and get a little bit carried away with the idea that you when you draw a little map
of and put events on a map that somehow that describes reality.
But you don't need to go there really. Yeah.
Right.
Well, this isn't really wrong.
If you guys have any other questions, just leave them in the comments here.
So I do have, depending on, you know, what level you're, you know,
I hate to do a shameless plug, but here's my second edition.
So that's the second edition that does lay.
I don't know if you could see that or not.
So sorry, the light is not very good here.
The title is the transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics,
a relativistic treatment. Right.
Any of you are listening or interested?
Yeah.
And that's the second edition.
And then I have a couple that I wrote more for the lay person that are less
technical, that lay out the concept.
So if you're kind of puzzled about the concepts, this one is I always get
in trouble with my understanding our unseen reality.
OK, and this, this is from World Scientific.
Solving solving quantum riddles.
And then there's a follow up to that that's called Adventures in Quantum Land.
Exploring our unseen reality.
All right.
So and I do have a little, a little animation that I that I designed
that it's very quick, little one minute.
I think it's only about one minute animation that I can give you.
Maybe later I can write in the comments under under the YouTube.
Yeah, so so that that's something people can go to that just gives a little
quick illustration of the idea of of a lot going on.
And in what I call quantum land, it's kind of a fun term, you know,
for basically the quantum substratum that I think quantum three is pointing
us to and saying, yeah, you know, this is part of reality.
OK, it seems crazy, but it does seem to be fruitful in various ways.
So so it illustrates the idea that you've got these interactions
at this quantum level that can under under quantifiable circumstances.
It's probabilistic.
So but it's quantifiable and that you can get these transactions
in which you kind of extract like a thread of space time, you know,
an emission event, an absorption event and that that comes out of of this level.
So that I'll put that in there later.
Thank you so much. I appreciate it. Sure. Sure.
And also, if you want to, in other comments, put the names of the books.
Sure. OK, yeah, I'll put that in.
Yeah, let me make a note here.
Begin to know asks, did you set things straight with Tim?
Tim. So, yeah, I don't know.
I mean, OK, so Tim Maughlin had this objection
to to Kramer's version of the transactional interpretation a while ago.
And and it basically doesn't, you know, there was kind of a thought experiment
that he he came up with that he said, oh, I think this is problematic
for various reasons.
And it it was it was a nice, you know, it's a good example
of what philosophers do, you know, race challenges from one another.
And I like that. And I think it was it was a good way to kind of say, hey,
you know, you maybe need to make this more precise or whatever.
And what I found was when I was developing the relativistic
form of it that you actually can't even you never get the situation,
the physical conditions that arise in that thought experiment.
So it it was a kind of an understandable concern.
If you're using the usual kind of paradigm where we live in space time
and, you know, causation has to go this way and so on.
And, you know, how are things going to go backwards and forwards in time?
And are we going to run into causal loop problems?
And that kind of thing.
But you just don't get that at all.
When you have this picture of for one thing, the relativistic level
where you just could never have that kind of situation
where we had a slow moving offer wave, you would never get that kind of entity.
And I explained that in detail in my second edition and in some
in preprints that are available also.
But so, yeah.
So, I mean, and I don't know I haven't personally heard
from Tim as to his opinion of it.
But, you know, I've I've shown that that that's no longer a problem.
Got you. Yeah.
Yeah. If any of you have any other questions?
We're closing in on the hour here.
But while I wait for that, I just want to thank you again for for being here.
Oh, well, you're very welcome.
Thank you for inviting me. It's it's always a pleasure.
I want to say, and this may be this may rise from my ignorance
in the field because I know I don't I very readily admit that
a lot of this I think goes over my head.
I'm trying to understand conceptually what is meant by a lot of these concepts
on an intuitive level.
I really struggle with understanding the meaning of what you're talking
about potentials and you're talking about.
This idea of an eternal or of an an unactualized reality.
These are things that intuitively, I think I run into like a linguistic wall
where I'm not and I hope you don't take this, you know, as a in the wrong way.
I don't mean to be in the wrong way. It's just.
I'm not sure I don't know what is meant.
You know, it's almost like when I hear it in a way, it reminds me of when I hear
he is talking about how their their interpretation of God is of of an entity
that exists outside of time.
And and while I understand that the difference here is that even if the
background seems uncertain or really abstract, well, at least the science
has this body of an empirical basis, that at least there is there's still
something there that we can point to.
We're still doing doing science, even if some of our concepts seem
really abstract and counterintuitive.
I think I I run into that wall on an intuitive level where I'm not sure
what's what is being said by the sciences.
Like what what how are we even talking about reality?
We're talking about these potentials that that don't aren't actually
you know, I guess that's what I mean.
Yeah, so maybe if we make it more more specific and just say
the term actual has a very technical narrow meaning in in my proposal.
And what it means is space time event.
So but again, space time is just a phenomenal superficial
level so that so that that reality is is deeper than that.
And and so our theories are the beauty of quantum theory.
And I mean, if you look at the history of quantum theory, it was sort of
nobody wanted it.
Nobody ordered it.
You know, they were they were like, oh, my goodness, this is terrible.
I don't want this, you know, so they were Heisenberg was really struggling.
And he he kept trying to make models that look like space time things
that look like concrete, concrete, you know, things that correspond to
space time events, and it utterly failed, it utterly failed.
And he just said, OK, fine, I'm just going to like make a list.
This abstract list of different, you know, the energy levels of of an atom.
OK, they're discrete energy levels.
And I see the probability of seeing that one after I got that one was this.
And he made what it's called a matrix and he didn't know that at the time.
But he called it a laundry list.
So he he did kind of this Zen beginner's mind thing.
And he said, OK, nature, I don't know, you know, I my models about what I think
reality should look like, they're all failing.
So fine, you just tell me, what is the mathematical relationship here?
And he wrote that down and he had this mathematical construct that worked great.
And it started working great.
Well, then Schrodinger came along and he wanted to make it more correspond more
like something he could intuitively get his hands on and say, well,
maybe it's a wave in space.
I wanted to be a wave in space so that he came up with his wave equation.
But it's not a wave in space because it's complex.
So it's this it's this whole tradition of people trying to get
this mathematical apparatus that worked great.
Nobody wanted it, but it was necessary in order to make progress in predicting
empirically corroborating, you know, predicted phenomena.
So they had this this terrible mathematical monstrosity.
And and I'm sorry to say, folks, that's what describing reality, you know,
that and whether we like it or not, you know, that we the theory
we can be anti-realist if we want to know a lot of people do that.
And they say, OK, well, it's just a tool for predicting phenomena.
And a good scientist doesn't doesn't, you know, say that it's real.
But then we run into Bohr's problem because Bohr would say things like that.
He would say things like this is a very loose trend, loose quote,
with paraphrasing where I, you know, sorry, Bohr, if you're around.
But he would say things like quantum systems, there is no quantum world.
You go in anti-realist quantum systems are abstractions.
Their properties becoming well defined only upon interacting with a measurement apparatus.
Well, I mean, I'm sorry, but that makes no sense.
If you want to deny that a quantum system is real, then how are you going to you're
claiming that it interacts with a measurement apparatus?
Well, presumably you think your measurement apparatus is real.
But now you're saying the quantum system is not real.
So what's this interaction?
So you see, when people try to when people try to say, oh, my goodness,
this is too crazy, these things can't be real.
I'm a good scientist. I'm a good physicist.
I don't I don't fantasize about angels dancing on the head of a pin in this garbage.
Right. When you try to do that, you end up saying just crazy, self-refuting things.
You know, so it's sort of, well, it's something we we need to try to understand.
But again, the the notion of space time, it's a bad word because really,
with just certain actualized events, and we can we can describe them in different ways.
And the term space and time are just ways that we have for describing them.
Is it fair to say that we have a quantum formalism, but no consensus on a quantum theory?
Are we making progress on the consensus issue?
It's an interesting, yeah, that might be a nice way of putting it.
I actually think the current formalism, however, is is flawed in that, again,
it's using this kind of unilateral notion of field propagation.
So, you know, what I what I'm doing is what I'm offering is a slightly
different form formulation of the theory that has a different way that the fields behave.
And again, it's, you know, it's a little bit troublesome for those of us who are
marinated in, you know, this the standard way of thinking.
But again, it resolves these anomalies.
And as far as consensus, no, I'm sorry, there's there's no there's no consensus.
And I think that's a reflection of how troublesome the standard approach still is.
And and the transactional formulation is still kind of a little viewed dubiously.
So I think once people start, you know, reading, reading it more,
realizing that it does, in fact, resolve these anomalies,
that we might start to get more consensus around that.
OK, I will read one last question here.
OK.
Would Ruth mind commenting on the speculation among physicists of offering
an explanation of dark matter as an emanation of a universe with a backwards flowing time?
I think I heard something about that.
And I, you know, I don't really know enough about it to comment.
But again, I feel like that comes from an idea that, you know, space time,
space time is kind of the container that we all live in.
And it's space time itself that has this flow and that will kind of do
with a mirror universe and see if that gives us something about dark matter.
So I think, you know, I can understand why people might want to explore that.
But I do think that we really get what we need from from the understanding
space time is emergent in this way, because then we find that that you naturally
get the kind of effect or the change, the generalization of general relativity
that allows you to see why you're going to get this behavior that we attribute to dark matter.
Should scientists be able to reduce their conceptual systems
and the individual concepts which make them up back to perception in the positivistic sense?
Well, I don't think so because I think that once again, perception is kind
of the way we corroborate the predictions of theories.
But it's again, you know, I think that's what tripped Borough because he didn't want
to allow quantum systems to be even be real because he couldn't you couldn't observe them,
you know, and I think if we make that a criterion and we really foreclose a lot of progress.
And again, if people had done, in fact, they did that, they tried to do that with with Boltzmann
and Ernst Mach was very much kind of an antagonist to what Boltzmann was trying to do.
And he made that claim. He said, look, you can't you can't tell me how I could verify
the existence of your atom. So, you know, please stop doing this.
It's irresponsible. And in fact, he was wrong.
So I think that we, you know, we're when we're being creative, when we're coming at,
you know, theories about how what's a good way to unify the way we're approaching things.
And in fact, that's what Einstein did. He didn't use perception.
You know, he had some thought experiment experiments.
But it was he was he came up with his postulates that led to special relativity through
theoretical consistency criteria and so on.
So he wasn't saying, you know, I need to be able to see this or I'm not going to develop my theory.
So I don't think we want to limit ourselves in that way.
And finally, great guests, please have her back.
Thank you, Dr. Castor.
So well, thank you very much.
It's it's been a pleasure and I really enjoyed all your questions.
So thank you.
Thank you again for coming on.
And yeah, I'd love to have you back.
OK, I mean, the future.
Well, thank you very much.
So guys, as always, thanks for having joined us tonight.
If you want to support what we're doing,
patreon.com slash axioms and trial or like and subscribe to the channel and the videos.
And we'll be back again soon in a few days with another episode.
So I hope that you guys all have a safe night.
We'll see you next time. Thank you.
Good night, everybody.
