Hello again everyone and welcome back to Linode. In today's video what I'm going
to do is teach you guys some command line tricks that I've picked up over the
years, some tricks that I wish I knew earlier in my career, and these are going
to be some command line tricks that'll save you time, maybe help you work more
efficiently, and some are just plain fun. So let's go ahead and get into my
favorite command line tricks for the Linux terminal.
Alright, so here I am on my laptop and I'm going to go over some of my favorite
tips and tricks right now. Now I'm going to go over these in no particular order.
So just stick with me and hopefully you'll find at least some of these
helpful, maybe you'll add these to your daily workflow, that would be really cool.
Let's go ahead and get started. Now what I'm going to do is start off with a
really easy one. So I'm going to go into the Etsy directory, I'm going to change
directory into that directory, and now that's my current working directory, but
what if I want to go back to the previous directory that I was just in? Well
to do that I can actually type cd and then dash, and that's it. I'm just going
to type cd dash just like that, I'll press enter, and I'm back to my home
directory. Now of course you could go back to your home directory by typing cd
and then tilde just like this, that does essentially the same thing, but the
difference with cd dash is that it's not specific to the home directory at all.
So for example if I go into the Etsy directory, then after that let's just
say I go into a different directory, cd dash takes me back to the previous
directory like I mentioned, whereas cd and then tilde takes you specifically to
your home directory, and I'm sure a lot of people know about cd tilde, but I guess
if you didn't already know that then well now you do. So what I'm going to do
right now is just clear my screen, so I'll type clear, and when I press enter it's
going to clear the screen. Actually I'm not going to press enter, but I am going
to clear the screen, but wait a minute how did I do that? So if you have output
on your terminal and then you hold control and press L, that actually clears
your screen, it's that easy. And yeah you could type clear to clear your screen
that does work, but when you do that you're using quite a few more keys than
when you just simply hold control and press L, which I find to be the easiest
way to do it. So again you have output on the screen, just hold control, press L,
and that's it. You've cleared the screen. Now the screen isn't actually completely
clear though, so for example if I use my mouse and I just scroll up a bit, you
can see that the output that I had is still there, so essentially what control
L is going to do is just move the command prompt back to the top of the
screen giving you all the space back, but the history is actually still there
if you use your mouse wheel to scroll up. Now alternatively you could also type
reset as well, and that's actually going to reset your shell. And I'm scrolling the
mouse wheel, but I'm not able to scroll. Why? Well I reset everything, so reset is
kind of like clear on steroids. It actually empties out everything and
legitimately clears your screen in every sense of the word. Now for me it's just
muscle memory to hold control and press L, so that's what I do. I don't use reset
all that often unless there's something wrong with my shell session, maybe
something is enacting right. If that's the case I might type reset, but most of
the time I'll hold control and press L, that's what I'll do. Now earlier in the
video I showed you CD dash to go back to the previous directory, but what I'm
going to show you right now is a different way to do the same thing, but
it's a little bit more flexible. What I'll do right now is change directory into
the slash var directory, but I'm going to go about it a different way. Instead of
typing CD I'm going to type push D, and then the directory I want to go into,
and you can see that I am now in the slash var directory, and that's pretty
cool. So what I'll do just to illustrate the point is just change directory a few
more times. Now I'm in my home directory, and now I'll just go into my dot
config directory. So I've changed directories a few times here, it doesn't
really matter which directories you change into, but what I'm going to do
right now is type pop D, and I'm back to Etsy. When you type push D and then give
it a directory, you'll change into that directory, but it's not quite that
simple. When you change directory into the new directory, the previous directory
is added to the stack, and here you can actually see the stack. I'm going into
slash var from slash Etsy. The push D and pop D commands are actually more
involved than this, there's more you can do with it, but for right now what I
recommend that you remember is how to type push D and then pop D, and push D
remembers the directory that you were in, and then pop D will take you back to
that directory, even if it's not the most recent directory that you were in. If
you recall, CD dash takes you back to the previous directory, but push D gives you
the ability to remember a specific directory, then pop D puts you back into
that directory anytime you want to go back there. So if you plan on doing some
file system navigation, and then at the end of that you want to return to a
specific directory, that's when push D and pop D helps the most. So now I'm back
into my home directory, let's go ahead and continue and check out some more
tricks. The next trick I'm not going to spend too much time on because it's one
of those things that I could actually explain in greater detail, but I've
already done that, I have a whole video about background tasks, so I'm going to
summarize it here, but I'll leave a card right about here if you want to check
out my background process video and learn even more about how this works. Now
let's say for example I have a file open, I'm going to use Vim for some reason
this doesn't always work with nano, I don't know why, but it really shouldn't
matter if it's a text editor or htop or whatever program, basically any program
that is in the front, you know something that takes you away from the command line
and what if you want to return to the command line but you don't want to close
the program you were in. So what I'm going to do is just open up a random file,
I'm going to choose the etsy ssh sshd config file, and let's just say I'm in
this file right here and I'm changing some configuration options, but I need to
work on something else real quick because something came up and I need to go do
something else, and let's say I've made a bunch of changes to this file, I'm not
ready to save the file yet because I'm not finished with it, but I also don't
want to lose it either, so how do I get back to the terminal without actually
saving the file and also without opening up another terminal window, but what we
can do is we'll control the press Z and that effectively minimizes that particular
program to the background. Now it's not quite the same thing as minimizing a
program in a desktop environment or a graphical user interface, but we're
going to pretend it's essentially the same thing because that's the value that
I see here, you have a program running, you don't want to lose it, you don't want
to lose your work, and you do want to return to it, but you also don't want to
open up a terminal just to get back to the command line, this is a great way to
do it. So now you know how to send things to the background, but how do you get it
back? Well that's easy, you type FG for foreground, and then it comes back, it's
that simple, you hold control Z to send something to the background, something
that's in the front, and then FG, and that'll bring it back to the foreground.
So I'll go ahead and exit this, and like I mentioned it doesn't really matter if
it's a text editor, another example of this is Htop, and this is a really cool
utility for monitoring system resources, but the same thing applies here, I can
hold control and press Z, it's sent to the background, FG, it's now in the
foreground. If you want to find out more about how this works then check out the
video that I mentioned, but at the very least being able to send something to
the background and then bring it back to the foreground will probably save you a
lot of time. Just keep in mind that if you close the shell or log out, you will
lose whatever is running in the background, so just make sure you remember
that when you send something to the background, you should bring it back to
the foreground, finish what you're doing before you close your terminal window.
Alright so it's time to move on to the next trick, and what I'm going to do
first is just update my package repository index, so I'll type apt update
just like that, and I'll press enter. Oh wait, I forgot to use sudo. You know as
long as I've been using Linux you would think that I'd remember that by now, but
even after two decades I'm constantly forgetting to run sudo. Of course I could
just run sudo apt update, I mean it doesn't take that long to type that
command, but that's not what I'm going to do. What I'm going to do instead is type
sudo and then two exclamation marks just like this, and then I'll press enter.
And it worked, now check this out. When you run sudo exclamation mark
exclamation mark, the two exclamation marks actually refer to the previous
command that you just ran. So by running sudo exclamation mark exclamation mark,
I'm telling the command shell to repeat the most recent command, but put sudo in
front of it. So that way I don't have to worry about retyping the entire command
just to run it as sudo. This is a great way to repeat the last command, but make
sure that you have the proper privileges and run it with sudo. And again, I find
myself forgetting to use sudo quite often, so this trick right here is
something I use at least once a week. Now another trick is going back through the
command history by holding control and pressing R. Now this is kind of confusing
to explain, so I think showing you will make more sense. So I'm going to hold
control, I'll press R, and now the command prompt has changed to a search
field here, so what do I do here? Well what I do is I start typing part of a
command that I remember, part of any command that I would have ran in the
past. Maybe I want to bring back a long command that I ran in the past, but I
don't remember the syntax and I just don't want to go through the history
file to find it. I'll just type what I know of the command, so we just ran
apt update, for example. Now notice I just typed apt and it's already showing
sudo apt update. If I hold control and press R again, it'll go to the next
thing in the search history that meets that criteria, and control R will just
keep going back through the command history, and then once I find the command
that I was looking for, I rerun it by simply pressing enter. And the sudo
apt install htop command, that's what I ran off-camera to install htop on this
computer. So there's popd, we ran that one, we also ran pushd, any command that
I've ran in the past, I could easily run it again with this trick. I'll hold control
and press C to break out of this, and what I'm going to do is show you yet
another way to run previously run commands that I think is even better.
What I'm going to do right now is run history, just like this, and we see all
of my command history, which is very useful in and of itself, especially if
you're a new Linux administrator for a company. If you're working with a server
that has a particular problem, maybe it's a problem that's happened in the past,
and as a new Linux administrator, it's always a good idea to check the command
history because you could find out what people before you have done in similar
situations. And like I said, this is a cool trick in and of itself, but that's
not actually the trick that I want to show you. What I'm going to do is show
you how to rerun any command from your history. Notice that there's a number on
the left side of each of these commands. So for example, I typed this command
right here off-camera to see whether or not htop was installed on this computer.
It wasn't, so then after that, I installed it. But what if I want to run this
command right here yet again? I could just right click and copy it, and then I
could right click and paste, but that's not what I'm going to do. What I'm going
to do instead is refer to the command by its number, but first I'll type an
exclamation mark, and then directly after that, I'll type the number, no space or
anything like that. And as Linux people, we often refer to the exclamation mark
as bang. So essentially, I'm typing bang 102. And what happens is that it
actually shows me the command that's associated with that number, and then it
runs it. So right there, I was editing the SSH config file. So I could do that
again by typing bang and then the number just like before. And now I'm back into
that config file. I think this is a very useful way to use the history, but I'm
going to make it even better. One thing that I think is missing here is the
date and time. I feel like it's really helpful to have the date and time that
every command was run in. So that way, if I'm looking for a specific command during
a specific time period, I could find it and have a better idea about the actual
command history and when the commands are executed. But the problem is we don't
have that information here. So how do we get it? For that, we have a very special
variable in its hist time format. And what I'm going to do is set this equal to
a very specific string. I'm going to type percent capital Y dash percent lower
case M dash percent lower case D space percent uppercase T and then another
space and adding another space here is really important. I'll explain why in a
moment, but anyway, I'll press enter. And now that we've done that, let's run the
history command again. Now we have a date next to each of the commands right here.
Depending on how your shell is configured, it might actually show the
same date for everything because maybe a date wasn't recorded when it was first
created. Different distributions set this up differently. So this may or may not be
a problem for you, but at least going forward, it's going to have the correct
date and time for every command. So if you're looking for a specific command
from a specific time period, you could just scroll through your history. And as
you can see, it shows that information here. Now one problem with this, though,
is that when you close your shell, then the hist time format variable is going to
go away. We set the variable here in this session. So even if I opened up a new
terminal window, it's not going to apply to that particular terminal window. It's
only for this session. So what I want to do is actually make this permanent. And
the way to do that is we just open up a special file with an editor. We can use
nano then it doesn't matter. And what we're going to do is open up the dot bash
RC file in our home directory. And right here we have hist control. And that's
actually another trick that wasn't on my list, but it may as well have been
his control being set to ignore both means it's going to ignore lines that
include a space at the beginning. So if you want to type a command and you don't
want it to show up in the history, if this is set, you could type a space in
front of the command and it won't show in the history. So if you are running a
command that contains something sensitive, it might be a great way to hide
that from the history. But that's not what we're here for. What I'm going to do
instead is add the hist time format variable right here in the bash RC
file. So that way every single shell I open will automatically have the setting.
Just like that. So hold control and press O to save the file, enter to confirm
it, control X to exit out. So from this point forward, every terminal window
that I open should have the hist time format variable set giving me the date
and time for each command. Now earlier I mentioned to not forget to type the
space at the end when you're setting the variable. And the reason for that is
because if you don't, then there's not going to be a space in between the date
and time in the command. So this space right here would not be present. Because
you added a space at the end of that string, it's putting that space right
here in between the date and the time and the command. So if you don't include
that, things get, you know, confusing. Now another command that I want to show
you guys is completely useless. I mean, it's cool, but it gives you no practical
capabilities whatsoever. It doesn't enhance your workflow. So technically it
doesn't even belong in this video, but I figured it might be fun to show you. And
that command is C matrix. You have to have this package installed. Most of the
time this will not be installed. So you could use your distributions package
manager to install this package. So I'll press enter and you'll see immediately
what it does. Does that look familiar? If you recall, in the background, I often
have a laptop that has this as the screensaver. But it's not actually a
screensaver. It's just a full screen terminal window that's running C matrix. I
just think it looks really cool in the background. Again, it has no practical
use whatsoever. It's not going to enhance your productivity, but it's cool. Now,
as an aside, what I often do is press F11 to make the terminal full screen. And
that makes it look even cooler. But F11 is not actually specific to C matrix.
That's a trick in and of itself. So I'll press F11 again. And that undoes the
full screen. And then to get out a C matrix, I hold control and press C. And
now I've broken out a C matrix. So again, I'm going to press F11. And notice
that the terminal is now full screen. So F11 is a terminal shortcut and it's
recognized by quite a few desktop terminal emulators. There's some that
don't understand F11, but most do. And that makes it full screen. And I mean
full screen to the point that you won't see any window controls at all. You
won't see your panel. It's literally taking up your entire screen. So I'll
often do this if I want my terminal to basically cover up everything else if I
don't want any distractions. And I just want to work on something without
seeing anything in my desktop environment. I don't want to see email alerts. I
don't want to see anything. But when I'm working on, I'll just press F11 and
make the terminal the only thing that's visible. And when you press F11 again,
it returns it back to normal. In addition, most desktop terminal emulators
will allow you to increase and decrease the font. And this is something that I
often do in my videos. So what I'm going to do is hold control and shift at the
same time. And while I'm holding those down, I'll press plus. Notice that
every time I press plus, the font will get larger. If I hold control, not
control and shift, but just control and press minus, as you can see, the font
is shrinking. Now, often when I do this, it kind of plays around with the
sizing of the terminal. So I'll often press reset to make sure that it's going
back to the proper size. Otherwise, I might have some blank space up here. But
anyway, that's how I actually adjust the size of the font in my videos. I often
crank up the font size to make sure that you guys are able to see what I'm
doing. And sometimes I have to shrink the font size if something I'm doing is
taking up too much space. I've had some people in my comments ask me how I do
that. And if that's you, well, now you know. Now, what I'm going to do is just
press the up arrow a few times. I'm going to just bring up a previous command. I
think this one right here is good enough. And what I'm going to do is hold
control and press U. And it just deletes everything on that line. Literally
everything. And depending on your computer, it could take some time to
actually backspace everything out. I mean, that didn't take too long. But if you
had a complete wall of text, control U will simply just delete everything.
That's pretty cool. Now, similar to that, I'll bring up another command here,
maybe something a little bit longer. I guess that's fine. Since we're on the
subject of control U to delete everything on the prompt, there's a few
other shortcuts that also involve holding down control. So what I'll do is
hold control and press A. And that puts a cursor all the way to the front of the
line. And then control E takes you to the end of the line. Now, suppose that I
want to run this command right here. But before I press enter, I realize that I
probably should have included sudo at the beginning. Now, I could hold down the
left arrow go all the way to the beginning, which might take more time if
the command is even longer. And then I could type sudo and I'm fine. But what I
think is more practical is that you can hold control and press A. And that
immediately brings you to the front of the line. And then control E takes you to
the end of the line. So that way I'm able to jump to the beginning, add sudo, jump
back to the end. That'll save some time. Maybe not the most useful thing in the
world, but you never know. Maybe this is something you'll find helpful at one
point or another in the future. So I'll clear the screen. This time I'll just
hold control and press U to delete that command. And now I'm back to an empty
prompt. Now, what if I wanted to run two commands one after another? Maybe I want
to run sudo apt update. And then sudo apt dist upgrade. The first command will
update my package repository index. Whereas the second command that I mentioned
will make sure that all available updates are installed. What I could do is run
sudo apt update. And then once it's done, I can run sudo apt dist
upgrade to run the second command. But that's not what I'm going to do.
Instead, I'm going to set up the command just like this. And watch what happens.
It immediately changed the command into the dist upgrade command. So if I was
to press enter, it's going to install all of the updates. Now, of course, apt is
actually specific to Debian and Dubuntu. But the command itself doesn't really
matter. I'll just say no for now because I don't need to update anything. I'm just
using a temporary installation on my studio laptop. I don't really care to
update it right now anyway. So what I'll do right now is just chain two random
commands together. So LS dash L. And then I'll run echo. Hello world. So the first
command produced this output right here because I ran LS dash L. And the second
command echoed hello world to the screen, which we see right here. So now what I'm
going to do is show you another variation of this same idea. So I'll recall
this command and I'm going to take away the semicolon here. And instead, I'll type
two and percents. What do you think's going to happen? Let's find out. The same
thing. But wait a minute, if it does the same thing, if this method changed two
commands together as well, then why would I want to use the semicolon versus the
two and percents? Demonstrate the difference. I'm going to bring back this
command right here. But what I'm going to do is make the first command completely
invalid. So I'm going to list the storage of a directory that doesn't exist. This
will produce an error. And then I'm going to chain the command into echo. Hello
world, just like before. But the command stopped me, though, it's telling me that
this directory does not exist, which I knew. But it didn't run the second
command. Hmm, that's interesting. Let's bring that back, take away the end
percents, and I'll replace them with a semicolon. So we get the same message as
before. It's telling me that the directory does not exist. But it still ran the
second command. So now you can see the difference. If you chain commands together
with semicolons in between, it will actually run the next command if the
previous command failed. But on the other hand, if you chain commands together
with end percents instead of the semicolon, if it encounters an error, it
will not run subsequent commands. And that's the difference. Depending on what
you want, maybe you want the second command to go through if the first one
fails, or maybe you don't. And that'll determine which one of these you actually
use. Now another command that I want to show you guys is tail dash F. And I feel
like this is a command that a lot of people know already. But for whatever
reason, I didn't find this out until much later in my career. So I want to make
sure that I let you guys know about this as early as I can. So if you didn't
already know about this, well, you're about to know about it. So what we're
going to do is just tail a log file. I just chose the var log syslog file
randomly. You could give it any file that actually exists. Now when I press enter,
it's going to show me the contents of var log syslog, or at least the last portion
of it. And you can't really see it now. But if anything was to happen on this
system, then this is going to update in real time.
So I could literally watch the log as content is being added to it.
So that way if I'm troubleshooting something, I could keep my eye on what's
happening on the server. Maybe the other person that's telling me about a problem
can try to reproduce the problem. And while they're doing that, I'll just
watch the log. And as they're trying, I'll see new entries
being added to the log file. It's a very cool thing to do.
And to break out of this, you hold ctrl and press c.
And now you're back on the command line.
Now for the next trick. If I list the storage of my current working
directory, I actually have this file right here called
hello.txt that I actually created off camera.
If I check the contents of that file, you can see that all it contains is hello
world. Now we're going to pretend that this is a
very long file. Maybe it's a log file, for example, and we want to empty it out.
Now most of the time you can actually delete a log file and then the service
will recreate it. But that's not always the case.
It's actually easier to truncate a file, especially if it's a log file. It's a
safer thing to do than outright deleting a file.
Maybe there's still an open file handle to that file.
And if you go ahead and delete a log file, maybe a new log file will not be
created. And that wouldn't be good. So what you
could do is run truncate because set the size.
That's what the dash s stands for. We'll set the size to zero. Be very careful
with this, by the way. And then we'll give it a file name.
And that's going to make the file size of that file exactly zero,
thereby deleting everything it contains. And that's why I mentioned you should be
careful with it. But cap the contents of hello.txt
one more time. It's an empty file. And that makes sense.
We set the size to exactly zero. It's now an empty file.
So now I'm going to show you guys one more command that I like and that's the
column command, but it's actually more useful when you chain commands into it.
For example, if I run mount, it's going to show me a list of all the file systems
that I have mounted on my computer or server or whatever happens to be.
But it's all kind of jumbled together. And yes, part of that is because of my
font size. But even if I shrink the font size and then
run it again, it's not all that much better.
So let's try this a different way. I'm going to run mount.
And then I'm going to pipe that into column
dash t. And I might need to make the font size really small so you can see the
difference. It's going to make sure that all the
output is shown in columns, which makes it a lot easier to read.
And it's not specific to the mount command. Any command that produces
output that's a little jumbled might actually benefit from being piped into
the column command like I'm doing here. If nothing else, piping mount into
column dash t is useful of and by itself. So if that's all you take away from
this, then I guess that's fine too.
So hopefully you've learned something new with today's video.
Go ahead and let me know in the comments down below what your favorite
command line trick or time saving shortcut happens to be.
I look forward to reading what you guys have to say and maybe I'll learn
something new myself. Anyway, as always, thank you so much
for watching and I'll see you again very soon.
you
