So I had a debate with Curtis Yarvin a few months ago.
It was actually the day before the previous live show, the one we did in LA.
I was in Chicago debating Yarvin.
I don't know if I got my donuts worth from that debate,
because a lot of it ended up being about,
I mean, in fact, the debate was much more about history
than I thought it was going to be coming into it.
Because I thought, I thought we were going to be debating principles.
It was about democracy.
And Yarvin is sometimes sort of like in his more provocative moments.
He'll call himself a monarchist,
where we can hear from Matt in a minute what he means by that.
So I thought we were going to be arguing about democratic principles.
But Yarvin, I think, was manifestly uninterested in doing that,
or really in arguing about much of anything.
And a lot of it ended up being, because he made these claims,
and he did a one-on-one,
we both did one-on-one conversations with the moderator,
Thaddeus Russell, before the debate between the two of us.
And so at the very, very beginning, Thaddeus asked,
okay, do you have anything you want to respond to?
And I was like, yeah, a lot, right?
It did have one of my favorite comments in the whole year, though,
when he's like, well, yeah, of course, if you look at what historians say,
they're going to agree with you, right?
It's like, oh, yeah.
Yeah, that is a new one to me.
I have never received that particular critique that I assume
that what historians say when I read them
is going to inform me about what happened in history.
And apparently, this is a totally wrong assumption,
and in fact, shows that I've been so brainwashed by the cathedral
that everything I say can be disregarded,
because I'm just assuming that you could read books
and gather information about what happened in the past
is the model that I'm working on.
Although, in this sort of previous exchange
with Adnan earlier today on social media,
you brought this up from our debate,
and you did point out something,
you put your finger on something that really infuriated me
with that debate,
if infuriated is too strong, it was frustrated in that debate,
which is that there's a lot of slippage.
And Matt has read far more
of Jarvan's written work that I have.
You know, I did some research before the debate,
but nothing like what Matt has been putting himself through
to write this Common Wheel article about Jarvan.
But this certainly seems to be a lot of slippage in general.
It's certainly the debate with me between people in the past
thought X, and you should believe right now that X is true.
Because, you know, it's like there's a point early on
where he was like, well, you know,
so I should say, just to set this up just a little bit,
that a lot of the sort of historical debate,
and it was about U.S. imperialism in Latin America,
and whether, you know, like Jarvan thought like,
oh, we're doing like too much promotion of democracy
in other countries that we're just, you know,
that we're that like, in fact, that was the problem that,
you know, the U.S. was just involved
in idealistic democracy promotion that was going wrong.
And my view is what the fuck are you talking about?
The United States has, you know,
especially specifically Latin America,
and I think he'd even mentioned Haiti.
I think he was the first one to do that.
I was like, look, I mean, how many times
has the United States overthrown elected governments of Haiti?
How many times has the United States overthrown
democratically elected left-wing governments
around Latin America?
I brought up, you know, some of the obvious examples,
you know, about Salvador Yende and et cetera, et cetera.
And, you know, he always had something to say about it,
but he didn't quite address the point.
You know, it was like, oh, well, Salvador Yende
was a very Americanized cosmopolitan, you know,
and Pinochet was like a real Chilean.
It was like, okay, let's say that this is an accurate
bit of cultural commentary.
So the fuck what?
What is that to do with anything that we're arguing about?
He loved his people enough to send 7,000 of them
to an early grave in Chile's native solo ill, right?
You know, what else could the motherland want?
Yeah, exactly.
And he kept telling me that I should be reading
more original sources on Google Books, which is, you know,
fine if you want to throw that at the end.
But it's also, you know, I mean, what?
It's a horrible waste of time during debate.
Like, I thought we were there to, like,
make arguments to each other and respond to each other's points.
And if you say, instead of, like, actually responding
to the specific things I say, you just say,
oh, you seem very entrapped by this worldview.
You know, here are some books you should read.
You know, it's like, well, that doesn't respond to the substance
of anything.
But also, you know, so this came out,
what Adnan's talking about, the slippage,
I think came out most vividly in the discussion about Haiti.
Because my view, you know, look,
my view of why Haiti is as much of a mess as it is right now
is that it has been constantly fucked over
by imperial powers going back to the inception of the country
and the slave revolution that threw off the French
and eventually to have the country be allowed to exist
for France to stop trying to intervene against them.
They had to make this treaty where they had to agree
to pay back the French for the reverse reparations,
you know, for the lost property in the slave revolution.
So let me think about, like, the slave owners, right?
Think about all the hard work that they put in to managing
those slave enterprises, getting the people into line.
Nobody ever thinks about them and their contribution.
Why does it, yeah, Helen Lovejoy voice, why would anyone
do that?
So, and they didn't finish paying that off until, I think,
like 1947 is when it was finally, like, it ended up being
transferred during one of the U.S. occupations,
I think the one in the 30s, ended up being transferred
to a U.S. bank, what they still owed, but they finished
paying it off in 1947, very shortly after that,
like within like 10 years of that, breathing room,
they were saddled with Papa Doc de Valier,
who was a really brutal, like kind of death squad dictator,
who was back to the hilt by the United States
for standard Cold War anti-communist reasons.
Poppy Doc was succeeded by Baby Doc,
and who, you know, friend of Mother Teresa,
but not particularly nice person,
and then the de Valier regime was finally overthrown.
You know, it's like the late 80s, they had the, you know,
the very first democratically elected president of Haiti,
Jean Bertrand, Aristide, you know, after the post-de Valiers,
not the first ever, but the first post-de Valiers was removed
in a coup where it's an open question, you know,
it's not a matter of dispute that a lot of the military
officers involved were on the CIA payroll,
like everybody acknowledges that.
It's an open question whether the company had any knowledge
of it, like beforehand, you know, that they,
or whether it was just that, you know,
they had a relationship with these guys,
and, you know, coincidentally, there was a coup,
but at any rate, you know, the United States did actually
intervene under Clinton to put him back,
but then it intervened again under Bush to remove him
at this point directly by U.S. Marines.
Aristide's political party, Lavalas, is, like,
not allowed to participate in a bunch of future elections.
The current president of Haiti, who after the one just now,
Moise, was assassinated by some guys who seem to have
a lot of connections to Miami, is the guy who came in after
who were and who nobody voted for and refuses to hold elections
and is strongly supported by the United States,
all of which is just to say, I think it's not a great mystery
how Haiti got to be the way that it is.
I think there's, like, a pretty straightforward material
explanation of this.
Jarvan's view, as far as I can tell, is he was coy
about whether it was cultural or genetic,
but he seems to have some sort of racial explanation.
He said...
Oh, he does.
I'll quote from his book.
This is his text, Muldbug on Carlisle, where he says,
In Haiti, we see one aspect of life without promises made
and kept, poverty, corruption, violence, and filth.
In a word, anarchy.
Haiti is the product of the persistence of human anarchy
and an excellent symbol because it symbolizes exactly
the same thing to Carlisle and Freud.
Haiti is far more anarchic now than was in 1888,
which, of course, whose port-a-prince is the paradise
next to today's.
The 19th century is Haiti is the 21st century's
whole third world, so it doesn't really take a genius
to sit there and extract all these references to filth
and garbage and trash.
And it's connections with the third world and Haiti
and drawn association between that
and all kinds of horrible racist views.
Well, he said, in the discussion with Bea,
he said that, well, when I think of a country,
I think of a people, and then he did the exact slippage
that Adnan was talking about, where he says,
well, you know, if you read, you know, go on Google Books,
Google Scholar, you know, you read these old books.
Everybody in like the 19th, you know,
certainly the 18th century assumes that there are these
real things that are like national characters,
that entire peoples have a certain character, whatever.
And the implications certainly seem to be that,
well, since they thought so, it must be true.
And I just, you know, like, I mean, just crassly,
I mean, my intuitive response to that is okay.
I mean, if you go back to like 1810, yeah, sure.
I mean, everybody more or less thought that,
but, you know, everybody thought all kinds
of other stupid shit, too.
I mean, like, why is it, you know,
why is like a view having been popular in 1810
a recommendation for...
Let's be clear, you know, the normal reactionary,
and I've met a lot of them, hasn't psychologically
come to terms with the French Revolution.
It's still a store spot.
Mulbug is so fucking old fashioned that he's still sore,
not just about the American Revolution,
although he's really sore about that.
He's pissed off about the English Civil War, right?
That's how fucking far back his grievances go.
That's a special kind of reactionary, right?
That's like the point where even Joseph de Maestra
in the 18th century would have been like,
okay, man, you know, it's time to get over it,
you know, when things have happened, it'll be okay.
Pat on the head, glass of wine, cigarette,
you know, it'll be fine, right?
Although I do have to say, Mulbug is entertaining
in the way that he'll sometimes tattle on himself
about his more so-called advanced views.
It kind of reminded me when I was reading him
of what Kanye did during that interview with Alex Jones,
where Jones offered him that beautiful off-ramp,
but he was like, you're not a Nazi,
they're trying to insult you,
and Tony was like, whoa!
You know, just decided to just avoid
the easiest off-ramp in history,
because at one point in his book,
a general introduction...
Yeah, when Jones was like, you know,
the Nazis did a lot of bad things, right?
And Kanye was like, I think they did a lot of good things, too!
Yeah, exactly.
But I mean, at one point in his book,
a gentle introduction to unqualified reservations,
Mulbug is musing a little bit on fascism,
and he's like, you know, it just occurred to me
that Hitler reads a lot like me
if I were to lose 25 IQ points
and contract a bad case of syphilis.
And I'm like, did you just fucking tattle on yourself?
And you're like, wow, it's kind of weird
how I sound an awful lot like Hitler.
Eh, what can you do about it, right?
You know, a lesser man might take that as an opportunity
to reflect on himself a little bit.
They would, yeah.
You know, say,
is it good to sound like Hitler?
But, oh yeah, I'm pleased.
Yeah, I just wanted to come in there because I think, you know,
Matt, what you said strikes a chord with me
because in trying to think of how to make sense
to some of the absurd things he was saying in that discussion,
it suddenly occurred to me that if he is a monarchist,
if he is such a reactionary conservative,
he would look upon the American Revolution,
the French Revolution, all of these things as horrible,
you know, turns away from tradition.
And as a result,
I mean, there's two things going on.
One is that he's decrying any of these changes and developments
so that when he's saying that America
is this liberal order that tries to globalize its system,
he, you know, there's a certain point from the perspective
of a monarchist that America, you know, supported and sponsored,
you know, was in favor of Republican revolutions
in, say, the New World, you know, you have the Bolivarian,
you know, transformation of South America.
Like, so there are things that he could, you know,
fall back on in his analysis to think that this is all part
of a turn in history, you know, that has gone down the wrong path.
And so it's the cathedral, you know, it's this new system,
it's this consensus, all these historians are operating
under the same, you know, terms and it's all illegitimate
as far as he's concerned.
Everything, really, he can pick and choose
and say it's all illegitimate if he doesn't like it
because it's this departure from that historical moment.
And the second thing is that he, when he, you know, articulates
his view on America, you know, being this liberal, globalizing,
you know, he's against the Monroe doctrine, you know,
he's against Wilson's 14 points because he believes
that America actually operates according to those documents
and not according to actual historical, you know, evidence.
Yeah, you're not, like, when Yorven talks about, you know,
the United States policy towards Latin America,
I don't think the expression United Fruit Company is going
to come up very often.
It is not, no, but also like, you know, Wilson, he thinks Wilson
is trying to promote democracy throughout the world.
Well, you know, as it happens, you know, if you're a Middle East
historian, you know that Wilson completely betrayed this,
you know, he meant fit for Europe and he was caught
by the contradiction, you know, at the Paris Peace Conference.
There were attempts to present new constitutional kind
of government, you know, they had a kind of constitutional
convention in Damascus in 1920, 1920, you know, 2021,
and they proposed the probably the most progressive
constitution in the history of the Arab world.
And of course, the powers did not accept that.
They turned over the Middle East to the British and the French,
you know, which is what he would have wanted.
So he doesn't even know and understand that the so-called
primary documents that he reads, you know, to understand,
you know, American political thought and so on, you know,
he doesn't know how to put them into any kind of context
and how to read them in their context to really
understand what they meant.
You know, who would help with that would be historians.
Who would?
You know, you could read some of those, you know,
some of those books by historians that, like, again,
yes, I could not, like, I could not emphasize enough
that that was his critique, that like, you know,
that like what I thought about what had happened in history
is like what most, you know, like historians thought,
you know, is okay.
I should point out, this is a man who said in one of his first
major pieces of writing, which has just led into an
open-minded progressive, that it wasn't the case that people
like Chomsky were dissident intellectuals.
In fact, Noam Chomsky and C. Wright Mills were the power
elites of the United States at their time.
And apparently wielded more influence than the police that
were arresting people like Miller Chomsky, right,
which is just a staggering bit of historical imagination
if nothing else, right?
Yeah, I mean, I remember actually an old documentary
I saw about Noam Chomsky that his wife went to,
during this period of like anti-Vietnam War protests,
you know, she went back to school, got to grad school
because she figured there was a good chance that Noam
was going to be in prison and she was going to have to
support the family when that happened, you know.
So I don't think the Chomsky family were under the
impression that they were part of the power elite and
making decisions, but this does actually get to
something really important in the art of it, right?
So, and by the way, if anybody's watching this and
thinks, okay, why are you talking about this bizarre
reactionary crank who is, you know, like, you know,
is mad about the American Revolution happening,
like, you know, why is this guy worth the breath?
I would point out that J.D. Vance,
who was just elected to the Senate from Ohio,
has actually on the campaign trail and interviews.
He referenced Yarvin as a friend and an influence on him.
Well, so has Bannon and a bunch of the other fine people.
Steve Bannon has done that.
The Blake Masters was almost just elected at Arizona.
The Senate has done the same thing, you know, this guy.
Peter Thiel.
Yeah.
I mean, Peter, of course, the reason we've all heard of him
in the first place is because Peter Thiel decided he was
he was interested and, you know,
him out of his obscurity.
But now, unfortunately, he's not at all obscure.
And he does probably need to be dealt with.
But the thing something that just said, I mean,
I wanted to go to, because I mean, I think this is a really
important point.
In fact, in a weird way, goes back to what I was,
Adnan and I were just talking about with Harvey,
about the theory of history, because, you know,
he has this like really deeply idealist view about all this
stuff that he like ideas are primary, which, which is why,
like, you know, like that bizarre comment about,
you know, I'm Chomsky and see right mills running the world,
you know, like that, that's, that's, you know,
what he calls the cathedral is, is like academics and journalists.
And, you know, but he thinks that well,
because those people set, you know, the, you know,
they produce the ideas that that, you know,
that means that like what, you know,
literal decision makers do is just downstream of that.
And so like really it's the, it's the idea of people,
the academics and journalists who run the world.
Yeah, I should say this pension for idealism as Mark
detected is always more common in reactionaries than it is
in leftist thinkers.
And it's very easy to see why, right?
If you blame any social discontent on the distribution of
bad ideas, then the fault lies with intellectuals,
journalists, that people are stirring up trouble.
If you're a materialist, then you have to say the problem lies
in relations of power, material conditions,
how people are actually doing, and that inevitably leads you
to adopt at least a somewhat critical disposition since these
are things that you can't just chalk up to a bunch of
troublemakers spreading a bunch of gossip and propaganda.
But I think that there is something that is actually pretty
unique about YARVEN.
And I say this not with respect,
but actually with a lot of disdain.
Because from an intellectual standpoint,
his arguments are really cheap and bad.
And often, as Aiden said, historically really out there.
Like trying to say that the biggest problem with the U.S.
foreign policy over the course of the 20th century is that
people were too soft on communism.
The only thing you can kind of do is roll your eye and say,
oh, so you think that, eh?
Okay, well, whatever.
I know a few million peasants in Vietnam and Laos and Cambodia
who'd like a word about that.
Yeah, absolutely.
But what's distinct about him is, again,
this attempt to reconcile libertarianism with this very
authoritarian political program.
Now, he's not the first to accomplish this.
And he's certainly not going to be the last.
But what's really interesting that you can see over the course
of his writings is a transition from really believing in the
writings of people like Marie-Raphaard or Ludwig von
Misa.
And then coming to the very Marxist, I should say,
conclusion that actually people will not be satisfied living
in this kind of libertarian universe.
And that the freedoms that people like Raphard and
Viennese want can't actually be secured without an extremely
strong state there to actually compel people to adhere to this
kind of program.
And what's really interesting is he's sometimes very overt
about that, where he says most people suck, as I put it,
the masses suck.
And they're not going to actually advance programs that are
good for them, which is precisely why it is that we need the
CEO and chief, this American Caesar, to create spaces for
freedom for the truly productive people who will go out
there and contribute everything that's meaningful in this
world.
And that's been a consistent through line in his work from
the very beginning, and it's still the case now.
One of the stupidest papers that he's written,
and that's a high threshold, let's put it that way,
came out very recently where he said, I'm bored with this
whole red pill metaphor.
Let's get toking-pilled instead.
And he actually condemns the conservative base for
imagining that in the future, they will get to share in any
kind of power once the left is defeated.
He characterizes the left as high elves in this.
He says that the job of the conservative base is to find
certain kinds of dark elves, that's the terminology he uses,
who will work on behalf of the Hobbits,
that's just named for the conservative base,
seize power, implement conservative policies,
and then the Hobbits will go back into their hold and let the
dark elves do their thing, which will include,
of course, banishing the high elves to god only fucking knows
where we're going, right?
Some kind of Gestapo.
And it's really, really, really, really disturbing when you
think that that's how much disdain he feels even for his
own base, right?
Most of you, we are going to be in charge,
we'll implement policies for you, but don't ever fucking
think that you're going to be get to have any kind of say in
how it is that you're governed.
It's our job to figure these things out for you.
It's your job to appreciate it and accept the fact that we're
banishing all these people for you.
Sounds like Hitler.
I mean, no wonder he saw an affinity.
Well, that's also fucking remarkable about this,
because if you would make one accusation against fascism,
I would not say that that accusation would be that fascism
is too democratic.
That's the biggest problem with it, you know?
When I think fascism, I don't typically lean to,
God, you know, that really indicates a lot of these
platonic problems with democracy.
But that's actually Jarvan's position, right?
That there are a number of different reasons why the right
shouldn't go fascist any longer.
Some of them are strategic and some of them are moral.
I'll give them that.
You know, he says Hitler did a few bad things here and there.
He's exaggerated, so-called, but a few bad things.
Wait, wait, wait a second.
Does he actually say that's exaggerated?
Oh, yeah, I mean, at one point he characterizes,
he would have quite put it this way, right?
The Axis powers as the rebellion and the allies as the actual
empire, because the Axis never aspired to world domination,
on his view.
The allies already ruled the world.
Cathedral dominates the globe.
And so the Axis were just rebelling against this world order
by the cathedral.
And he says, you know, I'm not making any kind of moral judgments
presenting it in this way, because yeah,
the Axis were still evil, but if you characterize something as
the empire and the Axis as the rebellion,
it's not hard if anybody's seen Star Wars to kind of infer
what the moral lesson is supposed to be,
at least historically.
Well, I mean, in the debate with me,
there's a point where he said, well,
it's, you know, yeah, people would say,
it's probably whatever.
But like, why weren't we going to war with, you know,
with Germany? Why not with the Soviet Union?
Because, you know, they were like, you know,
that really shows that, you know,
the sort of softness on communism, you know,
that like Roosevelt thought it was worth going to war with
Germany and not with the Soviet Union.
And, you know, I mean, my suggestion back to him was that
the Red Army was, you know, not in fact bombing London at the
point when, you know, when U.S.
policy has been escalated, right?
I mean, like this is, you know, the United States was not
the only player, you know, making decisions and reacting
to the decisions made by others, you know,
in this series of events, right?
I mean, like Germany, you know,
Germany was actually doing stuff leading up to the
United States and Germany, you know,
being in a state of war with each other,
ultimately, you know, declaring war on the U.S.
first after its ally, you know,
attacked it and, you know, whatever,
which is due to, you know, U.S., you know,
embargo and, you know, and demands against Japan,
but still, like just this idea that, like, you know,
I don't know, FDR and his advisors were just sitting around
with a map of the world, you know, deciding,
it's like, yeah, you know, who should we go to war with?
Let's do Germany because they're, like,
ideologically further than from us.
Yeah, I was babbling about that also.
Oh, what are you saying, Eddie?
I was just going to say, one of my favorite quotes
from Harry Truman whenever he was still in the,
was he in the house before he was vice president?
He actually said on the floor of whatever
a steer body he was in, let's back the winner
in the fight between Germany and Nazis,
you know, Nazi Germany and Russia.
If the Russians are winning, we back the Nazis,
and if the Nazis are winning, let's back Russia.
And I think that kind of sums up America's
foreign policy of that war.
Yeah, and what's also baffling about it that really frustrated me
is anybody who's been in high school knows about
the history of appeasement directed towards Germany
and the fascist powers, right?
And anybody who's actually looking to the matter
with any degree of sophistication,
and I strongly encourage people to read Richard Evans'
Third Reich Trilogy if they're interested,
I still think it's someone to work on the subject,
well, no, one of the reasons why the Nazis were shown
a soft hand at many points is there were plenty of people,
conservatives, liberals, and even a few socialists
in Western countries that actually admired
what they were doing, right?
They characterized Hitler as engaging in non-aggressive actions
when he remotorized the line land,
when he decided to enact the union with Austria.
They even said, well, he says this is going to be
his last territorial demand when he claims this
to date land.
Hitler can be a trustworthy figure, right?
Why would he lie to us?
You'd never see that kind of tolerant viewpoint
directed in the 20th century towards any communist power
that was gobbling up its neighbors in that way.
And the Western states would just be like,
oh, I guess Stalin is certainly a nice guy.
We can trust him when he says it's the last territorial demand
that he's going to make.
Now, thank God we did eventually go to war with them,
and if only we'd done it sooner, right?
But this entire historical narrative is completely
bogus and extremely self-serving,
and it does serve to whitewash
a lot of the history of the Second World War
and the horrible things that happened there,
even if Curtis will sometimes try to apply
some politically correct language
to imply that that's not what he's doing, right?
By saying, well, yeah, but of course the Nazis were evil.
Even if they were the resistance to the world empire,
they're still evil, so we shouldn't support them, right?
You know, from what I've read by Yarevan
and from the debate I had with him
from his debate with Jen Kueger, which I watched,
it seems to me like he's very slippery
about exactly what he wants,
because he has this kind of provocative mode
where he'll describe himself as a monarchist.
He'll say things like,
we want some Silicon Valley CEO
who says sometimes to become the American Augustus,
which, like...
He has a long parable in his earliest book, actually,
where Steve Jobs literally becomes
the lord and ruler of California.
Sure, why not?
He has a bit of fan fiction.
Yeah, so he'll say things like that,
which suggests that he, you know,
like taken literally would mean he's, like,
really seriously opposed to the American constitutional order,
but that he's got this sort of, like,
when he's out, you know, when he's retreated to the mod,
you know, he'll say,
well, all I really mean by monarchist is that
I think we should have a really, really strong executive branch.
And which, you know,
that would actually be more democratic,
because that's the only...
That's the only election that he pays attention to anyway,
is the president.
So, and really, you know,
because the Constitution uses the phrase chief executive,
so which he interprets,
like I'm not saying about context,
you know, he interprets as, like,
meaning, like, you know, a CEO and a corporation,
which is obviously a metaphor
that would not have been available to anybody
who was writing the Constitution.
But, you know, he says,
well, if you let, you know,
democratically elected presidents exercise
more or less absolute power,
then that would actually be the most democratic thing of all,
because who pays attention to congressional elections?
And so, and then, like,
sometimes he'll even say, well, you know,
FDR was basically like a king,
because, you know,
Congress was a rubber stamp,
and he could do whatever he wants,
which, you know,
it seems to me there's a lot of...
There's this big gap, you know,
between those three proposals that is toggling
back and forth between,
which are, you should have FDR,
in other words, you should have, like,
a president who's so popular
that, you know, congressmen feel pressured
to support his policies,
because they don't want their constituents to get mad at them,
which is, you know, fine.
Between that and presidents
should basically have all the power
and Congress should have none,
which, you know, makes me a little nervous,
I think about George W. Bush
and the ways that executive power
was expanded during the Bush administration,
to do things like, you know,
to entertain and torture people
and, you know,
send troops all over the world and et cetera, et cetera.
But even that
isn't an American Augustus.
I mean, American Augustus would, like, you know,
like, again, take it literally,
that would mean that we just, you know,
that we just don't have
a republic anymore, right?
I mean, that's what Augustus's
role was.
So as far as you can tell,
what does he actually want,
or does he just, like,
or does he just enjoy the game
of keeping people guessing?
Oh, I think it's very clear what he wants.
But I will say just to your point,
this is one of the areas where I think he's a pioneer
of sort.
And I wish I had read his work before I wrote my book
on postmodern conservatism, because I would have actually
just been, here's patient zero, right?
Because the way that he writes, including using
the pseudonym
writing on a blog, all these kind of pop culture
references that are intertwined
by a highfalutin kind of appeals
to any number of different figures,
esoteric figures in the reactionary tradition.
It means that any time
where he's pressured in the way that you're talking about,
he can retreat into the argument that
he's just joking, or that this is just
irony, or that this isn't meant to be taken
literally, or sometimes we even just say,
of course this will never actually happen, so it's just
a thought experiment, right?
And this is a very good defensive way
of guarding himself against
accusations of any kind of extremism,
because if anybody sits there and says,
what you said is fucking horrifying,
he can just say, well you're not in on the joke,
and that shows how unsophisticated you are,
because you don't actually get what I'm going for here.
Whereas, you know, to the people
who do take him literally, he can
lean in a little bit more and inhabit
that identity without these layers
of irony and shading him.
But, you know, in terms of what it is that
he's arguing for, there's been
a consistent through line that's extremely simple
and really quite
horrifying, which is that he genuinely
believes that we should have a
libertarian society, by
what he means, maximal freedom for
a certain class of people,
those that he considers worthy,
dark owls or whoever it happens to be,
and the broader
masses who suck, that was his term,
shouldn't be allowed
any significant input into
political processes, because
they're never going to accept giving
these kinds of rarefied individuals
the maximal freedom to make everything better.
And this is where he differs from
conventional libertarianism, because he says
since they're going to try to use their freedom
to put limitations on these
rarefied bunches, this is why
people, this is why we need
a very strong state
with a very strong executive that's
going to essentially put them in their place.
And maybe they'll be better
cared for, sometimes he does develop this
kind of patronizing attitude
towards the masses where he says,
you know, they'll be better off having someone
tend to them, but that doesn't mean that
get any kind of meaningful power
or certainly any kind of meaningful freedom
compared to the Peter Teals of the world,
the Steve Jobs of the world,
or Elon Musk, a recent obsession
who claims could be an American Caesar, right?
And you can see
antecedents to this all
throughout the American libertarian tradition,
the right libertarian tradition, not the
left libertarian tradition, it's just never
been made as explicit
with Jarvan. And in some ways
reading this was actually kind of fucking refreshing
because I'm like, well, at long last
what we've been telling you is the inevitable
outcome of your theory
has been stated clearly because you've
reached the conclusion like, yeah, people don't want to
live in a right libertarian universe, so we're going to
have to fucking compel them to with the state.
And it's like, bravo, you've reached the level of
19th century Marxism, it's quite an accomplishment.
Music
You have been watching free public content
from give them an argument
to access every single episode of the show,
the main show on Monday nights,
all of the streams, all of the
debate breakdowns,
all of the
Patriot exclusive post games on Monday nights,
all of the Patriot exclusive bonus episodes
every week and much, much more
go to patreon.com
slash Ben Burgess.
I cannot resist
ending this with
don't be foolish.
