Evolution has pulled a simulation over your eyes that optimizes you for survival and not
accuracy. Tragically, this prepares us for savannas, not cities, and that makes modern life very
difficult to navigate well. But joining me today is legendary biologist Robert Sapolsky,
and we're going to take a hard look at the hidden truth. While there is no God, there is no free will,
and nothing happens for a reason, you can still massively improve your life.
Let me ask, right now I think there's a lot of people that feel lost, they feel lazy,
they have no sense of what to do with their lives, and given that there is no God, no purpose,
and no free will, how do people go about improving their lives?
Right off the bat, what I think that's tapping into is one of the misconceptions about the notion
that there's no free will, which is that is synonymous with, oh my god, if everything's determined,
nothing can ever change. And all you need to do is look at the world around you and know that
people change dramatically, societies change, all of that changes, the brain changes, there's this whole
trendy sexy field of neuroplasticity about how the brain does all that. Yeah, change occurs.
Where people get into trouble is when change has occurred, they conclude,
thus I chose to change. And that's where you are predicating your whole stance and the notion that
we are captains of our ships, and there's free will and all of that, and that's not the case in
the slightest. When we change, it is because we have been changed by a certain circumstance.
And why have we been changed in the particular way that we have? Because all those prior
circumstances that made us who we are, over which we had no control, brought you to that moment so
that you were going to respond to this stimulus in the way that you did, and would change you in
the way that it did. So we are capable of being changed, and even better, once we are changed
in a particular way, it can even lead us to modify our behavior so that we're changed in that way
even more so. And nonetheless, we are not sitting there and exercising free will when we decide,
you know, I'm no longer a Buddhist in Amsterdam, a nudist now or something.
So here's the way that I approach life is very much that everything is downstream of biology
and ideas. And I've said many times on the show that on my tombstone, I wanted to read you're
having a biological experience, because as somebody that has really, I have been changed
profoundly, so I don't need to take any credit for that, but the just empirical evidence is I went from
hardly being able to get myself out of bed, because I had a set of ideas. Just based on
what I had encountered the home I grew up in my personal genetics and the things that I respond
to. But all of that led me to a point in my early 20s where I had a hard time getting out of bed,
I'm talking I would lay in bed for four to five hours a day every day. And it was really only
shame that eventually got me moving. So I wouldn't even take credit for that. But ultimately, I had
biology that was to the point where I could receive the ideas. And then once I encountered
those ideas, I was able to put together what I call a frame of reference that and I'll be as
careful as I can. I know I'm going to slip up in terms of language that makes it sound like that
I'm in the driver's seat. But have have a frame of reference that is puts me in a position where I am
on a path to improving and getting better. And so when you look at my life over a long period of
time, again, without needing to clap for me. But as I've accumulated these ideas, it's had a
profound impact on my life, the quality of my life, my emotional tenor, the financial outcomes,
all of it. And so I became obsessed as somebody who's worked in the inner cities, I've seen up
close what it looks like when somebody hasn't been given the right environment with which to build
their biology, with which to get the right set of ideas. And it's absolutely devastating. And
if I try to map out in my own mind what it means to exist in a world without free will,
I start actually thinking of myself as a change agent, as a capsule that carries ideas that
when other people encounter those ideas, some of them will be changed. And so that to me is the
frame for this conversation is going to be what are the things that people need to do to their
biology, because they are hearing this, right? We can make that assumption. So they're hearing this.
So now they're encountering these ideas will assume that they're at least fertile enough soil
that the ideas will take plant, not all of them will, but it's just a more useful assumption.
What ideas would you want to plant in people's minds during this time that will be most fruitful
if they want to move in a positive direction? For people to learn enough about biology and
its interaction with environment and how it turns us into who we are out of our control, all of that,
to recognize that blame and judgment and a sense of entitlement and self-satisfaction
and none of those things make any sense at all. And all they do is send people in a bad direction,
either of wanting people to be treated less well than average, because of things that they've done
that you were willing to decide they were responsible for, or deciding that you should be
treated better than average, because of things that you've done that in actuality you did not
earn and did not deserve and that you were just handed by random luck in life. And if people come
out of that, deciding judgment is almost always a suspect concept, and it doesn't make a whole
lot of sense to ever hate anybody because that's like hating plants that grow with some toxin
that have made you sick, it's just outcome of stuff, and that no matter how good you are at
something, that doesn't entitle you to more consideration of your needs than anybody else
deserves. What do you think are the evolutionary reasons why we have that proclivity? So people
bend towards, not even Ben, they are yanked towards the illusion of free will. And as I really sit,
like whenever somebody asks me about this, if I'm being interviewed, I'll say, yeah,
free will is an illusion, but it really doesn't matter. We'll get to the societal implications,
because I know that's an important part of your book and your stance. But on an individual life,
I don't think, I think it is far wiser to act as if you have free will, because that frame of
reference will put you in a more empowered mindset, which I think makes you more fertile
for good ideas to take hold. Does that seem to you why we would, from an evolutionary standpoint,
develop that delusion? Well, it certainly can be the fuel of motivation,
and that is something that obviously is highly adaptive in many circumstances.
It's also incredibly protective psychologically. We are a weird species in that we are the only
ones out there who know that inevitably at some point our hearts are going to stop beating.
Whoa, bummer. And the only way to function is to have evolved a very unique capacity for
self deception. We are a species that can generate enough circumstances where we know that bad news
is coming, and we can't do anything about it, and where that could be crushing, that it has become
adaptive to decide that we actually have more agency than we do in reality. And I think the
best way to appreciate that is to look at a disease of people who are not able to do self
deception and who are not able to rationalize away reality. And what that is is clinical depression.
These are people who are pathologically prone towards seeing the world for what it is,
and they're like poster children for showing the psychologically protective effects of being able
to decide that things are going to be okay, and you're the master of your fate, and then
that sort of thing. It's good for our mental health until it turns out not to be good for our
mental health. So how do we walk that line? Because that's one of the questions I had
reading your book is, why try so fervently to pull people out of a delusion that,
as you just said, is better for their mental health?
Well, because it turns out it all depends on who the person is. I would bet anybody who would go
out and buy this book about the neurobiology and philosophy, the free will debate and all of that,
actually go and read it. My guess would be they're not homeless. My guess would be they had enough
protein in their diet when they were a kid, and the opportunity of schooling that they actually
know how to read and can comprehend it. I bet all sorts of things about them. In other words,
they're one of the lucky ones. And there's this ironic prescreening that anyone who has the luxury
in life to sit around and think about, are we captains of our own fate? And what does biology
tell us? And how about Aristotle and all that? That we are the lucky ones who have wound up in
this position. And thus, what being convinced that there's no free will does is take the wind
out of a lot of our accomplishments. What do you mean I didn't earn having my corner office and
being a CEO? What do you mean I didn't earn my advanced college degrees? I worked hard.
There are all those nights where my roommate went to parties and I stayed and studied instead.
I earned this. I earned this. I earned love by being like a kind person or empathic or whatever.
And like, whoa, bummer, that's deflating to hear that, if it's true, I don't believe it, blah, blah,
that I did not earn any of this, that none of this reflected the core of the me in there with all
these wonderful positive attributes. But what that mostly means, though, to me is most people on Earth,
rather than being given privilege and power and, you know, efficacy and all of that,
because of traits that they didn't really earn, that they had no control over and they just lucked
out with, most people on Earth instead are suffering deprivations and being ignored or
neglected or considered unworthy of attention or because they're getting treated badly because of
stuff they had no control over. So virtually by definition, anyone who's going to go and read a
book like this is going to be bummed by it and feel like, oh my, I can't work that way because,
look, I busted my ass in grad school or whatever. And the people whose lives are being made a lot
tougher by the fact that it's all random, all that there's no free will does is free you from
the myth that this is a just world and people get what they deserve.
It's very interesting. So when I, I really tried to parse through, okay, what do I want
people to do with this information? And from my perspective, and I'll be very interested to see
if we agree on this, from my perspective, the only reason I want people to acknowledge that
free will doesn't exist is that if you do not understand your own biology, you're going to derail.
So if you don't understand that you have a bias towards in-group, then you're going to treat
people in the out-group ridiculously. If you understand that you have a penchant towards
in-group, but that you can, and this is something that I learned from you, so much of what we're
going to talk about today, I've learned from you, but take sports. You look at somebody that's of
a different ethnicity that in one instance, you clock as an out-group. And then if they're wearing
a jersey of your favorite team, you suddenly clock as an in-group. So understanding the way
in which, the way I always say it is your brain is messing with you. Your brain is optimized
to keep you alive long enough to have kids that have kids. Now that's not the thing that I focus
on. What I focus on is how do you have what I'll call a good life? And it's probably worth us
defining that. So for me, my North Star is I'm trying to move the individual and society as an
echo of the individual towards increased human flourishing and decreased human suffering. Now
I'm going to make the base assumption, you're not a sociopath and all of that, because sure,
the thing that makes Hitler flourish is going to be very different than what I hope makes the vast
majority of humanity flourish. But that, that's sort of my North Star. And so to get people to
understand your brain is not optimized for joy. It's not optimized for pleasure. It is optimized
for survival in a historic evolutionary environment that we're no longer in. And so there is this
wild mismatch between what you, what will make you thrive today and your impulses. So that's
where I root around, okay, this is why I'm trying to get people to understand this. Is,
is there any of that that you focus on as well? Or are you interested only in that societal echo of
hey morons, you're acting foolishly and you're holding people accountable for things that make
no sense? Well, no, I think framing things and you've got the perfect word for it in terms of
the evolutionary mismatches that we deal with. We've got, you know, paleolithic appetites and
suddenly we've got fast food and obesity, epidemic, all of that. I mean, the mismatch is a really
useful concept in terms of all of this. We have a mismatch in that our building blocks
of agency, our building blocks of the sense of efficacy and of registering with those around us
were built with 99% of human history spent in small hunter-gatherer bands,
where you did have efficacy and your opinion counted because everyone's opinion counted,
very egalitarian by the best guesses and these were familiar and you registered
and you had a sense of efficacy. And now we're in a society where, you know, just to mention,
once we stumbled into idiocy of inventing like socioeconomic status after inventing stuff and
the unequal distribution of stuff, once we get into that, we can have somebody who's born into
poverty and I'm not exact on the statistics, but in this country, there's now something like a 90%
chance that they will still be in poverty as an adult. In other words, they can be subject to a
world of lack of control and lack of agency and lack of free will and a pretty
bruising kind of way. That's very novel for humans. I think that's one aspect of the mismatch
in that our tendency to delude ourselves into thinking we have more agency than we actually
do didn't have that much of a chance to go off the rails. It was pretty focused in reality back
when we were being like 99% of humans and it's this current world instead where it is so destructive
for so many people to be taught that they deserve what they get.
When I think about the way things are, I'm always looking for what is the evolutionary
explanation of how that would come to pass. If we don't have free will and we are just
billiard balls bouncing around, something is selecting for that and when I think about
meritocracy is probably a good place to start. When I think about meritocracy,
that isn't going to go away, no matter how many people recognize that they don't have free will
one idea that I love of yours is this idea that we are machines that are aware of our
machineness but aren't comfortable with our machineness. When I think about, okay, if I could
get everybody to just snap, not think about meritocracy, I don't think it will work. The
reason that I don't think it will work is as much as it pains me to say this, there are machines,
meaning us, I'm using your word, that are better at things than other people.
Whether we should or not, we value different things. Once you have an evolutionary algorithm
running in your brain that says, not only do I want you to survive, I want you to pass on your
genes to the next generation and I want them to survive. Now that algorithm creates what I'll
refer to as a simulation. It is not trying to show you the real world. We only see 0.00035%
of the available electromagnetic spectrum. It's like, we already know this is a gross
simplification of what's there and if it's simplifying, it's making decisions of what to
show what not to show. It's making those based on that desire for survival. Now I'm like, okay,
if that's true, then the things that we have now, theoretically at least, are selected for
because they do a good job of that. And since we are optimized to be good at things that allow
our genes to pass forward, there's already a hierarchy of values. You're never going to be
able to get people to ignore that some machines are better at those things that we value than others.
Does that make sense? Hootily. And two levels of response. The first amid that picture of,
yeah, we are driven to pass on copies of our genes, all of that. But then you get somebody who
joins some group that involves celibacy, or then you get somebody who adopts a child from
the other side of the planet who bears virtually no genetic relatedness to them. And yeah, there are
strong trends that have been sculpted by evolution, but we specialize in the idiosyncrasies of being
exceptions at every possible turn. I mean, there's not a whole lot of evolutionary biology
that could explain like giving up your life for somebody on the other side of the planet
in a setting like that. So we are shaped by evolution, but we managed to have a lot of
wiggle room with it. But in this larger sense now of like, what do we do with the fact that
we are machines who could know our machinists? What do we do with the fact that we kind of want
to have a world in which dangerous people can't do damage, and we're competent people or the ones
who are doing difficult stuff? How do you do that? And in some ways, dealing with the dangerous people
is a lot easier. And quarantine models of all sorts that are out there that people who are
asking not for reform of criminal justice system, but replacing it entirely. What's the much harder
one for my money is the flip side, which is how do you deal with the fact that it makes no sense
whatsoever to like, decide that someone who has the skills to remove that brain tumor from your
head and can do that amazingly well, and is totally unique in that regard, blah, blah, all of that.
It's really hard to construct a world in which they will not somehow feel entitled.
My wife, Lisa, struggled profoundly with her gut health and experienced debilitating stomach
pain. So I focused my energy on learning everything I could about the human gut.
Viome is on the cutting edge of this growing area of study with our at home gut intelligence test.
Just two to three weeks after sending in your sample, you can see your results on 20 integrative
health tests that measure your inflammatory activity, metabolic fitness, and the health of your
gut lining. As a special offer to my viewers, Viome is offering $110 off your test. Just go to
tryviome.com slash impact and use code impact to get the $110 off.
We particularly have trouble seeing, but I worked so hard to get there. Being able to work so hard
is another biological attribute, just like having like good dexterity with your fingers so they can
suture you without making a mistake kind of thing. I think it's in the realm of we need to make sure
it's only competent people who are doing brain surgery on you, and we need to have them motivated
enough so that they've gone enough sleepless nights to learn how to master this, and to do all that
yet somehow have the person, rather than thinking I've earned extra consideration, I earned to be
able to be in the front of the line because of how skillful I am, and here's where I'm getting
utopian ridiculously, for them to mostly just feel gratitude and pleasure at seeing what their hands
are able to do. Wow, I lucked out. Wow, sit me down at a keyboard of a piano and look how it turned
out that I'm the sort of person with the sort of nervous system where I can now play something that
moves people to tears. Wow, how cool is that that I lucked out and got to be like someone who could
experience that, experience knowing that you were able to generate this. Okay, so that's totally
ridiculous that we're going to think of making people go through like years and years of neurosurgery
residencies and like all of the agonies of that and the enormous emotional investment and everything
else in there, that they will come out the other end and say, yes, all I do is feel gratitude that
the randomness of the universe has put me in a position where I can help people by removing
their glioblastomas. That one's going to be an uphill battle, obviously, and there's that bias that
the people listening to this will probably be tilted already in a direction where there's
something they've worked hard at and they're good at and all of that and asking that we just have
like gratitude for how randomness turned out with us, that we were given the gifts to make
less pain in the world around all these other machines. Yeah, you got to get a pretty high
pollutant state of mind where that's going to work. Maybe all we could do with that sort of a
lower end version of the solution is just recognize how inappropriate a sense of entitlement is in
all sorts of domains because you can do something fancy with a scalpel doesn't mean you are a better
person than somewhere else and that seems like a plausible thing to try to train society in.
It's not too lunatic to get people to the point where a really, really skilled neurosurgeon
and a really, really skilled garbage collector can both feel good about themselves
and feel good that they lucked out to have this ability, but not that there's somehow better than
the person next to them who can't do that. This is a very complicated idea. So as somebody who
really focuses, I was going to say takes pride, but I know better, as somebody who focuses a lot on
usefulness, I want things to be useful. I want to put useful ideas out. I want to take useful
ideas in. So I know part of what we're going to want to touch on today is very much what the
societal implications are for this and how we can improve society, criminal justice system. I
know as an example, you use a lot. That'll be a good one to talk about. Before we get to that,
though, what I have a mantra in business, which is don't try to change behavior, try to leverage it.
And I feel and you obviously acknowledge it. You say, look, it's going to be a tall order to
get people to do it. I'm stepping into utopian zone. But when I hear these ideas, I start thinking,
okay, well, how do we make sure that these become useful? How do we get them to generate momentum
so that life really can be better? Now, you didn't expressly push back on my North Star. So I'll
assume for now that we're both on board with we want people to thrive and we want to reduce
suffering as much as possible. I know that I believe that getting people to the point where
we give them as good of a shot as humanly possible to biologically be ready to absorb
useful ideas and to encounter those ideas as much as possible. So I obsess a lot about education
and what that looks like. In fact, before we started rolling, talking to you about, I'm so
grateful to you. You've put so much content out into the world that just makes it more likely
that people are going to encounter those ideas. Okay, so anyway, going back to the idea of don't
try to fight behavior, try to leverage it. Don't try to fight biology, try to leverage it. So we've
got like evolution has selected for things. And one of those things is that I think you have said
this in the past, we are a hungry species. We hunger for so many things. And I think about when
somebody comes to me and is like, you know, hey, I'm really struggling in my life. The first thing I
say is go serve somebody else, get out of your own head, go do something awesome for somebody else.
We are evolutionarily wired for that because we're a social creature. And so you want to do
things that elevate not only you but other people. So I just, I'm not fighting the biology. I know
you will get something positive out of that. And then the other one though is progress.
Make progress in your own life. Set a goal and work towards that. I make video games. I assume
you know nothing about my background, but we make video games here. And so all day long,
we're thinking about reaching into somebody's brain and squeezing the dopamine centers to
get them to want to engage. Now, for now, just assume that I'm not an evil schmuck that's just
trying to get all the money in the world and that my whole reason for existing is implanting,
empowering ideas and entertainment. But nonetheless, we have to think about that. And so when I want
to get to the point where these ideas are not encountering sort of utopian like whatever is
like this is never going to happen, I want to say what's real like meritocracy is not going away
because people value things and they what we may change what they value fair enough,
but they're going to value a thing and they're going to want to get good at that thing. And
they're going to want to be praised for doing that thing. And they're going to want to feel
that they're better for doing that thing. And it's like, we've already run the experiment.
Monks are people that are like, Hey, I'm not an idiot. I recognize I need to be grateful. I need
to see a blossoming flower for what it is and really see it and understand a rock and know that
there's nothing good or bad, but thinking makes it so just nobody does it. So it's like this
tiny, tiny fraction. So do you think that I'm misunderstanding what we what will be easy to
get us to do and what will be hard to get us to do? I agree completely. It's very, very hard. It
seems to get around the problem of motivation and drive and even dirty words like ambition and
things of that sort in a context that are being no free will. Amid that though, we can show over
and over that we can manage that in some domains because we have already managed it. Okay, so a
bit of social conditioning. You meet someone and you shake their hand and they say, Oh,
you have beautiful eyes. And we're all conditioned to say thanks. And most of us who are sensible
say thanks. And then a quarter second later realize how idiotic that is. Wow. Thanks for
praising me for my choice of photoreceptor genes. You know, that's a domain where we've made some
progress that most people would feel sheepish if the other person went on for too long. Most people
would be willing to point out the realities of agency or lack thereof. If someone tried to
introduce a law that people with your eye color get treated better in society. Most people would
see the fallacy of that. So we've accomplished that in that domain. We're able to navigate a world
in which people can appreciate eye color. And we're in general, the person complimented for it
does not come out of that feeling entitled that they earned their eye color. And I don't know
enough about the history of people liking eye colors and such. But I'm sure there was a time in
the past where, you know, with a mindset where basically every attribute that anyone had that
was positive was a sign that they had a good soul because beauty on the outside and beauty inside
were exactly the same and intertwined and diseases God's way of punishing you. And there was a time
in the past where someone said you have beautiful eyes would know that they were being complimented
about their moral, moral anchor, because the two go hand in hand. And then we kind of learned,
no, that actually has nothing to do with it. It's just like, so you can say, oh, thanks, because
you're socialized and you say that. And like if you kind of out of it feeling like you have earned
that compliment for your eye color, that's ridiculous. Yet at times in the past, there's
people who would have interpreted it exactly that way. We're in a mindset now that your eye color
is not some sort of index of your worth as a person. We managed to get there. And we can
manage to get there in other domains as well. Like there are people, somebody with photographic memory
may think it's kind of cool or find circumstances where it's advantageous. I mean, there being
circumstances where photographic memory is not advantageous. But we are of a sufficiently
informed mechanistic world at this point, that they don't think they had anything to do with
their photographic memory, or the fact that they happen to have perfect pitch or something like
that. And if people praise them too much for that, they're able to feel a little sheepish.
I don't know, I just read a page and I remember it. I just glance it and I remember it. I had
nothing to do with it. I can just hear a C sharp in my head anytime I want. And it's always like
perfect down to like a couple of beats of, you know, vibration. That's how I turned out.
We've been able to get to the point where some of those ways in which we can be appreciated
for some positive attribute, we can accept the appreciation while accepting actually
we had nothing to do with it. And I'm not sure I'd be comfortable in a world in which only
people with perfect pitch get to have COVID vaccines. We've done that in some realms,
we could do it more, but it's not going to be easy. Okay, so let me ask,
do you believe people should build their self-esteem? Yes, and just because
I am of the place and time to, if nothing else, see that as instrumentally a good thing.
People will work harder if they have good self-esteem. People will be able to put their
shortcomings into proper perspective and realize that something bad may be bad,
but it's not the entire world. And there's not your destiny. Things like that are protective
and efficacious. And that's often a good tool to have to make somebody feel better self-esteem.
Like a great example where that intersects with all of this, a domain where we used to see
room for blame and labeling and insights into lack of motivation, all of that,
is, you know, when I was a kid, if, you know, I had trouble learning to read and I simply was
not getting there, and it would be very easy at the time for me to be labeled as lazy or unmotivated
or whatever. And then a long-come scientist about 30 years ago and discovers that, no,
you can have some screwy thing happening with a layering of neurons and like a layer four of
this part of your cortex. And as a result, like curved loop letters, you tend to reverse them
when you're looking at them. And you have dyslexia. And that's great. We just figured that out.
That's great on a very concrete level, because people could then learn what to do,
what to do for people with dyslexia so they can learn to read more readily. It gives you
sort of more insight into the outliers. But what it also does, bringing it back to this, is,
like in the old bad world, where you're screwed up cortical layering and this part of your brain
instead is interpreted as laziness and lack of motivation, is your self-perception and your
self-esteem is built around that for the rest of your life. And one sees all the ways in that
becomes self-defeating and like these endless, wow, it wasn't until I was 40 that I was diagnosed
with this learning difference and all those years that I felt myself being this. Yeah,
self-esteem is a good thing to build up for efficacy thereafter. Self-esteem is not a good
thing if it fuels entitlement, but it certainly has its place. And we can see those circumstances
where we decide we're watching agency where there wasn't and the outcome isn't great and the kid
still isn't learning how to read. And they are being taught what their self-esteem is going to
mumble in their ears for the rest of their lives now. That's a pretty bad thing.
What should people build their self-esteem around?
Well, given that none of it makes sense and we're all machines and it makes no sense for a machine
to feel good about itself and that's irrational except when it makes the machine work better,
except when one has learned the contingencies well enough that the right kind of self-esteem
will make someone kinder, will make them more likely to feel somebody else's pain,
will foster all sorts of good stuff. Yeah, in those cases, if your self-esteem is built around,
you know, the world is going to have been a better place because a whole bunch of molecules
came together randomly and formed the thing that I called me. That's a good reason to have self-esteem.
Now, going back to, because here is the confounding variable. You were talking about people understand
that their eyes are just their genetics and they didn't do anything to deserve it, which obviously
I totally agree. But at the same time, beauty has power. I didn't do anything to deserve being six
feet tall, but I can reach things that my wife can't. So, coming at it from my perspective,
I wouldn't want people to build their self-esteem around something that they didn't earn just
because I don't think it will return anything super useful. But this is where I'd want them
to start leaning into the delusion of free will and say, but I would want you to, for instance,
just use your example to say, hey, go out of your way to be more kind. And doing things like that,
that you're now putting attention and energy into, that I would say build your self-esteem around
that. Now, again, this goes back to Norstar for me. Everything is adding up to you want to do
things that increase human flourishing, your own and others decrease human suffering, your own and
others. But I would encourage them to do that. Do you, at that point, have such a reaction to
the illusion of free will and the negative consequences that you see to that, which I,
the word you've used the most, like if we were to do a word diagram, entitlement would just be
this gigantic glowing red orb. Are you so concerned that the illusion of free will creates a sense of
entitlement and probably self-defeating, right? Because it's going to create entitlement and
people who think they're awesome. And it's going to create a sense of self-defeating, I'm lame,
I'm not worthy, and people who fall out of step for whatever reason, which could go back to
natal, prenatal, epigenetic, I mean, before they're even born. Are you so afraid of that
that you would never want somebody to lean into the like, hey, I know free will doesn't exist,
but I operate my daily life like it does? Maybe the conclusion is some nice pragmatic thing, which is
it's impossible to imagine how we're supposed to function if we really, really reject the notion
of free will all the time. I've thought this way since I was 14, and I can't imagine it,
or pull it off 99% of the time, because it's really, really hard. Maybe what we should do in the face
of reality of how hard this is, because we are people of our place and time and things that
intuitively seem just intertwined with our sense of efficacy and our goodness and our will, you
know, intentions and all that, maybe save the effort for when it really counts,
maybe save it for when how judgment is really consequential, when people really are causing
damage, if they secretly believe they're a better person than somebody else for something
had nothing to do with when people are okay with the society running on myths of like,
any kid could grow up to be president kind of thing. Yeah, put your effort into the rare ones
of those. And like, if you want to feel good about yourself because your eye color, you know,
go ahead, it's not the end of the world. Save it for where it matters. And I think
what is aptly clear is in a world in which the organizing myth is we get what we deserve,
and effort somehow is coupled with outcome, there'll be no shortage of finding places where it
really matters. Let me ask you, when you think about the grips of the biology, the biases that
we have, the things that we are in the grips of, what are the ones that make you most concerned?
Obviously, we have entitlement, which I think if I'm understanding you correctly, entitlement is
born of thinking that you have earned height, beauty, intelligence, whatever, whatever. What
are other traps that we fall into that for tomorrow to be better than today, we need to get people
out of? One of the biggest ones is one of those uphill battles in terms of like how we're wired
up in some very fundamental way, which is in the right setting, a setting of a feeling of
righteousness, all of that, we like to punish, we like to punish individuals and translating that
into like actual biology, like one of the most reliable ways of getting dopamine running and
anticipation and all of that is to have somebody think that they are going to be able to punish
someone for an infraction and that they are doing something righteous, and you see the same thing
with rats, you get a rat that is being stressed and is secreting stress hormones, and it gets to
bite another rat, a complete innocent bystander, and the first rat's stress hormone levels go
down, it feels better, and you see the same thing in non-human primates, displacing aggression,
displacing frustration, and then especially inventing cultural trappings that tell you
this is actually like good civic duty, that one's really tough, because if you're trying to say
it makes no sense whatsoever to have a world in which there's any blame or punishment,
damn, but it kind of does feel good to punish, like I know of this guy who's coming up for what,
four, five different criminal trials in the next year, and I will be very pleased if the outcome
is if he's locked up for years to come and maybe even like feels lonely in the process,
but yeah, that really doesn't make sense. I mean, I see this all the time in like at a point
of years ago, I do a lot of work with public defenders offices with murderers and trying to
teach juries about how screwed up brains can be and how like they will like virtually be guaranteed
to make the wrong choice at various junctures, all of that. And there was some guy who went into a
house of worship with an automatic weapon and mowed down a whole bunch of people,
and it was completely horrifying. And a few days later, I'm listening on the radio saying, well,
the alleged shooter here was arraigned today, and it was decided they're subject to federal
hate crime charges also. And that makes them eligible for the death penalty. And my first
thought was, yeah, fry the guy, just son of a bitch. And then two seconds later, I think,
what are you talking about? You're working on a death penalty case right now. And seeing, okay,
maybe what we have to settle for is after two seconds of saying, yeah, fry the son of a bitch,
to remember, no, that's actually, it's not by chance this person turned out this way. And I have
no idea like what their view of the world is and how much pain and damage got them to that point,
blah, blah, blah, all of that. So maybe we should not expect our first reflex to be saying, oh,
what a poor guy that circumstances made him a damaging individual, my heart goes out to him,
and my task is to love the unloved or to love the unlovable.
Be pissed off and want him to be fried two seconds later. And then somehow in there,
get into your algorithm to stop and look back on that and see if this actually makes any sense.
Maybe that's what we have to settle for doing. Amid you saying one of the things that I see is
really insurmountable. Whoa, two seconds of thinking about this guy being like
flayed by, you know, the whole town square watching him be decapitated and the horses
pull his limbs apart or whatever. Yeah, okay, okay, let's talk for a second. This doesn't make any
sense. Maybe in the face of like, okay, we really like punishing, get people to the point where
they can feel the pleasure in that. And then three seconds later, we have taught the more meta level
of how we think about things to reflect on, does this actually make any sense?
It's interesting. I think we're going to have to define what makes something make sense, because
this, what you're saying makes sense to me in a very stable society where we have a way to
quarantine people. But again, I look at everything from an evolutionary perspective. Now, whether the
following stat is accurate or just directionally correct. I heard that roughly 80% of people in
the Navy SEALs score very high on the psychopathy scale, if I'm not mistaken. And that's because
from an evolutionary standpoint, you need people that can kill just without remorse because you
lived an insanely dangerous world where there were people that were coming to kill you. They did
not think of you as human. You were other. They were going to take everything you own. They were
going to take your women. They were going to rape them. They were going to kill you. Like
very bad things happen on an evolutionary timescale. It is just a litany of tragedy and horror. And
you know, obviously right now there are two hot wars going on that I'm aware of, maybe more.
October 7th was a level of horror that was just startling to behold. And so it's like,
oh yeah, humans really are capable of just an insane level of violence and dehumanization.
And so when you say it doesn't make sense, it feels like maybe in this current time,
in this country, it doesn't make sense. But I get why from an evolutionary perspective
it was selected for. How do you think about that?
Well, one of the great sort of bugaboos about sort of evolution and the first decades of social
Darwinists saying what is, is what was meant to be and sort of naturalistic fallacy, all of that
is this notion that what evolution rewards is aggression and domination and passing on more
copies of your genes. And a lot of what both evolutionary biologists who like sit there and do
math modeling and evolutionary biologists who sit and look at animals, including humans, is
you know, this concept of alternative strategies. Like there's lots of different ways in which
humans succeed and passing on copies of their genes and baboons. And like one thing I've seen
in my years of studying baboons is the guy who was able to walk away from every stupid provocation
instead of getting into a fight, when you look at his whole lifespan, he will have left more copies
of his genes than the guy who fights his way to be alpha and is there for eight months before somebody
breaks his arm in a fight. Like nice guys, yeah, it's not just nature, bloody tooth and claw,
and it's not just that nice guys finished last. One manifestation of that is like I am by nature
extremely pessimistic, but I have to admit some retrospective optimism. Looking at sort of the
Hobbesian picture you you painted just now, one of the things that all sorts of nice socialized
anthropologists will come to blows about is when did our ancestors invent warfare.
And there's one school of thought that says we have common descent from a
shared ancestor of chimps about six, seven million years ago, and overwhelming what it
shows is our entire history as a species has just been blotched with organized violence and
warfare and such, and sort of citing certain contemporary studies of indigenous populations
and rates of violence and such and paleontological records of how often you're finding an arrowhead
stuck in somebody's like skull when you dig them up kind of thing. And then meanwhile,
the alternative school is that when you look carefully, there's actually no evidence of
organized warfare up until we invented agriculture about 12,000 years ago, up until we became sedentary,
up until either because of agriculture, one notable case where people had the greatest fishing
hole on earth in North Kenya about 12,000 years ago, and we're willing to be violent to defend it.
But as soon as you had people become sedentary, and start farming, and start generating surplus,
and being able to make things, and also having surplus time, you could invent things like a
standing military, you could invent things like hating somebody because they've got more stuff
than you have. And I'm quite convinced by the evidence suggesting that humans did not invent
organized violence until like the last 10, 12,000 years or so. And you look carefully at say the
anthropological records looking at contemporary hunter-gatherers and how often they're violent
and overwhelmingly it's built around they are keeping out people who are trying to come in
and take their land because they want to like cut down the forest and things like that.
Amazonian circumstances, you go through it. And I think the good news is we haven't been a species
reflexively organizing into massive violence against each other for all that long of a time.
It's a pretty recent invention. That said, what the best evidence suggests is that individual
hominins have been killing each other at the same rate in every sort of culture on earth over
individual conflict kind of things everywhere you look. When you spend enough time say studying
Kalahari hunter-gatherers in Botswana and like if you're studying a band of 30 of these people
you're going to have to watch them for like 55 years running to get enough observations to tell
you what their violence rate is like compared to downtown in Detroit over the course of a year.
But when you get enough of those data, there's basically the same rates of some guy killing
some other guy over reproductive access of some guy killing some woman over a perceived rejection
of overtures of some guy killing some other guy over an honor violation.
Yeah, that we've been doing forever. And that proves to be a very tough one. No degree of
punishment in the form of a death penalty does much for crimes of passion. Whether you were
talking about like an ancestor two million years ago or people in most cultures on earth,
including all those nice well heartwarming hunter-gatherers, you come home and you find your
loved one in bed with somebody else and your impulsive crime of passion there is going to be
pretty unchangeable by external contingencies of punishment. So that aspect of us I think is
really, really long lasting the notion of a whole bunch of hominems coming together
and working in a cooperative way with the willingness to have a hierarchy of command
to go and try to do damage to somebody else's equivalent group. That's not all that baked
into our legacy, I don't think. That's the first time I've heard that. That is very interesting.
Now, knowing your own work on chimps, chimps will band together and do patrol parties and raid
other chimp groups and kill them off. Given that, that sounds more to me like organized
militaries, not exactly a standing army, but it rhymes with it. So given that we are on that same
evolutionary tree, why do you think that we don't have that in our just eternal past?
Well, for a very simple reason. First off, I wish I had had the luck to spend decades with chimps,
but I spent them with baboons who are... Baboon, sorry. They're not chimp groups,
they don't make tools like that. They're not as smart, but they're plenty interesting when it
comes to primates being awful to each other in interesting ways. Well, exactly what you bring
up was the driving force on notions of like our demonically violent past, because our closest
relative historically was chimps six, seven years, million years ago, we share 98% of our DNA or so.
And yeah, they have organized violence, they kill each other, they kill each other in ways
where the males in one group will systematically kill all the males in another group and take over
their territory and expand that. And whoa, look, we've got this legacy of six million years back
and all of that. And there's one word that shows how this is not really the case, bonobos.
Bonobo chimps, pygmy chimps, they used to be called, bonobos have a completely different
social system. They are female dominated, they have virtually no aggression, nothing like that has
ever been seen in a bonobo. They solve every source of social tension with sex and sex of every
stripe you could imagine, they're totally groovy, all of that. And you look and oh, we share 98%
of our DNA with bonobos as well. They are as close of cousins as chimps are and even separate of the
fact that we're not chimps, we're not bonobos, we solve their own evolutionary selective challenges
in a unique way, all of that. We're as closely related to the most groovy pacifists out there
in the primate world as we are to murderous demonic chimps. So that does in that one.
And some of the most influential writing about our supposed inevitability of violence because
of our shared chimp ancestry predated our knowledge about bonobo social behavior
and bonobo genetics and what the genome looks like. Okay, very interesting. It doesn't seem
self-evident to me that if we're related to both of them equally and we are in today's age certainly
capable of extreme violence. Look, I'm maybe optimistic, we're your pessimistic. I think
the vast majority of humans just want to get on with their day and their loving and kind.
But we do have these weird evolutionary quirks that make other people the out group,
us the in group, we have envy. So there are things that will then trigger that murderous rage. We are
also be very interested to see if there are studies on this. But as an entrepreneur, I will
tell you that people crave certainty and that when you give them certainty, you can get them to follow
you and people are so very malleable. And if you give them something to believe in and then say,
hey, but we have to go kill these other people, they'll be here for it. If things are bad enough
and you need look no further than the rise of the Third Reich and anybody unfamiliar with that
history is just absolutely astonishing. And I am a big believer in what Solzhenitsyn said,
which is a line through good and evil runs through every human heart. So when I look at
those stories, I go, oh, God, I have all those same the same ability to be manipulated to come to
just horrifyingly erroneous conclusions. So anyway, bringing it back to the monkeys, given how
far off the violent or far off the beaten path to violence that we have proven that we are capable
of going. When I look at bonobos who have every groovy flavor of sex, as you were saying,
and I look at at least in contemporary society, even now, like, there's a shame, there's a sense
of that needs to be in private. So I don't feel a ton of kinship there. And then with chimps,
dominance, aggression, hierarchy, as a guy in business, I will say, yeah, that all sounds
pretty familiar. Again, I don't know the studies and the way that you do. So I'd love to know,
is there is there more to that story that shows that no, no, no, we're really in alignment with
bonobos? And if we are, does that mean that if they had stuff to protect at a farm, they could
hoard wealth? Do you think they too would break bad eventually? Yeah, which is a great question.
I think what you're alluding to with your entrepreneurial self recognizing the chimp in you
is, you know, we're not a chimp, we're not a bonobo. We have been subject to the same evolutionary
rules, but came up with a unique solution to a unique set of challenges. But nonetheless,
one that can have a lot of overlap with how chimps solved it or bonobo solved it. But what I think
is implicit in your statement, is we show staggering amounts of variability. We have both,
I don't know, Elon Musk and the Dalai Lama or, you know, whatever, we're incredibly varied species.
And we are simultaneously the most violent species on earth, but also the most cooperative
and altruistic and empathic. And sometimes it could be the same person who embodies both of
those behaviors. And sometimes it could be the same behavior. And it's in the eye of the beholder,
whether this person is a terrorist or a freedom fighter kind of thing.
You can reboot your life, your health, even your career, anything you want. All you need is discipline.
I can teach you the tactics that I learned while growing a billion dollar business that will allow
you to see your goals through. Whether you want better health, stronger relationships,
a more successful career, any of that is possible with the mindset and business programs in Impact
Theory University. Join the thousands of students who have already accomplished amazing things.
Tap now for a free trial and get started today.
So we're a very in the middle confused species with tremendous individual variation.
And thus there's an implicit danger to decide that any other species out there is a good model
for making sense of how we evolved. And I think one can cherry pick stuff on that. And I
guarantee you there's somebody somewhere on some organic farm wearing Birkenstocks or whatever
whose natural affinity will be much more with bonobos or yeah, we're highly variable in that way.
Great, great example of this. Okay. In primatology, there's this broad classification you can do
across like 150 primate species or so. There are species that are monogamous pair bonders.
And there are ones who are polygamous polyanthros, pair bonders, gibbons,
ceamangs, some South American monkeys. And then there's all the apes and most of the old world
primates and all of that. So you see these two patterns. And it turns out there's all sorts of
traits that go in common with if you turn out to be a pair bonding species or a polygamous
species, a tournament species. And these traits play out in remarkable ways. In a species in which
males mate with a lot of females, different females, you don't see male parental care,
because they don't care. In a species in which females are mating with multiple males over the
course of their cycle, you don't see male parenting either because there's a high degree of uncertainty.
In a species like that, where there's high degrees of aggression, there's selection for
secondary sexual characteristics, like lots of muscle and sharp canines. And then you look at
one of the pair bonding species, and males and females look exactly the same because they've
been selected for the same sort of traits, being good parents. And male marmoset monkeys will do
more parenting of their offspring than even the females will. And these are two totally different
sorts of pictures. Sufficiently so, like you go out in a newly discovered island, and there's a
new primate nobody has ever seen before, and you manage to see this one way up in that tree is
a male, you see his penis, and then magically he falls out of the tree dead. So you've got his body
to examine then. And over there, there's a female because you saw her nursing somebody and she falls
out of the tree. And now you can compare them and you know nothing whatsoever about the species
social system. Right off the bat, if the male is a whole lot bigger than the female, you're looking
at a tournament species. Right off the bat, if you look at, you know, the length of time the
female nurses and how much milk can be stored, you're finding out something about if she's a pair
bonding species, and I'm right away, you look at whether females and males have canines. So
a whole bunch of these, you know, nothing more than like you've just found out all this private
stuff about them. So where do humans fit? And by every measure, some of our genetic diseases,
the degree of difference between the average male human and female human in life expectancy,
body mass, lung capacity, width of nostrils, all of that, you know, sperm levels and the testes,
all these things that are functions of that, by every one of those measures, we're about halfway
in between. We're not a pair bonding species. And we're not a tournament species. We're halfway in
between. And that was part of what made us generalists. So on the average, we're that. And what's
also clear is amid that average of us being halfway in between and confused a whole lot of the time.
And basically, that explains, you know, half of Earth's poets and all of Earth's divorce lawyers,
the fact that we're confused some way halfway in between is that individuals are not always
halfway in between, they're skewed way out in one end or the other. There's gene profiles related
to hormones like vasopressin and oxytocin in their receptors, which are significant contributors
to how stable and fidel, fidelius, whatever the word, how how faithful somebody is in their
relationships, how close of interpersonal space they stand in front of somebody of the opposite
sex if they're heterosexual, while they're already in a relationship, like that lines of it. So
we're the species where we don't fall into any of those patterns easily. And thus, we're on some
fairly thin ice in saying, you know, in this regard, we're just much more chimpish than we're
Banoa wish or whatever, we're, we're highly variable. And we by definition, the species that
doesn't fit into any of those categories. And when you look at the individuals amongst us,
none of them fit into the what the average is for our species.
Yeah, that the getting into how much of our makeup is either echoed in our body or driven by our
body, I find endlessly fascinating. My wife and I have been together for been married for 21 years.
And so we get asked a lot about, you know, what's the secret to a long marriage. And
while I rarely give this answer, the thing that's in my mind a lot of times is I almost certainly
have a lot more receptors for vasopressin, because I get so much out of bonding with my wife. I don't
know what to do with that. Not to mention what she has to do with that. Yeah, this is exactly
our our discussion of, Oh, my God, we're machines. And you just proved that you're a machine who could
know your machinists in that regard. And does that like do in hallmark cards? Does that do in
like the feelings that you feel that you feel so strongly that they feel real, even if they
aren't real, because you're just a machine? Yeah, that's that's the challenge that we have that
somehow we need to come to terms with us knowing our machinists in the sense that like, you can do
biomechanics on pelvic arches and angles of femurs with pelvic arches. And thus in this
species, they could leap in this way. And in that species, they can't. And here's the the
equations that will prove it. And that could make perfect sense to you. And still,
your jaw drops open the first time you see that a gazelle can leap 20 feet across,
you know, a riverbed. And that's the most amazing thing. And you're like, can't believe the world
has produced something like this. And you can do that and understand the equations that it makes
a possible for their hind legs to spring that way. We have to be able to sort of
come to some sort of, you know, treaty and peaceful stance with our knowing our machinists
and knowing and sensing the gears just underneath the surface, explaining the things that make us
who we are and you and your vasopressant receptor profile, while at the same time still being able
to say like, Oh, it's amazing having somebody who your universe revolves around them and theirs
around yours. And yeah, okay, it's vasopressant receptors, we need to be able to do that simultaneously,
because knowing like the architecture of a gazelle's pelvis should not take away your ability to just
be awestruck by like how they turned out that way, how circumstances produced an animal that
could that gracefully go flying that far in the air. So be intellectually taken with biomechanics
and be grateful for the like awe and aesthetics are getting to watch it. And I think that's
the only thing we can do with our being machines who understand our machinists. So, okay,
good for you. You got the right kind of vasopressant receptors.
Like, may it bring you lots of pleasure. And it's a good thing if it does somehow,
we have to reconcile that. Yeah, well, it's definitely brought me a lot of pleasure. That is
for sure. The body is one thing that I'm always thinking about from an optimization standpoint,
I'm always encouraging people that remember, you're having a biological experience, if you're
not getting sleep, if you're not getting sunlight, if your diet sucks, if you're not exercising,
like all of these things are going to make it hard for you just to process the world.
There's a couple of things I'd like to touch on just to really drive this home for people. One is
what I've heard you talk about before, which is the idea that the timing of your parole hearing to
win the last time the judge ate was, and then Phineas Gage. And Phineas Gage is the one I always
reach to when people are like, Oh, what do you mean? Of course we have free will. I'm like, bro,
walk us through those. Phineas Gage, every neuroscientist on earth at some point was
sat down in their grandpa's knee and told the tale of Phineas Gage. And neuroscientists
almost are required to consider naming their kid after Phineas Gage. Phineas Gage was a railroad
construction line foreman in Vermont in the 1840s. Obviously, like a sobriotist reliable guy, if he
was the foreman of this church going devout guy showed up for work every day, all of that.
One day, somebody like left a stick of dynamite where they shouldn't, and Gage was carrying
this carrying this three foot tamping iron rod that you do something with that to make railroad
lines go through mountains and stuff. And this caused an explosion. And it shot this metal pole
into his eye and out the front part of his skull. And it landed 30 feet away with a large part of
his frontal cortex stuck to it. And, you know, he had just had an interesting biological intervention.
And the remark is this went through so fast and with such force that it cauterized all the blood
vessels. He wasn't even bleeding. He was like a little bit dazed and got up. And like somebody
went and like got the boss who looked in his head and said, Oh, my God, Gage, I see what's wrong.
You've got a hole in your head. I can see all the way out at the top of your head. And they said,
you know, tell me what gauge take the rest of the day off. See you tomorrow. And some of his
friends walked a mile and a half with him to go to the town doctor who looked in there and said,
Oh, something shot through your eye and at the top of your skull. And weird. And this doctor
proceeded to be able to document what happened to gauge, which was gauge was almost literally
overnight, transformed into this disinhibited, hyper aggressive, alcoholic, sexually predatory
monstrous guy who was never able to work for years and years afterwards. And what we had just
learned was summarized by the doctor who in his notes said gauge is no longer gauge. Something
about that part of the brain constrains the animal energies within us. And that's a pretty good
19th century definition of what the frontal cortex does in terms of regulating behavior and
emotion, all of that. And that was the first demonstration that you could change like the
fundamental character and moral values and everything else of somebody just by mucking
around with your brain, mucking around with an iron rod that goes through there. So this was an
unsubtle one. And thus it's easy for us to appreciate that as the causative agent that had
nothing to do with free will. But this is an extraordinary example. And all we've learned
since then, our subtler version of it, one that should give one pause, which is depending on the
study, 25 to 75% of the men on death row in this country have the history of a concussive head trauma
to the front of their heads where their frontal cortex is. And when you put that in context,
you're not looking at bad souls, or you're not looking at people who just are not capable of
feeling somebody else's pain, right? You're looking at a broken machine. You're looking at a machine
whose breaks in this particular domain were shattered by concussive trauma. So Phineas Gage
was the first of our lessons in that. And all we've done since then is learn far more subtle
stuff is underneath the surface than just metal rods or concussive head injuries.
This is where all of us are turning into who we are. The judges, the hungry judges, I love this
study. And it has been subject to some controversy. This was published in a very prestigious
journal a number of years ago, looking at parole board judges in a particular country
where the researchers were, and they examined all of the decisions these judges made over the
course of a year as to whether to parole somebody or send them back to prison. And this was well
more than a thousand cases, something like that. And then looking for like what predicted one
a judge would free someone versus send them back for another five years and out pop this
flabbergasting finding, which was a single biggest predictor was how many hours it had been
since the judge had eaten a meal. Oh my God, see a judge right after lunch. And there was about a
60% chance of being paroled by four hours later, you were down to basically a 1% chance. Oh my
this is this is like earth shattering all of that. What is this about? This is about something very
simple. Like when you haven't eaten, your blood sugar levels go down. When they're low, you don't
have enough glucose to run your brain, which is the most expensive organ like pound for pound in
your body. And you especially don't have the means to run the most expensive part of your brain,
the frontal cortex, the frontal cortex that would make you say, wait, before you just send the guy
back, think a little bit about his circumstances, think about whether you know, someone like that
makes you a little bit edgy because of how tough they look, try to try to look past that think
about how the world has been from their perspective. That takes energy in the same way that we become
more selfish and less cooperative when we're hungry or tired or sleep deprived and all of that.
Yeah, it's low blood glucose and your expensive part of the brain can't do the harder thing.
So that's amazing. But what's even more interesting is like if you took a judge at that point and said,
hey, look at this, you had a guy with the exact same history the other day there and you paroled
that guy and this guy you sent back to jail. How come they're not going to say because I had low
blood glucose, there's a quote, a manual comment or something and and come up with a post hoc
explanation. What's that telling us, you know, our most consequential decisions that tap into the
core of us as morally reasoning beings, we're biological machines, all of that. That said,
this study has been mired in controversy, one group sort of wrote in and challenged the conclusions
based on statistics. And for my money, the original group reanalyzed their data in accord
with these people's complaints and showed that it did nothing to their conclusion. Another group
has challenged them on an artifact of how the study was done. And that was then controlled for
and shown to be intact. Another complaint was brought up, which when you look at it closely,
makes the point of the original study even stronger. I think it has held up. And it has
held up in other realms as well. Go in and you're going to go into a bank and ask a bank officer
for a home loan, mortgage loan or whatever. Make sure you go in right after they've had lunch.
The same exact phenomenon. The more hours it has been, the more likely they are to turn down a
loan application studies where you give people job applications to read and some of them by name
or from an out group member and some are from one of us. And the more hours it's been, the shorter
time you spend reading the out group members application before you toss it in the trash.
The more hours a doctor has gone without sleeping, the more implicit racial bias they show when they
make judgments about dosages for painkillers, all of that. Yeah, there's all this biology going on.
And then the coolest thing is superimposed on that is this great cultural wrinkle that I saw
on a paper that came out more recently, which is looking at one circumstance where the more
hours it has been since the judges eat in the meal, the more forgiving they are and the more
benevolent and the more empathic. What is this about? These are Muslim judges in Sharia courts
during Ramadan, when they're fasting during daylight hours and you're hungry then,
not because, God damn it, I had to go to this meeting during lunchtime and I didn't get to eat
and I'm starving now, because you're reflecting on the meaning of life and your responsibility to
your fellow humans and what God wants of you. If that's the culture you're growing up in,
being hungry because it's Ramadan makes you more merciful. Get the same judge four weeks later
in this starving because they missed lunch and they're going to throw the book at the person
just like the American judge would do. So all of that mechanistically and then there's a cultural
wrinkle that's thrown on top of that. So if you were raised in that sort of culture,
two different types of hunger bring out very different things in your moral decision-making
process. Wow, not only are we machines, we're really interesting ones.
Yeah, that is crazy to me that context can have that kind of impact on it, which also makes me
think about dopamine, testosterone, things that people think they have like a really strong beat
on, oh, it does this, but in reality they are way more context dependent. Walk me through that.
How is it possible that testosterone can mean one thing in one context and another in another?
Because you're secreting it in response to contextual information.
Incredible, like mistake people have in their heads is that testosterone causes aggression.
Testosterone does not cause aggression. Testosterone makes aggressive individuals
more sensitive to social cues that trigger aggression. And there's all sorts of studies
that have been done that show that testosterone does not turn on the radio if the radio is already
turned on. It ups the volume on it. It ups the sensitivity of the system to whatever you have
been socially trained to learn, to view as a provocation of aggression. So that, but then you
see there's something even more subtle there are going on. It's not that testosterone causes
aggression. Yeah, yeah, we just got rid of it. And it's not even that testosterone makes you
more aggressive if you're already getting the social cues that trigger aggression.
What testosterone really does is make you more likely to do whatever behaviors give you status
when your status is being challenged. Okay, you're a baboon and your status is being challenged
because some guy is like hassling you and challenging you. If you're a baboon, status
being challenged is answered by you get into a fight with a guy. Baboons are a lot simpler than us.
But then in our world, all you have to do is go to like some fancy ass private school that's
having their annual auction and fundraiser or whatever. And you see a whole bunch of like
self satisfied captain of industry rich guys there who are on the board at the place and
they're sitting there half drunk because they make sure the banquet has lots of alcohol flowing.
And then you get to watch these like masters of the universe compete with each other as to who
could bid the highest in this charitable auction. Oh my God. These are apes who are sitting there
trying to maintain their social status by seeing who can give away more of their money. Whoa.
We're a weird species. Go explain that one to a baboon. And you can show this experimentally.
There are economic games where people accrue status by being more generous,
give people testosterone and they make more generous offers. The issue isn't that say testosterone
makes aggression more likely and that that's the problem. The problem is that we hand out status
for aggression so readily. That is very interesting to me. And what do you make of the fact that,
well, what I take away from that is that men are selected for their response to testosterone,
which is why they have so much more of it than women, which means that men, for some reason,
evolution wanted to make sure that we would defend our status. What do you think that's all about?
Well, that immediately fits into things like that gets you more copies of your genes passed on and
that sort of business going back to the fundamentals there. What it tells by the
time you get to us is there's a lot of different ways to optimize that. We're a complicated species
and sometimes you do that by like being a CEO maverick and before you know it, that's one
version of incredible status. And some of the time you do it by like being a warlord somewhere and
context dependent. We are a very heterogeneous species in terms of cultures and cultural values
and what we mostly have are brains that evolved, not to be set in stone, but instead to be malleable
enough to learn what your particular culture's rules are. Do you think that it indicates that
women are selecting males based on status? Yes, and most studies indicate that. One classic body
of work by a guy named David Busse, University of Texas at Austin, doing this massive cross-cultural
study of people all over the planet and like here's 25 adjectives and rate them for how far they
are up in your list of what you would look for in a partner, in a spouse, whatever.
And what you saw was consistently men in every culture out there averaged preferring a partner
who was a number of years younger than them. Consistently, women chose for partners who were
older than them. Consistently, women put money earning capacity in the guy higher up on the list
than the guy would do. Consistently, men put potential fertility higher up on the list than
women would do. And this was cross-cultural, this was all over the world. Oh my god, some of the
stuff is so solid there. And then you find out what the most interesting thing is about this study
which is regardless of culture, the most common number one thing on the list was kindness. Oh my
god, all this cultural stuff and inculcation into roles and gender roles and maybe it's not inculcation
because biology is making that and we're so different women and men and Mars and Venus and
and yeah, at the end of the day, like everyone put kindness at the top of their list. So like
we make perfect sense is just another primate when you look at us through one angle and then
we're completely bizarre and unprecedented in another that like you can have people who are
hunter-gatherers or living in like the middle of Chicago and somebody who's a socialist or someone
who's a capitalist or something and they all come out with roughly the same list of preferences
there yet a list that has some stereotypical gender differences. Oh, we're a really weird
primate, we're a primate, but we're a very unique one. The things that people rate from a sexual
attractiveness perspective has become very much a hot button issue. I'm very curious to hear what
you think about this. Whenever I think about my wife as being like me, my prediction engine breaks
and I can no longer predict her behavior, when I think of women and look, of course, there's
more overlap than there is difference 100%, but there's a great, I'm going to paraphrase it,
I don't remember who said this, but there's a quote that goes, any individual man is a mystery,
but put them in the aggregate and they are a mathematical certainty and I will say that
the same is true of women. That makes a lot of sense to me that if you're looking at any one
person, of course, you have to get to know them, you have to figure out what is particular about
them. But as you begin to step back to the population level, suddenly you get a lot of things, a lot of
traits that become reliable at a population level. And so when I think of my wife as being
very different than me of having more classically feminine ways of approaching the world. So she
doesn't have my level of aggression. She is far more interested in people than things. She's far
more interested in subtleties of communication. She values me for very different things than I
value her. I mean, obviously there's a lot of overlap, but just that they're become these
outliers. Do you see that as, yes, at the population level, there are big differences
between men and women? Or no, no, no, that's all much to do about nothing and better to think of
them as you would think of yourself. Well, it depends on what domain you're making the assessment.
Higher ability, appropriateness to cast a vote in a ballot sort of thing. Yeah, took this country
only a bunch of centuries to figure out that that's not a domain in which sex differences are pertinent.
So there shouldn't matter. And it doesn't matter and equal pay and, you know, all that sort of
stuff, hooray for a progressive agenda. When it looks at systematized thought versus relational
thought and sex differences in that, that's a fairly reliable one. Those are interesting. And
like people even know what different gonadal hormones do to the cortex during fetal life and
stuff like that. So that's really interesting. But what you come down to is exactly your point,
which is there's no human out there who is an average human. Your average human is an average
human, but there is no individual who fits averageness across the board because it's a
statistical artifact. If you throw enough data points together and patterns emerge and patterns
emerge with certain distributions of frequencies, unless you can identify somebody who's average in
the middle, but look closely, and they're not going to be by some trader or whatever. That's why,
I don't know, sociologists probably can tell us a whole lot more about, you know,
what is changing the economy will do to rates of violence than psychotherapists can do.
Because one of them specializes in aggregate predictability from populations and the other
one does one case at a time. And depending on what you want to know, one could be a more valid
approach than the other. But yeah, individuals on the average are individualistic and, you know,
hooray for that. And we're far more variable than your average, you know, porcupine is because
we evolved in a way where a lot more elbow room and the workings of the system.
So I want to go back to neurochemistry. So dopamine has become something that people
are really focused on these days in terms of the way that our lives are structured such that,
you know, whether it's being on social media, just the way that a phone is able to trigger
all these rewards that phones seem designed very much like a slot machine with colors and sounds
and alerts and alarms. What do you advise for people that, you know, in terms of if our goal
in this interview is to get out a bunch of ideas that non free will having beings will hopefully
take on and move in a direction that's more useful. What do you tell people about dopamine,
about dopamine detoxing? How should people approach a life if they want to
not become the puppet of their phone? I think one thing to recognize is another one of those
misnormers testosterone is not about aggression. Dopamine is not about reward and pleasure.
Initially it is, but when you look more closely, what it's more about is it's about
anticipation of pleasure. It's about how great it is going to be when the reward actually happens.
The neurochemistry of that is much more built around endogenous opioid like neurotransmitters
things that dopamine is about anticipation. And even more importantly, dopamine is about the
motivation you derive from that anticipation. How many times are you willing to press that
lever with your paw in order to get that reward there? What dopamine is about is it's the fuel
for goal goal directed behavior. And that's a very different picture than dopamine is about reward
and such. Because it tells you the fueling of behavior with dopamine is mostly about the fueling
of the ability to hold your breath and wait because it's going to be that much more amazing
when it comes. The ability to decide the future may carry a larger reward than the present.
And it's worth waiting for. And mice can do that. Monkeys can do that. And they could do
that for a few minutes at a time. And we could do it deciding that if you have a certain mindset,
doing a certain sort of delayed gratification will get you into heaven when you're dead.
Whoa, you could maintain dopamine as like a motivator of anticipation of reward and thus
living a pure sacred life or whatever because you're going to wind up in paradise afterward.
Or because you're maintaining dopamine while you press the lever over and over because you've
got this bizarre thing, you want to leave a better planet for your great grandchildren.
Like we take the basic dopamine system that like motivates you to press a lever in order to get a
nice food palette if you're like a monkey sitting there or a lab rat. And then we do it for like
taking on a five generation long project of building some like gothic cathedral where like
you were going to train your children to be the stone mason who will take over when you die.
And like, whoa, we can maintain dopamine up there for incredibly long periods of time.
So that's the first thing people should know about dopamine and suck in us when trying to make sense
of like where the species that can hold our breath for a long, long, long time.
And that's very unique. The other thing about it is like you look at a baboon
and you look at what are its sources of pleasure in life? What are some of the things that could
anticipate? And it's basically like food that you want or sex that you're motivated about,
or if you're in a bad mood, somebody smaller and weaker who you can beat up on to displace
your frustration. And that's about it for baboons like inventory of things to feel anticipatory
about. But then you get us and we've got people who could be anticipatory that, you know, with
another 14 years of digging an old divine gorge, you're going to pull up a hominid fossil like
nothing anyone's ever seen. And you are going to feel such pleasure and you've been scraping there
in the sun for 14 years out of anticipation that it's got to be there. And then you turn around
and then you also use dopamine because the doughnut you get afterward when you come at
the end of the day tastes delicious and you know it's going to taste delicious. And then you turn
around and you use dopamine because the smell of a flower is going to be amazing. And then you
turn it around because you hope that, whoa, once again, you can have like multiple orgasms and one
then when that's all done, you go to the symphony and like you can't believe Beethoven could do such
things with like a Piketty third quarter or something like that. And we're weird because we've
got to use the same dopamine system. It's the same neurotransmitter and it's the same circuitry.
And we use it for everything from like the smell of a flower to winning at a lottery to taking cocaine
to like understanding a passage of like some philosopher who's impenetrable and suddenly it
makes sense and ooh, we just released dopamine just like a baboon does when it is just killed
a gazelle and is getting to eat it. What a bizarre species we are. And the only way we can do that
in that some of the time on our dopamine dial going from zero to 10 means a great smelling flower
and some of the time going from zero to 10 is you've just won the lottery. The only way we can do
that is it's a system that has to reset the gain on the system really fast because right now you're
doing good flower smells and you've got to have a way to tell the system we've just switched over
to winning the lottery dopamine and going from zero to 10 on that is totally different than
going zero to 10 on the flowers. And people are beginning to actually figure out unique things
about circuitry in the human brain of the dopamine system that allows you to reset the gain on the
system more. There's more little feedback loops in the wiring. This is totally cool stuff and has
to work that way. And once you've got a system that can reset so you can go from doing flowers to
the lottery and then back again to like solving a math equation you got a downside to that which
I think people need to be aware of and one that explains like incredible presenters of human misery
if you've got a system that resets that easily by definition whatever was an amazing wonderful
surprise yesterday is going to feel like something you're entitled to today and is going to feel
insufficient tomorrow. And that's this price of perpetual hunger that we pay for a system
that constantly has to habituate to whatever the latest pleasure was because you got to
reset the whole thing for starting the repetitive motivation process all over again
and guarantees whatever's nice now is going to leave you hungry tomorrow and like that's how we
go do things like invent you know vaccines and fly to the moon and write whatever grand
achievements that yeah we can have extraordinary sources of motivation to carry us through with
that but another way of stating that is what is okay today is going to be insufficient tomorrow
and yeah but what have I done lately my next novel has to be even better than this one or my next
public offering has to be even more successful than this one where the species that always gets
hungry again is another way of saying that we're a species that always habituates to the present
which is another way of saying that we're the species that has to use the same dopamine system
for incredibly different things on like the turn of a dime spinning on a dime or whatever and
that's the price we pay we're always going to invent new stuff unlike chimps chimps make tools
and all of that and you find 20 000 year old paleontological sites of chimps tool making and
they were making the same tools 20 000 years ago that they're making now they don't have incremental
advances in their material culture we're the species that keeps inventing new stuff and we're
the species that also what was great yesterday is going to be kind of boring tomorrow and more
more more so how do we avoid uh dying on the treadmill of dopamine well i think awareness of it
is a good thing those of us who sever break on a regular basis we have somewhere in their
values in our heads that what is implicit in us could be made more visible and examinable by
explicit self-reflection and we're even like able to understand literatures that showing
things like implicit biases when made explicit by self-reflection weakens those implicit biases
yeah think about this stuff wonder why it is like what was amazing yesterday isn't feeling
quite enough today and why it's boring now and you should be able to get something better and
more exciting and something shinier and newer and all that like whether it's a neurochemist
version of understanding it or i don't know like what was that theologian merton who wrote about
this a lot that level of understanding this in either version that sort of insight
should make you a little bit skeptical about the omnipresence of your hungers and
that's a realm in which whether it's poetry or reading neurochemistry journals if either of
those accomplished that that's a good thing that's a good way to make mechanism work to your advantage
and recognize how much we are running on hunger that like takes us a wrong pathways and even
if it takes us up the right one isn't gonna last for very long one thing that i found very useful
in life is exactly what we're talking about now which is the idea of just pulling something into
the light acknowledging what it is understanding its impact and then being able to make changes
based on now that i know that was a big breakthrough for me in my life with brain plasticity which you
mentioned at the very top of the interview once i could understand what was happening i
knew how to take advantage of it so we you know we've talked a lot about obviously that free will
doesn't exist we've talked about the ways that our brain works and how we're trapped by biology
now again going back to the word diagram entitlements going to be this gigantic word
i understand what you're afraid of when it comes to free will but now i want to talk about at a
societal level the the changes that you want to see be made so i think that look your book
basically breaks into two parts number one is free will doesn't exist and you give
extraordinarily detailed and compelling reasons why that is true um i'll sum up for me phineas
gauge was all i needed to hear like oh wait i can completely change somebody's life just by
damaging their brain like that to me just makes it so self-evident there could be no soul there could
be um nothing beyond my ability to uh process and so whether i'm disrupting that by something i'm
eating that's disrupting my gut which is disrupting the serotonin that's being made which therefore
my brain has less to deal with like it just seems so self-evident to me that we are our biology and
i will never understand uh i have awe and this is something you were very clear about recognizing
this stuff leaves me in awe i i stand in wonder and the same kind of reverence that people that
are religious have i have that and i want that for people and and i love that but it just seems
impossible for me to make the leap that we have a soul when i'm like well what if my brain got
damaged like do i then reconstitute when i'm in heaven like i don't understand it doesn't make
any sense to me uh also i have a terrible memory am i going to have a terrible memory in heaven like
all it's just this is also weird to me so setting that aside though so now we look at the criminal
justice system and this becomes the second half of the book which is like okay if i can get you
all to believe that is as uncomfortable as it is to embrace the free will doesn't exist that you don't
get to own your um accomplishments in the way that you would probably want to uh
but the criminal justice system and the changes that you want i think will be the other controversial
part so what's the what's the pitch in reality so if we're gonna quarantine people
what do you mean by that and how do we actually pull it off okay so when deciding you could
subtract responsibility let alone like a culpable soul out of making sense of humans
damaging actions against other humans um what you're left with there is how do we protect
society from people who are dangerous and what sort of the public health model quarantine model
of infectious disease is built around is number one figure out how to constrain the person so
that they're no longer an infectious danger to people around them number two don't do a smidgen
more than that because the person doesn't deserve that number three make sure you're framing that
in a context where this person had absolutely nothing to do with the fact that there's some
like virus blooming out of their lungs now into the air around them and number four
put effort into understanding where disease like that comes from original causes and stuff
and when that's turned into the same thing for dealing with like damaging humans in the way
that we would call now criminality figure out how to constrain them so that they're not dangerous
anymore obviously like not believing in free will doesn't mean we'll just let murderers running
around all over the place constrain them don't do it an inch more than you need to don't preach to
them in the process about how there's some sort of soul that's relevant to all of that and make
sure like any good public health person you are interested in root causes and try to figure out
what it is that creates people who are damaging in that way and try to fix things at that level
and this sounds completely like you know absurdly idealistic or something but we do that all the
time and just to give two different domains we do that all the time you get a car whose brakes
aren't working and it's dangerous it'll kill people you don't know how to fix it it's dangerous
constrain it don't use it put it in a garage don't do a smidgen more than that don't go in
every day with the sledgehammer and smash the hood of the car because it deserves retribution
for the fact that its brakes failed and it hit someone don't preach to it and at that point try
to figure out why brakes fail okay so that's that's machines as machines but what about us as
machines how do we do that where we really can subtract out a sense of responsibility and blame
and culpability we do that all the time there's a circumstance where there's a certain type of human
who's dangerous to the people around them they will harm them they will damage them and this is a
danger and we have to take societal steps to prevent this from happening and what do you do
if that's your kid and they have a nose cold you keep them home from kindergarten tomorrow
because the rule is if your child is sneezing a lot please keep them home so they don't get
everybody else sick constrain them quarantine them so that they're now not a danger to the other
classmates but don't tell them they can't play with their toys today when they're home because
they're bad having caught a rhino virus and don't like confuse health with purity of soul
like previous centuries and tell them they've gotten a rotten soul and that's why they're
sneezing and make sure people are figuring out why people get nose cold and if there's a way to
prevent it wow we have subtracted a blemish on your pristine moral soul out of five-year-old
sneezing and we're able to protect other kids from getting the nose cold and we don't tell this kid
that they're a rotten human because they're sneezing and it's a more humane place and it's a healthier
place great that's our blueprint we've got two things that we've been talking about this entire
episode one is biology everything is downstream of that but it's also downstream of ideas and so
the one thing that I worry about with this approach is that if we assume people don't have free will
but they are going to respond to the ideas that they're able to ingest by one let's take the kid
example that has a nose cold so that works quarantining them works because the immune
system's kicking in is going to fix that the car breaks thing that's probably closer because
there's something wrong and let's say we're not a mechanic so we don't know how to fix it we know
it's dangerous we can recognize that we can put the car in a garage that's incarceration of some
kind whether it's a mental hospital or otherwise and while I hope that tomorrow we have the breakthrough
and this becomes the thing that you can cure and then it's you you quarantine them long enough to
cure them and then you let them go but we don't yet have that solution so it still ends up being
incarceration now I hear you and one of the things you want is just to make sure that we're not
smashing the car hood because it deserves to be smashed for having bad breaks I I definitely
understand that but I that still feels like incarceration and then as we get into what
that's going to look like in real life it feels like that's just going to play out the same way
that we are now because they're going to be housed with other people it is going to be the violent
and the deranged and it's all going to end badly the second part of this is uh do you know um Sam
Bankman Freed do I know okay no but I don't know I just mean the the story of what happened so
yeah which is fast okay so for he's very fascinating for people that don't know quick primer
ends up defrauding people out of eight billion dollars he's awaiting sentencing right now but
he's been convicted now the weird twist here is that his mother wrote an essay called Beyond Blame
saying like hey like we have to I mean very similar to what you're saying now this I don't
know that she said broken car but like you you have to separate the the person from the thing
that they did and so one I'm not saying that Sam uh is abusing the system though that is another
thing you have to worry about is whatever system you put in place people are going to exploit it
100% and so follow the show me the incentives and I'll show you the outcome says um Berkshire
Hathaway I'm forgetting is Charlie Munger so if you incentivize people to say oh it wasn't me
which it wasn't but like people will begin ideas will plant themselves in people's minds that are
you know have that criminal nature to begin with and and they're going to leverage that
in the system it's like what we see right now with you make it uh you don't prosecute people
that steal less than 900 dollars or whatever and they'll go in and steal 899 we're watching that
play out so um I worry about that do you think it is just pure coincidence that um Sam Bankron
Freed's mother happened to write an article about that and he happens to be or the second biggest
fraud of all time and no doubt competitive with Bernie Madoff because he isn't quite in his league
um Sam's mother who I am forced to note is a colleague of mine she's professor at Stanford
Law School and has built a career about sort of issues of free will and stuff and I I can't get
past the point that it's just the most wonderfully ironic thing on earth and I can't like stop just
seeing that is like a meme for like the unlikely turns that happen in the world oh my god of
course his mother that's what kind of legal scholar she is and then when you look closely
that both she and her husband benefited financially quite a bit from Sam shenanigans
yeah yeah okay we've got an irresistible version of the oh my god if you convince people there's no
free will we're all just going to run amok people are going to run amok because there's no responsibility
and there have been some unfortunately highly compelling convincing studies done supposedly
showing that when you psych psychologically manipulate people to believe less in their agency
they cheat more games immediately after we think yeah we're all going to run amok because because
the devil is just underneath the surface and thank god it's only the veneer of reward and
punishment and societal disdain that keeps you acting civilly and we're all just you know
Hobbesian savages underneath but then you look closer at that literature and instead of looking
at somebody who you've just manipulated into feeling a little bit less belief in their agency
get somebody who comes in and says I don't believe in free will I haven't believed in it forever I
don't believe in it and you put them in a circumstance like that and they are exactly as highly ethical
as is someone who believes we need to be held responsible for our every action and all of that
what's that about there's an amazing parallel the other version of people will just run amok
they'll run amok if they stop believing in god because forget you're not responsible for your
actions this is the version of no one will hold you responsible for your ultimate actions
and oh my god they're going to run amok and that whole thing and what you see when you look at it
is atheists people who are stridently solid in their atheism are just as moral in their behavior
as are the most religiously observant people out there and who are the ones who fall off but that
you know olympian state there it's the people in between for whom they don't believe in god but
it's mostly because they're apathetic about it or they're religious but it's just for the kids or
just in the holidays or whatever and what you see is this ironic thing you get somebody who is thought
long and hard about the basis of human goodness and what we owe to our fellow human and where
meaning comes from and all and it basically doesn't matter if your conclusion is yes we have free will
and we have the agents of our action or you conclude yes there is a god or if you conclude
there's no free will or there's no god the fact that you've done the hard work to think through this
is what virtually guarantees that neither end to the spectrum runs amok and you know as one
quasi anecdotal example of this after world war two there are all sorts of sociological studies
of who are the people who risk their lives to save various outgroup members from nazis and stuff
and it wasn't the people with rarefied philosophy degrees and it wasn't the people who were highly
religious in a particular way it was people who were either highly religious or highly secular
and were brought up that way by their parents and had built a system of moral imperatives
built around that because you thought long and hard about it and it doesn't really matter which
end of it you wind up with and you know in the face of but you know still you're a dangerous
person you're going to put them in a prison with other violent people and that's just a breeding
ground and like that doesn't look good i'm virtually required by law to say at this point
the scandinavians the scant they have a penal system that avoids most of that
and they have a system where responsibility is viewed as far less part of the picture than
the american system and they have a system where prisoners are treated far far better
and where the principal is one of quarantine and minimal constraint nothing more than that
and oh my god people are going to run amok and they've got one tenth the violent crime rate
that we do and they have one fifth the recidivism rate that we do talk to me more about that i'm
not aware of that so what do they do in the prison system uh are they educating people are they um
really cracking down on violent outbursts how do they pull that off yeah they do all that
and they view that as a system okay the the greatest example is andres brevic he was that
white supremacist guy who 10 years ago whatever went and killed 75 people in norway
went to this island where there was a whole bunch of a progressive party's summer camp for teenagers
thing going on and he killed a cop and took his uniform and showed up there pretending and mowed
down 70 kids there after he had killed us after setting off a bomb just outside the
office of the prime minister who is a progressive liberal and in fact had grown up in that summer
camp program and all of that and this was the worst atrocity in the history of like norway
and he made it worse by throughout his trial giving pseudo nazi salutes throughout insisting
he wanted to be considered a prisoner of war of like the white knights of templar army trying to
save europe from the the ethnic horde that and like and what did they do they convicted him
and they gave him the longest jail sentence possible that is allowed by law in norway
he's in jail for about 20 years and he has an apartment he has internet access he's currently
enrolled as a part-time student at the university of oslo irony of iron he's majoring in political
science and he's got like a fitness machine and when he's getting a little bit lonely like the
state will pay retired cops to come and play cards with him because he's feeling a little
bit isolated there because he has renounced his beliefs and he's still dangerous so his
constraint has to involve he doesn't get to interact much with other people and like that's
what done that's what's done with him and that's the sort of society they have and amid that
they've got a far far lower crime rate than they do for a gazillion other reasons than in the united
states because they believe government should support the social needs of people and you know
off we go in the scandinavian utopias that may not hold up to close examination all that great so
it's not just that but the surest measure of it is you ask member of societies after that trial
was completed was justice done and an overwhelming majority of people in norway thought this was
the appropriate thing to do with him and you ask the family members of his victims and there were
few of them who wanted to torture him for the rest of time but the most average response of family
members of the victims was yeah he's away the government has done what it's supposed to do
he's away and even better than he could never harm someone again we never have to think about him again
that pathetic broken guy who latched on to vicious you know rabid ideology at some point because he
had been a nobody mediocrity his whole life and this made him feel important for a little while
and he fell into the hands of sociopaths who manipulated them him with their ideology yeah
poor schmuck that's how we turned out to be like that but best of all we don't have to think about
him anymore he's never gonna hurt anyone anymore and that's the kind of society they've constructed
there oh my god people are going to run amok no they've got a fraction of the crime rate that we
do in the united states and a fraction of the recidivism rate the purpose of their quarantine
system is to train somebody to have useful skills when they come out the other end to
have a society that has a network that will give them the opportunity to live by that
and along the way try to teach them skills about empathy and like trying to understand
what damage consists of and what it is you did to other people and whoa it works it works better
than here and it works better than here in a place where not only do we believe in god and free will
and something that we inculcate your average american kid in from like kindergarten but where
we prove over and over that it has done any good because we're a society filled with violence
and treating people terribly and stuff like that so like whoa a lot that god fearing has
gotten us in this country here yeah you look at the the options the comparisons to choose from and
like there's better ways of doing it and ways that are capable of subtracting out the pleasure of
punishment and retribution and the notion that penalizing somebody is a virtue in and of itself
and you can subtract all that stuff out and it's a more humane place and it works better
such an interesting debate this whole thing free will all of it
that's crazy robert thank you so much for joining me today where can people follow you
oh well i have to say at this point you know i got this book and it just got published last
month and it's called determined a science of life without free will penguin random house
where people can follow me i don't know but my young adult children have recently gotten
enthused about this and i'm doing something now i don't know if i'm tick talking or
twittering or ask me anything on am a on they they've set that up because they insist that i'm
so as of a week ago i have a social media presence and that is all i know about it
um so somewhere i'm out there and good luck finding it i sure don't know how to but
welcome to the 21st century even if i'm not really part of it yet that's all right free will uh it
lacking free will has has led you to that so nobody nobody blames you will put it in the
show notes uh that way people can find you very easily you are well worth following that is for
sure speaking of things that are well worth following everybody if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my friends be legendary take care peace if you enjoyed this
episode check out this deep conversation with donald hoffman about reality and consciousness
what we are our avatars of the one the one awareness is exploring all of its possibilities
through different avatars
