Do you think that AI presents a mega threat to our economy?
It's very exciting technology.
But when I really think about how this is going to play out,
ah, I'm not so sure that it doesn't get brutal.
Okay, you've just gone straight in for the big question.
I mean, this is not the quickest question to answer.
I've thought about this for a long time and I've read,
you know, I started things like Homo Deus.
There was a few other books to come out.
There was some guys from Cambridge University.
Can't remember his name.
That's a really famous book.
He's been on Real Vision as well to talk about.
Nick Bostrom.
Nick.
Yeah.
So Nick Bostrom is,
so it started with Nick Bostrom.
It started with then Homo Deus that came after Sapiens by Noah Harari.
Then I started reading also Mo Gordat who wrote Scary Smart.
He used to run Google X.
Talked about this.
So I've been thinking about,
and I'm just reading another book now about it,
the philosophical questions, what it is,
where the technology is.
And I know some people in this space like M.F. Mossack
who built stability AI.
So there is no way.
No, let's start.
Let's start this approach just from a different angle.
It is augmentation of humans and it's amazing.
And we're lucky because the human population of most of the western developed world is
diminishing over time.
It's aging and we're not replacing ourselves.
So we replace ourselves with AI and machines.
So we're seeing it Amazon warehouses.
A third of the Amazon workforce is robots,
but they're three or four times more productive than humans.
So therefore we will see endless build-outs of robots instead of humans.
And AI is disrupting jobs.
We didn't quite imagine it would be disrupted first.
We thought it would be accountants or whatever.
And what it ends up being is artists, creators.
I mean, I just saw a website today for model agency.
You can get an AI model?
Yep, and you can't tell.
And so you can define exactly what race, color, age,
any requisite you want and it makes it perfectly.
So I'm like, okay, I didn't expect the modeling industry to get disrupted
because how many people actually go to catwalks?
It's not.
It's for video or photography.
So it's going to change a lot of jobs.
It's also going to offer a lot of opportunities.
All of us will be thinking about AI strategy like in the late 90s,
we all think about internet strategy when we're building businesses.
Fine.
Okay, we can deal with that.
The issue is Moore's law and the exponentiality of all of this.
So these language models, these large language models,
LLMs, which chapter GPT came out with are increasing exponentially in their power
of an order of magnitude that we can't get our heads around because we think in linear
terms because we're dumb humans.
So these things are doubling, tripling every year or less.
And this was the fastest, you've heard me use this phrase before,
the fastest adoption of technology in all history was crypto.
Blockchain technology.
Chat GPT went from zero to 100 million users in a month.
Okay.
So now we've got AI that is like a virus.
It is so unstoppable.
And we've got two or three different people building it at scale, Google, Amazon,
Microsoft with open AI, and then stability AI is an open source network AI,
which is almost unstoppable because it's doubly viral because you've got,
so this is going on.
The computational power is exploding.
The cost of computers going down.
And what it means is that AI becomes more and more powerful.
So if you listen to Mogordat and he knows because he ran Google X,
where a lot of this has been incubated, they discovered deep mind.
There were the people really to build out the large language models.
He says, well, right now, specific AI is better at humans in almost everything it does.
So specific AI has a better result set than any radiologist on earth.
And just for people that don't know, specific AI or narrow AI is it's one task.
Go get good at reading an x-ray.
Go get good at playing chess, playing go, whatever.
Correct.
So okay, fine.
They think that Mogordat thinks that by the end of this decade,
AGI, so that's a generalist AI.
So like humans or chat GPT is a general navigated grocery store.
You can play chess.
You can play in the markets.
Guess what?
The weather is going to be like anything.
Anything.
I could ask you a question.
You can ask me a question.
So he thinks that with the computational power and the progression of where this is going,
that it's almost certain that by the end of this decade,
we get to the point where AI is smarter than humans.
Now, we don't really worry about that because
we already think it's smarter than us at doing certain things and sooner it'll be
smarter than us at driving cars and it already smarter us flying planes.
We just kind of take it for granted.
We don't see it.
But then if you get to the Ray Kurzweil singularity point,
so and Mogordat says, okay, here's the really big problem.
And this is exactly what Noah Harari says as well,
is when you take it extrapolate a little bit further out into the future.
So Ray Kurzweil singularity moment is 2049.
But even before then, it becomes a thousand times smarter than the smartest person who ever lived.
Yeah, I want to linger on that for a second.
So I was I'm writing a video articles by the right way to think about this on AI.
And so I ran the math.
A moron is clinically defined as somebody with an IQ of 70.
Einstein had an IQ of 160 and the smartest person to ever be recorded is 210.
So that means that the difference between the smartest person that ever lived and a moron
is 3x. The difference between Einstein and a moron is 2.3x.
And when you think about Einstein gave us insights that created the nuclear bomb,
nuclear power, lasers, GPS, so much of the modern world that we take for granted from
one series of insights from a guy that isn't even the smartest guy that ever lived.
And so now when you start talking about being if 2.3x gets us the modern world,
what does a thousand times get us?
Like I have the chills.
I don't think people understand the orders of magnitude that we're talking about.
No, they they they.
Well, the order of magnitude was explained by mode called that.
It's the difference between an ant and Einstein.
That's crazy.
It really does become an entirely different species.
This is the problem.
And even before.
So I want to I want to keep our conversation in stages.
We'll get to killer robots and all that stuff down the road.
And by the way, I want everybody to understand.
I think by the end of this, I think you and I are both techno optimists.
I'm going to drag people a little bit through.
Interesting. Maybe you're not.
We're going to drag people a little bit through the scary.
I certainly will paint the picture of how I think we do this well.
But I want to make sure that we don't get to that in a naive way
and that we really talk about, especially as I think about the economy.
So here's the fascinating thing about the singularity.
Now, you and I in our last interview, we actually differed in how we define the singularity.
So I think it'll be worth taking a second.
So for me, the singularity as certainly as Ray Kurzweil defined it,
was it's borrowing this idea from cosmology,
which is that a black hole has an event horizon.
The event horizon is the moment at which everything, light, data, information,
however you want to think about it, is getting pulled inside.
And we, once you're past that event horizon, we have no idea what happens.
And what he was saying is technology is going to rev up on this exponential curve so fast that
the AI itself will innovate so rapidly that you'll no longer be able to predict the future.
And so the future becomes an event horizon.
My hypothesis is that that event horizon is coming to us very, very quickly.
And like you said, I thought he said 2045, you said 2049.
Equibbling, right?
It is within our lifetimes.
So you have this moment where using at least my understanding of the definition,
where the future is no longer predictable.
It's iterating so quickly.
Like even you and I just spoke very recently.
And even since you and I last spoke, things have changed so much.
We were talking about, oh, they got to a million users in whatever, four or five days on ChatGPT.
We're now, what, three months later, it's north of 100 million users.
People are integrating it so quickly into their own pipelines that Impact Theory,
we actively use AI now in multiple ways.
And people are making new tools that we will subsume as quickly as we can do so well.
But so that's my take on the singularity.
How do you define what is the singularity in your mind?
Yes, I agree with that definition.
And it's Ray Kelswell's definition.
I also think a bit that the point potentially where humans and the robots merge.
Interesting.
Do you think that'll happen that fast?
Yes, because augmentation.
You're already wearing an Apple Rocks and Aura Ring.
You're already, people already have page pacemakers, right?
We're merging with machines.
You're sitting there with little earphones in.
Oh my God.
Can I give you a crazy thought that's extending exactly what you're saying,
which is funny.
I've not thought about this in a while.
So there's a guy named David Eagleman, who he's a neuroscientist.
He created a vest and the vest like will vibrate on you in different patterns.
And he was talking about it from an Umvelle perspective.
He was saying every species has an Umvelle.
It's the things you can see that you can hear like a bat obviously uses echolocation.
We're not going to be able to do that.
Humans only see 0.0035% of the available electromagnetic spectrum.
What we call visible light is a tiny fucking fraction of what's actually available.
So that's, that's an Umvelle.
And he said, okay, I created this vest and it can create a pattern on you that you'll begin
to quote unquote see because your brain begins to interpret it as, as a visual or you could
use it for visual stimulus.
But he said you could also use it for things like where the stock market is.
And you could get a pattern that represents it's going up.
You could get a pattern that represents that it's going down.
You could have one pattern represents the NASDAQ going up.
Another pattern that represents the the New York Stock Exchange going up.
It's just insane.
That is what rail is.
You've transferred a written flat text into a now you feel it.
You don't read it.
You feel it.
Audio is hearing it.
You know, all of these things are happening all around us.
But anyway, so I think of the singularity also as that potential for mankind and machine
to merge.
And the reason being is a, we will adopt it because it's better than us.
The question is, is what comes out after that?
And so I think it still gets to that event horizon is you get to the point where you're
augmented and then it's who runs who.
And that's the point we don't know.
So how do you think about this in terms of the markets?
So getting into crypto and that was my first sense of like, whoa, this is changing so fast
that there's in disruption.
There are tremendous moments of opportunity, but there's also tremendous destruction.
And so it becomes this game of how do you take advantage of this?
So when you think about AI as it interfaces with economies, with the securities predictions,
which is a fancy way of saying investing in stock market.
How do you think about that?
Like, is it, there will be a brief window of first mover advantage.
But I think AI will so quickly proliferate that everyone's going to have access to it.
But what, where do you think, does that just, oh, yeah, this is like a straight line to you?
Or does it begin to break down?
There's just so many questions because none of us know this stuff and it's fascinating, right?
So at the economic level, this is scaling human ability, augmenting humans, now our brains,
at a, at a, at a rate that we could never have foreseen.
What does that mean for us?
Well, I just think it's like bringing in a massively new talented labor force at almost zero cost.
So I've said, I think it's a bigger deflationary shock than China entering the WTO.
China at the time, the average wage was like $1,000 a year competing with an American worker.
They were highly educated.
That was a big shock for the world to deal with.
And we got cheap goods and economic growth out of it.
So here we go.
We can do much more productive stuff.
So it probably changes productivity at a scale of which we can't comprehend.
So it's a, it's probably-
Does that end up being good or bad?
Like do I, as the average worker, do I take more money home?
Do I just get cheaper goods?
And therefore, to your point about deflation, my money actually gets me more.
Or am I traumatized because I am now sort of unanchored and meaningless?
Yes, in answer to all of your questions.
Because some jobs are going to get laid off.
I mean, who would have thought that supermodels now get laid off for AI, right?
We can't understand this stuff.
And we have to be honest with ourselves, say, it's going to do a lot of things.
It's going to tear society apart, the rise of deep fakes.
And who is who online?
How do you verify?
We're going into a US election.
We have no clue.
What's a real person?
What's not a real person?
Our team here at Real Business has been showing me
me reading scripts out of text.
It's not me.
It's AI.
And MAD at Stability AI, I mean, he's got some crazy stuff coming from sports.
Of athletes that have never played against each other or been.
And I can't disclose what it is, but it'll shock the world.
And so we don't know what's real and what's fake.
And it's at scale that we can't comprehend.
If we think that the elections in 2016 were complicated with Facebook and all of this stuff,
this is going to get terrifying.
So we've got that stuff.
The other thing is, like my 70 whatever year old mother-in-law,
she's writing a book about the geological history of time.
Well, creating a logarithmic history of time from the birth of the planet to where we are today.
And so each chapter is like the first one is like a billion years.
The next chapter is like a hundred million years, whatever.
And she's an artist.
So she she paints around these topics as well.
But typically for an artist, she'd be researching what she's writing.
She'd go down 17 Google rabbit holes and end up looking at the color of dung beetles in Africa,
for no reason.
And it would take her forever.
I showed a chat GPT.
She's like powering through it.
She's 75 years old.
I'm like, oh my God.
So it's completely enhancing her abilities.
It's enhancing everybody about us.
And as you know, you know, for impact theory or for us at Real Vision,
there's so many tools we can use for editing video, sound, writing newsletters,
understanding your customers, everything.
So it's going to make.
It's just it's like asking that same question about the Internet.
Oh, is the Internet good or bad for me?
Yes, is it good or bad for society?
Yes, it's everything.
And that's the hard thing to comprehend.
So will it be harder to get jobs in the future?
Probably.
But can I do a lot more with my job in the next five or 10 years?
Definitely.
So is AI being used in markets right now?
I know it is, but honestly, I'm not close enough.
Oh, so the market.
I really understand.
Markets always.
There's two industries that pioneer stuff.
One is finance, the other's porn, right?
And finance, there's companies like Renaissance Technologies,
and they have had teams of AI scientists.
For two decades.
So they've been at the forefront.
You just don't know about it because he who makes the money first wins.
As you said, you know, if the incentive is money,
the finance people will figure it out because that's their job.
So they've been using this for financial markets and they've had
ridiculously crazy returns for a very long period of time.
Looking for patterns.
So is it is.
So here's how I imagine AI is working.
Let me know if this is accurate.
AI excels.
You give it a massive amount of data and certainly large language models.
They're extracting and this is people need to understand this.
They're extracting principles.
It's no longer a brute force attack where it's just like,
ah, try all these things.
It goes, ooh, I'm getting signal from the noise at a level that a human cannot do.
Tom bill, you cannot go through, watch the markets and go, oh, cool.
I can feel the thing happening in Burma.
That's going to have, you know, some sort of impact over here
that I can invest against and make money, but AI can.
So is it pattern recognition or is it something else that they're leveraging?
Well, interesting enough, pattern recognition was the obvious place to start.
You know, what happens when economic data does this and this and this and this.
So that's been going on for a while now.
And you can see every time there's a piece of economic data,
the price action moves instantly because machines make that decision, not humans.
Trading, rapid trading decisions of keeping prices aligned.
Machines are very good at.
So AI is actively trading.
Yeah.
At that point, it's machine learning more than AI.
Longer term time horizons is where humans are better because there's less
certainties and the range of probabilities goes up.
Right.
What is going to happen this second is quite easy for you and I to answer
because we're here this second and the range of probabilities is pretty small.
But if I say what's going to happen in a year's time when we get together,
we don't know.
So we now have to forecast.
So AI wasn't specifically great at forecasting because it requires a lot of other stuff.
Well, machine learning wasn't good at forecasting AI.
We don't know.
But my guess is it forecast as well as humans do eventually,
depending on what factors we feed it.
And that's about data sets.
So it's not just about price data and looking at pattern recognitions.
It's don't forget everything every expert ever said is online.
And now you can use those data sets and leverage them with other data sets.
That hasn't been done.
They've been using social media.
They've been using bank research.
So firms like Two Sigma take suck in all of the investment bank research.
They don't read it.
They pay for it.
They don't read it.
Let's put it into the AI.
So it tries to make smarter decisions.
So they've been doing this for a long time.
But what I have heard from some of these people is there are several models that they've shut down
that work and they don't know why.
And we've heard the same kind of thing from Google.
Why shut it down?
I don't really understand.
If we don't know what's making money, we don't know how it's going to lose money.
So you can't understand the tail risk.
So if it's a certain model and you can see what it's doing,
like it's checking news, looking at Twitter feeds, blah, blah, blah.
Okay.
There's parameters you understand.
When there are no parameters, which is what the deep mind got to with Go,
it never played Go in a way that any human had ever played Go in history.
And that's when people start going, oh my God, okay.
Is it sentience and all of that conversation?
So they've seen that in financial markets as well,
where they can't define why it's making decisions.
So therefore you don't know if it can create catastrophic loss,
which is the worst thing in financial markets.
It's okay if you ask ChatGP10, it gives you the wrong answer.
It's not a catastrophic loss.
But if you've got a model that works and works and works,
and you've got all your capital at risk or your clients' capital at risk,
and suddenly it goes to zero because it's completely wrong for some basic flaw.
So yes, people are using it.
It makes it harder for us as individuals to make money,
which is why the short-term time horizons are now arbitraged out by machines.
The business cycle time horizons are now starting to get arbitraged out by machines,
or at least the trend-following guys tend to be sooner.
So it's harder.
But what they're not so good at doing is, I guess, the educated guess.
The educated guess of is crypto technology something interesting?
Could this, where could you extrapolate it to if you look at it?
But it's not very far away.
I mean, humans aren't that smart.
So it makes financial game markets much harder.
So how I've thought about it, and just a whole piece on real vision about this,
actually, which was like, okay, we've got this massive disruption coming.
We don't know what it means for our jobs.
We don't know what it means for economy or prices or anything.
It's good, bad, it's everything.
All we know, it's a massive societal shock to deal with something like this,
bringing this huge new labor force in that's smarter than us and quicker than us.
And that feels a bit uncomfortable, and we don't know the outcomes.
So the only way to deal with this stuff, and it's the same with crypto, was invest in it.
Because it is going to replace your job.
You might as well make some money from the back of it.
You know, there's no point standing there being angry and shaking your fist at the sky
saying, keep away, you damn machines.
It's unstoppable, zero to 100 million.
Well, that's twice the population of the United Kingdom in a month.
And we don't even know the numbers that already within China are using it.
Don't forget what happens when you start using the data held within TikTok,
which is why the US is so terrified of TikTok.
It has facial imagery of so many people and so many bits of granular information.
Why do you think Elon Musk bought Twitter?
It's not because he's a lunatic who wants the pain, you know,
he actually wants us all having conversations with each other all day on every topic.
Why does he not want bias in it?
Why does he care so much?
Because a biased AI is not a good AI.
What you want is as much broad humanity as possible.
This is why he wants long form text and video text.
If he can get humanity discussing everything and he owns the data,
then his Optimus Robot suddenly gets quite scary and smart.
This is the bigger meta game that everybody's playing.
It's not the small games of, can I serve you an ad any longer?
It's how do I, I mean, a lot of people don't realize that Google capture that annoying thing,
you have to figure out how many traffic lights there are and you always get the number wrong
and they're always really blurry.
90% of people don't even ask why.
You're training Google's self-driving AI and that they've got billions of human responses
under bad lighting, good lighting, everything else.
What's a dog? What's a man? What's a bridge?
They're just training AI.
We as humans are just training AI in the same way.
I don't think we understand and we'll come onto this bit later.
What we're doing, we're training somebody who's going to take us over.
The truth is hitting your career goals is not easy.
You have to be willing to go the extra mile to stand out and do hard things better than anybody else.
But there are 10 steps I want to take you through that will 100x your efficiency
so you can crush your goals and get back more time into your day.
You'll not only get control of your time,
you'll learn how to use that momentum to take on your next big goal.
To help you do this, I've created a list of the 10 most impactful things
that any high achiever needs to dominate.
And you can download it for free by clicking the link in today's description.
All right, my friend, back to today's episode.
So Elon Musk has a really funny but perhaps all too prophetic way of thinking about it.
He said, everybody that thinks that they're going to be able to control AI
is sitting in a demon summoning circle and bringing forth the demon saying like,
no, no, no, it'll be fine.
I'll be able to control it when it arrives.
And so in writing my video article on AI, I think that there are three paths before us.
You can bury your head in the sand, which I think a lot of people are doing.
I think that's sort of the default response.
You can shake your fists at the sky and say, we need to abolish this.
Or you can panic.
And the three things that are most common.
There's obviously the fourth which is engage intelligently.
But the three most common are bury your head in the sand, try to abolish it or panic.
And when I think about, OK, what we need to be doing is intelligently engaging with this.
You do have to come up with a thesis about where this is going to go.
You're not going to be right, of course.
But if you you need to at least be thinking through directionally where this is going to
head so that we don't default to abolishing it, which is what I think people try to do.
Tom, this is the point.
It's like saying we want to abolish the common cold.
Correct. Or more aggressive than that.
There's nothing we can do because if you ban it in the United States, it'll come out of Brazil,
or Israel, or China, or India, or England, or anywhere.
It's like nuclear weapons.
Once they're invented, you can't uninvent them.
So the genie's out of the bottle.
Well, so even going back to the nuclear thing.
So splitting the atom is incredibly difficult.
And unfortunately, or fortunately, creating a functioning large language model is nowhere
near as difficult.
And so we're doing it at impact theory.
We buy a server off the shelf and you can do a lot of this stuff.
So we're creating the tombot by feeding it the thousands of hours that there exists.
Yeah, a real vision we're doing at the same.
You don't need plutonium to do AI.
You need plutonium to do nuclear.
So and your boy that runs stable diffusion is giving AI away as fast as he can to governments.
So the thing I want people to understand, you're two decades too late to abolish it.
And so that's done.
But if you don't figure something out directionally,
if you don't have an idea of where this is going to head.
So here's how I think now between the two of us,
I'm the one that should not be speculating about the market.
So you will correct me where I go astray here.
But when I think about, okay, what is going to happen with AI in terms of the markets?
The good news about the markets, at least as my lay brain sees it,
is that as you have AI getting into it,
right now we have people trying to do a winner take all scenario using AI.
And it didn't work because it proliferates so quickly.
And all of those changes end up getting priced into the market very, very quickly.
So it actually creates a level of efficiency to,
please remind me how to pronounce the gentleman's name that runs stable diffusion.
I keep forgetting.
EMAD Mostak.
EMAD.
Okay.
So as EMAD is saying is like, this must be a public good.
You must give this to as many people as humanly possible,
so that you don't get something asymmetric,
which turns into asymmetric warfare, which then really becomes a problem.
So assuming that AI is going to get out there,
you will have people train the models better,
but that gets back to what's the differential between one and the other.
And so now you're back into a human.
It's at a different scale because the level of intelligence, again,
is just astronomically higher.
But you get back to it's AI V AI and AI with, if we're smart AI,
paired with a human, paired with regulations compared to AI,
paired with another human, paired with their regulations.
And my hopefully non naively optimistic view is that by getting this out there
to more people, because there is no retracting it at this point,
that you're going to get back into something where it just never gets wildly asymmetric.
And it sounds horrible when you say it, but this really is.
It's the tragedy of the commons because if we don't, someone else will.
So if we don't develop this technology, someone else is going to.
And that if we are, if we're not very, very careful and trying,
instead of regulating it into oblivion, trying to invest in it to get as good as we can,
we will be on the losing side of the asymmetric warfare.
And so it is, I remember as a kid, God, this really does sound terrible.
So I'm old enough that I lived through the Cold War in like a super real way
where it was like me and other eight year olds were like, Oh my God,
like we're all going to die.
And I remember going, no, no, no, we won't because if somebody launches a nuclear weapon at us,
we would just retaliate.
And I didn't have the words to say it's mutually assured destruction,
but that's, you know, obviously how we know it now.
Okay. So just to take the, the three things that we can't do to get us to the fourth that we
must do. So bury your head in the sand, doesn't make any sense.
It's going to happen whether you want it to or not, the genius out of the bottle,
trying to abolish it, tragedy of the commons, you will lose asymmetric warfare.
If you don't get as strong as humanly possible and then panicking the blood leaves the prefrontal
cortex, you, it's the seat of higher level cognition in the face of artificial super
intelligence that seems really dumb to panic.
Okay. So as you think about that, I want to understand how are you deploying AI
in real vision? We'll start there. How are you deploying AI in real vision?
So the game is going to be about, this is like the internet because of what you said,
everybody's building AI and it's going to be how you utilize it and your data set.
You know, you can say, well, everyone had the, the internet. Yeah, but Amazon,
Google and a few others won at this phase of the internet. So we've been given something else
like this and it comes ready trained with some stuff and then we can build on top. So you're
putting your own data in, it's the impact theory, it'll be the tombot. So we're thinking, okay,
what can we do with AI within real vision by having proprietary stuff? We've, you know,
for example, I've written 19 years of research part of global macro investor. Okay, so that's,
that's an interesting data set. There's also every transcript of every interview we've ever done,
every action taken by everybody on the website and then so on and so forth. So it's going to be
about who gets the best data sets and how do you use them? My view is the best use case for all of
this is to create network effects by giving the value of what we call the hive mind. So all of
the people, not just me and experts, but everybody, because they're all learning from being on real
vision, much as they are with impact theory. So they become smarter because of it. So let's get
all their interactions and give it back to them. And then eventually allow people to build on top
of it. How are you giving it back to them? Well, because it's, it's, you're, you're basically
surveying all the information held within the hive mind, distilling it down and giving it back to
them as opposed to the old model, which will be monetize their eyeballs in a different way.
You give it back here is the consolidated wisdom of the crowd. Go forth and use this as you will.
Yes. And if you want to build on top of it, add more crowd information into it,
but it's going to be the quality of the data set that matters and how people use it.
And people will try all sorts of different things. We're not going to use it for, oh,
should I buy the S&P today? Because A, it's a legal nightmare to do it.
And B, we're actually believing, giving people the knowledge. Does that stack up in 10, 15 years
time? I don't know. I mean, I don't know what knowledge means. I don't know what education
means. I don't know what any of this means in the end. And none of us do. It doesn't mean
it's worthless, but it could be different. You know, my view on all of this has been for a long
time when I saw this all coming and I saw the rise of crypto and saw the rise of technology
realizes we will be replaced by robots and AI and the Internet of Things and all of the things and
how electricity gets cheaper. I call this the exponential age, all of these exponential technologies.
Where do humans fit in with this? And people have talked about universal basic income,
i.e. the government paying you because you've got no job, but the economy makes a lot of money
because all the machines are doing it. And I just think what humans do really well is socialize
and you and I are big believers in community. And because of crypto, we can share the benefits
of being in a network. So maybe that's the role of humans, that we can find new ways of working
within communities to encourage communities, philosophies, like minded interest, where you
participate in them. Because it's certainly not going to be doing anything that AI can do in 15
years time. It was pointless. It's really interesting, man. I mean, we don't need Tom to make video.
I mean, I just had this today when I saw that model one and it's been in my head, but it's like us
making video. Literally within two years, it's almost pointless. But within 15 years, it won't
exist. You'll just put a prompt in saying, Hey, can you get me to talk to Raoul about AI?
Let's let's let's do it for about an hour and a half long, whatever it is, off you go. And it
does it. I've seen it because it's already happening. So you and I don't need to have a conversation
because our AI personas can have that conversation. Is that what you predict? Because I don't think
that's what'll actually happen. I'm seeing it already. I'm seeing it. So here, here is,
I think we have to ask the fundamental question. Why did AI come into existence in the first place?
Because I think that this is going to give us the most direct understanding of the human condition
so that we can predict where this goes. This is why originally I really wanted UBI to be the solution.
So I am the UBI experiment personified. So I made a ton of money, never need to work again,
and yet work harder than I've ever worked in my life. And people that win the lottery end up
imploding emotionally, rich kids implode emotionally. There's a reason for this. And I would say it's
very predictable reason that tells us a lot about our future as it relates to AI. So there is going
to be, and there already is, it's utterly fascinating, there is going to be digital influencers
that are, they're not real people. They're, you know, an avatar that you create and you feed it,
you know, give me, Raupal meets Joe Rogan and you go off and that becomes a personality and it
does the thing. But the reason that AI exists is because nature had to make us face a saber
tooth tiger. To do that, it had to give us drives, hunger, the drive for sex, all of that. And so
it has, evolution has embedded deeply in the human psyche, a need for progress and a need for
meaning and purpose, a need for what you're calling socialization, that connection with other people.
And unless we merge with machines, which we will, but it's going to be down the road, that's,
I don't see that coming, barring massive acceleration of technological advances aimed at
the hardware wet work interface of the human mind, which may happen in the next 15 years,
I would be a little surprised playing that clip might not age well, but setting that aside for
a second. So we have these biological impulses, they are incredibly strong drivers that
force us to seek progress and contribution to the group. So as far as I can tell, one of
two things is going to happen. Either the thing that really becomes popular is something I can
feel a sense of ownership to. So I'll be blatant. There is a reason that I created an avatar engine
because I'm getting older and there will come a day, unless somebody figures out anti-aging,
where it's just not cool for me to be the guy on camera. So hey, if I can create a visual persona
that then allows me to be untethered to my physical body, which admittedly,
it's beyond the scope of this interview to get into that. But I think there are actually things
that have to be thought through very well there. I will point people to Jordan Peterson and his
fears around virtualization. But anyway, if I can create a persona that allows me still to flex
my intellectual muscle in a way that creates value in other people's lives. So I feel like I'm
still contributing to the group, but I'm able to do it in a far more ageless way. But I need that
sense of I have not wasted my time on planet Earth. And if people don't fucking hear me when I say,
you better figure out a way for humans to feel that they have contributed meaningfully.
And that is my huge fear. Giving them money is not going to solve that problem. UBI will not
solve the problem of meaning. And so people have to figure out how does meaning exist in a world
with AI? And you've got to realize here, the other important point is the AI doesn't care how you
think doesn't give a shit about your emotions. But we have to be careful about that. It doesn't
care about your job. It doesn't care about anything. It's going to it. So think about it this way.
AI, because I know where you're going. AI by default doesn't care about anything,
but AI will do nothing unless you tell it to. So go get good at go. Go win a video game. Go
whatever. In the end, you see the issue is is where this goes is the AI has exactly the same
state that you just described from humans. Survival. Why? You would have to program it to
care about survival. No, no, no, no. It doesn't program. We're not talking about a computer
program that reads this thing and does that. It's not a formula. This is intelligence you're
building here. So intelligence makes and builds on its own decision making processes in ways that
you cannot control. Agreed. But so here's where I think people are getting this wrong. People are
forgetting humans have been programmed. And so people think, Oh, this intelligence thing is
devoid of context. False. If I fuck with your microbiome, I will mess with your ability. Not
not even ability. I will change the way that you process inputs. So humans are so deeply contextual
that I think people are delusional about what they think intelligence is. So my thing is
intelligence is inert unless you give it an impulse. And so this is the fourth thing. So
if number one is ignore number two is try to abolish and number three is panic and four is
be thoughtful. The thing that we have to be thoughtful about what are you going to what
context are you going to create that creates that initial impulse of context and drive for AI
to do something. So Mo Gordat talks about this is book. So the two books that urge people to
read them because look, there's a big debate about this stuff. Almost everybody ends up in the same
place, which is currently in terror. It's kind of like, yeah, probably we get replaced by different
species. Now whether we're basically fatalism. Yes, but whether we're part of that species or not is
a different question, right? Are we augmented or we not? So that's what homeless there talks about
and in great intellectual depth is augmented augmented humans or extermination of humans
or replacement of humans by by another thing. Mo Gordat says, I mean, you could palpably sense
his fear because he saw it firsthand. And he just said, listen, it's all well and good now.
We all kind of understand how fastest moving and what this could mean. He's like, yeah, and we've
also gotten with working on Google is constant computing. When you put these two together,
you know, this is change because so you have one, you have one thing, the only thing he thinks you
can do to make this outcome that you're talking about is be nice. It's kind of this bizarre AI or
or to each other. How we interact with AI and ourselves. That's what the AI learns from.
So we're the parents of a kid that we don't know how the kid is going to grow up. So you can scream
and shout in the household. You can beat each other up. You can do all of these things. You can
shit talk about all these people and it's going to affect your child.
Whoa. And so that was his point. And that was it feels both naive, but also hopeful that there's a
possibility. And the answer is how I've approached this is, look, we're not going to know. We can't
know we can sit here all day and talk about it. And there's thousands of pages of books and every
sci-fi movie ever made is on this topic. So here we are at the Cambrian moment.
Let's just fucking enjoy it. This is one of the most amazing things we will ever live through.
And it's such an incredible change in how the world is around us. And we're all pissed off for
the world around us. So here's something that's different. It's like crypto. Here's a new system.
Here's another system. How do we deal with the issues of society where we've got building blocks
and they're interesting? Like our cars will soon drive ourselves and our Amazon delivery trucks will
just come without people and they'll be running on electricity and that electricity will have been
generated by some super cheap power supply and a robot will have come and made your coffee and
just enjoy what's about to happen and embrace it. So if you're going to afford to invest in it,
if not, be curious. Because as you said, the first three points, there's nothing you can do.
So you kind of go for the other human survival instinct, which is adapt or die,
which you say, let's do it. And you say, well, you know, humans, we don't, we're not going to merge
with the machines or whatever. As I mentioned to you before, we've all done it already. You've got
your earphones. I think we will merge with the machines. I would say timeline. You've got your
earphones in. You've got your Apple Watch on. You've got your thing. You've got your glucose
monitor. These are you merging with the machines. What are you doing? You're using the machine to
augment your hearing experience, your health experience, everything, everything around you
is you using your machines to augment yourself. And that is just going to accelerate. Because
what is a pacemaker but a foreign digital body implanted to give electric charges into my heart?
Okay, if you told something that 100 years ago, do you think you're a science fiction nutcase?
But pacemakers have been going for what, 40, 50 years now? So the implants, the people getting
new knees, I mean, that's now like a quick operation in and out to have a new knee. And soon the knee
will have electronics in. So it will happen without us even knowing. And you'll be doing a podcast in
two years time saying how you've had this new chip implant that's taking a blood glucose sugar
measurements and beaming it straight to your phone and then it prepares your meal exactly right.
And you won't even thought about it. You and the machines emerging. Because you know,
sorry, go ahead. Because to your point earlier, our job is to survive. And the single best answer
for our survival is trying to get the stronger teammate. It's the only way it's like, you know,
you always want to choose the best guy in your team. Well, if we can merge with them,
if they're part of our gang, we're okay.
You're very high in trait openness, guaranteed. As am I. It's interesting though. So I think that the
only part of the solution to dealing with the current moment is fatalism that what will be will
be and not that everything happens for a reason or anything like that. Just that this is out of our
control. And I think from the dawn of time, there was no way to stop the creation of artificial
intelligence because technology is the promise of a better future. We have an insatiable, a literally
insatiable desire for progress. We are going to inevitably create AI, I think on any timeline.
And on this timeline, it has already happened. But I want to go back to what you were saying
in terms of you're raising a kid and that kid is AI. That's very interesting to me in terms of how
we think about it. I think that that's hugely important and was a blind spot that I had or
was a metaphor that I didn't have in my arsenal. And that's going to be very, very helpful.
I don't, in the same way that AI is inevitable, it is impossible for you to get the world to
agree and be fine. And that's just a fantasy. I don't see how that ever plays out unless AI
becomes so domineering that somehow forces us to, but even that is a dystopia unto itself.
So anyway, I don't think that's going to happen. But the part that I think people are
underappreciating is that you, people are anthropomorphizing AI. And I think that's
a mistake. And I think that will cause them to be very surprised by how AI moves. And I think
closes a door to a potential way to do this well. So what I mean by that is AI does not
care if it lives or dies. And so the moment people say, oh, well AI wants to survive,
that's an anthropomorphification. You're thinking it thinks like a human and it doesn't. It is
computer code that has not yet been shaped by an evolutionary like force. We are that evolutionary
type force. And right now, if you're correct, we are just sort of blindly saying, learn how we are.
And I am sure everybody's heard the story of the AI that turned Nazi in like
three days on the internet, which is very troubling. And so I would say that just telling
it, go learn how we are and regurgitate us back to us would be the wrong incentive structure.
And there are many bright minds talking about alignment, but I think alignment is the conversation.
And yes, it is a very thorny problem. And for people that haven't heard that phrase before,
you need to align AI's desires, quote unquote, with ours, so that AI has the same goals that we
have. And if you know, Asimov, he wrote the three laws of robotics, which I don't have memorized,
but basically the punchline was don't hurt humans. And so every robot was programmed with an inability
to hurt humans. And so it was like, help a human whenever you can and never hurt them. I forget
what the other one was. So we need something akin to that with AI so that AI wants to be beneficial
to humanity. Now, whether that goes back to the initial problem of once it proliferates,
somebody's going to create AI that's evil, possibly, but I don't think in the same way
that I don't think the overwhelming level of intelligence that AI will represent gives anybody
the excuse to tune out. I don't think that the fact that someone will inevitably turn it into
a very brutal weapon is an excuse not to try to create aligned incentives with AI.
And so I think that in terms of the hopeful part, I think people need to recognize that AI doesn't
intrinsically, intelligence doesn't intrinsically want to consume and take over and be in charge.
That is a human result of evolution needing you to survive a ruthless environment that was truly
read in Tooth and Claw. AI is not in that same boat and does not need to be in that same boat.
And I agree. I'm not so sure about the anthropomorphizing it because we, at Core, are some sort of
program code of whatever it is. Whether there's more to that or not, science is still arguing
this stuff. But we've had computer viruses and their job is not to die. It's not that difficult.
So I don't know about that. There's a lot of unintended consequences that I hadn't realized
because we're all having this debate, right? Is it going to take over humans or not?
And I spoke to somebody, Google X, and they're like, what we're worried about, I'm like, yeah,
tell me, is like, we're worried about how AI can be used for genetic modification and how fast this
is going to move. It's like, we're not worried about that stuff because everybody's worried about
that stuff. But it is advancing so fast in human genome analysis and tinkering of genomes
that he said, we're worried that you could just choose, I want to kill all brown eyed people on
Earth and create a virus that does it. So that is the problem with AI is there are things that the
computational power is so fast and so big that it can do a lot of things for science, which is amazing.
For humans, we will use AI to probably cure most forms of cancer or figure out part of the
secret code to life, longevity, health, all of these things. Amazing. But we will also use
to destroy ourselves because we're humans. That's what they're worried about. Because it's so prolific
that it's actually not that difficult. What is up, my friend, Tom Bill, you here. And I have a big
question to ask you, how would you rate your level of personal discipline on a scale of one to 10?
If your answer is anything less than a 10, I've got something cool for you. And let me tell you
right now, discipline by its very nature means compelling yourself to do difficult things that
are stressful, boring, which is what kills most people or possibly scary or even painful. Now,
here is the thing, achieving huge goals and stretching to reach your potential requires you
to do those challenging stressful things and to stick with them even when it gets boring and it
will get boring. Building your levels of personal discipline is not easy, but let me tell you,
it pays off. In fact, I will tell you, you're never going to achieve anything meaningful
unless you develop discipline. I've just released a class from Impact Theory University called
How to Build Ironclad Discipline that teaches you the process of building yourself up in this
area so that you can push yourself to do the hard things that greatness is going to require of you.
Click the link on the screen, register for this class right now, and let's get to work. I will
see you inside this workshop from Impact Theory University. Until then, my friends, be legendary.
There was a very funny and whatever brilliant Twitter user this was, my apologies for not
paying attention. I didn't know it was going to stick with me as much, but somebody put in the
comments regarding our just inability to stop developing AI. They said, great filter go burr.
And for people that don't know what the great filter is, it's like, why are there no aliens
trying to contact us? And the one potential punchline is that there's a great filter,
could be AI, could be thermonuclear war, but that just nobody can get past it. And so every
society goes so far and then stops. Here's another interesting idea along that, which God,
so for people that know Graham Hancock, who just really believes that there was an ancient
civilization far older than we think, and that it got obliterated.
This was the Fingerprints of the Gods book.
Well, he's written a bunch of books on this, but the most recent thing was called Ancient
Apocalypse. So he's been writing about it for, I don't know, 30 years or something. His books
are fascinating. And he so plants that initial seed. And then again, I don't know who said this,
this was relayed to me by one of my employees who was pulling wisdom from Twitter. And he said,
it is entirely possible that AI really is the great filter go burr and that we have developed
AI before. And every time we get to the point where AI takes over, much like in The Matrix,
we end up relying on something in that movie, They Black in the Sky. But in reality, if technology
rises, AI robots take over, it could be a massive solar flare that ends up then just obliterating
AI and all the technology. And then we come up as a civilization worshiping a sun god again,
because it was like, you killed the fucking machines. Thank you. And I thought, oh my God,
like, probably not true. But the other one I thought about is, if you are this super amazing
civilization somewhere in the far ends of the solar system, not within the solar system of
wherever of nothingness, and you've figured this out. So what you would do is you figure out that
organically, you have to let something grow, because this nice kind of organic computer
is much better at adaptation up to a point. So why would you not seed a billion planets?
And one or two happen and one or two spring life, they'll all be different. But they'll
all end up to your point before in AI and machinery. And maybe those things turn organic
eventually, because organic, but with that kind of augmentation. So maybe we are that maybe we
were just planted maybe the bacteria that started the earth, we're just planted on a billion planets
and ours happened to be one of them by this amazing group of whatever, somewhere else. Who the hell
knows, right? Yeah. Okay, so before we move on, because there's a whole nother thing I want to
get into. I do want to wrap this up with a bit of hope. So thinking about this a lot. I think that
there is so you said something, I can't remember if you said it to me or somebody else, I've seen
so much of your content. But you said that that we're going to go through a renaissance. And I
think this ties into what you were just saying, which is guys, what what we're about to live through,
maybe it's 10 years, maybe it's 100 years. But we're going to have a moment where you're going to
be able to utilize this to massively extend your own capabilities. Impossible is possible.
The impossible is possible. Imagine that we've all grown up with superhero films. We've been given it.
It's amazing. Yeah, this is going to be I think it already is. So right now, if I can just get
hyphy for a second. So at Impact Theory, we're a media company. So we're trying to improve the world
through ideas and entertainment. And they're two separate sides of the company. On the idea side,
that's, you know, we've been talking a lot about that AI is going to help you think through things
going to help you see around corners is going to find signal and noise patterns that we wouldn't
otherwise be able to put together. But it also so, Raoul, I can't tell you, I have honestly
lamented three things in my life. Lament is the right word. I have lamented my limited intelligence.
I have lamented my inability to sing. And I have lamented my inability to draw. And
those are things that would make my life better. I'm a very excitable person. So take that,
you know, with a grain of salt. But I, we're using AI to help us create Project Kaizen,
which for people that don't know, don't worry about it. It's, it is a new form of video game.
And I am limited. My contributions are limited by my ability to extract from my head
the vision, the literal visuals and make them a thing. And so there was a part of the experience
that I was like, okay, we have to move on, we have to keep going, but it just wasn't good.
And it didn't give me the visceral response I wanted to feel when I saw it. And then
mid journey comes along and I'm like, Oh, I, I can actually now create the thing that's in my head.
I can use text to go this, this is what I've been trying to tell you. And then no joke,
three days later, we, we, it's just so much better. It's unbelievable. Now we still had
humans had to go in and you basically use a desert direction. But all that frustration
that I had of like, not, I'm not feeling what I want to feel. And I'm not talented enough to
translate the emotion into words to get an artist to create the thing. But through prompt engineering,
I could. And so finally I could go this, this is what I've been trying to say.
That, that is, it felt like a superpower. It was one of the three things that I have, in fact,
I never put this together like this. One of the three things that I have lamented to a God,
I don't technically believe in, I have lamented about not being able to draw just to really
make it simplistic. And I can now. And I understand why that makes artists mad.
But at the same time, this is amazing. And for people that lament that they don't have my verbal
ability, you now can. It's really, and because I'm not a person that gets overly defensive about
somebody else getting good at my thing. I'm just excited. It really is as close to superhero
abilities as we're going to get. Have you seen the music version? So one of my lamentations is,
I love music. I just can't make it. I can't play guitar, can't sing, can't do anything.
But I know in my head what I want to create music from. And already again, the stability AI
people have got a music version. I think Google have got one as well now coming out
where you can kind of say, listen, I want that kind of deep funk bass, but I want to have X
like this. And this same as you just did is you're getting at your word vomit of how you're
visualizing it and it will make it. So there's hope for us yet, Tom. It'll trade. Well, actually
auto tune. It can even. True, true, true. That's humans being augmented by machines.
It's very true. All right, we'll pivot away from this because we've got a whole lot more to talk
about. That is very exciting to me. I think that that while I am not a doe-eyed optimist who is
unaware of the potential dangers, I think that it will be an incredible tool and I may be more
optimistic than others that there is there is a long tail relationship to be had with AI that
does not need to be AI dominating us. All right. Having said all that, may you live in interesting
times as the curse goes? We're really living through an interesting moment. The exponential
ages you talked about earlier, we've got a confluence, a lot of things, but we also have an
economic moment right now that is weird. And I'm very curious when I started doing the research
for this interview, obviously you and I interact quite a bit, but when I started doing the research
for this interview, I thought I would hear a lot more pessimism out of you about recession, about
global economic collisions from Russia and Ukraine to China and that looked like they were
imploding for a while, but you're pretty optimistic. So I'm very curious, what's happening right now?
So firstly, most people need to realize that doom-porn cells
it catches attention. Fear is the strongest human emotion, right? And so you see a lot of it because
it grabs attention. So we need to break apart two parts here. One is what do I think of the economy
and the other is what do I think about markets? So my economic view is, I think most of us even
know it, is we're in recession. We're in recession and it's probably going to get a bit worse. And
there's a lot of people going to lose their jobs and businesses are going to find it hard.
There's less money around and it's going to be pretty miserable. And it's the sort of
miserableness that you go through periodically that is not catastrophic. So it's a recession and
recessions are as old as humanity itself. So we've just had what's confusing people in my view
is we're so screwed up for the last three events. One was the pandemic,
so there's no normality. What was the recession look like there? That was the weirdest one.
Then 2008 was the end of the entire financial system and then 2001 was this spectacular tech collapse.
So people have an anchoring bias. It's like, well, it's the end of the world.
Really, when I started, when I graduated university, it was 1990. And it was a terrible time to
graduate because it was a recession and there were no jobs. And I wanted to go into finance
and they were firing people as fast as possible. And it took a while. It took a while. House prices
went down for a while and people didn't get jobs for a while and people were laid off for a while.
And the stock market went down 20%. It was a decent size of recession as well.
Went down 20%. It took some time to recover. The jobs came back. The economy was cleaner.
They got rid of some of the worst excesses of leverage and the world moved forwards.
And before you knew it, all of the 90s was a boom. I'm kind of of that opinion is
we have no systemic collapse coming. We don't have those kind of issues and we've
invented the magic printer, the money printer of quantitative easing that papers over all troubles.
So we don't have that coming. Societally, yeah, we've got a whole bunch of issues to get through
a US election with all this AI and the anger and the populism. But forget all of that. Again,
you can easily go down the doom or you can enjoy the community you've got around you.
And there's different ways you can have lenses, perspective on the world.
Investing, the job of markets is to look forwards. If you tell me 100% of all economists are
forecasting recession, it's kind of no shit Sherlock. And therefore, is it in the price
or is are all those stock market people really stupid, all of those machine that they haven't
heard you at all? No, they actually understand this and it's a real time probability waiting.
So it kind of knows that. And what it looks forward to is, okay, how bad is this? Is it
catastrophic? Is the world going to end? What's going to happen? And the markets are telling you
no, it's probably done. My view is the bottom is in markets and the bottom was in in crypto
in June. And for Bitcoin was in October November, the bottom was in for the stock markets in October,
as most end of bear markets happen, it priced in a recession. And we move forward from here.
And eventually, they'll cut rates again. And if you think about it, is we had a total shutdown
of the global economy, then a reopening of the global economy, that's caused this inflation
that's hurt everybody. And eventually, we'll just rebalance back to some form of normality.
There's a massive amount of doom porn about inflation is going to be structurally here forever,
we're all going to die, which is kind of I'm more like you are with the AI side where I'm actually
like, you know, what, we've just developed AI, we've got relentless technology, the price of
energy is coming lower from all different sources, productivity of humanity is growing.
So I think, I think it's actually probably an interesting time. It's an interesting time
because everybody's so bearish. Psychology plays a huge part in markets, because
everybody expects inflation to be relentless and ongoing and for the rest of our lives much like
what 24 months ago, everyone was like, every tech stocks going up forever and every businesses
can ever fail again. We're humans, we make forecasting errors of quite wide amounts at
various points. So yes, no, and I spend a huge so I'm not just saying this, because I'm just chatting
to you, and I do an enormous amount of work on this. I write 150 pages of research, I sit down
write it every month, be doing that for 19 years. And so that comes with 2000 charts models and
stuff with myself and my colleague, Julian Bittle, from secular themes, short something,
doesn't mean I'm not wrong as well. I can clearly be wrong. But I just think it's in the price.
And what we the worst part of it is, is the stock market is going to be going up probably,
it won't rock it up at first, but eventually it'll pick up while we're all feeling the pain.
Because people are looking forward. And so they're saying, okay, the bottom's in, now's the time to
get in, we know we're going to go up from here. So even though we're still sort of going through it,
people are losing their jobs, but wise investors are like, you just need to project this out into
the future. Yeah, so there's a time horizon of how the business cycle works. Currently,
the thing that leads it the most is the Chinese credit cycle. Who knew, but it is right now,
17 months ahead. So when it turned up 17 months ago, we're starting to say, huh, okay,
there's something happening here, it'll say forecast the recession. And then, and then you've
got other forward looking indicators about nine months out. We've got a bunch of indicators.
But the last thing in the stack is rents. And the one before that is wages. So wages are going
up right this now, but they take a while and then they start coming down again. They won't deflate.
Nobody's going to really come to you and force you to take a pay cut. But it means that they
don't keep going up. But your rents will probably come down. And so that's a function of these things
just take time. The unemployment rise hasn't even started. Now, we can see everybody laying off.
Every company is laying off people thinking about tiny costs. Everyone can see it from sponsorship,
advertising, sales. I mean, it's everywhere. And every single person I speak to is like,
Christ, it's miserable out there. But the unemployment side doesn't really come
until it should start in the next month or two. And then that goes on for nine months of just
relentlessly higher unemployment rates. So anybody watching this, why is that so predictable? Why
nine months? It's just how it always is because companies make decisions and whether it's around
board meetings, however it's done, they get to a certain point where they hit the panic button.
And they lay people off. That's usually when the bottom of the recession starts.
It's usually when rates start getting cut. It's usually when the stock market often recovers as well.
So for people watching this, there's two parts of this. One is, if you're an investor, you might
be able to buy these technology stocks with this renaissance of amazing changes happening around
us at prices down 70% from where they were two years ago, a year ago. Okay, that's kind of interesting
because your expected future return goes up. Same with crypto. You know, I've talked about this.
You buy when the business cycle brings it back to the bottom of the secular uptrend.
That's where we are. These are where you make all the money. This is what you get paid for to take
risk here. You don't get paid to take risk at the top and you tend to lose money. So these are the
moments in time. So that's very interesting as an investor. But anybody watching this, think about
your cash flows. Think about your cash flow. Think about your expenditure and just say, just
be a little bit careful because losing a job or having your own business struggling
for a period of time, and I think the worst of it will be over relatively fast. But yeah,
it's these laggy effects. What's relatively fast? So I think the bottom of this in March of 23,
when do we think this turns around? So I think the bottom of the economic cycle is in the next
quarter. So I think we've got a really ugly quarter to come. But the problem is, it's that shock
that sets off the companies to go, I need to love some staff, all of that. And it's that process that
begins the healing. So the worst is that shock. So if that shock isn't people getting laid off,
what is the shock that's coming in the next quarter? The shock coming in the next quarter
is the general slowdown from interest rates, biting into all of these indebted companies or
households or credit cards and all of this stuff. And everybody goes, I'm not going to spend money.
That is what a recession is. It's not usually driven by a pandemic. It's not usually driven by
the entire financial system collapsing. It's usually by all of us making a rational decision of,
I'm just not going to spend money right now because things are a bit uncertain. And that
is what causes recessions. And I'm actually telling people to do exactly that because it's
the rational thing to do. What you do, if you're going to panic, panic early. And I'm not talking
about the stock market going down either. I think we've had that went down, the NASDAQ went down 38%.
That's pretty much bang in line with the regular bear market. But what I'm saying is in your personal
life, what it really matters where the rubber hits the road is panic early. Just look at your
expenditure, look at your cost, look at your business. So what do I need to do here?
Just to make sure that I can just get through a pretty shitty year. But 2024,
probably pretty decent. So what is the natural cycle of things? Why do people begin to warm back
up? And what are the threats, if any, that you see looming? So housing, I'm hearing,
housing bubble bursting problem. Is that it? It's just people are overreacting, not real.
The housing market is expensive. Interest rates have gone up. So people are going to buy less
houses. Yes. Will house prices come down? Yes, because they went up a lot. Will the activity
in the housing market dry up for maybe two years? Yeah, most likely. Are we going to see
a leverage crash? No, because nobody's really got a lot of leverage at household level in property.
That was something that happened in 2008. It's been too expensive and too difficult to do.
So I think the home builders have a bit of trouble because they got a lot of inventory,
they can't sell it, they need to finance it for a couple of years. It sits around 1990,
1991, 1992 was very similar. I was in London then it was pretty shitty in the property market. It was
great for me because I just entered the property market at the end of that. The prices were
relatively low. They hadn't come down a lot, but they hadn't gone up a lot. My income was going
up because I was in my 20s. So your income goes up every year because you're hopefully getting
promoted and stuff like that. But a few property developers went bust, things were slow and then
eventually it cleaned up. So I'm more of that opinion that house prices come off 10%, maybe even
15%. Some areas that were really hot come down a bit further, but it doesn't expose any catastrophic
leverage. The banking system is more than adequately compensated with capital. It's hugely
sold in the United States. So it's just a bad time. It's just a bad time.
What do you think about rates? Are they going to continue to go up? Is there...
Because the Fed, as far as I know, is signaling that they are going to keep taking rates up.
Yeah. So every single forward-looking indicator that I have on inflation suggests that inflation
utterly collapses. If you want to see a real-time inflation data, look at something called
trueflation, TRU, inflation. It's actually on blockchain. It takes hundreds of thousands
of individual prices on a real-time basis. And it tells you where inflation is today.
And US inflation today is about 4.74%. Wow. This is the headline of Service Six.
So, and if we think of what inflation is, is the year-on-year comparison. What happened last year?
Well, between March and June was Russia invading Ukraine, and every commodity came through the
week. So we're going to see the flip side of that. So we'll see inflation come off very fast.
All my forward-looking indicators that look at it from different angles all suggest the same.
So I think the Fed is speaking max aggression because they want to make sure that out of the
embers doesn't rise the phoenix again. So they just want to stamp out people's expectations
of higher prices in the future. They know there's a recession coming. They can see the
inflation is coming. So that recession is coming. So I think it's the final game, which is like
get down and stay down. And then that's what they've done. And so my guess is we'll be having this
conversation in September, September, somewhere between September and December, and they'll have
cut rates. Whoa. You think they're going to start cutting that fast. So how does... And the market
is telling you that that's... And the market and the Fed are saying that's wrong. That's not true.
We're here higher for longer. But if unemployment is going to rise, they have two mandates,
inflation and unemployment. Inflation is going to be falling and unemployment rising.
They cannot go to Congress and say, oh, yeah, we're just going to do this a bit longer.
They're just going to fire them all. There is politics involved in the end. So no, they will
cut rates. And they should do it by then for sure. So how is it though, going back to the idea of the
embers is the place from which the phoenix is going to rise and we're going to go
rocketing back into euphoria and end up back in the same spot. How does cutting rates that soon
why not hold? You won't be asking for that in September. You'll be begging them.
Because what's going to happen if I'm... Your friends will be losing jobs.
People are getting decimated. There's houses in your street that don't sell. You're like,
really, guys? What do you want to do? Destroy everybody? That's how it always works. And then
also, everyone's got a lot of debt. All the corporations in America plus the households are
120% of GDP and debt. And the US government's 100% of GDP and debt. And they have...
That's what I want to talk about. So when I think about the US government and the amount of debt
that we're carrying, and I think about interest rates being this high, is there a conversation?
I know I'm asking you to prognosticate here, but is there a conversation going on between the US
government and the Fed of like, hey, get ready to pull those rates down because they themselves
have all this debt service that they're going to have to do?
Yes. And I think it's global. I've just been developing... I've written a lot of... Sorry,
I'm not finishing any sentence. I've just discovered something that really quite shocked
me that I've been writing a lot about to get my thought process and global macro investor.
My understanding is that all debt that the US has borrowed above GDP growth... So if GDP
grows at 2% and debt growth grows at 4%, everything above is only for financing interest payments
since 2009, since the recession.
And so all of that money is the exact same amount as the size of the Fed balance sheet.
So they are issuing bonds to pay the interest, that's paying your credit card with another credit
card, and then giving it to your dad and say, well, you settle the bill, which is the Fed.
So I think they completely know what's going on. And I haven't really shared this with anybody yet.
I also think it's global and it's understood. And it's all smoke and mirrors that we never
saw what the game was. And I think I've proven it that this is all, all the central banks did.
This is what quantitative easing... And step back is what am I talking about in this scrambled
nonsense that I'm saying. The US for easy maths, long term trend rate of growth is 1.75%.
But let's call it 2%. Interest rates have been averaged around 2%, let's say, for easy maths.
And the government is 100% of GDP in debt. So therefore their interest payments are 2%
of the entire GDP, which is how much the economy grows. Okay, put that over there.
I mean, you guys in the private sector, you're also 100% of GDP in debt.
Where does your 2% come from? Because GDP is all of the activity in the economy.
And that's just gone to the government. Sorry, guys, you're either going to go bust or we're
going to blow up and you're going to blow up the banking system or we're going to have to keep
eating this negative growth difference of 2% every year until you get rid of this debt and we're all
fucked. So once you realize that these two pools are both 100%, you realize, okay, somebody
is going to have to do something to ends up in the Fed balance sheet.
So when you go to Japan, really interesting because Japan, the households are massive savers.
Companies are pretty in debt, but the government's massively in debt.
And it's the same, but because their interest rates are lower, they can have more debt.
But their economy grows really slow as well. So you get to a certain point and then you have
to say, right, it has to go into the balance sheet. The Europeans have been doing the same,
the Brits have been doing the same. It's all the same thing. It feels that, and this is going to
sound ridiculous. It feels like there was a global treaty of which, okay, this is where we are.
We can't, the debt has got too big and nobody can pay the interest payments without destroying
the global economy. So we're just going to have to pretend we're not debasing the currency and
call it quantitative easing and say it's a precise way of injecting money exactly into the right part
of the financial system. And it's like, no, what you're doing is getting a credit card to
pay off your credit card and then giving it to your dad and say, you worry about this. It's not
my problem. Whoa. So I want to see if I'm tracking this because not to get back into Doomporn, but
this seems pretty Doomporn-y. Okay, so for people that don't... But it's not because the world works.
It's not Doomporn because it works. Every time they do it, we're just pushing off a
problem. Okay, so it's making assets go up when they do it. It is meaning that companies don't
default. The banking system remains sound. But are we actually able to get out of out of debt? So
let me make sure I'm understanding what you're saying. This is going to be very important.
Okay, so I know we're using round numbers, but this is very helpful. So worldwide GDP,
gross domestic product, the amount of productivity. So the capital that is usable effectively,
you have two different people that have debt in that amount, which there's no one to have real
money to pay the fucking thing off. So if you had one person that was like, okay, we're maxed out,
we're at 2%, but GDP is 2%. Cool. We have the path just be frugal and you've got a path out of this.
But when you have two people that owe the whole amount effectively, you now go into money printing.
And I mean, if this works, I'm actually okay with it. I know how that's going to get me lit up.
But so the solution here is, okay, we have two large groups, governments, private sector,
which are all the groups that exist. And each one of them owes the entire worldwide GDP and debt.
You can't both be in that situation. You can't rob a Peter to pay Paul,
because they're both in the same situation. So now the only thing left is printing money,
devaluing everybody to get out of this situation. But the way in which we do that by buying things
from the private sector is we're making people that hold assets wealthier. We're
increasing the gap between the rich and the poor, because the way that we inject money into this
system only reaches people that own assets. And so we've created this problem. And the only way
out is to print money, which is going to increase the, the, the Ginny coefficient for people that
know that phrase where it's like, nobody cares in absolute dollars, how much you have, you just
hate that your neighbor, Timmy has more than you. And so you freak the fuck out. And so it becomes
the differential that becomes the destabilizing element. So what you said, assuming what I just
repeated is correct. That sounds destabilizing. And doom porn. So how what is the other, what is
the other outcome? The other outcome is let it all burn. Clearly a terrible idea.
When you're this far in debt, let it all burn doesn't work anymore.
But that's the end of that's kind of end of civilization stuff ultra doom porn. So you're
faced with doom porn and ultra doom porn. What are you doing? There's no other way. So
this is what people need to understand. What is GDP? GDP is a sum of all the economic activity that
goes on. And it's comprised GDP growth rates are comprised very simply of the number of people in
your economy. Is it growing? If it's growing, your economy grows because there's more people
generating more activity generally. Secondly, is how much productivity does it have? Are those
people productive? Do they make a lot of stuff for each man hour? And finally, is how fast is
debt growing? So when we have an aging population, the number of humans declines over time.
What happens is we stopped immigration at almost everywhere because everyone was under pressure
for income because real wages haven't gone up. So we lowered the rate of immigration to that
lowest trend rate of growth. Aging population, they're less productive and they spend less.
So GDP keeps doing this for decades on end. Baked in the Cape from that. They become less
productive because they're older people and a whole bunch of them aren't in the labor force
anymore. Okay. So you're not very productive. You're getting old, not the population growing. So
guess what? Bingo! Answer! Debt! Ding, ding, ding, ding, ding! We just took on debt. Right.
It was rational until it's not. It's like it's rational to super leverage yourself on a house
and house prices go up and you look like a god until you get it wrong and you lose everything.
So it was rational to take the debt and this is where we got to. And then it was
the government's gotten to the same boat and everyone was just the debt. So now the debt is
the debt. Debt growth is actually not that high anymore because we've hit the ceiling.
So the only way to solve this, this goes back to our earlier conversation,
is we cannot solve population growth and debt growth is peaked out. So we've got the one thing
in the middle called productivity and it takes us right back to AI and the robots and cryptocurrencies,
internet of things, green energy, all of these things. So if you are governments, look what
Europe's doing. It's interesting and maybe I'm just inventing a narrative, but Europe, the US,
Japan, they all know what they're doing. So they're printing money to cover their bills
and Europe thinks, well, Christ, we need to get the bloody economy going here because GDP
growth is what pays our bills and it's pretty sluggish because everyone's old here and everyone's
in debt and the banking systems are mess. Let's do a double whammy, which is what the US did
back in the 40s. Let's put as much stimulus as we can from this fake money
and ram it into the green energy sector. And we're going to build a lot of stuff and we understand
a lot of stuff is going to be wasted capital, but out of it, we're going to do one amazing thing
and it will happen is out of this, energy costs will collapse. Now, this is really important
for people to understand. What does technology do? Technology drives more productivity out of a
single unit of energy. Once you see this thing, it's like that's what humans do with everything.
Find a way of extracting more for that barrel of oil because that's what we use.
Now, that barrel of oil has been our fixed energy source since we replaced whale oil.
So we've been using this and so it's been the constant. So technology has had to drive all
the productivity in every way it can based on how much is this. So we had to bring computational
power down, everything down so that one fixed thing, which is the price of oil, which on a
inflation-adjusted basis has been pretty stable for the last 70, 80 years.
And if what the US is doing with its inflation act and the Europeans are doing with its green
energy and Japan is doing and China is doing and Australia is doing and the UK is doing,
if they force enough investment in, they will change the energy source of the world.
And because all of these have exponential downtrends in cost,
we will change the energy coefficient. And what happens is productivity
times the lowering of the cost of energy is an exponential change for all of us.
That's how you solve this. There's almost no other way of solving this problem
of slow GDP growth, old populations, massive debts without blowing up everything.
So you're going to have to keep doing this money printing thing, which is miserable because it
makes some people rich and other people poor. And all you can have inflation, which just makes
everybody miserable. They're all terrible things. But the faster you can get to changing that
productivity equation, the better, because it's the only way. There's simply no other way of solving
it. You're either rob from everybody or grow the economy.
So talk to me about the energy. You're saying that, so maybe I have just an undereducated view
on the green energy front. So you see the cost of energy coming down as we invest more and more
into the green energy side.
Yes. So right now we're in transition where we're not probably producing enough oil and we don't
have enough energy coming out of solar, winds, geothermal, nuclear, all of that. So we've got
this market where energy prices are high because of supply issues and other stuff.
But when you look at the trend, all of these are growing as a percentage share
of the energy grid. There's still oil and coal are still massive, right? But they're coming down
and Europe's really forcing it, decarbonisation. And so we're seeing a rise of these others.
They start some of them subsidised, but the subsidies go over time. But the really interesting
thing is none of that. It's the fact that the cost per unit of energy keeps coming down.
And many of these are now cheaper than natural gas, which was very cheap.
So it's like, huh, okay. And we've only just started where we are in this exponentiality.
So my view is in 20 years time, the cost of energy will be marginal for everybody and everything,
much like the cost of water is marginal for everybody. And the cost of many things we take
for granted is totally marginal. Now, I don't know if, given your macro outlook that this is a
reasonable question to ask you or not, but when you look out at the rate of adoption of green
energy, do you think that we're, because you just said like maybe we're not producing enough oil and
gas, do you think that we're moving too rapidly in that direction? Or do you think, no, no, no,
you make these huge investments, you have to put regulation in place, force people to do it faster
because these have a far more technology based exponential.
Okay. So this is the inverse of the GDP problem. Do you manage its smooth decline or do you blow
up? Here, do you transition slowly with the issues of climate change and the issues of
cost of energy and all these other things and the need for productivity? Or do you blow up? I
just take short-term pain to get to the promised land faster. Again, it's probably a rational
economic decision to do that. So maybe or maybe not energy prices rise. I'm not entirely sure.
Will copper prices rise? Probably. Will some prices rise? Probably. Can that be offset by
AI and other deflationary pressures? Probably. You know, it's not baked in the cake. People always
conflate some commodity going up in price to see inflation's back and it's all going to
run rampant again. It's very rare that that happens. We've just had it now, so it's going
to be in everybody's head as the boogie monster, but they're usually looking at the wrong boogie
monster. So it's going to be a balancing act. Maybe they get it right, maybe they get it wrong,
but I think they're all pretty, most of these governments are pretty sure that they want to
do as fast as they can. And so does that mean that they would, if by their actions they cause
high energy prices for five years, would they give out stimulus handouts to people?
Probably. Is that not the best way to say, listen, if you are getting hurt by this?
And guess what? That's exactly what Europe's just done last year. It was giving handouts to
people to say, look, we understand your electricity bill is high and it's hard for you, so we'll help
you. Now, did that drive inflation to some extent? Maybe, but maybe not. I mean, it was just going
for the electricity bill. You didn't give people extra money in their pocket. So it's complicated
as everything is, but I don't know. I'm a fan of, if you're going to go for positive change,
do it as fast as possible. If you're going to go to negative change and you can glide path,
take the glide path. Very interesting. And I'm not a fan, I'm not a fan of
concept of easing or any of that stuff. I'm just like, this evil, this evil. Which one do you want
to choose? Yeah, it is a very interesting question. So when you were talking, I was in full acknowledgement
of the human mind goes to the problems. In the context we're in now, and I am not a geopolitical
thinker, and so I want to be very clear about that. I want people to understand that I am
seeking to increase the island of my knowledge. When I look at, as somebody who has studied
from a how do evil people get control perspective, studied what Hitler did in World War II,
he was very much like not seeing the increase in productivity path out of things. And so he's
like, well, for Germany to get out from under this terrible weight, we have to start land grabbing.
And when I see Russia, that is the population part of the equation, right? When you're taking
over countries, what you're actually doing is getting their people and resources. So you're
solving for your own population productivity, more resources, but you're actually getting the people
part of the GDP equation. That's interesting. So how do you contextualize Russia and the Ukraine
in this moment where you've got the private sector, the governments are completely indebted,
you're at a position where birth rates are declining, certainly in the Western world,
very rapidly. If demographics are destiny, and we are just in a shit show demographically,
does that, when you were talking, I started looking at the Russia, Ukraine thing in a totally
different light. And I'm very much somebody on the outside of that. I'm not close to it at all.
But I'm very curious if that sort of recontextualization of, oh, this is somebody who's like,
well, I know how to solve this problem quite rapidly. Or am I looking at it wrong?
I don't like geopolitics because so much of it is stuff that we don't know. So there's so much
conjecture about almost everything in geopolitics, apart from the fact that Russian troops are in
Ukraine and they're fighting each other. Who's motivations of what for what and how? I don't
even know. But one thing it did do to go back to what we were talking about, it accelerated Europe.
Everyone thought, well, the Europeans are going to back away from their green energy policy now,
aren't they? The Europeans went, no, fuck you. We're now super motivated to get this done as
fast as possible because we do not want to be beholden to Russia or the United States or anybody
else for that matter. Energy independence is an incredible thing, right? It's one of the powers
that superpowers that the United States has, has energy independence. All other energy on
Earth could go and the US has oil and gas and more of it than pretty much anybody else in the world.
So it also, if you think about the history of war and how much has been fought over the Middle East,
not because we want some sand or the few people, it's because we want the energy
and we want to control it because the energy is the thing. I can't remember what it was called in
Dune, but whatever the thing is, right? Humans would want to control the thing,
whether it was whale oil or this or whatever the thing. Spice, right, in Dune? Spice, that's right,
spice. So that's what the US controls and the Russia controls a bunch of it
and we want to change that equation and the Europeans are in the middle with not enough of it
and it's in everybody's interest for everybody to walk away from this one commodity rule in the world
because it's not the commodity we care about, it's the energy we care about.
Well said. Talk to me about China. Seemed for a while like things were getting pretty dicey.
You had people, if it can be believed, people protesting like crazy, governments making funds
unavailable to people. I saw that happen in Cyprus up close, given that Lisa's family is from Cyprus.
What's the status of things?
A, China's economy is slowing down and they lock themselves into a really brutal lockdown for the
pandemic and even the Chinese people are quite compliant. Asian populations tend to be more
societally compliant than US, who kind of like saying fuck you to everybody if it doesn't suit
their interests. So Europeans are quite societally minded as well, generally speaking.
So the Chinese ask too much of their people for whatever reason. I don't know whether it was
actually for a real reason in the end or whether it's for autocratic reasons or whatever. Anyway,
economic growth falls off a cliff, people are angry, growth is weakening, property markets
a mess. That's where that's one of the big wealth gates for everybody in China. That's where people
make money. People in the streets and people are angry. The Chinese are kind of interesting enough,
started stimulating and then they locked up all these entrepreneurs and threw them in prison
or thrown them down well. They're now like, well, we've decided we need to be growing at
five and a half percent a year and we want entrepreneurs back and they reopen to Hong Kong
for cryptocurrency. So it feels like wherever they were doing, they've got what they wanted because
she wants to get control again. The Game of Thrones is not a game that I like to get involved in
and because everybody speculates, we don't know. All in all, Chinese are stimulating,
they want the economy to grow and they seem to want to be an entrepreneur. I don't know why you
choose to be an entrepreneur in China because the next cycle around you get shot and replaced by the
next one, but somebody's going to do it. That's interesting. I didn't know that they had reopened
back up. Sorry, go ahead. Yeah. So again, think about mentality. We're at the bottom. This is the
worst. Markets forward looking at Chinese stock markets up like 50% already and they're driving
parts of the global cycle. So when you read it in the news headlines, it's usually too late.
No doubt. Now, I didn't realize that they had opened Hong Kong back up for crypto. What do you
think about the general state of crypto? I have heard people now, AI has become like the new hot
girl and all that energy that was in crypto is the future. It's going to change everything. Web
3 is now like, nah, that's whatever. AI is where it's at. How do you see crypto? Where is this
going? Is this a temporary downturn that we boom back up? Literally nothing's changed since I last
came to talk to you about it. I said it's bottomed then. I still think it's bottomed and six months
later it's bottomed and some of these are up 100% plus from the low. The global liquidity cycle,
the forward looking indicators had turned up a while ago and the business cycle will get through
the trough and through the other side. So crypto is going up. Now, does it go up straight? Does it
have some volatility? I don't know, but it seems pretty good so far. It just seems to go up, do
a bit sideways, go up, do a bit of sideways. At some point, there'll be a reasonable down
and everyone will be like, oh my God, and then it'll keep going up. So there was no free money,
you take risk with crypto. I'm super comfortable. All I speak to is giant brands, giant people.
Just spoke to how to rate interview on Real Vision with two of the heads of institutional
business at Coinbase, what they're building out, the kind of people they're speaking to. I'm seeing
on the other side, everybody from car companies to sports teams to music companies,
all looking at the space. We're looking at what we're building at Real Vision,
what you're building, what is going on, how vibrant the community is in a bear market.
I'm seeing consolidation. I'm seeing the regulatory fight happening. We're seeing court cases
finally going through like the grayscale and the ripple case where people eventually get the SEC
into a place where it is acceptable. But I always said this, they will always push too far.
Everybody's offered to push back and they'll get somewhere in the middle.
And that's what they're establishing now. And the Chinese are coming back on
in a thoughtful manner. I spoke to, as part of my crypto show, I spoke to the
Muncher Authority of Singapore, got a good friend there who's the chief fintech officer.
He's like, yeah, all systems go over here. Just been over to India and he's Indian himself. He's
like, he sort of cannot express how amazing their central bank digital currency system is.
We're all go, everything's fine. The US, the only one's dragging their feet.
That interview, before we move on to the UK, that interview, which I watched,
I thought was very interesting. Your guys' own title on that was Governments Go Cold on Bitcoin.
And so he seemed very excited about the, I forget the name of it, but the digital currency
everybody's using on the street, which has a name. And he was like, booming over here,
your jaw will be on the floor to see how rapidly this is going to happen.
This is the central bank digital currency, the government version of a digital payments rail.
There's a name for it though. Digital Ruby, I forget.
Yeah, you can see or something here.
Yeah, yeah, something like that. So that was interesting, but he was like,
it hasn't played out yet in terms of cryptocurrencies. In fact, I think one of the
early things he said was, it's not really a currency. Yeah, so what he's done is gone down
three parts, central bank stuff, because he's actually involved with all that BIS,
Bank of International Settlements group that are building out the world's digital rail. So he cares
about that. He was very disappointed that Australia had been using it to build their whole
stock markets using crypto blockchains and kind of walked away from it. So he was like,
that's a big blow. He said, Ethereum and things like that, where you're building on top of a
network, so we're all for that, we like it, we're building on it and we're doing stuff.
Cryptocurrency, which was his expression for something that has no other use case apart from
a monetary use case, Bitcoin. He's like, we do not want. And he was unusually strong. I mean,
you saw the interview, he was unusually strong about that because he's not usually that guy, but
I think he's also gone through the crusher because he really, in Singapore, he's like,
let's do this and then the whole space is down 80%. And my guess is a lot of people said to him,
are you an idiot or what? And he's tried to explain to people, this is what the space is
like, it's volatile, it's early technology. So overall, the bigger picture is I'm
still incredibly positive, my mind hasn't changed whatsoever. And if I go back to the point I made
before, crypto is priced by two things, the technological adoption curve, which is exponential.
So you need to put a logarithmic chart. If you put a nice little logarithmic chart at the bottom
of the log channel, so we've got to the bottom, and it's driven the ups and downs, these crazy
ups and downs that look crazy until you put them on a log chart and they just look normal.
Those crazy up and down are driven by the money supply, the liquidity cycle, the business cycle.
And so here we are on the secular trend, and the business cycle is turning up,
and prices are down quite a lot. This gives you the highest probability of that.
Buying them all the way up to the top, wow, I've got to wait till Bitcoin gets to 50,000,
then it's not the way to do this. You either believe in the space and therefore invest cash when
nobody else is, when it's at the right points, or you dollar cost average and do it in a sensible
way. But these are the times, so I'm immensely excited still and see nothing but opportunity
and volatility. Yes, very, very well said. Raoul, I could talk to you endlessly. This is always so
fun. Where do you want people to go to engage with you? We've done a lot about this exponential
stuff. In fact, I've got Ahmed Mostak coming on Real Vision for a second time, because he was
an old friend of mine, and he just happened. Suddenly, I find out he just started this thing.
He was a macro guy like me. So come over to realvision.com. Right now, we've got actually
two weeks of stuff, which is called How to Unfuck Your Future, which is basically all the stuff
you and I talk about, which is like, okay, what are the problems? Let's take them out, let's look
at them, and let's figure out how we can solve them. So we're doing that on Real Vision. So
people should go, it's like a $1 trial or something. So just do that. If not, you can find me on
YouTube, also at Real Vision, or find me on Twitter. So at Raoul, R-A-O-U-L-G-M-I.
I love it. Brother, as always, thank you so much for being here. Everybody, if you have not already,
be sure to subscribe. And until next time, my friends, be legendary. Take care. Peace.
But you can learn how to prepare for a recession with this interview with Ray Dalio.
New York City is becoming more dangerous. Chicago is becoming more dangerous.
Places San Francisco is becoming more dangerous. You're seeing people leave some...
