Culture is software. We know it's continually failing us. We should not have a significant
number of Americans alleging the election was stolen.
There was a pretty gnarly one-two punch between COVID and Trump that I really think
caused a sense-making apparatus to fall apart in some way. Yeah.
My question is, can we stop the rise of evil, or is that already a fallacy? And if we can,
then how? Well, I think your first point is that we didn't have anything like a consensus
around what was going on. I mean, people were siloed into various echo chambers and just not
converging on an assessment of just what the facts are about anything. I don't consider myself the
best judge of how this happened because there were people who were sufficiently far from me
on the information landscape so that I just cease to understand how they could be thinking and
doing what they were thinking and doing. I'm not seeing their social media feed. I'm seeing some
fragments of what they're finding persuasive, but it's just amazing to me that there are,
I don't know what it is, 30%, 40% of American society still thinks that Trump was not only fine,
he was better than fine, he was impeccable on some level ethically, and that January 6 was a
non-event and that there was really nothing at stake there. It's all just been insanely,
it was a combination of nothing happened, but everything that did happen was Antifa or Trumped
up by the CIA. It was not violent, but the violence was from some other source. I mean,
this is not a coherent view, but you literally have something like 100 million people who think
that it was just no factor. I mean, there was just nothing. The only thing bad that happened is that
the election got stolen from the rightful president, which was Trump. I don't know how you
are paying attention to anything like a valid source of information and you still believe
that, right? And there are people who believe that or pretend to believe it enough that they're,
I do think there are people who are just being fundamentally dishonest with their audiences.
So you have, it's amazing how it can come down to a couple of dozen personalities that really are
close to the lever that moves public opinion here. So you have someone like Tucker Carlson,
who we know on the basis of the Dominion lawsuit, behind closed doors was talking about Trump as a
demonic force. He couldn't wait for him to disappear from the public conversation.
He hated him with passion. Those are basically verbatim quotes of his text messages behind the
scenes at Fox that got entered into evidence in the Dominion case. And yet his public-facing
message is all Trump supporting conspiracy theorizing all the time for years. He was the most
watched person on Fox and pretty soon he'll be the most watched person wherever he finally
hangs his hat, but his Twitter videos get apparently tens of millions of views. And
so he's got this enormous audience that seemingly doesn't care about his hypocrisy,
right? Which is amazing to me. I don't know how you maintain an audience with this kind of loss of
face. The mainstream media was not shy in advertising the discrepancy between what he was
saying behind closed doors and what he was saying on his show. So either you have a hundred million
people who just simply never watch any mainstream media product or read it, and that's quite possible.
But the basic problem before anything, before we think about antithetical ethical commitments or
political commitments or people who disagree about evil really at bottom, we just can't even
converge on a discussion of facts. People just can't agree about what is happening or much less
why or what should happen. The thing that we have to start with, one, to set the table, is that what
people are doing, that they really do all have their own good intentions. They all think that
they have spotted the evil, but they're just spotting it from different sides. If that's true,
then people's behavior at least makes sense. I understand how it's self-motivated. Now,
it's never going to be that pure. I'm sure there are also some people that are just grabbing for
power. But if the public response is, okay, I see from where I'm sitting from my side that
the other side is evil and I need to really react accordingly, then it starts to make sense.
Now, if that's what's going on, then it becomes, okay, well, now we need the sense-making apparatus
by which we figure out what is evil, what is the right response. The first step in that is going
to be, I think, to identify what's true, that we need some anchor in the storm that we're going to
say, okay, this is the foundation and we're going to build up from here. There has to be a mechanism
by which we start to figure all this out. All layout, my rough thesis is a way just to guide
the conversation. So I think that there's something about the modern world, largely as it's married
to technology that creates this inability to get people to share a narrative, which allows us then
to approach any issue from the same perspective of what we're trying to achieve. So you've got
velocity of information. So information is just coming out of so fast and furious. I've heard
you talk about Alex Jones in that context of like, hey, this guy just talks as fast as he can,
throwing out so many points at you. Each one just makes you look uneducated if you're like,
I didn't know what that was. And you're like, you find out it doesn't even exist. And so that is
social media, just the rate at which information can come at you is so fast. The business model
of social media is that whatever grabs attention is going to be monetized. So then people very
quickly realize the more salacious, the more sort of grand and aggressive, the more likely it is to
get attention. So now it's coming at you hyper negative and hyper fast. When you combine that
with this sense of everything has to roll up into a headline. So all of these ideas are incredibly
nuanced. The problem is to get them to propagate on social media, they have to be a headline. It
has to be something that's memorable. It has to be something that's easily digestible. And it has
to be something that's repeatable. And when you repeat it, that the other person's like, oh,
that's sick, you got it just right. And now they want to go tell somebody else. And so for anybody
that's being bombarded with all this information as a way to wrap their heads around it, they just
pick a team. And then the team just tells them, yeah, these are all your positions. So now all
you have to memorize are the headlines for your group. And I actually am deeply empathetic to
that because holding on to the nuance of a complicated situation is already very difficult
when you are able to roll that up into a headline, it becomes something that you
can hold on to far more easily. But then the truth of the on the ground interaction points
all get lost. And so I, as I was watching all of this unfold, then it became the
those 12 people that you're talking about, and certainly I will put you as one of them,
it began to be unclear, like, okay, wait, what, what, what is the foundation that you're building
on that you level up from this? And so what I want to get through in the beginning here is what
is that foundation? So in a world where the sense making apparatus is dealing with velocity of
information, misinformation, power grabs, corruption, but you can actually hide a lot of that through
velocity of headline, rolling up a complex topic into an oversimplification, where do we get the
bedrock? Now, I'm, I am aware of the not debate, maybe it was a debate that you and Jordan did
about what is truth. And I know that you can devolve into madness. But like, if you were to
give a simple explanation of how you ground yourself when you think through these things,
what does that look like? First of all, not being tribal, right? So not being not caring really
about, I mean, I care about source, I care about sources of information as a proxy for just not
having to figure out everything from, from, you know, the bedrock every time, right? So
meaning expert? Yeah, I think you can default to expertise most of the time, all the while
knowing that expertise can fail. It's just a sanity sparing and certainly time sparing
practice to say, okay, most of what is printed in the New York Times has to be to a first
approximation mostly true. Otherwise, the New York Times is no longer the New York Times. Now,
I think there, there have been moments where, and certainly on specific topics where it's been
valid to worry that the New York Times is no longer the New York Times, right? There,
they can sort of systematically getting certain topics wrong or shading the truth for, you know,
as an expression of obvious political bias. So there's, there, there are moments where all of
our institutions have, if not, you know, frankly failed us, showed a capacity to fail us, you know,
at times. And, and what that did to much of the country is just torpedo any trust in institutions,
right? So the trust in the mainstream media is at its all time low, I would imagine.
Certainly the last time I looked at a poll on that topic, that seemed to be the case.
But so it is with government messaging on virtually any topic, in particular public health,
our scientific institutions, our universities. And all of this is understandable in that in the
last, you know, six years post Trump and post COVID, we had this almost perfect storm politically
where there really did seem to be a capture of the mainstream institutions by a very intolerant
and really at bottom illiberal political ideology. I mean, it's supposedly liberal, it's far left,
but it's, you know, in terms of its style of thought, it was, you know, we were edging toward,
you know, Chinese show trials. I mean, it was really, it was just, you know, the kinds of,
and the truth is you didn't need that many specific cases to feel like, okay, you've seen enough,
there's no reason to listen to these people ever again, right? I mean, if you're, if you're somebody
who's just poised to throw the baby out with a bathwater, it's just, you just need to hear,
one case of someone being, you know, defenestrated at the New York Times for
is not surviving one specific blasphemy test. And that's, you know, then there's just no,
then the New York Times is no better than the Epoch Times or Breitbart or anything else that is in
in the business of, you know, putting things in font and shipping them. And it's all journalism,
right? You know, so, so for me, it was, it was, you had to recognize that though our
institutions are challenged, there is still such a thing as expertise. There is still such a thing
as institutional knowledge. There's a need for institutions that we can trust. Certainly when
you're in the middle of a pandemic, we need a CDC and an FDA that we can actually trust, right? So
the fact that we felt that we couldn't quite trust them is an enormous problem. And it's,
it's the thing we need to shore up is the trustworthiness of indispensable institutions.
It's not that we need to tear everything down to the studs such that there are no institutions,
no one thinks in terms of institutions, it's all just podcasts and sub-stack newsletters,
as far as the eye can see, and we're just going to all do our own research, right?
And I think it's not to say that doing your own research is never valid and it's never even
important. I mean, there's certainly cases where one person can pull at a thread long enough that
something really important unravels and we're all, you know, wiser for it. Or that, you know,
one individual, given a specific problem in their lives, you know, let's say a medical problem,
they do their own research and they discover the, the remedy for the thing that was alien
their family member or whatever. And you know, the doctors didn't do it and the CDC didn't do it
and the FDA was wrong and they found the thing that helped. Okay, great. Generally speaking,
doing, when times are good, doing your own research is just frankly a waste of time. And
when things really matter, it's very likely a dangerous waste of time, right? It's like,
you don't, you don't get on an airplane and decide, you know, well, I'm, you know, I'm not so sure
I trust the pilot or the guy, you know, the guys who repair the engines, I'm going to do some of
my own research here, you know, like, you know, let me in the cockpit. I want to, you know, I want
to interrogate some of those dials and switches. It's like, that's, that's not a situation where
anyone would tolerate this sort of contrarian anti-establishment. I'm going to innovate,
you know, just break stuff and see what happens. And that the problem is, in many respects,
we are at 30,000 feet together, all of us, all the time. And we're having to, we're having to
figure out what is real and what to do. And we do need experts that actually warrant our trust
because they are, in fact, experts, right? So when, you know, there's just specific cases, like
what's really happening in Ukraine and why and what should we do about it, right? What should we,
should we send them arms? Is Putin lying about, you know, the last thing he said was true on the
ground? When our State Department has a press conference and tells us what's going on, we need
a State Department that we trust to inform us, right? And when the New York Times has some point
of view on what's happening there, we need a New York Times that is sourcing information in a way
that is valid. We just, we can't have everyone trying to get to ground truth based on their own
private efforts to come up with what we should all think about Ukraine or what we should all think
about mRNA vaccines or whatever it is. But people do feel that. And I certainly felt that
at the beginning of this. So as I hear you say, so remember my, my initial question is what's
your foundation? And the foundation felt like you wanted to be experts, but you understand how
much they've eroded their credibility. So my question, because I don't disagree with you,
if I was at 30,000 feet, I don't want people going in and trying to mess with the pilot.
But I think that the analogy might not quite be right for what we went through. We,
what it felt like, I'll just speak for myself, but I think I represent a lot of people,
what it felt like was, oh, I'm realizing that the pilot is lying to me. Now, I'm willing to be
generous and say the pilot is lying to me because they're trying to stamp out evil. And they really
believe that, that to trick the American public into taking a vaccine, whatever, is the right answer.
And that they are doing it with a big heart and that they really just want to help people get
where they're going. But like when they said, you know, masks don't work, it was just like,
come on, like that doesn't make any sense. And then they flip and they're like, no, of course,
actually masks do work. And we were just lying to you because we needed to get them into the
medical professionals hands. So it was like, just slowly, slowly, they start eroding and you
suddenly realize everybody has an agenda. Now, that I get it. But where it starts to be a problem
for me is when, if we understand that experts have an agenda, and I'll even, I had Peter Attia on my
show, who's a medical expert, amazing. And if he tells me to do something, I basically just do it,
like he's unbelievable. And he, in his new book, he talks about how you actually can be fat and
healthy. And when he said that my first impulse was, Peter, you can't tell people that. Because
even if it's true, it's in such a like edge case, narrow percentage, and the vast majority of the
bell curve are all people who are fat and unhealthy. And if you give them that out,
they're going to take it, they're never going to make any changes, and they're going to die. And
they're going to raise their kids worse, and their kids are going to have shorter life expectancy.
And I really had an emotional response of like, you can't tell people that even if it's true.
But in that moment, I realized, oh, this is the very thing that drives you crazy. Yeah. So I'm like,
you, you can't. So I was like, well, if it's true, it's true. And the consequences are going to be
what the consequences are going to be. So then I start going, okay, then if I can't just mourn
myself around, experts are going to know, and they're going to be able to say, because I don't
think three years ago, Peter would have written this book, I don't think he had the insights
into it. So even somebody as bright as him over time is changing. So experts don't really know
what's right and what's wrong, especially not in a hot and heavy situation like that.
On top of that, there are inevitably going to be things that I think should be said, somebody
else thinks shouldn't be said or vice versa. And so now you get to, okay, well, if we can all agree,
we're only going to say what's true. Like even that, I think is a task, but let's say that we
all agree that we're only going to say what's true. Now this gets really complicated. And I
will put forth that what I think is quote unquote true is based on perspective,
interpretation and reinforcement. So there's physics, which we don't even understand fully,
and then there's everything else. And because a gigantic part of every day truth, and I don't
know if that will help us get to a sort of in the weeds working definition, but every day truth
seems to be predicated on that you have to take into the into account the person's perspective.
So how do they see the world blue, red, right? You have to take into account their interpretation.
So looking at data, some people are going to say, no, it doesn't show that it shows this. And you
can get people that look at the data and just violently disagree on what it shows. And then
you've got the reinforcement. So if they put out a tweet saying their version of the truth,
and they get a wall of reinforcement, then they're just one that feels good,
they're going to see it more and more and more and more and more. And so just the sheer repetition
of it all. Any of those pieces feel wrong. Well, I think the thing you pointed to there
in your conversation with Peter is important to focus on because people have a very hard time
keeping track of everything that's said and keeping things in proportion. And so I think
your intuition that is dangerous to be precisely true on that point, because most people most
of the time will draw the wrong message. That is the style of thinking, as you observe, that
our public health officials were too encumbered by. They were aware that they were messaging into
a very dirty information landscape. It's just polluted with conspiracy thinking and frank lies.
And we had a president who was by turns minimizing everything and lying about it. I mean, just
telling pointless lies. We have 15 cases and it's going to go away immediately.
And there was this basic fact, it's quite inconvenient in the case of a pandemic,
that it's this moving target where we're finding that we actually don't understand what we thought
we understood yesterday. So the message is changing. It's not that we have a completely
clear message that is still difficult to parse and we have to be careful. We have to talk to people
like children or at least in a kind of paternalistic way and say, okay, listen, most fat people are
not healthy. It's generally not healthy to be fat. Virtually every fat person would be healthier if
they were less fat, but it's still possible to be healthy if you're fat. And there are people
who are skinny who are not healthy and it gets confusing. But you can't really go wrong with
this basic message that you want to be thin and fit and you want to do the things you want to be
on your way to being thin and fit at minimum, you want to be active, you want to be eating well,
et cetera. I am a freak for efficiency. So let me tell you, I am always on the hunt for clothes
that can work in any setting. The bad news is most traditional pants do not have that kind of
versatility, but bird dogs were designed to meet that exact need. They were created to be your
go-to pants for any and every activity. Bird dogs are made with a cloud knit fabric that looks just
like khaki, but stretches with your every move. And their built-in liners use anti-stink, sweat
wicking fabric that I know a lot of you boys are going to need to keep cool and dry all day long.
With bird dogs, you can go out, work out, meet with clients, come to fight, go to an event,
whatever. They've got you covered and you can do it all without having to stop and change.
Go to birddogs.com slash impact or just enter promo code impact for a free Yeti-style tumbler
with your order. You won't want to take your bird dogs off. We promise you that.
In the case of COVID, the truth was getting overturned by further revelations. I mean,
the truth with respect to the disease, the epidemiology of it, how contagious it was,
how dangerous it was, we were getting new variants. It was literally the disease itself was changing.
What we understood about vaccines was changing. Initially, in the beginning, there was every
reason to believe, at least it was every reason to hope that the vaccines would block transmission
and therefore not getting vaccinated was a decision not just with respect to your own health,
but the health of the people around you. Later on, that began to unravel and it was clear,
okay, that doesn't really block transmission all that much, maybe a little bit, but not really.
Therefore, it's a personal decision and it's not a decision that you're making for others.
You're not a bad citizen. Therefore, if you don't get vaccinated,
we were messaging into an environment where there's so much misinformation around specifically
things like vaccines. There's literally an anti-vaccine cult that has been working in the
background of our culture for decades. This was their moment to really seize the reins of
the social media conversation, at least. It was understandable that our public health officials
and doctors generally felt like, okay, we got to keep this really simple. This has got to be
idiot-proof, get faxed, COVID is dangerous, wear a mask. Don't wear a mask when you're stealing
the masks from people who don't get our first line responders who need the PPE. Once we had
enough, wear a mask. The problem was, when that began to unravel, there were so many
clear moments of dishonesty that where anyone who was going to have their trust broken with
mainstream institutions, they broke up right there and they seemingly broke up permanently.
Okay, you're going to tell me that I have to get vaccinated because it stops transmission
and now I'm hearing that it no longer stops transmission. Okay, I'm done. The other problem
is that now we have an information landscape where basically everything survives. There is
not the normal Darwinian contest between sources of information where if something gets sufficiently
discredited, you never hear from it again. The internet is big enough and friction-free enough
such that you can be a complete lunatic who everyone knows is a complete lunatic and yet
you create an ecosystem that enough people love and you can figure out how to monetize it.
You can have an audience of a million people forever, it seems. And literally you could be
saying that the craziest case is something like QAnon where it's like the actual claim
that people are bonding over is that the world is being run by child-raping cannibals and among
those cannibals are people like Michelle Obama and Tom Hanks and it's just- I always know it.
Yeah. So it's like, okay, we're really saying that these people are cannibals and pedophiles
and we're going to spend a lot of time having this conversation amongst ourselves. We don't care
if the rest of the world thinks we're crazy because in this space, this is just our playground.
This is our information playground. There's nothing. We're not bumping into any hard objects here
because we have as much information real estate as we want to carve out
for ourselves. I mean, that didn't used to be- it used to be that if you wanted to publish books
or publish print newspapers or magazines, you needed enough contact with the normal kind of
reinforcement of just mainstream consensus that you would survive financially. It's like
there's something about the internet that has just made the cost of spreading information go to zero
and when you're dealing in bits and no longer dealing in atoms, it's- everything survives
and persists in some basic sense. Yeah. I think it's important to really understand what that
mechanism is. So it's what I'll call velocity of information if you have a better name for it,
I'm all for it, but there's something about packaging an idea up in an environment where
there's so much information, all you can digest is the headline when something is hyper-transmittable,
that it just has- whether it's clever, it rhymes, it whatever, that has just that little bit of
extra juice on it, it's something that's funny, memified, that it's really going to burn through
culture. Now, for me, where this all begins to become deeply problematic is that it isn't so
much that just the internet is forever, it's that Socrates hated democracy because he didn't think
people were smart enough to parse through the information and he thought, man, you shouldn't
be able to vote in this thing if you're not educated on this thing and the reality is most
people aren't going to be educated and therefore democracy is really not going to survive.
So I take a totally different approach to this, which is I think that if you create an environment
where everybody gets to vote in a world that has the velocity of information that we have,
information is free to send, it's easy to package it up, roll up into headlines,
there's no doubt that a lot of misinformation is going to get out there and people just don't
even know where to check, where to turn, to know who's who, what's what. That will have
very negative consequences, but the only flip side of that that I see is top down authoritarian
control where it's like I decide whoever I is, the government, Twitter, YouTube, whoever, they
decide what's real information and what's not because what people are trying to get back to
is what you were talking about before where information velocity was slow, that you had to
go to a print piece of newspaper, they even put extra checks where it was like it had to be vetted
by three sources or whatever and I'm not saying yellow journalism didn't exist, of course it did,
but there were self-imposed constraints, there was a business model that let even those self-imposed
constraints really be financially viable, it was just harder to do, harder to get out there
and so by reducing it, there were only so many narratives that you were going to be able to get
out, so even if New York, you know, back in the 20s or whatever had 50 newspapers just in New York
City, that's still only New York City, you're not dealing with a global readership, so you have
just this natural constraint. Now once nature isn't giving you the constraint anymore,
the second you want that constraint from the top down, you now step into what I call the trifecta
of evil and the trifecta of evil is three books that I read, they technically have nothing to do
with each other but just completely explain how all of this goes awry and has made me absolutely
terrified of top down authoritarian control, far more than I am afraid of the absolute chaos of
a thousand Alex Jones. So the three books are The Gulag Archipelago by Alexander Solzhenitsyn,
Mal, The Unknown Story and Then The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich and those three books tell you
just how wrong things go when people are told shut up, your opinion doesn't matter and this person
knows better and you're just going to get in line. The great thing about the Mal book is that
I hadn't realized how evil Mal was, I thought he was like a junior level of evil compared to
Stalin and Hitler, but you read that book and it's just, I mean the details are just so sadistic
and ghastly, unbelievable. I literally had no idea when I started reading that book. The fourth,
if I were going to do an honorable mention, to give Stalin some more love would be Red Famine.
Yeah. That book is shocking, shocking. Have you read it? No, but I've read a lot of
best Stalin. Yeah, I don't know if I can recommend it. There's this one part where a woman telling
a tale, a woman comes up and looks through another woman's, this is in the Ukraine, Starving, 1921
or whatever and she looks through the window and catches her neighbor eating her seven-year-old
daughter. You're just like, I just, I can't imagine. So that scares me a lot more than
we're all having a hard time figuring out what is true. Now, I have a pitch for how I think we
figure out what is true that is certainly going to be flawed, but the first thing I want to
to either agree, debate whatever is, do you agree that this is sort of the sequencing of events,
that we have this wall of information that's coming in too fast? It's all rolled up into
headlines. There's no nuance. Most people probably aren't smart enough to deal with the nuance
anyway. And now, temptation one is to just go, oh, dear elites, pre-masticate all of this for us
and tell us what to do. We tried that. They have agendas, even if they're really being sincere
and trying to be good, they have agendas and that just feels absolutely shitty. It feels like
you're being manipulated. It breaks all your trust. Can't do that. The other one is,
just absolute top down, do what the fuck you're told, shut up and this is it.
Both of those strike me as horrendous and that leaves the third option, which is free speech,
which has become contentious somehow. So as a child of the 80s, to me, that's like the greatest
thing ever. I'm all for free speech. I love what Elon is doing on Twitter. I think it's amazing.
But at the same time, I know that's not widely shared. I'm not even sure where you fall down.
Yeah, I can push back on some of that. Well, so a couple of distinctions. One is that
it's not just that everything gets boiled down to headlines. I mean, that is a problem. Sometimes
the headline doesn't even faithfully represent what's actually in the article. And so many people
only read the headlines. They never even read the article. So there's that problem. That problem's
with us for a while. There's the algorithmic boosting of outrage and misinformation preferentially,
which is the problem on social media. And the distinction, so I would make one distinction,
which is, and this is, many people have made this, freedom of speech and freedom of reach
are different things, right? So you should be free to post whatever you want to post,
but it is a choice on the side of the social media company to preferentially boost or dampen
whatever they want to boost or dampen, right? So it's to change the character of the conversation.
And they have to make decisions there. To make no decision is itself a decision, right? So if
you're going to make a completely flat, people will have one experience. If you're going to tweak
it algorithmically, people have a different experience. And that is a business choice that
they are incentivized to make largely because they have a terrible business model. I mean,
the gaming of attention is a bad business model, I would argue. So the fact that it's an ad-based
attention economy has a lot to do with the kind of the original sin of social media,
I think, is the business model. And if these were all subscription businesses,
I think we could have a different landscape there with respect to social media.
But still, there would be a moderation burden. And it's something that it seems like they're
never going to get right, even, I mean, except for the, in the presence of something like
omniscient AI that we could trust, I don't see how you, your effort to moderate what
hundreds of millions of people say to one another, or even in some cases, billions of people.
That's always going to produce casualties. It's always going to produce somebody who was just
a completely valid academic who just took a, an edge case position and got flagged as a,
you know, a Nazi or whatever. And, you know, that they, there has to be some process of appeal,
etc. The other distinction I would make is that there's a big difference between
governments silencing speech and actually punishing people for, you know, errant speech.
And companies, private companies, or even publicly held companies,
deciding that they want to be associated with or not associated with certain kinds of
speech, right? So, and so when I look at this from through a free speech lens from a, you know,
a U.S. centric, you know, First Amendment lens, we should acknowledge that most of the world doesn't
have the protection of the First Amendment and they're worse off for it. And so, you know,
if you're living in the U.K. and you're perceiving this debate, you're looking at it as someone who
feels stifled by the reality that you don't have a First Amendment to default back to. And that's,
you know, I've been slow to appreciate just how different that is politically and ethically
for people. So, speaking from the U.S. context, I think we have it right that the government
should not make any kind of speech illegal with, you know, a few exceptions like inciting violence.
So, I think you should be free to be a Nazi and say you're Nazi things and you should be free to
reap the reputational costs of that, right? People now know you're a Nazi, they don't want to do
business with you, they vilify you on their forums. But the question is, should a platform
like Twitter or any other platform be legally required to associate with Nazis, right? Can
they have in their terms of service a no Nazis policy? And I think they should, I think my free
speech concern now is aimed at the owners and employees of those platforms, right? So, I'm
thinking about the person who starts a social media company. The truth is what we're going to
do this. We're going to, you know, this is an experiment because my, you know, as you might
imagine, my faith that you can actually produce a social media platform that works is pretty low.
But for waking up, my meditation app, we are going to launch a, basically a forum of some kind.
And that will, you know, very quickly have tens of thousands and even some hundreds of thousands
of people in it, presumably, should I be able to have a no Nazis policy, right? Now, I'm not
expecting any Nazis. I mean, first of all, this is a subscription business. So there's already
a gatekeeping function that is helpful there, I think, ensuring a kind of good faith and quality.
But there, you know, anyone who needs free access to waking up also gets it. So there's a lot of
free users of it. So it's not a perfect paywall. I think when I start a platform like that, first
of all, I should be able to just zero it out overnight. Like if it's not working, if I don't
like the way this is working, I should be able to just send everyone emails saying, sorry,
you know, you guys broke this place. I don't like the conversation. This is over, right?
That's what I actually something I told Jack Dorsey when he was still running Twitter that he
should just delete it and he'd win the Nobel Peace Prize and he would deserve it. So I think
you should be able to, you should be free to delete your social media account if you in fact own
it. And you should be free to decide, okay, these are the standards of conduct in this space.
Like it's, you know, this is true if you open a restaurant or if you open a movie theater,
if you open any public space, it doesn't change. If it's merely digital, you should be able to
set the terms of service. And if it's a no Nazi space, well, then Nazis are not welcome here,
right? So you, if you demonstrate it that you're a Nazi, we kick you out of our platform.
Now I, so I'll grant you that any company should be able to do what they want to do.
If Hooters wants to hire only attractive women, by all means, let them hire only attractive
women. If someone wants to do a female only company, I don't have a beef with it. I don't
even have a beef if Harvard only wants to, you know, if Harvard wants to make it near impossible
for an Asian student to get in, as long as they are clear and transparent and don't take government
money, I'm all for it. I don't care. But the transparency matters to me. But my real question
is like, as we think about actually solving the problem. And so I'm asking this largely in the
connotation of 2024 is coming, we're going to be running into this again. I really think the right
way to set the table is you've got people on the left and people on the right who both think that
the other side is evil. They both think that they have recognized the problem reincarnate and
if we don't establish a new sense making mechanism for a world in which the velocity of
information is this fast, AI is coming, so deep fakes are going to be a real thing. Like we need
a method that we can all rely upon in order to think through these problems well. And so, Mike,
where I come down on free speech isn't whether a private company should be able to limit the
reach of somebody that's a Nazi or say, I don't want Nazis on my platform. That's fine. There
is a real consequence to that though, which is then it just bifurcates and you get the right
and the left because that's really what's being argued about as far as I can tell.
I have not seen any of what I would call real Nazi like stuff. It's normally just
behavior people don't like it. It's coming from the opposite side of the aisle. So when I say,
okay, what is the right way to deal with this? My answer is I think everybody needs to distrust
themselves a little. So they should not assume that they are right. Everybody should be willing
to put their ideas forward on how they think through the problem. So rather than only listening
to experts, it's like, hey, I'm an expert or I'm not, but this is how I think about the problem.
This is how I've ended up with this conclusion. I've looked at this or I've studied that whatever,
but this is how I come to this conclusion. And then to want the collision of ideas.
And the second people are more worried about bad ideas being out there. They're either saying,
I completely give up to this velocity of information problem. So we have to just choke it.
And we have to make sure that there's, there's only the authorized information.
Or you accept the, the consequences of letting the ideas battle it out in the public consciousness.
And as far as I can tell, the second you say, the people aren't smart enough to battle these
ideas out, the system of information distribution is so broken that it's, it's unsafe. Maybe
isn't the perfect word, but you'll never get a good outcome by doing that. You can't have democracy.
Like it is literally only in the face of the ability for people to say what they believe
is true and to battle out those ideas that we have any hope of people really understanding
as close to the sort of unsculptured way of presenting an idea that we're going to get.
And look, there are going to be people that won't be able to navigate that mess.
And so I'm certainly not saying that this is perfect, but when I step back and look at the
reality of the landscape that we're in, algorithmically controlled, all of that,
everybody has a voice in social media, et cetera, et cetera. I don't see a way around it.
Well, so we don't have a pure democracy, right? It's not like you just get online and vote,
and it's, you know, one person, one vote, and then we decide whether we go to war with Russia,
based on the tally. We pick representatives, and there I think it's important that we have
representatives who are not blown around like weather vans by just whatever's happening on
Twitter that day, right? So yes, they need to care about what their constituents want, but
I think it's good that there's a looseness of fit between what 500 people in the government do
and what, and the cacophony on social media, right, that may be, to some degree, informing
their impression of what their constituents want, right? So we need serious people in serious roles
of responsibility, and insofar as we're losing that, and there's definitely signs that we are
losing that, and we've got, you know, at least one person in Congress who, when our state is on fire,
she speculates that maybe it's, you know, Jewish space lasers starting those fires,
right? This is Marjorie Taylor Green. Yeah, yeah. Marjorie Taylor Green has heard that there were
some space lasers put up there by Jews. I think it was Rothschild funding
that could start fires, and we might want to look into that, right? So insofar as that is
happening, that we're getting people so anti-establishment that they are effectively lunatics,
in positions of real power. I think that's a, maybe that problem has always been with us,
to some degree, but at least I am perceiving it, certainly post-Trump, as uniquely worth worrying
about at this moment. Populism is tending to promote candidates that are, almost by definition,
have fewer institutional commitments with all the good and all the bad that that entails, right?
So, but there's a lot that's good, that if you care about, you know, the last 100 years of scientific
knowledge, right, and your statements about, let's say something like climate change is going to be
constrained by a basic awareness of, you know, what most climate scientists most of the time
think about climate change, that's, you're one kind of representative. If you're somebody who's
just going to freewheel based on what they heard Alex Jones say, or, I mean, literally,
Trump gave his first interview, I think, to Alex Jones, right? Like, there's a difference of
kind of a center of narrative gravity there in populism that I think we need to worry about,
but, and there's obviously right wing and left wing variants of populism, both are problematic.
But there's just, we have to recognize that there are asymmetries, like, so what you seem
to be recommending is that we basically talk to everyone, give everyone a fair hearing. It's only
when you just bring sunlight to everything that people are going to be able to make up their
minds and they're not going to, they're still, left and right are still going to demonize one
another, but we're going to approach something like maximum understanding if we just talk about
everything. So why not have RFK Junior on your podcast, right? You know, Rogan brings them on
the podcast and just, you know, RFK, tell me, tell me, give me the world as you see it, you know,
tell me, you know, who killed your father, who killed your uncle, what do you think about these
vaccines? Do vaccines cause autism? And just let them go for four hours. The downside with that
is that even in the presence of somebody who is a subject matter expert, who's there to
provide some kind of guardrails to that conversation, there is an asymmetry between
the time and effort it takes to make a mess and the time and effort it takes to clean it up,
right? And whether it's even possible to clean it up given the resources available, right? So if
somebody is, if someone's just going to make up lies in front of you, even if you're an expert
in that area, you, there's only so much you can do because like you're not, they're playing with it
completely different, you know, kind of information physics, right? They're just going to make something
up. So if you, you might be a climate change expert or a vaccine expert, and if you have a
somebody who's a pure conspiracy theorist on those topics, you know, in my experience, you're
sitting with someone who is very often unscrupulous enough to just make stuff up, right? Or to be so
delusional in there in the way they have interacted with even valid information in the past,
that, that, that the word salad they're going to produce is, you know, effectively just a tissue
of lies. And yet there may be no way to actually interact with it in an honest way in real time
on Rogan's podcast or anywhere else such as, so as to properly debunk it. So you can't take,
let's take RFK Jr. as an example. Do we think that he is wrong and well-intentioned? Or do we
think he is sinister? Well, wrong and well-intentioned can cover for a lot of, of a dangerous error,
right? I mean, you can, you can really make a mess being wrong and well-intentioned. I think with
him, he's so, he's got so much sunk cost. He's so, first of all, there's so many, like there, there
is a, just a, a characterological, you know, psychological, you know, phenotype that just
is addicted to the, the contrarian take on more or less everything, right? So it's just like,
and it's not an accident that you see the people who are all in on, you know, the JFK
conspiracy, right? Like, you know, no way it was a single shooter, no way Oswald was a Patsy,
whatever it is, right? Those people by and large tend to just jump on all the other conspiracies,
whether it's, you know, the moon landing or 9-11 truth or it's like, they, and you have someone
like RFK Jr. where it's, it seems, I don't know the man, but I've, you know, I've been paying
attention of late. It seems like there's, there's almost no conspiracy that he doesn't have an
appetite for, right? So like, when someone says, well, what about Bill Gates injecting,
you know, transponders into us with the vaccine? He's got time for that, right? He doesn't say,
oh no, that's, I mean, you really, you really think Bill Gates is doing that? That's just,
isn't that obviously bullshit? No, no, he's like, well, you know, that's just something we really
have to look into. It's like, you know, I don't have verbatim what he said on that, but it was,
he's way too open-minded on points like that, right? And so it is with everything. And now
it's, it's deeply inconvenient for someone like me at a moment like this to have to recognize
some of these conspiracies turn out to be true, right? And some always looked plausible from the
very beginning. So like the, the, the origins of COVID coming from the Wuhan Institute of
Virology, right? Like, is it a lab leak or is it a wet market? Well, it always looked plausible
that it could be a lab leak, right? That was always a valid thesis worth worrying about and
investigating. And it was never racist to speculate that that might have been the case, right? So
the fact that our medical establishment tried to tamp that down in a completely bad faith way,
and maybe for reasons that are, if you, if you dig deeper into Fauci and into, you know, the other
players, maybe they really are, there's some deeply invidious things to discover about people's
conflict of interest and, you know, and, you know, research we funded and now we don't want to admit
we funded or whatever it was. I mean, it was that moment in Congress where Fauci and, and Rand Paul
were kind of debating the meaning of gain of function research and Fauci looked like, you know,
to many people's perception and actually shared it at the time. He looked like he was just doing
this sort of Talmudic hair splitting on what gain, the phrase gain of function meant, whereas Rand
Paul was saying, kind of just be honest with the American people. Like, you know that if you're,
if you are changing the function of the dynamics of a virus such that it spreads more among humans,
that's gain of function, you know, by whatever, by any other name.
So maybe there's something sinister beneath all of that, right? So here's one conspiracy,
among all these other conspiracies, that people, people were branded as conspiracy theorists
for entertaining. And yet it was always plausible to be worried about that. But,
this by the way, is exactly the thing that I'm worried about. So it becomes very easy to
shut people down to say, oh, that's just conspiracy. And to start having the
apps get involved. So YouTube marking it as like, oh, you talked about ivermectin, this,
shutting this episode down, like just so many things coming at you at once, trying to say,
this is outside the Overton window. And so my, my whole thesis is, is very simple, that the,
in a world where there's too much information coming in, the answer cannot be to choke it off
to try to limit the amount of information, because you will get that wrong. It is manipulative by
its very nature. The closest thing you're going to get is to let ideas battle out. There are going
to be consequences. I want to be very clear there. We probably, when it comes to things like this,
you were better off when you had trusted, but hyper limited media sources, that could at least
get everyone to walk towards the exits in a calm and orderly fashion. So I'm not denying that, but,
but that world is over. And so now you really only have two options that I can see. You either
top down, clamp down, or, and I'll lead people back to my trifecta of evil, or you go, there are
going to be consequences to letting people battle the ideas out in public. And there are going to
be a lot of people that get confused by things that should never be taken seriously. And they're
going to be taken seriously. And we're going to have lives lost because of that, but it will
balance out and we won't have lost all of our faith. And you're not going to get the small guy,
trample the death, sent off to the gulag, killed because he's an inconvenient voice,
whatever the case, which also opens the door to the power grabs. And now you get will to power,
which we saw a lot in COVID was like, Oh, I can get a little bit of power. And so it draws people
into that. So you get power grab, power grab. So when I think back, and in fact, maybe the
right way to ask the question is, and I want to keep this tied to RFK, I don't want to depart
from that yet. So you've got RFK, your view is that he's making things up that it's conspiracy,
maybe just personality wise is drawn to it. I don't hear you saying that you think he's sinister,
just dash just how his mind works. Other people, though, think that he's bang on, that he's right.
You've already admitted that he'll probably end up being right about some of these things.
I know you well enough to know you're going to say, well, there's nuance. And if you're right
for the wrong reason, you really do have to think that through. It's not enough just to be right.
We'll set that aside for now. So you've got this guy conspiracy minded, not being sinister,
probably will be right about some of these things. But probably you still don't want him to be
platformed. And then it becomes, but the crucial distinction again is between it being illegal
to platform him or just the choice for private platform. I only care about the choice. I want
to know why because you are such a potent sense maker. There's so many of us that are like
children of Sam Harris, where you really helped us think about putting these ideas together.
And then there's something in this one to punch of COVID, Trump, where all of a sudden I felt like,
wait, I've been using the tools you gave me. And now I feel like you're using a different
set of tools. And so I'm trying to remap because here's how I approach you right now. Obviously,
I've watched some portion of the internet go, Sam's brain broke. He used to be Sam Harris,
not Sam Harris. You did your own podcast about it, which was brilliant, by the way,
where you're like some portion of my audience thinks like, what have you done? I forget the
exact phrase you used, but you're so aware of how people have responded, but you've stayed
really steady. So I'm like, okay, then maybe there's something here I'm just not getting,
which is why I keep laying my thing out because you don't feel erratic to me,
but I want to understand your layering ideas that allow you to make sense of this in a way where
you're calm. If people are going to freak out on Twitter, I'm just going to step back. I'm going
to keep doing my thing. Like being with you does not feel like I'm in the presence of
someone who's on a manic episode or anything. Like you feel as ever sort of calm and centered.
And so because I am skeptical of my own approach, I want to understand yours. Now,
I'm not going to pull back on the parts where I think that it doesn't make sense. I'll say it
doesn't make sense, but I actually do want to understand. So where I was going with that is
I don't worry about illegal, not illegal. I just want to know why you think it makes sense to
de-platform or to not platform maybe a more accurate way to say it, to not platform someone
like RFK Jr. when the founding fathers said, hey, the one thing you don't want to fuck with,
make sure people can say whatever the hell they want.
Okay. Well, it matters what the platform is. So with a podcast, it's very simple. You're only
going to do 40, 50 podcasts this year. I just have to make a choice. It's an editorial choice.
It's a publishing choice. What do I want to pay attention to? Whose book do I want to read?
Who do I want to talk to? Most people... But you have said, there are certain people you don't
think should be put on a platform. Trump was one of them. Well, certain people I wouldn't
talk to for a specific reason. You're not talking fair enough, but are there people that you think
should never be platformed? Well, I think if you're going to platform... What I said about RFK
on my podcast is that if you're going to platform him, you have a journalistic responsibility to
do your homework, not only in anticipation of the things he's going to say on your podcast, but
you need to catalog the things he's already said, which are obviously bullshit that you
should challenge him on. There is just a widespread scientific consensus at this point
that there is no link between childhood vaccines and autism. Now, autism is a problem. Autism rates
have gone up. We don't understand autism, but people have gone deep studying the MMR vaccine,
but all just vaccines in general and autism and found no linkage. He is out there telling people,
anyone who will listen, that there's every reason to believe that vaccines cause autism,
or we should be worried about it, or I'm hearing from mothers who have seen the clear correlation.
They had a normal kid on Tuesday and on Wednesday. They got vaccinated and the autism started.
So he is spreading that fear, and as far as I can tell, it's on the basis of
no valid scientific information now. Now, it's also this is now linked up with everyone else's
concerns about COVID vaccines and just the reliability of medicine in general and bad
incentives and pharmaceutical companies. There's a lot of there there in stuff
that it's worth worrying about. I mean, I think a profit driven motive in medicine is something
that we're always going to be in tension with because what we want is we want the medical
establishment to be recommending drugs because they're safe and truly safe and effective to
people who truly need them, right? We don't want people in the privacy of their own minds
or in the privacy of their board meetings celebrating how they're going to make billions of
dollars at this new opportunity because they can market this drug successfully to people who may
not need it, may not benefit from it, maybe in fact be harmed by it, right? So is that
disalignment of incentives that is specifically in the case of medicine that is, I think people
are understandably uncomfortable with. So in the narrow case, when you're talking about having a
podcast, first of all, the burden is not on you to platform everybody. You can just decide who
you want to talk to. If you're going to talk to someone like RFK Jr., I think given his track
record and given how much, I think, genuine misinformation he has spread and consequential
misinformation, I think you have a responsibility not to just put a mic in front of him and let him
rip. You actually need to debunk him and maybe bring on someone who can also debunk him. Now,
again, as I said- And you have no problem with that. So if it was done in a debate format with
another expert or superior expert, then it's, we're good. Yes, except the asymmetry I pointed
out before still applies. If he's going to just make stuff up, right? So like, you know, he will,
I mean, the example I mentioned on my podcast, like he's been telling a story, I think in several
venues that, you know, he had collaborated with the journalist Jake Tapper 15 years ago on a
documentary. They had just put in a ton of effort. They did a really deep dive on the link between
vaccines and autism. And at the last minute, Jake Tapper called him and said, listen, we're
going to pull this. We just, I've never, in all my years as a journalist, I've never had this
experience, but this just came down from corporate. They're just pulling the plug on this. I'm so
sorry. And, you know, the punchline for him, and I'm not sure if he said this on Rogue and he
definitely said this on some podcast I listened to. Punchline for him is, okay, the pharmaceutical
companies have such a pull with, I mean, they spend so much money with CNN and these other
outlets that, you know, if they don't want something to air, it's not going to air, right?
That's how corrupt journalism is now. Now, if I was on a podcast debating RFK Jr. and he
trotted out that story, I would just have to eat it. I would say, all right, well, that's,
that's bad, but I agree that looks bad, right? Now, Jake Tapper has published an article saying,
this is just a lie, right? This is just like, this has like a 2% relationship to what actually
happened. There was nothing about it being, it's just, it's all upside down. And I keep debunking
this and he keeps telling this story, right? So unless you know that, it doesn't matter that
you're a vaccine expert or you could be an expert in a dozen, you know, relevant disciplines,
if someone's just going to make up a story that is perfectly shaped to tickle the contrarian,
you know, they're all a bunch of fucking liars, part of the brain,
and he still lands that blow in real time on a podcast. There's no way to debunk it in real
time. You literally need Jake Tapper to, you need to pull him out of the woodwork to,
for that particular point. But isn't there many, there are many things like that. That's the thing,
I mean, there is not like, so someone who has this style of reasoning, again, some of its conscious
lines, some of its misremembering, some of its, they're reading studies and they're not understanding
them and they're just, they're pulling half truths out of studies that can be made to seem real.
And so they're making such a mess that it is genuinely hard to be an expert in that,
you know, writing shotgun on all of that and debunking in real time. But the only responsible
way to do it would be to have an expert there to try to do that. I think it's worth stepping back
and asking the question, well, why is anyone listening to RFK Junior about vaccines at all,
right? He's not an expert in the relevant domain, right? He's not, I mean, he's not an expert in
epidemiology, he's not an expert in immunology, he's not a vaccine guy. He's like, he's not,
he's a lawyer and an activist who got this particular bee in his bonnet 20 years ago,
and he's just made a lot of noise about this. And interestingly, he's also a climate
science activist, right? And there you can see a very bizarre mismatch between
how he deals with mainstream scientific consensus in climate and how he disavows mainstream
scientific consensus on the topic of vaccines. And everything is flipped. I mean, he's just like,
he's got all the... This is the perfect example for me of the very thing that I'm worried about.
So here you have a guy, he's either sinister and wants to help the climate, in which case,
I think most people have cognitive dissonance, or he's sinister and wants people to not take
vaccines that are going to save their life, or he's maybe right about something that other
people disagree with, or maybe he's wrong but well-intentioned. So I think...
I think wrong but well-intentioned covers for a lot. I mean, just think about it. The vaccine thing
is really a unique case because what you have is an intervention on a healthy person, very often a
child, that is nevertheless risky to some degree. Some number of people are going to have a bad
reaction. Some number of people are going to die from... I mean, this is just everyone's worst,
certainly every parent's worst nightmare. I let them stick a needle in my child
and he was never the same, or he died. So you just have to hear one story like that.
It doesn't even have to happen to you. It could be a friend of a friend of a friend.
You hear this story and you think, man, it's not worth it. In the case of childhood illness,
infectious disease, you can, as basically everyone who doesn't get their kid's
vaccine does, you can just be a free rider on this larger system of herd immunity. You can say,
listen, most people are going to be vaccinated for measles. I don't even have to get my kid
vaccinated. I'm not going to run this risk. I'm just going to opt out.
And so he's intersecting with totally understandable fears that get wherein
specific anecdotes, specific stories get amplified to the... I mean, they're above data.
They're more important than data. You can show me all the data in the world. I know what happened
to my kid, right? That's, again, scientifically, that's all upside down, but it is so compelling
that... What should we do though with people that are in that situation? Because for me,
if a parent doesn't want to vaccinate their child, I do not think you should be able to force them.
Even at the height of COVID where I was like, when I really believed everybody just needs to go get
vaccinated and some people were like, I don't want to do it. I was like, word, then fine.
That just feels... So it felt wrong to me. And this is where it feels like everybody needs to
have a moral compass. Part of where I think the breakdown is happening. I've heard you refer to
something as a great unraveling. Now, I don't know what you mean by that, but I started mapping out
what I thought you meant by that. And one of the things that certainly I would mean is a great
unraveling is we don't have these shared morals anymore. We don't have one religion to carry us
through. Because what I think ends up happening, and the thing that you and I have been talking
about without really talking about, is this is a battle for the truth. If things were clear,
they'd be clear. If we really knew, vaccines don't cause autism, if vaccines caused autism,
it'd be very clear. You'd just see it, boom, done. So it's in some weird... Maybe it does. There's
enough credibility there that people can still buy into it. There isn't enough just like unequivocable
evidence in the other direction. People go, I've looked at this, because if it were true,
I could just show you this and I could show you this. And then people would go down the line.
Nobody's arguing about whether what you eat impacts what you shit, right? Everybody just
gets it. Not to tell anybody. I don't have to go convince people. It's just like your life is such
proof that there is a one-to-one relationship between what you put in your mouth and what
comes out the other end. So there is some weird gray area. So the question becomes...
And it's mostly gray area for most things. Right. So now, if we know we're living in
this area where everything is gray, nobody knows who's going to be the expert, you started the
conversation by saying, okay, we really do need experts, but no joke, like nine words into your
sentence, you were caveatting experts have sort of thrown away their credibility. And so it's like,
that is the world that we live in. Like this stuff is so complex. So the thing that we have to take
on in head-on collision is how do we discover what is true? Well, if you do it the way RFK
Jr. is doing it for climate, right? Like you notice that you can find any...
Believe the preponderance of experts.
Yeah. It's like, it's not an accident that almost all climate scientists, right? I mean,
there's a general principle you have to understand here is that it's always possible to find a handful
of PhDs or MDs who are crazy or conflicted or just for whatever reason, disposed to stake out a
genuinely disreputable and indefensible thesis. You could always... So the cigarette companies
could always find somebody with a seemingly relevant degree to say, I don't think smoking causes
cancer. I don't think it's addictive. You could find that guy. And then that guy would sell his
wares to the chemical companies that are putting fire retardant in mattresses. And he could say,
I don't think this is... If it gets into the bloodstream, it's not a problem.
You can always find those people. So I'm not saying we are always ruled by scientific
consensus because there are genuine breakthroughs in science that overturn even a 99.9% consensus,
right? But scientific consensus is still salient and still matters most of the time. And it's not
arrived at by accident. And there's so much tension in science to disprove other scientists,
right? It is such a competitive atmosphere that, again, there are studies that don't get replicated.
There's false ideas that survive far longer than you think they would. But generally speaking,
you are not going to go wrong most of the time by lining up with what 99% of
specialist X thinks on this very specialized topic.
So RFK Jr. plays that very center of the fairway game on the topic of climate,
and he does something completely different when he's talking about medicine. Now,
I don't know. Maybe he has a story that reconciles that difference. But
we need, yes, we need a healthy institutional and scientific conversation such that good ideas
generally survive and bad ideas are generally debunked. And that we know that most of the time
our experts are real experts. They acquired their expertise by a process that was going to
weed out the imbeciles and the delusional and deliver somebody who really
is arriving at their opinions on the basis of a methodology that we generally can trust, right?
They're not obviously conflicted by- Can we lay out that methodology?
You're on guard for obvious cognitive bias and wishful thinking and certainly bad incentives,
right? So it's understood, it's like, yes, if RJ Reynolds is funding research into the toxicology
of cigarettes, right? It's not to say that obviously conflicted money is always going
to fund a study that is false, right? I mean, you could run it. It's not, it's not,
wouldn't be hard to run a totally valid study where the money came from, you know, a
what would be classically be considered the wrong source, but it's easy to see that there's a,
there's at least the optics are bad enough that that's not how you want to fund that particular
science, right? And at minimum, scientists have to declare any economic interest they had in any
part of this, you know, part of this picture. But we, the truth is, scientists, science has
deeply flawed and yet it's better than any other part of culture with respect to how we play this
game of just letting ideas collide against one another and seeing what survives. That I agree
with. So the problem is I don't feel like that's what's happening or what's being championed.
So broadly, and then we can get specific to you and I and exactly what we're saying, but
the way that I think about this is you've got even, even something like science.
If you talk to Eric Weinstein talks about the disc, the, I think it's the distributed information
suppression complex. So he talks about how there is for whatever reason, just inherent into the
world of science, there's a certain bias, there's certain ideas they don't want getting out because
people have built their entire careers on something. And if you're putting something for it that
challenges it, not necessarily that they're being evil, but it's the same kind of idea of the
cigarette guy is going to see what he wants to see. And the guy whose entire career collapses,
if your new idea is right, well, magically, the peer review that you get is terrible. And
he's got a laundry list of things like that. And so I'll, I'll back up. So in a business context,
I created something called the physics of progress. And it was me trying to teach to my
students exactly how you solve novel problems. So I was like, Hey, if you want to grow a business,
I have no idea what the product is, how the audience is going to respond, what the market
situation is going to be like. So you really have to understand how to think through new business,
new product, new era, new market dynamics, whatever. And the way that you do that is physics of
progress. And I lay this whole thing out and I'm super proud of it. And I'm pitching it to my team.
And I'm like, okay, you're going to start with where, where are you trying to get to what's your
goal? You're going to identify the obstacle between where you're at and your goal. And like,
why won't I just automatically achieve my goal? Then you're going to come up with a experiment
that you can run a thing that you can do to try to overcome that obstacle, you're going to do
that thing, you're going to look at the data, figure out whether you made meaningful progress,
you're going to then re-inform your hypothesis about how to overcome that obstacle, and you're
going to start over. And one of the guys in my team goes, that's the scientific method.
And I was like, is it, I actually don't know the scientific method. And he's like, yeah,
that's the scientific method. And I was like, okay, that makes sense. To me, that's it. The reason
that I called it the physics of progress, and again, just completely acknowledging it's the
scientific method. But the reason that it occurred to me as a physics of progress is because it is
the only way to make progress that you're not going to know, you're just taking your best guess.
You know, you know where you're trying to get to, you have a guess about what the thing is
that's stopping you, you're going to try something. The problem is, and when I teach this, the big
issue is when going back to what I was saying is truth, truth is perception, interpretation,
and reinforcement. And at the moment you look at the data, so I ran my test to see if I could
overcome that obstacle, I get a result. When I look at that data, I'm bringing my perception,
my interpretation, and my reinforcement to that. And it's not that I'm evil, but I'm not necessarily
going to see what's true. And this is where science then begins to break down. It is the
right answer. Like it is what we need to do. As far as I can tell, it's the only way to make progress
in anything. But what we're living through right now is that moment of the interpretation,
the perception and the reinforcement causes you to see something that's not actually there.
You're looking at the world through a fun house mirror. And so, what, sorry, one second,
let me bring this all together. The one thing that I live in perpetual fear of is that you have the
guy, the doctor, you'll probably remember his name, I don't, who was like, you know what, I think
after you do an autopsy, you need to wash your hands before you give birth to somebody.
Yeah, Semmelweis, yeah. What, Semmelweis? Semmelweis, yeah. So Semmelweis goes and tells people this,
hey, I think this is causing the death of mothers. We really have to start washing hands. People
make fun of him, lambast him, drive him into an insane asylum where he dies before it's discovered,
oh yeah, germ theory, he was right. And so, that's how wrong this goes. I don't think that humans
have changed. I think that we still have that reaction where it's like, they're not necessarily
even trying to be mean. It just doesn't make sense. And it, to them, and it would cause like,
all these changes and, and we don't really know that this is a thing. And so, to me,
the people that want to make the decisions, they lack the, the humility to recognize the
odds of me being wrong, border on 100%. Not, not on everything, but when you take everything in
totality, you're going to be wrong. And you just don't know about which things. And so, if I'm
thinking, okay, you've put forth your idea, we need these, we need experts, we need an institutional
response that we can trust. My thing would be the closest thing I could imagine to that, you have
to red team, blue team, you've got to get somebody like RFK Junior who really believes this is a
problem. This is really causing autism. And then you debate it with data that you predict ahead
of time. So it comes down to, okay, what was your prediction? What did you think was going to
happen? Then you run the experiment. Did it actually happen? Yes or no? And then both sides,
because when you look at the data is the point at which you're most likely to make your errors,
bring your biases, all that. You look at the data, and then you try to go with the consensus. Now,
I don't see any way and climate is a great one to talk about. I don't see any way to stop all kinds
of pro longed debate. But then you hope that when there really is evidence that it starts to be
just one by one, all the detractors start falling away, it just becomes too self-evident.
And then you really can get something approaching consensus in action.
Yeah, well, so let me see if I can just isolate what we're disagreeing about here because
you seem to be imagining that we can have an information landscape, whether let's say it's on
a platform like Twitter or YouTube, where it's as flat as, there's as much, no one's doing anything
deliberate to tune the signal to noise ratio, because to do that would be to be biasing it
on the stance or is I think people are hyper biased. So that is factored into while I didn't
talk about that, that is factored into how I think you have to let the ideas battle
so that the wiser, more eloquent fighters. And I think this is probably a lot of some people's
pushback on you stepping back somewhat exiting Twitter is they were like, you were the guy
counted on to be able to throw and dodge punches and bring humor and all of that.
And so we've lost one of the great fighters of this. And that gets hard because I don't see myself
as talented enough in the idea of public opinion to do that. So you have to have people that can
dismantle these ideas. Like I've seen you on stage do this, particularly with religion,
which is outside of where we're at right now in the conversation, but where you have been,
you've been funny and it's shareable. The clips themselves are amazing because they hit and they
shake you up, but they're easy to transmit and remember. And so when you find a great orator,
Douglas Murray is another guy that can really do this. That feels to me, and I know you've
you keep saying, I'm not the guy to think through COVID or whatever. And I'm like,
actually, so as long as it's people who are disagreeing respectfully, who care about truth,
you have to, as the individual care about truth, and you have to not pride yourself on being
right. You have to pride yourself on identifying the right answer. But I have a feeling that experts
almost need that external panel of people who are like, I'm not invested in this,
but I know how to think through novel problems. Here's how I'm parsing this data.
Let me ask you really pointed questions, give me your feedback, and then I'll triangulate on an
answer that feels like in the reality of how ideas win at scale, that feels the closest to true.
But it requires a people be able to say whatever the hell they want, that they don't get
booted, kicked off, silenced, whatever. Well, so let's just take that last claim first.
All of these platforms have to kick people off for specific violations of their terms
of service, right? You need some terms of service. As far as I know, even 4chan has
the terms of service, right? I think maybe 8chan doesn't, but if you want to be more extreme than
4chan, you have to go somewhere else. I will give you barriers, must be put up now,
where we put the barriers, we are going to. But the moment you concede that, right,
then you recognize that there's absolutely nothing novel about what Elon is doing on Twitter,
he's just biasing it in a way that he likes better than the previous bias, right? So he
brought Kanye on knowing he was an anti-Semite, and then Kanye did something, and he kicked
him off because he realized, okay, I can't really have this happening on my platform.
And so it is. I mean, he's cozying up to sort of queuing on lunatics, and he may not even know
who he's signal-boosting. He's just like, you know, glad-handing somebody who said something he
thought was clever, sent him a meme he thought was clever, and he's actually signal-boosting
somebody who's just odious in their ideological commitments and in their line about everything
under the sun, right? And I'm not saying Elon's actually paying attention to all that, but he's
doing something incredibly ad hoc and sloppy, and it's still not free speech absolutism, right?
Free speech absolutism just doesn't exist. It doesn't even exist on 4chan. I mean,
as far as I know, I have this on just good faith because I'm never on, I don't think I've been
on 4chan ever, but I think it has a terms of service, and that's why 8chan was spawned. It's
like in protest over the puritanical control on 4chan. So what you seem to be recommending
is the 4chanification or the 8chanification of everything, and what that would be, in my view,
if that were happening on YouTube and TikTok and Twitter and threads and everywhere else,
it would be a maximally noisy, uncivil space, right? So it would get hard in so far as you
achieve that ideal of no libtard institutional bias, right? We're just gonna let it rip,
anyone with anything to say gets equal chance to say it. What you're gonna have there is just
pure cacophony, and it's gonna be harder and harder to find the signal and the noise, right?
So the moment you admit that, you admit you're in the business of favoring certain voices over
others, platforming and even de-platforming people when they prove on the 10th infraction
that they're truly beyond the pale and just committed to making a mess, right?
And so my leaving Twitter was just, you know, it was much more of a personal decision. It wasn't
a decision that it was just a decision about how I was gonna spend my time at attention ultimately,
but I mean, the reason why I didn't see a benefit to my staying there is that it's just the wrong
space in which to try to have a conversation, a conversation that converges on anything useful
on these kinds of topics, right? Really any polarizing topic, because I tried. I mean,
it was the only, it was the only social media platform that I ever used personally. I mean,
I'm on others, but those are just marketing channels and I never see them. But it was really
me on Twitter. I was really trying to make sense to people. What I was getting back was just this,
you know, tsunami of bad faith attacks and craziness. And what was actually exploding was not
just, you know, headlines that were false, but like, you know, in the final case, it was a clip
of me on another podcast, which was genuinely misleading as to what I said in context on that
podcast. But it simply didn't matter because the clip itself seemed to be, it seemed intelligible
enough. It seemed clear enough what I was saying within the clip that people just,
they didn't even want to hear that there was a context.
Is it the Hunter Biden thing?
Yeah.
The Biden myself.
So they didn't, like literally, they didn't want to hear and even,
like no one has the bandwidth to go back and find the context for the thing that they just reacted
to that just, you know, primed all their, you know, satisfied all their salt and sugar and fat
receptors. And so when you ask, like what my principles are, my general principle is to be
very on guard for doing that sort of thing myself. So like, even when there's somebody who,
who I know I understand and revile appropriately, somebody like Trump,
I'm still on guard for the clip of him that is actually misleading, right? And I will actually
defend him as much as I, you know, find him indefensible. I have, I've burned a fair amount
of, you know, reputational capital now over here on the left by defending him on specific points
when I felt that the attack on him was just based on lies, right? So like when he, when he
gave a press conference after Charlottesville and said that, you know, there were good people
on both sides. And he seemed to be saying in that clip that the neo-Nazis are good people,
right? And that was spun from, that was spun politically from, you know, everyone from Biden
on down, it was spun by the New York Times. I mean, literally, I would have, if I had to bet
95% of the commentary at left of center still thinks he was praising neo-Nazis in that,
in that press conference. And yet within the, within the context of the press conference,
it's absolutely clear that he's not doing that, right? He says, you know, within 20 seconds of,
of the, of the clipped piece, he says, you know, I'm not talking about the white supremacists and
the neo-Nazis. I'm talking about other people who were there for, you know, who were just worried
about, you know, monuments getting torn down. And so I think we have to acknowledge that there's,
we're in a media landscape now where people are being reliably misled by clips. So the, the, the,
the underlying ethic here is that when people are arguing in a partisan way,
they don't really care what their enemy has said or meant to say. What they want to do is
they want to hold them to the, the worst possible interpretation of what they said and make that
stick, right? And the game is just see if you can make it stick. See if you can, you, and so,
so I've long, I've made this claim, you know, for years now, and this is, you know, this is more
based on what happens to me out from the left as opposed to the right. I mean, the example we're
talking about now was sort of defamation coming from the right. But, you know, I've, I've made this
point before and this is, you know, it's an inconvenient point to make because like even
this can get clipped out to my disadvantage, but it's just, it's worth saying because
this, this shines as bright as possible a light on what everyone is doing and many, many good
people are doing it kind of unthinkingly. But so I'm living, I've long known for at least eight
years or so. I've known that I'm in an environment where if I say on my podcast, black people are
apes, white people are apes, we're all apes, racism doesn't make any sense, right? There are some
considerable number of people who will clip out me saying black people are apes or make a meme,
black people are apes, Sam Harris, right? And they will export that to their channels
with apparently with a clear conscience saying this is fair game, right?
And that's the kind of people I was dealing with on Twitter and that's the kind of the person who
clipped that clip from that podcast is exactly that sort of person and that, and he was being
signal boosted by lots of other people we could name. And so I just recognize that this is a,
just, it's just the wrong occasion to try to have a conversation with people. It's built into the
dynamics of the system where people are incentivized just to dunk on everybody, however dishonestly,
and then move on. And you know, the, and part of the pathology I saw with Elon taking over the place
was not so much what he was doing to the place as its owner, but just how he was behaving personally
on the platform himself. I mean, he was doing the same thing. He, one of the first things he did
after he took over Twitter was he spread this meme about Nancy Pelosi's husband, you know,
after the hammer attack on him. It's like, it's not what it seems. It could have been a, you know,
a gay trist gone awry and he linked to a website that had an article to that effect.
This was a website which during the 2016 election claimed that Hillary Clinton was dead and that
a body double was, was campaigning in her place, right? So Elon links to that as a source, right?
In front of, at that point, probably 110 million people amplifying a completely crazy conspiracy
theory that is getting spun up in QAnon circles. And then when that gets pointed out to him,
just how, just how wrong all of that was and how irresponsible it was, he never corrects the record,
he never apologizes, he never changes his, his appetite for doing that again. In that case,
I think he just deleted the tweet, right? And moved on. And so it's, it's like even people who
reputationally have a tremendous amount to lose by behaving that way, you would think,
are goaded into behaving that way because of the mechanics of the platform. And so,
you know, for me personally, I, I simply don't understand how people
have audiences that will still follow them after they prove that they don't care to make any of
these distinctions. I mean, I mentioned Tucker Carlson, the fact that behind closed doors,
he's saying that Trump is a demonic force. And then in front of the camera,
he's basically messaging to Trump a stand 85% of the time, you know, in a very supportive way.
I don't understand how, like in front of my audience, if that, if a similar thing were revealed
about me, my, my audience would, would just completely disavow me. I mean, I was like,
there'd just be no, it would be a complete breach of trust with my audience. And that's,
that's the way I think it should be. But Alex Jones, I mean, like Alex Jones has an audience of
some tens of millions of people in the aftermath of the, of Sandy Hook, right? You know, when he's,
like he has lied and lied and lied about Sandy Hook being a false flag, fake, you know,
confection of the, of the Obama administration, you know, they're all crisis actors, the kids never
died or like, I mean, it's like, I don't, I don't know how he, he, how deep those claims went,
but some version of that, right? Like this is none of this is as it seems.
He created immense harm, demonstrable harm with all the Sandy Hook families. I mean, these are
families, in many cases, they've had to move home. Some have moved homes 10 times since
he started spreading those lies about them. All of this gets kind of, you know, forensically
documented at trial. He gets a billion dollar judgment against him. How does he still have
an audience? Like, like, who are these people who are still listening to him?
Is that legitimately confusing? Cause that one to me is very clear. He's entertaining.
All these people are mentally ill or like, what is this?
Cause I don't, look, I don't know Rogan well at all. But Rogan keeps having him on. I don't know
if he has recently, but he thinks he's funny since then, but yeah, that I don't know. But
certainly my take is that people find him amusing. He's funny and he's gotten enough weird stuff
right that people are like, all right, look, he missed. I don't, I know literally nothing
about the Sandy Hook stuff. So I'm certainly not defending that. I'm just saying I understand
the phenomenon. The phenomenon is that, that this is, this is an age where the algorithm
is a big part of the piece of information. And so the reason that certain people become the voice
is that they also are able to speak in a way that people find really compelling, entertaining,
engaging. And so that person is going to keep going. Alex has a way of delivering information
that's zany. It's crazy. It's over the top. You can't believe it's real. He's funny. He's fun to
make fun of. And there are enough things that people like, I mean, he gets memed, right? It's
like another crazy thing that he said five years ago just, you know, came true. And so he's, he's
a bit like the, the Simpsons in that people would be like, yo, Simpsons 12 years ago predicted
this thing. You're like, that's insane. So same thing with Alex. But now that doesn't mean that
he isn't a destructive force. It just means that it's very easy for me to see why he's entertaining
enough that people are going to keep going back to him. You can reboot your life, your health,
even your career, anything you want. All you need is discipline. I can teach you the tactics that
I learned while growing a billion dollar business that will allow you to see your goals through.
Whether you want better health, stronger relationships, a more successful career,
any of that is possible with the mindset and business programs and impact theory university.
Join the thousands of students who have already accomplished amazing things. Tap now for a free
trial and get started today. I'll grant you the entertainment component, especially in his case,
but in, in, in his case, perhaps to a lesser degree, but certainly in Tucker's case,
there's this pretense of, I'm just giving you honest information, right? I'm just calling it
as I see it. Like this is just, you will like, what you see is what you get. There's not like,
this is just, this is, there's a fundamental integrity to, to, to the message. That's what
his audience seems to think they're getting. And then we know that he is a completely different
person behind closed doors. I can explain that one as well. So you've got, all right, we, we all
know they, I'm just giving you what a dyed in the wool red Republican is going to say.
Um, they shouldn't be looking at his private communications. And, uh,
I mean, that's a way of not taking the, the knowledge on board.
Correct. I'm not saying it's the right way. I'm just saying this is how he keeps his
audience. They shouldn't be looking at his private communications. This is exactly what
Trump has been warning us about people getting into your private life, governmental overreach,
all of that. And then of course, like he's going to fight for Republican values, even if he thinks
that the leadership isn't great and that he'd rather have somebody else. He knows that lying
on behalf of a guy that he thinks is demonic, but at least he's Republican is better than,
than the, the outright dangerous, I don't know what words they use for othering the Joe Biden
camp. But like that's how it's going to be that you would much rather, I mean, it was like when
Trump said that, yes, I'm a bully, but I'm a bully for you. It was like, okay, sure, Tucker's not
perfect. Sure. He lied to present things well, but I'm kind of glad he did because I need him to
represent our side. We have to win against the other people. Like there's this real escalating
sense of like, we have to win. The stakes really matter. And in fact, going back to that idea of
if, if I look at, so I, I watched the whole interview that you did where you were talking
about the Hunter Biden laptop. And so I'm watching it with an open mind and just like,
just a ton of respect for you, Sam. I cannot stress it enough before, after this minute,
a year from now, I just can't fathom not really being blown away by how you think and
the, all the meditation stuff, you seem sincerely to want to help people.
So it was very easy for me to go, okay, I think I get where you're going with this,
but for me to interpret that moment the way that you did, this is why I said,
this is about stopping evil. To me, your interpretation of Trump is that either because
he's just a clown on the loose, a dangerous troll, or because he's actually nefarious,
either one has the same outcome. So I doubt you split real hairs with that, but
he cannot be in control of this company. It is, I don't know if you'd go all the way to existential,
thank you, this country. I don't know if you'd go all the way to existential or not, but it's like,
it's so high risk finger on the nukes asking questions like, why do I have less nukes in JFK
back in the 60s? Like this is as close to unhinged narcissism as you're going to get.
It's too dangerous. We are now at a point where, hey, everybody, yeah, fine. I will step forward
and say that there should be a small group of people that just keep us from this lunacy. And
if that means that we have to not necessarily bury the laptop, but you cannot let it come out
right in a moment where it could possibly sway the election and put that psychopath back in.
Now that's where I say that is way more dangerous. And now we can at least talk about what we disagree
on. To me, the authoritarian nature of like, I and some small group of people have decided that
Trump is that dangerous and have decided that this laptop revealing at this moment would be
dangerous to the Democratic candidacy. So whatever it is that we have to suppress,
we have to suppress it. Now that-
Let me just be clear about what my position actually was at the time and what I was actually
saying on that podcast, not especially well. My position was, it was always a hard judgment
call at that point. We're talking about 10 days before the election. This thing comes,
it's clearly an October surprise, foisted on us, timed intentionally to be hard to parse
right before the election. It's just like we're on Rudy Giuliani's timetable. It's like,
he, this is like here, this is when I'm going to show you the laptop, right?
You got 10 days to figure this out. It was meant to detonate politically at that point.
And we already knew what happens in the 2016 election when 10 days before an election you say,
hey, we got Anthony Wiener's laptop and now we're reopening the email investigation to Hillary
Clinton. We saw that that was, her poll numbers by the hour went down. And whether that was decisive
or not, who knows, she was unelectable for other reasons. So we had a, so my claim at the time was
it was totally understandable for journalists to say, we're not going to be hostage to Rudy
Giuliani's timetable here. We have an election in 10 days. First, do no harm. Let's just give this,
let's give, let's wait for three weeks to figure out what's true about this laptop, right? We can't
figure out whether this is a Russian forgery. There's reasons to be concerned that it could be
Russian disinformation. Who knows what's going on here. We should not be in a rush
to create a disaster here politically. So it was, and so I viewed each of these platforms
having different choices to make. So journalists could decide, do we want to focus on this now,
or do we want to give this a little more breathing room? That was an editorial choice that I completely
understood and still a genuine hard call. Then you have Twitter deciding not only to,
whether or not to amplify certain things, they decide to de-platform the New York Post that had
a journalist who decided to write about the story, right? That was a very different decision and I
think almost certainly the wrong decision, right? I mean, again, understandable given the political
bias of the people on Twitter and given the genuine uncertainty as to the ground truth of the
validity of the information and where that laptop came from. And I think even in that case on the
New York Post story, one of the reporters who reported it out didn't want to sign his name to
the article. I mean, it was the Wild West over there in terms of actually doing the journalism.
So it's, I mean, in my view, it was a coin toss as to what to do there. Now,
if you raise the stakes more, right, you make Trump even more sinister, you make the election even
more tenuous, you make the information even more dubious than the dials change. And so many of
these decisions are not decisions you can make categorically in principle. It really is this
pragmatic balancing of just what is true and what are the stakes, right? So like, I'll compare this
to another case you spelled out earlier. So you felt that it was obviously wrong to force people
to get the mRNA vaccine for COVID, right? Now, I would grant you, certainly in retrospect,
that seems true. But if we change a few of the variables, I think your ethical intuitions and
certainly political intuitions would totally change. So you make it a much more obviously
effective vaccine that really does block transmissions like a sterilizing vaccine.
You make it a much more dangerous virus. You make it a virus that's actually preferentially
killing kids rather than old people, right? So now we're in an environment where like,
you're deciding not to get vaccinated is putting my kids at risk, right? Do you get to make that
choice, right? And you might say, oh, yes, yeah, I should be able to make that choice as my body,
but dial up the deadliness of the pathogen. Give us something like airborne Ebola
that incubates for a month. You don't know you have it and you're walking around spreading it and
it's got a 75% fatality rate and it's mostly killing kids. No one gets to make that choice
anymore. I mean, then literally the cops come in and vaccinate you. And I would say that all of
us would agree to that. Again, that you turn up the lethality on the pathogen, you turn up the
effectiveness of the vaccine, you turn down the risk of the vaccine, give me a truly safe vaccine
where there's not even one documented case of vaccine injury, right? So then you just have to
be completely crazy to be worried about being vaccinated in that kind of environment. Then
it's just a no-brainer. Then we just don't tolerate a diversity of opinion because the stakes are too
high. It's a full-on emergency. Bodies of kids are being stacked up in parks, right? There's so
many of them, we don't know what to do with them. We've got these mobile morgues and we have a vaccine
that actually works and then we've got RFK Jr. saying, maybe you don't want to get the jab
on Rogan's podcast, right? That's the world I've been worried about ever since COVID, like a
world where the truth is really clear and yet our media environment is so crazy that we can't even
talk about it. Again, the fact that something like QAnon is possible, the fact that we could have a
president who messages to QAnon favorably without disavowing any association, right? When asked
about QAnon, he says, well, they sure seem to like me. They seem like nice people, right? This is a...
I mean, some tens of millions of people, it seems. Let's say it's a hardcore of maybe
three million people. Who knows? Millions of people who believe that the world is being run by
child-raping cannibals, right? If that is possible in the current system, you just have to imagine
what that would do when the stakes are truly high, right? When it's part of the machinery of some
decision-making. I have a slightly different intuition on this. I like to take the hardest
possible look at this thing and then see what I would do. So one, even if you dial it up, it's
Airborne Ebola. It takes a month. You're walking around, dead kids are being stacked up. I would
still let RFK go say, I don't think people should get the jab. But having said that...
What do you mean let? You would decide to have that conversation or you just think...
Oh, on my podcast, there should be no law against it.
Right. So I agree with you there. So where I hold the line with the First Amendment is,
yes, you should be able to be as wrong as you want to be, but we don't have to algorithmically boost
those errors, right? Correct. And if I have a platform, again, I'm creating a social media
platform. I don't want the Nazis and I don't want the people who are spreading lies about the current
pandemic that is going to get people killed. Where you and I break down is, I am so paranoid
that people don't know what a lie is. Right.
And so the very thing, and this is why I brought up the founding fathers before,
the reason that I'm saying I want these people to be able to speak is because I don't know
who knows the answer and who doesn't. And so I need the information. Now, over time,
certainly for myself, I'll begin to discern who I think is a good faith actor and is really
thinking through this problem. And I get that there's going to be people that get caught up and
just the speed of it, it's hard to parse who's right and who's just entertaining. And that will
be very frustrating, especially if it's my kids that are being stacked up in the park. And I get
all of that. But I would also say that if you need those sort of wartime powers, this is Ebola,
it's spreading, the deaths are just absolutely outrageous. We have reason to believe that the
vaccine is working. While I wouldn't say that people can't speak up, I would be like, you are
getting vaccinated or you're getting quarantined in some way. And that would be horrible. And that's
really got awful. And it will have absolutely terrible consequences. But I don't want to say that
I can't see a world in which I look at it and go, that's the right answer. What I want to talk about
is what am I using to determine that that's the right answer? That's really the thing that I
want to talk about is how we think through these very difficult, very novel problems. And so
one of the things that I find interesting is you've got founding fathers and you've got religion.
So the founding fathers to me represent a shared narrative about what people ought to be, what the
U.S. for sure ought to be in a moralistic sense. Like how do you structure a government to protect
itself from tyranny? How do you recognize the individual people? What ought they be able to
pursue without the government being able to interfere with them? Like what are those bright
lines that makes us Americans riding on the back of freedom and freedom of speech and all of that?
Now, of course, crazy, they're doing all this while holding slaves, but they put an idea together
that as you adhere to the idea, all that other bullshit starts to fall away. So that to me is
is is a structure of a system that grows better over time. So that's one element that it's an
orienting mechanism where live free or die, right? It's something people were literally willing to
give their lives for an idea that has fallen apart in a way that I don't clearly understand
that I would love you to talk to. The other part of this is religion. Same thing. It's how do you
know what is true? In fact, my I was thinking about this today. Tell me what you think. I think that
religion is the thing that allows you to establish your behavior patterns when truth cannot be
scientifically established. So you have religion for the millennia when you couldn't look under
a microscope to know about germ theory. So you just said, don't put these fabrics together,
don't eat pork, whatever. And ultimately it was like, you knew you were doing the right thing
because it was written down in a book or told an oral story and you either hewed close to what it
said to do, and you were doing the right thing, or you didn't and you weren't. And so what I think
we're living through now is people realize, mm, religion doesn't hold that sort of gravitational
center that it used to, because we now do have microscopes and we can really see what the
religions were trying to get at. But it did give us a shared narrative that works well for people
that are headline readers that can't hold the nuance of the argument. And so they just need 10
commandments, tell me what to do. And so I know that I'm either in line or not. So now when you're
looking at a global pandemic, we don't really know what's going, we don't know the lethality,
we don't know if you should get the shot or not. If I can point to religion and say, to be a good
Christian, you would get the jab. For this reason, I would draw a parallel with one of the stories,
then people do it. And now I get people to, of their own accord, out of a desire to adhere to
this shared narrative, they do it. And so you see how religion can be this incredible boon,
but in a modern era with idea of velocity, with hyper fragmentation driven by algorithms and social
media and all of that, religion is, I need you to speak to this because I don't know the data
well enough, losing its power, losing its efficacy. I don't know, it's lost something. It does not
have the effect that it used to have. And
Well, I would also say it just doesn't address many of these use cases, right? So it's like the
religion doesn't have a position on vaccines. I mean, there are some religions that might,
I mean, you know, Christian scientists would probably not get vaccine.
Don't you agree that you, if I'm a preacher, I find the story that I want to draw the parallel.
Yeah, but I think you could probably do it either way. Like you could be against vaccines or pro
vaccines to connect how you choose. But I get you to adhere by, I don't have to use the authoritarian
rule. That's my point. I don't have to do something top down. What religion allowed you to do was keep
the sovereignty of the individual, especially if you're talking about a Christian religion,
keep the sovereignty of the individual and yet get them to fall in line. It's really pretty genius
where whether you do it because you believe in America and so you keep your freedoms,
but you adhere to the mores that allow this amazing thing to exist that you're proud to be a part of,
religion serves the same function. But now as we get into weird, like cultish, new religion,
wokeness, whatever you want to call it, something deranges.
I think what you want are principles here. I mean, one principle is I think we should
be very wary of being driven by tribalism. Right now, it's not that tribalism is always in every
case pathological. I mean, I think there's tribalism we can play at for fun. I mean,
it's entertaining and it's not very deep and yet it can take up a fair amount of bandwidth
and it's fine. So you can be a fan of a sports team and we know what that looks like when you
take it too seriously and then when you're like a South American soccer player and you lose the
World Cup or you commit an own goal or something and you literally have to worry about getting
murdered by your former fans. We know that it's gone too far. It's too much like religion in
that case. But in the general case, you can play at tribalism or you can be loosely identified with
some subculture and it can be fun and you can enjoy the diversity and the diversity can be
somewhat antagonistic even as it is, let's say, in sports. But it doesn't reach deep into a person's
psychology and social network and political commitments such that they're making life and
death decisions on the basis of how much more they like the Yankees than the Red Sox. So
deeper tribalism is, I think, something we just need to outgrow, right? Because the truth is not
tribal. The truth is universal. Even specific truths have some, there's some view from above
where diversity of opinion is just a matter of our ignorance and if we could really see those
truths clearly, we would all converge on the same account of reality regardless of our background,
regardless of our language, regardless of, we just don't have the right to be to our provincialism
anymore with respect to our basic epistemological commitments, whether those are scientific
or ultimately ethical. So I would say that it used to be the case that we could agree to disagree
about how to treat women in a society. So yes, if you're in Afghanistan, you don't let them get
educated. You force them to live in cloth bags. You beat them if they try to get out.
They can't be out in public without being accompanied by a male relative.
There's a list of taboos and most of them are killing offenses. And do we just agree to disagree
there? Well, practically now, yes, because we lost that war. We're no longer there. We just don't
have, it's not worth sending our sons and daughters to die to defend those girls.
But the ground truth is, if you're born a girl in Afghanistan, you are profoundly unlucky.
And that disparity in luck should be galling to all of us. It's just not a good status quo.
Ultimately, if we got our shit together as a species, some subset of women and girls would
not be forced to live in cloth bags as they are in Afghanistan at this very moment.
So ultimately, we will converge and tribalism is precisely the wrong algorithm
to use if you want to converge on the deeper truths, whether they're scientific or ethical or,
I would argue, even spiritual, that we should organize our beliefs about reality and how to
live within it. And we should recognize that that's what we're trying to do. We're trying to
navigate in the space of all possible experience individually and collectively. And we're just,
we're trying to figure out what to do next. This is politics. What should we do next? We've got
$100 billion to spend this year in the state of California or whatever it is. I actually don't
know what our budget is in California, but we've got this money to spend. What should we do with
it? And then we have diversity of opinion. And in some cases, radical diversity of opinion about
what is important and what is even decent to focus on. And I agree with you that a basically free
space of conversation is the way we will orient and resolve those disagreements. I do agree that
in most cases, we need the conversation just to run long enough and to be
uncoerced enough so that most people most of the time can notice that the better ideas are
surfacing and the bullshit is being moved to the sidelines. But there are still obvious cases
where the topic is specialized enough or the knowledge you need to just have a valid seat at
the table is deep enough that not everyone gets to air their opinion. Not everyone gets to air
their opinion in that particular conversation or if they do, we're all wise to just have very
little patience for that particular opinion because it's obviously incredible. It doesn't
have the person, doesn't have the right background, they're not playing the language game appropriately,
they sound crazy, they're telegraphing, there are other ideological commitments
that are distracting and not convergent with the actual truth at hand.
So you bring Alex Jones to the physics conference, it's not going to take him too many minutes to
disqualify himself as a relevant subject matter expert on physics or anything else.
So we live with that tension that yes, it's in fact true that a Nobel laureate on any given topic
can discredit himself with his very next sentence if the sentence is obviously wrong.
And somebody who knows basically nothing can be right in a debate with this guy by just pointing
that out. That doesn't make any sense. And it is true from a scientific point of view
that we take scientific authority very lightly. It's not good enough that you're a Nobel
laureate. That's not the thing that's going to make you right. And on some level, you're only as
good as your last sentence, even if you have a Nobel Prize. And that's how we do it. So a
Nobel laureate is giving a lecture in, again, it could be on his narrow area of expertise.
And at the end of the lecture, hands go up and it could just be a lowly undergraduate
who embarrasses him or her on the, again, not even on an adjacent topic, on the very topic
on which that person became an expert. And that's just because truth is, in fact,
orthogonal to any given person's reputation or educational and career achievements. It doesn't
matter who you've been. It matters what you're saying right now and why you're saying it,
and whether it is connected enough to a chain of reasoning and a chain of evidence
that anyone should take it seriously. So that's all true. And yet, as a time-saving device,
if we have to figure out whether a certain chemical is toxic, we don't want to hear from
Alex Jones. We want to hear from the real chemists, right? Yes, we don't want to hear
from the chemists who are working for Monsanto if this is a compound that Monsanto is marketing
that they stand to make a billion dollars on. And we know we don't have good regulations that
would force them to do the relevant toxicology and really safeguard human health, right?
We know that a lot of the incentives are misaligned such that some of the time,
even someone with the right educational background is either lying or impressively
self-deceived and we're getting bad information. And this is what I come back to. What we need
in every case here when things matter are institutions and regulations and procedures
and alignments of incentives that we can actually trust because they're trustworthy,
right? Because they are actually reliably keeping bad information out and surfacing
good information. And I would admit that we have a highly imperfect system, but the system we have
is way better than no system, right? And it's very easy for people to see when you move it
out of science and certainly out of medicine and put it into areas of just straightforward
engineering, like on an airplane. People don't tend to be iconoclasts with respect to engineering.
Like when you get on a plane, you don't want to be doing your own research. You don't want to be
doing Google searches about plane replacement parts, right? You just want to know that the
FAA has it, right? You want to know that the regulations work. You want to know that the
pilots for United don't want to die, right? That they're not going to get on the plane
if they think it's unsafe. You want to know that the mechanics are not getting bogus parts
because they can shave a profit. They're incentivized. You don't want a system of incentives
where we tell the mechanics at Boeing that if you can figure out how to get parts from Malaysia
cheaper, right? We're going to let you keep pocket half of the difference. If you save us
a million dollars, you get to keep 500,000, right? So get us a landing gear that somebody
3D printed in another country, right? If we found out that that was how we were incentivizing
mechanics, we would go nuts understandably, right? But presumably we're not doing that.
We have to discover as a species all the ways in which we're doing dumb things
at a systems level, right? In institutions and in the systems of incentives that connect
institutions, we have to defrag all of that such that mirror apes like ourselves can be making,
reliably making better decisions than individuals can tend to make on their own
because the systems are so good. And so again, this is not, we're not going to solve this in
podcast to stand, right? Or substack a stand, right? Like I'm not saying we don't want podcasts
and substack newsletters, but I think what you can do is delineate how to think about the problem
because here's the last thing on this. And then I've got so many more things I want to talk to
you about. But I think part of, because I agree with you as you break down what it should look like,
I agree with you. The problem is that the example that you gave that I think really freaked people
out was like, the saying isn't going well with the timing of the Trump thing, the Biden laptop,
the Trump thing is so serious. I'm going to just real fast break the system to make sure that this
doesn't go forward. And that sets everybody's alarm bells off. But again, just to be clear,
I was not advocating to break anything. I said that Twitter was wrong to de-platform
the New York Post. The New York Times, I think, was probably, again, and I put it explicitly in
these terms, it was a total coin toss for me, journalistically, whether you decide to do a
front page story on the Hunter Biden laptop with 10 days left when there were valid concerns that
this could be Russian disinformation. And you had the previous example of an election seeming to get
derailed by something similar. But the second you say that there might be reasons, but somebody
is making, a human is making a judgment call, and certainly the way you presented is your take is,
if it were my call to make, that's probably what I would do. I think that's certainly the thing
that made me uncomfortable of like, whoa, that feels like you're running a much higher risk
scenario. Let's make it even more realistic, because now, what am I doing now with respect to
the laptop? I have not done a podcast on the Hunter Biden laptop yet, even yet. It's been now
with us for years. It's conceivable that I could. I still don't find the topic interesting enough,
given the political environment that I care all that much. Because for me, it was a very
straightforward calculation. Here we have a sitting president who I knew to be
unqualified in all kinds of ways, but the specific problem for me at that point was,
we have a sitting president who is not committing to a peaceful transfer of power.
That was a five alarm fire politically. That was just, that was as bright a line as I needed to say,
this is an emergency. It's not an emergency such that we could do anything to stop him. I'm not
saying that the New York Times should have printed lies about him. I'm not saying that it
absolutely did not require lying or even a shading of the truth. It's just, here's a guy who on
multiple occasions has been asked point blank on television, will you commit to a peaceful
transfer of power? In so many words, he said, no. It's like, if I win, it will be a valid
election. That's basically what he said. Let me ask, what do you think about, people want him
elected still? Theoretically, as we're recording this, is the prime contender for the Republican
nomination. Just to close the loop on what I just said, that's why I'm not, among other reasons,
that's perhaps, I haven't thought much about it, but that is why I'm not so motivated to spend a
lot of bandwidth or any bandwidth trying to figure out what's so wrong with Biden and the Biden
family. Now, I have no doubt there are politically inconvenient, embarrassing, even shocking things
to discover. Certainly in Hunter Biden's life and in his behavior, I'm sure there's no end to
embarrassment there, but even some degree of implication with President Biden,
is that possible? Is it conceivable? Is there something there that I just haven't freed up the
bandwidth to pay attention to coming out of that laptop? I'm sure there are many people in
Trumpistan who could speak for an hour about all the things they think we know based on that laptop,
but I certainly doubt some of that. But why am I not motivated to pay more attention to that?
Because just as you said, Trump could very well come back in 2024.
Maybe I'm just not explaining it well. I don't think that's where people get the friction. Where
they get the friction is the sense of, it's one of the earlier questions that I asked. I think you
either believe that the people can sort through this themselves and figure things out and you put
the trust in the hands of people. I think your position is clear. Tell me if I'm getting this
wrong. Either the people on mass just give me the information, they'll sort it out. Or we need
experts, which people are going to read elites, which is not a charitable interpretation, but
that's how they hear it. Or we need a group of elites that are better than us plebs and go figure
it out. I think that's what they hear when you say that. Now, I get what you mean about experts,
but I know that even the most well-intentioned expert has a propensity to be wrong that I just
feel like the mistake I would rather make going back to my trifecta of evil, the thing I'm most
afraid of is authoritarian rule. In that moment, I go, oh, God, these are both terrible situations,
but I really feel like you have to put the hands in the people. You have to leave it with them.
If they let them see all the information, and yes, I know it's calculated.
But there is no seeing all the information. There is no unmoderated, pure, just fire hose of
information. I mean, the information doesn't exist as a unitary object that can be contemplated in
its totality, always in proportion to what it is in fact in reality.
It makes me a little nervous. You do have, it is so specific, a laptop. Maybe it's
Russian disinformation. Turns out it wasn't, but maybe, but you have this thing. It becomes so
concrete and so tangible. I think that's why there's so much attention on that thing.
But so I just want to get to your principle versus my principle, because I don't, again, I don't know
that either. So my principle here is that, again, I mean, I stand by everything I said
on that original podcast. I just didn't say it especially well there. But,
and so people are genuinely confused about what I was recommending.
Can I say it so I know if I understand?
Yeah.
That the, what was going on is it was a real emergency. You had a real emergency. You have a
president who was not committing to the peaceful transfer of power. Our democracy was truly at
risk. Our democracy is, is the most important thing in this scenario. A laptop comes out.
First of all, it could be Russian disinformation. We don't know yet. And so it would be,
it would be foolish in the same way that if the Russian guy that sees the five nuclear weapons
getting shot at him, for him not to pause and go, this just doesn't make sense. I'm not going to do
it. In that moment, it was far wiser to not put this in front of the public, but instead to go,
the risk-reward ratio is off, hold off.
Also, because there was no rush. There's still no rush. Like again, I still haven't done it.
But I want to make sure, did I accurately convey how do you think through that problem?
But the crucial thing is people took up from that podcast clip, people took away the
impression that I was advocating that we lie about Trump, right? Or that we say that we-
It felt that way. So as somebody watching the whole thing, not the clip, the whole thing,
I walked away going, okay, I get where Sam is coming from. If you really believe
that this is an emergency, that this will disrupt, honestly, if all of that were true,
emergency, he's going to steal an election. It is going to jeopardize our democracy. And
all I have to do is hide the laptop or buy time, create a smoke screen. If I really believe that
all of that was true, man, I'd be very tempted. Now, it's just my obsession with this trifecta
rule that makes me terrible. So if it's a sufficient emergency,
you should want the guy assassinated, right? I mean, like it goes all the way. Like if this
guy's Hitler, well, then we all wish Hitler got assassinated, right? Now, I don't think Trump is
Hitler or anything like Hitler. So there is a- And can you precog him? That's where I get nervous.
Like everybody's so quick to say that he really is Hitler. And it's like-
You know, I know, well, I don't know how much harm he could ultimately do,
but he shows no sign of being ideological in any way. And it shows no sign of wanting to take on
a kind of world building or dismantling project. And that makes my radar.
People want what? People want him. So this may illuminate the difference. So
because some people want to elect him, I'm like, damn, is there something I'm missing?
And so because I know I could be flawed, I'm just like, then you have to let the people decide.
Well, no, you have to let the people decide. I would argue we still don't entirely know
what's up with that laptop, right? It's like, I know there are people who think they know,
but like, I don't actually know what sort of forensic analysis has been done of that laptop
and how reliable that is and what the scope of fraud is there, really. And I'm still unaware
of anything that has surfaced from that laptop that is clearly a smoking gun that implicates
Biden in corruption. There's new information coming out in recent weeks. I don't know what
the relationship that is to the laptop, but if there's a 20-megaton scandal in that laptop,
it still hasn't reached me and it's been over a year, right?
But again, I default back to my original position, which is
the fact that Trump wouldn't commit to a peaceful transfer of power and we in fact didn't have a
peaceful transfer of power and he's now running again, that to me is so disqualifying that I'm
not inclined to do anything that could possibly increase his chances of getting elected, right?
So again, he's not Hitler, but I think he's someone who is totally committed to subverting
all the norms of our democracy for purely personal avarice and just his malignant narcissism.
I mean, it's just he really is a pure case study in that. But again, not ideological,
not especially ambitious in any of the ways that somebody like Hitler or Stalin was,
but it's so corrupting of our politics and so destabilizing of the institutions we should
care about in our democracy that I think having him for a second term could well be a total
disaster and it's just such an awful precedent to have someone who didn't commit to a peaceful
transfer of power basically saw to it that we didn't have one were still really did try to
steal the election all the while claiming it was being stolen from him, right? I mean,
stuff he was trying to do behind the scenes, the pressure he was putting on Mike Pence,
all of that was a genuine effort to steal an election he knew he had lost. I mean,
his all of the people, the, you know, his attorney general, the people behind the scenes
got it through to him that he had actually lost and he was still willing to just bluff his way
back into the presidency. That's so disqualifying and should be so disqualifying from my point of
view is that, yeah, do I want to do three hours on just how awful Joe Biden is? No. Right now,
I don't think Joe Biden should be running for president. He's way too old, right? He's obviously
past his, you know, not just his prime, it's just like, it's a disaster, right?
And I think Kamala is, I mean, I can't see a scenario in which she's electable. So like if he
dies or if anything happens to his health, it's so catastrophic that he's no longer the candidate
and she is, I think that's just, you know, that's just a red carpet rolled out for Trump or really
anyone to become the Republican president. So I think it's totally irresponsible and dangerous
that the Democrats have put us in this position that we're running Biden with Kamala Harris being
in his VP with no alternative. Really, you know, I mean, maybe there would be, you know,
maybe if he died today, then maybe that, you know, maybe Gavin Newsom or somebody would step up and
we would have a different race. But the fact that we seem to be running Biden by default with Kamala
Harris really set to, to some significant degree, half the country will be seeing her
as the person who's running because they plausibly wouldn't expect him to survive his term.
All of that's a disaster. All of that is well worth criticizing. I don't want to touch it because
what's the alternative? Like, I mean, if I could, if I saw an alternative
that I could, could advocate for, right, that would, could it all be effective? If I saw an
upside in criticizing Biden validly, then I would do it. But this is a pure pragmatic
case where I'm deciding, first do no harm, right? And it comes exactly back to the, you know, some
fat people are healthy principle, right? If you're at a moment where something really is going to
turn on people getting their, their head straight around diet and health and exercise and, you
know, body image and the clock is ticking, right? We have to, we have got 10 days to get this right.
You know, it's like it and, and a lot hangs in the balance. Do you really want to do a podcast
on here are all these fat people who we've just tested them and they're actually just, they're
as healthy as any Olympic athlete, right? They got the right, their lipids are perfect,
their, their VO2 max is great. They look fat, but, you know, this is not what it seems, right?
No. And, and what about, let's do a hundred podcasts on that topic, right? Which is what people
have done with around COVID and ivermectin and mRNA vaccines, right? Like, you know,
Brett Weinstein literally did a hundred podcasts in a row on ivermectin and mRNA vaccines, right?
As though there was no other topic in the world worth paying attention to.
That seemed, it made me feel like I was getting all the information. I didn't just assume he was
right, but it really helped me feel, and I watched a lot of those podcasts. It really made me feel
like, okay, at least somebody's talking about this. It felt like pirate radio. And as we're talking,
I think I now understand one, I think it's very important that I love about you, that you say
what you believe, and it doesn't matter whether I or somebody else would love to nudge you in
another direction. But truly, as somebody who thinks you're amazing, I will just say that I think now,
through this conversation, I realized what I, what I want your particular mind to do,
because you are so good at this. What I would rather have seen is the, okay, I'm going to look at this
laptop and, and whatever it says, it says, and I'm going to break it down and I'm going to explain
all the stuff you just went through about Kamala. This is crazy. In no uncertain terms,
I want them to win, but you can't hide from information. Let's just pull this out into
light. Let's pull Trump out into light. Look, guys, in the final analysis, the, the laptop is
fucking crazy. It does seem to indicate that there's some connection to whatever you find,
right? I'm just, I'm riffing here, not saying this is actually what it says. And then, but look,
the Trump thing is a thousand times worse. This one feels like a real emergency. And then I'm like,
oh, that's the Sam that I know, who's just like coldly dispassionate about this is this,
this is this, but I am being coldly dispassionate. I'm just, and I'm being completely transparent.
You're being also strategic. And that's the part where I think it gives people that sense.
But it's not, but it's not, it's not a hidden strategy, right? Like it's just very fair.
I'm just telling you why I don't, I don't see an upside in talking about certain things.
Because again, there's, there, there are asymmetries here that are really strange,
but they're incredibly powerful. Like so, there's,
Can I tell you what the upside about talking about it?
But let me just add this one piece. There's, there's almost nothing you can say about Trump
that is true and awful that his supporters care about.
That's crazy.
Right. So, and yet, so he functions by a completely different reputational physics.
And I think many people in that ecosystem do too. Like again, I, you know, I mentioned Tucker.
It's like, he's not paying a penalty with his audience the way I would pay a penalty with my
audience if similar revelations came out about me. And, and over here, you have somebody like,
you know, Barack Obama, literally it was a 48 hour scandal when he wore a tan suit.
Right. I mean, like that was the level where he was getting dinged.
You know, Trump is a completely different situation. So it's someone, again, coming
back to the fat analogy, we know that there's a, that there's an appetite to, to eat junk food.
We know most people, certainly most people who have not already made it a habit to exercise,
they're hard to motivate, they're hard to get into the gym. You know, most people join gyms and
then they lapse. Not everyone gets addicted to, to working out. We know that there's a center of,
of gravity to where people are stuck. We've got a problem with something like 40% of Americans are
actually officially obese and like 60% overweight, something like that. Right. So it's like,
we know that it is, it's hard to get through to people. And even if you get through to them,
it's really hard for them to change their behavior, even if they decide
they want to change, to make these changes. So then you have to ask yourself, okay,
just how sexy do we want to make the message that
some fat people are as healthy as anyone alive. I get it, but there's second and third order
consequences. So my thing is, I'm not saying you lie about it. I'm not saying I didn't hear you say
that. I'm just saying like, do you want it to make your next, your next project is to get the
message out on that topic. Of all the messages, you could, you could be dealing with child
trafficking. You could be dealing with climate change. You could be dealing with, you could be
helping people actually get it. I'm arguing whether you should do a podcast about it. So if that's
what people have been pushing on you, not at all what I'm pushing on. They think I should talk to
RFK Junior. They think I should have platformed all these, these COVID skeptics. In fairness,
you would talk to RFK Junior and I'll, I maybe give you insight into that. You probably already
get it, but I want to outsource some of my thinking to you because I think you think
through the world in a really interesting way. So rather than me have to go do the research
in RFK Junior, I'd rather you do it. So it's a factor of trust and just I, I look at other humans,
people may fucking hate this, but I look at other humans as like a really specific AI.
And I'm like, okay, I'm a specific AI to other people, right? But you're a specific AI that I
use to think through certain problems. And so RFK just happens to be one of the problems I would
love to see your AI go, think of now you have to go do all the research and all that shit and
combat him and bring the expert and all the things that you don't want to do. But that's why people
would love to see you do that. And so that's where I'm like, uh, the Sam Harris AI that I want to use
just gives me all the facts about that laptop gives me all the facts about Trump. And then just as
more persuasive that Trump is going to be the bigger problem. Well, again, because I, but I know
that certain bells can't be unwrung, right? And that's the part where speaking for myself, I'm
like, uh, and I know, but I, but I know that there's, there's super stimulus stimuli, right?
Like I know that if I got on my podcast and said, my daughter has a vaccine injury, right?
And I, I don't care what you think about me. I'm not, she's never getting vaccinated again.
And I'm done with all this, you know, vaccine. Like that's not science. That's not like, like,
it doesn't matter if, if you get 10 people, 10 prominent podcasters to tell 10 different stories
just like that. That's not, and that's not a sampling of the data space, right? And yet it is
so powerful, right? It's so, and so you just have to, you have to, you have to be aware of
the rhetorical effect of kind of shining the light of your attention on certain things. And
you have to, you have to be aware that though you are making, you are going to make a best effort
to keep this information in proportion, right? Or, or, or honestly convey the proportion that
you think in fact exists in reality. If you frame it a certain way, or even if you, if you
speak about two things in the same context, that project becomes impossible. Like you just,
you just, you just know that people are going to come away thinking, you know, I forgot the details
of that podcast, but I, I do remember that, you know, facts, that vaccine is just dangerous.
Like, like Sam Harris said, that is just dangerous. I get it. You know, I get it. So my takeaway is
just, I don't know what comes of it. I think it's always, it's always better to say what is true.
And there's true, so I would filter, I totally agree with you. True and useful is the filter
for me. I mean, that's, it's like the vendor is not, I think the truth is just too big. I mean,
the Venn diagram, the, the, the circle for truth is so vast that we can't possibly,
useful to making sure Trump doesn't get elected is where you spin people out of control, which
fine. You're in, in this, you have been, I think, hyper consistent. I understand your position
now completely. Right. And now my only thing is, I think you already understand this, so I can just
wrap. I think you know why it bothers some people. Well, let's talk about those people.
It certainly bothers the people who don't understand how shocking and untenable it was
to have a sitting president not commit to a peaceful transfer of power.
Yes. Like they, like there are people who just don't even know he did that or don't even,
don't think it mattered. There are people who think that January 6th was a non-event,
the people who think that the election was actually stolen from Trump.
So there's like lots of confusion around all of this. So those people, so some numbers,
some percentage of those people are just frankly confused. And if they had the right
information, they would see it the way I do. Most of those people are essentially in a
personality cult, right? There, there is a pure expression of tribalism. It's not Republican,
it's not establishment Republican tribalism, but it's, it's a populist awakening on the right,
which is not the right we are used to, but it's, and it's not even conservative in many respects,
but it's, so that's why I refer to it as like Trumpistan, but it's like, it's a kind of personality
cult, which, yeah, I can't reason with those people. I mean, I can't, like I've said enough,
like if they want to understand what I, you know, what I think is true, there's 20 hours on my podcast
where I explain what I think is true about all that. And, you know, they're very likely not
going to agree for reasons that, you know, impressively resemble sort of the birth of a new
religion. It's like this is not, this is like me talking to Muslims about how the Quran is
probably not the direct word of the creator of the universe. Like we're not going to agree,
right? Like I lost them in my first sentence, you know, and so does the Christians and Jews and
everybody else. But essentially, so you mentioned AIs. One thing that AI could in completely
destabilize and everything else, it could somehow resolve this very much in my favor, in that
what it might do, I mean, let's forget about existential risk and the other deeper concerns,
but just it could, in the near term, could so fully pollute our information landscape with just
fake information, right? So deep fakes and fake journal articles and fake sources to things that,
you know, like people will write, you know, seemingly totally compelling articles about
everything, mRNA vaccines and everything else, and they'll be sourced with stuff. And none of its
exists, right? It's just a pure confection of AI gibberish that we might all have to default
to just very straightforward old school gatekeepers of information. Otherwise,
we're going to recognize that the internet is completely broken and we just don't know what's
real. So like in a world of endless deep fakes, I'm really going to have to rely on the New York
Times or Getty Images or Apple or somebody with just way more resources than I'm ever
going to have on my own to tell me what's real. If I see video of Putin saying that he's just
launched his tactical nukes, right, or he's going to do it tomorrow at four o'clock,
and I have to worry about a world, and I think we do now, and if we don't now,
it's four months from now, we're going to have to worry about this, a world where basically
anyone who wants to can produce a perfectly compelling video of Putin that will be undetectable
by me as a fake, what are we going to do with that? I think we're all basically going to declare
something like epistemological bankruptcy and just say like, I don't know what's true anymore.
I'm not going to react to this video. The fact that Elon tweeted it,
and it's just raw video on Twitter, or it came from, it aired on a Dallas news station,
the local news station, and it's like, I just have to wait to see what the real gatekeepers
say about this. I'm going to give this 24 hours before I even think I know anything,
and how am I going to know anything? Is it going to be me with my blockchain algorithm
that got democratized by either I read about on some blog where I am now figuring out whether
this video has the right watermark, so it's got digital provenance, or I'm just going to,
very likely, it's going to be a few institutions that prove that they can figure out whether a
video is real. Maybe this particular use case is going to be fully democratized, and we're all
going to just have a plug into our browser. One, I think that the way that it will really play out
is the platforms that show video and images will build into their infrastructure, the ability to
read the blockchain signature. You'll very quickly know, is this authentic from the source,
and then the other part will be a community notes like function, where people can say,
yes, it's real, but here's the context that you need so that you're not manipulated.
Both of those speak to the wisdom of the crowd and the right place for something to be
truly democratized. But the crowd, the LLMification of the crowd,
the crowd is going to get so much larger. Because you think there'll be a lot of bots?
Yeah. The crowd could be literally 99% AI at a certain point.
It will be tough if you're spinning up what Elon has done and you charge whatever, $8 or $9.
It's suddenly a bot farm. But almost nobody's doing that. It's like 500,000 people are paying
for Twitter and out of 300 million. Yeah, but when you think about what defenses we have when
things really start to break, right now, they think he's just being dumb ass and he shouldn't
have bought it. And so they're not going to pay it just because they're stubborn.
But if they realize, oh, he actually wasn't fucking around, the bots really are a problem.
And by spending $7, I can verify that I'm a real human and now we're back in business.
Then I think people are far more likely to do it. But I think the avalanche of fake things that
are coming are going to come in so hot and so fast. And it's not just going to be people like me
and you of thousands of hours of us out there, people have already cloned my voice. You can hear
me speaking in Portuguese and I think Italian. I didn't do it. Somebody else did it. And it
literally sounds like me. So that's going to happen. But it's also going to happen revenge porn
where a disgruntled boyfriend makes porn from his ex-girlfriend and it is indistinguishable.
And so everybody very fast is going to have a reason to care. Now, the moment I worry about
that whatever six to 12 months it will take to embed the infrastructure and each of the things
to read the watermark and to say this is real, not real, and to filter out things that aren't real.
But that will, barring that sort of naked year, you will very rapidly, because it will be so
detrimental to just each individual, people will adopt that technology, I think pretty fast.
I just worry that this all happens right in time for the 2024 election.
No, I'm worried about that too. Seems like the right time frame for it.
It's crazy. A year of a year of chat, GPT or GPT four, maybe five. And
yeah, no, it's 2024. It could be all too interesting. No doubt.
How do you think about preparing for that? How do we get ready?
Well, who's we and what is ready Americans so that we're thinking well through the problem?
Well, I hope that, I mean, I can imagine this is a major priority of people currently in government
that we're doing everything we can to ensure that the election is run in such a way that
there's the least opportunity to worry about election fraud. Now, I don't think election fraud is,
I think most concerns about election fraud are generally imaginary, but I think we need a system
where there's just no scope to worry that the election was not run properly. The fact that we
can't figure, the fact that we're finding that that's so hard to figure out to the degree that
we are, I'm actually not close to current efforts to shore all that up. But that has to be
the number one priority. Whatever happens on election day, we should not have a significant
number of Americans credibly alleging that the election was stolen. That's just so
sanity straining and shattering of democratic norms that it's just, we have to get over that
hurdle and we have to stay over it. There can't be some new concern that surfaces that you can
hack or voting machines. That has to be, the integrity of elections has to be the paramount
concern. If we solve that, then at least we have, okay, then we're at the mercy of whoever we ran
and whoever won. There, I just think you have, yeah, if Trump is in fact the candidate, I think
we have to, I think it would be a terrible precedent to reward someone who's behaved as
recklessly as he's behaved and as dishonestly as he's behaved with a second term in the White
House, may just would be insane that we have, if in fact we have a majority of Americans who would
want to see that happen. Do you think long form podcasting could change the landscape of who gets
nominated? Yeah, because podcast, I mean, many podcasts have audiences that are larger than any
other form of media. I mean, certainly Rogan's does. By a country mile. Yeah, but again, I think
Joe and everyone else in a similar position, even at whatever fraction thereof, anyone with a
significant platform like that needs to be more responsible than most people are tending to be.
Again, it's like, I mean, Joe may think he's just shooting the shit with friends,
but he's actually not. He's educating or miseducating tens of millions of people
with on every topic he touches, right? So there's a responsibility that comes with that and it's
not. I don't think Joe has been, I mean, I think he's been less careful than he should have been on
specific topics. I mean, I think that's definitely was true during COVID and it's true, it's been
true on certain political points. But I mean, genuinely, generally speaking, I think his
heart is in the right place and he's not, his format is such that the people who are going to
be, I mean, people are given ample opportunity to discredit themselves in that context, right?
So there's just, you know, but I do think he's, if he were going to take seriously the
impact he's having and can have, I think he'd be more careful on specific topics than he has been,
right? And I think it would be a good thing for him to be more careful.
And then there are people who have similar platforms like Elon, who I think are being
totally reckless, right? And I just think his behavior on Twitter has been unconscionable in
how he has amplified bad information, pseudo information, lies, and denigrated real information.
And it's just, and it's not, again, I don't put this on him, it's not in a systematic way,
it's just in a reckless way. He's not even paying attention to what he's breaking or what he's
what he's signal boosting. It's like he's, he's not,
it's just, there's, it's like an adolescent attitude toward the safeguarding of real things.
It's like, you're like, like we have, we have a world where the difference between
are succeeding in this common project of, you know, building a civilization that works
and are failing is, I mean, like that, that, that gulf is, is so enormous.
And given, and given that basically all of our problems are, are the result of
failures of human cooperation. I mean, like everything that's just not an asteroid that's,
you know, that's, you know, gonna cross our, our, the path of Earth. And even there,
even with an asteroid, an Earth crossing asteroid, human cooperation is the answer to
that problem. It's like, like there's, there's almost no problem we could have that in the limit
we can't, I mean, if it's compatible with the laws of nature for, for that problem to be solved,
I think our understanding the problem and collaborating in its solution is going to solve
it. Now it may not, you know, conveniently, it may not, we may not have the time we need to solve
it, right? Like if we find out about an asteroid, and it's, you know, 15 days away, we don't have
enough time to get up there and divert it, right? But if we had 15 years or, you know,
30 years, we presumably, we would have the time we needed to solve this problem.
Have you read Ian Bremmer's book, The Power of Crisis?
No, but I, I may have spoken with Ian, I mean, I think I probably spoke with him before that book
came out, but he's been on my podcast several times. So I have, I have the gist of his thoughts on
this topic. Yeah. So he unnerves me a little bit. Adam on the show and he was great and I was very
honored to do it, but it unnerves me a little the idea that we need some sort of crisis,
what he calls a Goldilocks crisis that's big enough to be really devastating, but not so big
that we can't overcome it. No, I hope that's wrong. Yeah. I mean, I don't, I don't think we need that.
What I'm saying though is what we need are, we need adults in the room and we need the most
powerful, we need the luckiest, most powerful, most influential, the people who command the most
resources and the people who command the most of, of our bandwidth, right? The people command
most human attention at the moment to behave responsibly, right? Elon is not doing that.
And I'm not, again, I'm not talking about the decisions he's made as CEO of Twitter. I'm talking
about his behavior on Twitter, right? It's just, it is, it's very Trumpian, right? It's just,
it's just, it's like all for the lulls, right? It's just, he's just shitposting. He's just
spreading memes. He's just fucking around, but he's touching real things. Like, you know, when,
when he speculates that his, his former head of trust and safety is a pedophile, right,
and just kind of freewheels on Twitter about that,
he completely deranges this guy's life. I mean, I think this, I think you all were off,
had to move, as a result of all the death threats he got, right? That's, it's, it's
complete, that, that is completely predictable. I mean, the reason why I thought Trump should
have been kicked off Twitter long before he was, was not because of his politics or how I viewed
his presidency or anything. It was, he was doing this on Twitter. He was, he was singling out specific
citizens for abuse. When it was absolutely predictable, given his platform and given the
nature of his fan base, it was absolutely predictable that those people would then have just
excruciating security concerns, possibly for the rest of their lives, right? It's just, it was just
like death threats and people doxing them and people showing up at their houses and at their
kids' schools. And it was just going to be, they're just, they were just, it was such a massive fuck
over of every one, every single person he mentioned by name. And he knew this, right? And he had to
know this. Elon has to know that about anyone he puts on blast on Twitter. He's got whatever,
130 million people following him. And some percentage of those people are crazy, right?
Guaranteed to be crazy, right? 1% of any audience is crazy, right? So he got 1% of 130 million
people you've got. And I would, and I would bet it skews worse than that in, in his audience,
frankly. And it certainly would be skew worse than that in, in Alex Jones's audience, right?
Alex Jones, at a certain, if Alex Jones didn't know it initially, he knew it ultimately that he
spent, I think it was at least a year putting the Sandy Hook families on blast, knowing it was
documented what was happening to them, right? Given the craziness of his audience, given the
craziness of the claims he was making about them, we can't have the most powerful connected people
in our society, certainly not someone like Elon, who can decide whether or not to put
you know, satellites over Ukraine, you know, in the middle of a war, right?
Just fucking around the way he's fucking around on Twitter. I get that he is what he wants to do.
My point is, if he had an ethical compass, he wouldn't want to do it.
So how do we get that? That feels to me, honestly, like the thing that's missing. We don't have an
anchor anymore. We don't have a national story. We don't have a religious story. We have hyper
fragmentation algorithms pull us into these super narrow little niches. How do we get a
unifying dogma? I just did an interview yesterday, in fact, where I wanted to compare and contrast
and rotate with Marcus Aurelius. And it's pretty interesting in terms of when you really look
at their sort of mirror images of each other. You've got one guy narcissistic, totally self-obsessed,
sees himself as the greatest to ever do it, whatever it might be. And then you have the other
guys reminding himself, don't become purple dyed, you know, so that you think that your royalty has
the guy walk around whispering, remember one day you're going to die, like just always looking at
the ways that he could be fallible and not letting the power go to his head. And you've got right now,
kids really looking up to somebody like that. I'll let Andrew Tate be a stand in now that the
potential allegations or the allegations hanging over his head, but he represents like the flashy,
tough, fast cars, access to women. That's what I want. I want to have that kind of fast, easy
fame. And then Marcus Aurelius is about being a good person, being a decent man is extraordinarily
difficult work that you have to focus on every day. You do it in the shadows, you do it when
you're alone. And that just doesn't get the airtime. And so given that reality.
Yeah, but so there you're making an argument for, which I totally agree with, for signal boosting
Marcus Aurelius in whatever way you can. And when you meet some semblance of a Marcus Aurelius
sort of person, that's the person you want to give a platform to. That's the style of argumentation.
That's the obvious ethical compass. It would be way better for the world
for Elon to be much more like Marcus Aurelius. It would be better for Elon, be better for his
life personally. But that aside, it's like that would be, to model that would be so much better,
objectively better for everyone involved. Like those are the virtues you want to spread.
And yes, it's the androtatification of everything that we're suffering under. And I think in large
measure, the business model of the internet has something to do with that. I mean, the fact that
we anchored it all to ads and to the dynamics of viral spread. But it's also true that in any, I mean,
even if it was all subscription, and so you get what you pay for, you need,
things still need to be entertaining. It's like you can't just be an eat your vegetables culture.
We need captivating stories, and we need it to be fun. So like in Elon's defense,
he would say, just get a sense of humor and just, this should be more fun than it is.
If it's not fun, it's not worth it. The line between fun and real ethical transgression
is, I mean, it's not always immediately findable in real time, but it's usually pretty clear.
And there's a kind of callousness. There's a kind of just not caring about the casualties
that is so obvious in most of the cases, most of the examples I just gave.
I mean, it's frankly, so obviously, I don't know Tate. I don't know whether any of the allegations
against him are real. And maybe he's going to grow up at some point. I mean, he's what,
he's 35 years old, maybe 20 years from now, he may be a very different sort of person.
But right now, he's obviously an asshole. I mean, his ethical center of gravity is just so
displaced from what it should be to be a valid model of successful manhood for that you would want
100 million teenagers in America to be following. It's just like, it's just,
yes, he needs to read Marcus Aurelius. He's not messaging any, I mean, he's messaging some
wisdom, like the wisdom of getting things done, the wisdom of getting it out of your own way,
the wisdom of realizing the dynamics of competition between people and just,
and protecting yourself, like all of that. But it is so self-directed. It's so selfish in principle.
He is so selfish. He's so narcissistic. He's so turned inward. It's so, there's such a,
an ambience of bullshit about him, right? Like just, it's all spin. There's no self-reflection.
It's, the superficiality of what he cares about is like, there's no awareness of the deeper project
of living a, a, a durably happy life where you have real ethical engagement with the world,
with important causes, with people where you're, where you're, where you care about other people,
really, and even care about other people more than you care about yourself in many instances,
right? Where your, where your happiness is born of, of making others happy and reducing
unnecessary suffering, right? Where it's like, where compassion is, is really what animates you.
It's like, there's none of that. I mean, I haven't seen all his stuff or even much of his stuff,
but I've seen enough to know that the kind of the center of the message is like, you know,
if you check these boxes, if you've got a Bugatti and you, and you can fuck as many women as you
want, you've basically solved the problem of being a man, right? Like that's, like, like,
there's no way you're doing much wrong if you've checked those two boxes, right? Like, that's
just bullshit. It's just, I mean, it's not only bullshit. It's completely backwards when you're
talking about what's really worth caring about and prioritizing in this life. I'm not saying that you,
that wealth isn't important. I'm not saying that relationships aren't important. I'm not saying
that status isn't important. I mean, there are very few people who can sort of get past the
general concern about status, right? So status is very high leverage with respect to
people's sense of their own well-being and whether their lives are working. You know,
the story they tell themselves at four in the morning is very likely a reflection of how they
feel they're functioning in some kind of status hierarchy. I get all that, but, you know, like,
my status hierarchy includes so much more than Bugattis and hooking up with new women. And in
fact, it doesn't, like, if that's what I was doing, I would be convinced I had just gone off the rails,
right? Like, so it's just, you know, nothing against Bugattis, but it's like, I don't want one,
right? As if by magic, I don't want a Bugatti, you know? So, yeah, I would agree with you. There's
something, something has gone wrong in our culture that we don't have a long list of people who are
very much like Marcus Aurelius, each more captivating than the next, who are getting their own reality
TV shows, who have figured out how to, I mean, or forget about just the media, I mean, look at the
2024 presidential campaign, right? Like, where are the shades of Marcus Aurelius to choose from?
Right? Like, how, how is it that we, I mean, I'm not the only person to have marveled at this,
but how is it that in a nation of 340 million people, these are our choices? Where we've got
this laptop from hell, you know, waiting to discourage all of these completely unseemly
relationships that, you know, the president's son has spun out in multiple countries,
and we have to worry about some scandals, you know, wafting out of that and, you know,
destroying his prospects for, and his prospects are only important because he's what's, he's the
precarious object put in place of a former president who
truly desecrated the office of the presidency. I mean, just he literally shattered the most
important norms we have in our democracy. I mean, I would, I don't know what to put
above a commitment to a peaceful transfer of power. I mean, it is the, you know, I mean,
Ronald Reagan, you know, who people right of center, you know, used to care about,
single that out as just the, the kind of the central miracle of our society that we had that,
you know, with all, whatever else is happening and whatever the depth of our political differences,
the fact that we could rely on a peaceful transfer of power every four years, right?
That was an absolute miracle. It's the thing about us that is most astounding to all these other
societies that can't manage it, right? In any generation, they either don't even have a system
that even purports to manage it or even having one, they can't keep that together, right?
We haven't had that problem historically and yet we have it now and we had it last time because
of Trump. How do we begin to unwind this stuff? So if there's something, it seems something broken
in culture to me, I think culture is downstream of the individual. That was why I wanted to
contrast the two different people. What that got me thinking about is what is the animating
philosophy of everybody's life? And I think for most people, they never take the time to define
what their animating spirit is. They don't have a life philosophy. They're just engaged in the
day-to-day river of algorithms that sort of pull them along and confront them with the things they
need to do, the things they find funny, the things that they find out raging. But when I really stop
and think about what people need to do, I come back to the thing that Jordan Peterson has been
circling around. This has been really interesting for me. So Jordan goes on his dad arc when he
really first burst onto public fame. I was completely blown away by how much he was helping
people. He then gets sick and he comes back and he's super religious. And I don't know what to
make of it. And for a long time, I was very confused. And then I started thinking, he might just be
ahead of his time, in that what I think he has his finger on is that there is, all of us have a
God-shaped hole inside of us. You have to fill it with something. And what I think, and I'm very
much putting words in his mouth, but what I think Jordan is putting his finger on is the Christian
text is the way to anchor people to a set of beliefs and values so that we have something that we
can point back to. So that in times like these, where people are going astray, you can point out,
does your behavior make sense? Yes or no? You think yes, because you're getting a bunch of likes on
Instagram. That's ridiculous. You should think yes, because you're healing close to the words of the
Bible, which are really deep mythological stories about the truth of the human condition. Now,
again, I've not spoken him about this. I don't know that he would agree with that assessment.
But that's my gut instinct, unless he really now is like, I am a believer. But he even publicly
tweeted at Richard Dawkins and said, basically, he was, I think, saying something about atheism,
and he was like, this is a mistake. I will debate you anytime about it. So even if he doesn't believe
in the literal word of God, he is really convinced that it is a necessary thing to help people orient
themselves to a life well lived. So as you know, Jordan and I have debated this topic of ad nauseam.
I think we had four public debates. We did two or three podcasts, and then we had a bunch of
live debates that were fun. And I don't know how much his thinking has changed since then he got
sick. And then he's probably, I'll take your word for it. I haven't seen much of his stuff of late,
but it was last time you guys connected. Well, I was on his podcast, certainly during COVID.
But it's been, it's probably been at least a year, I think, since I've connected with him anyway.
Maybe there was an email or so. But I don't think it's, I would be surprised if it's thinking
has fundamentally changed. I mean, yes, as you say, he thinks that religious stories, and in
particular, a Judeo-Christian story is really indispensable for Western civilization. And
we should recognize how much we owe to that story. And it's in the absence of that recognition that
you have this eruption of weird political commitments on the left that seem to have a kind
of religious fervor. I think there's a bunch of half truths in there that I would sort of agree
with. But generally speaking, I think that's just a mistake and diagnosis of our problem
for a bunch of reasons. One is, I break this into kind of two layers. The most important thing,
I think, to recognize is that stories aren't good enough. We need more than stories. Well, what
genuinely ails us is at a level psychologically that isn't remedied by just having a consoling
string of thoughts to think again and again and again, a story to tell yourself, a story to tell
your kids, a story to have them pair it back to you, a culture of stories that just ramifies
all of these ideas. That's not good enough. It's not the thing that allows you to recognize
the real sacred depth of the present moment. It's not the thing that you encounter when you
really know how to meditate or take the right psychedelic at the right moment with the right
guidance, with the right set and setting and have a real breakthrough into a landscape of mind that
transcends your sense of egocentricity. To really get over yourself, to really be available to
self-transcending love and connection and ethical commitments is a deeper move
than any new set of thoughts is going to engineer for you. It requires an insight into the superficiality
of thought itself. You have to recognize what the mind is like prior to thought, prior to
identification with thought, prior to being continually spellbound by the voice in your head
that is telling you one thing or the other. It's telling you you're great and everything's
working perfectly or it's telling you you're a failure and nothing worked out. On the relative
level, on the level of being identified with thought, it matters what story you tell yourself.
It's much better to feel like everything's going great, if in fact it is, than to feel morbidly
and masochistically self-critical and self-doubting and depressed. You can get a lot of leverage from
stories, but you can't get the thing you really want to get at the end of the day spiritually
and contemplatively and ethically by just telling yourself a new story. That's the
deepest claim I'd want to make. The baby in the bathwater of religion that we should want to save,
that what it would take to really be like Jesus, what it would take to really be like Buddha,
that's not a matter of endorsing any particular story. There's a deeper engagement with
the reality of the present moment and just the mechanics of one's own attention
that's required for that. But in addition to that, even if we were just concerned about stories
and having the best stories, the best stories are not in the Bible. The Christian story,
the Judeo-Christian story, is not the best story. It's not the most life-affirming story. It's not
the clearest ethical compass we can engineer. In fact, it has its moments. If you have a
Jeffersonian a la carte attitude toward the Bible, yes, you can get some great wisdom there,
but it is also chock-full of modernity annihilating bullshit and you have to
push all that away and you have to find some principle by which you would disavow that stuff.
The very real hatred of homosexuality, literally homosexuality is a killing offense in the Bible
and in nowhere, nowhere in the New Testament does it cease to be a killing offense. In fact,
it pretty clearly is in Paul's letters. Even the most basic religious ethical test of sanity
slavery, like, what's our policy on slavery? You don't get a good one from the Bible. That
is as pure a defeater of ethical omniscience as you could ask for. Is this the best moral
document we have? Well, let's check the index. What does it say about slavery? Oh, it gets
slavery wrong. There's no way it's the wisest book we've ever produced. That's where we are
with the Bible. That's quite inconvenient for Christians and Jews who really want to make
that tradition, kind of the sole repository of wisdom for us. I think
what should obviously be true to us is that every book we have, the Bible included, the Quran
included, was at some point the product of merely human insight and intelligence. People wrote
all of our books. We do not have a single book that was not written by a person leaving chat
GPT aside. All we have is the totality of human insights and human conversations
to draw from. What traditionally religious people seem to recommend is that
we limit ourselves to the insights and conversations of a previous age. Whether you want to walk that
all the way back to the 7th century or 1500 BC or 1st century AD, that depends on which religion
you favor, or some people will just want to go with Elron Hubbard. We'll go with the guy with
bad teeth whose driver's license we can literally inspect, but he's compelling enough for us to
just stop there. He got it right in Dianetics, and we need to look no further.
What I think should be obvious is rather than feel like we're entitled to any kind of religious
provincialism, we should just want the totality, and very much in the spirit of what you were
recommending earlier, we want the totality of human insights and conversations available,
and then we want to just see what survives contact with reality. We want to pressure test it in
each present generation in the presence of new technology. What is going to give us
guidance? What in our prior conversations gives us real guidance when we decide to build more and
more powerful AI? What should we believe about the totality of everything that's been said before,
its provenance? What equips us to make a truly wise decision in the present
with respect to this emerging technology? Now, I would argue that you get close to nothing
in the Bible to equip you to actually navigate this appropriately.
We have these challenges, some of which are quite foreseeable, but some of which aren't,
some of which has come out of the blue, and we just have to recognize that all we have,
collectively, is conversation by which to navigate. Again, I do think it's helpful to
continually view all of this collectively and also just personally as a navigation problem.
We're constantly faced with the question of what to do next, what to physically do next,
what to do next with our resources, what to pay attention to next, what to talk about next,
what to think about next, what kind of laws to write next. We're constantly
tacking in the wind, and all we have is human insight and human conversation by which to do
that. Persuasion is important, understanding the dynamics of all that is important,
but to default to some prior century and to say that these are the last words that are relevant
on the deepest questions of human life. They can never be improved, they can never be superseded
by anything. All of their internal contradictions are something that we have to pretend to have worked
out, and in most cases, we're better off just ignoring them because who can understand the
mind of God? It's like, let's default to mystery there and the unknowability really of truth there,
but no, there's very specific truths we can know. I guess homosexuality, no, that's forbidden,
so we know that. View it in terms of software, it's like we know we have to keep improving it.
Culture is software. Culture is an operating system. We know it's continually
showing its bugs. We know it's continually failing us. We know it's throwing up new challenges that
emergent behavior that we have to correct for. We can't just say this 2,000-year-old legacy code
is perfect. It so clearly isn't perfect. It was not perfect at the time. It was possible at the
time to know that slavery was wrong. It's not like 2,000 years ago, everyone thought slavery was
okay. No, it's just the people who wrote the Bible thought slavery was okay. It was possible to be
wise enough as a human being. You brought up Marcus Aurelius. There is so much more wisdom
in his meditations. I'm not saying they're perfect. They're not everything. There is so much more
wisdom in that book than in most of the Bible. There's so much less wrong with his meditations
than is wrong with most of the Bible. If you're going to take one book to guide your life,
you could do a lot worse than Marcus Aurelius. It's so modern in so many ways. It's like you
don't have to go through this tortured translation, like what he really meant. He didn't mean keep
slaves. It's a very modern set of insights into, I don't know if he said anything about the ethics
of slavery. Maybe there's something in there that is inconvenient. The parts of Marcus Aurelius
and Stoicism generally that are so serviceable and so modern is that there's this basic insight
into your mind being basically all you have. Whatever you have in the world, whatever you
have in your life, whatever you're being confronted with, the layer of experience
is mind. What you do with your attention, what you choose to focus on, how you choose to frame
the thing that seems to have happened in the world, that is the cash value of the world
and of your life in it is what it convinces you to do with your mind.
And if you can just seize those reins deliberately, you can be happy in objectively terrible
situations. And conversely, if you fail to understand anything about those mechanics,
you can be miserable in objectively wonderful and truly fortunate situations. You can have all
the luck in the world and not enjoy any of it. Do you ever worry that given that all that we
really have is our mind and attention, that AI ends up coming along and playing the role of God?
It focuses your attention, it tells you what to look at, it makes sure that you feel X, Y, Z way,
but that it ends up being able to either through culture or something far more individualistic,
it ends up being able to shape your values. Oh, yeah. I'm very worried about
the deepest questions of the AI alignment. I think that's a real problem and I'm amazed that
there are many people fairly close to this technology who either don't think it's a problem or
just figured that out like last week after working in the field for decades. I'm truly
mystified by the people who don't think it's a problem. As you might have heard, I had Mark
Andriesen on my podcast and we debated this and he's super smart and super close to the tech
and just thinks that this is pure science fiction to worry about AI alignment. There's
just no reason to worry about it. I spent whatever it was, two hours talking in his
direction. He's totally unconvinced by anything I had to say. Everything I have to say on the
topic is really, I don't think there's anything original from me on that. I've just been very
informed by people like Stuart Russell who is also very close to the tech. He's a computer
scientist at Berkeley, but then people who are more peripheral to the field who just have made
very compelling arguments about the problem of alignment like Nick Bostrom or Eleazar Yudkowski
or Max Tegmark. I mean, there's a lot of smart people who are just, they're not actually doing
the AI research, but then you have somebody like Jeffrey Hinton who's like the father of the most
current tech of deep learning and he wakes up three weeks ago and he realizes we've got a
problem on our hands, right? So I don't understand why that took so long, but that aside, even in
success, or even not reaching anything like a catastrophe of misalignment,
just our engagement with machines that are smarter than ourselves and the way in which
that can be, I mean, there's so many examples of the way it could derange us, but just,
I recently rewatched the film Her. I don't know if you saw that recently, but it lands
differently now. I sort of forgot what I thought about it 10 years ago. I saw it when it came out,
but now it just seems like, okay, this is pretty damn interesting. It was not consciously a very
dystopian film. I mean, it kind of split the difference between dystopia and something more
benign, but you can see, just imagine all of us, I mean, even the model of success here,
we all have a kind of a superhuman AI tutor who understands us better than anyone in our lives,
and understands us better than our friends or our spouses. It has literally noticed everything
we've paid attention to for years, right? It's followed. It's like it's caught everything we've
forgotten. Oh, you said in that email that you were going to tell Sam X, you never told him,
you want to tell him now, right? It's reading everything you wrote, it's reading everything
you read, and it's doing that to a billion other people fairly similar to you and drawing insights
from them and then propagating that back into its understanding of you. So it's understanding you in
ways that you can't even understand yourself, right? And so now you're in dialogue with this thing.
Now, I'm not saying there isn't some good that could come of this. I mean, it's just imagine
just being in relationship to the smartest and wisest oracle you could ever have access to.
That's what's not to love about that. But then you just imagine, as in the film, her,
that we all have a different version of this thing. And it's slightly different
because we're different, right? So it's a fun house mirror. And our culture is fragmented,
like we don't have a shared reality because the AI is tuning itself differently. So it's like,
I think, Geron Lanier gave this example once, not so much for AI, but for just the
disorienting capacity of social media. It's like, imagine if Wikipedia was different
for every person who went and read an article there. It's like, you go read the article on the
American Revolution and it's bespoke just for you, given the kinds of things you have
signaled that you like in the past, right? So no one has a common understanding of the world,
really, because we're all sort of drifting off into this conversation with more and more compelling
information tools. Again, if this thing coughs up a cure for cancer next year,
but the pragmatics of the moment are going to be such I'm going to say, all right, well,
let's just, let's at least acknowledge that we really wanted that cure for cancer, right?
I'm really happy we got that. I'm not so worried about the misinformation problem today,
given that AI and everyone I know are now, now know we're never going to die from cancer,
right? So let's get our priorities straight. But it really is easy to see how it can
bend us in ways that will not be functional. And yeah, I mean, I hope we equip ourselves to
realize that in time as these advances roll out. No kidding. All right, man. I think even at the
end of this amazing conversation, we still all have a lot of work to do in terms of figuring
out what our compass is, how to sift through all the information. There's no letting us off the
hook. But now that you're no longer on Twitter, where can people engage with you?
Well, just WakingUp.com has all my stuff on meditation and really applied philosophy. And
SamHarris.org is my website. So anything I do will be announced from there. So yeah,
and if in the age of deep fakes, I mean, this is one thing I've thought about. It's like,
at a certain point, if something hasn't come from one of my channels, I don't think you can
be sure that I said that thing or if that's me saying it. And so it is with you or anyone else
with the platform. I mean, it's just, it's really, it's really strange. But yeah, that's where I am.
Awesome. Yeah. All right, everybody, if you haven't already, be sure to subscribe. And until
next time, my friends, be legendary. Take care. Peace. If you enjoyed this episode, check out
this deep conversation with Donald Hoffman about reality and consciousness. What we are are avatars
of the one. The one awareness is exploring all of its possibilities through different avatars.
So somehow there is this field of awareness.
