I think we're getting to the point that normal porn has gotten really sick, that if you're not
approved about eroticism, some of the things that you're seeing pushed have to do with the fact that
our brains are now habituated to all sorts of things that you probably would never have seen
visually unless you were like Genghis Khan, right? Because everything's on demand. And so
the search for novelty I think is taking in some cases quite a dark term, even for people who
are pretty okay with the idea of pornography and eroticism as being an important part of an adult
diet for the mind. Where worries me as kids for sure. And I may be even less worried about today
than I am in 15 years when you have VR that is bordering on photorealistic and that's where
Photoshop, whoever you want in, you know, choose your own experience, that's very disturbing.
But I'll be honest, I'm more concerned right now about people finding partners to have children
with. I think that this is an economic epidemic that we don't feel comfortable talking about.
And people comfortable talking? Well, because for example, if you have a fair idea that you're at
risk for not having the family thing work out, like it's gotten a little late in the day and you
don't see a lot of prospects lined up and you've had a few relationships that haven't ended in
commitment and resources and children and the economy doesn't seem to want to come up with a
30-year plan to fit a mortgage and getting some kids through college. I think that the transition
from the previous world has been pretty brutal and a lot of people don't want to say, yeah,
I really want a family and if it doesn't work out, it's going to be a major hit to my life and my
sense of myself. And we need, you know, in part, I think that a lot of us don't want to see young
women forced onto the apps, you know, which seems like it turns life into this. From this dating
perspective? Yeah, like a sink. It's just, you know, somebody, somebody said, this is the singles bar
in my pocket. And wherever I'm bored, I just go to the singles bar and start swiping. And I thought,
okay, and how do you feel about this? Well, in the aggregate, I feel pretty terrible about that,
but I can't stop. And so you know, you've commodified all of this stuff. And I don't think it's a good
deal for young women at all. I think that, you know, young women have been used to putting men
through their paces and demanding a lot and, you know, saying, you know, jump this high and seeing
who can clear the bar. And when that power is not present, and when men can't win these competitions
and have those competitions really mean something, we derange the society because society is about
continuity and continuity is about babies. So no matter what you want to do, you can take it away
from babies. I remember I was talking to a young woman who was like 26 or something. She asked me
if I had kids and I said yes. And I said, do you have kids? And she like practically spit out her
beer like what? And I thought, do you think it's really the crazy question that I would ask a 26
year old woman if she had kids? And then, you know, she thought about it and just felt very remote.
And this is the economy that we're bequeathing to people. And my belief is that if the median
individual cannot count on being able to, you know, have a home in a reasonable city that has lots of
jobs so that if one job doesn't work, they can switch and one person can stay home, doesn't have
to be the dad, doesn't have to be a mom and a dad, any pair. But you need somebody with the freedom
to stay home to raise children while somebody else can be counted upon to go be the breadwinner
in an economy that isn't, you know, absolutely razor's edge. This is nuts. And, you know,
it was driven home to me recently and my father turned 85. We were at a party for his friends
and some of their closest friends lived in our neighborhood when I was growing up.
They were saying, oh, yes, you know, when we moved in all those years ago,
there were 14 boys who used to play on the street and now there are none.
And I said, what do you mean they're none? She said, what young families can't afford to live on the
street? And I said, do you have any thought in your mind that that was a catastrophe that happened
to your street and that maybe your generation had some response? But this is the silent generation.
So before the baby had something to do to say, hey, maybe this is not good for society. If young
families, she said, well, these homes are perfect for families. I said, but you just told me that
there are no families on your street. So this is an epidemic and this is deranging us. And this is
a lot of what's behind this kind of sense of injustice and people trying to find groups,
I think, to take care of because you have got a lot of maternal instincts that are not grounding
in happy, hopeful homes, raising kids. That's really interesting. What do you think is
the sort of key driver? Is this student loans? Is it the average salary isn't going up? And part
of what drives my question is, I know what I pay. So my previous company I had at 1.3,000
employees, about 1,500 full-time and then another 1,500 part-time. Here I have 20 plus employees
full-time and then another, I don't know, seven or eight part-time. And I know what I pay them
and it's a good wage. It's a hell of a lot more than I was making at their age. That's probably
the easiest way to say it. So where is it that just the way that we are and what we pay is not
indicative of what other companies pay? Is it something else? This is going to be
really kind of brutal. First of all, we were in an orchard with lots of low-hanging scientific
fruit where you could take the scientific fruit and turn it into technology in short order.
We're still making scientific advances, but most of those that are even fairly profound
are not instantly convertible into technology. So there might be low-hanging fruit in a new
orchard, but we haven't found the new orchard. So we're picking fruit that has a very different
characteristic. So that's the first part is that our pipeline got screwed up.
How does that really play out in like dollars and cents? Well, I'm thinking of this street,
right? It's the perfect analogy. So you have a street, the houses have a price to buy,
they have a price to rent. So when I think about, okay, what is stopping somebody from either buying
or renting? So if the prices are too high, prices are too high. So then is it that the prices are
artificially too high because we have a bunch of empty houses and people who are buying as an
investment and they're just being stupid? So you're fairly familiar with my theories and
acronyms and things. So you've probably heard about the embedded growth obligation, the ego.
And I get that and that scares me and I totally buy into it. What I don't,
and for anybody listening and tell me if I fuck this up, but like basically we have a system that's
entirely predicated on continued growth and that growth slowed down starting in the 70s or 80s
and we've done a lot of bullshit shell games to make it seem like we're growing. The one that
when you give, I'm always freaked the fuck out by is the essentially Ponzi scheme of education,
where higher education, you're teaching people to be professors, but there's only going to be so
many professors or the law firms only going to be so many partners. So it's like every graph tells
the same story. So but what I don't understand is if that's been the same since the 70s, like
I didn't even graduate high school until the mid 90s. And this has nothing ever seen. I mean,
look, there were times I couldn't quite pay my bills. There were times where I was sharing an
apartment with a bunch of people, but it's like it never felt like the system had broken in some
impossible way. And this isn't me saying that it isn't broken. This is me just saying I want to
really understand like where we've gone wrong. Well, so this is what I say to my friends in
San Francisco. So they've got good jobs. They're programmers. They're having a blast. They're going
to Tulum and, you know, traveling to Bali and all these things. And so I say, you're living in a
group house. What do you think about buying your own home and asking that gal you've been
going out with for a couple of years to get married? And like the conversation just gets
really weird. Well, I'm not so confident that I can commit to a 30 year mortgage and, you know,
prices are insane. And I'm not positive that she's the right one for me. And, you know,
all these things. Or if I talk to my female friends, they have a set of different stories,
which is like, I'm so tired of little boys who never grow up.
Is this a psychological malaise? Like, because that explanation, I can understand.
We're not excited about low variance futures needed for children as we see.
Because we don't see things popping off. Like this isn't Beijing in 2006 where it's just like
the sky's the limit or? Well, I think people have a pretty strong sense. Well, like I hired a millennial
who I'm very good friends with. And I noticed that he was like not that committed to certain
kinds of projects. He'd work hard, but he also had a very clear sense of, you know, my obligation
ends at this point. I said, well, I know this person. I think they work here. Okay. Keep going.
And I said, well, why do we have a difference in a sense of work ethic? And he said, oh,
because my generation watched your generation get screwed by the baby boomers and we're not falling
for it. Do you buy that? Yeah. That sounds like bullshit to me. And when I say I am happy to
be convinced what I want is the fucking truth, dude, because I have no interest in let's get to
the truth. Because so I have a psychotic work ethic. Why? Because I didn't used to and my entire
life changed when I changed my work ethic. But you fact look, you're talking sounds to me like
you're talking about founding companies. I've done both. I've been an employee and I've founded
companies. So I've played both sides of the fence. And how did, how did the employee, well,
look, I don't want to over index on, I mean, because, you know, there are particular lawyers
in particular law firms who aren't founding anything or doing just fine, but it's a minority
position. And what I believe is, is that we are in a situation in which we are not excited
by the future. And the people who are real stakeholders in the system have in general
been very focused on making sure that the pyramid is always supplied. So this idea, for example,
of you have to go to college, the debt has to become non-dischargeable and bankruptcy. We get to
load up the universities with administrative, all that kind of stuff. And then of course,
the main one, which is really bizarre, which is there's the secret weapon and the secret weapon
is immigration. And the great part about immigration as a, as a invidious tool for one generation
to screw another generation with is that if you call it out, there's only one explanation
for why you would fight having other people added to the bottom of a pyramid scheme, which is you
must be a xenophobe or probably a racist. And the answer is no, I'm really just trying to choke
your supply of new virgins to add to this pyramid scheme so that you can continue to
transfuse yourself. Yeah, that's interesting. So let me see if I can steal men this quickly.
This is the one time in my life where I am the one that has a heart out in five minutes. I'm
so fucking horrified. This is so interesting to me. So I'll try to do it quickly. Okay, so
so we have a pyramid scheme in that there are only so many jobs, and I'll even abstract it from
being a lawyer, which is very easy to understand. There's only so many people make partner,
being a teacher, it's easy to understand, you can only create so many other teachers and obviously
we're talking at higher education. And I'll just say your normal job. And I've told my employees
this, like, look, every step you go up, you there's fewer available positions until you get to the
CEO, and there's only one. So there's only like, you can get promotion, I've never thought of
there being sort of a money does not strike me as the finite resource. The promotion strikes me
as a finite resource, you can keep making more and more money, depending on the health of the
company and your contributions to it. So that's part of my bias is that when I try to use just
first principles, I'm like, if this person is that valuable to me, I'm going to fucking pay them
because I have fear of loss, I don't want to lose them. So which is why default to create fear of
loss in your employer if you want more money. But the company has to be doing well. So let me
stick to the Ponzi scheme here. So very interesting take on immigration. So you have people coming
into the system, they're willing to work cheaper than the other people would otherwise work in
the system. You got to be careful about that. But keep going. It's interesting. I'm trying to
represent your position. No, no, no. But what I'm trying to say is that really the biggest
issue is push out the labor supply curve. Say that another way, your wage is your price. Yep.
And I bring people from foreign countries to make sure you can't compete because they'll do it for
cheap. No, it's not even that. I mean, maybe the idea is that you're a superior source of labor.
Who's you, whoever you are, you're the domestic. Let's assume that you're a worker inside of the
US. Yep. The big play in some sense of the previous generations, the silent generation,
and more importantly, the baby boomers, was internationalism, which they called globalization,
and the hidden part of globalization that wasn't the United Colors of Benetton
was the idea of we can just break our dependence on each other and look abroad and talk, tell a
beautiful story about what we're going to do for Africa and Asia. Then the idea is, is that we can
continue to grow our slice of the pie, even though the pie might not be growing at the same rate,
because from my perspective as a silent generation or baby boomer, I'm focused on a slice, not the
pie. There was a huge amount of value gotten from tricking people into thinking that globalization
was this beautiful, Davos-inspired kind of philanthropy that was going to be a rising
tide to raise all boats. Those Americans who had rights inside of our system, and this goes for
Britswitz, British rights and French rights, whatever, had a right that was valuable, which is,
I have asymmetric access to my labor market, and that's how we worked as a nation. Now,
you start the world's greatest PR campaign, which is patriotism doesn't exist. It's only
nationalism. Of course, nationalism is really ultranationalism, which is jingoism, which is a
precursor to Nazism. You start saying, I kind of believe in citizenship and patriotism, and now
you're telling me that I'm a bad person, and now you've got the Davos crowd talking about
financial inclusion in Africa and Asia, and you notice that they're not really that interested
in Michigan or Alabama. Tell me why they're not, because I felt like I understood it until you
told me that I was getting it wrong. Because the amount of value, you see, if I had to purchase
your rights to what? Well, your asymmetric access to your labor market. I wrote a paper called
Migration for the Benefit of All, published in the International Journal of Labor. I forget
what the title is. Migration for the Benefit of All, which said, if you pay people for their rights,
like if the baby boomers in silence said, look, we think we can get better labor outside,
and we want to pay you for the right to shop elsewhere, then the idea is that everybody
would have been better off, and we would have all screamed kumbaya at each other as we got
rich together. But instead, what they said is, you're a protectionist and a jingoist
and a xenophobe. We loaded them up with as much negative imagery as we could pop. You're just a
bad person. And they were doing that, though, so they can get cheaper labor, right? So they can
keep you from having leverage. But you keep saying it is we're willing to work below. But my point is,
is that if this coffee mug cost $10, and now we have 10,000 coffee mugs, it's not that those
coffee mugs are willing to be bought for less. The entire cost of coffee mugs plummets. It's
just pushing out the supply curve on labor, and wages its price. So it behaves much as supply
and demand should. Now, you can then point out, you can make lots of other arguments like, well,
some of these people are starting business, and people are not coffee mugs. And these are the
most vibrant members of us. So you cue stars and stripes forever, you put your right hand over
your heart. But the key point was, is that all of these arguments were necessary to keep the
institutional structure going as the Ponzi scheme ran out. And a lot of this has to do with what I've
called fake growth, downsizing, offshoring, immigration, securitization. It's just this
mind-numbing parade of different techniques that these older generations have used
to keep a system afloat that has been saying, we're exhausted. Like the law firms are supposed
to fail, the universities are supposed to fail. All sort of the newspapers don't make sense as a
business model. And things that you're creating, and that we all might create, would be replacing
these things. But instead, what we've done is we've come up with an exotic kind of economic
parbiosis where we're going to transfuse our fellow Americans and the younger generations
to pay for a group of people who are just far too expensive to keep living in the style to
which they've unjustly become accustomed. So I'm sorry about your hard stop, but I think that
there's a tremendous amount to be excited about and enthusiastic about, because in essence,
getting back to your original point, you're right about the matrix. For 50 years, we've been
in a constellation of ideas suppressing the really interesting new ideas and calling names
on anybody who would propose ideas that would point out the unstable nature of our market
democracy. And right now, what we're doing is we're living through the beginning of a global,
low-grade revolution of a type that we've never seen before.
If you liked that clip, check out the full, powerful episode here, and I'll see you there.
