Not too long ago, the process theologian and philosopher John Cobb, Jr. asked me
if I would join his Cobb Institute, which is a nonprofit trying to advance a
process relational worldview, as well as the philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead.
And in particular, John wanted me to share the Science Advisory Committee, one
of the avenues that the Cobb Institute is hoping to advance Whitehead's work is
in the natural sciences. And one of the ways that I thought I could help to
advance this mission would be to record a number of dialogues with scientists
who have been influenced by Whitehead's work or who have found that there is a
correspondence between their approach and Whitehead's. I have already reached
out to a few scientists. I'm hoping to record dialogues in the near future with
the astrobiologist Bruce Damer, who I've spoken to in the past. I'm also going to
record a dialogue with the plasma physicist Timothy Eastman and others.
But the first scientist who was willing to speak with me about Whitehead is
Rupert Sheldrake. And Rupert probably needs no introduction, but for those of
you who are somehow unfamiliar with his work, he is a biologist, a Cambridge
trained biologist. He is a psychical researcher who has developed, in addition
to his novel biological ideas, he has also developed a number of experiments to
test certain parapsychological so-called phenomena and has accumulated a wealth
of interesting data that challenges the materialist paradigm that much science
still operates within. Rupert Sheldrake is rather controversial from within the
scientific establishment. I would be surprised if my listeners are not aware
of some of the controversies that he has stirred up trying to challenge, ultimately
I would say, trying to challenge science and scientists to be more scientific, to
admit more data into their understanding of how the universe works and to then
develop better theories to include and elucidate that data. So I will leave it
at that and I hope you enjoy our conversation.
I'm really grateful to you for making the time to speak with me. I have already
mentioned to our mutual friend, John Cobb, that we would be doing this and he was
very glad to hear that and sends his well wishes to you in hopes that you're
doing well. And he's excited to hear our dialogue. As you may know, John has recently
started the Cobb Institutes to help further a process relational worldview.
One of the areas that he's hoping that the Institute can help advance and carry
forward is Whitehead's relevance to the natural sciences. And John has asked me
to lead that effort. We have a committee made up of some other scientists and one
of the first things I wanted to do to help advance the mission of the Institute
was interview different scientists and you are the first one. So I'm very excited
about that. I'm also going to be interviewing the plasma physicist at
the Goddard Space Flight Institute, NASA's Institute, Timothy Eastman, he's a plasma
physicist and an astrobiologist named Bruce Dahmer, who's working on a very
interesting hypothesis. You know him, yeah, he was good friends with Terrence
McKenna, who you were also good friends with, so there's a connection there. So
let's talk about Whitehead. Just so you know, I will introduce you later when I
I'll record a separate introduction that will lead into this conversation. So I
won't do that now. So I've got a series of questions here. And the first one for
you would be, when did you first encounter Whitehead's ideas?
You suddenly froze then. But I mean, I could hear you all right, but you're
the visuals froze. Okay, well you heard the question then, so go ahead.
I can't remember actually. I think that I may have read, when I was doing History
of Science at Harvard in 1963-64, I was in the graduate school, I just finished
my undergraduate degree at Cambridge. I was doing History and Philosophy of Science
and I think I read Science in the modern world at that stage. Because I was very
interested in Whitehead's take on, you know, what was happening. The reason I was
doing History and Philosophy of Science at Harvard was because when I was an
undergraduate at Cambridge, I'd become very disillusioned with mechanistic
materialism. I'd been converted to atheism and materialism when I was at school
by my science teachers. But I began to doubt mechanistic materialism because I'd
gone into biology because I loved animals and plants and I noticed the first thing
we did was to kill them and then grind them up. And everything I was most
interested in about them disappeared in this process by the time you got sort of
DNA in a test tube. You know, the animal, I was interested, I kept homing pigeons
as a child. And I was interested in her pigeons' home. Of course, by the time you
killed the pigeon and ground up its liver and extracted its enzymes and centrifuged
them and looked at the properties of the enzymes in a test tube or the DNA, you
were an awfully long way from homing behaviour. And the rest is just sort of
filled with hand waving, you know, well, it's genetically programmed, you know,
and so on. So I got very critical of the whole approach and I didn't know
whether it was inevitable or whether there was an alternative. And I read
Goethe when I was an undergraduate and that gave me the first inklings of a
holistic approach to biology. So anyway, I was at Harvard and I think I read
Whitehead then. And then I went back to Cambridge. I was a graduate student doing
a PhD in developmental botany. I wanted to work on plants because I couldn't
spend, I didn't want to spend the rest of my career killing animals, which is
what zoology would have meant. And during that period, somebody approached me,
a fellow graduate student, and asked me to write an article for a new magazine,
Theoria to Theory. I don't know if you've come across it, Theoria, as in
Greek mystical intuition to DO theory. And that introduced me to this group in
Cambridge called the Epiphany Philosophers, who were a group of philosophers
and scientists who were interested in mystical spirituality and philosophy of
science. The journal of the group, Theoria to Theory, was edited by Dorothy
Emmett, who was a student of Whiteheads. And the whole group was permeated by
Whitehead because Dorothy was the editor and she was one of the key figures. The
other key figures in the group were Richard Braithwaite, who was a philosopher
of science, professor at Cambridge, and his wife Margaret Masterman, who was
worked on linguistic philosophy. She worked with Wittgenstein and was in charge
of the Cambridge Language Research Lab, which was doing pioneering work on
artificial intelligence and artificial translation. This was in the late 50s
and early 60s, she was doing this. So this was way out ahead of Google
Translate and stuff we now take for granted. And we had retreats every
year, four week-long retreats, where we, in the mornings and evenings, put on
robes and chanted the matins and even song prayers from the Church of England
in morning and evening prayers. Then we always had a seminar during these
retreats. We're very hard-hitting seminar on ideas. It was about holistic
science. Margaret Masterman and Dorothy and Richard and the other members of the
group took the view that if there was a conflict between science and mystical
religion, then there must be something wrong with science. And that was the
exact opposite of all the religion-science dialogues at the time, where they
were assumed as a conflict. Then you just got to chop religion down more and
more on a kind of pro-crustian bed of materialism until there's almost
nothing left. So I was at that stage looking for a more holistic way of
doing science. I met this group in 1966. And in these various seminars and so on,
Whitehead kept coming up all the time. And Dorothy was always having to try
and expand it, because no one could really grasp what he was saying. And I
tried reading process and reality and couldn't make head and not tail of it.
So I always had to go and ask Dorothy and she'd sort of explain it in more
simple terms. And this has been my relationship with Whitehead ever since
1966. I can't understand the original sources apart from science and the
modern world. So I always had to ask Whitehead experts the last in that
distinguished series is you.
Yes, I'm familiar with this problem.
So anyway, this, I was part of this group for all through the time I was a
research fellow at Clare. I was a don at Cambridge and I was a fellow at Clare
College where Merlin later went. And during that time, I was wrestling with
the how morphogenesis happens. In 1973, I came up with the idea of morphogenetic
fields and morphic resonance. Morphogenetic fields were already part of
biology. But the idea of morphic resonance came to me then in a kind of flash,
provoked not by reading Whitehead but by reading Bergson. I read Matter and
Memory by Bergson and that was for me absolutely seminal step. And it led to,
after reflecting on it, the idea of a causal memory causation, anemic causation
as Bertrand Russell called it over time, a kind of form of causation that could
work across time. And that was what the main theme of his book, Matter and
Memory. And I also read his creative evolution. So I was enormously inspired
by Bergson. And then when I started talking about this to Dorothy and the others
at the Epiphany philosophers, because this was a small group and I could bounce
ideas off them and we were always bouncing ideas. And I managed years of that
already. And they'd emboldened me to think more broadly because they had a very
radical approach to science. And we had quantum theorists and we had acupuncturists
and alternative medicine people and people interested in psychokinesis and telepathy.
And nothing was banned from these discussions except that the discussions
were very, very hard hitting. And most people who went to them were as soon as
one stage or another reduced to tears. Because Braithwaite was very, very aggressive
in his critiques of people. And I mean, he was open minded but aggressive and couldn't
stand nonsense. So anyway, then when I talked about Morphe Resnes, then Dorothy
said, well, there are lots of parallels for this in Whitehead and began to explain
how this could link up with Whitehead. But the main inspiration came more through
Bugsdon than Whitehead and then the linking up with Whitehead came a bit later.
Then just to fast forward through the story, I then left my job in Cambridge and got
a job in an agricultural research institute in India. I was in India for five years
and then for two more years after that on and off. In India, I was mainly working
on crop improvement in plant physiology. But when I was there, I got interested
and I was thinking about Morphe Resnes and I continued to develop the ideas and got
to the point where I felt I could write it up in a book. I did that in an ashram in
South India, Father Bede Griffiths, who was a Christian Benedictine monk in an Indian
style ashram. He wore orange robes and it was a very Indian ashram, actually more Indian
than Hindu ashrams which were overwhelmed with spiritual tourists from the west.
Because this was Christian, most spiritual tourists from the west weren't interested
in Christianity. So this one was ironically far more Indian than any of the Hindu ones.
Anyway, I left there and wrote my book A New Science of Life. And then when it came out
in 1981, there was a lot of interest in it in Britain and in America, particularly California.
And Stan Groff and the Transpersonal Association asked me to speak about it at a conference
they were having in India in the beginning of 82, which is where I met my wife Jill.
And as a result of that and the fact that people started writing about it in California,
I was invited to California for the launch of the American edition in 82, published by
Tarcher in Los Angeles. And so I went to California. I'd never been to California before.
I'd never been living in India for years. So this was a very strange world for me, California.
I was invited to Asselin, the Ohio Foundation. I was invited to speak at the Jungian Institutes
in San Francisco in Los Angeles. And the most interesting invitation came from David Ray Griffin,
who said, I'm at Claremont College. We're very interested in the relation of your work to Whitehead.
Could you give a seminar? So I was in LA. So I gave a seminar at Claremont College.
I walked into the seminar room. There were about 12, 15 people there.
And they all had a copy of the English edition of my book, which had come out a year before the American one.
And I said, well, you know, shall I give a talk? David said, no need for a talk. He said, we've all read your book.
And they all have these well-thumbed and marked copies. He said, we've already had several seminars discussing it.
Can we start straight in the Q&A and discussion? Wow, really, really ready for you.
Yes, that was an extraordinary experience, you know, because everywhere else I had to start at the beginning
and expand it step by step. But yeah, these people were, you know, I could leap straight in and they were already
tightly up to speed. You know, and then say on page 27, you say this and they'd read it.
Now, how do you interpret that? And that parallels something Whitehead said.
And so that was my first encounter at Claremont College.
And then things went on and, you know, I met and talked to various Whitehead scholars over the years.
There aren't that many of them. But the next encounter, big one, was really 2011,
when John Cobb organized this two-day seminar about Morphic Resonance and Whitehead,
a two-day seminar in Claremont. And people came from all over the US for it.
You know, there were experts on Whitehead's philosophy, experts on sort of different aspects of Whitehead's work,
Whitehead's entheology, Whitehead and this and that.
There are transcripts somewhere. I don't know if you've seen them, but that's so John would have them.
Yeah.
And that was very, very helpful, actually, because, again, everyone there had actually read my work.
And so we could start straight and we didn't have to waste time on the kind of going through the background.
But to see the only context that's ever happened to me at Claremont College,
where I had this level of attention and advanced discussion.
And actually, that was quite an interesting gathering because it was happening over the Feast of All Saints,
November the 1st. It was a two-day seminar. And Claremont College is a school of theology.
And so I said to them, you know, I always observe All Saints Day because it's one of the main festivals.
And is there a service here? And they said, oh, no.
I looked and I found the nearest service at some Catholic church about 10 miles away.
And I said, well, look, I really want to go to it. And but it's very hard to get. I haven't got a car.
There's no public transport, you know.
And then I had this idea, which I said to John Carr, I said, why don't we have an All Saints service here?
And we've got an Episcopalian priest in this group.
I asked him and he said he'd be happy to take it.
And I said, and since we're all here because we admire Whitehead, let's promote him to the rank of a saint.
And because it's really about the blessed dead.
And I said to John Carr, and then could you give the homily on the theme of Whitehead as we have a mass for All Saints Day?
And so John was a bit taken aback by all this, but he agreed to it.
And and so we had this hurriedly arranged All Saints service at Claremont.
And then he said, well, he said, but that's all very well. But who's going to play the organ?
And I said, well, I will. I'm an organist.
And so when it actually came to it, they couldn't find the keys to the organ.
So I had to play the piano.
But anyway, we had we had a full scale mass with hymns for Whitehead.
So that was the that was the beatification of Alfred North Whitehead.
I did not realize he had been sainted.
So yes, very, very nice to know.
And that, you know, you and John Cobb collaborated on that.
It's quite wonderful.
So wow.
One, one more point I want to ask you about, which is that one of the people who was at this meeting was called Professor Wang.
W and G.
And I talked something about my book, The Science Delusion Science Set Free, which came out the following year.
And Professor Wang
had studied there and had set up institutes of process studies in China.
And he said, well, this is very important. And I'd like to arrange the translation of this book into Chinese.
And it's very important for process studies.
And I said, well, have you got an institute of process studies in China?
Then he said, not one Institute. I said, I said, how many?
He said, we have 32 Institute process studies in China.
It's a popular country.
Amazing, right?
The entire Western world, there's only one where we are right now.
And I said, why is that?
And he said, I have friends in the Central Committee.
He said, they want to make Chinese philosophy more Chinese.
They want to rehabilitate Chinese philosophy, including Taoism, but especially Confucianism.
He said, because if they preach revolution, then young people may think, why don't we have another revolution?
They do not want revolution.
He said, they want Confucian ethics, respect for authority.
And he said, but we cannot justify it with Chinese philosophy because in modern China, only something that comes from the West will be respected.
So I have persuaded them, Whitehead is the key to the rehabilitation of our own philosophy.
He said, now we have many institutes of process philosophy.
Did you know about that?
Oh, I did. Yes.
Back in, I mean, that's been going on for a number of years now.
And John Cobb has been very involved in networking with Chinese scholars to help forward that work.
The Communist Party has written into their constitution this ideal of moving towards what they call ecological civilization and Whitehead's work and ideas play a big part in that.
And we had a big conference back in 2015 in Claremont called Seizing an Alternative Towards an Ecological Civilization.
I believe it was the 15th International Whitehead Conference at the same time.
And we had probably 1500 people there total a dozen different tracks running simultaneously.
And there were about 500 scholars from China present.
Amazing. Yeah.
Truly amazing.
You know, there's obviously political motives here, which you're hinting at, but it's also quite wonderful to see the way that Whitehead's work is living on in contexts that none of us would have imagined.
And so I'm fascinated to see how that plays out in China.
Chinese civilization certainly seems to be moving into a new phase of world power.
You know, so I think we will see an increasingly important role for China in the world and hopefully a positive one.
I mean, that remains to be seen, but I think the more influence Whitehead's work can have moving us towards a sense of, you know, for Whitehead persuasion is so much more important for the evolution of human beings than coercion, right?
And his view of the way that power works.
And so hopefully, you know, the Chinese government moves in that direction.
Well, they haven't moved in that direction very far with the Muslims in China.
So Uighurs. Yes. Yes.
Lots of issues there.
I agree. It's an important thing. By the way, if you're in touch with Wang, remind him about the translation of the science delusion because there's a new addition just come out in England.
So if they do do translation, this is a good time.
Gotcha.
Updated.
Wonderful. Yeah, I was hoping to travel to China.
Last year and with the Trump administration and the trade war, there were some issues with the visas and it just hasn't, it wasn't the right time to travel and then the pandemic happened.
And so obviously it can't happen now, but hopefully at some point in the future, I'll be able to go inspect these at least a few of these process centers in China.
So wonderful. Wow. It seems as if you almost followed a similar pathway as Whitehead from Cambridge to Harvard. You obviously went back to Cambridge after Harvard, which Whitehead did not do but
and it's how wonderful that you got to study and learn about Whitehead from a student.
Dorothy Emmett directly I've read and she has a book I think it's called The Philosophy of Organism.
Yes, that I have read and enjoyed.
So that's, that's, and this problem that you express of lots of people telling you that there are deep resonances with Whitehead's work and but trying to study Whitehead yourself and not being able to make heads or tails of a lot of it.
It's a very common issue.
He is not easy to understand. He's developed his own language and a few of us are crazy enough to devote years of study. I've been reading Whitehead for about a decade now.
And eventually when you learn the language.
It starts to make sense, but then you still have the problem of communicating to others about it.
And so, you know, one of one of my goals as a Whitehead scholar is to try to do that work of translation and to be in dialogue with as many kindred thinkers as possible to draw connections and
if there's anyone better at doing that sort of thing, then I mean, John Cobb's been doing it too, but David Ray Griffin has an amazing capacity to immerse himself in the work of other philosophers and scientists that he thinks might be in some way connected
to Whitehead and then to engage with them to unpack those connections. He's just been doing this for decade after decade with so many different thinkers.
So, you know, his work has been absolutely essential to keeping Whitehead alive in the contemporary period.
And I think we seem to have reached a point now where I don't know that it's quite at the level of a Whitehead renaissance, but there's a lot of academic philosophers and scientists who are now beginning to reference Whitehead and to actually
engage with his writing and struggle to make those interpretations. And so I'm excited to see that happening.
But I have to say that your own books and articles have been an immense help to me because you do, because you've taken so much time and trouble to assimilate it, you are able to make it clearer what he's saying and to express it in a way that's more comprehensible.
And for me, the complete proof of this was when Merlin came to your course at Schumacher College and, you know, I don't know what five days or however long it was, a week or something.
But he came back completely enthused and Merlin is now very much a kind of Whiteheadian. And before that, he'd never shown much interest in philosophy.
And I tried to engage him with philosophy and stuff, but he'd always been a little bit skeptical about the kinds of things I'm interested in. I mean, we're quite close in our interests, of course, but, and they're very complimentary.
Suddenly, I found this sort of wave of enthusiasm for Whitehead was entirely due to your, your course. I mean, you must have some interest in the first place or otherwise he wouldn't have come but it worked so well for the way he was thinking you know ecologically and about high full growth and about biological processes and stuff.
Yeah, I mean my serial networks are a wonderful example of an analogy for the sort of networked ontology that Whitehead develops. So I think Merlin actually, if I recall correctly, said that you convinced him to come to the course.
When he had mentioned that someone was coming to teach Whitehead at Schumacher. But I'm glad to hear I infected him with Whiteheadian ideas.
And more than superficially, I mean, this is part of his very being. I mean, he sort of identifies with Whitehead and that approach very strongly. And of course, he's shown through his recent book that he has an incredible gift for communication.
And so, you know, getting this kind of general approach without necessarily mentioning Whitehead very much but it's, I mean, there's thousands and thousands of people are reading what he's written and obviously being influenced by it.
Yeah, it was very exciting to see his book come out and I've read, I'm about three quarters of the way through it and it's very well written. Mycology is a science that I was introduced to by Terence McKenna actually.
Yeah, from a different perspective. But yeah, it's it's remind me what's the title of entangled life entangled life, right? Yes. So I hope to be able to convince Merlin to talk to me to do one of these interviews at some point.
But so another question I have for you would be, which, which aspects of Whitehead's philosophy do you think are most helpful for or hold the most promise for moving science beyond materialism?
Well, there's one aspect is the kind of memory aspect, what I call Morphic Resonance. But I mean, I'm obviously biased here. I find the idea of Morphic Resonance much easier to convey to people and to use than prehension or some of the way or
So these Whitehead in terms that refer to something similar. And the thing is, it's not clear whether what they're referring to is that similar or not. And this is where, when I brought this question up at Claremont College, the seminar room sort of dissolved into different
interpretations and different factions. And even among the Whitehead scholars, there was no unanimity as to exactly what he meant and stuff. So I don't see that as the most helpful aspect, because the I can just talk about Morphic Resonance without I didn't refer to Whitehead and coming up with the idea.
You know, in a sense, the connection with Whitehead came after the idea. But the bit that I personally wrestle with and think about and find most stimulating and talk about in my lectures where it really grips people is the idea that the relation of mind and body or
mental and physical pole is a process in time that the mental poles, the future pole and the physical poles, the past pole. Now, as a way of interpreting mind body relationships. I think that's extraordinarily stimulating, interesting, exciting, undeveloped and and full of possibilities.
And I'm never sure whether my own interpretations of it are going way beyond what Whitehead intended or whether it would fit.
But the idea you see that I mean, I read things like Journal of Consciousness Studies, I get conscious on consciousness and because I talk about it in various contexts like the sense of being stared at and Morphic Resonance and memory and so on.
And I haven't seen any coherent approaches. You know, the quantum theory ones seem to me not illuminating at all they are fuscating and stuff.
But by far the most illuminating to me is the idea that mental causation works from virtual futures towards the past whereas physical causation works from the past towards the future.
And these two streams of causation sort of overlap in the present. And because the mental causation is about possibilities and choosing among them. I also find it very helpful because when people say what do you mean by consciousness as opposed to I first made the distinction that the mind can be conscious or unconscious the unconscious mind is still mental but not conscious and most of our habits are unconscious.
But they're still mental.
So if we come to consciousness per se, then I starting from Whitehead, my answer is that it's about choosing among possible actions, and the role of consciousness is to choose among possibilities and therefore consciousness is an arena of possibilities.
And possibilities are always things that haven't happened yet. So as soon as you've chosen among possible actions, you'd be the causal chain works, as it were, from that choice, which is about a future state back through times from a virtual future back through time.
And you see within the in the world I live in.
There are a lot of people discussing things like precognition, precognitive dreams, of course, limits experiments that show that the conscious choice happens after the mental change.
After the physical change brain change the brain change.
The brain change happens first and that happens afterwards.
So the thing is that there's a lot here where this could be relevant to phenomena that certainly occur. I mean I do research on precognition and pre sentiment myself and pre sentiment feeling the future.
I think it's an established fact of course it is not part of established in the main academic world because they say it's impossible as parapsychological it's impossible and so on.
But actually, it would require the idea that consciousness is somehow working from the future.
And there, of course, it's not a virtual future is an actual future.
But this is a whole area where my ideas are not fully clear on this but my starting point for thinking about these naughty problems is whitehead and I don't know any other starting point other than whitehead for these questions that make sense to me.
Yeah, I like that this is this polarity between mind and matter or past causality out of the past versus causality into the future. This does seem to me to be a very fruitful avenue for opening up science to a different understanding of the way that nature operates.
Because there's so much what I would call residual Cartesianism or Cartesian dualism in even materialist science because the mind doing the observing and all the theorizing and stuff is sort of bracketed out and forgotten about.
As nature is just thought of as a machine where only efficient or mechanical causality is operative which would be the push from the past. There's no pool or as whitehead would call it lures from the future in the materials picture and clearly to understand.
It's almost it's almost inescapable and stares you in the face in the biological realm that there's some need to invoke a lure or a future pool or a purpose a telos of some kind.
But even in physics when we understand the evolution of the universe through supposedly billions of years of different stages of development there seems to be a tendency towards organization and to stars and galaxies and these are sources of
profound order that we wouldn't expect to emerge if there wasn't some sort of a lure or tendency if there weren't some future possibilities that seem to want to manifest.
And I think whitehead provides a very rigorous coherent and scientifically applicable way of understanding this interplay between mental and physical causation.
So I completely agree that might be the most fruitful avenue to draw on whitehead to sort of fertilize the scientific worldview.
And then yeah what you're saying about precognition. I've had this discussion with many people, you know very interested in your work and who have had experiences themselves of something like a vision of the future they have a dream
and then something happens that confirms what the dream was suggesting and it seems that, you know, and David Rick Griffin has written about this I think specifically in reference to your ideas and it seems that in whitehead.
There's some room for offering an explanation of this but certainly for whitehead, he would reject the idea that the future is already determined.
And so for him, maybe there are certain possibilities that are more probable than others, but that even if I think whitehead would say if someone has a vision of the future, you know, something that's going to happen next year or even a few days from now,
I would say that's not yet determined. It could be otherwise and maybe in that moment when that precognitive experience happens, that particular future that was envisioned is the most likely, but it could still change and so I wonder what you think about that wiggle room that whitehead would insist upon that.
Well, I insist on it too, because I think that the, I totally reject the idea of the future is determined and this sort of Einstein block universe view.
And one of the things that comes out of psychical research is that the, when you have a pre sentiment or a precognition, then the precognition is not necessarily of something, which is not something in the objective outer world, it's a future state of your own experience.
So, some people in this area say we should call it pre call, as opposed to recall, that it recall is recalling something that happened during your experience in the past, and pre call is linking to your experience in the future.
It's your experience you're linking to, not the outer world. And J. W. Dunne was, you know, who read that famous book and experiment with time, you know, in the 1920s.
I think the best book on precognitive dreaming J W Dunne pointed out that he had this dream of a volcanic eruption in Martinique, leading to 20,000 deaths.
He wrote it down because he recorded his dreams and then he read in the Daily Telegraph a couple of days later being this eruption in Martinique with 20,000 deaths.
And for him, this was a pre call of this reading this a few days later. However, the twist on this is very interesting that what he'd done, he'd misread it, it wasn't 20,000, it was 2,000.
And when he later checked up, he found that actually when he looked at the paper, it didn't say 20,000, he thought it had said 20,000. So it wasn't what the paper actually said, or what had actually happened, it was what he thought it had said or what that mattered.
So, so that's, that's one thing you see and then there's there's pre sentiment. This is a short term thing Dean Radin's worked on. I don't know if you've read about pre sentiment.
Yeah, I'm familiar with some of Radin's work. Yeah, it's over a few seconds today you respond to something that's emotionally arising.
So, you see one way of dealing with that would be again taking a lead from Whitehead that we normally think of the present as defined in terms of you know instantaneous microsecond or something.
But actually, I mean his word the specious present is is about a spreading out of the present I suppose but he gets from William James. Yeah.
Yes, that you could you could actually say that the present in relation to dreams are present maybe extended over several days, or are present maybe extended over, you know, several 10 seconds or something.
If you, I mean, it's obvious the present is the fact that the cinema works shows that we actually 10, you know, 10th of a second we blow them all together those that our content is spread out in time.
But in some circumstances it may be spread out more and others less. And, and if it's spread out in time the usual assumption is that the present instant is here and if it's spread out is 10 seconds into the past.
But if it's spread out in time, it could be five seconds into the future and five seconds into the past.
And, and in which case, something happens five seconds in the future is part of the present and would cause reactions, emotional responses to erotic pictures in Dean Radiance experiments.
I mean, actually, parapsychology is very hard to get people to accept but I'm working at the moment with somebody developing a day trading market app.
And I've discovered by interviewing people on trading floors in the city of London.
You know, people are doing this day trading there, they're making, they're predicting the market within the next three or four seconds, you know, they're sort of saying it's going to go up and this can't be based on a rational analysis of trends or reading Wall Street
Journal or anything. And when, when I've talked to people on the trading floor floors, you know, I've asked to speak to the best trader and friendly with the chap who runs one of the best companies in London.
He's kind of found of mine. So he let me into the trading floor and I was able to speak to these people. And I asked to speak to his best trader and he said, you know, this guy's a phenomenon.
He just seems to know when news is going to flash up on the screen just seems to feel which of the 10 screens he's working at, where the action is going to be just seems to know where it's going to.
And I talked to this chap and I said, you know, do you know how you know he said, no, he said, I read the papers and I just think, you know, I'm sort of tuned in and stuff.
But when I said has it occurred to you might be pre sent from you said what's that, you know, yeah.
I think this is actually happening all the time. So I'm trying to develop an app. People use on their mobile phones, where you can, we'd start with monopoly money, you know, sort of, you'd give people $500,000 to start with, and they trade and doing it just on feelings.
So if one could show that you can make millions by developing this intuitive skill. The question that does pre sentiment exist or not would cease to be a question people would be clamoring to go on training courses, and no computer be able to compete.
Yeah, that's very interesting. I've, I'm friends with Tom Steadall, who I believe works with you on an app about phone calls.
And it's, it's really wonderful to accumulate data on this and my understanding, you know, as a sort of general takeaway from a lot of this parapsychological research is that there is a higher than significantly higher than random correlation between even the average person, their ability to predict the future is
more than random. And then there are some people who seem to have a special capacity for this and it's significantly higher than random but the data is, is there waiting to be integrated into our understanding of what's possible but so many scientists locked in the materialist paradigm just refused to look at the data.
And this has been a problem for you for many decades, I think.
Yes, they just refused to look at it doesn't matter how good it is they just refused to look at it. You know I had argument Daniel Dennett two three years ago we were at a conference and, and I said you know what about a public debate and I said you're a member of the committee for sceptical inquiry you're
implacably opposed to psychic phenomena. I said, what about doing a public debate and then we could find out why it is you're so opposed.
And he said no I don't want to do that so why not he said, if I did a public debate, but I don't have to read up the literature and he said I want to waste time on something that's so obviously false.
He said well, you know, if you haven't read the literature and how can you possibly be sure it's so far he got terribly angry if he's just really angry that you know that when I pressed him.
It's a denial movement.
Whereas you see, most some people try within the Paris I'm on the Paris psychology discussion list which is an email discussion, written that Dean Radins on it and you know Julia Mossbridge most people in the field are on it.
And most of the discussions about precognition are about possible retro causation in quantum theory, which I don't think it's very fruitful line. I mean, it might be but they've been on this for decades now and hasn't got anywhere.
I mean, in the epiphany philosophers we were discussing this in the 1960s.
So there's a tremendous sense of deja vu with a lot of these discussions. Whereas, why tend to know if we have the idea of conscious causation and mental causation, working from virtual futures to the past.
Then, sometimes from actual futures, you know, this could be a starting point. It's the most promising one I can think of.
Yeah, as well as being the most promising starting point for thinking about what makes consciousness different from unconsciousness and also, as we were saying you know what how to understand the mind body relationship.
I mean, the way I often look at it is that if we were to adopt the whitehead in paradigm. If we were to fully inhabit the whitehead in cosmos then all of this parapsychological phenomenon just becomes psychology.
It's just, it's a feature of our experience and we have to incorporate it into our normal understanding of how human consciousness, the place that it has in relationship to the rest of the universe and so it's not paranormal anymore.
It's just perfectly normal. Whitehead even says this in the fourth part towards the end of process in reality. He's just finished this really elaborate reconstruction of how we understand space.
He calls it the extensive continuum. It's the hardest part of the hardest book that Whitehead wrote. And at the end of it, he's like one of the implications of this new understanding of space and energy vectors is that telepathy is likely a real phenomenon.
He just drops that in one sentence doesn't say much more about it. But he, his cosmology normalizes what for the materialist paradigm is woo woo and spooky and strange but it's not strange in Whitehead's universe.
No, well, I completely agree. I mean, for me, it has to be normal not paranormal. In fact, I don't like the word parapsychology. I prefer psychic research.
And so, yes, I think there's an area there where Whitehead's ideas could be relevant to science in yet another way and much more mainstream area, which is that in developmental biology.
More and more people, some people use the concept of morphogenetic fields. Not in my sense, because that would be too provocative.
But more in Waddington sense of the word. And as you know, Waddington was very influenced by Whitehead. I don't know if you've tracked that.
Yeah, yeah.
But you know in his famous diagram of the creode, the canonized pathway of change.
You're familiar with that, are you? Yes.
Well, basically, when René Tom, the French mathematician, worked out, you know, the founder of catastrophe theory, worked out models for creodes in morphogenetic fields.
The end point of the creode he called the attractor, using the concept the attractor, which is in dynamics, you know, well-named concept in mathematical dynamics.
And basically, this leads to the idea that development is goal-directed, and it's a way in which teleology has been smuggled back in to science.
And the mathematicians who developed the dynamical attractor didn't know teleology was banned in science.
And, you know, they just made models, and this was a good way of making a model.
And in these models, interestingly, the ball rolling down the groove, or the basin of attraction, which is the principal metaphor in dynamics,
is basically a pudding basin you throw little marbles in and they all roll and end up at the bottom.
The source of the attraction in all these models is gravitation.
And personally, I think that gravitation is an attractive force. In other words, I think gravitation is a lure from the future.
It's usually treated as simply, you know, something in Newton's equations or something.
But if you think about it, what gravitation would do, left to its own devices, would pull the entire universe into an ultimate black hole,
into a final unity. Now, it's opposed by the dark energy, the expansive force that's making the universe expand.
But if you took away dark energy and left it to gravitation, the whole universe would begin collapsing inwards,
and stars and galaxies would amalgamate, and everything would finally implode in the opposite of the Big Bang, the Big Crunch.
And the ultimate attractor of gravity would be a final unity that mirrored the initial unity at the moment of the Big Bang.
And so I think gravitation is much, much more mysterious than most people assume.
You know, you just think, oh, we've got the equations of gravitation, no product, the masses, inverse square of the distance, gravitational constant.
Whitehead was, of course, very interested in this because his mathematical theory of general relativity made somewhat different predictions from Einstein's
and were allowed for variability in the gravitational constant, which actually happens.
So, I think that attractive forces, including gravitation, and teleological processes modeled by attractors in developmental biology,
goal directed development, are something which mechanistic science has nothing to say about, because teleology was amputated in the 17th century.
And it's been smuggled back in by these mathematical models, but not fully explicitly.
And so, teleology is the elephant in the room of modern science, and you need to have it to explain why we have purposes and why organisms are purposeful.
And when I was studying biology at school, I was told the very last thing you were allowed to say was to say, what is a wing for or an eye for, because that implies it's got a purpose.
You could say, why is it that natural selection worked on random variants, which gave an increased ability to see that could finally result through long perifersive random selection in an eye?
That was what you had to say. You couldn't say what's an eye for.
And, of course, the dishonesty in that is that living organisms already exist and they already have their ultimate purposes of survival and reproduction.
They're already purposive, and these structures serve their purposes. So they're within an already teleological system.
So personally, I've always found Aristotle much more helpful than any other philosopher in this respect, you know, with final causes.
And in a sense, you get a hint of that in Whitehead, but for when I'm thinking about that, I go back to Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas more than Whitehead because it's clearer to me.
But I think that in the context of modern science, people like Michael Levin at Tufts, I don't know if you're familiar with his work, but
I don't think so. What is he, what's his research?
He's by far the best and most interesting developmental biologist operating at the moment.
In my view, L-E-V-I-N.
And he's wrote a paper on morphogenetic fields and he's done fascinating work on morphogenesis.
You see, almost everyone in developmental biology is still obsessed with the bottom-up explanation in terms of genes and molecular biology.
And so he's very well, and I think he's aware of, like, Whitehead's work.
And he might be somebody that you could bring into your survey.
But, and Merlin's into Levin too.
And he's very, very prolific.
But let me give you an example of the kinds of experiments he's doing.
In one experiment, he trained flatworms, you know, which are very simple.
With high regenerative capacity, he trained them to avoid particular things on a standard learning, moving around, learning protocol.
Avoid colored light of a particular kind.
So you can train them, they learn, it's conditioned reflex type thing.
He then cut off their heads, where what little brain they have is located.
And within a few days, they regenerate a head.
And when they've regenerated the head, they remember everything they'd learned.
Fascinating.
Fascinating.
So you see, when he, I emailed him about that experiment, and I said, well, in his paper, he said, well, that suggests the memory must be stored, distributed throughout the whole body, not just in the central ganglion.
And perhaps the environment as well.
And perhaps the environment.
But he's got a motive behind all this, which is to move biology on to a much more holistic approach.
And for example, he's been studying the development of African Claude frog is an opus development.
And he's shown, if you look at the embryos, as they develop, he's got an electrically sensitive die, which reveals electrical potential differences.
So with living samples under the microscope, you can actually see the electric field around the embryo.
Now, of course, molecular biologists and genetic engineering people don't see electric fields because all they do is grind things up and analyze the genes.
And they don't look for electric fields invisible to them.
And then what you see is in the area that's going to become a face, two areas sort of light up.
And, and then another area that the eyes and the mouth sort of light up, you can actually see them under the microscope.
And as he points out, they've done all the genetic analysis. This is not because the mouse and the eye genes have been activated and giving signals that cause the change in electrical potential.
This electrical change occurs before the genes are activated and in fact seems to trigger the activation of the appropriate genes.
In other words, there's literally a field in this case an electrical field patterning the developing system.
Then of course the next question is what patterns the electrical field.
Now, he doesn't address that question because I think the answer would have to be a morphogenetic field, which I think work through electric fields.
But he's pushing up against the very limits of where you can go in contemporary biology.
You know, he's sticking to electricity. He doesn't mention me or morphogenetic fields.
And what Levin is doing is, is, and the stuff gets on the cover of science, non-nature and stuff.
And everyone says, what fascinating research and stuff.
And he always, his papers are always full of molecular biology data where he proves about the genes and claims the genes and that sort of thing.
So the people say, well, this is good science, you know, because it's familiar to them.
So he's the person who's, I would say today at the very frontier of where things are going and leading the way.
That's so wonderful. Thank you for sharing his research.
It's quite astonishing and it makes me, I'm profoundly grateful to the scientists who do the slow, difficult, detailed laboratory work of establishing these things.
I understand why he wants to be so careful not to speculate about its larger implications.
And maybe that's the role for philosophers to step in and, you know, look at his scientific work and say, well, this is what it might mean for the larger field of biology and the place of life in the universe.
It almost seems as though, I mean, from a Whiteheadian or a Berksonian point of view, the part of the living organism that we can see and weigh and that we call material is it's almost like the, it's the wake left behind a creative process that unfolds in a way that's
invisible to our normal capacities to to sense and measure.
It's the morphic field, perhaps, but it's, it's as if there's a creative unfolding occurring at a subtler level and what science materialistic science has been studying is the, is the material left in the wake of this creative process that's unfolding and trying to just, it's as if we're trying to understand what makes the
boat go by just studying the wake behind it, right?
And these thinkers like Whitehead or Berkson allow us to understand that we need to go deeper to understand the causal influences at play here.
Yes, and what's steering the boat and why it goes in one direction rather than another. I agree. It's a very good metaphor. We're looking at the wake.
Yes, I, yeah, I think that's very good metaphor.
So we've reached the end of our hour and I don't want to take too much more of your time. But if you'd like, if you can hang out for another 10 minutes, I have another.
Yeah, I'm happy to hang out longer. Yes. This is, I mean, these are things very close to my heart.
So, sort of a very different topic now that I'd like to ask you about.
In terms of the relationship between science and religion, Whitehead seems to me to offer a rather unique and promising approach to reintegrating them, not to collapse them, they're very different.
But they can be in a different kind of dialogue with one another that is perhaps mutually enhancing and enriching. And I think Whitehead offers us one way of understanding the role that science plays in human civilization and human life and the role that religion plays.
You know, Whitehead had a whole understanding of the evolution of religion in his small little book, Religion, the Making. I'm not sure if you're familiar with that.
I've not read it, but no. I'm just going to put on the light because it's getting dark here. Oh, sure, yeah.
And so I wonder, you know, if let me, let me briefly in a sentence or two summarize what Whitehead says about the evolution of religion.
Yeah, perfect. I'm sorry I didn't send my lighting crew out to give you a makeup and proper lighting and everything, but very low budget here, unfortunately.
So in his book, Religion and the Making, Whitehead describes this evolution of humanity from sort of primal tribal context where through certain play behaviors that are very common among all mammals, but especially among human beings where we have this prolonged period of childhood, where the parents are
finding the food and protecting the young from predators and whatnot. It produces a relaxed field where the normal pressures of the environment are subdued and through this play behavior as it gets elaborated in the evolution of our species.
Early human beings began to recognize the way in which certain movements, dance, song would reliably produce certain states of consciousness, certain emotions, certain experiences of the newness or transcendent.
And that gradually these these performances of dance and music became ritual and then they were symbolically elaborated and then eventually myth and narrative began to be developed and then eventually we entered the stage of what Whitehead calls rational
religion where you get theology and whole elaborate cosmologies, but for Whitehead it's all rooted in ritual play and ceremony and feasts and the practical dimension of religious life, you know, gathering together and participating in a dimension of reality.
And then that would be the source of religion for Whitehead and the ground of the religious feeling, religious emotion and religious insight, rather than the way I think modern people typically understand religion as a set of beliefs in something.
As you believe in whatever the dogma is or the teaching is, then you are a member about religion. Whitehead saying religion is not about believing in a certain set of information, it's about practices of transformation.
And that most of these practices are very embodied or they involve eating, feasting or communion of some kind that you're participating in a bodily way in these transcendent dimensions.
I wonder if, given your exposure to Whitehead, if you think that his approach allows us to have a new kind of dialogue to avoid this culture war that continues between science and religion.
And what ways do you see Whitehead's view being helpful and what is your own view of how science and religion can come into a more harmonious relationship?
Well, it's very similar to his actually. I didn't know that aspect of his work, but I don't know. Have you seen my two recent books, Science and Spiritual Practices?
I haven't read it yet though, yes.
And Ways to Go Beyond and Why They Work. These are two books, each book I deal with seven different spiritual practices.
And what I say is more or less what you just said that religion is not primarily about beliefs. I mean atheists like to frame it as being a set of absurd beliefs that are rationally untenable in which they've refuted.
That's not the way it actually is for most religious people.
And, you know, I'm a regular church going Anglican Christian and when I go to church, I'm pretty sure that if you asked most people what they actually believed after saying the creed, you'd come up with a whole set of different answers.
Somebody actually did a survey of this kind recently and they found almost everyone had a different interpretation or understanding of it or misunderstanding.
So it's not, I mean the creed is a statement I believe it's the one bit of the service which actually is about beliefs.
And, and it's by no means uniform.
So, no, my science and spiritual practices the the first book science and spiritual practices. I have a chapter on meditation, connecting with nature, gratitude, singing and chanting pilgrimage rituals.
And what's the other one.
There's another one. It'll come to me.
And then ways to go beyond. I have traps on sports which I think is the main way in the modern world people enter altered states of consciousness, learning from animals, which bring us into the present prayer.
Early days and festivals, spiritual openings through psychedelics and morality basically being kind, you know, kind of ethical dimension.
I did. And what I show in these books is that these practices are common to practically all religions.
You know, they all have fast. Oh fasting. That's the other one.
And this fasting mean Jewish people fast at Yom Kippur, Muslims in Ramadan, Christians in Lent Hindus have lots of fasting days shamanic cultures fast before rites of passage and so on.
And yet, and you can study physical you all these are things you can study all of these practices have measurable effects.
And the general conclusion from thousands of papers that have now been written on the effects of spiritual and religious practices shows that people who have these practices are healthier, happier and live longer than those that don't on average.
Conversely, those that don't have them are unhealthier, unhappier and shorter than those that do. That's why I think militant atheism should come with a health warning.
So the.
So I completely agree with that approach of white heads and I think what I'd add to that though is that one of the things that is absolutely key to many religious traditions is mystical experience and mystical experience can come through practices can also come spontaneously.
You know, some people have near death experiences they don't go out saying I want to be in an accident so I can nearly die.
They have an accident and then as part of the accident they nearly die and then they find this is floating out of the body, going into the light, their lives are changed.
And these have happened.
It's in Plato, the myth of earth.
You know, these people have had these people have had these for millennia, and they give this sense of being part of a much greater consciousness than our own.
They happen spontaneously they happen as a result of spiritual practices they can happen as a result of psychedelics and some traditional cultures have taken psychedelics.
You know, the Eleusinian mystery is so ma we don't know what they were but they were clearly taking something.
I would say in addition to Whitehead, his list of things which I completely agree with that approach that mystical experience is probably the most key thing I mean, the Buddha didn't get enlightened through doing a PhD.
He got enlightened through sitting under trees meditating for many years and exploring consciousness from within.
And so mystical experiences direct exploration of consciousness is one thing.
And then I think dreams is another because I think a lot of the figures in visionary experience and indeed psychedelic visionary experience are akin to the dream world and you could say that there are different ways of accessing that same world of the
imagination, which we all have access to every night in our dreams.
And I would say that's another major ingredient.
So, I think singing together, chanting together dancing together all those things that Whitehead says are key parts and rituals and rights of passage we know that early cultures had burials and stuff and mean very early in human history.
So there must have been rights of passage.
And those rights of passage are related to the idea that there's a life after this and so life after this the evidence for that would come from near death experiences from shamanic trans mediumship and communication of the departed, which is common in many shamanic cultures,
and also encountering the departed in your dreams, which most of us have done.
And I would say that that that is an approach. And of course it's not totally different from William James, who the seven types of religious experience is is not about belief it's about experience.
Certainly and I don't think there is safe play to another philosopher that was more influential influential on Whitehead than William James, and certainly his huge study varieties of religious experience.
He was in the background you know Whitehead quotes James and his little book religion in the making.
And I think James was James's view of the experiential dimension of religion is really what's motivating Whitehead's view and so the way Whitehead would put it is that, you know, he has this critique of what he calls the bifurcation of nature,
the idea would be human consciousness is on one side and then the mechanical world of nature is on the other side and nature is just mute matter in motion, and then human consciousness has sense and sounds and poetry and value and all of this
says no no no it's it's continuous human beings are part of the universe and in the context of religion.
The history of human spiritual and religious experience is a part it's part of the data that we need to include if we want to understand this universe because we are beings emergent from this cosmological evolutionary process and so of course part of that process
means the history of religious experience that's all data that needs to be part of what we include in our interpretation of the universe.
And so that's that's what follows from eliminating this bifurcation of nature and Whitehead's view that religion is, if you want, I mean I know then it Daniel then it would say this but I mean it in a different way, a Whiteheadian way, religion is a natural phenomenon.
It's part of what the universe does in its human form.
Right and so I completely agree, you know, I'm, and I think that, you know, some of the most interesting thinking at the moment about these things is in the leading edges of theology.
I don't know if you follow the theological literature at all.
I tried to.
But then my favorite see a legends David Bentley Hart, I don't know if you've come across his book.
He writes about imagination a lot doesn't he.
He does do but the one I like most is a book called the experience of God being consciousness bliss.
And what he shows is that there's a kind of Trinitarian understanding which many religions explicitly or implicitly have in common and what unites them is much much closer than what separates them it's as much more in common.
And basically, the being consciousness bliss obviously is from Sat Chit Ananda and the Hindu.
But the ground of being a conscious being is the ground of all things then Chit is that which is known names and forms and I'm a Rupa or forms and ideas.
I mean, we'd like the platonic realm in a sense.
And then ananda this is ultimate consciousness is joyful, which is why mystical experiences are usually blissful because we link into that experience.
And, but another aspect you see is the dynamical principle in the Christian version, God the father is is conscious being in the present.
I am that I am his first revelation to Moses.
Then the Logos the second person Trinity God the son Logos is not just Jesus of Nazareth it's it's the, you know, the principle through which all things were made as it says in the Creed, you know, this is the word of God through which all things were made.
It's the name and form principle or the platonic idea principle which St Augustine and other early theologians were platonists and or or neoplatonists and that's what got built in.
And then the spirit, the Holy Spirit is the dynamical principle of movement and change the energy flow light flight of the bird flames of fire all the images of the spirit breath movement.
And so you have the created world, grounded in the being of God the father who sustains all things from moment to moment and without who's being everything would vanish and disappear.
It's expressed through these two principles the formative principle, the word or Logos which I think of as fields, and the moving principle which I think of as energy.
And then you look at modern science, what's nature consists of its fields and energy sustained by some kind of ground of being that keeps them in operation from moment to moment fields of what give form energy is what gives flow change movement.
And the so called laws of nature that govern fields and energy there, but the they're not part of nature they're sort of our abstraction from it.
But anyway, David Bentley Hart's view on this is, I don't know if he mentions Whitehead, but he's, he's, it's a wonderful work of synthesis he's highly intelligent and really interesting writer.
And I recommend taking a look at his, his work, because I think I don't think he brings it into process, he doesn't bring process theology explicitly into his synthesis.
But, and I mean process theology is a kind of niche, not very well known subdivision of theology, I mean it's big in Clermont, obviously, but in, you know, when I talked to other.
I went to a wonderful conference in Cambridge last year, she was one of the biggest theological conferences for a long time, the biggest in the sense, big ideas, and it may not have been the most numerous but all the big headers were there including David Bentley Hart,
Rowan Williams, and so on. And there were Jewish theologians, Muslim theologians, Hindu the, anyway, it was called Neutronitarian ontologies.
And so really what they, what's so interesting you see is that we're seeing this as a fundamental ontology, through which we can understand nature, and, and God is not in that view.
It's supernatural. The expression of the divine being is through nature, and God, it's sort of pan-antheistic, God's in nature and nature's in God.
And I would say the leading edge of serious theology, that's where they're going, all the most interesting theological thinkers at the moment.
Because we've had decades of sort of word analysis and biblical criticism and did Jesus really say that. And, and so we have lots and lots of that kind of theology. This is much, much more interesting and much deeper and much more compatible with the kind of things you're
interested in, the time you're interested in.
Right, right. There's a chapter in one of Whitehead's books, Adventures of Ideas, which he published in 1933, it's called The New Reformation.
I'm not sure if you've read this book, but in this chapter.
I haven't read it, I've already decided it too.
So what you're saying about the importance of a Trinitarian understanding reminds me of what Whitehead says in this chapter, where he, he describes these three different culminating phases in the history of Western theology and philosophy,
beginning with the Plato's idea of participation.
And then Jesus is in Whitehead's terms exemplification of this idea, and then the elaboration of the Trinity by the early Christian fathers.
Whitehead thinks that this, these three phases of theological development of this, this important, not only idea, but as exemplified by Jesus and as elaborated theologically by the early Christian theologians that
we need to return to that, that matrix of ideas to rejuvenate the importance of, of Trinitarian thinking, not only for our religious life today, but for our scientific understanding of nature as well.
It's a very interesting chapter that I think was really seminal for the elaboration of process theology, particularly in a Christian context.
So I recommend that to you.
I'll take a look at that, and the chapter's name again, I need to write it down.
The New Reformation.
New.
Yeah, very good. I mean, that's, yes, that's, that's exactly the kind of thing I'm, I'm so interested in and, and the, in my book, ways to go beyond and why they work.
In the last chapter, I try and integrate why it is that all these different spiritual practices that are so different can all be spiritual practices.
And again, I relate that to the Trinity.
You know, if insofar as sports can be a spiritual practice or dancing, these are about movement.
And those, I think, and singing, and those are aligned with the spirit, which is the principle of movement.
Insofar as contemplating the beauty of a flower can be a spiritual practice or a beautiful building like a cathedral or a temple.
Then that's more like the log, as you're relating to the sort of name and form aspect of the ultimate.
Insofar as through meditation, you reach a state of utter stillness and the sense of ground of being, you're relating to the site to the, you know, the ground of being.
So I think these different spiritual practices have different emphases and relate to this Trinitarian model.
And incidentally, although it's elaborated by Christian theologians.
In many elaborations, the seeds of it are all present in, you know, the first few verses of the book of Genesis.
You know, the world was that form in the beginning, the world was that form and void, and darkness was over the face of the deep.
The spirit of God moved over the face of the deep.
The spirit is wind. I mean, Ruach in Hebrew and what happens when wind moves over the face of the deep or the ocean or the primal chaos is waves.
I mean, that's what you get.
So the first thing is waves, a process of waves, which is one reason, as I understand it, Whitehead thought quantum theory revealed this process thing because waves can't be localized as an instant.
You can't have a wave as an instant.
And so the first thing is all the chapter to Genesis is waves, a process and and God said, let there be light.
Then you have the creative logos, the word, obviously the spoken word.
And the spoken word is about form structure.
And indeed, the primary metaphor in the Jewish and the Christian model of the Trinity is speaking, because like I'm speaking now, unless there was not for breath, the words in my mind would be silent.
Just inside my mind.
If I adjust the breath, it's a kind of white noise, no structure.
But speaking is you have the breath, we've already got the breath in verse two, or verse one, which in the spirit of God moved over the face of the deep.
And God said, then there's the first word that they'd be like, it creates structure, form, it separates light from darkness.
It differentiates.
It's, it's, it's chipped. It's the contents of consciousness as in such it's an end.
It's not the consciousness itself. It's that which is known as opposed to the never and and of course they're all unified.
So I would say this model is absolutely fundamental to the whole Judeo-Christian tradition.
Yes, yes.
And it strikes me that when we're talking about something as profound as the creation of the world.
You know, we can turn to Genesis or many other creation stories that the world's various religious traditions have articulated to get at this mystery.
And that when, when physical cosmologists try to talk about the beginning of the universe, they try to do it as if they could be purely empirical and rational and scientific but almost always,
inevitably, I hear them doing theology.
And as far as I can tell, the best kind of theology that one can do would be conscious deliberate theology in dialogue with the history of this tradition of trying to think about or maybe think with the divine.
We better do that consciously rather than pretending we're not doing it because then we're liable to do bad theology.
Absolutely. I mean, what's that chap who read the universe from nothing that American Lawrence Krause Lawrence Krause.
Yes, I was in a debate at a philosophy festival last year where somebody was defending Lawrence Krause's view of the universe from nothing.
And I said that, you know, what struck me about it was so theologically conservative.
He has the principle of logos, the laws of nature, they're there at the very beginning, the universe comes in because the laws of nature already there before the universe.
And then he has the primal energy, the quantum fluctuation that gives rise to the whole universe. He has the spirit, the, the dynamical principle that gives rise to the universe.
So he's got these two elements of a Trinitarian model and the laws of nature imply a mind in which they exist.
The only difference is that conventional theology, the ultimate being that gives rise to it all is conscious and joyful.
Whereas Lawrence Krause's model, it's unconscious and joy less otherwise the models in the same.
Yeah, I've had a number of conversations with physicists who say, look, we don't need God to explain the universe. We know the laws.
We can understand how it all works together to produce the world that we see. And, you know, I just asked the simple question, well, where did the laws come from?
And they, they all of a sudden get all uncomfortable and say, well, well, that's a philosophical issue and maybe we'll understand it one day, but I don't have anything to say about that.
But it's like, well, that's the very foundation of what you're arguing.
It's laws all the way down.
So one final question for you and then I'll let you go. I'm sure you want to go eat dinner.
I really appreciate your time, Rupert.
No, it's just fun. I'm really enjoying this.
So the final question I think is in a very whiteheadian spirit. Whitehead was a very humble man.
And it was said that he actually his, his will asked for his all of his papers to be destroyed because he didn't want graduate students to be pouring through them searching for the secret to his philosophy.
His family, his family did not follow his wishes. His papers were recently everyone thought they were all destroyed but they were recently discovered that there's a whole group.
I think out of Edinburgh University that the Whitehead research project that's scanning all of this material and publishing some of it and making it available.
But in any event, you know, Whitehead was very humble.
He wouldn't have wanted people to consider process in reality as some sort of a revealed, you know, new, new religion that people have to just learn and stick to.
He would want the research and philosophy and science to continue, maybe draw on his ideas but don't be afraid to tinker with them and expand them.
So in that spirit, I wonder if there's something in Whitehead's work that you've come across that you feel like, no, I don't think he got that quite right.
Or maybe there's another approach to this and, you know, Whitehead went down the wrong track on that issue.
I wonder if there's anything like that that you've encountered in his work.
I can't say that there is exactly. I mean, I could, what I could say is I wish he'd written more clearly or I wish he made his views less obscure.
I don't really think that.
I don't, I haven't studied his theology well enough to, to know exactly.
I mean, I think he, what bits I have looked at, it doesn't seem that he was very up to speed with theology and the theological tradition, maybe he was but
that
I think he could have paid more attention to the mystical side of religion and, you know, mystical insight.
It's rather rationalistic and he started as a mathematician and sort of very mind based.
So I think more of a kind of mystical dimension, but I mean that comes in, I suppose, via William James and his approach to religion.
I don't think there's anything there that, and again, for me, the philosopher who's influenced me more than Whitehead as I said is Berkson because Berkson writes very clearly and he's a pleasure to read.
Whitehead is, is not clear and a lot of it and is not a pleasure to read.
That's what Whitehead says about Berkson actually is in a lecture, one of his early lectures at Harvard, he says that, you know, basically I'm summarizing that Berkson is such a pleasure and a joy to read.
But Whitehead, the mathematician and logician actually thought he said that, you know, but it's never quite clear what Berkson's trying to say, which is interesting because when I read him, like, like you're saying, it's pretty clear.
But Whitehead, the logician wants to know in more with more precise mathematical rigor, exactly what's implied by the literary beauty of Berkson's writing.
So, no, I don't think there's anything where I've sort of come across something Whitehead, but I think that's just wrong.
There's lots of places I think it's unclear or perhaps inadequate or could be developed further and that sort of thing.
But I don't know that there's anything I've come across, I feel no, that's wrong.
And you see, I think that where he's read one final point about his relevance today is that with this panpsychist turn that's going on at the moment in philosophy of mind, you know, people like Philip Goff and
I'll be talking to him soon too.
Well, you see, I think that Whitehead is so much more interesting, because basically the current theme of these panpsychists to solve the hard problem by endowing matter with an extra quality consciousness, awareness or experience.
But basically, that's, they just think they can solve the hard problem that way.
The reason where this has come out in a debate was on the parapsychology discussion list.
There was a discussion recently about, you know, here are all these panpsychists.
Does it help in understanding psi phenomena, parapsychological phenomena?
And I actually asked Philip Goff, you know, and he said no, you know, because basically everything stays the same, we just interpret it differently.
Yeah.
And I don't even think he thinks that consciousness has any causal influence on the behavior of matter, it's just sort of the witness that's going along for the ride.
Parallel phenomenon.
Yes.
Well, that's it. So that's why you see, I think that since that kind of panpsychism is becoming more and more predominant and actually respectable and academically, if not orthodox, at least respectable.
That's another area where I think the Whitehead approach to panpsychism is so much more interesting.
It's got something to tell us over and above just getting rid of the hard problem by a few armchair speculations or a flurry of words.
It's actually can deliver something. And that's why when I was writing my paper on is the sun conscious.
The Whiteheadian approach is actually, you know, treating consciousness as considering possible actions. The sun's mind deciding where to send out a solar flare or a coronal mass ejection.
It's not just parallel to the activity of the sun. It's something does something. And that's why I think that the Whiteheadian approach.
That's probably the thing which has most to offer today as together with a deeper understanding of teleology and biology and indeed pictures a whole.
Yes, exactly.
I think when I wrote this journal article which I shared with you about Whitehead's relevance to this emerging panpsychist paradigm in analytic philosophy of mind.
Because it seems to me that, yes, Whitehead is a kind of panpsychist, but unlike Philip Goff and other analytic philosophers who are toying with panpsychism.
Whitehead has a process relational ontology that grounds his panpsychism whereas, for the most part what I've seen is in analytic philosophy, it's still working within a Whitehead we call a substance property ontology which goes back to Aristotle and in so many ways, I think Whitehead is very Aristotelian.
Aristotle is a neoplatonist, right, you know, but Whitehead's taking Aristotle's organic philosophy and putting it on a processional ground instead of a substance ground and, you know, we can still think of, I think Aristotle's understanding of substance was very dynamic.
You know, these weren't static substances.
About becoming about becoming in final causes and and that's very process oriented, I would have thought.
I think Whitehead wants to open it up a little bit more to make room for evolutionary emergence in a way that maybe in Aristotle's sense of a more stable cosmos.
Whitehead sort of pushes the great chain of being over on its side so that it unrolls into the future.
But yes, this I think Whitehead's panpsychism on this process oriented ontological basis is as different from the substance oriented panpsychisms like Goff as it is for materialism.
So there's a real difference here in the way that Whitehead is approaching panpsychism that I'm hoping to get into when I when I speak to Philip Goff at next month.
So stay tuned for that.
Sure paper. I thought you brought this out very well. In fact, it helped clarify for me the difference between that.
Okay, so I very much hope that you're able to sort of express possibly express Whitehead's ideas in non Whiteheadian language.
That's what you're trying to do, you know, to to bring this into this debate, because it's not just looking back at the history of philosophy.
I think very relevant in these areas, which is obviously why you're doing this.
Yes, yes. Definitely. Well, thank you so much, Rupert. This has been such an enjoyable conversation.
And I think that others will enjoy it. I know John Cobb will be thrilled to listen to our to our dialogue here and keep up the good work.
I think the efforts that you've been making over decades to push the scientific establishment to be more scientific are paying off slowly but surely.
And so thank you for your work and thank you for this conversation today.
Well, thank you, Matt. I'm so glad you're doing what you're doing. I mean, I couldn't think of in philosophy is one of the most important things to be doing right now.
I'm very much appreciated. And I'm thrilled that you and Manin have linked up in this way because, you know, there's a lot more mileage in this in biology and in philosophy and hopefully by interacting over years to come, you'll both be able to carry it further forward, a lot further forward.
Oh, I hope so. You know, I'm not a scientist and I love to make friends with scientists so that I can learn more from them and try to integrate it into a philosophical speculative philosophical paradigm that then influences future scientists to ask certain questions that maybe they wouldn't have asked.
I definitely look forward to the remaining in conversation with Merlin and with you and I also enjoy Cosmos music.
I was listening to that on my drive. So very talented family.
Well, very good. Well, hopefully to be continued sooner or later.
I would love that. I would love that.
Good.
All right, Robert. Well, you have a good night and let's stay in touch.
Bye for now.
Bye.
