Recorded books is pleased to present the Modern Scholar Series, where great professors teach you.
My name is Brian Hutchison and I'll be your host.
Today we begin a course entitled Mathematics is Power. Your professor will be Dr. William Goldblum Block.
Dr. Block is chair of the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science at Wheaton College in Massachusetts.
He is the author of the honorably mentioned book, The Unimaginable Mathematics of Borhays Library of Babel.
His mathematical interests are centered in the areas of low dimensional topology and chaotic dynamical systems,
and he has published articles on related topics in a prime number of research and expository journals.
And now we begin Mathematics is Power lecture one. What is mathematics?
What is mathematics? Math is a huge field. It's a multi-thousand year human project.
It's always being added to and refined, and yet very rarely subtracted from. And I know best the parts that I work in.
For the record, those parts are low dimensional geometric topology, fractals and chaos.
This time has gone on and I've grown more interested in different aspects.
I've moved towards the borders of philosophy of mathematics, paradoxes, computational theory and all sorts of other things.
And I'm going to be talking in these lectures about the parts that I find most interesting and how they reflect the world,
how they speak to the world, how mathematics encapsulates the world and builds models of worlds.
In some sense, how mathematics is buried in the world.
And hope that you too will get a sense of the power of mathematics as a way of looking at the world
and interpreting it and manipulating it.
So very soon I'll start saying we probably instead of I.
Now this seems like it might be a curious tick for mathematicians and what we like to do,
but there's actually a lot of reasons for it.
The first is there's long historical precedent.
For hundreds of years, mathematicians have been saying we.
And as a mathematician myself, I'm certainly most comfortable talking about it, we.
One of the reasons for this is that all of us are building upon the work of our predecessors.
We don't feel like we could do it by ourselves.
It feels almost egotistical to throw the word I in there as I did this and I did that when our subject is so humbling
and what we do that the goal is to try to work with what our predecessors have done before us
and add to it just a little bit at least.
The other main reason that we say we is we're all in this together.
This is not just an endeavor of one person against the cosmos or one person against all the rest of humanity.
We are working as a team here, both you and I and all other people.
Both you and I and all other mathematicians trying to pry truth out of a unforgiving cosmos
that doesn't necessarily care if we find out its secrets at all.
It's a great treasure hunt ransacking the chests of reality looking for truth
and to try to understand the universe that we live in.
