Logic may not apply everywhere. It may only seem to apply in our universe.
However, mathematical calculations are repeatable. They are exactly repeatable.
If they are done correctly, if the rules are followed, time and time again, the same answer will always result.
Let me emphasize that time and time again, the same answer will always result.
Now contrast this with the scientific method. Scientists probably thought along the lines of this.
If we want to say that something is as true as we can know, we're going to have to repeat this.
We're going to have to do it ourselves in the lab a couple times.
We're going to have to get people in different parts of the country to do it, maybe in different parts of the world.
If enough people do it over and over and over again, then we can start to say we think we're on to something.
Now, there are many experiments that are quite hard to repeat, especially as science has grown larger and larger in importance.
The experimental apparatus might become very expensive. It might be very delicate.
And when experiments are repeated, almost always now, there are error margins that are accepted.
That is to say, again, different experiments will give approximately the same answer as other experiments.
When do we decide that's acceptable? Now, what are we willing to live with?
Do we say that one percent is fine? That if it's off by five percent, that the experiment confirms what the other experiments have done?
Different scientists will make different decisions at different times, but the point in contrast to mathematics is,
mathematics, if you do it right, you will always get the same answer.
If other people cannot find the same answer that you got, you probably have made a mistake.
And if you look at it long enough, hopefully you'll correct it.
And this is an extraordinary thing.
So how is this used? Historically, areas have been calculated. That doesn't sound very exciting, does it?
Well, it doesn't until you work as a surveyor or you're worried about a real estate lot.
Even then, that might not be so exciting. Then you start worrying about how much of something you'll need to fill something else.
And suddenly, area calculations start to seem more important.
Later on in calculus, area can start to represent things like the energy consumption of a town during peak electrical periods.
And now, that kind of area calculation becomes very important.
These kinds of calculations get at deep truths and other kinds of calculations such as assets and debts.
What's the correct arch of a bridge that needs a pre-specified load tolerance?
These kinds of things are very important.
And so the deep truth there in mathematics is that we've arrived at a number that is telling us something.
And that number has significance beyond the number-ness of it. It has a significance in our world.
And the connection between the abstract there and the concrete world we live in is one that's hard to put one's finger on exactly,
but to me, very, very deep.
Why should the universe behave logically?
To forego the skeptic and the radical doubters, this is a great question.
Why should it be that if I add 2 plus 2, I always get 4?
And it doesn't matter if I add 2 apples to 2 oranges, I now have 4 pieces of fruit.
It is always going to be the case that 2 plus 2 equals 4.
And there's really not a good answer to this question.
Why does the universe behave logically?
Why does it seem like these laws, these laws of reasoning, can apply over and over and over again without any variation
when everything else does seem to vary?
