Let me go back to the quantum mechanics for a second.
For a long time, people believed that atoms
were the smallest possible unit.
And of course, as time went on,
and our instrumentation became sharper and more refined,
people were able to find smaller and smaller particles,
including electrons.
For a long time, people thought electrons
acted like particles.
Various experiments that were performed on electrons
showed that they acted just like particles.
But then when time went on with different kinds of instruments
and different people running the experiments,
they found that electrons acted like waves.
Now, this was very confusing.
It seemed inconsistent.
How can an electron be both a particle and a wave?
It would have been possible at that point
for a kind of orthodoxy to have said,
well, we know that it's a particle, can't be a wave,
we're just going to forget that and move on.
But scientists remained true to their sense
of what must be.
And they believed that their experiments
gave reproducible results.
They believed that logically everything
followed from both experiments.
And so something had to be deeper.
It wasn't that electrons were particles,
and it wasn't that electrons were waves.
So the early pioneers of quantum mechanics wisely thought,
we need to create a theory that explains
both of these seemingly inconsistent results.
And that would be way outside the scope
of these discussions.
But here would be a very offhand,
non-mathematical way of saying it.
Under some circumstances, electrons act like particles.
Under other circumstances, electrons act like waves.
What we didn't understand before is that circumstance
could have such a powerful effect
on something that we thought would be unchangeable
and immutable, that is to say electrons.
Now we have a more sophisticated understanding
that doesn't violate logic,
that electrons can be one thing one time
and another the other.
So in some sense they partake of both.
And those things that seemed so inconsistent are not.
It's a classic example, well classic in the sense
that it's 100 years old now,
of something that seemed so wrong and so paradoxical,
it turned to open up a broader view of the universe.
One that enriches our understanding
and helps us better figure out what it is that's true
and what it is that's verifiable.
Onto paradoxes, because paradoxes are something
that are either not reconcilable
or seem much less reconcilable.
They're not necessarily subject to a broader understanding
the way quantum mechanics and electrons were.
Now ancient Greeks loved paradoxes.
And many of the paradoxes that they dreamt up
thousands of years ago are so powerful
that they're continuing to plague us today.
Well, maybe not plague us on a daily basis,
but for those of us who think about them
and worry about them,
they curtail our sense of what is possible.
They help us believe that logic has limitations
and strange boundaries.
They will turn out to show restrictions
on all the way logic works.
And again, to me, the remarkable and powerful thing is
they've been around for thousands of years.
Some of the finest human minds,
most people who've thought of them,
at one point or another have grappled for at least a while
and tried to reconcile them.
And the more that people have thought about them,
the more they seem to think that they hold true
and that our thinking does have limitations.
And then if you think that your thinking has limitations,
that's a little bit worrisome
because then you worry,
is my thinking about the thinking about the limitations
itself a dangerous thought?
At any rate, a paradox is something
that produces an inconsistency or violates common sense.
There seems to be something problematic with it,
something that can't be resolved by applications of logic.
And we'll see in some of the later lectures
other interesting examples of things
that violate common sense or create problems
and inconsistencies.
So I'm gonna start with the Greeks
and I'm gonna talk about probably my favorite
producer of paradoxes just in the sense that
his are the one that got me thinking about them myself
and that would be Zeno, Zeno's paradoxes of motion.
