Welcome to Earth Changing Climate, a course with the teaching company.
If you're new to my courses, welcome.
If you've viewed or listened to my course, Modern Physics for Non-Scientists or Physics
in Your Life, welcome back.
This is a rather different course.
We're looking at a much more contemporary scientific issue, and we'll plunge right in
with the first lecture.
The question it asks is, is Earth warming?
And I hope in the course of this first lecture to answer that question, at least in the context
of the last 150 years, and then in subsequent lectures we'll go on further.
It happens to be a beautiful January day here in the Washington, D.C. area where the
teaching company is located.
It's sunny, it's climbing through the 40s and into the 50s.
Just a nice day.
Now that's a statement about the weather.
I hope the weather's nice where you are, but having seen the weather reports this morning,
I know there are parts of the United States that are digging out from blizzards.
So weather varies, and weather varies a lot from day to day.
And I want to make very clear distinction between weather and climate.
This is a course about climate.
It's not a course about the weather.
It's not about predicting what tomorrow's weather will do.
It's about long-term trends in the weather, how the weather changes over years and decades,
not what happens from day to day.
Now having said that it's a beautiful day here in Washington, I'll also point out that
it is running nationwide today some 20 degrees warmer than average for early January.
And I'll also point out that the last few months in my home state of Vermont have been
abnormally warm, remarkably warm.
We've had only one significant snowfall.
We haven't seen any temperatures below zero or even in the single numbers.
Those are statements about climate.
And they're statements about climate because they're comparing what's happening today,
and not just today, but over say the last few weeks or months, with what has happened
in the past over similar time intervals.
So climate is about the long-term trends in the weather, the long-term trends in what's
happening in the atmosphere, what's happening to temperature, what's happening to precipitation
and so on, whether refers to the short-term local immediate events in the atmosphere.
So I want to emphasize that distinction.
This is a course about climate.
Is climate changing?
And particularly we're asking the question here today in this first lecture, is Earth
warming?
So let's plunge right in with a graph that looks at the Earth's average temperature,
the global average temperature, some kind of representative temperature of the entire
planet over roughly the last 150 years.
And I'm going to pause here and give you a little aside on graphs.
You know the statement that a picture is worth a thousand words.
Well, I think of a graph as being worth a thousand numbers.
And I'm going to show you lots and lots and lots of graphs in this course because there
are lots and lots of numbers that summarize the state of climate.
And the easiest way to see what those numbers are doing is to look at them graphically.
So I have some obligations to you when I show you a graph.
And by the way, those of you who are listening to this course in your cars or otherwise listening
on audio, you have access to these graphs in your booklet, and I urge you to look at
them at a time when it's safe for you to do so, not when you're cruising down the freeway.
And I will try to describe as much as I can what these graphs show.
So if you're in the audio audience, you'll get a sense of what's going on here.
Not only are the graphs, by the way, in your booklet, but there's also a list of the sources
of all the data that went into these graphs so that you can understand where they've
come from.
So my obligation is to tell you what the graph is showing, to tell you what the two axes,
the horizontal and vertical axis of the graph, show you, and to tell you something about
how uncertain we are about the information in the graph because science is not 100 percent
certain about anything.
And before you say, well, wait a minute, what about science?
Science isn't very useful then.
Nothing else in life is certain, and science can be quite certain, and we can put numerical
certainties and uncertainties on our information.
And I will try to tell you when we look at graphs roughly how certain or uncertain we
are.
So let's go back to this graph of the average global temperature over a time span since
1860, roughly.
And the first thing to notice is that the vertical axis here is in degrees Celsius.
In the United States, we tend to use degrees Fahrenheit for temperature measurement.
The rest of the world uses Celsius.
A degree Celsius is exactly 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit.
So if you want to make a very rough conversion, if you hear a temperature in Celsius or temperature
change in Celsius, you can roughly double it to get the temperature in Fahrenheit.
There's also that 32-degree offset because ice water freezes at 32 degrees Fahrenheit,
but at 0 degrees Celsius.
So there's a little bit of complication in converting those.
But I'll mostly be talking here in this course about temperature changes, and there a temperature
change of 1 degrees Celsius is equal to a change of 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit or approximately
2 degrees Fahrenheit.
Now it's easier to measure deviations in temperature than to pin down the actual exact global temperature.
And so this graph and a number of the other graphs I'm going to show you show not temperatures,
but deviations in temperature from some average value.
And in this particular case, the average value that the climatologists to prepare these graphs
use is from the 1961 to 1990 average temperature.
It doesn't matter what average we take, but once we take one, we're looking at deviations
from that average.
The particular graph I'm showing you now shows deviations from that average.
And I've done an area graph where I've filled in the area between the average temperature
line and the line representing the actual temperature.
And consequently, you'll see a number of areas where the graph is below that line, and the
graph is extending downward.
Those are times when the temperature was below the 1960 to 1991 average, and you'll see regions
where the temperature is clearly above that average, and you'll see some fluctuations
where it's going back and forth either way.
Why do we do these deviations rather than to try to get a global temperature?
Well, as I'll describe later, these measurements come from thermometers all around the globe,
different kinds of thermometers, different places, some in the ocean, some in land, some
on mountains.
It's much easier to talk about what changes are happening at a given station and incorporate
those into a global average change in temperature than it is to talk about the actual temperature
calculated from the temperatures at all these different spots.
So we'll see very frequently temperatures expressed as deviations from some average.
As I mentioned, these data come from thermometers, actual physical thermometers like you would
use to measure temperatures, and I'll say a little bit more about how that's done later.
I mentioned that I should talk about uncertainties in our information about these quantitative
data.
In the early part of this record, in the late 19th century and into the early 20th century,
these temperatures are accurate by probably about two-tenths of a degree Celsius.
That is, if you look at the graph and you say, well, the temperature was down by half
a degree, it might have been down by only 0.3 degrees or it might have been down by
0.7 degrees.
In other words, it's plus or minus 0.2 degrees is roughly our uncertainty.
By the middle of the 20th century and beyond, we're pretty sure that these temperatures
are correct to within about 0.05 degrees Celsius, about five-hundredths of a degree Celsius.
And the reason for that improvement is an increase in the number of stations we have
reporting temperatures from around the globe.
So having understood this graph, let's take a look at what it shows.
There's a lot of variation, first of all.
The temperature fluctuates from year to year substantially, but there are several major
sections in this graph and they're worth looking at.
First of all, from about 1860 into roughly the year 1900, the graph is roughly flat.
Now I say very roughly because there's a lot of natural variability in the climate and you
can see the temperatures fluctuating quite a bit.
But overall, if you kind of drew a line representing the average trend here, the temperature has
stayed roughly constant from about the mid-19th century when this record starts to about the
beginning of the 20th century.
Then there's a rise in the early 20th century, quite a pronounced substantial rise in temperature.
Then there's a leveling off in the mid-20th century, maybe even a slight decline.
And then there's a rather steep rise that characterizes the final roughly three decades
of the 20th century and that continues into the 21st century.
So our question is, for this lecture and for in fact the entire course, what causes this
temperature variation and how typical is it for Earth?
Is this just what Earth naturally does or is there something unusual here?
That's a major topic of the course, but I want to give you right now just a very quick summary.
So we think that the early part of the 150 year record, the variations there are caused
largely by natural variations of three types.
First of all, the climate system itself is a very complex thing and it has internal oscillations.
The El Nino phenomenon that you've probably heard of is an example of an internal oscillation
in the climate system.
It just happens naturally.
The climate doesn't stay absolutely flat and steady.
So that's some of the variation.
Take eruptions, of which there were a significantly large number in the early 19th century in
particular, put dust into the atmosphere and that exerts a cooling effect on climate.
And we think volcanism has a significant role to play in the early part of this record.
And there have been some significant, not substantial, but significant variations in
the power output of the sun and that's what of course supplies Earth with its energy and
so that causes some of the variations.
But we're quite certain that the variations in the global average temperature from the
roughly 1950 or so onward, maybe 1970 onward, cannot be explained without a human influence
on climate and particularly the dominant human influence being the emission of carbon dioxide
from burning of fossil fuels and I'll have a lot more to say about that in the second
half of the course.
The second half will deal particularly with our evidence that there is a human effect
on climate and we're seeing it and it's there in the last part of this temperature record
that I show you in this graph.
Now so far I've discussed only the global average temperature or rather the deviations
in the global average temperature from some particular average we chose in 1960 to 1991.
There's also considerable variability in regional temperatures and I'd like to take a look at
some of those.
In particular when you look at this global average temperature I've been showing you
that's temperature averaged over land, over oceans, over northern hemisphere, over southern
hemisphere and so on.
If you look in particular regions you'll find the temperature has changed rather more substantially
than the global average.
For example over almost all land areas the temperature has increased more than it has
over the oceans and since the oceans dominate the Earth's surface the change in land temperature
is much more significant than the change in the global average temperature.
This pattern I've showed you in the global average with roughly constant temperatures
in the late 19th century and early part of the 20th century arise in the earlier decades
of the 20th century a leveling off and a steep rise.
That's evident in quite a few climate records.
A colleague of mine and I recently published a paper in which we analyzed temperature records
in the northeast and we found that this pattern prevails in almost all of the 73 individual
temperature stations we looked at.
Of those 73 stations all of them showed something consistent with this kind of warming with a
lot more fluctuation only two of those 73 stations for example showed a cooling.
Well let's take a look at some other examples of temperature records that aren't quite as
global as this.
So I'm going to change this graph to the same data.
This is exactly the same data now portrayed perhaps a little bit more the way a scientist
might portray it as a simply a line representing the global average temperature.
You see exactly the same data you saw before.
You see the roughly average temperature in the early part of the late 19th century, early
part of the 20th century and then the rise in the decades of the 20th century from about
1910 to maybe 1930 or 40 then that leveling off and then that fairly steep rise.
It doesn't look as dramatic on this new graph because I've scaled the vertical axis to cover
a broader range in temperature and there's a reason I've done that because what I want
to do next is add on top of this the same kind of data but now taken for just the northern
hemisphere and just temperatures on land.
So if we look at that you see both the black curve which represents the global average
temperature I've already discussed and the gray curve which is northern hemisphere land
temperatures and you see several things.
First of all the same general pattern is there.
The steady temperatures in the late 19th century arise in the early 20th century, a kind of
leveling or slight fall in the mid 20th century and then that steep rise continuing into the
21st century.
However, you'll see the deviation at the very end into the 21st century here is considerably
more substantial for the northern hemisphere land temperatures than it is for the global
average.
You'll also see some other subtle differences for example especially in the early years of
the record the land temperatures are showing much more fluctuation than the sea temperatures
and there are several good reasons for that.
So that gives you a sense that when somebody talks about the global average temperature
change that you want to look in a little more detail at what's been changing and where it's
been changing and really to do that in more detail let's take a look at a map which will
show the entire globe and gives a sense of what the temperature changes have been over
the entire globe in recent time.
So this is a not a graph but a map it's a kind of graphical representation of quantitative
data but it's placed on a map and without going into all the details what we're looking
at here is a map of the earth and color coded temperature changes measured in degrees Celsius
per decade.
So for every ten years a one degree Celsius per decade change means in ten years the temperature
in that region went up by one degree Celsius.
At the bottom is a scale and we're not going to go into the quantitative details of the
scale but in the middle the white colors represent basically not much change maybe
plus or minus a tenth of a degree per decade.
It's still significant but it's not a huge change.
In the far right we're dealing with several degrees Celsius changes the brightest red
regions and to the left the blue regions represent places where the earth is cooled.
And the first obvious thing you'll notice is that most places have shown a warming.
These are degrees per decade since the year 1950 so they encompass most of that region
in the late 20th century and early 21st century when we've seen the most dramatic rise in
the global temperature.
And you can see very clearly that most of the planet has experienced a warming.
You can see a few spots that have experienced cooling.
They mostly tend to be in the oceans.
You can see a place in the Pacific off the western coast of North America you can see
just south of Greenland there's been some cooling there's a little place east of Asia
where there's been some cooling but most of the of the earth's surface including most
of the oceans have experienced some warming.
You'll see particularly a broad band of red across the northern hemisphere land area which
has experienced the most warming and that's a trend we'll see again and again that the
warming has been greatest over land and it's been greatest in the Arctic.
Been a little less clear in the Antarctic and I'll have more to say about that a little
bit later.
The bottom line of all this is that if you look at earth's global temperature over the
last hundred years or so the earth's temperature has risen about 0.65 or 0.7 degrees Celsius
a little over 1 degree Fahrenheit in that time.
That's what the global average has done.
That has occurred there's been warming in almost every region of the globe and the warming
has been more substantial than that 0.65 or 0.7 degrees would suggest in many regions
of the planet.
Now 0.65 degrees Celsius or 1 degree Fahrenheit or whatever it works out to may not seem like
a whole lot but I want to emphasize that a small rise like that in the global average
happening representing things that are happening all over the globe that can be climatologically
very significant and I will show you why very shortly in subsequent lectures.
So that's the bottom line this warming of about 0.65 degrees Celsius.
Now I shouldn't just present these numbers I should tell you how we take earth's temperature.
Well so how do we do that?
Well what we won't do is to stick a single thermometer somewhere on the earth and record
an average temperature that just doesn't work a single thermometer won't do it.
The reason I showed you temperature data dating back to the mid-19th century is because only
at about the mid-19th century about the year 1850 did we have enough data from all around
the world to calculate a statistically meaningful average temperature.
How did we do that?
Well we have a number of sources.
First of all there are air temperatures and they're coming from basically land based
weather stations which place their thermometers in particular standard locations at the height
of my eyes about a meter and a half and they measure what's called surface air temperature
SAT and they're measured from thermometers typically placed at weather stations.
There are marine air temperatures, MATs taken from buoys or ships.
There are sea surface temperatures taken from ships also, temperature of the surface waters
and all those temperature measurements reported from all around the globe are combined with
careful statistical analyses to compute a best estimate of the earth's global average
temperature.
There's an art to this and a science, a very subtle science, there are a number of corrections.
For example weather stations may move, they may replace their instrumentation and that
has to be corrected for.
Water temperature sampling requires particular corrections.
In the old days they'd throw a bucket overboard, haul it up to the deck of a ship and take
the temperature.
Well whether the bucket is made of metal or canvas or wood affects how much cooling occurs.
How big the ship is, how high above the water affects how much the water may have cooled
or warmed before the temperature is actually taken.
Modern ships take the temperature at the intake water to their engines so that requires a
different, that doesn't require as much correction, that requires a different treatment.
So all these things have been handled.
One of the most significant changes that you may have heard about is what's called the
urban heat island effect.
If you imagine a weather station that for example was a hundred years ago on the outskirts
of a city, cities tend to be warmer than their surroundings because they've changed the land
area by paving, the land's reflectivity by paving roads, they've generated a lot of energy
themselves which causes local heating.
Well if a weather station a hundred years ago was on the outskirts of a city, chances
are now it's surrounded by city, here's a visual that suggests how that might have happened.
You see initially a village with a weather station on the outskirts of that village and
then as the village grows, the urban area surrounds what was a rural weather station
and that causes the temperature of that station to go up and that will give you a false indication
of global warming if you just took your measurements from such stations.
Well fortunately we can test for that effect and in these huge data sets which have thousands
of places reporting, we can simply take out the places that represent large urban areas
and we find that the global temperature record doesn't change much, maybe a few hundredths
of a degree and some of the data sets that look at global temperatures correct for that
and some don't but the point is everybody recognizes it isn't a huge correction.
It's not something that, it's not the reason we see the planet warming now.
There's a slight effect there, if we want to get very accurate we correct for it but
the urban heat island effect is not the reason why we have a global temperature rise.
So that's a quick look at the science behind how we take Earth's temperature today and
how we've been able to take it over roughly the past hundred and fifty years.
Now I started this question, this lecture with the question is Earth warming and the
answer I'm clearly giving you now is yes Earth is warming but I haven't said anything
about whether that warming is unusual, what things look like going further back into the
past where unfortunately we don't have thermometers to take the record.
So I'll be saying a lot more about that in subsequent lectures but let me pause a minute
at this point in this first lecture and say a little bit about science and about public
policy and about this course because science really deals with facts, their facts and their
governing principles that tell us how physical reality works.
It's never a hundred percent certain, I already gave you the uncertainties on that global
climate record but neither is everything else.
How do we develop science?
We develop it first by observing the real world, we develop it by experimenting, perhaps
less so in this field of climatology than some other fields but nevertheless we can
do some experiments and I'll describe those later.
We theorize, we publish in peer review literature which means we publish something, we write
a paper, the editors of the journal we send it to, send it out to several scientists who
review it, who assess whether the science is correct, who make suggestions for changing
it, the paper is published if it's deemed suitable, it's published in the literature,
other scientists read it, they can try to duplicate the results or they can show that
these results are incorrect and so science is a very self-correcting process and after
a while when observation and theorizing come to a consistent picture of what's happening
in the phenomenon under study then a scientific consensus tends to emerge.
So in that consensus science can be quite certain of sort of big picture ideas, the
whole grand scheme without necessarily knowing every detail and I want to emphasize that
because that's certainly the state today of climate science.
We certainly know the big picture.
We know that earth is warming, we know why earth is warming, we know as I indicated and
as I'll describe in the second half of the course that at least some of that warming
is caused by human activities.
We know the big picture, we don't know every detail.
Not knowing every detail doesn't negate our knowledge of the big picture and there are
plenty of other areas of science where you can think of that also.
One example is evolution where we understand the big picture about how species evolve but
we don't necessarily know every detail of every mutation that caused one species gradually
to evolve into another but we do understand the big picture and that's the state of climate
science today.
There are plenty of uncertainties, there are plenty of things we still need to understand
but we know the big picture.
Now there's another issue and that's public policy.
Public policy is about what the public ought to do about many factors including scientific
knowledge.
How should we respond to our understanding of what earth's climate is doing for example?
Now science can certainly guide policy but science isn't about policy and some scientists
stay meticulously away from saying anything about policy, other scientists will happily
use their scientific knowledge to jump in and give advice to policy makers, political
leaders, business leaders and so on.
That's sort of a personal choice for the scientists.
Once the scientist steps outside the realm of science he or she is then giving his or
her opinion about policy.
That's a different thing from science because science is this consensus building corrective
peer reviewed procedure that arrives at a common understanding.
Policy is based on many other things including values, political judgments and so on.
So science can guide policy but science alone can't determine policy.
Now the content of this course certainly more than any other teaching company course I've
done and certainly more than most courses I teach at Middlebury College has significant
implications for public policy.
In a way that for example the big bang theory of the origin of the universe at least at
present seems not to.
That may have important consequences for how we think of our place in the universe and
so on but it doesn't have immediate policy implications.
Climate change does because to the extent that climate change is caused by human activities
then what we choose to do can affect future climate.
That situation has led to a kind of muddling of science and public policy.
A lot of muddling in the mind of the public, a lot of muddling in the media, some of the
muddling has been intentional, some has not been intentional.
It's raised a lot of questions in the minds of policy makers and of the public about climate
change and I don't want to get into questions of policy.
That's not what this course is about.
What I'm going to be dealing with is the science of climate and my job is to explain to you
why we understand what we do about Earth's climate, about its changes and about the causes
of those changes.
So I'm not going to get into the policy issues, I'm not going to recommend what we should
do although at the very last lecture I'll give some suggestions about what future climates
might look like depending on certain paths we might or may not choose to take but this
is not a course about policy, I'm not advocating policy, I'm sticking with the results of that
peer reviewed consensus building theorizing, experimenting, observing aspect which is science.
The course comes in basically two halves, it's a 12 lecture course and it basically comes
in two distinct halves.
The first half is going to deal with our basic scientific understanding of the climate system.
We're going to look at past climates, we're going to look at principles that determine
climate and let me pause here a minute and give you a brief outline of the first half
of the course then.
So here's the first half, part one, the first six lectures.
The first lecture we've just come near to the completion of is Earth warming, raised
that question, is Earth warming and answered it basically in the affirmative.
Earth is warming, has warmed over the last 100 years or so by most of a degree Celsius
by a little more than a degree Fahrenheit, so we've taken care of that question.
Lecture two, butterflies, glaciers and hurricanes, why?
Because it isn't just rising temperatures as indicated by thermometers that tell us
what's happening to Earth's climate.
So do things as diverse as the way species are behaving, butterflies are an example,
the way glaciers are behaving, most of them are melting, the way hurricanes are behaving,
some of them are getting more intense.
What does that have to do with climate change?
Well those may all be additional indications of climate change.
Lecture three, ice ages and beyond, unfortunately this thermometer temperature record can only
take us back to the mid-19th century and if we want to know whether what's happening
to Earth's climate now is abnormal or maybe just some natural fluctuation that will stop
in a few decades, we need to know what Earth's climate has done in the more distant past.
So we'll go way back, we'll go back into the ice ages, we'll go back first a thousand
years or so, then we'll go back into the ice ages, hundreds of thousands of years and
eventually we'll take a quick look all the way back three billion or so years to the
beginnings of Earth's history.
So we'll be looking at climates in the past in lecture three.
Lecture four, in the greenhouse, you've heard of the greenhouse effect, the greenhouse effect
is crucially important for understanding why Earth's climate is the way it is, not
only naturally, but if there are also human effects on it, so we'll look at the science
of the greenhouse effect.
In lecture five, a tale of three planets, we'll look at our evidence that this theory
of the greenhouse effect and its role in climate is correct and we'll end the first section
of the course with global recycling, a look at how the Earth recycles materials, particularly
water and carbon, whose recycling is crucial to understanding how climate develops.
That's the first half of the course.
The second half of the course is more about the human influence on climate.
So in Earth's changing climate, part two, we'll start with lecture seven, the human
factor.
We'll look at what we humans are doing in the context of the science that I described
in the first half of the course and we'll see how some of the balance that gives us
the natural climate is being upset by changes we humans are making.
We'll talk about computing the future, how do we project, not predict because it's not
that accurate, but how do we project future climates?
How do we understand what future climates are going to do?
How do computer climate models work and so on?
We'll look in lecture nine at the impacts of climate change.
What is climate change going to do to the planet besides the obvious, which is warming
things up?
What are some of the other impacts, sea level rise, changes in the way species behave, changes
in precipitation, what are some other impacts of climate change?
And then we'll move in the last three lectures to energy and climate issues because it's
the human use of energy that far more than anything else is what's causing human beings
to alter nature in a global sense for the first time and in particular to alter the
climate.
So we'll look at energy and climate that link, we'll look at the resources we have to make
energy for ourselves here on earth and what some alternatives are to what we're doing
today and in lecture twelve we'll raise the question can we see our way to a sustainable
future with a stable benign climate?
So that's an outline of where we're going in this course.
Now there are a few other resources available to you that I strongly urge you to take advantage
of.
At the end of each chapter in your booklet, at the end of each lecture in your booklet
there is a list of suggested readings and I've chosen to break out the suggested readings
into two different types.
There are the suggested readings that you really ought to go into to remind yourself what this
is about to get corroborative evidence from other authors and so on.
And then I've given you a section of readings called Going Deeper where I give you books
and occasionally scientific papers that go deeper into the issues I've discussed in that
particular lecture and if you really are interested in looking quantitatively at the
science behind those things, I urge you to look at those.
We get an awful lot of our information today from the World Wide Web and so at the end
of each lecture I also give you websites to visit.
Some of them are websites that give you more explanatory material on what I've covered
in the lecture.
Some of them are the websites that give you the raw data that I've used.
If you wanted to make that graph that I showed you at the beginning of this lecture of Earth's
global temperature, I'll show you what website to go to that publishes that data, makes it
available to the public and you can go ahead and use that data yourself.
A final reason for looking at the websites is that everything I say here is frozen in
time as of the moment I'm making this lecture.
Those websites can update that material and keep you very much abreast of what's going
on in this rapidly changing field.
So I hope you'll enjoy the rest of this course.
