Welcome to lecture two, Butterflies, Glaciers and Hurricanes.
In the first lecture, we looked at the temperature trends over the last hundred and fifty years
and we found that the earth has been in fact warming.
We found that warming wasn't even, that things were roughly steady in the late nineteenth
century, that there was a warming trend in the early twentieth century, a roughly even
trend in the middle twentieth century and then a much more rapid warming into the twenty
first century from the last few decades of the twentieth century.
That's perhaps the clearest indication that earth's climate is changing, but climate is
about a lot of things other than simply temperature.
It's about humidity, it's about moisture content of the soils, it's about cloudiness,
it's about precipitation trends, it's about a lot of other aspects of the state of the
atmosphere.
Furthermore, there are other indicators that can tell us about changing climate that are
independent of the measured surface temperatures that we talked about in the first lecture.
And in lecture two here, we want to look at some of those other phenomena that may indicate
that earth's climate is also changing.
Some of them themselves will be simply other ways of measuring temperature, but some will
be entirely different phenomena, phenomena involving animal and plant species, phenomena
involving storm intensities, phenomena involving ice, that also indicate that earth's climate
is changing.
We'll be looking at all of those.
Scientists call some of these phenomena that are indicative of climate change fingerprints,
they use the word fingerprints of climate change, and they use the word fingerprint
in a particular way.
Some of these changes that we are seeing, other than the thermometer temperature changes
I discussed in the first lecture, some of these changes are themselves things that
we would expect to have happen if climate change were occurring in a particular way
for a particular reason.
In particular, some of the changes we're observing today are changes we would expect as a result
of anthropogenic, and that's the word I'm going to use again and again in this course,
make means of human origin, anthropohuman.
Some of the changes that we see are, quote, fingerprints of anthropogenic climate change
and give additional evidence to the statement I made in the first lecture and the statement
that I'll elaborate on in the second half of the course that at least some of the climate
change that we've seen in recent decades is caused by human beings.
So what are some of these fingerprints?
What are some of these other indicators of climate change other than simply taking the
global temperature with thermometers?
Well, that global temperature record, remember, was surface temperatures.
It was made from thermometers mounted about the height of my eyes above the Earth's surface,
so it's basically the surface layer of air.
It was made from thermometers that measured marine air temperatures, temperatures just
above the sea surface, and it was made from sea surface temperatures, SSTs, temperatures
of the surface waters of the ocean.
So it's temperatures at the surface layer of the Earth.
But there are other temperatures you can measure that also say something about climate change.
For example, if you dig a hole down into the Earth, you'll find the temperature changes
with depth.
How should it change with depth?
Well, if you think about it, the interior of the Earth is very hot.
It's thousands of degrees.
There's a molten outer core of the Earth made of largely molten iron.
Things are hot down there.
That's the primeval heat that the Earth comes with.
Some of it is still left over from the formation of the planet, and some of it comes from the
decay of radioactive elements inside the Earth.
I'll say more about that when we talk about energy sources, because that is one of the
energy sources available to us.
But if things at the surface were completely steady, if we had a steady climate at the
surface, what we would expect to see if we drill down into the Earth is an increase in
temperature.
It's not a very dramatic increase, but we would expect to see a measurable and more importantly
steady rise in temperature as we went down into the Earth.
Now what happens if the planet's surface is warming is that additional heat flows into
the Earth from above instead of just flowing to the surface from below.
And when that happens, the temperature profile that we would expect to measure if we drill
down into the Earth would give us warmer temperatures in the surface layers of the
Earth than we expected, and we'd have to drill down some significant distance before we began
to see that steady increase associated with the geothermal heat in the Earth's interior.
So that's a long-winded explanation of what's called borehole temperature measurements.
A borehole is simply a hole bored into the Earth, and we have lots of them, because every
time we board for oil, we've made a borehole.
There are abandoned oil wells and mine shafts and all kinds of other boreholes around the
world, and if you study the temperature profiles in those, you're learning something about
what's been happening to surface temperatures over timescales of decades to centuries, typically.
Why is that again?
It's because the surface temperature signal, if I can call it that, slowly propagates into
the ground and leaves us a kind of record with depth of what the temperature has been
doing, and until we get to that depth where the geothermal heat flow begins to dominate,
the outer layers of the Earth's surface are dominated by these effects of recent climate
change, and we can read that climate change by measuring temperatures in boreholes.
So that's one way of getting at temperature change over the last decades to centuries.
Furthermore, those borehole temperatures are interesting because they smooth out fluctuations
as the heat gradually diffuses into the Earth.
Fluctuations, for instance, are particularly warmier or particularly cooler.
Those will be smoothed out, and we'll get a kind of average sense of what the climate
has been doing over the years.
So what do the borehole temperature records tell us?
Well they tell us simply that the Earth has indeed been warming.
Now we don't have enough borehole temperature measurements to get a really clear global
picture, but just about everywhere we've looked at borehole temperature profiles, the results
are consistent with the surface temperature profiles I showed you for the 150 year temperature
record.
So boreholes provide a kind of smoothed averaging that gives us a sense of what's been going
on on kind of a timescale of decades or so.
So that's one example, and a very recent study, by the way, suggests that the upper surfaces
of the continents have absorbed an enormous amount of energy because of this heat flow
from the warming climate.
And so there's a big reservoir of energy, and that may in turn begin to have its own
effect on climate, the land area, the land and the rocks absorb this heat, and they
can release that heat if they need to under certain conditions.
Another place where a lot of heat gets stored is in the upper layers of the ocean.
Again, there are temperature profiles associated with the ocean in its natural state, and as
the surface layers, the surface begins to warm, some of that warming permeates down
into the oceans, and it changes the temperature structure of the oceans.
And from that, we can calculate what's called the heat content of the upper layers of the
ocean.
And that's a measure not of what the climate is doing right now, but what it's done over
time, how much heat has accumulated in the surface layers of the ocean.
And that trend also shows an upward rise in temperature.
So the surface temperatures of the ocean have been rising, the temperatures in the
top layer, the extent to which warm water goes downward into the ocean has been increasing,
and there's an increase in the heat content of the upper layers of the ocean in the past
few decades.
Finally, there's the atmosphere.
The surface temperatures I talked about in lecture one are measured, again, largely just
a little bit above the surface, or in the case of sea surface temperatures in the upper
layers of the water, they're not measured high in the atmosphere.
What have those temperatures been doing?
Well, there's been a lot of discussion of that over the past few decades, and only in
recent years has it become pretty clear what's happening there.
In fact, if one looks in the lower atmosphere, the so-called troposphere, the lowest layer
of the atmosphere that extends upward to a little bit higher than commercial jetliners
fly up to maybe eight or nine miles above the surface, 10 kilometers, varies quite substantially.
But that's the lowest layer of the atmosphere, that's the layer in which most weather occurs,
and temperatures in the troposphere, in fact, show a warming.
Those temperatures are not easy to measure.
The old way of measuring them is to send up weather balloons, so-called radiosons, equipped
with suites of instruments that would then radio their results back, and of course you
were only probing a small part of the atmosphere and only in a certain time, and those data
are not terribly consistent, they're difficult to build a global picture of the tropospheric
temperatures.
In recent years, we have instruments called microwave sounding units that are flown on
satellites.
They look down on the atmosphere, and they can calculate a rough average temperature
for vast volumes of atmosphere based on microwave emission from oxygen molecules in the atmosphere.
They're also a little bit hard to interpret because they can tend to smear out the temperatures
in different layers of the atmosphere, and there's been a lot of discussion of what
those temperatures have been doing, but in recent years it's become clear that the troposphere
has also showed a warming of approximately the same magnitude as the warming at the surface.
Some of the latest measurements suggest the troposphere has in fact warmed a little bit
more than the surface, and if you looked at a graph of that, you would see a warming trend
for the surface, a slightly larger trend for the troposphere.
Now above the troposphere is the next layer of the atmosphere, the stratosphere, and in
the stratosphere things happen rather differently.
The stratosphere shows a marked cooling, and if you looked at a graph of the tropospheric
and surface temperatures, and they showed an upward trend over the past few decades,
the stratosphere would show a sharp downward trend.
In fact, a more substantial downward trend, you may, wait a minute, how can I say the
earth is warming if the stratosphere has been cooling?
Well, as I'm going to show you in lectures four and five on the basis of the science of
how climate is established, warming of earth's surface under the mechanisms we understand
causing that warming, namely the greenhouse effect, which I will elaborate again in later
lectures.
Under the greenhouse effect, one expects a warming of the surface to be accompanied by
a cooling of the upper atmosphere.
In fact, the temperature difference between the surface and the upper atmosphere is part
of what drives greenhouse warming.
And so if the earth warms, you expect ironically that the stratosphere will cool, and the more
the earth warms at the surface, the more the stratosphere should cool, and the more that
temperature difference between the lower levels of the atmosphere and the surface and
the stratosphere.
And in fact, we see that the stratosphere has cooled substantially, and the troposphere
has warmed, and so has the surface.
Now earth has many spheres, it's got the biosphere, the sphere where life lives, it's
got the atmosphere, the gaseous layer, it's got the lithosphere, the rocks.
It's also got the cryosphere, as in cryogenic cryostat, these words meaning cold.
And earth has a cryosphere, the cryosphere refers to the ice and snow that exist at the
surface of the earth, some of it in the form of ice caps on places like Greenland and Antarctica,
some of it in the form of floating sea ice, some of it in the form of mountain glaciers,
some of it in the form of the seasonal ice and snow that falls in the temperate climates,
and so on.
The cryosphere.
In the cryosphere, the ice and snow layers of the earth respond to changing temperature,
and as you know, if you've ever left an ice cube out on the counter or something, it
takes a while to melt ice, you put an ice cube out on your counter in your 68 degree
Fahrenheit house, and it doesn't instantly turn into liquid water.
There's a lot of energy involved in changing the state of water from solid to liquid.
So it takes a long time, it takes a lot of energy, and as a result of that, these changes
occur slowly, and they therefore, like the borehole temperatures, are indicative of long
term trends in climate.
They don't tell you what's happening from year to year or month to month, they look
at long term trends because it takes so much energy to melt ice that the melting occurs
over very long periods of time.
Now if you look at mountain glaciers around the world, take pictures of them from a few
decades ago, take a pictures of them in recent years, you will find that in many, many cases
you find substantial and dramatic retreat of glaciers.
In the Cascade Mountains of Washington, for example, there are glaciers that in the 1920s
extended, filled entire valleys, and if you take a picture of those glaciers today, you
find they've retreated substantially up their valleys.
There's far less area of ice, the ice is far less thick.
Same thing in Alaska, for example.
There are places where in the 1940s, as recently as the middle of the 20th century, as glaciers
filled whole valleys, today there are lakes where those glaciers were, and way at the
far end of the lake, you can see just the little bit of ice that's left of that glacier.
In tropical mountain glaciers, places like Mount Kilimanjaro that have substantial ice
caps near their summits, even though they're in equatorial latitudes, those are diminishing
rapidly shrinking in area and thickness.
So the mountain glaciers around the world seem to be by and large shrinking.
Now science is subtle, and there are other effects besides the warming of the planet
that affect some of these things, and what a glacier does is determined by a balance
between it's melting or it's calving off of ice at the point where it reaches the sea
if it does, and the accumulation of snowfall on the glacier, and one of the effects of
climate change may be to cause more precipitation, and so some glaciers, depending on exactly
how they're situated, may actually grow under global warming because they get more precipitation
falling as snow and adding to the glacier.
So these things are subtle, and a glacier that is bucking the trend of most mountain glaciers
to be shrinking is not a counter indication.
It says, let's look at this glacier and understand what its particular circumstances are.
If you do look at a whole lot of glaciers, if you were to make a graph, for example,
of what a whole lot of glaciers have been doing over the past decades or even a century
or so, you would find that most mountain glaciers' lengths remained relatively constant until
a few decades ago, and then most, again, not all, began declining in length of the glacier,
which is one measure of a glacier's extent.
Another measure is its area, another measure is the thickness, another measure is the volume
of the ice, but if you simply looked at the length of great glaciers, and scientists have
done this, tracking glaciers all around the world, you will find glacier lengths have
tended to decline, and the decline has been particularly steep in recent decades.
And that coincides with that steep increase in world temperature that I showed you in
lecture one.
So most mountain glaciers are retreating.
A very different kind of ice is Arctic sea ice.
Arctic sea ice is floating ice in the Arctic Ocean, of course, and the Arctic, we have
ocean at the North Pole, we have continent at the South Pole, so the two Arctic regions
of the Antarctic and the Arctic are very different geographically and climatologically,
and in the Arctic the floating sea ice is shrinking substantially.
And if you, for instance, looked at pictures of Arctic sea ice, and you look particularly
in September, which is about the time the ice has reached its minimum area, you will
see, again, over a time scale of only 20, 30 years, you will see substantial decreases
in the extent of the Arctic sea ice over that time.
The minimum ice cover, make a picture based on satellite imaging and the minimum ice cover
is substantially lower at the present than it was 20, 30 years ago.
The Arctic sea ice is diminishing in extent, it's also diminishing in thickness, we know
this from declassified information from nuclear submarines that ply their way underneath the
Arctic ice and did so in the 1950s and 60s, so they got measurements of the thickness
of the sea ice from below, and we know that the thickness of the ice is also decreasing.
If you were to make a movie, put together a bunch of data here and make a movie of it,
you would see the Arctic sea ice gradually decreasing, you would see it some years it
grows, some years it shrinks, but overall the trend is a decrease in the Arctic sea
ice in the extent of the Arctic sea ice.
And that trend shows you as the ice blows around and expands sometimes and contracts
sometimes that overall we're losing ice, overall something is happening to supply enough energy
to turn that ice into liquid water.
I am going to show you one graph here, and you audio people this graph is in your booklet
so take a look at it, these are measurements of the aerial extent, the area of the Arctic
sea ice over time since the 1970s, and measurements are taken every year at what's called the
minimum ice extent, it typically occurs in late summer, early fall, typically sometime
in September, and this graph shows the measures of that area, and the area has dropped substantially
something on the order of 30% or so, again the time since these accurate measurements
were taken in the 1970s, it's a steep downward trend, it has accelerated somewhat in recent
years, again as with all scientific data there's some fluctuations involved there,
but the area of Arctic sea ice has been decreasing substantially.
You may have heard a lot about ice in Greenland, ice in Greenland represents a different kind
of ice, that's an Arctic ice cap, that's ice that is on land, it's land based ice, and
in Greenland ice has been melting at accelerating rates quite recently.
There's been a bit of alarm about this, you get the sense that perhaps a large amount of
Greenland is melting well, what we're measuring typically is how much of the surface layers
are beginning to show melting rather than staying solid all year round, and those numbers
are increasing dramatically, we aren't losing an enormous amount of ice yet, but the trend
is upward and it looks like Greenland is beginning to lose ice at a significant rate.
So the Greenland ice cap is melting, the situation in Antarctica is a lot less clear, at the
fringes Antarctica is showing the effect you would expect from global warming, but the
interior of Antarctica being a very cold, dry desert-like environment, if any precipitation
falls in the interior it doesn't melt, and even with substantial warming of the planet
the interior of Antarctica is nowhere near the point where it melts, so it actually is
accumulating snow, and if there's more precipitation associated with global climate change, Greenland
or Antarctica rather may actually increase in the interior extent of its ice sheets or
ice caps, but the regions near the margin of that continent are definitely showing
the effects of warming.
One particular concern we have with places like Antarctica and Greenland is as the ice
begins to melt, melt water can flow not only on the surface but it can flow down through
crevasses and it can flow along on the bottom of the ice sheet between that and the rocks,
and it can lubricate that region where before the ice sheets may have been locked rigidly
to the rocks, now that it gets lubricated and whole large pieces of ice sheet could
then slide off the continents and into the ocean, and there's worry that that could be
something that could precipitate an abrupt rise in sea level.
It doesn't appear to be a substantial possibility in this century although it could happen,
and that's one of the worries associated with this melting.
There are other indicators, other fingerprints of global climate change, for example if you
track weather patterns over a few decades there are changes, and again I said in the first
lecture weather is different from climate, weather is the day-to-day stuff that's happening
in the atmosphere, but if you look at the trends in weather over the decades that tells
you something about what's happening to climate, and what are some of these changes, well you
would expect there to be more heat waves and prolonged hot spells if it's warming, that's
sort of obvious, although what's perhaps not obvious is why those heat waves and prolonged
hot spells should rise dramatically if the temperature on average changes only like a
degree Celsius or something, well I'll show you in a later lecture exactly why that's
the case, it's the same reason by the way that I showed some of you in my video course
physics in your life about why food spoils in the refrigerator if the temperature goes
up only a little bit, it's the same phenomenon, a very small change in the average temperature
can dramatically shift conditions at the extremes, and so we expect to see more extremely hot
days and more heat waves.
Precipitation is changing, the patterns are changing, and in particular the precipitation
globally seems to be increasing, there's a slight increase in precipitation, but some
areas are drier, that change is not even, so some areas are getting drier and some areas
are getting warmer, some areas are getting wetter, there's more precipitation coming
in brief intense events, that's another characteristic fingerprint of anthropogenic climate change
and we're definitely seeing more precipitation coming in brief intense events, and if you
think about that you might say well if you were a plant or if you were some soil that
was going to erode, how the precipitation comes, a gentle rain that lasts an hour, a
brief downpour that lasts 10 minutes, that makes a big difference even if the amount
of rainfall stays unchanged, so here's a more subtle change in what's going on, and that's
a change that again is a fingerprint of anthropogenic climate change, and there's pretty substantial
evidence that we are seeing more precipitation coming in brief intense events than we used
to, and again there's evidence that we are seeing more precipitation generally globally,
not a whole lot more but more, and we are also seeing some parts of the world drying
out and some parts getting wetter.
Another thing that's changing is the diurnal temperature range, what climatologists call
the DTR, the temperature difference between night and day, and that's decreasing, it's
actually warming more at night than it is in the daytime, that's causing the temperature
range from night to day to decrease, that's probably associated with increased cloudiness,
in my home state of Vermont there's a big worry about that because maple sap production
requires very cold nights and then warm spells in the day, and if we lower the diurnal temperature
range we don't get those conditions, and in fact the maple syrup industry may leave my
state for Canada as a result of global climate change.
We've heard a lot about hurricanes in recent years, and we've heard a lot about whether
hurricanes may or may not be related to global climate change, and there the issues are
quite subtle.
There are definitely some changes in hurricanes, and I'm going to show you another graph, this
is a graph that is associated with the North Atlantic and with the intensity of hurricanes
as measured by an average of the actual power contained in the winds of the hurricane multiplied
by the time over which those winds were blowing, which gives you a sense of the total energy
contained in the hurricanes, and that's done over a whole hurricane season, and this graph
shows you two curves, the lower curve is the sea surface temperature in the North Atlantic,
the upper curve is the hurricane intensity as measured as I just described by that total
energy associated with the power contained in the winds multiplied by the time over which
those winds were blowing.
For those of you who are mathematician types, by the way, that power in the wind goes as
the cube of the wind velocity, that's because kinetic energy goes as the square of the wind
velocity and therefore the wind is carrying that kinetic energy along at its velocity,
so the whole thing goes as the cube of the wind velocity, so if you double the wind speed
in a hurricane, the intensity of that hurricane goes up eight-fold.
And here you see in the North Atlantic at least quite a clear correlation between the
intensity of the hurricanes and the sea surface temperature, and there's plenty of good reasons
for expecting that warm sea surface is what drives intense hurricanes, so that's not surprising
and that seems to be something that's related to climate change.
Now in the interest of scientific accuracy, I will tell you if you do the same thing and
it has been done for other ocean basins, the correlation is less dramatically obvious,
and one thing that is not at all obvious is whether to expect an increase in the number
of hurricanes or whether in fact we've seen an increase in the number of hurricanes.
It's pretty clear we've seen an increase in their intensity, but have we seen an increase
in their numbers?
These things are a little bit harder to get at than you might expect.
So something like hurricanes presents a kind of an ambiguity for us.
We can get at some aspects of hurricanes that may be related to climate change, but hurricanes
are subtle and we don't know all the details.
And finally let me end with something related more to life itself, and that is what happens
to species, and that was the butterflies in the title of this lecture, what happens
to species as a result of climate change.
So well a lot of things happen to species.
Species undergo a lot of behaviors that in fact are related to timing of when the spring
arrives, what the highest temperatures are, when the first frost is, things like that
affect plant and animal species both.
And the results I'm going to talk about here are from not one study of a particular species
of butterfly or bird or tree, but rather of a meta study, so called, that looked at
hundreds and hundreds of studies of individual species and came to kind of general average
conclusions about what was happening.
So what do those species do?
Well in the northern hemisphere on the average species seem to be moving northward, their
ranges, the southern extent of their range and the northern extent of their range, seem
to be moving northward at about six kilometers per decade.
Every ten years if you take a species whose southern range was New York City or something,
then ten years later its southern range is six kilometers about four miles north of there,
and the same goes for the northern most range.
And again, this is not about any one species, it's kind of an average over many, many species,
but there you are when you do that average.
Mountain species, species that live in high altitudes tend to be moving upward, that's
the only way they can move easily, they're moving upward at about six meters per decade,
so six kilometers per decade roughly for the species that are moving toward the poles and
six meters per decade roughly for the species that live on the mountains.
Other events, spring events seem to be taking place earlier by roughly two to three days
for every decade, so every ten years a lot of events that you think of in spring move
earlier, and I know having lived in Vermont quite a while, I used to plant my tomatoes
on Memorial Day, now I plant them in early May.
That's an example of that kind of spring events moving earlier by two to three days
per decade, you can see it's not always a bad thing.
Some of those events include nesting, when birds build their nests, when animals breed,
bud burst, the bursting of buds to make leaves, when things flower, or when the migration,
the spring migration ends, as all those things are happening earlier by about two point three
days per decade.
So there are some other examples of things that species are doing that are varying.
Now I want to emphasize that something as complicated as the behavior of a plant or
animal species is not determined solely by climate.
There are other factors, what are other species doing, what are the prey or the predator species
doing, what are diseases that affect that species doing, there are all kinds of other
effects.
There's subtle scientific questions and that's why this meta study of hundreds and hundreds
of different species gives us a sense of what's happening overall.
We don't expect every single species to be doing that.
In fact, if you look at these meta studies, you will find that roughly 87% of them have
changes that are consistent with what you'd expect if those changes are driven by global
warming.
A small fraction of them, species whose behaviors may be dominated by things other than the
actual warming associated with climate change, maybe they're affected by precipitation, maybe
they're affected by other species, this is not surprising.
About 13% of species in this meta study of hundreds of species have shown changes that
are in the opposite direction than you'd expect associated with the temperature change.
And that's simply an indication that what controls the behavior of the species is a
lot more than climate alone and that's not surprising.
But the main point to take away from these studies is that of the species studied, 87%
showed changes in their behavioral change range, their mating behavior, their early
spring behavior, their migrations, etc., that seem to be consistent with global warming
and only 13% showed changes that bucked that trend.
Let me end by summarizing what we've seen here.
We've seen a whole lot of fingerprints for global climate change in a whole lot of different
areas.
The temperatures in boreholes measuring the temperature down into the earth and indicating
that historically the temperature, there's been a flow of heat into the earth and therefore
the temperatures are rising abnormally near the, not abnormally, but are rising at the
surface.
They're rising, there's a change in the temperature occurring.
We've seen the heat content of the ocean rising, we've seen the atmospheric temperature
rising in the lower atmosphere but falling in the stratosphere, which is something as
you'll see in a few lectures, is exactly what we would expect if there was greenhouse
effect global warming.
We've seen changes in the cryosphere which are largely associated with melting and shrinking
of polar ice, mountain glaciers, ice caps, and so on.
And finally we've seen changes in the behavior of species with respect to the ranges they
occupy and with respect to the timing of characteristic behaviors like mating and nesting
and bud burst and so on.
There are many fingerprints that point to the fact that earth is indeed warming, that
the climate is indeed changing.
