In the first lecture, we looked at the 150-year temperature record from thermometers and saw
that Earth has indeed been warming, especially in recent decades.
In the second lecture, we looked at a number of so-called fingerprints, other phenomena
that also are indicative that Earth's climate is changing either because temperature is rising
or because other climate-related phenomena like species ranges and so on, melting of ice,
are occurring.
But we'd really like to know whether that roughly 150-year record of temperature corroborated
by these other phenomena is just a natural occurrence in the history of Earth's climate
or whether there's something abnormal, something unusual, particularly about the warming of
recent decades.
So what we need to do to answer that question is somehow to go back further, further than
that 150-year time horizon where we have enough data from thermometers to tell us something
about Earth's global temperature.
The problem is, of course, we don't have thermometers that were in enough quantity before about
1850 spread enough around the globe to measure an average global temperature, and by a few
hundred years before that, we don't have any kind of temperature-measuring instruments
at all.
So how do we get back further?
We've got to do that if we're going to find out whether the climate change we're seeing
now is, in fact, something unusual or something just to be expected in the history of the
planet.
Well, what we have to do are to find measurements that serve as so-called proxies for temperature.
Other things that we can measure that kind of stand in for temperature.
Sometimes they may also stand in for other aspects of climate or other phenomena altogether,
but at least they have to be able to give us some indication of what temperatures we're
doing at times back before that historical temperature record.
And it would be really nice if these proxy temperature measures also extended into the
region where we have thermometer temperature measurements, because then we could cross-correlate
them and understand them.
So what are some of these proxies we use to go further back in time and try to establish
so-called paleo-climate, climate in ancient times, or even climate in fairly recent centuries?
What do we use?
Well, there are a number of common proxies.
One of them are tree rings.
The oldest trees go back thousands of years.
The rings in trees, the annual growth rings, tell us a lot of things.
They tell us about conditions when the plant was growing.
They tell us about temperature.
They tell us about the length of the growing season.
They tell us about humidity.
They tell us about where the tree is in its age cycle, and all these things have to be
sorted out.
But if you look at tree rings, you look at the interior structure of a tree that's been
sawed in half, you see these annual growth rings laid down as the tree undergoes its
annual spurts of growth.
The rings vary in thickness, they vary in density of wood, they vary in other quantities
that tell us something about climatic conditions during the years that tree was growing.
And because tree rings are laid down annually, we have a precise measure of when a given
tree ring is associated with, and therefore we have a real, dateable record of past climate
as measured by tree rings.
Now tree rings are most useful in regions like the temperate zones where there are large
summer-winter temperature differences.
Tree rings and the tropics aren't going to tell you a lot, but tree rings in the temperate
climate where there's this large differential between summer and winter tell you quite a
bit about the climatic conditions of that kind.
If you go into the tropical oceans, you find, in contrast, coral reefs.
And coral reefs form annual layers of the calcium carbonate, which is what forms the
shell structure of marine, shelled marine organisms, and analysis of those layers tell
you something about the temperature of the water at the time the coral reefs were forming.
So coral reefs are analogous in some sense to tree rings, except they work for warm tropical
waters, whereas tree rings tend to work for temperate land areas, so they're complementary
in that sense.
We can get it two different regions of the planet by looking at tree rings and looking
at coral reefs.
Freshwater lakes have layers of sediment typically on the bottom.
Where do those sediments come from?
Well, they come from streams that are washing the sediment in.
There tends to be a lot of stream flow in the spring when there's snow melt going on,
and then as the summer progresses, the stream flow dies down.
Sometimes it goes away altogether.
And as a result of that, the sediments in freshwater lakes tend to be deposited in layers, which
you can, again, as with tree rings or coral reefs, identify on a year-to-year basis.
You actually look at the sediments, you take a core of them, and you can see individual
layers.
And the thickness of those layers tells you something about the intensity of the snow
melt.
They tell you how rapidly the streams were flowing.
They tell you a measure of the springtime temperatures, roughly.
Also in those sediments, one often finds pollens, and if one goes back long distances in time,
then those pollens tell you something about what kinds of species happen to be living
in the surrounding land.
And so lake sediments provide another proxy indicator of climate.
But perhaps the most significant one, and the one that's going to take a little bit
more scientific explanation here, are so-called isotope ratios.
And I need to get a little tiny bit into nuclear physics here.
I talked about some of this in my course, Physics in Your Life, and I'm going to talk
about it again a little bit here.
What is an isotope?
Well, an isotope is one particular version of a chemical element.
What's a chemical element?
A chemical element is a substance characterized by a particular atom, and in particular, it's
the number of protons, the positively charged subatomic particles that make up atomic nuclei
along with neutrons, that determines what kind of a chemical element something is.
And the reason the protons determine that is the protons are electrically charged positive.
They attract an equal number of electrons to complete the atom, the electrons orbiting
around the nucleus in the simple classical picture of an atom.
And it's that number of electrons, particularly the outermost electrons in their configuration
that determines the chemical behavior of the atom.
And so the individual chemical elements, and their very different chemical behaviors,
for example, oxygen versus hydrogen versus gold versus uranium, those different chemical
properties are determined by the number of protons in the atomic nucleus.
The number of neutrons doesn't affect the chemical properties because neutrons are electrically
neutral.
So you can have different so-called isotopes of the same element that have different numbers
of neutrons, but the same number of protons.
And chemically, they're essentially indistinguishable.
Two isotopes of oxygen are both oxygen.
You can breathe chemical oxygen with either isotope, and it will work pretty much the same
in your system, for example.
But the two isotopes differ, and they differ in mass because an isotope with more neutrons
is heavier.
And so their physical properties are slightly, typically not dramatically, but slightly
different.
And that's what isotopes are.
And I want to look in the context of this course and temperature proxies, particularly
at isotopes of hydrogen and oxygen.
Hydrogen, a very common element, component of water, normally consists of just a single
proton.
It's the simplest element.
It's one proton in its nucleus surrounded by one electron.
That's what hydrogen is.
But there are two other isotopes of hydrogen.
One is called deuterium.
Its nucleus consists of a single proton.
That's what makes it hydrogen.
One positive electric charge, but also one neutron.
And because a neutron and a proton weigh about the same, in fact, deuterium is about twice
as heavy as ordinary hydrogen.
And deuterium is a stable isotope, which means it can exist basically forever.
And there is some deuterium among the hydrogen here on Earth and elsewhere in the universe.
And in fact, about one out of roughly every 6,500 hydrogen atoms is, in fact, deuterium.
It's also called H2 because it's got two nucleons, two neutrons or protons in its nucleus.
So there's deuterium, and it is twice as heavy as hydrogen, although there isn't very much
of it.
Oxygen, another common material on Earth, in fact, the most abundant material on Earth's
crust is oxygen, comes commonly in the isotope oxygen 16.
Oxygen has eight protons in its nucleus.
Any nucleus with eight protons is oxygen.
It's got eight electrons surrounding it to make an atom, and that determines its chemistry.
Most oxygen is oxygen 16, but a small amount of oxygen is oxygen 18.
Oxygen 18 has two extra neutrons.
There's also oxygen 17.
There's also, by the way, hydrogen 3, but that's radioactive, so it doesn't tend to
hang around.
But the oxygen isotopes, 16, 17, and 18, are stable.
They can exist basically forever, and 16 and 18 are particularly significant in trying
to measure temperatures, as are the hydrogen isotopes, hydrogen, and deuterium.
So what's the deal?
How do we figure out what temperatures have been based on these isotope ratios?
Well, there are a number of ways we do it, depending on what we're looking at, and I
want to focus on looking at ice cores, because in the Arctic and Antarctic, we can drill
into ice sheets that are a mile or so thick.
And again, the ice tends to form in layers associated with the annual snowfall, and sometimes
we can see individual years in the ice core record, and other times those are kind of
smeared together, and the dating is a little bit more approximate.
But in any event, we can go back in these ice cores, and we can look at the ratio of
the two isotopes of, say, oxygen in the precipitation that fell and eventually formed that ice.
And what do we do?
Well, most oxygen, again, is oxygen 16, the lighter isotope, 8 protons, 8 neutrons, but
a little bit of it, about 0.2%, is the heavier oxygen 18, again, 8 protons, because it's
still oxygen, but in this case, 10 neutrons to give it a total of 18 nucleons in its nucleus.
These things are basically similar chemically, but again, they're different physically, and
the oxygen 18 is heavier.
And that means when water containing oxygen 16 is near the surface and is warmed, the
oxygen 16 containing water evaporates preferentially, because it's lighter.
It's more likely to go flying out into the air than the heavier isotope.
So what that already means is that oxygen 18 is depleted in the water that goes into
the atmosphere.
Atmospheric water vapor is somewhat depleted in oxygen 18.
Why?
Because the oxygen 18 preferentially remained behind when the water evaporated, because its
nuclei are heavier.
So the water that's in the vapor in the atmosphere is depleted.
It has less oxygen 18 than the natural abundance of oxygen 18.
Now what else happens?
Well, water typically evaporates in the tropical regions where it's warmest, and it's transported
into the temperate zone and into the Arctic zone by the motions of air that is one of
the major conveyors of energy from the tropics to the poles.
If we didn't have that conveyance, by the way, the poles would be a lot cooler relative
to the equator than they are.
There's a transport of energy associated with the transport of heat and of evaporated
water from the equatorial regions.
However, in the process of going from the equator toward the poles, the oxygen 18 containing
water being heavier tends to precipitate out more readily.
And so first you evaporate water and it tends to be depleted in oxygen 18, and then as the
water moves poleward, it gets further depleted.
And how much depleted it gets, you can see, depends somewhat on the temperature.
The cooler it is, for example, the more the oxygen 18 will precipitate out, and that leaves
Arctic and Antarctic precipitation even further depleted in oxygen 18.
And the cooler the climate, the sooner the oxygen 18 is gone, and so the more depleted
is the precipitation that eventually falls in the Arctic, and that precipitation falls
typically as snow.
It eventually is compressed into the ice that makes up the ice sheets, and it preserves,
as I said, either an individual yearly layering or in some cases just a smeared out layering
that allows us approximately to date it.
But if we go in and core that ice, pull out an ice core, we then have a datable, sometimes
datable by year, sometimes datable by rough era, record of the temperature at the time
that precipitation fell.
Similar technique works the same way with the hydrogen isotopes, because again there's
water that contains H1, and then about 1 every 6,500 waters contains an H2, a deuterium
atom.
So either oxygen isotopes or hydrogen isotopes can be used to date particularly ice cores.
And of course they tell us something about conditions when that ice fell, and unlike
the global average temperature that I talked about in the first lecture, they tell us about
conditions at particular places, in Antarctica, in the Greenland ice sheet or whatever, but
we can infer from those something more general about the temperatures on the Earth.
So what do we do with these different proxies, the tree rings, the coral reefs, the isotope
ratios and so on?
Well we put some of them together and make multiproxy studies, studies that take a lot
of these proxies into account, and do a detailed statistical analysis and try to reconstruct
temperatures back into the past.
And the rest of this lecture I'm going to spend primarily looking at some of those reconstructions
of temperature.
We're not going to call them measurements because we haven't actually measured temperature.
We've attempted to reconstruct temperatures based on these proxies and our well-founded
scientific understandings of how these proxies reflect climatic conditions including temperature
at the times that the tree rings were formed or the precipitation fell or whatever.
The first set of proxies studies I want to talk about are studies that push us back roughly
a thousand years.
And what these proxies suggest, what these proxies studies suggest is that Earth's climate
to get to the bottom line quickly is that Earth's climate at present in the past few
decades has shown a warming that is unprecedented on the thousand year timescale.
And I want to show you a graph here, or actually I want to show you a lot of graphs here.
There are actually eleven graphs I want to show you.
And these graphs represent ten different reconstructions of the climate of roughly the past thousand
years.
Every wiggly line you see is a different scientist or group of scientists, a different study
of what the temperature probably looked like on Earth back over the last roughly thousand
years.
I said there were eleven lines.
There's only ten of those wiggly lines.
There's a thick line that occupies only the rightmost portion of the graph and extends
highest right at the rightmost edge.
And that's the same instrumental temperature record that I showed you and talked about
in lecture one.
Now it's been crammed into this very short piece of the overall thousand year graph and
so you see that rise in the early twentieth century, that fall in the mid-twentieth century,
slight fall that's exaggerated here and then you see that very steep rise at the end of
the twentieth century.
And you see all these wiggly proxy studies.
They are not measurements of temperature but reconstruction of temperature.
And they all show roughly the same thing.
There's some variation and you can argue about that and talk about that and who's right
and who's not right.
But they all show basically a slight downward trend over roughly the first nine hundred
years of the millennium and then a fairly steep rise at the end.
If you had to summarize that in one quick sentence that's how you would describe the
graphs.
If you were a climatologist you might want to go into more detail and talk in more detail
about what's going on there.
But the basic big picture is over the last thousand years there's been a very gradual
decline in temperature followed by a sharp upturn at the end of that period in roughly
the twentieth century, late nineteenth through twentieth century.
So on that basis we can say that the temperature rise we've seen in the last few decades has
been unprecedented on timescales of at least a thousand years.
Now how good are these reconstructions?
Well that's a little hard to know.
One has to assess them.
One has to look at the statistical methodology used.
But again we're looking at ten different studies, ten different studies, ten independent
studies that all point to basically the same thing.
The U.S. National Academy of Sciences did a study of these ten studies and concluded
that at least for the last four hundred years we can have considerable confidence in these
studies and going further back the uncertainties get bigger but the general trends are still
basically the right thing.
So these are not the final word on what temperatures have been doing on this planet over the past
thousand years but they almost certainly give us a pretty good picture of the overall big
picture and the overall big picture conclusion is that the temperature rise of recent decades
since about 1960s or 1970 has been unprecedented at least on a thousand year timescale.
So that's the beginning of the answer to the question I started this lecture with.
How is the temperature rise we looked at in lecture one augmented by these fingerprints,
is that unusual in the history of the Earth's climate and over a thousand years it looks
like it probably is unusual.
What happens if we go back further?
Well we can go back a lot further using ice cores from either Greenland or Antarctica
and there are a number of studies doing these.
I'm going to show you some results from drilling at the Vostok station in Antarctica.
It's a Russian site and that climate record has been available for quite a few years.
There's a newer study that goes back almost a million years.
The Vostok study goes back about half a million years.
There's a newer one now that goes back almost a million years by a European group.
I'm going to show you the results from the Russian Vostok area study and here is a picture.
This graph is showing a picture of the climate of the past 420,000 years.
So you're seeing on the horizontal axis thousands of years before present with the present at
the right, zero years before the present going back to 400 and something thousand years.
You're seeing temperature deviations on the vertical axis.
These are measured in degrees Celsius from the present day temperature.
You'll see immediately that there is a pattern to this picture.
There's a pattern of relatively short 10 to 20,000 years in duration, warmish spells
when the temperature is at or about the present day temperature.
Again, the present day temperature on this graph is zero.
It's just arbitrary chosen to measure deviations from the present day temperature.
So if you look at zero, zero represents the present day temperature.
Some of those spikes go a little bit above the present day temperature by a few degrees
but most of the time is spent in a much lower temperature state.
You'll also notice that we rise rather quickly into those warm spells and then we fall rather
slowly into the cool spells and we rise again.
And the time period between these warm spells is about 100,000 years roughly.
So for the past roughly half million years, this pattern doesn't go back unchanged like
this too much longer, but for roughly the past half million years, the earth has been
in a sickly climate pattern in which the temperature has mostly been in a fairly low
temperature state and then it's risen for 10,000 years or so to a warmer state, stayed
that state for a fairly short time and then dropped down again and again with roughly
100,000 year periodicity.
Now let's take a look at a closer, a close up version of that.
These cool periods are ice ages.
The warm periods are called interglacials and I want to focus now on the most recent
cycle from the last warm period before the one we're in now and the ice age in between.
So here's the most recent cycle.
It's the same data, same temperature deviation from the present in degrees Celsius.
The cool period is the ice age about 120,000 years ago.
I said the period I see was about 100,000 years, about 120,000 years ago there was a
warm spell.
We're now in another warm spell.
We're not quite the warmest time in that warm spell, at least not yet.
There we are.
And a number that I would like you to walk away from this course with is roughly the
difference in temperature between that warm spell that we're in now or one of these typical
warm spells and the temperature sort of typical of the ice age.
So what is that difference?
Well, you can argue is it 10 degrees?
Is it 4 degrees?
It's not 1 degree.
It's a lot bigger than 1 degree.
It's not 100 degrees.
It's not 20 degrees.
It's I would call it 6 degrees.
You could call it 8 degrees.
I'm sort of getting it typical here.
But roughly 6 degrees Celsius separates the present climate from that of the ice ages
when North America, all of Canada basically and Northern United States, had a mile or
two of ice sitting on top of them.
When I said in the first lecture a few degrees can make a big difference, I meant it.
A few degrees in the global average temperature can be the difference, 6 degrees in the global
average temperature can be the difference between the present conditions and an ice age
when there was two miles of ice atop Montreal, for example, or Northern Vermont or whatever.
That's a significant difference.
And so when you hear people talking about climate change of a few degrees, global average
climate change of a few degrees is climatologically extremely significant.
Now what causes this change in Earth's temperature, this cyclic change?
We don't understand all the details yet, but what we do understand is that this temperature
change is not caused by any one particular factor.
It's probably triggered by astronomical factors, astronomical factors related to Earth's orbit.
And those astronomical factors are probably things like the tilt of the Earth's orbit,
the variation in the ellipticity of the orbit, how elliptical is the orbit, the changes in
the tilt of the axis as the Earth goes around in its orbit change, how much of the time
is spent in winter versus summer, and all these things trigger very subtle changes.
And what we believe then happens is that those subtle changes cause feedback effects in the
Earth's climate system, feedback effects that I'll talk about a lot more when we deal with
climate models, and we will see just exactly what we think causes these effects.
And I'll say a little bit more about that in subsequent lectures and look in more detail
at those orbital effects that we think cause this to be triggered.
But again, these orbital effects are subtle, they are very small effects, then they trigger
changes within the climate system that rapidly build up the temperature into one of these
warm spells, and then gradually as the orbital parameters change slightly, we gradually drift
back down into that low temperature state we call the ice age.
So don't think of this as a clear indication that there is some dramatic effect causing
the temperature change.
No, there's some subtle effect that causes the beginnings of a temperature change, that
temperature change then leapfrogs through various feedback effects in the Earth's climate
and away we go.
Can we go back further?
Well, yes we can.
It's harder to go back further with certainty.
We're quite certain about the temperatures I'm showing you with these, these are hydrogen
isotope graphs I've just showed you, based on the hydrogen isotope temperature data.
But can we go back further?
Well we can.
And we have other proxies for that, some of the same proxies we've been talking about,
but we can look for example at oxygen isotope ratios in marine organism shells that are
trapped in ocean sediments.
We again sediments form in layered structures so we have a sense of what the time is that
they were formed at.
We can measure the oxygen ratios that tells you something about climatic conditions.
At the times those shells were formed which then sank to the bottom of the ocean and became
a part of the sedimentary, ultimately of the sedimentary layer or the sediment layer at
the bottom of the ocean.
So it's one example.
Another thing we can do is look at fossils.
You look at fossil leaves.
Again fossils occur in rocks, the rock are layered, the layering is a rough indication
of age and so you can look at fossil leaves and just the type of leaves you see tells
you something about the climate.
Was it tropical?
Were these deciduous leaves?
Was this a more temperate climate?
And you can begin to learn something about climate from that.
You can also learn something about the volume of ice.
There are a number of indicators that give you the volume of the ice.
You can tell whether sea level was high or low and if sea level was low that indicates
that a lot of water was locked up in ice and if a lot of water was locked up in ice the
climate was probably cool.
So there are a number of indicators that take us substantially further back in time.
They don't do so with the accuracy of the 150-year temperature record.
They don't do so with the accuracy of those 1,000-year temperature reconstructions.
They don't do so with the accuracy of the hydrogen isotope cores from Antarctica.
But they do give us a rough overall picture of what the climate has looked like over the
last, well, to be honest, last 4 billion years which is about the history of the Earth.
The Earth was formed about 4.6 billion years ago and I'm not going to describe the total
history in all its gory detail.
And again, the more recent times in that history we know better.
But if you look at the history of the Earth's climate going far back, it's probably the
case that the present day is relatively cool compared to the historical climate.
By the way, that's somewhat of an interesting anomaly because we know that the sun has
actually been getting brighter over time.
That's something that's worried climatologists but they think they haven't figured out.
So the present is probably a little bit cooler and the present has been experiencing this
fairly rapid cyclic behavior in the climate associated with the ice ages and the warm
interglacials occurring roughly every 100,000 years.
And that's a fairly short time scale on the 4 billion-year history of the planet Earth.
So as you go back in time, into times tens to hundreds of millions of years ago and here
we're getting into the age of the dinosaurs, it was probably a lot warmer.
How much warmer?
I don't know.
We can't really pin that down but warmer, significantly warmer.
I mean, there's evidence of tropical-like fossil vegetation found in what, at that
time, were continents that were in the Arctic, for example.
So the Earth was considerably warmer at times in the past, at times 10 to hundreds of millions
of years ago during the age of the dinosaurs.
There was a time further back, probably somewhere between 200 million and a billion years ago
maybe when the Earth's temperature fluctuated quite a bit but averaged maybe not terribly
differently from what it is today.
And that may extend back to several billion years, maybe two billion years or so with
considerable fluctuations.
And then going way back into the early history of the planet, of course, we were formed in
a very hot state, the heat due to the accretion of small bodies in the solar system that congealed
together to make planet Earth and gave up their energy as heat when they collided together.
So in the very early history of the planet, it was hot.
At some point it was too hot for life.
Life formed probably well over three billion years ago and has been continuing ever since.
So we have a climate record of a living planet that goes back billions of years.
One of the most interesting things about that record and something that's only recently
come out is there are probably situations, and they probably occurred somewhere between
about 750 and maybe 580 million years ago in which the entire planet froze solid.
We believe these times were associated with periods when continental drift had put most
of the continents near the equator, the oceans froze completely solid, the continental interiors
were completely dry, dust blowing off the continents landed on the frozen ice and changed
the amount of sunlight that absorbed and volcanic eruptions put gases into the atmosphere that
as I'll talk about in subsequent lectures helped the planet warm and eventually the
Earth recovered from, in fact, probably very quickly would recover from those states which
are called snowball Earth.
This is still somewhat controversial, not all scientists believe they occurred, but there
begins to be some pretty good evidence that Earth froze solid for several occasions and
if it freezes solid you might worry how will it ever melt again because ice reflects so
much sunlight.
How could it ever warm up?
And the answer is there was dust involved and there were gases from volcanoes involved
that let it warm up again.
One of the interesting things about those snowball Earth phases is that we believe that they may
have killed off a good fraction of the species that were living on the planet, but right
after them there were vast sort of explosions in the diversity of living things, including
possibly the occurrence of land animals and the occurrence of complicated multicellular
organisms.
They may have some of their origin in these unusual climatic events called snowball Earth.
So the climate has done interesting things going back in the past and if we were to ask
the question is the Earth's climate, the question we started this lecture with, is the Earth's
climate and particularly the change in climate we've seen in recent decades unusual, yes,
it's unusual in the context of the last thousand years.
Is it unusual in the context of Earth's entire three or four billion year history?
Absolutely not, at least if you talk about the magnitude of the change.
It was a lot cooler than just the few degrees, the degree or so warming we've seen.
It was cooler by six times that much during the most recent ice age.
During the age of the dinosaurs it was certainly warmer globally by a lot than it is now.
So the Earth has certainly seen climate extremes which are much more dramatic than the variation
we've seen in the last decade.
The more significant question is, is the variation in the last decade unusually rapid?
Have there been very rapid oscillations of the entire global climate?
And that is a question which needs to be answered and that's a question that's a bit more subtle.
We certainly know that as Earth came out of the most recent ice age ten thousand years
ago or so there were, at least in regions, parts of the northern hemisphere for example,
quite rapid excursions in temperature that occurred naturally.
Do they occur globally?
We're still not sure about that.
So we don't know the answer to the question of whether the climate change of recent decades
is unusually rapid but it certainly is in the context of the millennium and in the context
of global temperature changes it probably is unusually rapid and as I'm going to show
you in subsequent lectures we understand the cause of the recent climate change and that
cause is things we're doing and that's causing this very rapid climate change of recent decades.
