lecture four in the greenhouse. In the first three lectures, we looked primarily at observational
data. We looked at what Earth's temperature had done first from thermometer measurements
going back 150 years. We then looked at other observations of species, of ice sheets, of
glaciers, etc. that told us something about what Earth's climate had been doing. We then
looked at proxy indicators for pushing climate records back, first hundreds and then thousands
and then hundreds of thousands and eventually billions of years. But in all those examples
we were looking at observational data. We weren't trying to explain the data, why the
data did what they did. We were simply observing what had been happening to Earth's climate.
And we came away with a conclusion that we've had some extremely rapid climate change in
the last few decades, that it is unprecedented certainly in the last thousand years and that
its rate may be particularly significant, may be particularly rapid climate change.
This lecture is very different. Here we look at the big ideas, the big science ideas behind
what establishes a planet's climate. I want to spend a good deal of time on this because
I want you to understand thoroughly just how much we know about the basic big idea behind
climate. Again, as I said in the first lecture, we don't know every detail. But we have a
very good theory of the big picture and we have very good reasons for believing that
theory is correct. And in lectures four and then in lecture five, I will give you good
evidence for why we understand how the climate behaves, why we understand what establishes
climate. And in lecture five, we'll come back to looking at some observational evidence
that these theories are in fact correct. The key idea, the one I want to begin with is
the idea I call energy balance. It's the key to a stable climate. And it's also the key
to a stable temperature in any system you care to think about. It could be a house, it could
be a pan of water sitting on the stove. It could be anything that maintains a temperature.
It could be your own body for that matter. What maintains a system at a fixed temperature?
And the answer is very simple. The answer is basically energy balance occurs when a house,
a planet, a body or anything else loses heat at a rate that depends on the temperature
difference between that thing and its surroundings. And that's true of just about everything.
Because if your house is warmer than the surroundings, heat is flowing out through
the windows, through the insulation, through the cracks and crannies. Heat is flowing out
and the rate at which the heat flows gets bigger if the temperature difference between
inside and outside gets bigger. The sun is losing energy because it's very hot and it
radiates that energy off into space and that radiation, what we call sunlight, is carrying
away energy from the sun. And it's being carried away at exactly the same rate that
energy from nuclear processes in the sun's interior are supplying energy to the sun's
surface layers. A pan sitting on a stove is at the same temperature. If the stove burner
is supplying energy to it at the same rate, various processes are sending that energy
off into the surrounding environment of the kitchen. And the same is true for a planet.
A planet is in energy balance and will maintain a stable temperature if, in fact, the energy
loss processes that cause the planet to lose energy are balanced by the energy gain. And
the key to understanding energy balance is the idea that the greater the temperature difference
between a system and its surroundings, the greater the rate of heat flow. If the system
is cooler than its surroundings, it's gaining energy from outside. If the system is warmer
than its surroundings, which is usually the case we're talking about, it is losing energy
and the rate at which it's losing energy depends on how much hotter it is than its surroundings.
And that's a big idea to grab ahold of. Because if that weren't the case, we wouldn't naturally
get systems into energy balance. But because that's the case, we do naturally get systems
in energy balance. The larger that temperature difference, the larger the rate of heat loss.
And therefore, there will come some temperature where the rate of heat loss is equal to the
rate at which energy is coming into the system. And at that point, we're in balance and the
system will maintain a constant temperature. This idea of energy balance isn't quite the
same as another science idea you may have heard of called equilibrium. In equilibrium,
a system would simply come to the same temperatures at surroundings. That would happen if I took
a glass of water and put it here on this table and just let it warm up to the surroundings.
But in energy balance, something active is happening. Energy is flowing into a system
from outside and energy is flowing from the system back to the environment. And when those
two processes are in balance, the system sits at a fixed temperature. And don't care whether
it's a house or a body or a pan on the stove or whatever. A greenhouse provides a particularly
good example of that. If the system, for example, a greenhouse is hotter than it, quote, ought
to be than its natural state, then it's going to be losing energy at a greater rate than
its gaining energy and it's going to cool down. If the system is cooler than its surroundings,
then it's going to be losing energy at a lesser rate and our energy is going to be coming
into it. There's going to be a net increase in energy and the temperature is going to
go up. And so it's naturally going to come into a balance at a situation where it's losing
energy at the same rate as which it's gaining energy. And a greenhouse, again, is a perfectly
good example. A greenhouse is simply a building with some glass that lets the sunlight in,
the energy from the sun in. If the greenhouse is in balance, it's warmer than its surroundings,
but the rate at which energy is flowing into the greenhouse is equal to the rate at which
energy is flowing out of the greenhouse. And we're in a state of energy balance and
if nothing changes, if the sun doesn't set, if the outdoor temperature doesn't change,
then the greenhouse will sit there at whatever temperature is at and that temperature will
be warmer than the surrounding temperature because it's got a flow of energy coming in
and it's got a flow of energy going out. If the greenhouse is too cool because the rate
at which the energy leaves the system depends on the temperature difference between that
system and its surroundings, the rate at which energy is leaving the system will be less,
but the rate at which it's coming in from sunlight will still be the same and consequently
there will be a net flow of energy in and the greenhouse will get warmer, the temperature
will rise. On the other hand, if the greenhouse is hotter than its equilibrium, its balance
temperature and the temperature it would like to be at in energy balance, then it's warmer
than its surroundings and so the heat flow out is even greater, it's greater than the
heat flow in and as a result the system is losing energy and it will cool down. So that's
the reason why systems from a greenhouse to a house to a planet all come to a temperature
balance, an energy balance at a fixed temperature that would remain constant if no other circumstance
has changed. Now in some systems like houses we have active devices like thermostats that
control ultimately the rate at which the energy is coming into the system from the furnace
and they maintain a temperature that you choose, but in other systems like the greenhouse or
a planet you don't choose the temperature it's going to be at, the conditions, the conditions
that describe the amount of energy coming in, the conditions that set the amount of energy
going out, they ultimately determine the temperature. But the point is either way there is an energy
balance that gets established, it gets established naturally, if something upsets that balance
the balance will be re-achieved, if conditions change like you put more insulation in the
greenhouse or you do something to earth's atmosphere then the balance condition will
change, but you will eventually achieve a new balance as long as the conditions don't
keep changing. That balance gets achieved naturally and again the fundamental science
reason why it gets achieved is because the rate at which a system loses energy depends
on the temperature difference between that system and its surroundings. The details depend
on the mechanism whereby that energy leaves the system, but the fact is the bigger the
temperature difference between the system and its surroundings, the bigger the rate
of heat loss and that's what allows a system to come naturally into balance at some temperature.
How does this work for a planet? Well in the case of earth for example, the energy input
to planet earth is the incoming sunlight. And we know the rate at which sunlight comes
to earth. Averaged over the entire planet, averaged over night and day, taking account
of sunlight that bounces off ice sheets and never gets to participate in the earth's
energy system, sunlight comes in at the rate of about 240 watts on every square meter of
surface area. So for every square meter, about a square yard of earth's surface, energy is
reaching the earth's system from the sun at the rate of about 240 watts. That is on
each of those square meters. What's a watt? Well I'll give you more about that much later
in the course, but you know what a 100 watt light bulb is, so 240 watts is about two and
a half, not quite two and a half, 100 watt light bulbs worth of energy arriving on every
square meter of earth from the sun. And if earth is to be an energy balance, it has to
lose that energy. And the earth being an isolated system in empty space has only one way to
lose energy. It radiates it by what's called electromagnetic radiation. And because earth's
temperature is what it is, around 15 degrees Celsius, around 60 degrees Fahrenheit, around
300 Kelvin, that's degrees Celsius above absolute zero, it happens that the energy it radiates
is in the form of infrared radiation that we can't see. It's radiation with a longer
wavelength than the visible light that we see with our eyes, and it's radiation that
is invisible infrared, and that's how the earth loses its energy through infrared radiation.
The sun being much hotter than the earth, the sun is 6,000 Kelvin, about 6,000 degrees
Celsius, about 11,000 degrees Fahrenheit. The sun loses energy also by electromagnetic
radiation because it's surrounded by the vacuum of outer space, but because it's so much hotter,
its light is visible. And that distinction is really important. The sun is providing
us with energy in the form of visible light. The planet earth is re-radiating energy in
the form of infrared radiation. They're both forms of electromagnetic waves, and I talk
about those in some detail in my physics in your life course, what electromagnetic waves
are, but they're both forms of electromagnetic waves, but they're different. The incoming
sunlight is visible to us with our eyes. It's very short wavelength radiation. The outgoing
infrared, because the earth is so much cooler than the sun, is infrared, and that's going
to play a major role in climate. But before we get to that role, let's just talk about
the energy balance that gets achieved. If you had an earth that was initially very cold,
it would be losing no energy by infrared radiation. Sunlight would be coming in, the planet would
be gaining energy, it would be warming up, and as it warmed up, it would radiate more
and more infrared radiation. And we know very well the physical law that describes the rate
at which a hot object radiates energy. In fact, it goes as the fourth power of the temperature,
P to the fourth, and so as the temperature increases, and that's absolute temperature
measured from absolute zero, as the temperature increases, the amount of energy radiated goes
up very rapidly. So as our initially cold earth begins to warm up, it radiates more
and more infrared, and eventually, when it's radiating an equivalent of 240 watts for every
square meter of surface, it will be radiating totally exactly as much energy as it's gaining
from the sun, and it will come into energy balance, and the earth will therefore be at
a fixed temperature. That's how earth's energy balance gets established. If for some reason
the earth were to get hotter, it would be radiating at a greater rate than that 240
watts per square meter coming in from the sun, and therefore, it would cool down. If
it were a little cooler, it would be radiating at less than the rate at which it was gaining
energy from the sun, and it would then warm up, and it would eventually come back into
energy balance, as long as nothing changed. Nothing meaning the sunlight's intensity didn't
change, and the properties of the earth, and particularly its atmosphere that allowed
this radiation to escape, didn't change. As long as none of that changed, we would have
a stable climate. And again, here, I'm kind of talking about an average condition. Surely
things vary from place to place. They vary from night to day. They vary with seasons,
and I'm kind of ignoring all that and talking about a sort of steady, long-term, average
climate. Now, we can do better than just talk qualitatively about earth's energy balance,
and we know the law, again, that tells the rate at which a system emits electromagnetic
radiation, and the system emits electromagnetic radiation at a rate that depends on its temperature,
and as I said, on the fourth power of the temperature. So if we equate the equation,
and I'm not going to do the math here, but if we equate the equation, or the term that
gives the rate at which a hot object radiates energy to 240 watts on every square meter,
the rate at which sunlight's coming into earth, we'll have an equation that has one
unknown, the temperature, and we can solve for it. And when we do, we find that the earth,
by this simple energy balance argument, ought to have an average temperature of about minus
18 degrees Celsius, which works out to about zero degrees Fahrenheit. I'll think about
that in a minute. It's not way off, because, you know, we could have had a temperature that
was so hot that the oceans had boiled away. But it's not that hot. It could have been
so cold that the entire planet was frozen in a snowball state. Well, if it's zero degrees
Fahrenheit on average, probably there are at least some places that are going to be warmer
by quite a bit, enough probably that water is a liquid. On the other hand, an average
earth temperature of zero degrees Fahrenheit, or minus 18 degrees Celsius, sounds a little
bit low. And it is. So, what's wrong with our calculation? Well, what's wrong with
our calculation is we've neglected the earth's atmosphere. And here we have to get into the
details, and these are the crucial details that determine why earth's climate is warmer,
in fact, than it would be if the earth's atmosphere weren't there. Most of the atmosphere, as
you probably know, is composed of nitrogen, which nitrogen N2, which is basically inert
and plays very little role in chemical processes, a little bit, but not much. About 20% of
is oxygen, which is crucial to our life and to the life of most organisms. And both oxygen
and nitrogen, which incidentally consist of simple diatomic molecules O2 and N2, are transparent
to this incoming visible radiation from the sun, largely transparent, a little bit of
it's absorbed in the atmosphere. Most of it comes right through to the surface. They're
transparent to that visible. They're also transparent to the outgoing infrared radiation.
However, there are other substances in the atmosphere, trace gases, gases that are there
in only small amounts, that have a significant effect on the ability of infrared radiation
to escape the atmosphere. These gases are transparent, largely, again, to the incoming
visible sunlight that's bringing energy to the earth, but they're largely opaque to the
outgoing infrared. Now, what are those gases? In the natural earth system, the dominant
ones that are most important are water vapor, which, depending on the humidity, may be a
few percent of the atmosphere, and carbon dioxide, which is considerably less than a
percent of the atmosphere, but is nevertheless very significant in terms of its influence
on the outgoing infrared. In the natural system, natural state of things, water vapor is the
most significant of these gases. These gases are called greenhouse gases. That name is
a bit of a misnomer. The idea is that they function sort of like the glass in a greenhouse,
but they don't really. The glass in a greenhouse keeps heated air from escaping the greenhouse
in bulk. These gases keep radiation from escaping. That's a bit different than keeping
heated air from escaping. The glass of a greenhouse does have some effect keeping infrared out
from escaping, but that's a minor effect. Nevertheless, this term greenhouse gas is
stuck, and this effect, whereby greenhouse gases trap outgoing infrared radiation, is
called the greenhouse effect. If you want to know a little bit more of the physics of
why the greenhouse effect occurs, I'm not going to go into the details. Maybe a chemist
would call this the chemistry of it. I'd call it the physics. If you look at the two molecules
I just mentioned, water, H2O, and carbon dioxide, CO2, those are both triatomic molecules.
Their molecules have three different atoms. It turns out those triatomic molecules have
many more ways to vibrate and rotate and move around than the simple diatomic molecules
of oxygen and nitrogen, and many of those ways involve vibrations at the frequencies
of infrared radiation, and that's why water vapor and carbon dioxide are greenhouse gases.
They tend to be more complicated molecules than the simple molecules oxygen and nitrogen
that make up most of the atmosphere. So these outgoing gas, these atmospheric greenhouse
gases absorb outgoing infrared radiation. They act like insulation. They keep that infrared
radiation from getting out. They kind of trap it, and I'll describe this in a little more
detail in just a moment. And the net effect, though, is that Earth's surface has to be
at a higher temperature to get rid of that still 240 watts per square meter of radiation
of energy coming in. It has to be at a higher temperature than it would be otherwise. And
in the case of the natural greenhouse effect caused by naturally occurring water vapor and
carbon dioxide in the Earth's atmosphere, the value of that effect, the amount by which
it increases Earth's surface temperature, is about 33 degrees Celsius, roughly 59 or
60 degrees Fahrenheit. The Earth is warmer than that number we calculated, that zero
degrees Fahrenheit by about 60 degrees Fahrenheit. It's warmer than that minus 18 degrees Celsius
by about 33 degrees Celsius, gives it a temperature on the average of about 15 degrees Celsius
or 60 degrees Fahrenheit. The Earth is warmer and more comfortable than it would otherwise
be because of this naturally occurring greenhouse effect. So when I talk about the natural greenhouse
effect, I'm talking about the effect of carbon dioxide and water vapor in absorbing outgoing
infrared. Water vapor has the biggest effect, carbon dioxide comes second, in absorbing
the outgoing infrared, and therefore warming the surface to levels above what it would
otherwise have. And so when I say the natural greenhouse effect is 33 degrees, I'm talking
about something very specific. It's 33 degrees Celsius warming due to the presence of these
greenhouse gases. And I think you'll agree that a planet at 60 degrees Fahrenheit average
temperature, about 15 degrees Celsius average temperature is a lot more comfortable than
one that would have been at zero degrees Fahrenheit minus 18 degrees Celsius. It wouldn't have
been an uninhabitable planet. I think life might have still formed and some forms of
life could still exist in some areas if there weren't the greenhouse effect, but it sure
makes for a more habitable, enjoyable planet. So that's the essence of the greenhouse effect.
And I'd like to spend a little bit more time describing not only the essence of the greenhouse
effect, but also three different ways of understanding it in terms of scientific understanding. The
simplest way is just to say the greenhouse gases act as an insulating blanket. They make
it harder for energy to escape, and therefore the surface temperature is a little higher
than it would be otherwise. And I think every citizen of an industrialized country that produces
greenhouse gases ought to know at least that. A slightly more sophisticated way of looking
at that is to consider an earth system with greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. In an
earth system with greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, the infrared going out gets absorbed
in the atmosphere, some of it. It heats up the atmosphere, and the atmosphere warms and
it does what any other warm system does is it radiates energy out in the form of infrared
in all directions. And for the atmosphere, all directions means upward and downward.
And so the atmosphere returns to the surface, some of the radiation that it got back from
the surface originally. And consequently, the temperature of the earth's surface has
to be warmer than it would be otherwise in order for that energy to escape and keep the
planet in energy balance. So if you had an earth without greenhouse gases and you added
greenhouse gases, that would momentarily drop the rate at which the earth lost energy
by infrared radiation. It would therefore heat up until there was again a balance established
at what would be then a higher temperature. Perhaps the most sophisticated way of looking
at all this is to consider what happens with the upper atmosphere as the upper atmosphere
is a cooler place than the surface and the lower atmosphere. And because of that, the
upper atmosphere can't radiate as much energy as the surface can because it's cooler. And
in particular, it can't radiate away all the energy that comes in as sunlight. And therefore,
the earth's surface has to get warmer and warmer in order to get some of that energy
to escape despite the presence of the greenhouse gases. If for some reason the upper atmosphere
were at the same temperature of the surface, there would be no greenhouse effect. And that's
an important point that I hinted at in earlier lectures. In lecture two, when I talked about
the temperature change that's occurred recently in the stratosphere, the stratosphere is
actually cooled. A cool upper atmosphere and a warm surface are conditions needed for the
greenhouse effect to occur. So that's the most sophisticated understanding of the greenhouse
effect. And if you were to sort of diagram that, you would imagine that a little bit
of infrared is escaping to space directly from the atmosphere or a significant amount
maybe, but not enough to balance the incoming sunlight. And you need some more additional
infrared to escape from the surface. And because of the greenhouse gases, you need to have
the surface very warm because it has to get a significant amount of energy out through
the nearly opaque greenhouse gases. And you can begin to see that there are many ways
that you might upset this kind of balance. You might upset this kind of balance by changing
the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. You might upset this balance by changing the
amount of sunlight. You might affect this balance by changing the composition of the
greenhouse gases. There are many ways to upset this balance, but the point is it's a delicate
balance and it's established by a balance between the incoming sunlight and the outgoing
infrared. Now, Earth's energy balance is actually a lot more complicated than what I've just
described here. And I want to show you a diagram that gives you a sense of that complexity.
Because I've only talked about sort of overall incomes this much sunlight, out goes this
much infrared. There's actually a lot of complicated interactions occurring, particularly
between Earth's surface and its atmosphere. And to understand climate in a little more
detail, we need to understand those interactions. So I'm going to take a look here at a diagram
that describes some of the details of Earth's energy balance. And again, this is still averaged
over the entire planet. We're not talking about what happens in Greenland, what happens
in the tropics, what happens in Hawaii, what happens in the middle of the South Pacific
Ocean. We're not talking about that. We're just looking at overall global averages and
already it begins to be fairly complicated and sophisticated. I was recently, by the
way, at a climate conference that I go to every year, a climate conference that relates
to the sun and its influence on climate. And every single speaker showed this diagram.
And by the time the third or fourth speaker had showed it, there was a sort of that became
kind of a standing joke. But anyway, here's a diagram that depicts pretty much our best
understanding of what the energy balance looks like in all its detail. Different scientists
will give you slightly different values for some of the numbers that appear in this diagram.
That's a matter of ongoing research, but the big picture we sort of understand. So there
is in this diagram a very large arrow representing the incoming solar radiation. It's about
342 watts on every square meter. You say, wait a minute, I thought you said 240. Well,
I did. But 342 watts per square meter come in. Some of those, that energy, some of those
watts are reflected back into space before they ever get to play a role in the climate
system. They're just sunlight that's reflected off into space. What are they reflected from?
From the tops of clouds, which are highly reflective. If you've flown in an airplane
and looked down on the clouds, they're very white and bright. That means sunlight is being
reflected back into space. And if it goes back into space reflected, it's only, it never
gets absorbed by the Earth atmosphere system. And it never plays a role in climate, except
in a sense a negative role by not being there to provide energy for the Earth atmosphere
system. So of that 342, about 77 of them are reflected by clouds and by particles and things
in the atmosphere. About 30 of those watts are reflected by the surface, largely by ice
sheets, snow, deserts, light colored areas. And there's another way we could upset Earth's
energy balance by changing the amount of, say, snow there is on the ground or by deforesting
an area and turning it into a desert. That would tend to make it absorb less sunlight
and more sunlight would be reflected. So that radiation, a total of 107 watts per square
meter going off on the upper left of the diagram, doesn't play a role in the climate system.
It doesn't get absorbed. Then what happens to the rest of the energy that's coming in,
which amounts to about 235 watts per square meter. That's my 240 roughly that I was talking
about before. Well, some of it, a small amount, about 67 watts per square meter, get absorbed
in the atmosphere. They get absorbed in clouds. They get absorbed by volcanic dust. They get
absorbed by dust that is blown off deserts. They get absorbed by particulate air pollution.
They get absorbed by things in the atmosphere and deposit their energy as heat in the atmosphere.
Roughly half only of the incident solar energy. Here it's 168 watts per square meter. Only
about half, a hair over half, actually gets absorbed and warms the surface directly. Some
of it's already been reflected. Some of it's got stopped in the atmosphere. Roughly half
of it gets to the surface and its job there is to warm the surface. Absent any atmosphere,
about 168 watts per square meter, but of course we've already had an atmosphere to reflect
some of that, but if there were no other effects from the atmosphere, that would be sent off
as infrared radiation to space and the Earth's surface temperature would be whatever it needed
to be to radiate that 168 watts per square meter. But we have the greenhouse gases in
the atmosphere and on the right side of the diagram you see the effect of the greenhouse
gases. You see that the greenhouse gases are radiating back to the surface, 324 in this
particular diagram, watts per square meter back to the surface. Of course everything's
in balance. So the surface is radiating most of that back away again and most of it gets
stuck in the atmosphere and there's almost a cycling if you want to think of it that
way. It's not building up. It's everything's in a steady balance, but there's a small fraction
of that depicted by an arrow that goes all the way from the surface up to the top of
the atmosphere, about 40 watts per square meter. It's called the atmospheric window and that's
the small amount of energy that's able to escape from the surface all the way up to
space as infrared radiation because the greenhouse gases are not 100% opaque. If they were 100%
opaque we'd be in big trouble, but they're not and that atmospheric window allows a small
amount of energy to escape and it's enough to keep everything in balance. But the point
is because of those greenhouse gases radiating energy back downward, the Earth's surface
has to radiate a lot more energy upward and because the radiation increases with temperature
that means the temperature has to be a lot higher than it would be otherwise. How much
higher? That 33 degrees Celsius, about 60 degrees Fahrenheit of the natural greenhouse effect.
So that's the picture and if you had to look at this diagram and say where's the greenhouse
effect? It's in that upward and downward, particularly in that downward flowing arrow
representing back radiation that's flowing down from the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere
to the surface. Of course those greenhouse gases are also sending some radiation off into
space. Now this isn't the whole picture and the reason it isn't the whole picture is
because there are other important processes that transport energy between Earth and atmosphere
and in particular they consist of convection, a process whereby heated air gets less dense
and rises and it takes with it the energy that it contains by virtue of being hotter.
That's in this diagram called thermals. When you see a day when there are a lot of little
puffy cumulus clouds forming in the atmosphere, they typically form at the top of thermals.
Warm air has heated, it's risen and it's cooled a bit as it rises and it reaches the point
where the moisture condenses, you get a cloud at the top of that rising thermal. But what
that thermal has done is transport energy into the atmosphere and a significant flow
of energy occurs because of those thermals, the actual bulk transport of heated air into
the atmosphere. A more significant flow from the surface into the atmosphere is in what's
called latent heat. That's the energy that's associated with water being in the gaseous
state instead of the liquid state. So when water evaporates from the surface of the ocean
and that moisture laden air is transported into the upper atmosphere, it's carrying with
it that moisture. And it carries with that moisture in the form of vaporous water, it
carries with it the energy that it took to turn liquid water into water vapor. And if
that vapor recondenses into liquid water and falls as precipitation, that energy becomes
available as heat. And it's that energy that, for example, in the extreme case, drives hurricanes.
It's largely the energy associated with the evaporation of water. Of course that was ultimately
solar energy, but in this case the mechanism for transferring the energy into the atmosphere
is not radiation, not the sending out of infrared radiation because things are hot, but rather
the transfer of moist air containing the so-called latent heat associated with the evaporated
water. So the energy balance of Earth is a complicated system. And we need to understand
the details of that system to understand climate. But the big picture for us here in this lecture
is that energy balance will occur and it will occur naturally and it will occur when the
rate at which energy comes into a system, particularly the Earth, is equal to the rate
at which energy goes out from the system. And for Earth the energy goes out entirely
to space by infrared radiation, but there are transfers between the Earth and the atmosphere
some of them by radiation, some of them by these convective effects, the thermals and
the latent heat that move energy back and forth between Earth and atmosphere. And the
big important one for our purpose is the effect of the greenhouse gases in absorbing the infrared,
sending some of them back to the surface and making the Earth warmer than it would be otherwise
by about 33 degrees Celsius or 60 degrees Fahrenheit, the natural greenhouse effect.
