Lecture 5 A Tale of Three Planets with Apologies to Charles Dickens, I suppose.
We've seen evidence that Earth's climate is changing.
Then in the most recent lecture, we saw the theory of what establishes a planet's climate.
That theory involving the basic idea of energy balance, that the energy that arrives from
the planet's star, in the case of our planet, and in fact, our neighboring planets that
I'll be discussing in this lecture, energy arriving from the sun, that that energy heats
up the planet, and the planet sheds the energy back to space as infrared radiation.
And regardless of whatever else goes on, we know that if the sunlight is shining steadily
and the conditions of the planet are steady, the planet will come to an energy balance at
a constant temperature, and that temperature will be maintained essentially unchanged,
as long as none of the conditions, the incoming sunlight, or the ability of the planet to
shed that energy back to space change.
On the other hand, if any of those conditions change, the planet will come to a new energy
balance at perhaps a new temperature.
So we've seen Earth's climate changing.
We've come to an understanding of how climate arises in planets, but I've given you basically
there a theoretical understanding.
How do we know that that's correct?
How do we know that this theory, that energy balance establishes a planetary climate, and
particularly the idea of the theory of the greenhouse effect?
The idea that there are gases in the atmosphere of a planet, particularly of Earth, that are
opaque to outgoing infrared radiation, and therefore they require a surface temperature
that's warmer than it would be in the absence of those gases.
How do we know these theories are true?
One of the nice things scientists like to do is experiment with nature.
They like to do controlled experiments.
They say, let's set up this condition, and let's put more greenhouse gases in the atmosphere,
and let's see what happens to climate, and they do carefully controlled experiments.
Well, unfortunately, Earth's climate is one area where you can't easily do carefully
controlled experiments.
You can't play with the climate.
You can't decide.
We're going to double the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
We're going to see what happens.
We're going to decide if we like what happens, and then we're going to undo the experiment.
We can't do that.
We don't have multiple Earths to work with, to perform different experiments on.
It would take a long time for climate to change, even if we could do experiments.
It's difficult to establish miniature climate experiments.
It's impossible to put a tiny Earth in the laboratory and do realistic climate experiments.
Now, having said all that, that doesn't mean there aren't some things we can know experimentally.
For example, we can put carbon dioxide in a chamber.
We can send infrared radiation through it.
We can measure how much of the infrared radiation gets through, and consequently we can determine
the opacity, that is, how much the carbon dioxide blocks infrared radiation.
So we can then determine, if we put so much carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, how much
infrared radiation will it block.
That's something we can measure experimentally, for example.
As I'll describe in a subsequent lecture, we can also build, if you will, simulated
climate systems, Earths and atmospheres and oceans and suns and all the rest, and put
them in computer models whose mathematical programming represents the physical and biological
and chemical science going into these systems.
And we can run these models and try to understand how climate would behave under other circumstances.
And climate scientists who do that actually call these computer runs experiments.
But they aren't experiments in the sense of our grabbing onto nature itself and doing
things and trying to figure out what happens.
We can't do controlled experiments with Earth's climate, unfortunately.
On the other hand, there are many who would argue we are in fact doing inadvertent experiments
on Earth's climate by, in fact, altering the amount of greenhouse gases in the planet's
atmosphere.
But those aren't controlled experiments.
Those aren't experiments we are intentionally doing, and they aren't experiments where we're
controlling exactly the effect we're producing.
So we can't do experiments to verify the theory of the greenhouse effect that I described
for you in the last lecture.
So how do we know it's correct?
Well, I'm going to give you in this lecture several arguments why we are quite certain
that the greenhouse effect is a serious and important explanation of what is happening
to our planet's climate, what establishes the climate originally, and what's happening
now as the climate is changing.
One argument I would give you is that the basic physics I described in the previous
lecture, the physics that goes into the greenhouse effect, the absorption of infrared radiation
by carbon dioxide, the presence of carbon dioxide and water vapor both absorbing infrared
radiation in the atmosphere, these are things we can get in the laboratory.
We know, for example, that law that I referred to last time about the amount of infrared
radiation depending on the fourth power of the temperature.
That's something we can verify in the laboratory.
In other words, that whole theory of the greenhouse effect that I described to you in the last
lecture is something that's based in very sound, basic scientific principles that we
know from theory and we know from measurement to be true.
It's not some cooked up theory designed to explain one particular thing, namely Earth's
climate.
It's a theory based on very fundamental, very sound, very long established scientific
principles.
So there's one reason why the theory I described for you last time, and I'm using that word
theory intentionally, and at the end of this lecture I'm going to talk a little bit about
what scientists mean specifically when they say a theory.
So one reason we believe the greenhouse effect theory to be correct is because it's based
in very sound and very fundamental science.
What's another way?
Well, in my arguments last time, I suggested that the presence of the greenhouse effect,
the 33 degree Celsius warming that the Earth experiences relative to what it would have
if there were no greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, that that's caused by the presence of water
vapor and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
And so perhaps if we looked at the atmospheric carbon dioxide content and the atmospheric
water vapor content over time, and we looked at Earth's temperature over time, and we
saw a correlation, we might be able to argue that in fact the presence of one infers the
climate change associated with the other, for example.
Now I'm going to try to do that in the first part of this lecture, but I want to warn you
at first that this is a little bit more subtle than a very quick glimpse at the data might
suggest.
First of all, water vapor, I argued last time, is the predominant greenhouse gas in the
Earth's atmosphere in terms of the natural greenhouse effect.
That's true.
People tend to forget that.
When they hear greenhouse effect, they tend to think carbon dioxide, but in fact the natural
greenhouse effect is dominated by water vapor.
Carbon dioxide's important, it's significant, but it's not the dominant greenhouse gas.
The carbon dioxide, though, plays a much greater role in regulating the strength of
the greenhouse gases and the strength of the greenhouse effect.
The reason water vapor is less important in that regard is because water vapor adjusts
itself in the atmosphere almost instantaneously to the conditions in the atmosphere.
If the atmosphere were to warm, for example, causing more evaporation and therefore more
water in the atmosphere, that effect would be felt almost immediately.
The time scales associated with changes in the water content of the atmosphere are on
the order of a week.
What happens to the water?
It evaporates, gets into the atmosphere, within about a week it precipitates back out and
lands on the surface, and so the water vapor content of the atmosphere adjusts very, very
quickly to changing climatic conditions.
Not so carbon dioxide, particularly not so carbon dioxide, and I'm going to present
you some reasons in the next lecture about precisely why that is and have you come to
an understanding of why carbon dioxide is so unique.
But for the present, the important point is this.
Changes in the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere are most significant in causing
changes in climate, we think, and I'm going to show you why precisely we think that.
So although water vapor is the most important natural greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide plays
a much bigger role in regulating climate.
So what we'd like to know about is what the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere has
looked like over time, and how are we going to measure that?
Well, if we want to go substantially far back in time, those very same ice cores that gave
us these isotopic temperature measurements, the measurements of temperature based on
the ratio of oxygen or hydrogen isotopes, the heavier isotopes being more slow to evaporate
and more soon to precipitate out, that giving us an indication of temperature at the time
the precipitation fell that has now become ice, we can more easily measure the carbon
dioxide content of the atmosphere at that same time because trapped in that ice are
small air bubbles, and they contain, if you will, fossil air from the time that that ice
was formed.
Now, there are some subtleties here, as always in science.
For example, that air diffuses somewhat through the ice, and there are corrections that have
to be applied for that, and scientists know about these corrections and they believe they're
applying them correctly.
So if you want to get precise dating of the carbon dioxide bubbles, you have to apply
a little bit of a correction.
We know about that, we understand that, and when we do that, we can get a record of past
atmospheric composition, in particular, past carbon dioxide levels, and how do we measure
that?
Well, we measure it in concentration, typically in a measure called parts per million, PPM,
sometimes for even rarer gases in parts per billion, strictly speaking, you have to specify
something more besides saying parts per million or parts per billion, and you say parts per
million by volume or parts per million by weight or whatever, and when we're talking
about atmospheric gases, it's essentially always parts per million by volume, which
you will sometimes see abbreviated PPMV, and if you want to, just PPM, if you want to picture
what that means is, imagine a milk jug, a one gallon milk jug, and imagine you took
a million of those, and you filled them up with air, and if you had done this in 1750,
before the industrial revolution started, and before humankind started burning fossil
fuels in abundance, you would have found that out of those million milk jugs, each
a gallon in size, each containing air, if you had separated out the atmospheric constituents
in the pre-industrial era, about 280 of those milk jugs would have contained carbon dioxide.
That's what it means when I say the pre-industrial concentration of carbon dioxide was about 280
parts per million.
I mean, of all the volume in the air, by volume, about 280 gallons out of every million gallons
was carbon dioxide.
That number's changed, and we'll talk about that change in number subsequently in the
lectures where I talk about the human influence on climate.
But until humankind began putting a lot of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, the amount
we had, the concentration, was about 280 parts per million PPM, and that's what that means.
So what we would like to do now is consider those same ice cores that I showed you data
from earlier, and I showed you at that point only temperature, and we're going to look
now at both temperature and carbon dioxide.
So I want to show a graph again, horizontal axis.
This is a graph you've seen before.
Horizontal axis is the time in thousands of years before the present.
I'm going to show you one cycle of that repeating roughly 100,000 year periodicity ice age cycle.
So we've seen this graph before.
It shows the deviation in temperature from the present, which is red as zero on the horizontal
axis.
The deviation in degrees Celsius.
You'll remember there was a number I wanted you to walk away from this course with, and
that number was the rough difference between the present and sort of the middle era of
an ice age, and that was on the order of six or eight degrees Celsius.
You can quibble about the numbers.
So that sort of sets the scale for the temperature variation.
And you saw that characteristic pattern that repeated again over about 500,000 years of
a fairly steep rise into these interglacial periods of moderate temperatures, the kind
of temperatures the earth is experiencing now, followed by a long decline into this
cool ice age period.
And there's a lot of fluctuations within that ice age.
It's not a smooth decline.
It's not a steady cold temperature, a lot of fluctuations, and then something triggers
this rapid warming.
We've seen that before, and that's what this picture shows.
Now, what if we put on top of that same graph, the carbon dioxide concentration, as measured
from the same ice cores, instead of working here with oxygen isotope ratios or hydrogen
isotope ratios, we're working instead with actual analysis of the air trapped in these
ancient air bubbles, the fossil air that's in there, and we can measure the carbon dioxide
concentration.
And the most remarkable thing about the two graphs, the upper line being the carbon dioxide,
whose scale is at the right, the lower one being the temperature, whose scale is at
the left, the most remarkable thing is they seem to track almost perfectly together.
They have exactly the same shape.
They have that 100,000 year periodicity between highs in temperature and highs in carbon
dioxide.
They have that long decline into lower temperatures and lower carbon dioxide.
So there is a remarkable correlation between the Earth's average temperature, at least
to the extent that these Arctic and Antarctic ice cores reflect Earth's average temperature,
and we think they do.
There's a remarkable correlation between carbon dioxide concentration and global temperature.
And with a lot of other data sets, going back a lot farther in time, we have very good
reason to believe that correlation holds to a very good extent throughout much of Earth's
history, if not all of it.
So there is a very strong and obvious correlation between temperature and carbon dioxide concentration.
Now before you read too much into this, it is not the case here that somehow the Earth's
carbon dioxide content increased, the atmosphere's carbon dioxide content increased, and the
temperature went up with it, and then the carbon dioxide went down, and the temperature
went down with it.
It's not as simple as that.
As I suggested, when I first showed you the temperature graph a few lectures back, there's
a subtle cause and effect thing going on here that involves orbital changes in the parameters
associated with the Earth's orbit.
Some of those changes include the eccentricity of the orbit, how elliptical is it?
Earth's orbit is not a perfect circle.
It's slightly elliptical.
Earth is about 3% closer to the sun, and it's closest approach than it is at its most distance
point.
If I were to ask you, think a second, when is it closest to the sun?
You might want to pause your DVD a second or pause your tape and listen.
Think about that.
Well, I'll answer it for you.
The Earth happens to be closest to the sun in January, and that's when the northern hemisphere
has its winter, and that effect makes the winter summer difference less substantial than it
would be.
If that were to change, and it changes partly with changes in the eccentricity, the ellipticity
of the orbit, it changes partly with changes in the tilt of the Earth's axis at 23 degrees.
That change occurs on about a 41,000-year cycle.
The orbital eccentricity changes on about 100,000 and a 400,000-year cycle.
There's also a change associated with the so-called precession of the equinoxes.
The fact that the North Pole doesn't always point in the same direction, but on a cycle
of about 25,000 years, precesses around.
I showed you why in my video series, Physics in Your Life.
It's like a big top precessing.
It takes 25,000 years.
So the North Star is now in the direction of the Earth's polar axis, and 12,500 years
from now it won't be, and 25,000 years from now it will be again.
All those effects conspire to make subtle changes in the climate.
For example, at some point, the closest point to the sun will be in June.
When that happens, the summer and winter difference will be exaggerated.
You might say, well, doesn't that just reverse in the southern hemisphere?
Well, it doesn't because the southern hemisphere has a lot less land, a lot more water, and
so the effects are different.
So there are all these subtle effects.
So what we believe happens to trigger this simultaneous change in carbon dioxide and temperature
is there are these orbital effects.
They're small, but they're regular.
They're periodic.
They're big effects on, or small effects on the Earth's orbit, but they're big effects
on the climate because they trigger a small change in temperature.
And then we believe other changes occur.
For example, the oceans get a little warmer.
That means some of the carbon dioxide that's dissolved in the oceans comes out that goes
into the atmosphere.
That makes more greenhouse warming.
That makes more carbon dioxide come out of the atmospheres or the soils.
And there are a host of other changes like this called positive feedback effects that
we believe leapfrog and bring about that fairly rapid rise in both temperature and carbon
dioxide until we reach these interglacial temperature maxima, like we're in right now.
And then gradually as the orbital parameters change a little bit, those conditions go away.
And then gradually, again, working in step, the carbon dioxide goes down and the temperature
goes down and that drives the carbon dioxide down, and they go down step by step.
So it isn't quite that, yes, carbon dioxide increases and so does temperature.
In the long history of the Earth, they go up and down together, and the important point
is they're strongly correlated.
So that's evidence that this greenhouse effect is really happening, that the carbon dioxide
content of the atmosphere helps determine what the temperature of the atmosphere is.
Never mind the fact that the carbon dioxide and the temperature kind of worked on each
other to get up and down in that 100,000 year cycle we've been talking about.
This relationship, we're pretty sure, holds a lot further back.
For example, during the age of the dinosaurs, which was on the order of 100 million years
ago, 60 million years ago, 200 million years ago, that kind of time, we know that warm
climate organisms existed in what are now tropical regions.
CO2 levels then were maybe 1,000 parts per million, maybe about four times what they
were before the start of the industrial era, and the temperatures were far higher than
anything the planet is looking at now.
Over the very longest term in the history of the Earth, it's not so much orbital processes
like I've described here for the ice ages, but geological processes, volcanism, volcanoes
putting gases into the atmosphere, and plate tectonics, the movement of the continents
to different places on the Earth, and the weathering of rocks which can release carbon
into the atmosphere or take carbon out of the atmosphere, those are believed to be the
main drivers of climate over the time scales of hundreds of millions of years and billions
of years.
And we believe and have good evidence that the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere
was high during times when the temperature was also high.
So one of our big pieces of evidence that supports the theory of the greenhouse effect
is this very tight correlation between carbon dioxide and temperature over many, many timescales
in the history of the Earth's atmosphere and climate.
But still it'd be nice to do an experiment.
Well, we can't, as I argued at the beginning of this lecture, but nature has done an experiment
for us, and it's provided us with our neighbor planets, Venus and Mars.
Now you recall I kind of outlined a simple calculation in which I said the Earth receives
energy at the rate of 240 watts per square meter approximately, and it must therefore
get rid of energy at the rate of 240 watts per square meter, and we know the rate at
which a hot thing gets rid of energy by infrared radiation, and that depends on its temperature,
and that sets us up an equation that we can solve for temperature.
Now we can do the same for the other planets, and this gets a little bit subtle, but if
you assume those other planets are basically just chunks of rock with no atmosphere and
you do the same calculation, well Venus is closer to the sun, so you'd expect it to be
warmer.
It turns out that because of that energy loss going as temperature to the fourth, you don't
have to change the temperature very much to compensate for Venus's proximity to the sun.
So if you calculate what Venus's temperature ought to be, given that very simple calculation
I sort of did for Earth or outlined for you for Earth a few lectures ago, you get that
Venus ought to be at about 55 degrees Celsius.
Now that doesn't sound real hot, it's hotter than it is here on Earth, it would not be
comfortable for us, it's nowhere near the boiling point of water on the other hand, which
is 100 degrees Celsius, it's different from Earth, but not dramatically different.
You do the same calculation for Mars, you get something on the order of about minus
50 degrees Celsius, now that's cold, but it's not so cold it would freeze the atmosphere
or something like Pluto, whose atmosphere is frozen on the rocks of the planet's surface.
No, it's cold, but it's not that cold, and that's because Mars is about 50% further from
the sun than the Earth is, so that's why Venus is a bit closer, about two-thirds as far
out as Earth is, so that would explain these relatively minor differences in the temperatures
of these three planets.
However, as I say, nature has provided us with an experiment in the form of the planets
Venus, Earth, and Mars, and Earth of course, if you do that calculation, we already did
that basically, and we found that Earth ought to be at about minus 18 degrees Celsius, zero
degrees Fahrenheit.
So here's the numbers again, minus 50 degrees Celsius for Mars, minus 18 degrees Celsius
for Earth, and getting closer to the sun, about 55 degrees Celsius for Venus.
What are the actual surface temperatures?
Well, we know those well, we have spacecraft roving around the surface of Mars, I've showed
you in the first lecture how we calculate the average surface temperature for the Earth,
we've had spacecraft go through the Venetian atmosphere, we know pretty well the composition
of these planets, of their atmospheres, and so on, and we know what the temperatures are,
the surface temperatures are on these planets.
So if you look at Venus, Earth, and Mars, and look at the calculated temperatures, 55 degrees
Celsius for Venus, minus 18 degrees Celsius for Earth, minus 50 degrees Celsius for Mars,
when you ask what's the actual temperature on these planets, there's a dramatically different
answer for each one.
For Venus it's especially dramatic, Venus actual surface temperature is around 500 degrees
Celsius, far above the boiling point of water, above the melting point of lead, this is a
hot place.
This calculation is way off for Venus, in a way that it wasn't way off for Earth.
What's going on?
You do the calculation for Earth, we already know that the actual temperature is 33 degrees
Celsius, 60 degrees Fahrenheit, warmer than it would be if we didn't account for the greenhouse
effect.
That's why the Earth's average temperature is 15 degrees Celsius, there's a 33 degrees
Celsius greenhouse effect for Earth.
Mars actual temperature is actually, it's pretty close to the calculated temperature,
it's certainly the closest of all of them, it's actually a little bit cooler, and there
are some subtle effects going on here.
I have included in these calculations the effect of reflection of sunlight from Earth
and Mars in doing these calculations.
I haven't included it for Venus, Venus it turns out is so cloudy that it reflects nearly
all the sunlight coming onto it, and in fact if you did a naive calculation that said
somehow Venus reflects almost all the sunlight that comes onto it, but it doesn't have any
atmosphere, an impossibility, but if you did that calculation you would get a calculated
temperature for Venus that's actually less than Earth's temperature, because Venus reflects
so much of its sunlight, but that's not what's happening.
So what is going on here?
Well, we already know what's going on for Earth, we know that Earth has about a 33 degrees
Celsius natural greenhouse effect, that's the effect of the greenhouse gases in Earth's
atmosphere blocking the outgoing infrared or more subtly absorbing the outgoing infrared,
re-rating it to the surface and then the surface has to be warmer to get rid of that energy.
What's going on in Mars?
Well Mars has an atmosphere that is about 1% the density of Earth's, it's a very tenuous
atmosphere, it's hardly any atmosphere at all, and it exerts essentially no greenhouse
effect.
And so Mars climate is not significantly altered by a natural greenhouse effect on Mars.
But you look at Venus, Venus's atmosphere is 100 times the density of Earth's, huge
amount of gas there, and it's 96% carbon dioxide, where Earth's before humankind began
fiddling with it was about 280 parts per million, Venus's if I said it in parts per million
would be 960,000 parts per million, 96% carbon dioxide, a very powerful greenhouse gas.
Absent that Venus's proximity to the sun would make it only mildly warmer than Earth, but
it was enough mildly warmer that a lot of Venus's early surface water we believe evaporated
forming a water vapor based strong greenhouse effect, and that caused a cascade of events
that eventually resulted in a lot of carbon dioxide based greenhouse effect in this strong
carbon dioxide atmosphere, and Venus has what we call a one away greenhouse effect.
The greenhouse effect went wild, it built on itself through positive feedback mechanisms,
and brought Venus up to this impossibly inhospitable 500 degree Celsius temperature it now has.
So Venus and Earth are two very similar planets of the same size, they're the same mass, they're
approximately the same distance from their star, but that distance difference was enough
to cause this runaway greenhouse effect to occur on Venus, and Venus now has this inhospitable
temperature due to its 96% carbon dioxide atmosphere.
We are pretty sure that a runaway greenhouse effect is impossible on Earth, so don't worry
about the oceans boiling away here on Earth.
That doesn't mean we shouldn't worry about greenhouse warming on Earth, but we are unlikely
to go into that runaway state that Venus is in.
So I would argue that our neighboring planets provide this natural experiment that confirms
for us that the theory of the greenhouse effect is not some cluged together explanation
to tell us what's happening on Earth, but it's kind of a universal principle that talks
about planets that have atmospheres and describes the climates of those planets in terms of
the composition of their atmosphere, and particularly the role that carbon dioxide plays in establishing
the natural greenhouse effect in those planets.
So that's the theory of the greenhouse effect, I introduced that in the last lecture, and
this is the confirmation for the theory of the greenhouse effect.
The basing on firm scientific principles, the correlation between Earth's temperature
and its carbon dioxide concentration, and finally the tail of three planets, the greenhouse
effects being very different on the three planets, Mars having almost none, Earth having
a modest 33 degrees Celsius greenhouse effect, and Venus heating up by hundreds of degrees
Celsius because of its greenhouse effect.
Now let me pause and get a little bit here into philosophy of science, because isn't
all this just a theory?
That phrase just a theory is being banded about a lot these days to talk about scientific
theories ranging from greenhouse warming to evolution, and I want to say a little bit
about the phrase just a theory, I think it's a misleading phrase, just a theory.
What's a theory?
In science a theory is not just some hypothesis or vague idea someone puts out and says maybe
this is true, a theory in science is a coherent body of principles, principles, big underlying
principles that behaves some body of scientific knowledge, describes some body of scientific
knowledge, and particularly describes many different instances, for example the theory
of the greenhouse effect describing what's going on on three very different planets.
That's an example of explaining a broad range of scientific phenomena, and these theories
gain credibility as they're supported by evidence from observations, by laboratory experiments,
and the theories are rejected if physical reality conspires to disprove the theory.
So established theories, theories that have been around for a long time have survived
many many many tests, because every bit of scientific evidence has to corroborate the
theory or at least not contradict it, and if any bit comes along that contradicts it
and can be repeatedly verified to contradict it, then the theory has to be replaced.
There are many established theories that have survived these tests, and let me just give
you a few examples.
The theory of relativity in physics, which I describe in my course Einstein's Relativity
and the Quantum Revolution, my teaching company course Modern Physics for Non-Scientists is
the subtitle, that deals with phenomena ranging from the overall structure of the universe
to astrophysical events to the functioning of the global positioning system.
If we didn't understand Einstein's theory of relativity, we wouldn't be able to explain
any of those diverse phenomena from the origin of the universe to the behavior of the global
positioning system satellites.
That's a remarkably solidly established theory, no reputable scientist doubts that relativity
is part of a correct description of physical reality.
That's a long established theory.
In biology, the theory of evolution, which describes how species evolved through the
evolutionary process, is a very well established solid theory.
In geology, and this is one of the newcomers to this list of big theories, the theory of
plate tectonics, the idea that the continents move around over the surface of the earth
over time, driven by convective motions in the earth's mantle.
That's a relative newcomer, but that has formed a body of theory that then coherently
describes a great many phenomena that we observe in the structure of our planet.
And I would add to that set of big theories, not quite as big as evolution or relativity
or maybe even as plate tectonics, but nevertheless as well established and based on scientific
principles and explaining a broad range of observed phenomena is the theory of greenhouse
effect that describes the fundamental principles that establish planetary climates.
Now I want to emphasize one other thing I said in the first lecture.
A theory doesn't have to have explanations for absolutely everything in order to qualify
as a solidly established body of evidence.
Evolution doesn't describe every step in the evolution of every species.
Plate tectonics doesn't describe absolutely everything that happened.
We still don't know what goes on inside black holes because relativity doesn't answer
that for us.
We still don't understand every aspect of the climate system.
What's the role of the carbon that's coming out of the soils or methane from plants?
We don't understand all that.
It doesn't matter in terms of the coherence and validity of the big picture idea.
Climate scientists don't understand every detail of the climate system, but to point
to a detail we don't understand is not to invalidate the theory of the greenhouse effect
any more than to say I don't know exactly how this monkey species evolved and I don't
know exactly what's going on in this black hole invalidate the long-established theories
of relativity or evolution.
So there we are with a solidly established understanding of what brings about planetary
climates and an essential key to that is the well-established and scientifically understood
greenhouse effect.
