lecture six, global recycling. Well, we've established that greenhouse gases, substances
that absorb infrared radiation going out from the surface of the planet, play a major role
in establishing a planet's climate. And the greenhouse gases that I've particularly emphasized
as being important for the natural greenhouse effect are water vapor and carbon dioxide.
So we want to ask a little bit more about what these substances do in their natural
behavior in the planetary system, because as you already know for water, they don't
just sit there in the atmosphere, water comes out as precipitation, it's re-evaporated,
it flows through rivers, it goes into underground water, aquifers, and so on. What do these
substances do? We really have some sense of the water cycle already, but what about
carbon particularly? So this lecture is going to emphasize the role of carbon, the cycling
of carbon through the earth system, and to a lesser extent water, because we already
understand most of what we need to know about water. But carbon dioxide and carbon in particular
has some very subtle aspects to its behavior that are really important to understand if
you want to grasp why it is that we humans have the capability we do to interfere with
the climate system, because you might argue that we just play a very small role in all
this, and the numbers suggest that we play a pretty small role. How can we end up making
a major impact on climate? I want to give you some detailed background science, particularly
on the behavior of carbon, that will help you to understand this. I want to begin though
with a distinction, an important distinction. With respect to matter, earth is basically
a closed system. What I mean by that is that any say oxygen that the earth possesses, it's
probably possessed since its origin, and that oxygen may be assuming different forms, sometimes
it's part of water, H2O, sometimes it's O2 in the atmosphere, sometimes it's incorporated
into living things in the carbohydrate rates we eat as foods. It may move around and change
its chemical state, but it's still the same oxygen the earth has had all the time. The
earth has iron in its core, and throughout its lithosphere, its rocky material, some
of that iron gets incorporated into the hemoglobin of our blood and then returns to the natural
systems when we die and decay. That's iron cycling around through the natural system.
Most materials do that. They undergo natural cycles, but with respect to these materials,
the earth is a closed system. I want to contrast that with energy, which has been an important
player in the first part of the course and is going to become an important player in
the last part. With respect to energy, earth is not a closed system. Energy comes into
earth, almost all of it from the sun, as we'll see in lecture 10, not quite all of it, but
almost all of it comes from the sun. It goes back out into space in the form of infrared
radiation, and to the extent that we are in energy balance, and we are very, very nearly
in energy balance, even if it's not perfect, to the extent that we're in energy balance,
all the energy that comes to us from the sun is radiated back into space. So the earth
processes energy as sort of a once through system. The earth is not a closed system with
respect to energy, but with respect to matter, with the exception of a few molecules that
occasionally escape off the upper atmosphere into space, and some meteoritic dust which
comes down to the atmosphere, and the occasional gas from a comet tail that we pass through,
or the occasional spacecraft that we send out into the cosmos, never to return to earth,
with those minor exceptions, the materials that make up our planet and its atmosphere
and its oceans and its rocks, and so on, cycle continuously through the earth atmosphere
or ocean system. And we need to understand those cycles, because it's when some materials,
particularly water and carbon dioxide are in the atmosphere, that they exert a greenhouse
effect, and when they're not in the atmosphere, they don't. So we need to understand these
cycles. Now there are lots of cycles that are important, as I've suggested. In particular
for climate, the water cycle and the carbon cycle are important. The nitrogen cycle turns
out to be important. I mentioned nitrogen, an atmospheric constituent that's largely
inert, but it does play an important role, for example, in fertilizing plants, and they're
plants that can take nitrogen out of the atmosphere and incorporate it into plant matter, and
that makes protein eventually. Lightning strikes can fix nitrogen from the atmosphere into
other nitrogen compounds. So there is some cycling of nitrogen through the system, phosphorus,
they're nutrient cycles through the system, sulfur, and all these things have some effect
when they get into the atmosphere, and so they affect climate. But the important ones
are water vapor and carbon dioxide, and so those are the only ones I'm going to talk
about, and that's because they are present in fairly substantial amounts in the atmosphere
compared to many of the other trace substances, and they are strong greenhouse gases. Although
what I mean by strong, I'm going to have to explain a little more in a subsequent lecture.
So you really know already pretty much what you need to know about the water cycle or
the hydrologic cycle. It's basically the cycle whereby water evaporates from the surface
of oceans and lakes, rises into the atmosphere carrying with it that latent heat that I described
earlier, maybe moves to a different geographical location, falls as precipitation, typically
flows down through the system of rivers and returns to the ocean. So it really is a cycle.
That's the water cycle. It's solar energy that ultimately drives that cycle, providing
the energy that evaporates the water, making molecules move faster and therefore able to
escape the liquid surface and go into the atmosphere as water vapor. That's what drives
it. And that makes the rate of evaporation very strongly dependent on temperature. In
fact, it's more strongly dependent than you might think. The rate of evaporation goes
up very dramatically with temperature until you reach the boiling point, and evaporation
then occurs extraordinarily rapidly as the water turns almost immediately into steam.
There's still very little water in the atmosphere. I've mentioned that depending on the relative,
depending on the humidity, the water in the atmosphere, maybe as much as a few percent
or maybe a fraction of a percent, but that amount is tiny compared to the water that's
stored in the oceans and in the cryosphere, that is the body of frozen water. So the liquid
water, surface waters, the underground waters, and the waters locked up in ice constitute
a far greater fraction of the water. It's only a tiny amount of the total water on earth
that's in the atmosphere. And as I mentioned before, it responds extremely quickly to changing
atmospheric conditions. If it gets a little warmer, we get more evaporation. If it gets
a little cooler, we get less evaporation, and the water vapor in the atmosphere responds.
And one way of thinking about that is to ask this question, how long would a typical water
molecule remain in the atmosphere? And the answer, that's called the resonance time,
the answer for a typical water molecule is a time on the order of a week. So if a water
molecule gets evaporated from the surface waters, it finds itself in the atmosphere and it's
likely on average to remain there for a week. Now that's an average. Some water molecule
may come out a day later. Someone may be up there for a month. But on the average, the
sort of time scale for water vapor to live in the atmosphere or stay in the atmosphere
is about a week. And it's up there and it has not only its waterness, it also has this
latent energy associated with the fact that it's in the atmosphere as a vapor, and it
can give up that energy if it condenses. It may still be in the atmosphere as a cloud
droplet, but eventually it precipitates out as rain or snow. So the water cycle does two
things. It contributes to a greenhouse gas that's in the atmosphere, but it cycles rapidly
so the amount of that greenhouse gas can change very rapidly with temperature. And I'll have
more to say about that in subsequent lectures when I talk about the human induced greenhouse
effect. And it also contributes to the flow of energy between Earth's surface and atmosphere.
So that's the water cycle. And you've all seen pictures of the water cycle with mountains
and the water falling down and running down the rivers. And that's pretty well known.
The important point I want to emphasize about it is that the water cycle is pretty fast,
that water cycles out of the atmosphere on time scales on the order of about a week.
And by the way, some of the other cycles I mentioned, the phosphorus cycle, the sulfur
cycle and so on, they also have characteristic time scales for the time that, say, sulfur
compounds remain in the atmosphere. It's pretty easy to give an unambiguous answer for some
of those substances. Carbon is different. Carbon cycles on many, many different time
scales. And so if someone asks, how long does carbon live in the atmosphere, that's a rather
subtle question. And I want to spend the rest of this lecture exploring the carbon cycle
so we can come to understand the answer to that question, because in the back of my mind
is something that's been implicit in everything I've said so far, but I haven't really talked
about explicitly. And that is, if we change the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere,
if we increase it in particular, we will strengthen the greenhouse effect and we will
cause the planet to warm. Now that isn't describing any details, but it's describing the basic
physics of what we should expect happens if we put more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
And it therefore becomes crucial to understand if we do put more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere,
how long is it going to stay there? How quickly can we turn it off? If we cause the planet
to warm up and we don't like that, how quickly can we reverse the situation? If the carbon
comes out of the atmosphere in a week like water vapor does, no problem. If it comes
out in a year or five years, maybe no problem. But if it takes a thousand years, maybe a
problem. So we want to explore that. And the answer I'm going to tell you right off the
bat is ambiguous in a subtle, important way that you need to understand to understand why
it is we worry about anthropogenic carbon. Carbon cycle is complicated because it involves
interactions among a whole lot of regions. The atmosphere interacts directly with the
land surface with the soils and rocks. The atmosphere interacts with the surface of the
ocean, particularly through carbon dissolving in the ocean and coming back out of the ocean.
And most importantly, perhaps the carbon in the atmosphere interacts with the biosphere.
That is with the living content of the earth by being taken up by plants and being breathed
out by plants and animals as they respire. And we want to look at all these processes.
There are even geological processes on the longest time scales where carbon interacts
in the atmosphere, interacts with carbon in the earth. So the rest of this lecture is
going to focus on the carbon cycle. And we're going to look at one diagram that really sums
up the entire carbon cycle. And it's a diagram that basically shows amounts of carbon stored
in different regions of the earth system. For example, the atmosphere has stored carbon
in it. These places that store carbon are called reservoirs. So the atmosphere is a reservoir
of carbon. The biota, the plants and animals are a reservoir of carbon. The surface waters
of the ocean are a reservoir of carbon. The deep ocean is a different reservoir of carbon,
different for reasons I'll describe. And among these reservoirs are flows of carbon that
go back and forth. And so to understand the question, how long will carbon stay in the
atmosphere, we have to understand all these flows that take place between the atmosphere
and the biosphere and the atmosphere and the soils and the atmosphere and the ocean
and the upper ocean and the lower ocean and so on. And I will say right at the outset
that neither the numbers I'm showing in this diagram nor all the details of the carbon
cycle are fully understood. A former student of mine is one of the experts on this and
she will tell you that there really is no answer to some of these questions yet. Scientists
are still actively studying parts of the carbon cycle. But we know enough again to get a pretty
big picture and to get it pretty quantitatively accurate. So here's what the picture looks
like. The picture looks like these reservoirs, the atmosphere, the surface oceans, the deep
oceans, the biota and so on. And they contain certain amounts of carbon. Now I have to give
you an aside here on the measurement systems I'm going to use in discussing this carbon
cycle. And I'm going to discuss in this lecture only the natural carbon cycle. In a subsequent
lecture I'm going to show you how we humans have altered the carbon cycle so you can understand
that. But everything I'm saying here is about the carbon cycle as it existed before human
beings began modifying it basically by burning fossil fuels which produce carbon dioxide
which goes into the atmosphere. But before I do that a word about measurement systems.
The units in this picture are either in gigatons, G-I-G-A-T-O-N-N-E-S, abbreviated capital
G, lower case T. Gigatons if they're a reservoir with an amount of carbon or gigatons per year
if it's a flow. So we've got two things going on here. We've got reservoirs that contain
amounts of carbon and we've got flows that involve carbon moving from one reservoir to
another. The amounts are in gigatons and the flows are in gigatons per year. Now what's
a gigaton and what's it a gigaton of? Well giga is a prefix that means a billion. You
probably ten years ago wouldn't have known that when your computer speeds were measured
in megahertz but today your computer speed if you've got a good computer is certainly
measured in gigahertz, billions of cycles of operations per second, giga means a billion.
It's the opposite of nano which means a billionth. Everybody's a buzz about nanotechnology, technology
at the billionth of a meter scale. Well giga is the opposite, it's a billion. So giga means
a billion, a gigaton is a billion tons. What's a ton? Well that's also a little bit subtle.
In the United States a ton is two thousand pounds and it's spelled T-O-N. In the rest
of the world a ton is a metric ton, a ton in the metric system, the system international
of units, SI system and in the metric system a ton is a nice round number, a thousand kilograms.
But a kilogram is about two point two pounds and therefore a metric ton is about twenty
two hundred pounds and therefore a metric ton, twenty two hundred pounds, a thousand
kilograms and a U.S. type ton about two thousand two thousand pounds are about the
same. Now they're different by ten percent but that's small enough I'm not going to worry
about that difference. So from now on when I say ton you're welcome to think English
type ton if the kind of tons we use in the American system of units if you like and you're
welcome to think metric ton it doesn't matter because to within ten percent they're basically
the same. So I'm talking about gigatons mostly they're the units used to measure global carbon
flows and global carbon reservoir quantities. You may hear us other scientists especially
biologists talking not so much about gigatons but pettograms and you may wonder what on
earth the relation between those two is. Well pett is a prefix in the metric system that
means ten to the power fifteen and so it turns out that a pettogram ten to the fifteen grams
is the same as a gigaton which is a billion that is ten to the nine kilograms and a kilogram
is a thousand grams. Anyway a gigaton and a gigaton and a pettogram are basically the
same thing. So because a gigaton is a billion tons a billion tons is a billion thousand
kilograms and a kilogram is a thousand grams it all works out a gigaton and a pettogram
are the same things if you happen to hear those units. I'm going to talk gigatons here
and then I'm going to ask the last question gigatons of what and the answer is gigatons
of carbon not of carbon dioxide and that's an important thing to get straight whenever
you see someone saying oh we Americans are responsible for X many tons of carbon dioxide
every year. You have to ask yourself are we talking about tons of carbon or tons of carbon
dioxide. Because carbon when it's tied up as carbon dioxide has those two extra oxygens
with it and a carbon dioxide molecule weighs let's see I'd have to figure this out the
atomic weight of oxygen is sixteen so I got two oxygens that's thirty two the atomic
weight of carbon is twelve that's forty four weighs forty four atomic units roughly carbon
weighs twelve so carbon dioxide a carbon dioxide molecule weighs forty four over twelve times
as much as a carbon molecule. So if I have carbon as carbon dioxide the amount of carbon
dioxide I have is forty four twelve or three point something times as much as the amount
of carbon I've got. However in the carbon cycle carbon is not staying as carbon dioxide
it may be taking different forms in your body it's in the form of complicated organic compounds
in the soils it's in all kinds of forms in the rocks it's weathered into different things
it's calcium carbonate in the shells of marine organisms it takes different forms and so
it makes sense to talk about the carbon cycle not as being about carbon dioxide but as about
being carbon which sometimes but not always takes the form of carbon dioxide. So in my
diagram the reservoir amounts are amounts of carbon in gigatons billions of tons a metric
or American doesn't matter English and the flows are in gigatons per year of carbon if
you want to convert for instance the atmospheric carbon content of five hundred and sixty
gigatons and remember again that's natural pre-industrial if you want to convert that
to carbon dioxide because it's mostly but not all in the form of carbon dioxide you'd
multiply by forty four twelfths and you'd get the amount of carbon dioxide in gigatons so
that's what this picture is all about and let's take a look at it in detail. First of all there's
a rapid part of the carbon cycle and that involves the exchanges between air and water between
air and living things and between air and soil. One of the easiest exchanges to think about is
what happens when you open a bottle of soda and the carbon comes fizzing out into the atmosphere
or you leave a bottle of soda it gets warm and even more carbon dioxide comes out it's lost its
fizz. Carbon dioxide dissolves in water the warmer the water the easier it is for it to dissolve
and so there's a constant flow of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere dissolving in the surface
waters of the ocean. However there's a nearly equal flow in the opposite direction and in my
diagram these are represented by a couple of arrows upward and downward representing the
exchange of carbon dioxide between the air and the surface waters and you'll notice the numbers
associated with those flows are almost identical. There's some slight imbalances here but they're
all compensated for if you add up all these numbers. So that is the natural carbon cycle there's
the one of the easiest parts to understand the exchange of carbon dioxide between the surface
waters and the atmosphere and that's roughly in balance within a few gigatons. What are some
other aspects of that? Well plants play a major role in the carbon cycle. Plants take carbon
dioxide out of the atmosphere and they use carbon dioxide which you can think of as burnt carbon
it's combined with oxygen. They basically use solar energy to basically unburn that carbon
separating the carbon from oxygen combining with hydrogen from water and making the so-called
carbohydrates the simple sugars and other carbon hydrogen oxygen compounds that we use as fuels
and that living things in general use as fuels and this diagram shows that photosynthesis
removes about 110 gigatons a year of carbon from the atmosphere each year and in the process
the plants release oxygen to the atmosphere and the original photosynthetic plants are
the source of the oxygen that's in the atmosphere. Earth is an unusual planet to have a strongly
oxygen atmosphere because oxygen is very reactive chemically and it won't stay there for long
unless something is replenishing it. What's replenishing it are the green plants through
the process of photosynthesis and I'm going to focus a minute on that number 110 gigatons
per year that's a big number. It's a lot bigger than the amount of carbon dioxide of carbon
that we humans are putting in the atmosphere from burning fossil fuels much bigger but
for reasons I'm trying to show you in this lecture the amount we put in is still significant
I'll come to that in the next lecture. Now what do plants and animals do with this energy?
Well they use it for cellular activity they use it for big animals like ourselves that
can move around they use it for actual motion the energy we get all comes from quote burning
those carbohydrates undergoing chemical reactions that convert the carbon and hydrogen that are
tied up in the carbohydrates to carbon dioxide and water we exude the carbon dioxide and
water that's why your car steams up when it's cold on the windows and you're breathing
out you're breathing out water where was the water come from it came from the oxygen you
breathed in combining with the hydrogen and the hydrocarbons there's also carbon dioxide
building up in the car that came from the carbon that was in the fuels. So respiration
this process of respiration returns some of the carbon from photosynthesis back to the
atmosphere something like roughly half of it goes back for that reason from the plants
themselves and roughly the other half goes back from the processes of respiration in
animals which have eaten the plants and also from decay of waste material that we excrete
or from dead organisms decaying and together all those processes respiration waste material
and decay of dead organisms return basically all the carbon not quite all but basically
all the carbon to the atmosphere and back it goes and so the carbon cycle is almost
closed right there in that process. Now some of the carbon ends up getting stored in soils
in the surface soils associated with the presence of living things or dead matter so there's
a reservoir of carbon in the soils also a reservoir of carbon in the plants and in the
animals not as much in the animals as in the plants and very very very crudely the sizes
of those reservoirs the biospheric reservoir and the soil reservoir are roughly the same
order of magnitude as the size of the atmospheric reservoir the plants and animals are maybe
on the order of 500 gigatons maybe a factor of two different I'm not sure the biologists
aren't absolutely sure we could study the earth enough to get that number but somewhere
in that ballpark there's probably more in the soil maybe a couple thousand gigatons
but it's still that roughly same order of magnitude. So we understand about those flows.
Now we could ask a question are there with a couple of other things I should mention
here in this in this rapidly cycling part of the carbon cycle the slight imbalance in
carbon associated with the cycling between the atmosphere and the biosphere system a
very small amount of carbon ends up in the rivers and is carried into the oceans so that
sort of couples the ocean and atmosphere part of the carbon cycle with the biosphere and
atmosphere part of the carbon cycle which includes both marine organisms and terrestrial
organisms. So the question we might ask is how long does a typical carbon molecule stay
in the atmosphere as carbon dioxide in the context of what I've just been discussing
the rapidly cycling carbon removed from the atmosphere by photosynthesis carbon goes
back from respiration carbon comes out of the oceans when they get warmer carbon goes
back into the oceans how long does an average carbon dioxide molecule stay in the atmosphere
because of those processes alone the average carbon dioxide the average carbon molecule
stays in the atmosphere only about five years only about five years now that's a lot longer
than the one week for a water molecule but it's fairly short in the grand scheme of things
so why do we worry about excess carbon going into the atmosphere here's why and this is
the subtle point the key point we need to understand any carbon we put in the atmosphere
joins that rapidly cycling system cycling through the biosphere the ocean surface waters
and back into the atmosphere so of the carbon we put in the atmosphere it turns out that
roughly if we put a kilogram of carbon in the atmosphere or a ton of carbon in the atmosphere
about half of that ton ends up cycling through that system continually so even though the
carbon dioxide molecules we put in the atmosphere remain there only about five years on average
they are rapidly cycled back at least about half of them so if we put a ton of carbon
in the atmosphere turns out about half of it ends up in the soils and the ocean waters
and stays there and we don't fully understand that breakdown and that's an area of active
research it's called the carbon sink where does the carbon go but the other half that
we put in the atmosphere even though it's pulled out by processes like photosynthesis
it quickly goes back and so when we add carbon to the atmosphere it stays there for a long
time and the five years I talked about as being the typical residence time for carbon
in the atmosphere is misleading it's correct but it's misleading because it suggests that
while we put carbon in it will all be gone after five years it won't be all gone because
it will be participating in that cycle and it will go right back into the atmosphere
so the key idea is carbon is going to stay in the atmosphere a lot longer than its five
year residence time how much longer that depends on two other processes that are involved
in the very long term removal of carbon from the atmosphere and the two important processes
both occur in the ocean and they take carbon from the surface waters down into the very
deep ocean where it really has a hard time escaping there are about thirty nine thousand
gigatons of carbon in the deep ocean a vast amount compared to anything that's anywhere
else in the carbon cycle and it has very little role to play at least in this short term climate
cycle how does stuff get down there well one of the main drivers is something called the
biological pump if you're a tiny marine plankton or even a fish or something you eventually
die and you eventually sink to the bottom and you've got carbon that was ultimately
fixed from atmospheric carbon by photosynthetic processes whether you're a plant or an animal
and when you sink to the bottom you take that carbon with you and that carbon is removed
permanently from the rapidly cycling part of the carbon cycle that's called the biological
pump and that takes down something on the order of about ten or eleven gigatons per
year there's another process called upwelling two other processes called upwelling and diffusion
that bring up deep waters and bring some carbon back up into the surface waters and that brings
up almost as much as the biological pump pumps downward the biological pumping this decay
of of dead organisms but not quite and so there's a net removal of about two gigatons
of carbon to the deep ocean and at least on time scales of hundreds to thousands to
hundreds of thousands of years that carbon is lost and so there is a net way of removing
carbon from the system but because that flow is so slow it takes hundreds to thousands
of years to remove carbon from the cycle in fact I've seen a recent study that suggests
that some small fraction of the carbon that we might put in the atmosphere will remain
for time scales up to 30 or 35,000 years that's a long time so if you say what is the resonance
time for carbon in the atmosphere to be honest I have to say it's five years roughly but
then I have to add but the carbon remains in the rapidly cycling system of the atmosphere
the biota the surface waters and so on for time scales and this is where it gets ambiguous
but anything from hundreds to thousands of years is a good answer there a nice even number
is a thousand years some people use 300 years there is no exact number for that some of
it remains a lot longer some of it shorter but somewhere on the order of hundreds to
thousand or a few thousand years is the typical resonance time for carbon not in the atmosphere
alone but in that rapidly cycling time that's the time it will take to remove any carbon
we add from that system that is the big huge key idea here that you have to understand
to realize why any anthropogenic carbon affects the carbon cycle and the atmospheric carbon
concentration and therefore the concentration of greenhouse gases and therefore the strength
of the greenhouse effect for a long time now there are two additional processes I should
just point out that occur on much longer time scales one of the important in the natural
climate cycle and that is over long times this carbon that sunk to the deep ocean form
sedimentary rocks those rocks are eventually brought up through tectonic processes they're
brought to the surface again where they can weather and release their carbon or they're
brought up through volcanoes and the carbon is eventually released into the atmosphere
for volcanism so over the time scale of millions and hundreds of millions of years geological
processes complete the cycle much more slowly and return that carbon was moved to the deep
ocean the one other part which is not terribly significant naturally but is terribly significant
for human beings is that a very tiny fraction of the carbon that is removed from the atmosphere
by photosynthetic plants and maybe gets incorporated into animals or maybe stays in plants and
it dies and gets buried before it has a chance to decay and return its carbon to the atmosphere
so it too doesn't participate in that rapidly cycling part of the carbon cycle but instead
remains buried underground where it undergoes chemical processes which eventually turn
it into the fossil fuels coal oil and natural gas and those fuels have in them stored the
solar energy that was fixed by photosynthetic organisms as they took that carbon out of
the atmosphere and used solar energy to make it into new chemical compounds that's where
the fossil fuels came from we don't know exactly how much fossil fuels are one guess
is there might be 10,000 gigatons there might be half that there might be twice that we
don't know if we knew we would better be able to predict how we're going to do in the next
few decades but that's where the fossil fuels came from and they play very little role in
the natural climate system because basically just sit there under the ground what we human
beings have done and this will be the subject of the next lecture is a great deal with that
carbon reservoir associated with the fossil fuels and that process so let me pause now
we're through the first half of the course and I'm going to give you a very quick review
of what we have learned in the first half of this course because now we're going to
move to the anthropogenic part the part about human beings and our role in climate we know
that the earth is warming we know that it's been warming especially much in recent decades
we've seen that from the 150 year thermometer record we've seen it from ice melt from changes
in weather patterns from changes in species behavior from species ranges from from springtime
events and so on we know it from paleo climate reconstructions which suggests for example
that the warming is unprecedented over the past millennium that the longer term shows
this periodic pattern of ice ages and warm spells that a planet's climate is established
by this balance of incoming solar energy and outgoing infrared radiation and that balance
is affected by the presence of atmospheric greenhouse gases that make it harder for the
infrared to escape and therefore warm the surface for earth we know that water vapor
and carbon dioxide cause a natural warming of about 33 degrees Celsius and we know that
there's a close correlation between temperature and atmospheric CO2 concentration and finally
we know that carbon cycles through the earth atmosphere system and as it cycles through
the system it does so in a way that although the cycling is rapid and results in carbon
remaining in the atmosphere itself only about say five years that cycling occurs rapidly
and the carbon is returned to the atmosphere or much of it is returned to the atmosphere
and it's only those very slow processes that bring carbon into the deep ocean that eventually
remove it and it takes those processes at least centuries and in some cases thousands
of years to remove the carbon from the system so the bottom line of the first half of the
course is carbon dioxide in the atmosphere causes a greenhouse effect which warms our
planet we know that to be true and we also know enough about the carbon cycle to know
that any carbon we put in the atmosphere is going to remain there for a long time.
