Welcome to the second half of the course, in particular to lecture 7, the Human Factor.
The title here is pretty much the theme for the rest of the course because we're now looking
at what effect human beings have had on climate and what our evidence is that we are in fact
influencing the climate of today.
Let me begin with a quick review of a couple points made in earlier lectures.
In the previous lecture you saw the carbon cycle, the natural carbon cycle, you saw how
carbon cycles between the atmosphere, living things, the oceans, the soils and some of
it is removed eventually into the deep ocean.
You saw in particular a very important fact about the carbon cycle, namely that any additional
carbon that gets into the ocean surface atmosphere, biosphere, part of the carbon cycle remains
there for time scales up to hundreds to thousands of years.
Even though carbon itself lives in the atmosphere for only about five years, the rapid cycling
means that any additional carbon we put into that part of the cycle would be with us for
a long time.
Earlier lectures showed also how atmospheric carbon dioxide levels and temperatures are
very well correlated.
What that leads us to believe is that if we humans put additional carbon in the atmosphere
not only will it stay there for a significant time, but it will also cause earth temperature
to rise.
Without going into any more details at this point, I want to emphasize that that conclusion
is basically physical science applied to a very simple system of the earth and the atmosphere.
Now there are a lot of complications in that system, I can't tell you immediately how much
the temperature is going to go up, but it makes perfectly good physical sense that if
we put additional carbon in the atmosphere it will remain there for a long time and it
will cause earth temperature to rise.
That rise in temperature associated with additional carbon dioxide particularly in the atmosphere
is called the enhanced greenhouse effect.
Where does this additional carbon come from?
The dominant source of the anthropogenic carbon, the carbon that comes from human activities,
is from burning fossil fuels.
That's not the only source of the carbon and that's not the only source of the warming
as we'll see in the course of this lecture, but the dominant source is the combustion
of fossil fuels.
Now I'd like you to think back to the graph that we showed, the diagram that I showed
in the previous lecture of the carbon cycle.
In that diagram we had flows going between the atmosphere and the surface, between the
surface and the atmosphere, between the plants and the atmosphere and so on and so forth.
We had one minor flow that I mentioned at the end that was very insignificant at least
in terms of the quantity of carbon involved and that was the flow of carbon in the form
of dead material that didn't have a chance to decay before it got buried and eventually
became the fossil fuels.
So there's a big reservoir of fossil fuels in the ground that contains a lot of carbon,
about 10,000 gigatons we think.
That reservoir under the natural state of things just sat there under the ground.
We humans have begun tapping that reservoir as the source of most of our energy as I'll
show you in subsequent lectures.
So what would you have to do to alter my picture of the natural carbon cycle?
Well you'd have to add an arrow coming from that fossil fuel reservoir and going up into
the atmosphere.
How big is that arrow?
That arrow represents a flow of about 7 gigatons of carbon per year.
So we human beings through the burning of fossil fuels are putting about 7 gigatons
of carbon or emitting about 7 gigatons of carbon into the atmosphere.
We add another arrow to our diagram, an arrow representing the effects of deforestation
when we cut down forests and the wood subsequently decays and the lack of the absence of the
forest means we aren't taking carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere as much.
All that means an additional roughly 2 gigatons of carbon is going into the atmosphere from
deforestation.
That number is less certain than the number from fossil fuels and I'll give you reasons
soon why we know so much about the fossil carbon.
So we're talking roughly an additional flow of 9 gigatons of carbon from the surface
into the atmosphere or from the buried fossil fuel carbon in that case into the atmosphere
as a result of human activities.
Now that flow, 7 gigatons of fossil fuel carbon and another 2 gigatons from deforestation
is pretty small compared to the magnitude of the carbon flows in that carbon cycle diagram.
110 gigatons a year for example from photosynthesis.
So you might say well this is a minor effect, why do we worry about it?
And again that's why I went into such detail in the carbon cycle last lecture.
The reason this is important is because any additional carbon we put in the atmosphere,
any add additions to those flows remains in that cycling system for hundreds to thousands
of years and so it accumulates over time.
And so if we keep putting 7 gigatons a year of carbon out, much of that accumulates in
the atmosphere and continues to build up and build up and build up.
So it isn't that we've perturbed the carbon flows in just a small way, while we have perturbed
the carbon flows in a small way, but we've done it in a system where the additional carbon
accumulates over time.
And we've been doing that since roughly 1750, roughly the start of the industrial era when
we started using fossil fuels wholesale.
Now what happens to that 7 gigatons of carbon that we put in from fossil fuel burning and
the 2 gigatons from deforestation?
Roughly half of that ends up adding to the atmospheric carbon.
The other half is taken up by a combination of the oceans and soils and exactly where
it goes and exactly how much is taken up is a matter of current research still.
But of the carbon we put into the atmosphere, roughly half of it ends up basically staying
there in the atmosphere.
Again, it goes through that rapid cycling, but the atmospheric concentration goes up,
the atmospheric content of carbon goes up by about half the amount of carbon that we
emit.
And as a result of that, we would have to make one other change in that carbon cycle diagram.
You may recall that the atmosphere was a reservoir of carbon with about 560 gigatons
of carbon before the start of the industrial era.
Today, and I don't know when you're watching this course, so today may be one day or another
and this number is always changing, but roughly at the time you're watching this course or
hearing this course, we have about 800 gigatons of carbon in the atmosphere.
That's a substantial increase from the amount there was before in the pre-industrial era.
And that's again because even though the carbon flows associated with human activities
are relatively small in the global carbon cycle, they put additional carbon into the
system that continues to accumulate.
So the amount of carbon in the atmosphere has gone up substantially since pre-industrial
times and it's now about 800 gigatons.
What effect does that have on carbon dioxide concentrations?
Well, that increases the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere as well and
the increase in carbon dioxide concentration shows a rise from about 280 parts per million
in the pre-industrial era to something on the order of 390 parts per million today.
And again, that depends on what today means for you, what day you're watching this.
Because the amount of carbon in the atmosphere or the concentration of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere is rising today at about 2 parts per million every year, give or take.
Sometimes it's a little more, sometimes it's a little less, but it's about 2 parts per
million every year.
So at this point, it's somewhere on the order of 390 parts per million.
You'll remember my milk jugs, parts per million simply mean if we had a million gallon milk
jugs of air and we separated it out.
In the pre-industrial era, 280 of those gallons would contain carbon dioxide.
Today, about 390 of them contain carbon dioxide, that's a rise of roughly 40%.
That's a significant impact we human beings have had on the carbon dioxide content of
the atmosphere.
And again, that couples with everything we know from the first six lectures that we expect
a rise in temperature because of the enhanced greenhouse effect because of this additional
carbon dioxide.
Now, how do we know this history of atmospheric carbon?
Well, I want to tell you a little bit about that because we have considerable confidence
in these measures of atmospheric carbon dioxide.
As I indicated earlier, it's pretty easy to measure atmospheric carbon dioxide in the
past because we have bubbles of air trapped in ice cores and that gives us a record way
back and I showed you some records and I'll show you them again that go back some 500,000
years roughly.
In the modern era, we've done even better.
Since about the 1950s, we've had monitoring stations at a number of places around the
globe and one of the most important ones is on Manalala in Hawaii, sticking up 10,000
feet above sea level and sampling the clean Pacific air that isn't contaminated by being
close to any major landmass that's close enough to the equator that it samples air that's
mixed from the northern and southern hemispheres and so we believe gives a good indication
of the carbon dioxide concentration of the atmosphere globally.
And let's take a look at our data on carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere from
the beginning of the industrial era from about 1750 to the present.
I have a graph here which shows overall that that rise in concentration from 1750 to about
the present, that's a rise from again about 280 parts per million to the present about
390 parts per million roughly and then there's a little inset that shows the data from the
year about 1960 just after we started this monitoring program on Manalala and this is
data from the Manalala measuring station and what I want to emphasize about that is that
we measure this data so accurately that if you look closely at that graph you'll see
little up and down wiggles.
Those aren't noise, those aren't random errors in the measurement, those are the effects
of the seasons.
In the northern hemisphere when spring comes green plants come out and the northern hemisphere
has most of the land area of the world so it has most of the green plants and those
green plants through photosynthesis take carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere and as
a result in the spring and summer the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere goes down
and then the plants, winter comes and the plants shut off much of their photosynthesis
and the carbon dioxide level goes back up again and that's what's reflected in those
little fluctuations and the reason I'm showing you this is to tell you that we can measure
with exquisite precision the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere and it is indisputable
that that carbon dioxide content has risen by something between 30 and 40 percent since
the start of the industrial era.
How do we know that that carbon dioxide is of anthropogenic origin?
Well, we have several ways of getting at that information.
First of all, fossil fuels are commercial quantities, they're things we buy and sell
so we know how much of them we're selling very accurately, we know how much we're burning,
we know how much we're putting in our cars, we have a pretty good sense of how much carbon
dioxide got produced from the fossil fuels that we bought and burned and consequently
we can keep track pretty accurately of how much carbon should have gone into the atmosphere
from the fossil fuels that we burned at any given year.
Now remember that only about half the carbon we emit from our tailpipes and smoke sacs
and so on ends up staying in the atmosphere but we understand that also even if we don't
know exactly how that carbon is getting partitioned among the soils and the oceans that are taking
them up.
So we have a good measure, if you tell me you burn a barrel of oil I can tell you how
much the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere ought to go up and the measured industrial
era rise in atmospheric CO2 correlates with in fact our measured quantities of this commercial
commodity fossil fuel that we've been burning.
So that's one way we know this well.
Another way is more scientific and a little more subtle.
Carbon like plenty of other elements comes in different isotopes and there are three
particularly interesting isotopes of carbon.
Most of the carbon is carbon 12.
It has six protons and six neutrons in its nucleus.
That's the common kind of carbon.
There's another isotope of carbon that's also stable, constitutes much less of natural
carbon and that's carbon 13 which has an extra neutron in its nucleus.
Then there's an isotope called carbon 14 which you may have heard of.
It's a radioactive isotope, it only lasts about 5,000 years before it decays away and
it's created continuously in the atmosphere by cosmic rays and that's what's used in
radiocarbon dating incidentally.
Well that means atmospheric carbon dioxide is a mix of carbon 12, carbon 13 and carbon
14, very small amount of carbon 14 but it's easy to measure it because it's radioactive.
The carbon in fossil fuels has been buried in the ground for millions, tens of millions,
hundreds of millions of years.
Any carbon 14 that was in it has long since decayed so it should be depleted in carbon
14.
Furthermore, the plants that originally did the photosynthesis preferentially take up
the lighter isotope carbon 12 and so fossil fuels are also depleted in the stable isotope
carbon 13.
And as we look at the isotopic content of the atmosphere, that is what the ratio of
carbon 12 is to the other two carbon isotopes, we find that over time isotopically the carbon
content of the atmosphere has become more and more depleted in carbon 13 and carbon 14.
Why?
Because we're putting into the atmosphere extra carbon and the carbon is coming from
the place where it had time to decay away its carbon 14 and where it didn't have as
much carbon 13 and so the atmospheric carbon content is being reduced, depleted in carbon
13 and carbon 14 and that tells us that we're dealing here with carbon that was coming from
deep within the earth particularly from the fossil fuels.
Finally, one other measurement is telling us that the oxygen content of the atmosphere
is decreasing in a way that's consistent with our combining extra oxygen with carbon
as we do when we burn the fossil fuels and make carbon dioxide.
Now you don't have to worry that you're about to suffocate, it's a subtle change but it's
a very clear and measurable change and it too is consistent with the depletion of or with
the addition of carbon to the atmosphere from the fossil fuel resource.
So I think it's incontrovertible that the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere has
increased significantly during the industrial era by something on the order of 30 to 40%
and it's also incontroversial that that rise is a result of our burning, largely a result
of our burning fossil fuels which have been buried in the ground for tens to hundreds
of millions of years.
So we know we have anthropogenic carbon in the atmosphere and it's a significant rise
in atmospheric carbon dioxide but how unusual is the rise of approximately 30 to 40% over
a period of 250 years or so of the industrial era in terms of the context of historic carbon
dioxide?
Well, one thing I would remind you of is that we asked that same question for temperature
and for temperature we found that the temperature increase of the last few decades at least
is unprecedented, at least on the millennial timescale, going back a thousand years.
If you were to consider overlaying our CO2 records for the past thousand years and we
can go back a thousand years and what you would see is CO2 was roughly level at that
pre-industrial 280 parts per million approximately and then about 1750 it started rising and
it took a very steep rise, the rise getting steeper and steeper as we get into the 20th
century and into the 21st century, that rise culminating in today's level of about 390
parts per million.
So you would see essentially a level for most of the first part of the millennium and then
starting with the industrial era a gradual upturn that gets steeper and steeper and steeper
at the end.
That's what a graph of CO2 over the millennium would look like.
It looks a lot like those temperature curves from those millennial temperature reconstructions
that I showed you earlier.
They showed a slight decline in temperature for roughly the first 900 years of the millennium
and then a steep upturn at the end.
If you were to imagine overlaying those temperature reconstructions on the CO2 curve, the millennial
CO2 curve, you would see quite a remarkable correlation in those two curves.
The CO2 rise at the end, at the, during the industrial era corresponds with that steep
rise in temperature at the end of the millennial temperature reconstructions.
What if we go further back?
Well, I already showed you the results of going further back with carbon dioxide measurements.
I had correlated them with temperatures and I want to take another look at that.
So I'm going to show you a graph which is one that we've seen before but I want to do
one additional thing to it.
I want to add the industrial era carbon dioxide rise to that graph and this to me is one of
the most significant indications that we humans have done something substantial to the natural
system of the atmosphere.
So let's take a look at what happens with 400,000 years of carbon dioxide from that
Vostac ice core record.
We remember that that correlated very nicely with the temperature.
So when we put those two graphs on top of each other, they look almost the same.
That's that correlation between temperature rise and CO2 concentration.
We saw that six degree Celsius difference between the temperature today, roughly in the
temperature in an ice age.
We saw that sickly 100,000 year pattern with short interglacial periods of relative warm
temperatures separated by long, cold ice ages when the climate was a lot cooler than
it was today.
And by the way, the carbon dioxide level was down much lower at somewhere around 140,
150 parts per million, much lower than it is today.
A little below 200 parts per million, I guess.
But if you add the present day carbon dioxide concentration to that graph, and that's what
I've done in the graph we're looking at here, we add that up to 390 parts per million.
That addition looks like just a vertical spike at the end of the 400,000 year temperature
and CO2 record.
A vertical spike, a rise in carbon dioxide to levels that the planet has clearly not
seen in about 500,000 years.
Way above anything the planet has seen in 500,000 years.
About 30% above any carbon dioxide level, Earth has seen in 500,000 years.
Their newest ice core data take that back about a million years, so we can say with
confidence that we have added to the atmospheric CO2 and bringing it up to levels that are
substantially higher than anything the planet has seen for a million years.
And we have less direct evidence, but still good evidence, that probably the levels of
CO2 in the atmosphere today are higher by a substantial amount, something like 30%,
than they've been any time in the last 20 million years.
And to me, that's the biggest indication again that we human beings have altered the
atmosphere system, the Earth atmosphere system, which is a major part of the climate system,
in a way that is substantial and unprecedented.
So we're looking at a rise in atmospheric CO2 to levels that the planet has not seen
for at least a million years, and probably 20 million years, to levels that are well
above anything it's seen in those time intervals.
That's a big deal.
And I think that's the clearest indication of a human influence on climate, or a human
influence on atmospheric composition, which opt to cause a human influence on climate.
Now, carbon dioxide is not the only thing that we do putting in the atmosphere that
changes climate.
There are a number of other human activities that change climate, and I want to look briefly
at them, some other human influences on basically Earth's energy balance, because anything that
upsets that energy balance will change the climate.
And I want to run quickly through these.
And as I described these, think about what it would look like if one were to draw a graph
of them.
Some of these influences cause a positive upset in the Earth's energy balance.
It makes it seem like more energy is coming in, or less energy is going out.
It's the same thing either way.
And that's called a forcing, and a positive forcing like that corresponds to an increase
in temperature, or would cause an increase in temperature.
Other things we do may alter the Earth's climate in a way that causes cooling.
And we can describe those by imagining a bar that extends from zero downward to some
negative forcing value.
And those forcing values are measured in watts per square meter.
How much is the energy balance on every square meter at the top of the atmosphere, or at
the stratosphere, troposphere boundary?
How much is that energy flow balance upset by these different phenomena?
And if we look at them, one of the more important is methane.
Methane gas, natural gas, CH4 is its chemical formula.
It's about 26 times more effective than carbon dioxide in producing climate change, in producing
warming.
On the other hand, there's a lot less of it, and it stays in the atmosphere for only
about 12 years.
It comes from many sources.
We don't understand them as well as we do for carbon dioxide.
Leaks from natural gas systems, from transportation, from mining.
Agriculture produces lots of methane, rice paddies, cows, belch, methane.
From a lot of sources, rice paddies, landfills, sewage treatment plants, even some hydroelectric
dams, particularly in the tropics, can actually produce more greenhouse warming than a coal-fired
power plant because of the methane that comes from vegetation that's decaying on the bottom
of the reservoirs.
We don't understand fully, again, the balance of methane, but it probably contributes about
a third as much to global warming as does carbon dioxide.
And other significant gases are nitrogen oxides, the hollow carbons, the gases used
in refrigerants and so on, and ozone, a pollutant which in the troposphere actually causes the
climate to warm and in the stratosphere actually causes a cooling.
But we do put other things into the atmosphere.
We put aerosols into the atmosphere, a number of particulate matter, soot from burning coal,
dust from industrial operations, but most importantly, sulfur from the burning of coal
produces what are called sulfate aerosols, and they reflect sunlight and they exert
a cooling effect on climate.
Furthermore, they act as condensation nuclei for clouds and produce more clouds along with
the greater evaporation that's occurring, and that also reflects sunlight.
And those processes are pretty poorly understood even today, so we know that human factors
also cause a cooling.
We also know that that cooling is largely localized to the regions where these aerosols
are produced and we also know that that cooling can't overcome the warming we're causing
with our greenhouse gases, but nevertheless there is a cooling effect there and we have
to take that into account when we consider what we're doing to the climate.
Just a few other things are land use changes that change the reflectivity of the planet
and although there are a balance of effects one way or the other heating or cooling, the
dominant effect we believe is a slight cooling.
And I'll just mention one natural phenomenon that also affects Earth's energy balance
and that changes in the intensity of sunlight and the amount of power the sun puts out.
And we have reason to believe the sun's intensity has come up a little bit in the time we're
talking about here in the industrial era, but it's a much smaller effect than the human
effects and it is not a major contributor to global warming, although it does contribute
slightly.
Now, why do we attribute the recent warming to human activities?
Well, I've just described you a whole host of human activities from the burning of fossil
fuels to changing land use patterns and so on that should produce a net warming of the
climate.
But why though do we attribute the recent warming to human activities?
First of all, there's that very strong correlation which I've talked about and showed you between
carbon dioxide and global temperature and that continues today with that unprecedented
temperature rise of the late 20th century and early 21st century corresponding to a
very rapid rise in carbon dioxide.
Now I should also tell you we don't expect those two to go right hand in hand year by
year because there's a lag time before the carbon dioxide that gets into the atmosphere
produces the warming.
So we don't expect a perfect correlation between those two.
So if you see some places where maybe it was warming while the carbon dioxide was cooling
while the carbon dioxide was going up, that's not a contradiction of this idea.
But overall the global trend should be a correlation of those two.
More quantitative studies look at correlations in those reconstructions of the millennial
temperature for example.
If you ask yourself how much of this correlation is attributable to natural causes, particularly
volcanic eruptions and variability in the sun and how much is attributable to human
greenhouse gases, you can sort that out mathematically.
And what you find looking at those temperature reconstructions is that until the 20th century
the dominant explanation for what was going on, for the variations you saw is natural
factors, volcanism and solar variability.
But then you find that through the 20th century the dominant factor in the explanation of
those changes seems to be human induced greenhouse gases.
Now I want to emphasize that discussion I've just given.
That's all about observational data.
Because millennial temperature reconstructions come from data, real data, from all that proxy
data I described, coral reefs, tree rings, ice cores and so on.
So what I've just told you is that if you look just at data, this has nothing to do
with climate models or any of that kind of thing, if you look just at data you find that
you can correlate past temperatures with three things, volcanism, solar influences and the
human greenhouse gas emissions.
And that before the 20th century the volcanism and the solar variability are sufficient to
explain what you observe but when you get into the 20th century you need the human induced
greenhouse gases to explain what's going on.
And so that argues strongly for a human influence on climate at least in the 20th century and
beyond.
Now, we have also another completely independent argument from that one I just gave for why
we expect a human influence on climate and why we expect that what's happening today
is a result of human influence.
We run computer models and I'm going to say more about computer models in the next lecture
but computer models are large calculations that take into account the physics, the chemistry,
the biology, all the atmospheric physics, the meteorology, everything that's going on
in the climate system and try to project what's going on.
But what I'm going to talk about are computer model runs that don't try to project what's
going to happen in the future but rather start about 100 years ago and move forward in time
and attempt to reproduce the present day climate and the beauty of the computer models
is there we can do controlled experiments.
So I'm going to show you a graph from some model runs actually from an ensemble of model
runs so we're looking at an average of a number of climate model runs and as you look at this
graph the black curve, the dark curve, the wiggly line, that's a thin line, that's dark,
that is the temperature record, not exactly the same one I've been showing you before
but pretty much the same temperature record from observations over the time period from
just before the start of the 20th century to about the year 2000 in this particular case.
There are two wider bands on this graph and the wider bands represent an ensemble of computer
model runs so they're wide bands because they represent an average because each of these
runs goes up a little bit differently.
All the runs were started with known conditions just before the start of the 20th century
so the computer models were fed with those conditions and they were asked to reproduce
the climate through the 20th century and they were asked to do so in one case with only
natural factors included.
We know about the volcanism, we know how much dust volcanoes are put in the atmosphere,
we know pretty much how the sun's energy output has evolved over this time.
If we put those in, we get the lower of the two bands that you see on this graph.
They're not terribly distinct through about the early part of the 20th century or even
the first half of the 20th century and what that tells us is that either of those two
sets of model runs does a pretty good job of explaining the climate at least through
the first half of the 20th century.
The upper band represents climate model runs that include those natural factors, volcanism
and solar influences but also includes the anthropogenic greenhouse gases and also the
cooling effect of those aerosols I talked about.
So we think we've got most of the human influence included in these model runs and it's very
clear after the second half of the 20th century in these model runs that only the upper band,
only the band that includes the anthropogenic and the natural effects reproduces the observed
temperature.
So this is a very clear indication that we can't explain that temperature rise at least
not the rise of the late 20th century unless we take into account the presence of anthropogenic
effects particularly the presence of greenhouse gases that tend to warm the climate but also
the effect of the anthropogenic aerosols that tend to cool the climate.
That's all in here and I think you'll agree looking at this graph that the model runs
that include the human influence do a pretty good job of reproducing the entire temperature
record including that steep unprecedented rise of the last part of the 20th century.
So let me give a quick summary of this very important lecture.
Human activities especially burning fossil fuels are adding carbon dioxide to the atmosphere
and Earth's energy balance is then upset in favor of a warming.
In fact today's CO2 concentration is some 40% above what it was before the start of
the industrial era.
There are other human contributions, there are other greenhouse gases, there are aerosols,
there are land use changes, there are contrails from jet aircraft I didn't even mention them,
there are other factors that are also influencing climate and we believe we've taken them into
account.
The greenhouse gases in particular produce a warming, some of the other factors produce
warming, some produce cooling but we're taking them into account and I will emphasize they're
a little bit less certain or quite a bit less certain than the greenhouse influences.
And finally the natural effects can explain climate variation to at least the 20th century
and maybe well into the 20th century but if you want to explain the climate of the
last few decades you can't do it unless you take into account these anthropogenic effects.
Human beings have had a real influence and are having a real influence on Earth's climate.
