Lecture 8, Computing the Future
I've already argued that we should expect any additions of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere
to result in global warming.
The temperature should go up because of the blocking of outgoing infrared radiation by
an enhanced greenhouse effect that goes above and beyond the natural greenhouse warming
that's already there of 33 degrees Celsius.
And how much should we expect the temperature to go up?
That's a more complex question because the climate system is a complicated system.
And so our tools for answering the question, what would future climate look like, are climate
models, mathematical models that describe as much as we can about the processes that
operate in determining Earth's climate.
I want to describe those models in this lecture, give you a sense of what they do, how they
do it, and in particular why we believe they give us an accurate or semi-accurate picture
of what the future brings.
I'm not going to say that these models predict the future.
These are not like weather predictions.
The best we can do in weather predictions, by the way, is about 10 days to two weeks
out.
Beyond that, things get chaotic enough that we simply can't predict the weather in advance.
Nobody's attempting to predict the exact climate.
What we're trying to do is project the general climatic conditions that we can expect in
the future under a variety of scenarios for what we human beings might do in terms of,
for example, greenhouse gas emissions, changes in land use, changes in air pollution regulations
that might cut down on the amount of aerosols and actually cause more warming because we've
reduced that reflection from aerosols.
All kinds of possibilities we need to consider, we need to be able to put those into models
that allow us to project what might happen under different conditions.
So our models become like our laboratories.
For climate scientists, climate models are the laboratories in which they do experiments.
As I argued earlier, we can't do real experiments, controlled experiments with Earth's climate.
So let me tell you a little bit about some of the climate models we use.
First of all, there are a range of climate models from very simple ones that give you
quick answers that may be somewhat accurate in describing a limited amount of what the
future climate would look like to very complex models that incorporate virtually every process
we understand.
You might think, well, in this day and age of very fast computers, all we really need
to do are these complicated models, but actually that's not true.
It turns out that the whole hierarchy of climate models from the simplest to the most
complicated is useful in various ways.
The simpler ones can elucidate very obvious physics or chemistry or ideas about what is
happening in a particular situation, whereas a complex model gets so complex it's like
the actual Earth system and it's a little bit harder to interpret sometimes what it
has to tell us.
The simpler models can run very rapidly and therefore you can do many, many experiments
with them, whereas I'll soon show you the big complicated models take a very long time
to run even on the fastest computers.
So I want to begin describing this hierarchy of models and kind of building them up in
complexity.
We've actually used climate models already in this course.
Early on, I described how you could calculate Earth's temperature in the absence of an atmosphere
by simply equating the 240 watts per square meter of sunlight coming in to the known expression
involved the fourth power of the temperature that tells us the rate at which something
that's hot at a given temperature T radiates electromagnetic energy.
And that equation alone, equating that outgoing infrared energy as a function of temperature
to the incoming 240 watts per square meter of sunlight, that was enough to give us a
global average temperature.
That was a very simple model.
It was a zero-dimensional model.
It treated the Earth as just a single point.
It didn't distinguish land from water, surface from atmosphere, in fact it didn't even have
an atmosphere, it didn't talk about poles versus equator.
It treated the Earth as a single point, but it came up with a not unreasonable answer
for the Earth's average temperature.
And when we understood the greenhouse effect and took it into account, we could add that
to that simple model, we'd sort of be accounting for an atmosphere that way, and we could get
a fairly accurate estimate of the Earth's global average temperature and we could experiment
with what would happen if we enhanced the greenhouse effect and saw what the temperature
did.
And that simple zero-dimensional model tells us something.
Back in lecture four, I showed you a diagram of all the complicated energy flows between
Earth and atmosphere that comprise Earth's climate system.
Now that complicated diagram still didn't take into account variations in latitude
and longitude and other aspects of the Earth's surface, it basically treated everywhere on
Earth's surface as being the same.
But it did take into account the interactions between the Earth and the atmosphere, interactions
that are very important in establishing the greenhouse effect, the causing reflection,
and so on.
Well, a very simple, still very simple model for climate is a so-called two-box model in
which you treat the surface as one system, the atmosphere as another system, and you
take those various arrows you saw in that diagram.
That was a diagram based on observations, it wasn't a model.
You take those arrows in those diagrams and you quantify them with equations that describe
how much energy is emitted by the surface at a given temperature, how much energy is
emitted downward from the atmosphere when it is at a given temperature, and so on.
And you would end up sort of redrawing that diagram with two boxes and showing arrows
representing, for example, sunlight coming in from outer space, reflected sunlight going
back to space, infrared emission from the atmosphere, infrared emission from the surface
to the atmosphere, infrared emission from the atmosphere to the surface, convection
and evaporation going up from the surface and carrying energy into the atmosphere, sunlight
that comes through the atmosphere and carries energy down.
You could put arrows in representing all those features that appeared in that diagram
of the climate system and you could then solve simultaneously the equations that describe
all those flows in terms of things you know, like the amount of incoming sunlight 240 watts
per square meter, the amount of greenhouse gases which tells you how much infrared gets
absorbed and so on.
And you would come up in that two-box model with a temperature for the atmosphere and
a temperature for the surface.
When I teach my global climate change course at Middlebury College, a kind of intermediate
undergraduate level course that requires some mathematics, my students actually build
a two-box climate model and they put the equations into a computer or because this model is simple
enough, they actually solve them with pencil and paper and they get out an atmospheric
temperature and a surface temperature.
And in this model where the entire atmosphere is lumped together, one thing they immediately
see is the atmosphere has to be cooler than the surface.
And they can experiment with changes in the amount of greenhouse gases and changing the
numerical quantities represented by that in the model and they can experiment and look
at how the surface temperature and the atmospheric temperature change, for example.
So that's a two-box model and that's a fairly sophisticated but nevertheless still simple
way of looking at the climate system and making some serious projections about what might
happen under certain circumstances.
When the models get more complex, they tend to include variations with latitude and they
may have many layers of ocean depth or many layers in the atmosphere.
And those are called two-dimensional models, models in which things vary in two different
directions in a two-dimensional model, for example, typically you vary in altitude and
you vary in latitude because latitude is far more significant in determining conditions
on the surface of the earth than longitude because the earth is basically symmetric around
its rotation axis but it's very unsymmetric from poles to equator and back to poles again.
So a two-dimensional climate model is more complicated still, it involves typically variations
with latitude and variations with altitude and you can show in such a model things like
the large-scale circulation of the atmosphere which results from the heating of the surface
typically at the equator, mostly at the equator, air rises and it forms large cyclic patterns
of air movement that among other things transport moisture and energy poleward, both towards
the north pole and towards the south pole.
So a two-dimensional climate model can do quite a bit for you in terms of exploring
the processes that go on in the climate system.
But the more complex models are three-dimensional.
They're called global GCMs which you might think stands for global climate model and
today it often does but it's an outgrowth of the acronym for global circulation models
because these models looked at the entire globe in three dimensions and attempted to
calculate climatic effects including the circulation of the atmosphere.
How do these models work, these GCMs, these global climate models or general circulation
models?
Well, what they do is divide earth, surface and atmosphere and ocean into small regions
called cells and within each of those cells they calculate the processes that are going
on in the established climate.
What are those processes?
They're typically flows of energy from adjacent cells, maybe if you have a cell at the bottom
layer of the atmosphere, energy is coming up from the surface, energy is also coming
down from the sun, there's infrared energy.
You also calculate the movement of material in and out of these cells.
Maybe there's an airflow occurring and it's bringing heated air into the region or maybe
there's moist air coming into this region.
You calculate the flows of energy and matter and also momentum which gives you forces on
adjacent cells.
You calculate the flows of those fundamental physical quantities into and out of these
cells.
You do that for all the cells that represent the layers of the atmosphere, the layers of
the ocean, the different parts of the earth's surface and in very realistic models you include
continents and oceans, you include topography like mountains and you do an enormous calculation
solving many, many, many equations simultaneously and out of that comes a model climate and
of course you can alter the models atmosphere to see what would happen if we put more carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere, what would happen if we stopped greenhouse emissions today and
so on.
These models represent serious attempts to look at the structure of the entire climate
system by breaking the earth, the atmosphere and the ocean up into many, many tiny cells
and calculating what's going on in each of those cells.
Now there's a fourth dimension, the fourth dimension is time.
Some of the models, even three dimensional ones, are not time dependent, in other words
they only calculate what the equilibrium climate would be.
You make some changes, you recalculate the model and that tells you if you waited a long
time this is the climate you would end up with.
But as I mentioned earlier there are lag times, for example lag times between when we put
carbon in the atmosphere and when we see the effect of that on climate and so the most
sophisticated models are also time dependent models and they calculate as time goes on
they advance in time doing a big calculation of this entire model, all these cells representing
the globe and the atmosphere and the ocean, time and time and time again and so they give
you a picture of how climate changes over time.
Those are the most sophisticated of the models, many of these models by the way use specially
developed modules for different parts of the model, for example the oceans may be treated
differently in a model that oceanographers have developed from the atmosphere and what
climate modelers do with these large scale models is take an ocean module for example
that is known to calculate ocean properties well and they couple it mathematically computationally
in their computer model at the surface of the ocean where it joins the atmosphere so
the ocean model couples to the atmospheric model and those are called coupled GCMs, AOGCMs
atmosphere ocean coupled global climate models or atmosphere ocean coupled general circulation
models.
Now these models are not perfect and they're not perfect for a variety of reasons, they're
not bad but they're not perfect and one of the most important reasons is that their resolution
is limited, by resolution I mean how finally do these models divide the earth and the ocean
and the atmosphere into small regions and even the best of the global models today have
grid cells that are only maybe 100 miles on a side so maybe a piece of land area 100 miles
by 100 miles is what they're representing as one unit, they don't get down to any detail
smaller than that.
They divide the oceans and atmospheres into maybe 20 to 40 layers, it's pretty good but
it's not perfect because these are really continuously varying regions.
Even if you do what we do today, grid cells 100 miles on a side and 20 to 40 layers in
the atmosphere and ocean, you've got several million of these grid cells in your model and
each of these grid cells probably has dozens and dozens of equations that have to be calculated
to describe the flows of matter and energy and momentum into and out of that grid cell.
So you can imagine that you have an enormous computational task.
These models except for the simplest ones like the zero dimensional model I described
earlier or maybe that two box model that can be calculated by pencil and paper, all the
rest of them they have to be done on computers and the global climate models we have today,
the biggest ones tax even the fastest computers we have and they tax them to the extent that
in 24 hours of actual computing run time, a day of actual run time, a full day, run
a computer running 24 hours, they can advance the climate maybe 5 to 10 years.
So if you want to explore what the climate is going to do for 100 years, you may have
to run this model for 20 days for the better part of a month.
And if you want to really ask long term questions about what's going to happen, you may have
to run for months and months and months.
There are climate model runs that have taken the better part of a year and this is a big
problem.
Computers models tax even the fastest computers.
Now there's hope for the future and that hope lies in Moore's law.
If you have seen my teaching company course physics in your life when I talk about semiconductor
engineering and the development of computers and so on, I talk about Moore's law which
is sort of an empirical statement that says computing power doubles about every 18 months.
That's rapid exponential growth and that's why the personal computer you bought yesterday
is already obsolete because computers are advancing that fast.
And so there's hope for the future.
Our climate models are improving in resolution and the ability to calculate for long times
into the future because of these advances in computer engineering that are bringing
us ever faster computers.
And that means with faster and faster computers we can make the resolution finer and finer
and the models become more generally more accurate that way.
There are other reasons the models aren't perfect.
We don't understand the details of every climate process for example.
Some processes that are in there like for example the radiation of infrared energy from
a hot surface, we know precisely, we understand the physics of that perfectly, it's based
in fundamental physics, but other processes, particularly processes involving clouds.
The transfer of energy through clouds depends on the size of the droplets in the cloud,
the condensation nuclei on which those droplets condense the structure of the cloud, the reflectivity
depends on all those things, we really don't understand clouds in all that detail.
And clouds and some other processes also have to be sort of put in empirically, we look
at what the real world does, we make a kind of empirical equation that reflects that and
we put that in our climate model.
So we don't understand all the processes from first principles, it would be great if we
could just throw a few laws of physics into a model and say compute the climate but we're
nowhere near there yet.
That doesn't mean the climate models aren't valid, it simply means they aren't all based
entirely on first principles.
Another problem, some of the processes that we want to describe happen at size scales
below that of these grid cells.
For example, if you have a city, a city is probably substantially less than 100 miles
across, so if you have 100 by 100 mile grid cell and you want to include the climatic
influence of that city which has the effect of raising the temperatures because of this
urban heat effect I talked about earlier, how do you include that?
Well you've somehow got to smear that city out over that whole 100 mile grid cell for
example.
A particularly important phenomenon that occurs often at scales smaller than the grid cell
size is clouds.
Imagine a sort of semi-fair weather day when you've got a bunch of little puffy cumulus
clouds, those are a lot smaller than 100 by 100 mile grid size.
Suppose the atmosphere is half covered with these small cumulus clouds, well you might
say okay I can model that in my model by saying the entire grid cell is covered with clouds
but they're only 50% opaque.
It sort of achieves the same thing, the same amount of solar energy gets to the ground
as it does if half the sky is covered by completely opaque cumulus clouds.
But if you think about that a little bit, that's physically rather different.
A thin overcast that blocks out half the sunlight is a very different condition than having
regions of clear sky with direct sunlight coming through separated by regions where clouds
are completely blocking the sunlight.
In fact you can think of some phenomenon that might occur.
It can actually bounce off the vertical sides of those clouds and be scattered downward
and you can actually get regions where the intensity of sunlight is a little higher than
it would normally be in clear air because of that effect.
Parameterizing the presence of those clouds and it's called parameterizing, it's called
sub-grid parameterizing the presence of those clouds by assuming a uniform overcast with
the same total amount of sunlight coming through, it just doesn't cut it completely.
It's a first approximation but we've got to do better.
Also a lot of these climate models include sophisticated so-called sub-grid parameterizations
that take into account processes that are occurring on spatial scales that are smaller
than the grid size.
Forests, lakes, those are agricultural regions are other areas that might have to be handled
with sub-grid parameterization.
One of the most important aspects of the climate system and one that's incorporated into the
models and we think correctly in most cases are feedback effects.
What is a feedback?
Well here I am teaching a class and if I ask you to give me some feedback, unfortunately
it's not an interactive class but you can't, and say hey give me some feedback on my teaching
and say hey Wilson you're talking too fast, well then I might slow down a little bit and
talk a little slower.
That's feedback, it's a corrective effect, I ask for some correction and you give me
the correction and my behavior changes as a result.
That's a feedback that is corrective.
Some feedbacks are corrective, other feedbacks exacerbate the original change.
feedback effects are additional effects that either enhance or diminish the effects of
some original change.
That's a sort of cumbersome way to describe it.
If the additional change enhances the original one, that's called a positive feedback.
In the climate system, if something makes the climate get warmer and that causes some
additional effect that makes it get warmer still, that's a positive feedback.
When I talked about the correlation of carbon dioxide and temperature over the paleo climate
record over those 400,000 year ice core records, I said there were feedback effects, positive
feedback effects.
A little more carbon dioxide came into the atmosphere, made it a little warmer.
That caused other effects that made more carbon dioxide come in, made it a little warmer.
We had a leapfrogging there of positive feedback.
On the other hand, if the additional change opposes what was going on at first, then that's
called a negative feedback, that's the self-correcting.
If I start to talk faster and you scream maybe hey you're talking way too fast, that's a
negative feedback.
Corrects.
It diminishes the original effect, but as I'll show you in a moment, it doesn't necessarily
correct it completely.
There are a lot of feedbacks operating in the climate system, many, many feedback effects.
They involve all kinds of factors from biological organisms to physics, to chemistry, to geology,
all kinds of feedback effects operate in the climate system.
One of the most important is called ice albedo feedback.
Albedo is a word that means reflectivity.
The Earth's albedo, for example, is about 30%, about 0.3, which means about 30% of the
sunlight coming to Earth is reflected back into space.
Different parts of the Earth have different albedos.
The oceans are dark, they absorb sunlight, they don't reflect much, and they have a relatively
low albedo.
Ice sheets, snow, are very reflective, they have a very high albedo.
The land surface, well that depends on what it's made of and what the vegetation looks
like.
Really low albedo, they absorb a lot of sunlight, they aren't very reflective.
Deserts have a fairly high albedo, they reflect a lot of the incident sunlight.
So let's talk about ice albedo effect.
The ice albedo effect is a positive feedback in which, particularly in regions where there's
ice and snow, if it warms up a little bit, then some of that ice or snow melts.
And if enough of it melts to expose either dark ground or more significantly dark open
water, then the diminishing of the ice cover causes more dark surface to show, the albedo
goes down, that causes more sunlight to be absorbed, that causes more heating, and that
causes, that exacerbates the effect because it causes more ice or snow to melt.
And so we get this cyclic positive feedback, the ice albedo feedback.
And the ice albedo feedback is a really important feedback mechanism in the climate system.
And it's the reason, as I've stated several times, why we expect and are seeing that the
Arctic regions warm a lot faster than the rest of the globe.
And why we're seeing particularly dramatic climate change in the Arctic, particularly
the Arctic, not so much the Antarctic, because the Arctic ice, most of it is floating sea
ice, it overlies dark water, and as we reduce the coverage of sea ice, we increase the absorption
of solar energy because we've reduced the reflectivity, and that further exacerbates
the heating effect.
So ice albedo effect is a very important positive feedback effect.
There's another effect, there's a cloud albedo effect.
And the cloud albedo effect is opposite, it's a negative feedback.
What happens?
Well, suppose there's a little bit of an increase in Earth's temperature.
One thing that does is cause more evaporation.
If there's more evaporation, more clouds form.
Clouds at their tops have a high reflectivity, they reflect sunlight, and they therefore
reduce the amount of sunlight getting into the climate system, and that causes Earth's
temperature to go down.
That's a negative feedback.
Now you might say, well, hey, we can stop global warming with these negative feedbacks,
but if you look at feedback effects, especially those that occur sort of in proportion to
the effect that's originally driving them, you can show mathematically that the best
a negative feedback effect can do is to reduce the initial warming, but it can never turn
it into a cooling.
It can never reverse the initial thing that started out.
The most it could do if it were an infinitely strong feedback effect would be to halt that
warming altogether, but no feedback is like that, so the best you can do with negative
feedback is simply to reduce the initial effect, but you can't eliminate it or reverse it.
So that's cloud albedo feedback.
There's another important feedback called water vapor feedback, also related to evaporation.
Water vapor feedback is a positive feedback.
If the Earth warms, there is more water vapor in the atmosphere, but water vapor is a greenhouse
gas, and so there's a bigger greenhouse effect.
And water vapor is a significant greenhouse effect, greenhouse gas.
We believe today that global warming caused by carbon dioxide emissions is enhanced by
about 50% by the water vapor feedback effect.
Because water vapor goes in and out of the atmosphere so instantaneously, we don't regard
water vapor as a greenhouse gas that we put there, we regard it as something that instantaneously
adjusts to the current climate conditions, but there is this water vapor feedback and
that probably enhances any warming from other factors by about 50%.
Some feedbacks may even involve human behavior.
Suppose it gets real warm, for example, lots of more people go out and buy air conditioners.
They plug them into the wall.
If they live in a region where their electricity comes from fossil fuels, they then produce
more carbon dioxide, which causes more warming.
Now that's probably a trivial one in the grand scheme of things, but it illustrates that we
human beings can have a role in these feedback effects and therefore altering the climate
system.
I want to emphasize that feedbacks work in either direction.
The isobedo feedback, if the earth began to cool, that would cause more ice to form,
that would reflect more sun, and that would cause it to cool further.
That's still a positive feedback.
It doesn't matter whether the initial effect was in one direction or the other.
If the effect is enhanced, it's still a positive feedback.
Well, I've talked a lot about computer models, some of what they contain, some of their imperfections,
some of the things we're doing to make them better.
How do we know that these computer models are any good?
Well, we have considerable confidence to actually end the models.
Climate scientists are doing a lot of things to test their models.
First of all, and I showed you one example of this in the previous lecture, if you start
a climate model in the distant past, or a hundred years ago, a couple hundred years
ago at the start of the industrial era, some of them started much further in the past,
and you run them to the present, you can make them reproduce present conditions, at least
if you put in everything we know about what's driving the climate system.
So, climate models started in the past can successfully reproduce the present-day climate.
They can also reproduce some other pretty obvious things.
For example, if you had a climate model that included the tilt of the Earth's axis and
the seasons and so on, it better be able to reproduce seasonal temperature variations,
or you want to throw that model out.
Well, models do reproduce things like seasonal temperature variations easily.
Climate models reproduce also a number of other details of Earth's climate system that
you might not think about.
For example, I mentioned that climate models have many boxes representing the different
layers of the atmosphere.
Well, we're not just concerned about surface temperature.
If a climate model reproduces the climate accurately, it ought to reproduce the temperature
at all levels in the atmosphere.
And if you run a whole bunch of different climate models and compare their results for the vertical
structure of the atmosphere, averaged over the planet, to what we actually observe for
that vertical structure, you find remarkable agreement between the climate models and the
observed vertical structure of the atmosphere.
So, there's a subtle thing that you might not think about that the climate models very
successfully reproduce.
If you look at patterns of precipitation, for example, how does precipitation depend
on latitude?
So, you average over longitude because longitude is a less significant variable in terms of
climate than, again, latitude, pole, equator to pole.
You find that precipitation is a more difficult and subtle thing to deal with.
You find, nevertheless, that the computer models do a very good job of reproducing the
latitudinal distribution of precipitation.
They all show a big rise in precipitation at the equatorial regions.
There's a drop in the sub-equatorial regions, like where the Sahara Desert is, and then
a rise into the temperate zones, and then a fall off as you go toward the poles.
There's another example, something rather subtle you might not have thought of, that
those climate models, many, many different climate models by many different groups, are
nevertheless successfully reproducing.
That's about current climate, how the models reproduce various aspects of current climate.
If you project into the future, one of the reassuring things is that the models from
different climate modeling groups working independently, having written different models
with different sub-grid parameterizations and different other features, do a pretty
good job of consistently reproducing the future climate, or agreeing on what the future climate
should be.
A common experiment that climate models do is to subject their model to a 1% per year
increase in the amount of carbon dioxide.
And if you look at a dozen or so different climate models, again from around the world,
and how they do at that rise in temperature with increasing CO2, most of them cluster
very close to the same average value, which comes out somewhere between one and a half
and two degrees Celsius rise at the end of a period of about 80 years.
A couple of the models are a little further outlying.
They all show an increase, none of them show a decrease, and the increase they show is
pretty much consistent.
So models are verified in a great many ways.
What we'd really like to do with our models is say, okay, let's do an experiment with
the real climate system and see if our model can reproduce the outcome of that experiment.
Well, that, as I've argued many times, we can't do.
However, Earth does provide us with some natural climate experiments, and I want to give you
one example of one.
And that experiment is the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in June of 1991.
The Pinatubo volcano put enough dust into the atmosphere to qualify it as the second
biggest eruption of the 20th century.
And it put enough dust in the atmosphere, high into the atmosphere, to produce a measurable
global cooling.
And when the Mount Pinatubo eruption went off, climate scientists said, let's run our
model with the amount of dust that this eruption has put into the atmosphere, and let's see
what our model predicts for the climate of the next few years.
And they ran their model, and they then waited a few years until we had global temperature
records for the years following the Mount Pinatubo eruption, and they then compared them.
And I want to show you a graph of that result.
So Mount Pinatubo eruption is really a natural climate experiment, and the graph I'm showing
has a dark curve that represents the actual observed global temperatures in the years
following the Pinatubo eruption.
There are two dashed curves, which represent the results of model runs.
They're slightly different because they make slightly different assumptions about the amount
and properties of the dust the volcano ejected into the atmosphere, but they're pretty similar.
And you can see very clearly a good qualitative and largely quantitative agreement as soon
as the volcano erupted the global temperature fell.
It fell quite significantly by about half a degree Celsius, not quite half a degree Celsius,
and then it took a number of years to recover.
And by the way, if you look at Earth's global temperature in the early 1990s, or look at
records of what were the warmest years on record, the years 1992, 1993, 1994 tend not
to be as high up in those lists as you think, and that's because of the Mount Pinatubo eruption,
causing a global cooling that was measurable and reproducible with climate models.
So let me summarize.
We have complicated, simple to complicated models, the more complicated ones being large
computer programs that run and try to simulate the climate.
Try to project the climate of the future.
They include things like feedback effects.
They include subgrid parameterization effects for very small scale phenomena.
They are verified by a number of verification schemes, including particularly this natural
Mount Pinatubo experiment, so we have some confidence that they give us a reasonable
projection of what future climate ought to look like under conditions we specify.
