Lecture 9, Impacts of Climate Change.
So what is climate change going to do to the world and to human civilization?
Well, the most obvious effect of climate change is a rise in global temperature.
But there are plenty of other impacts as well, and this lecture is going to cover those impacts
of climate change starting with the rise in temperature itself.
Now there's an issue here.
When I talk about future climate change, there's no single right answer to what the
climate in the future will bring, and that's because we don't know what human beings are
going to do, and future climate, as we've now seen, depends on human activities, particularly
how much greenhouse emissions we put into the atmosphere, and other effects as well.
So how do we deal with this?
Well, we have to make up little scenarios, little storylines to tell about what the future
might look like in terms of human activities, and then we can use our climate models to
calculate the climate that might result from those activities.
And I'm going to describe some scenarios developed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, the IPCC.
Let me pause and just say a little bit about the IPCC because it's worth looking at what
this organization does, and also understanding what this organization does not do.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is an outgrowth of the United Nations Environmental
Program and the World Meteorological Organization, and it consists of informal gatherings of
hundreds of scientists, policymakers, and others to talk about climate change, the state
of climate science, and to make recommendations about what we might do about climate change.
The IPCC is not a research organization.
Its main job from the scientific side is to draw together from the open literature and
make summary statements about the state of climate science.
The IPCC publishes many, many documents on different aspects of climate change.
The most important ones are the assessment reports that are published roughly every six
years, and the fourth assessment report has just come out, and so that's the latest statement
on summarizing maybe six years before of climate science.
There are also reports on how to mitigate climate change.
There are also reports on how to adapt to climate change, but the only report that I
really concerned with in preparing this lecture series is the report on the science of climate
change.
And there are plenty of other sources for the science of climate change besides the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change operates by a kind
of consensus.
They have to get approval from a large body of scientists and policymakers before they
can publish the information they publish.
So if anything, it's kind of a least common denominator understanding of what the state
of climate science is at any given time.
Now, what the IPCC put together to envision the future, these so-called storylines, are
scenarios that are based on a kind of two-dimensional arrangement of what human behavior might be
like.
And they divide human nature in these two dimensions.
One is whether human society decides to emphasize economic growth and economic development, and
those are called the A scenarios.
The letter A distinguishes them from the B scenarios, and the B scenarios envision a
future society that puts more emphasis on environmental concerns and environmental preservation
and so on.
So the A scenarios are economic emphasis, the B scenarios are environmental emphasis.
Then their scenarios are also numbered.
The one scenarios, the number one scenarios assume that globalization, that is the spread
of economic cooperation, the spread of cultural norms throughout the world will continue.
And that has some important implications because it means, for example, that there will be
more universal education, particularly of women, and that turns out to be a very important
aspect of population, affecting future population.
Number of other globalization factors go into the one scenarios.
The two scenarios, on the other hand, assume that the world stays pretty much regionally
divided, that different regions have their own subcultures, that economic cooperation
doesn't develop to a very great extent.
So those are a regionally based scenario, and then there are the global scenarios, the
one scenarios.
So crudely, this sort of two dimensional space of scenarios for the future is divided into
four scenarios.
The A one scenarios, which emphasize economic development in a globalizing world.
The A two scenarios, which emphasize economic development, but in a world that stays more
regional, the B one scenarios that talk about a world with environmental emphasis and globalization,
and the B two scenarios that talk about a world that remains regionally divided, but
has environmental emphasis.
Those are the scenarios.
Now within that, the IPCC actually considered some 30 or more different sub scenarios.
The only ones of which I'm going to talk about are within the A scenarios, the A one scenario.
There is the A one F one scenario, or A one F I scenario, and that stands for fossil intensive.
That's a scenario in which business as usual continues, and we continue to burn fossil
fuels at an ever greater rate, as we in fact are doing today.
There's an A one B scenario, again economic emphasis globalization, and the B scenario
stands for balanced, we replace some of our fossil energy with non-fossil energy, non-carbon
based energy, and we get a more balanced picture.
And then there's the A one T, T for technology, in which new technologies replace much of
fossil fuel technologies, and those create very different scenarios, as you can imagine,
for future carbon emissions.
I should mention one other thing about these scenarios with respect to population.
In the globalization scenarios, the one scenarios, the A one and B one scenarios, the world population
peaks at about the middle of the 21st century at somewhere around 9 billion people, and
then it begins to decline.
In the regionally based B two and A two scenarios, the population continues growing until the
year 2100, the final year in which most of the projections are made.
And that has important implications for energy consumption and for the amount of greenhouse
emissions.
And so the globalization scenarios, partly because of the spread of education and economic
development, and particularly the education of women, results in lower birth rates and
a population, world population that peaks in 2050.
That's a profound thing to think about.
When I started teaching environmental studies, we always talked about the doubling time for
the world population.
We don't talk about that anymore because the world population is unlikely ever to double
again.
And it would be a wonderful thing in many ways if it were to peak in the middle of the century.
That's what the A one and B one scenarios have it doing.
What happens with these scenarios?
Well, the IPCC has worked out detailed assumptions under each of these scenarios and sub-scenarios
for the emissions of all kinds of different greenhouse gases, for all kinds of other factors
that affect climate.
And you can look at tables and tables and tables of numbers they've developed that
are their assumptions in each of these scenarios for what will happen with greenhouse emissions.
And when we put that all together and put it into climate models, what's happened is
a number of climate groups around the world have run their climate models with these different
assumptions.
Different models, as you learned in the last lecture, give slightly different results.
So we've averaged together the results for these different model runs and come up with
projections for what future greenhouse emissions, particularly carbon dioxide emissions, might
look like under these different scenarios and for what the resulting temperature increase
might be.
And let's take a look at some of those graphs.
So we have two graphs, one about CO2 emissions and the other about projected temperatures.
The CO2 emissions projections differ dramatically.
If you look at the graph on the left side, the dotted line is the A1FI scenario, the
fossil intensive scenario.
And you see under that scenario, carbon emissions rising dramatically, they're starting at the
left at that 7 gigatons per year that I mentioned.
These are in gigatons of carbon per year, 7 gigatons per year, the same flow of carbon
that I mentioned is coming from the fossil fuels and going into the atmosphere.
They rise dramatically under several of these scenarios, particularly under the A1 fossil
intensive scenario and under the A2 scenario, they also rise dramatically.
In some of the scenarios, the B2 scenario and the, to a lesser extent, the B1 scenario,
they rise for a while and then decline.
That makes a very big difference by the year 2100 in how much carbon dioxide we have put
into the atmosphere.
On the right are the temperature projections.
They show less dramatic variation and that's because they depend on the accumulated carbon
dioxide, some of which is already there and under all these scenarios, more carbon is
still being put into the atmosphere even if the rate of emission goes down.
So the temperature range projected is not nearly as great as the range of projected
greenhouse emissions by the end of the 21st century.
Let's take a look at the global temperature.
There's a light band that marks the range in which most of these models predictions lie.
The A1 fossil intensive scenario, not surprisingly, shows the greatest temperature increase.
It's a temperature increase here of about maybe four and a half degrees Celsius over
the century to come.
The lowest rising scenarios include the B1 scenario, B1 curve shows a rise in temperature
of perhaps only 1.5 degrees Celsius.
So somewhere in that range, 1.5 to 4.5 degrees Celsius is probably what we can expect for
a temperature rise over the course of the 21st century.
That doesn't sound like a whole lot.
I want to take a little bit of time to describe why those numbers mean something important.
But let's just pause a second and look again at these graphs.
We have a choice here.
These are scenarios based on assumptions about human behavior, about what we decide to do
about the rate of our greenhouse emissions.
And if we continue business as usual with the A1 fossil intensive scenario, we will end
up in the year 2100 with greenhouse emissions that exceed 25 that approach almost 30 gigatons
per year.
Now it's about 7 gigatons per year.
Incidentally, the A2 scenario actually exceeds the A1 fossil intensive scenario by the end
of the century in greenhouse emissions.
And that's because that growing population actually causes more greenhouse gases to be
emitted right at the very end.
Although through most of the century, the A1 fossil intensive scenario results in the
most greenhouse emissions.
But at the very end, the other one catches up because it's the one that has the growing
population, whereas the A1 fossil intensive scenario has a population that peaks in 2050.
So the bottom line from these CO2 and temperature projections from many, many computer models,
ensembles of different computer climate models being run with these assumptions from the
IPCC scenarios, is that we can expect the temperature rise of somewhere in the range
of 1.5 to 4.5 degrees Celsius over the coming century.
By the way, statistical analysis of the distribution of probable temperatures suggests it's very
unlikely to be less than 1.5 degrees Celsius.
But there's a substantial chance that it might be greater than the 4.5.
So it's not kind of symmetric in that range.
Very unlikely to be less than the bottom end at 1.5 degrees Celsius.
Substantial probability that might be significantly greater, 6 degrees, 7 degrees even, than the
uppermost of those model run projections.
So why should a temperature rise of a few degrees matter?
I raised that question earlier right back in lecture one.
I answered it in several ways, and I'm going to answer it in more detail now.
First of all, that rise, remember, is the global average temperature.
The global average, averaged over the entire planet, over the Arctic, over the equatorial
regions, over the oceans, over land.
The rise will be greater by roughly a factor of 2 on all land areas.
Not every point in land will go up.
Some points will still go down.
But on average, the rise in the temperature over land will be bigger than the global
temperature rise by roughly, very roughly, perhaps a factor of 2.
The polar regions will rise much more dramatically, and from what you learned in the last lecture
about the ice albedo feedback, you can kind of see why that's going to occur.
In lecture three, I gave you a number that I wanted you to walk away from this course
with, and that was the number that represented the temperature difference between the present
temperature, the present interglacial warm spell, and sort of the average temperature
at an ice age.
And it was on the order of 6 degrees Celsius.
So when somebody tells you the global temperature in the next century might go up 4 degrees Celsius
or 3 degrees Celsius or whatever, that's not much smaller than the difference between
now and an ice age, a difference that meant, again, Northern Europe and North America being
covered by a few miles of ice, a couple miles of ice.
That's a big climatic difference.
So globally, a difference of a few degrees can be huge in terms of the global climate.
That's another reason.
And finally, a third reason is that if you look at statistical distributions in general,
even a small shift in the mean value of some statistically distributed quantity can result
in big changes in the extreme values.
That's another reason why a few degrees makes a big difference.
If you think of something like the grades on a test in a course or the temperature extremes
or the maximum temperatures you get in a given day, they tend to distribute themselves in
a bell curve.
There are a lot of values grouping right near the peak of the curve, right near the average.
And very few at the tails of the distribution, the extremes that are very far from the average
are very, very unlikely.
And that's what makes this bell-shaped distribution.
Now if the average temperature goes up a little bit, for example, a distribution of
temperatures moves only slightly, let's say it goes up a degree or something, the average
value goes up a degree and that whole bell curve moves over only slightly.
And that doesn't very much affect things that are happening around the mean.
But what it does do is affect much more dramatically what's happening at the edge.
And if you work this out mathematically, way out in the tails of that distribution in
the very rare events that are very far from the mean, even a very small shift in the mean
value dramatically raises the likelihood of those events.
If you've seen my teaching company course, Physics in Your Life, I described the same
phenomenon with respect to food spoilage.
Why is it that you can leave a bottle of milk in the refrigerator for two weeks and you
take it out on the counter and it's spoiled in an hour in the grand scheme of things in
absolute temperatures?
That difference isn't all that much.
Why it's because the extreme events, the high energy molecules in that case that cause
the chemical reactions that cause spoilage and the biological activity that causes spoilage
are much more enhanced with even a few degrees of temperature increase.
And the same is true in climate.
Any extreme events that occur in climate, even though they're very unlikely, their likelihood
is greatly enhanced by even a slight shift in the mean temperature.
So the one thing we should expect in addition to just the temperature going up is an increase
in extreme, unlikely, but extreme events.
One such event is heat waves.
I mentioned heat waves before.
Heat waves are extreme events where the temperature remains very high for a long time.
And I'll just give you a little anecdote from today because I heard the weather report this
morning and today in the Washington, D.C. area is going to be the 25th day in a row in which
the high temperature is above average.
Now if you think about that, on average the high temperature should be above average half
the time and below average roughly half the time.
This is 25 straight days in a row in which the high temperature has been above average.
That's an extreme kind of event.
That's why the meteorologists took note.
That's an unusual event.
You might get a string of two or three days, maybe a week, where the high temperature is
above average.
That wouldn't be too unusual.
But 25 days in a row, there's something unusual about that.
That lies way out on the extreme of that bell curve.
And it's that kind of event, that kind of extreme unlikely event that's enhanced by
global climate change, by even a slight change in the mean temperature.
You may remember that in the early 2000s there was a heat wave in Europe that killed tens
of thousands of people.
Now you can't attribute any single event, like the 25 day streak I'm just talking about
or that heat wave in Europe, to human-caused global warming.
You can't pin down any one event.
Maybe more than you can say one particular case of cancer was caused by radiation or
something.
However, analysis of that heat wave in Europe, statistical analysis, says that was so far
out on the extreme, so far out on the tail of the bell curve, that there's only a 50%
chance that it was caused by natural effects.
So there's a 50-50 chance that that heat wave that killed tens of thousands of people
in Europe was anthropogenic in origin, caused by anthropogenic climate change.
There are plenty of other extreme events that are likely to occur more frequently because
of a few degrees change in the average temperature.
They include intense precipitation events, they include droughts, they include intense
tropical storms.
I talked about tropical storms before and showed you a correlation between tropical
storm intensity and sea surface temperature.
That like many other aspects of climate is a little bit subtle and nuanced.
For example, we know that warming ocean water should contribute more energy to make the
storms go and as the warming penetrates deeper into the ocean, the agitation of the storm
which in previous eras would have brought up cool water that might have quenched the
storm will now bring up warm water and that may make the storms more robust and longer
lasting.
On the other hand, there are subtle changes in wind pattern and hurricanes when they
try to form, if there's too much wind shearing along at high altitudes, that will simply
shear the top of the hurricane off the hurricane won't be able to form.
So there are subtle effects here but we do expect more intense tropical storms.
One of the most significant and most talked about aspects of climate change is sea level
rise.
That's not an easy thing to measure.
Sea level itself, you might think well there's a uniform sea level all around the world
but that's not true.
The sea level varies from place to place.
Furthermore, the land areas are going up and down still.
One reason they're going up and down is they're still rebounding from the last ice age when
huge blocks of ice weighed the continents down and when the ice melted they began to
rebound and that rebound is still going on 10,000 years after the ice melted.
So it's difficult to measure sea level.
In the past we used tide gauges to measure sea level gauges at particular locations that
measured the sea level as the tide came in and out.
But even their measurements again have to be corrected because the land on which they're
sitting may itself be moving up and down.
So recently we use measurements from satellites that look down on the ocean and can get measurements
over broad areas of the sea surface so we have a better feel for what's going on.
During the last ice age, sea level was 120 meters roughly, about 400 feet below what
it is now.
Sea level changes dramatically with time.
You can imagine what that would do to the world's coastal cities if sea level suddenly
dropped 400 feet, which it did because all that water was locked up in ice.
And the sea level rose quite rapidly as the ice melted but by about 6,000 years ago that
rate had slowed to about a tenth of a millimeter per year.
That's not very much, one to two tenths of a millimeter per year, tiny tiny little rise
every year.
Today we see a significantly greater sea level rise of about ten times that, about one to
two millimeters per year.
What causes sea level rise?
You probably think well it's caused by all that melting ice that I talked about earlier.
That's some of the cause but the most significant cause is simply the thermal expansion of the
water.
The ocean acts like a giant thermometer.
The water expands when it's heated because the molecules get farther apart because it
got more energy and consequently the whole water level rises.
And by the way, that's a process that will take some time to complete as the heat penetrates
further and further into the ocean.
It's only the surface layers that have been affected so far.
So thermal expansion of the ocean water causes sea level rise.
The melting of land-based glaciers and ice sheets causes sea level rise but the melting
of floating ice causes essentially no sea level rise.
You can find that out for yourself by putting a few ice cubes in a full glass of water,
dry it all off on the outside, let the ice cubes melt and you'll see there's no change
in the water level and that's because the density of ice is less than the density of
water by just the right proportion to make that work out.
That's how floating things work.
So land-based ice melting causes sea level rise.
Floating ice does not cause sea level rise although it does cause other changes that
I'll mention.
There are some other contributions.
For example, melting of permafrost probably causes sea level rise.
And we humans alter the water cycle in ways that are actually quite significant.
When we mine water out of underground aquifers and mining is really the right word for that
non-renewable resource.
When we mine water from underground aquifers and let it flow through surface waters to
the ocean, that contributes to a rise in sea level.
When we build dams that block water and keep it from going to the sea and it gets evaporated
instead, there we lower sea level and those effects are small but they're significant.
And again, this is a complicated subject.
For example, Antarctica, I mentioned earlier, its interior is a cold, dry desert.
Any precipitation that falls on Antarctica is locked up as ice for a long time and it
would take a really large temperature change to start melting anything in interior Antarctica.
And therefore, if global warming causes more precipitation, one effect will be to remove
water from the oceans and deposit it onto Central Antarctica.
That's not a huge effect but it's enough to counter some of the increase in sea level
caused by some of these other effects I've mentioned.
So again, the climate system is subtle.
So the 20th century, as I said, saw a rise in sea level of about one to two millimeters
per year.
That's about a half to one inch every decade.
It doesn't sound like a whole lot.
If you look at the projections for sea level rise that come out of our best climate models,
they now predict a rise of some 6 to 18 inches by the year 2100 in the A1 balanced scenario.
It would be more in the A1 fossil intensive scenario.
It would be less in the A1 technology scenario and it would be different in the other different
scenarios.
6 to 18 inches.
Now that doesn't sound like a lot and you may have heard, you know, tales of very large
sea level rises and how we're going to in and out the coastal cities.
This is one projection in climate science that has actually become moderated over time
as our climate models have gotten better.
We used to think it might be more like half a meter, about 20 inches in the coming century.
Now it looks like it may be a little bit less than that.
It will be greater if we continue business as usual with our fossil intensive economy.
And I mentioned also that sea level rise is going to go on for a long time because it
takes a long time for ice to melt and because it takes a long time for the heat to penetrate
and expand the deeper waters.
And so even if we stopped greenhouse emissions right now, we probably committed ourselves
to about 20 inches, so maybe almost two feet of sea level rise over the next few centuries.
That doesn't sound like much, but it already adds to high storm surges and high tides and
if storms get more intense, that coordinates with the more intense storms and the higher
sea level to make a double whammy in terms of the storm surges.
Some other effects also, very low lying areas like Florida or Bangladesh will see significant
loss of land even from a very small amount of sea level rise.
Bangladesh still stands to lose maybe 10% of its land area in the coming century from
sea level rise.
Rising sea level also forces salt water into freshwater aquifers and it also contaminates
marine estuaries by altering the salt balance.
So that damages the nurseries for much of marine life.
So there's some other problems that we have to worry about from sea level rise.
It's not the dramatic flooding you may be thinking about, but it has some subtle effects
and it will be significant.
And that's only to the end of the 21st century that I'm talking about.
Things may get worse after that.
Another thing I discussed in lecture two was this poleward advance of species that we measure
as an indication of climate change.
That will certainly continue.
But some species, particularly things like trees, that can't move rapidly to keep up
with changing climate, they can only seed a little more at the northward edge of their
range and so on.
They may not be able to move fast enough and they may go extinct, at least in some regions,
and then other species that depend on those trees may disappear also.
Tropical species, like particularly disease vectors like mosquitoes and so on, may move
into northern climates or southern climates in the southern hemisphere.
So malaria, Lyme disease, tick-borne disease, West Nile virus, dengue fever, diseases like
that may become much more widespread in a warming world.
There's another effect that scientists are only recently beginning to worry about and
really beginning to get people's attention.
And this is something that is not a direct result of global warming, but it is a direct
result of carbon dioxide emissions, anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions.
I've mentioned that about half the carbon dioxide we put into the atmosphere doesn't
stay there but ends up in the soils and the oceans.
And that which ends up in the oceans changes the acidity of the ocean waters because carbon
dioxide dissolves in water to make a mild acid.
That's why soda pop is not so good for your teeth because it gives you, it makes the soda
water acidic and it can rot your teeth.
Well, what's happening with the acidifying oceans is that the ability of shell-forming
organisms to form their shells and keep their shells together goes down as the water becomes
more acid.
So another subtle effect of our human greenhouse gas emissions, not related directly to the
warming that those emissions cause, is when they are taken up in the oceans, the oceans
are acidifying and that may have a significant impact on the marine ecosystem.
Finally, let me end by mentioning the so-called surprise events that may occur and may be
quite dramatic if global warming reaches a certain point.
Most of the phenomena we're talking about so far involve, are sort of proportionate
to the cause.
If the temperature increase doubles well, sea level rise might double and so on.
There may be surprise events, so-called tipping point events, that switch on suddenly despite
only a small change in temperature.
Let me give you an example of something that is a so-called nonlinear or tipping point
response and that's a light switch.
Take an ordinary light switch and start pushing on it and nothing happens.
The light doesn't get a little bit brighter and a little bit brighter and a little bit
brighter.
No, it stays off and then suddenly the switch flips into the on position and the light comes
on at full brightness.
That's a very nonlinear effect, a very small change from just before it was going to go
on to when it goes on fully.
A very small change in the position of the switch makes a huge change in the intensity
of the light.
And there might be things like that lurking in the climate system, surprises like that.
I need to say that most climate scientists do not consider such surprises likely in the
21st century.
They will become more likely as things progress, but in the present century they aren't considered
very likely.
On the other hand, if they occurred they could be catastrophic.
One such surprise event would be the slippage of a large land-based ice sheet into the ocean.
I mentioned before that one worry we have about melting of land ice is that the melt
water running under the ice sheets lubricates the ice sheets and if they're unstable they
could suddenly fall into the oceans and slide into the oceans and cause a large rise in
sea level.
Another reason that might occur is that certain sea ice at the edge of the land area is actually
holding some of that land ice on continental areas like Antarctica and if the sea ice melts
then that land ice may be free to slide in.
A particular concern is the west Antarctic ice sheet, a large ice sheet that appears
to be somewhat unstably positioned on the continent of Antarctica.
And if it fell into the water it would raise sea level quite abruptly by some three meters
which is about ten feet and that would clearly be a problem for us.
A second nonlinear surprise would be an upset in the global circulation of the ocean waters
which is driven by changes in temperature and also by changes in salinity.
And the particular concern here is in the north Atlantic where melting Arctic sea ice
will cause an influx of fresh water because when ice freezes it leaves the salt behind
and that will cause changes in the circulation pattern.
And the particular worry there is that the circulation that carries warm water from the
Caribbean and the southeastern United States area up to Europe and keeps Europe's climate
quite mild, the Gulf Stream, that that might slow down.
And despite what you've seen in the Hollywood movies, a freezing of Europe is unlikely.
In fact this effect, even if it occurs, is only likely to reduce the amount of global
warming Europe would otherwise experience.
So it's kind of a worrisome thing to imagine shutting off this enormous circulation pattern
that affects the entire ocean and that's one of the concerns people have.
Now let me end with a comment that I really is outside the scope of this course and that's
a comment about the effects on human society and the global economy.
Again, this is a course about science and this is not an area I want to go into but
I do want to make two observations.
A lot of people don't want to think about global warming because it's going to cost
us money to solve the problem.
It's going to cost us money to develop new energy technologies, for example, and worried
about the effect on the economy.
A new report suggests that if we don't do something about global warming that could decrease
the global economy by some 20 percent whereas it might cost us only about 1 percent every
year to fix the problem now.
One other thing I think anybody who worries about global climate change should think about
is this.
Countries like the United States are better positioned to adapt to the changing climate.
They're also largely the countries that are causing the problem and one thing this is
going to do is exacerbate the gap between rich and poor nations and in a world that
is already quite hostile and combative, I think we need to think about whether that's
something we would like to have happen but that's really beyond the scope of this course
which is, of course, largely about science.
