Welcome to lecture 12, the final lecture of this course entitled Sustainable Futures with
a question mark after that title.
Why the question mark?
Because I want to ask the question of how might we build a sustainable future, a future
in which we have a stable and benign climate, one that doesn't cause all kinds of disruptions
and dislocations for the various species that live on Earth, including particularly our own.
So what's our goal here?
We're faced with the problem of anthropogenic climate change, climate change caused by human
activities, predominantly the burning of fossil fuels for energy, but also other activities
as well.
Well, humankind as a body has in fact articulated a particular goal, and that goal was articulated
at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, which started the process called the UN United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The Kyoto Protocol, which you've surely heard about is a sub-aspect of the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change.
So what is the goal?
Well the goal as quoted in the UN FCCC as it's called is, with regard to climate change,
our goal is, quote, stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a
level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic influence with the climate system.
So we're trying to prevent dangerous anthropogenic influence with the climate system.
That's all well and good, but what is dangerous anthropogenic influence?
Well that's a matter of some debate, but not a whole lot.
Most climate scientists would suggest that somewhere around a doubling of pre-industrial
carbon dioxide, we reach a level where the interference that humankind has made with
the climate system, in other words, the climate change that will have occurred as a result
of a doubling of pre-industrial carbon dioxide.
That will be dangerous in the sense that it will be disruptive to the systems like agriculture
that keep us going, to the marine ecosystem, to the climate that keeps us healthy, and
so on.
Somewhere around a doubling of pre-industrial CO2 concentration will result not just in
unpleasant climate change, some places it will be pleasanter, but some places it will
be unpleasant.
But will result in real dangers to human societies and to other species as well.
Now I want to pause a minute and say something right at the outset.
I personally don't think global climate change will ever be the kind of disaster that, for
example, an all-out nuclear war would be, or a strike from a large asteroid, or even
a moderate-sized asteroid.
These are things that are potentially civilization-destroying events.
I don't think global warming fits in that category.
There are some people who would argue it does and who are very alarmist about it and think
this is an enormous crisis.
I think it's a big crisis possibly, but I don't think it's a civilization-destroying
event.
For one thing, it's happening rather slowly unless one of those surprise events occurs.
It's something that we can adapt to.
It may not be very pleasant to have to adapt to it, but it's something the human species
and human civilization can survive.
That doesn't mean I think it should be allowed to happen, but I don't rank it in the same
category as an all-out nuclear war or an asteroid impact.
Most scientists would argue that somewhere around, again, a doubling of pre-industrial
CO2 is where we really get dangerous with climate change, with anthropogenic influence
on climate.
Some would argue that the threshold is probably a little bit lower.
Some might argue it's a little bit higher, but if anything, some would argue it's lower.
Now remember what the pre-industrial concentration of CO2 was.
Remember my milk bottles?
The pre-industrial concentration was about 280 parts per million.
Today it's around 390 parts per million.
A doubling is twice 280 or 560 parts per million.
So we're part way there, but we're not anywhere near all the way there.
On the other hand, CO2 concentrations are going up by about two parts per million every
year, and that rate is almost certain to accelerate as developing countries, particularly China
and India, rapidly industrialized.
China particularly has huge resources of coal, and that's the quickest way for them to get
up to our kind of standard of living by burning a lot of that coal, particularly to make electricity.
Now we've already looked at some graphs that show the CO2 emissions and the resulting temperature
changes under several of the IPCC scenarios for what humankind might do.
For example, we saw an enormous variation in the CO2 emissions between the A1FI, the
fossil intensive business as usual scenario, and the more environmentally friendly scenarios
of the B categories.
Big differences in the amount of emission.
We saw rather less difference in the amount of temperature change because the temperature
change depends not on the instantaneous rate of CO2 emission, but on the accumulated CO2.
What if you look instead at not the CO2 emissions or the temperature change, but rather what
the CO2 concentrations might be in each of those scenarios?
Well, if you were to look at what the CO2 concentrations predicted by the year 2100 are
in those scenarios, you would find that, for example, the A1FI, the fossil intensive business
as usual scenario, predicts the highest level of carbon dioxide concentration at the end
of the 21st century, almost a thousand parts per million.
That's in the range of what we think was the CO2 concentration during the time of the dinosaurs,
when much of the earth was tropical in climate.
That's at the end of the present century in the A1FI, the fossil intensive scenario.
That's clearly well above, by almost a factor of two above, the doubling of pre-industrial
CO2 to about 560 parts per million that most climate scientists would regard as dangerous
anthropogenic influence on the climate.
Many of the other scenarios, the A2 scenario, for example, the scenario that involved a
non-globalizing world, but still with emphasis on economic development, a world in which
the population continues to grow to the year 2100, that one doesn't produce quite as much
CO2 concentration as the fossil intensive business as usual scenario, but it gets us
up to about 800 parts per million.
And several of the other scenarios also get us up above 600 parts per million.
In fact, only the most benign scenarios, the B1 scenario is the most benign, the B1 scenario
is the scenario that says we're going to be a globally oriented world, but we're going
to put our emphasis on environmental protection.
That scenario is the best, and it gets us to about 500 parts per million, give or take
a little bit.
It gets us a little bit below that threshold, but just barely for dangerous anthropogenic
influence, and who knows whether that's a sharp threshold or a gradual thing, even that
may be too high.
The next best one is the A1T scenario, the economic development-oriented world that is
globalizing, but uses advanced technology to replace fossil fuel combustion.
That one gets us to somewhere between 500 and 600 parts per million, just about in that
pre-industrial doubling range.
So of all those IPC scenarios, those storylines, those projections for how humankind might
behave in the future, only a couple of them, maybe three, get us in the range of that 560
parts per million doubling at the end of the 21st century, and for one of those three,
the concentration is still continuing to climb at an increasing rate.
For the other two, the A1 technological scenario and the B1 scenario, the environmentally friendly
scenario, they are both leveling off by about 2100 at levels approximately twice the pre-industrial
concentration.
So we talk like viable scenarios for meeting our goal if our goal is indeed to avoid, quote,
dangerous anthropogenic influence with the climate system.
So how do we get there?
We're not headed there now.
I want to emphasize that.
We are headed toward the combustion of more and more fossil fuels, and in over the next
couple of decades, it looks like a lot more big power plants, coal-burning power plants
are going to come online.
It looks like a lot more people are going to have cars run on fossil petroleum.
It doesn't look very good for getting off that A1 fossil intensive scenario, yet that's
what we've got to do.
Given that the dominant anthropogenic influence on climate, the thing we're trying to avoid,
a dangerous anthropogenic influence on climate, is from the combustion of fossil fuels, we
really have four different ways, as I see it, to avoid that influence.
Some of them I mentioned briefly, I'm going to go into more detail on them, and some of
them I haven't even talked about yet.
So here's one.
I haven't mentioned this at all, and I'm going to be pretty dismissive of it.
We could devise global engineering projects that compensate for the upsetting of the Earth's
energy balance by fossil fuels, particularly fossil greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide and
methane, by upsetting the energy balance in the other way to compensate for that.
We could keep burning fossil fuels as much as we wanted, but we could do things like,
for example, injecting sulfur particles into the upper atmosphere.
This has actually been suggested.
Seed the upper atmosphere with sulfate particles, serious papers in the scientific literature
have been written about this, put just the right amount to reflect enough sunlight to
compensate for the enhanced greenhouse effect due to fossil fuels.
We could place mirrors in orbit to reflect incoming sunlight and reflect just enough
incoming sunlight to compensate for the increased warming again associated with the greenhouse
gases.
We could seed the oceans with iron.
Most of the open ocean is a vast desert.
There isn't much life there, and one of the reasons there isn't much life there is because
there's a dearth of nutrients, in particular iron.
And if we seeded the oceans with iron, we could cause the growth of phytoplankton, plankton
that do photosynthesis, tiny marine plant organisms that do photosynthesis, and they
would take up carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere and we could remove some of the carbon dioxide
that we put in.
Those are three of the number of examples that have been proposed of what I call global
engineering projects.
We're trying to re-engineer the whole Earth's system.
And I personally, as a scientist, don't think they're very good ideas, and I don't think
they're very good ideas because the Earth's system is very complex and we don't fully
understand it yet.
And we are doing major tinkering with it, with any of these approaches, and we don't
know if they're going to backfire, if they're going to trigger positive feedback mechanisms
that make things worse.
We don't know enough to know how those global engineering projects would really work, and
I think it's dangerous to play with planet Earth in that way, and so I'm going to dismiss
that as one of the options.
Proponents of these options would argue differently, but I don't think global engineering is the
way to solve the problem.
But it would allow us to keep burning fossil fuels.
Now here's another way we could continue to burn fossil fuels, which we seem to be good
at doing.
We know how to do.
We have the technology for doing.
We could burn the fossil fuels, but we could prevent the carbon dioxide from getting into
the atmosphere.
And this approach entails something called carbon capture and sequestration, CCS.
And in these CCS schemes, one captures the carbon either before or after the fuel is
burned, and one puts the carbon somewhere, typically deep underground, possibly deep
in the ocean, and keeps it out of the atmosphere.
How would these work?
Well, first of all, I want to remind you that CCS is a daunting problem, because unlike
the pollutants, sulfur, mercury, other stuff that we, particulates, that we can remove
from the exhaust streams of combustion processes in the tailpipes of our cars and the smokestacks
of our power plants, carbon dioxide is what we want to produce when we're burning fossil
fuels.
So there's a vast amount of it being produced, as I mentioned before, from a typical large
power plant, a 1 gigawatt power plant, a 1,000 megawatt power plant, typical of a medium
to large sized power plant these days.
We produce about 1,000 tons of carbon dioxide every hour.
We would have to capture that carbon dioxide and sequester it.
First of all, we have to capture it from an even vaster gas stream, because most of
the atmosphere is nitrogen, and most of that nitrogen just goes right through the power
plant and comes out the smokestack unaltered.
A little bit of it combines in the high temperatures to make the nitrogen oxide pollutants.
That's a problem too, but most of the nitrogen comes through.
So we have this vast amount of gas coming out of the smokestacks.
We have to remove the carbon dioxide, which is a vast amount itself, 1,000 tons an hour.
Then we have to pump it deep underground and somehow keep it out of the atmosphere for
very, very long times.
That's a big technological challenge.
People are working on that challenge.
One way to make it a little less challenging is to process fuels before they're burned
and try to remove the carbon then.
Since these fuels contain hydrocarbons, you can then be left over with hydrogen, which
you can burn as a fuel, but you've taken the carbon out beforehand, and that's an easier
thing to do than remove it from the gas stream after combustion.
On the other hand, you've removed some of the carbon, which contains some of the energy.
If you combined it with oxygen to make CO2, you'd get more energy out, and you've lost
that energy by taking the carbon out that way.
Sequestering means you have to store the carbon where it simply can't escape, and where is
that?
Well, scientists believe that one place is in rocks that are saturated with a brine,
a kind of saltwater solution, and you can pump the carbon down there, the carbon dioxide
down there, and with the right geological formations, geologists believe it can stay
trapped there four thousands of years without leakage.
Now, obviously, if the carbon leaks back up and into the atmosphere, you haven't done
anything, and you've wasted a lot of money and energy and other things to do that, but
if you could find a geologic formation where it could be sequestered, that would help a
lot.
Another place to sequester it is in oil fields.
The earth is full of old oil wells, abandoned oil wells, where we pumped all the oil out.
In fact, carbon dioxide is a commercial commodity for the oil industry.
They buy it and they pump it down into oil wells where it helps bring up the last residues
of oil down in the wells.
So there's a kind of nice symbiosis there.
If you produce carbon dioxide from fossil fuel combustion and you capture it and you
pump it down, abandoned oil wells, you may bring up more oil and get some more energy
out.
That's a possibility.
On the other hand, regions full of oil fields may have uncharted oil wells that act as possible
leaks for the carbon dioxide to get out into the atmosphere, so that may not be such a
good idea.
There are also those who advocate putting carbon dioxide deep into the bottom of the
ocean where under this enormous pressure it would presumably stay.
That would solve several problems.
It would get it out of the atmosphere.
It would keep it out of the surface waters where it's causing acidification problems,
as I pointed out, but we don't know enough about the ecology of the deep ocean or the
movement of the carbon dioxide in the deep ocean to be sure that that method would work.
There are some sample of some trial plants that are doing that off the coast of Norway
and some other places.
There's a trial operation in Canada taking carbon dioxide from power plants in the Dakotas,
but these are just small pilot projects going on right now.
I should mention CCS is obviously a technologically difficult thing to do.
It's obviously an economically expensive thing to do, and it also consumes a huge amount
of energy to pressurize carbon dioxide and pump it deep into the ground or deep under
the ocean.
It takes a lot of energy.
If CCS-equipped power plant may require something like 40% more fuel, 40% more coal, 40% more
natural gas, whatever, to produce a given amount of electrical energy, say, then it
would if it didn't have the carbon capture and sequestration technology.
But CCS is something that people are looking actively at, and I must say, after a report
on this by the IPCC, I used to be a skeptic about this.
I thought it was just a way of keeping the fossil industry going.
Now I think it's something we ought to look at as one possible step of many in the solution
to the problem.
But I don't have high hopes for CCS, and I think we need to wean ourselves from fossil
fuels for a number of other reasons, including their pollution effects and their scarcity.
So I don't think CCS is a long-term solution, but it might be a short-term solution until
some of those longer ones can come online.
A third possibility is that we could switch from the fossil fuels to the various energy
alternatives that I described in the previous lecture.
And I want to be realistic here.
Of those, only nuclear fission and hydroelectric power are currently developed at the large
scales that we need to supply a significant fraction of the world's energy.
And both are at present suited only to one thing, namely electric power generation.
So of all the things we do with energy, electricity, by the way, is one of the most versatile forms
of energy, nuclear fission and hydro power basically are good for producing electricity
and not much else.
The hydro resource is almost fully exploited in the industrialized countries.
You can talk about building small-scale hydro in your state, in the United States, and maybe
there are places you can do it, but I guarantee you, you aren't going to get a great deal
more power out of hydroelectricity because almost all the hydro sources are developed.
In fact, in some states, we're taking down old hydro dams because they have ecological
consequences we don't like.
The nuclear option is a different story.
This is not a course in nuclear power.
I could go into the whole thing, but you know there are some problems with nuclear power.
I would argue that those problems may not be as serious with exception of proliferation
as many people think, but still there are questions to be raised about nuclear power.
There are other alternatives.
In particular, there are the direct and indirect solar technologies that I discussed, the conversion
of sunlight into electricity through photovoltaics, the conversion of sunlight directly into heat
through simple thermal solar collectors, the use of solar concentrators to make heat engines
basically thermal power plants that run on sunlight.
These are all possibilities.
The use of indirect solar energy, wind power also growing very rapidly at about 30% a year,
especially in Europe.
Denmark gets about 20% of its electricity from the wind, for example.
These are coming along.
They have considerable promise.
They are advancing technologically very rapidly.
Wind power in some areas is becoming competitive with ordinary grid, fossil fuel-based grid
electric power.
I think that's a good thing.
But a single wind turbine of the largest size produced today makes perhaps 5 megawatts of
electricity at its peak.
A single large coal burning power plant produces 1,000 megawatts, 200 times as much.
So you need a lot of wind turbines to replace coal-fired power plants and the coal-fired
power plants run around the clock and the wind doesn't necessarily blow around the clock.
So you've got to be realistic about these things.
Nevertheless, the direct and indirect flows of solar energy, direct use for photovoltaics
and so forth, indirect use of wind, water and biomass do have serious potential for replacing
fossil fuels.
But the most promising of those, at least in the long term, like photovoltaics, are simply
not developed technologically or economically to the point where we can switch them in.
Now, having said that, I need to...
This is as close as I'm going to get the policy in the whole course.
We have been subsidizing the fossil fuel industry in many ways for a long time.
For instance, we subsidize highways as a means of transportation in the United States over,
say, rail, which is also fossil powered, although if it's electric it could be nuclear powered.
We give oil companies depletion allowances as they remove oil from the ground.
There are many things we do that encourage the use of fossil fuels through policy.
One of the discussions that's been going around in the IPCC circles and environmental
circles in general is the idea of a carbon tax, tax fuels on the basis of how much carbon
they put into the atmosphere.
We could do that, and that would be a policy change, and a policy change like that would
change the economics of where, say, photovoltaics sit relative to coal power.
It wouldn't be enough at the present to reverse that economics, but it would help.
And my point is there are policy decisions we could make that would take the economic
ordering of these technologies and change a little bit in favor of the non-carbon technologies.
And you may or may not want to do that politically, and that's not what this course is about,
but there are ways to nudge things in more favor of these non-carbon technologies.
And it isn't as though right now it's a level playing field.
It's quite different from that if you look at the subsidies direct or indirect that we
have for carbon based fossil energy.
Now I could imagine a distant future in which we have carbon free energy that's coming
from, say, solar photovoltaics or from nuclear fusion, and that produces our electricity,
and we take that electricity and we use it to split, as I said before, a water into hydrogen
and oxygen, and we use that hydrogen as a fuel for our portable transportation vehicles.
That's a completely carbon free energy future, and it could be fusion powered or it could
be solar powered.
And I think we could have that in 50 years.
But we need to do something well before 50 years to get our carbon emissions under control.
So that's a goal to have for the distant future, but to be realistic, that's not where we're
going to be now.
Now there are a few other things we could do.
For example, just shifting from coal to natural gas buys us a factor of two reduction in carbon
emissions because natural gas is CH4, methane, and it's got a lot more hydrogen, so a lot
more of the byproduct is water than carbon dioxide.
Coal is almost all carbon, it's almost all carbon dioxide it produces.
There are things we could do in the interim.
Natural gas may help us slide over to a completely carbon free future.
We can burn the fossil fuels in more efficient engines and so on.
There's one last thing we could do.
We could use less energy.
Now if you're somebody who remembers the late 1970s and 1980s, you can remember all this
talk of energy conservation from the energy crises of the 1970s and early 1980s and people
shivered in the dark, they put on lots of sweaters, they kept their heat at 55 degrees
and all that, that is not what I'm talking about.
I'm not talking about giving up the benefits of energy, I'm talking about using energy
more intelligently, getting those same benefits from energy, but using less energy.
And if you don't think that's possible, take a look again at Europe and North America.
Europe uses energy per capita at roughly half the rate that North America does.
There are some reasons why there is a legitimate difference, I mentioned for example the large
size of the United States and for that matter Canada that require more transportation energy.
But there are plenty of other reasons.
For example, the high gasoline taxes in Europe that encourage smaller cars, the development
of localized village centers rather than suburban sprawl, you name it, there are lots of things
going on in Europe that aren't going on in the United States that allow the Europeans
to use half as much energy per capita without sacrificing their quality of life.
That's what I'm talking about, using energy more intelligently.
Now I don't want to knock North America, we've already done a lot of things to reduce what's
called our energy intensity, the energy it's required per unit of gross domestic product
if we want to use that as a measure of our well-being, by some 50% since 1975.
We have increased our total energy consumption and we've slightly increased our energy consumption
per capita, but we would have increased those things a lot more if we hadn't reduced our
energy intensity, the amount of energy it takes to produce a unit of gross domestic product.
And we've had some energy shortages in the 1970s and early 1980s and during those shortages
we showed remarkable declines in our oil consumption in particular, energy consumption in general
but particularly in oil consumption.
And if you look at the period of several years around 1980, late 1970s to early 1980s of
USA oil consumption you would see a very steep decline, an exponential decline in US oil
consumption that decline stopped in the early 1980s when the price of oil fell and we no
longer felt it was necessary to conserve it and the oil consumption started right back
up again.
If you continue to trace the exponential fall off curve downward to the early 21st century
we could be using a tiny fraction of the amount of oil we are now.
We wouldn't have to import any oil if we had simply continued to pursue the energy conservation
energy efficiency measures we were pursuing then.
Now I'm not saying and I'm not promising that it would have been technologically or economically
feasible to continue all that way down, but it's obvious to me and to anybody who looks
at these numbers that we certainly could have continued substantially further down
and we could have done that even though the price of oil went up, but the price of oil
going down took away the incentive to do so.
Finally, most of our energy systems can be made a lot more efficient and just to give
you some examples let me consider vehicles.
The average vehicle today doesn't get very good mileage compared to the best vehicle
you can buy.
You can go out and buy a hybrid vehicle whose fuel efficiency is maybe three times that
of the typical vehicle in the American car fleet for example.
And car manufacturers have produced prototype vehicles, not things that they could sell economically
or that you'd necessarily be comfortable driving that get up to about 300 miles per gallon
of gasoline.
So there are great possibilities for gains in energy efficiency.
Look at another area of technology.
In the 1970s refrigerators were horribly inefficient.
When we began imposing standards on refrigerator efficiency the typical model in the early
21st century was about three times more efficient.
It used about a third the amount of electrical energy as did the typical 1970s model and
the best possible model you can buy does about more than twice as efficient as that.
So if we move to the most efficient possible devices that have already been proven to be
possible we could reduce our energy consumption enormously.
And let me point out that energy efficiencies compound.
If you make a house better insulated you need a smaller furnace.
It took less energy to build the furnace and so on.
Same in industry.
You could really compound these energy savings and do very well in improving energy efficiency.
Now there is no one solution to the climate change problem.
We're going to have to use a range of these options to reduce our greenhouse emissions
and we actually have quite a bit of choice.
And I want to end by describing a study by Robert Sokolow and Stephen Pakala of Princeton
University who have this wedge idea.
They say let's try over the next 50 years to avoid a certain amount of carbon emissions.
So I'm going to show you a graph that gives their wedge approach.
So what we're seeing here is a range of times over about 100 years the first 50 years of
it we show the historical emissions of carbon dioxide continuing to rise.
Sokolow and Pakala project what would happen if they just continued to rise at the same
rate for the next 50 years there would be additional carbon dioxide emitted into the
atmosphere and they say let's prevent that carbon dioxide from being emitted.
And that forms a triangular region on this graph of emissions versus time.
And they say how could we get rid of that triangular region.
How could we keep that carbon dioxide about 50 gigatons from being emitted.
And the answer is their wedge approach.
Let's divide that triangle up into seven wedges each of which prevents by the 50 years
out 1 gigaton of carbon from going into the atmosphere.
So they prevent a total of 7 gigatons from going in in that final year and they reduce
the total atmospheric emissions by about 50 gigatons or atmospheric content of carbon
by about 50 gigatons.
What are those wedges?
Well that's the beauty of this approach the wedges are choices.
The wedges give us choices they have choices for instance we could substitute nuclear for
coal fired power plants that would be a wedge.
We could if you don't like nuclear power don't choose that wedge.
We could substitute natural gas for coal that gives us another wedge.
We could use biofuels for transportation that gives us another wedge.
We could implement carbon capture and sequestration on our coal fired power plants that gives
us another wedge.
We could plant trees and temperate climates to pull carbon out of the atmosphere that's
another wedge.
We could build 2 million wind turbines to displace coal fired power plants.
We could build 2,000 gigawatts worth of solar photovoltaic power generation capability.
We could halt tropical forest deforestation.
We could restore 300 million acres of damaged tropical forest.
Any one of those would be one of these wedges and we need 7 of them.
We got a lot more than 7.
Now if you buy this wedge approach 50 years from now we will have stabilized carbon emissions
but we'll still be emitting carbon dioxide and at that point we have to go downward.
This is not the complete solution.
But it's an optimistic way of looking at the next 50 years and saying hey if we take concerted
action now we can really do something about this problem.
But the key is now we have to start now to make this work.
If we don't start soon we're going to end up seeing a tripling of pre-industrial carbon
dioxide.
So let me end with a quick look at the entire course.
This course is about the rise in the Earth's global temperature, the change in climate.
There's been a warming.
We've seen it.
It's been especially strong in recent decades.
Most of it's attributable to human activities, primarily greenhouse emissions from combustion
of fossil fuels.
It's going to have a significant impact on the environment, on human society.
Most of that impact is associated with our consumption of energy and we have many possible
approaches for minimizing anthropogenic climate change but we've got to act soon.
And let me end characteristic of the entire course with one more graph.
So we're going to look at a graph which is basically that set of 10 reconstructions of
the past millennium's climate that showed a gradual decline over the first roughly 900
years.
Sharp upturn.
Imposed on that graph also is the instrumental temperature record, an 11th curve on that
graph from the last 150 years showing that sharp upturn.
And now we're going to impose on that graph also a 3 degree Celsius rise by the year 2100.
That's about average for the IPC projections.
And that graph shows you something remarkable in the thousand year history of the Earth.
There is an enormous increase in the global temperature compared to any fluctuations we've
seen over that thousand years and that's something to think about and recognize that
if we're to prevent that or at least moderate that we've got a lot to do and we've got
to start doing it now.
