Plato's noble lie isn't simply one concept or one strategy that he deploys as part of the larger edifice of his thought.
Plato's entire philosophical project could be seen as a noble lie, where my thesis is essentially that Plato didn't believe in the existence of the forms.
That he contrived this doctrine for the purposes of psychological and social engineering.
Before he met Socrates, he was an aspiring tragic poet in the theater of Dionysus, and the story is that after he heard Socrates talk, he burned his great tragedy in an offering to Prometheus.
He calls forth the god of fire and decides to become a student of Socrates, but he's coming from the background of having been a tragic poet.
Dionysus is the god associated with tragedy.
A case can be made that people who understood very well what Plato's esoteric project was, and people who knew how to deploy noble lies engineered the Abrahamic revelation, the biblical religion as a catalyst for the transformation of society.
But the catalyst was not intended to get people to become good Jews, or later good Christians, or even later good Muslims.
The catalyst was intended to get people to go to the devil, instigate rebellion, give people models of challenging authority.
That's very Plato. His intention was to separate the goat from the sheep.
Well, it's great to be back with you.
Yeah.
We've been planning this talk on Plato for a really long time, and it's a difficult subject to approach.
I've written two essays that are relevant to it, which I want to reference right up front, because as deep as we may go here, it's still only going to be scratching the surface compared to the complexity of what I've written in these essays.
And the most important of them is called The Pharmacon Artist in Lovers of Sophia.
So I believe it's the second essay in this book.
This book Lovers of Sophia, it's an anthology.
It's a collection of essays rather than really being a book.
And these essays were actually written before Prometheus and Atlas.
I think almost every piece in Lovers of Sophia preceded Prometheus and Atlas in some cases significantly.
And frankly, I have to confess that Pharmacon Artist is the oldest of them.
So in that essay on Plato, which is fitting, because as I quote Alfred North Whitehead at the beginning of this essay, some people have taken the view that the whole history of Western philosophy consists of a series of footnotes to Plato.
That's how Whitehead put it.
And so I suppose it's fitting that my own first philosophical work was my interpretation of Plato, which is an essay of almost book length.
It could be a short book.
And I wrote it in my 20s.
And in a lot of ways, this essay The Pharmacon Artist can be seen as an esoteric key to my entire corpus.
And by the end of our conversation, maybe I'm going to highlight a few ways in which that's the case.
So that essay in Lovers of Sophia, and then there is a chapter in Prometheus and Atlas toward the end.
I believe it is chapter 9 of Prometheus and Atlas.
Atlas of the New Atlantis deals with Plato's quote myth, unquote, of Atlantis.
And we'll get into that as well here because I think it's very relevant to understanding what we could call Plato's unwritten doctrine or esoteric Plato.
His knowledge concerning Atlantis is very relevant to that subject.
And in that chapter, Atlas of the New Atlantis, I get into, you know, Plato's understanding of Atlantis and how it's related to the way in which he wanted to transform Greek society.
So anyway, those are the two references that I wanted to give up front.
And I mean, do you have any prefertory remarks you'd like to make before we jump in?
Yeah, I just want to lay this out for people that this we didn't know that we didn't plan this out as a series to begin with, but it's becoming it's materializing as one now.
So we started off our discussion. This is going to be a four part playlist on my channel for people who are watching.
It's okay if you use the first video you stumble on, you can watch this one first, you can watch them in any order.
But I would prefer to start off with the Mithra video because Mithra is such an ancient idea that has his has his tentacles in the Vedic world as well as the Western world.
And then so that was our first video we introduced that and then we went into Zoroaster and Zoroaster coming out of the Mithraic tradition,
which revolutionizes religion, theology, philosophy for the entire Western world.
And so then after that video we did Prometheism.
And why that's so important to come third is because from the Prometheism video really shows that there's a divide in the world between people who are submitting to this idea of a tyrant god, the L cults, the Judeo-Christian religions,
versus the Promethean religions of divine knowledge that you yourself become like the gods.
So there's this idea of the two and now we're getting into Plato.
And so Plato is going to be the end of all this, but also the beginning of something else.
And so if you want, based on what I just said, tell us why this is so important to have Plato at the end of this.
You know, I don't want to go on about Iran again, you know, and continue to give people the impression that I'm some kind of Persian chauvinist.
But there are a few points that could be made with relation to these other conversations of ours that you referenced.
And one is that, of course, Plato was a member of the Pythagorean order.
After the death of Socrates, Plato went to Italy and joined the Pythagorean order.
And, you know, of course, Pythagoras himself had studied at length in Egypt.
And so Plato kind of followed Pythagoras' footsteps and then studied in Egypt for a while, tracing, you know, some Pythagorean ideas to their source in ancient Egyptian wisdom.
But as we've discussed in our previous conversations, Pythagoras also studied for over a decade in the capital of the Persian Empire.
He was brought back to the capital of Iran by Cambyses II, the son of Cyrus the Great.
And he studied with the Magi in Babylon, the administrative capital of, you know, Achaemenid Iran.
And so, and by the way, Pythagoras only left Iran when the Persians conquered Samos.
He was from Samos.
And so he only goes home once his homeland, his island, becomes part of the Persian Empire.
And there's some evidence to suggest that basically he was kind of sent on a mission by the Magi and that his founding of the Pythagorean order in Sicily is an extension of sort of the Magian order of Babylon and so forth.
And so here you have one of Plato's sources of wisdom, namely the Pythagorean order, having been fundamentally shaped by Mithraic, Zoroastrian thought.
And then Plato, as we're going to get into in this conversation, very significantly, Plato's, I don't know if you want to say, second most important source of influence, whatever, another major influence on him was the School of Heraclitus.
And in fact, let me reference this right here.
Okay, Aristotle tells us that Plato in his youth, presumably after the death of Socrates, Socrates died when Plato was still quite young.
But presumably, immediately after the death of Socrates, Plato became a Heraclitian, and specifically he studied with this Heraclitian teacher, Cradolis, okay, Cradolis who was a thinker in the School of Heraclitus.
And actually, we just want to take the time for a moment to read this quote here, because it's very significant to the argument that I want to lay out about Plato's unwritten doctrine.
One is where Aristotle tells us in his metaphysics, quote, for as a young man, Plato was originally an associate of Cradolis and Heraclitian opinions to the effect that all perceptible things were in a permanent state of flux, and that there was no knowledge of them.
And these things he also later on maintained, unquote.
Then there's another remark regarding this from Aristotle, also in his metaphysics, and by the way, for those who are not familiar, Aristotle was Plato's student, okay.
Actually, Aristotle was Plato's greatest student, even though Plato did not choose him to head the academy after his death.
So, you know, Aristotle is a fairly good witness and source of testimony regarding the developmental trajectory of Plato's thought.
And the other thing he tells us in metaphysics concerning the Heraclitian background to Plato's philosophy is this quote, now the starting point for those who came up with the theory of forms was a conviction of the truth of the Heraclitian considerations to the effect that all perceptible objects are in a permanent state of flux,
so that a condition on the very possibility of knowledge and understanding was the existence, in addition to the perceptible ones of certain other natural entities which are not in a state of flux, on the assumption that entities in flux were not possible objects of knowledge, unquote.
Okay, so this is what Aristotle tells us about.
And then there's one other remark that's specifically about Plato's Heraclitian teacher, Cratalus.
So this is Aristotle commenting on Plato's teacher from the School of Heraclitus, quote, they meaning the Heraclitians, observed that all nature around us undergoes change and held that one cannot speak the truth about that which is undergoing change.
So a for teriori, nothing true could be said about what was changing at all points in all ways. This is the position of those who appropriated the legacy of Heraclitus, notably of Cratalus.
His mature position was that speech of any kind was radically inappropriate and that expression should be restricted exclusively to the movement of the finger.
He was appalled that Heraclitus had claimed that you could not step twice into the same river. In his Cratalus's opinion, it was already going too far to admit stepping into the same river once.
So that was, well, I presented that as a kind of a side, but it's going to become key to the argument that I want to make. But I took the time to just, you know,
put those quotes out there because Heraclitus was invited by Darius the Great, the Emperor of the Persian Empire to be the court philosopher of Iran.
Wow.
Okay, so look, in a country where you have all these Magi who are the bearers of the legacy of Zarathustra, Darius doesn't choose one of his fellow Iranian magi to be the court philosopher of the Persian Empire.
He invites this Greek from Ephesus to come to the Persian court. Now, of course, Heraclitus refuses.
Instead, he exiles himself to the temple of Artemis in Ephesus, never leaves other than to come out onto the temple steps and play games with children whose parents are, you know, visiting to basically worship the goddess.
But Artemis, the goddess whose temple Heraclitus sequesters himself to, is also originally an Iranian goddess, specifically worshipped by the Sarmatians. So Heraclitus is very clearly in the Iranian orbit spiritually.
And so now we have a second major influence on Plato, who steeped in Iranian thought, Heraclitus.
Let me just jump in for one second. Artemis has the subtitle, her name, her nickname, Luciferia. She is like the female aspect of Lucifer.
So you have this, and we talked about this in Prometheus, this idea of the opposing viewpoint of these two different views on what God is or which God we should give our devotion to.
And so here we are with this court with the goddess whose subtitle's name is Luciferia, and that's from Calimacus. I can show the sources if you guys want.
I'll add something esoteric that makes this even more striking. So the name Artemis, contrary to what some linguists have argued, doesn't really mean anything in Greek, but it means a hell of a lot in the original Old Iranian.
And that's Arta Amesha. Arta Amesha means immortal truth. Arta meant truth in the sense of like logos, cosmic order.
And so it's the undying cosmic order, which by the way was symbolized by fire. Heraclitus, fire becomes, you know, the metaphor for cosmic energy in his thinking.
Arta Amesha means immortal truth in Old Iranian. And it's a, what do you call it? They say se fatin Persian. It's a quality. It's an epithet. It's a descriptor.
But the actual name of the deity that was worshiped by the Sarmatians, who is described as Arta Amesha or immortal truth was Satana or Shatana.
Wow.
So, and so I've always thought that, look, I mean, this culture, the Scythians invaded. The Scythians and Sarmatians are kindred cultures.
In some cases, they're almost indistinguishable from one another. And they invaded the Middle East by at least 700 BC. And we know they got as far as the border of Palestine with Egypt.
Okay. Or the border of Israel with Egypt. And so I've always thought that this reference Hashaytan in Hebrew actually is coming from the name of Shatana and was a demonization of this serpentine goddess figure of the Sarmatians who had, you know, serpents entwined around her and who was served by the Gorgons.
The Gorgons were sort of goddess figures associated with this great goddess. And so in any case, there's a lot there, you know, behind Artemis and the figure that of course Heraclitus decided to devote himself to or rather at least take refuge in her in the sanctum of her temple, rather than accepting the invitation of Darius the Great.
Anyway, we want an attention. My point was that Plato is influenced by at least two figures who are steeped in Iranian thinking Pythagoras and Heraclitus. So did you want to
Well, okay, so I just want I'm glad we laid that out because I'm trying to show the setting in which we're in that leads up to the world that Plato so when we get to by the time we get to Plato.
Plato is inch is he's initiated into the Pythagoreans. But we hear about him at his funeral. According to people who write about his field, leave us Aristotle, the Magi attended his funeral.
So what, what is he, what is he?
I got distracted. This was the third thing that I was going to mention is that I believe it is Aristotle, and this is reported on by Mary said aghast in her book, when Zarathustra spoke.
According to classical sources, the Magi attended Plato's funeral and they claimed he was a member of the order.
Okay, now this doesn't mean that Plato was like a Zoroastrian or something. Okay, like this is a common misconceptions today. Order of the Magi, you know, I discussed this at length in Iranian Leviathan originally was a Mithraic order.
And it was very esoteric. You know, it had incorporated various Babylonian and Assyrian beliefs into it and so forth child in astrology. And so it was a complex esoteric order.
And just because Plato was a member of the order of the Magi, I didn't mean that he wasn't also a member of the Pythagorean order and also this and also that I mean, today, people who belong to Freemasonry tend to also belong to I don't know the Golden Dawn and any number of other esoteric societies.
And so Plato was probably such a person in those days.
He said aghast initiated into seven different things.
Yeah, but it's worth mentioning that, you know, Plato wanted to go to Persia after traveling to Italy and Egypt, never made it to Persia, but, you know, the Persian Empire extended into Greece into parts of Greece, and it appears at some point he was initiated into the order of the magi.
And the magi considered him among their own.
Okay, here's a good lead into the, you know, conversation that I really want to have.
The most striking thing about Plato being a magus, a member of the order of the magi is his concept of the noble lie, because as Herodotus tells us and as we know directly from the compositions of Zarathustra, lying was considered the worst thing among the Persians and
well, I was going to say among Zarathustrians in particular but also in Mithra's early Mithra's Mithra's the God of Odes and contracts right this raising of the right hand that we have to this day.
This is a Mithraic oath.
You know when you raise your right hand to supposedly tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth in court and so forth.
And so how is Plato a member of the order of the magi and also someone who's advocating this concept of the noble lie.
Now in Iranian Leviathan, I have a whole chapter called Emperor of Noble Lies which is about Darius the Great.
And I showed that the understanding of truth that prevailed amongst the Mithraic initiates in Iran was a lot more complex than some simplistic idea of, you know, honesty to a fault, right.
And, you know, so someone who wants to understand the nuances of the concept of truth and its relationship to strategic deception in an Iranian context should look at that chapter, Emperor of Noble Lies about Darius the Great in Iranian Leviathan.
But to bring the conversation back to Plato.
This essay pharmacon artist that I referenced at the outset, I argued that Plato's noble lie isn't simply one concept, or one strategy that he deploys as part of the larger edifice of his thought.
Plato's entire philosophical project could be seen as a noble lie by his entire philosophical project I mean the elaboration of the so called theory of forms.
So I make this really radical argument in the pharmacon artist.
The highlights of which, you know, I'd like to discuss with you where my thesis is essentially that Plato didn't believe in the existence of the forms that he contrived this doctrine for the purposes of psychological and social engineering.
And that his quote unquote unwritten doctrine which he confesses to having is one that is, let's say, deeper than or, yeah, let's say deeper than more profound than this exoteric theory of forms that he publicly disseminates and that becomes so seminal and pivotal in the history of western rationalism.
So that's the basic thesis that I forward in the essay the pharmacon artist.
Now, that's interesting because in the dialogues that Plato gives us there's a really important dialogue called parminides, where he has the master of that time period was parminides.
But underneath parminides are these two up and coming sages that are his students, Socrates and Zeno.
And Zeno is is he's he's a I guess you would say before the Epicureans he's sort of a not he's against the forms he's more of like an atomic Adams and void, but Socrates in the he has through the mouth of Socrates, he's arguing for forms and he wins the debate,
and he convinces parminides that forms is the is the real reality.
And so is this part of this, he's setting up.
Look, even the great master parminides believes in these forms.
Is this what's happening.
Right, so okay, parminides is among the most complex platonic dialogues.
And in that dialogue parminides, and the dialogue called the sophist, where, you know, Plato is engaging in another one of his critiques of the kind of sophistry that prevailed in his time, where people would hire these tutors to basically teach them how to argue
anything regardless of whether they believed in it or not.
These two dialogues parminides and the sophist.
Plato engages with the thought of parminides.
And one of the keys in my argument, one of the key points in the thesis that I lay out in a pharmacon artist is that Plato makes a strong man, both of parminides and of heraclitus in order to develop the theory of forms right.
So let me, yeah, since we're on parminides, let's let's go with that and then I'll come back to heraclitus.
In essence, what goes on in these two dialogues parminides and the sophist is that Plato feigns stupidity in the guise of Socrates his mouthpiece by
misinterpreting what parminides means by being in the sense of the one and by nothingness.
Okay, so in the in his way of truth in parminides poem, the way of truth, the parminides was, let's see, about he flourished as they say in the Greek context he flourished around 475 BC.
So we're talking about someone living a generation before Socrates and a couple of generations before Plato.
And parminides is point in the way of truth is very similar to the doctrine of Advaita Vedanta.
It's that the world of multiplicity and change is illusion.
And really, the only existent thing is an absolutely unified, eternal and infinite one.
So if anything really exists, it has to be one thing of which nothing can really be predicated.
And all of the specific characteristics that changing things have changing both in space and over the course of time, all the predicates and qualitative characteristics of changing things are really illusions.
Okay, and so, you know, what we really are are sort of like facets of this infinite and eternal one.
And we should strive by the power of our transcendental minds to apprehend our union, our, our, yeah, our identity with this transcendental one.
And the leatics, the school of parminides would engage in various practices in order to initiate adherence into the mystery of this transcendental oneness, including the use of psychedelic drugs inside caves.
So, Plato, besides studying with Cratolus, who was a Heraclitian, Plato at one point studied with, I believe his name was Hermodorus, representative of the school of parminides.
So Plato is not getting his own, his only understanding of parminides through Socrates. Plato, prior to having written the parminides and the Sophists dialogues, studied under a leatic or, you know, parminidian teacher himself.
And I, okay, so I cannot believe that what we see reflected in the dialogues parminides and Sophists represents Plato's actual understanding of parminides.
Because basically, he argues that like parminides doesn't understand what non-being means.
That when parminides is saying, look, either you have to say that there's nothing at all, or you have to say that really everything that's in a state of, in a seeming state of change, and all of the multiplicity in the world is actually just a one, right?
When he sets up, Plato says that when, when parminides sets up this false binary in the way of truth, his poem, he's mistaking what non-being means.
When we say, you know, nothingness or the non-existent, we are just referring to something other than the present state of affairs. It's what we would call it like an indexical reference.
So, you know, right now, you know, I'm not sitting in a taxi.
So, you know, if I, if I say, you know, like, you know, my laptop on my lap in the taxi now, it's referring to some other state of affairs than the current state of affairs where I'm sitting in this room, right, in this, in this apartment.
And so it's a counterfactual that we intend to indicate when we use not such and such, when we use a negation.
It's not some mysterious nothingness. This is what Plato is arguing in parminides on this office.
And so basically what he's trying to parse out in these dialogues is what we mean when we refer to a true or false state of affairs with some kind of a logically constructed proposition.
He's trying to lay the groundwork for epistemology, for theory of knowledge.
But Plato, well, let's just say, would have to have been dim in order to believe that this is really what parminides was on about. Right.
Clearly, Plato could have understood that by nothingness, parminides meant something like what Gotama Buddha means when he talks about shunyata, and that parminides is, you know, advocacy for an ontology of an absolutely perfect unified and
eternal being is similar to the argument of Advaita Vedanta adherence against what they consider Buddhist nihilism.
He would at least have had to have that level of understanding. And if you read the Platonic corpus and see the kind of sophistication of thought this man engages in and his flair for irony and sarcasm and the subtlety with which he writes, there's no way to me that that could have been lost on him.
And also the numerous passages and various dialogues, especially Phaedrus and Symposium, where Plato reveals himself to be a profound mystic.
There's no way that he thought parminides was making this kind of a logical error. And yet he creates this straw man out of parminides.
And the other part of the straw man is that he says that what parminides meant by the one is mistaken, that the one is sort of like what makes anything the particular thing that it is.
It's like the what what makes a substance cohere as that particular thing that it is. It's not some, you know, mystical vague sort of, you know, oneness that encompasses all things because if there were a oneness that encompasses all things, then anything that you would predicate of that would contradict its essence as infinite and eternal.
Right. Like, if you imagine if you imagine the oneness as some mystics have as a sphere that extends in all directions, well, you can't wrap your mind around the outer edges of that sphere without putting the sphere in a certain space in the context of a certain space.
There's something outside it.
And once you admit that the sphere is inside a certain space, you also admit that it has spatial parts. You can think of the top of the sphere, the side of the sphere, the back of the sphere.
So then there's a multiplicity spatially. And then, as you're thinking about the sphere, time is elapsing. So then you're thinking of the sphere as it was in state A, as opposed to state B and what it's going to be in state C.
So the sphere winds up or say, you know, it's a rotating sphere, it winds up having temporal parts. So as soon as you have any coherent conception of this sphere of the one, it has both spatial and temporal parts.
And anything that you predicate of its spatial and temporal parts contradicts the essence of infinity and eternity that's proper to this one.
So this is the kind of argument that he engages in, right, in parmenides in this office.
And I think that it's making a straw man out of parmenides. Plato does something similar with Heraclitus. Okay, so Heraclitus is an incredibly sophisticated thinker.
This guy, when he describes everything in the cosmos as an ever-changing fire, he is not using fire the way that Thales used water as a kind of element from out of which all other elements or things can be derived, right?
He had thinkers very early in the history of pre-socratic philosophy who took one or another element as fundamental. In the case of Thales, it was water and they derived everything else like earth and air and fire from out of it.
It's a huge mistake to think that that's what Heraclitus means by fire. If you want to understand what Heraclitus means by fire, look at what Werner Heisenberg says about him in physics and philosophy.
He's the greatest German scientist of the era of the Second World War, German physicist rather. Werner Heisenberg, one of the pioneers of quantum theory, writes about Heraclitus in physics and philosophy and says that how Heraclitus describes fire and its relationship with the psyche.
And the way in which fire is a metaphor for the Logos, the order in the cosmos, and the relationship between the fire and the psyche to the mind of Werner Heisenberg was some kind of a precursor to the relationship between consciousness and quantum potential in quantum theory.
So that what Heraclitus means by fire is something like what we mean by quantum potential. You had these early atomists that thought the world was basically made up of marbles.
Their metaphor for the fundamental stuff were something like the marbles the Greek children played with.
You had others who believed that some substance like water went through various changes of state and that all things arose, had their genesis in that manner.
What Heraclitus is saying is that what everything is made up out of is a dynamic flux that can't be pinned down and that is never in a static state.
At no point you find it in a static state, it's something that's always inherently in a dynamic flux and that thing is integrally interconnected with consciousness or what Heraclitus calls psyche, suke.
The relationship between suke and this dynamic flux has a Logos to it, it has an order to it. It expresses certain teleology.
And this is very similar to what we eventually arrived at on the other side of atomism in the quantum theory that describes the collapse of the quantum wave potential by consciousness.
So Heraclitus is so sophisticated in his ontological thinking that Werter Heisenberg I think rightly saw his understanding of the cosmic flux and its relationship to the mind as a precursor of quantum theory.
And Heraclitus makes it very clear that he isn't saying there's no such thing as existence. In other words, it's not a view of pure becoming as opposed to being. It's that existence is always in a state of process and this process does have a kind of teleology to it.
And so when Aristotle claims that Plato developed the theory of forms, because Heraclitians like Cradilus, Plato's teacher and his youth, thought that you couldn't know anything about things that are in a state of perpetual flux.
This is not credible. Okay, there's no way that Plato did not study Heraclitus for himself. There's no way that, you know, this book that we call the fragments today that used to be called On Nature isn't a book that Plato picked up and read for himself.
He probably poured over it for years. And as a student of the Heraclitian school. And so even if Cradilus was such an imbecile that he misunderstood Heraclitus so badly that he says, you know, Heraclitus shouldn't have said you can't step into the same river twice.
You can't even step into it once, because as your foot is going into the river, it's not the same river the waters keep flowing, right? Even if Cradilus was such an imbecile to believe that Heraclitus was advocating a view of such sheer becoming that, you know, you couldn't know anything about objects, right?
That, you know, knowledge was ruled out and that we were going to wind up in a state of like perpetual skepticism regarding everything. There's no way that Plato wouldn't have understood Heraclitus better than Cradilus himself did.
Right. I mean, this is typical. Like you go to study a certain doctrine with some teacher. And that teacher is a lame representative of that school of thought. And you're introduced to that school of thought through the particular teacher.
But then you go and, you know, study the origins of that thought yourself, and you come to a better understanding of it than this person who, you know, gave you some introductory lessons.
Sure.
Concern. And so I have to believe that that's the case in terms of Plato's understanding of Heraclitus.
And I argue that it is the case on the basis of all kinds of remarks that Plato makes in Cradilus and Theotetus in particular. There are two dialogues, dialogue named after the Heraclitian teacher.
And another dialogue Theotetus in which, and you have to read my essay, pharmacon artist to really be able to see, you know, how I do this, but in which if you subtract the forms that Plato's setting forth, the account of the world that you're left with is a deep understanding of the teaching of Heraclitus.
So, so, so basically, you can see from in between the lines of Cradilus and Theotetus that Plato thought deeply about the doctrine of Heraclitus.
But then he wants to make this straw man from out of Heraclitus, the same straw man that Aristotle gives us when he says Plato studied with Cradilus.
And he saw that if you have this view of all things in flux, knowledge is not possible. And so he came up with a theory of forms as a way to build an epistemology to build essentially what becomes the first theory of knowledge and the basis for science ultimately.
Yeah.
It requires making a straw man out of Heraclitus in order to do that, because see, essentially, essentially what Plato does is this he takes Heraclitus, and he turns them into this cardboard cut out, where everything is in a state of flux, we can't know anything about
Heraclitus, right? And in fact, the mind is not stable enough and separate enough from the flux of nature for the subject to predicate anything of objects that have independent existence.
He turns this into the view of Heraclitus, right? So everything is flowing. You can't know anything about the dynamic fuses. That's, let's say, the material world, right?
Matter is a dynamic fuses that you can't know anything about because it's always flowing. Then he makes a straw man out of Parmenides.
Right.
And he said, okay, well, what can be salvaged from out of Parmenides is this idea of the one as what gives something enough coherence to be the particular thing that it is, namely, to make it a substance.
And he says, instead of there being this one that's synonymous with infinite and eternal being, which would render the entire world of multiplicity and illusion, there is a multiplicity of ones.
There's a multiplicity of unities. And this multiplicity of unities interacts with or interferes with nature in a state of flux in order to give us the objects of our perceptible world that we experience.
And here, the Pythagorean doctrine becomes significant because this multiplicity of ones, okay, that he's getting from Parmenides, he's adapting from out of Parmenides, it takes a mathematical form which he's getting from the Pythagorean order.
And remember Pythagoras quote unquote believed the world is made of number. That's an oversimplification but Pythagoras thought that the fundamental constructs of the physical world were geometric and mathematical in nature.
So Plato takes the oneness of the one of Parmenides, and he fuses it with the geometric quality of the fundamental nature of reality as Pythagoras elaborated it, and he creates these forms, which he compares to geometricians, geometers, templates.
The templates, the geometers work with templates. They use them in machine shops also, even back in ancient Greece, the templates that, you know, a craftsman technetist, the craftsman's work with.
And so you have these templates that each have absolute imperfect unity, right? So the form of the circle is not circular. The form of the circle isn't round.
And the form of heaviness isn't actually heavy. It doesn't weigh anything. Each of these forms is absolute. It's perfect. It's infinite and eternal in the same way as the one of Parmenides.
The multiplicity of these, and they're of a geometric or mathematical nature, and these infinite and eternal forms interfere with the flux of pure matter, of Hewlett as a kind of dynamic energy, the fire of Heraclitus.
And from out of this interference, you get the objects of our world, the things that we experience, right? And also the finitude of the human mind as shaped by experience in a human body.
Okay, this is how basically Plato develops the theory of forms by taking a strawman Heraclitus and a strawman Parmenides and fusing them together, also drawing on the mathematical thinking of Pythagoras.
And I think the most complete form of this that you see in the Platonic corpus is in the dialogue Timaeus, Plato's dialogue Timaeus, where he talks about how the forms and matter, pure matter in a state of ceaseless flux and chaos,
basically, I don't want to say intermix, you know, but how they interact with each other in this void, in this chasm that he describes in Timaeus.
And from out of this chasm, this interaction of forms and matter and flux produces the multifarious objects of our experience, of which we can predicate things about which we can know things with reference to the eternal forms, right?
So our rational minds are of the same nature as these infinite and eternal forms. And although our minds are ensconced in souls that are further shaped by the conditions of our physical body, it's still possible for our minds to grasp and analyze the physical world in terms of these supposedly non physical forms.
And that gives us the basis for, you know, episteme or what later comes to be framed as scientific knowledge about the world.
Okay, I'm trying to show this in a way where we can like see the timeline, because if I'm not mistaken.
Is it because, okay, Zeno, not Zeno, Parminides comes from what was a part of the Persian Empire, and which is modern day Turkey, he goes to Magna Graecia, which is Italy now, and was Pythagoras there before him?
Does he, is he going to the Pythagorean?
So he, so he basically joins this Pythagorean movement happening in Magna Graecia.
Parminides?
Parminides?
Yeah.
Is that what happens?
I haven't seen any evidence that he joined the Pythagorean order, but that's what I'm asking.
Are they separate?
I think it was first.
Pythagoras is first.
Parminides comes from, from the East, sets up with the same general area as Pythagoras, but they have two different schools.
Now, is this where Heraclitus, is he learning from both of these people?
Is he coming?
Because I think Heraclitus, well, no, it's Heraclitus.
Both of them.
Right.
But I'm saying Heraclitus, where does he fit in between Pythagoras and Parminides?
Is he one of their, is he part of one of those schools or is he a completely different school?
Are these, are these three different schools?
Different school, different school.
So we have three different schools.
At least the interesting thing is that Heraclitus hated Pythagoras.
They were both coming from out of the Persian Empire.
I don't mean just geographically, right?
Pythagoras studied for over a decade with the Magi, and then Heraclitus was invited by Darius to become the court philosopher of Iran.
So they're both coming from out of this Persian spiritual intellectual background.
And yet, Heraclitus hates Pythagoras and takes a few jabs at him in his fragments, where he basically says,
Why, like, he's like, uh, charlatan who came up with some like new agey cosmopolitan.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Just true though.
Well, okay, so now I just want to lay that out.
We have these three schools that are all three of them seem to be somewhat tied to Persia.
They both come to Italy, or they all come to, um, oh no, I'm talking about those two.
And then Heraclitus has his own thing.
Now Plato, who's coming a century and a half later after Socrates is learning about these schools, which, which are these other pre-Socratics.
Now, so my question is this, this is very interesting what you're, what you're laying out because we have these three schools of thought.
Is Plato trying to unify them?
What is, what is he trying?
And what is, what is his goal in, in, in like straw manning these brilliant thinkers?
What is he trying to do with these three schools of thought?
Yeah, okay, this is really the question.
Okay, this is really the question.
So in order to answer that, we need to step back and look at the world into which Plato was born.
Okay, and the time, the time, you know, and society of these men that we've discussed so far.
Homer is often misunderstood as a literary figure and as a poet in the contemporary sense.
That's not at all the case.
If you read the Iliad and the Odyssey, particularly the Iliad, which is believed to be actually older than the Odyssey.
And there's some question about whether the Odyssey, you know, the Iliad and the Odyssey were both oral traditions.
And this Homer, who at some point wrote them down, was a particular Bard who sort of codified what was for a long time before that century, before that an oral tradition.
But the world that's revealed by the Iliad and the Odyssey is one where basically people are the playthings of fate and, you know, are at the whim of the gods and don't have hardly a thought that's their own or a conscience of their own.
At any moment when someone, quote unquote, comes up with an idea in the Iliad, it's because some god suddenly came in and gave them a particular inspiration.
Eros comes up with his bow and strikes you, now you're in love with somebody.
Yeah, that's the idea.
Or when Achilles is by anger.
Or when Achilles is seized by anger.
When, you know, any passion that seizes a person is attributed to the influence of a certain god.
And they would hear these gods and sometimes they would see these gods.
And there's no sense of personal conscience.
All of the actions taken by the heroes or the villains in the Iliad are basically either dictates of one or another god or they reflect some deeply ingrained social custom and ritual.
We're dealing with a completely ritualistic society of custom and incredibly conservative traditional society wherein there was no distinction even between nature and culture.
Right, like the same way that birds had certain habits, they had a certain way of life that was proper to them.
It was proper for women to be in the kitchen, you know, and to like take care of the domestic sphere.
That wasn't considered an aspect of a particular culture and the migratory patterns of birds are an aspect of nature.
The distinction between nature and culture is something that was defined by the first philosophers to begin with.
It didn't exist in the world of the Iliad.
So all of these actions taken by various figures like Agamemnon and Achilles and so forth in the Homeric world are either based on what was expected customarily or they are, you know, they're things that the gods commanded.
There's no personal conscience or sense of free will even that would allow for conscientious action.
And the other important point is that the medium of the Homeric, let's call it whatever, sagas, the medium of the Homeric epics was something akin to rap music.
It was recited and performed in a way where the temple and modality of the poetic performance was meant to sort of contagiously move the audience in a way where they embodied the message being delivered through the medium.
A book that's been written about this is Eric Havlock's Preface to Plato.
So I refer people to that Havlock's argument in Preface to Plato, where he's saying that we shouldn't think of Homer as poetry in anything like contemporary sense.
It's more like a cultural encyclopedia of like, for example, there's huge passages on ship building in the Iliad like how to build ships.
That knowledge was transmitted through this poetry quote unquote.
Orphic and Homeric hymns are the predecessor of the internet.
Would you agree with that statement?
Well, there's something to that in the sense that the internet is becoming yet again a kind of highly mimetic medium.
The core idea in Eric Havlock's study, Preface to Plato, is the idea of mimesis or mimicry, action that's highly imitative in which there's no reflection.
So it's like highly imitative embodiment of the message being conveyed by a medium without any personal reflection or critical thought about it.
And so this is exactly what takes place today, let's say, with bad rap music, not the kind of rap music that occasionally has like thought-provoking messages to it or like revolutionary political rap, but like gangster rap.
You know, the old bling-bling gangster rap about money and cars and hose and etc. on whatever, right?
And the people who listen to this rap and you can see them like on subways and they're moving their bodies in a certain way as they listen to this rap.
The Bacchic revelers were like this. They were just full energy, full just going with it, just going hard.
Like that was what, that would be the equivalent of what that rap is.
Yeah, and so when you say the internet is like that, it's because in a way like we are being, we are being, how can I put it, barbarized or kind of like being reduced again to a kind of pre-rational,
pre-reflective state through the intense mimesis, the mimetic power of the internet, right?
Okay, that's a whole critique that's a side conversation.
But point being, Plato was dealing with a society where that's what poetry is.
And this poetry is totally corrupting children with all kinds of stories about, you know, sadistic and manipulative gods like Zeus,
who use people as their playthings and engage in, you know, rape all the time on, you know, using various disguises.
And so he considered this totally deleterious to the development of the moral fiber of children.
And when he bans the poets in his republic, this is the kind of poetry he's talking about.
He's not talking about poetry in the contemporary sense.
He's very specifically taking aim at Homer.
Okay, let me jump in for one second.
Yeah.
This is about to, this question is about to lead up to, I know this is going to be the one.
This is going to be the question.
You're going to enjoy this question.
Because in-
Let's not forget the previous question.
I'm still trying to come around answering, why did he make a straw man out of Parmenides and Heraklites?
Okay, you know what?
You're right.
Let's do that first.
Go ahead.
But don't forget it.
Nope.
No, I got a really good question that's going to follow up.
So, so here's the thing in the context of this culture of mimesis of, you know, unreflected imitation and the basically
unthinking absorption of traditional cultural values, right?
In what had for centuries been an oral culture.
These sages like Parmenides, Heraklites, Pythagoras are breaking out of that and they're teaching people to think for themselves.
But the people who they're teaching are an extremely minuscule elite.
Okay.
And by elite, I don't necessarily just mean wealthy people, although that tended to be the class of people in the Pythagorean schools in Sicily, for example.
But they were teaching at the very least we can say a very rarefied spiritual elite.
And so they had the luxury of engaging in very esoteric manners of expression, very cryptic and profoundly thought provoking formulations of the kind that you find in Heraklites and in Parmenides.
And in the school of Pythagoras, I mean, the guy didn't even write down anything.
It was, it was, it was, you know, not permitted at his time in his own time to write down his teaching.
And he had two grades of followers, at least one of which was in front of the curtain sitting at his feet and the others of which had to sit behind the curtain that separated him from them.
So Pythagoras is the original man by man behind the curtain.
That's where the expression comes from.
Wow.
So point being, point being, these esoteric sages were not really changing the society of the time.
And in fact, when the Pythagorean order was in danger of reshaping the society of Sicily, when it started to have significant sociopolitical influence, the aristocrats riled up the mob and they set fire to the Pythagorean schools.
And this is how Pythagoras ultimately died himself.
He either died in the fire or from, you know, wounds that he sustained during the burning of the Pythagorean schools by the mobs of Sicily, who were riled up by aristocrats.
So Plato's look, and then of course, Plato sees how his own teacher Socrates is executed by the Democratic Assembly of Athens for provoking people to think for themselves and question authority and question customer tradition.
And so Plato realizes that it's not enough to express yourself in this esoteric and cryptic form and convey deep truths by that means the way that Heraclitus and Pythagoras, Heraclitus and Parmenides did.
You have to build a theory of knowledge that you can institutionalize in an academy, which then becomes responsible for educating the youth, rather than allowing them to be corrupted by what they're absorbing through Homer, for example.
Right.
And in point of fact, Plato does set up the first Academy.
But, you know, what we have to remember about Plato who sets up the first Academy is that before he met Socrates, he was an aspiring tragic poet.
He had written this tragedy that, you know, he was going to submit to a competition in the theater of Dionysus.
And the story is that after he heard Socrates talk, he burned his great tragedy in an offering to Prometheus.
He calls forth the God of fire and burns his great tragedy that he was going to enter into this competition and all of the rest of the poetry he had written up to that point and decides to become a student of Socrates.
Coming from the background of having been a tragic poet, and of course Dionysus is the God associated with tragedy, and then it's reputed that Plato when he died was discovered to have had a copy of Aristophanes' comedies under his pillow, which he slept on every night.
Wow.
It's perfect to bed with him.
And when you look at the symposium toward the end of Plato's symposium, there's this conversation between Aristophanes, who appears as a character in that dialogue, and a representative of comedy, and Agathon, who's a tragedian, and Aristophanes and Agathon after everybody else has fallen to sleep they're all drunk and they're falling to sleep.
They're all sprawled all over the floors. These two are the last ones awake. And as the dawn is rising, they're having a conversation about whether there could be a new form of art beyond the binary of tragedy and comedy.
And I think that this is what Plato wanted philosophy to be, that he's conceiving a philosophy as a new art form that embraces the best qualities of both the tragic view of the world that you see in like Heraclitus and comedy.
In other words,
Is this where you get the satires from?
They try to merge the two together.
Yeah, and okay.
In symposium, Alcibiades, who is this scandalous politician and disciple of Socrates, actually people say he was trying to become Socrates's lover.
Alcibiades gives this eulogy of Socrates with the main ads all dancing around to the flute tunes of Dionysus. Okay, this is the backdrop.
As this Dionysian ritual is taking place and everyone's drinking and they're playing the Dionysian flutes and the main ads are all dancing around.
Alcibiades gives us this eulogy of Socrates and he says Socrates is a, he is a trickster.
He is a pharmacus, a witch doctor who has brought us a pharmacon.
It was snake poison that was used by traditional doctors as a cure. So in the right amount, it's a medicine.
In successive doses, it will kill you. And he says he's been subjected to the venom of Socrates's poison and it's driven him mad.
And that Socrates deploys all these arguments in an apparently rational manner, but really what he's trying to do is drive a person toward a kind of divine madness.
And he admits to having been driven there himself by Socrates. And so we get this, why does Plato present this image of Socrates in Symposium?
And why in the same dialogue, does Socrates say that Eros is the only thing that he's ever understood and the only thing that he worships?
Socrates says this in Symposium. Excuse me, what happened to the forums?
Right.
Right. So Diatima, he had this teacher, Socrates had this teacher, Diatima, who according to Plato and how he writes the Symposium, taught Socrates this great mystery of Eros as the ultimate enigma, the ultimate secret, right?
You know, divine love, in the sense of the erotic, is somehow the ultimate key to wisdom, right? And essentially it's a Western form of Tantra, okay?
And
And he lays out how in every, he said, look at the stories of Homer, every time a character is in trouble, Eros comes, he strikes his bow and makes one of these lovely ladies fall in love with the hero and save them.
Eros is always, he said Eros, according to Longus from this, from the novel Daphnis and Chloe, Eros has more power than Zeus himself.
He has the power over all the elements. That's like, what? What the hell is Socrates talking about?
Yeah, and what happened to the forums? So look, if you go back to Plato's Republic, there are some rather cryptic remarks that he makes.
This was my question. This was going to be my question because in Plato's Republic, he says, Homer's no good.
Homer, no, no, no, no, no, no. Homer has Achilles in Hades crying. That can't be the, we cannot have this.
We need a cosmology where the good people go to heaven and experience eternal bliss and the bad people go to Hades, not Achilles going to Hades.
And so my question is, is Plato setting up the cosmology of Judeo-Christianity?
Okay, so now I was going to go to Republic, but let me just make a brief assignment here that's relevant to how you frame this question.
In Phaedo, the death dialogue, the dialogue where Socrates drinks the hemlock and martyrs himself.
Socrates' disciples are all around him, his friends, his friends are surrounding him.
And he says that he tells them they shouldn't worry because he's going to a place where he's going to be surrounded by all the best men, essentially an afterlife populated by the virtuous.
And lays out, as you put it yourself, a kind of prototype for the Christian vision of heaven.
And he basically, how is this set up? Let me actually read you the passage because it's quite striking.
This friend or disciple of Socrates as Sebes says to him,
Probably even in us, there is a little boy who has these childish terrors, try to persuade him not to be afraid of death as though it were a bogey.
What you should do, said Socrates, is to say a magic spell over him every day until you have charmed his fears away.
But Socrates said, Simeos, where shall we find a magician who understands these spells now that you are leaving us?
Okay, that's when they're imploring him to console them about his dying, right?
To reassure them that he's going to a better place and that they shouldn't, you know, excessively mourn his death.
And so then Socrates comes back with, he comes back with, quote,
If I did not expect to enter the company first of otherwise than good gods and secondly of men now dead who are better than those who are in this world now,
it is true that it would be unjust for me not to grieve at death.
As it is, you can be assured that I expect to find myself among good men.
While I would not particularly insist on this, I assure you that I could commit myself upon this point if I could upon anything.
One more time.
While I would not particularly insist on this, I assure you that I could commit myself upon this point if I could upon anything, unquote.
All right.
This is a disaster.
And I'm going to tell you why.
First of all, in the same dialogue, Phaedo, this is these quotes were from Phaedo in the same dialogue.
Socrates says, Plato, of course, in the mouth of Socrates says that we can't have any true knowledge while we're inside the body.
That we can only have approximate knowledge and that true knowledge can only be attained through total freedom from the senses.
Objective absolute knowledge can only be attained when our mind has been freed from our body and it's distorted perception of things and we're able to perceive sort of like as if from the vantage point of the realm of forms.
Okay.
But he's presenting a vision of the afterlife where that's not the case. When he wants to reassure his disciples, he's presenting like what becomes the classic sensuous afterlife of, let's say, Christianity.
My faith, right.
My faith.
And that's, in that state, you have what's called a soma pneumaticon. That's what the Greeks called this, the spectral body, soma pneumaticon.
It is a world where you still have perception and you still have sensations even.
Now, here's a further problem. This heavenly afterlife that he presents us with in Phaedo contradicts what he writes in Republic in the myth of error.
In the myth of the story of this soldier error myth of myth is not the right word in this tale of error in Republic were presented with basically like what we call today an NDE a near death experience account where this guy air sort of dies and lives to tell the
tale comes back and lives to tell the tale of what the afterlife is like what is the transition between death and rebirth life because of course Plato argues in favor of reincarnation.
The or the orifics use this as the secret, the secret knowledge of what to do when you go to Hades and how to reincarnate the right way and keep your memory.
Yes.
Plato studied all these things, right? So, but the thing is this, the story of error portrays a kind of afterlife transition between death and rebirth.
That's actually very similar to what we see in the Tibetan book of the dead, the Mahayana Buddhist account of the bardo state, and it is not the same as what Plato says to reassure his disciples in the Phaedo.
They conflict with each other.
Absolutely.
And the account of the Phaedo conflicts with what Plato says about knowledge only being possible once we free our mind entirely from the senses, because the bardo state or the state of the soma pneumaticon is still a sensuous state.
And so this stuff doesn't make sense.
Okay.
No.
And the guy obviously not a moron.
He's not contradicting himself.
He's saying these apparently contradictory things for a reason.
Let me present one more.
Yeah, no.
And everything you're saying is this is what I've been wondering about Plato, since I've been reading about it, like what is going on with Plato.
And it seems that he's changing.
He wants to change the norms of what people think about reality and the afterlife.
Go ahead.
So one more point that's relevant to this death scene to, you know, the account that we get in Phaedo of Socrates's last days.
His disciples show up and they see him writing poems based on Aesop's fables.
These animal stories, the animal stories with the moral about donkeys and things.
Yeah.
And he's sitting there in his last days writing poems based on Aesop's fables and they ask him basically like, what are you smoking?
Like what?
Have you lost your mind, Socrates?
Like what are you doing, man?
This is how you're spending your last days.
And this is what Socrates says in reply.
He says, quote.
Now let's keep in mind, right?
Now this is the Plato who's writing this is the guy who in Republic has claimed that the poets should be banned.
Right.
Because they're corrupting the morals of the youth and he thinks there should be very narrow like limits on like what kind of poetic compositions there are for the sake of edification and inculcation of virtue in the.
This is the guy who's writing what I'm about to read.
He goes, Socrates says to his disciples who are wondering if he's lost his marbles, versifying Aesop quote.
I did not compose the poetry to rival either Evanus or his poetry.
I did it in the attempt to discover the meaning of certain dreams and to clear my conscience in case this was the art which I had been told to practice.
It's like this, you see, in the course of my life, I've often had the same dream appearing in different forms at different times, but always saying the same thing.
Socrates practice and cultivate music, the arts in the sense of poetry, music, Socrates make music.
In the past, I used to think that it was impelling and exhorting me to do what I was actually doing.
I mean that the dream like a spectator encouraging a runner in a race was urging me on to do what I was doing already.
That is practicing the arts because philosophy is the greatest of the arts and I was practicing it.
But when my trial had taken place and this God's festival was delaying my execution, I decided that in case it should be this popular form of art.
That the dream intended me to practice.
I ought to compose and not disobey.
I reflected that a poet ought to work on stories, not discourses.
And I was no story writer.
So it was the stories that I knew and had handy which I versified.
Asops, the first ones that occurred to me.
Okay, this is a diabolical writer.
Yeah.
What is he telling us here?
He's telling us something about the relationship between the Dionysian essence of the poetic and the kind of art that Plato sought to produce in his youth as a tragedian on the one hand.
And the Apollonian rationalism of what becomes Plato's philosophical project on the other hand as exemplified by the theory of forms.
And the same Socrates who's telling us this ridiculous and unbelievable thing.
Namely that, oops, maybe I was supposed to like, versify children's stories and animal fables instead of doing philosophy.
Maybe that's what this voice, this daemon was telling me all my life that I should make music.
Right. And I did, I wasted my whole life. So I make up for it by making poems of, you know, animal fables that I read in childhood.
No, no. So this ridiculous story is really another way that Plato is signaling the fact that there's an esoteric and unwritten doctrine here.
That when Socrates says in symposium, the only thing I've ever understood and that I've devoted myself to worship in life is Eros.
Again, Dionysian power, right.
And so now where I was going to go before, and I think there's a good time to loop back around to it, is these passages in Republic where Plato is comparing the forms to the diagrams drawn by geometers.
And so look, according to the conventional understanding of the theory of forms, you obviously can't see forms, right.
So you can, no matter how perfect the circle you draw is, it's not a representation of the form of the circle, nor is a perfect triangle, the form of the triangle, right.
The geometric diagrams that are drawn on blackboards or whatever, or these days that are formulated by computer code are not the form of that geometrical object.
I mean, if you zoom in enough on what appears to be a perfect triangle generated by a computer, it's going to pixelate at some point.
Okay, even if you were to print out what appears to be a perfect triangle using individual atoms, right, in molecular nanotechnology, if you use an electron microscope, it's going to also pixelate.
So nothing we can craft in this world will represent the perfect circle or the perfect triangle or the perfect square or whatever, right.
Isn't that debunked, you know?
Well, no, but here's the thing, right, Plato claims that the forms exist in this invisible realm, right, that they're beyond the physical world.
But here's the thing, I don't think he really believes that.
No, me neither.
There are passages in Republic where he compares the invisible forms to the diagrams drawn by geometers.
Okay, try to grasp this point, just a little bit of a subtle point.
So the diagrams drawn by geometers can never represent forms.
They're infinite, they're eternal, they exist in this realm beyond the physical world.
So Plato shouldn't be comparing forms, the real forms, the transcendental forms, to the diagrams drawn by geometers, but he does do this.
He does do this in Republic.
I'll give you the passage in a minute.
Let me lay it out.
And what he says is that these forms are meant, like the diagrams used by geometers, to act as step ladders in order to help us intellectually grasp or spiritually grasp with our mind's eye, the form of the good.
So all the other forms are simply step ladders or useful tools like geometers diagrams to help us grasp the form of the good, the way that geometers use the drawing of a circle on a board to help someone understand what a circle is as an abstract definition.
And with equal significance, Plato says, I was afraid that if I, and he said, okay, so that was Republic, what I just laid out there, and I'll give you the passage numbers in a minute.
And then in Phaedo, he says that I was afraid that if I contemplated the form of the good directly, I would go blind the way someone who looks into the sun does.
And so I took refuge in the realm of ideas, or and so I took recourse to ideas, meaning the forms.
Right.
So what are these forms then?
Are they constructs that are meant to help you not go blind intellectually and spiritually? And what's the relationship between that looking straight into the sun and the madness that Plato talks about in Phaedrus and that
Alcibiades accuses Socrates of having driven him to in symposium, the divine madness.
Okay.
So let me just take a moment to give some references here.
Geometers diagrams that I was talking about, that's in Republic 510 to 511c, 510c to 511c, where he's saying that all the other forms are there only so that you can contemplate the form of the good, and they're like tools, they're like geometers diagrams.
And then the passage where he says that he was afraid he'd go blind by staring straight into the sun if he contemplated the form of the good directly, that's in Phaedo 99d to 100a, Phaedo 99d to 100a.
Specifically he says, quote, I thought that in the contemplation of true existence, I ought to be careful that I did not lose the eye of my soul.
People may injure their bodily eye by observing and gazing on the sun during an eclipse, unless they take the precaution of only looking at the image reflected in the water, or in some analogous medium.
I was afraid that my soul might be blinded altogether if I looked at things with my eyes, and I thought that I had better have recourse to the world of idea and seek there the truth of things.
Okay, the world of idea, meaning the realm of forms.
Now I want to look at two really important letters that Plato wrote.
One is the seventh letter.
These are, they're referred to as Plato's epistles, the letters that Plato wrote to various people.
One is the seventh letter, and one is the second letter, and significantly the second letter, Plato's second letter, is a letter that he wrote to Dionysus II of Syracuse.
Oh my God, this is going to lead up to another good question, go ahead.
Doesn't he try to kill Plato later? Plutarch writes a story.
It's one of the tyrants of Sicily or Syracuse tries to kill Plato, and then Plato had to get out of there by the squire.
Yes, I thought you said sure. No, yes, kill. No, no, no. It's a disaster.
So, okay, so Plato, this is also a really important point to grasp in terms of the philosopher living his ideas.
The philosopher, as someone who doesn't just sit in an ivory tower but wants to change the world, okay, wants his ideas to reshape society.
Plato attempted to implement his conception of the ideal society.
He went to Syracuse in contemporary Italy, southern Italy, and he attempted through a follower of his in the court of Dionysus the Elder, Dionysus I.
A guy named Dion, who was part of the family of Dionysus, was a follower of Plato, and this Dion gave him basically Plato a foothold in the royal court of Syracuse.
And Plato tried to influence the son of Dionysus to not be a tyrant like his father and basically mold him into the type of philosopher king that he portrays in Republic.
And long story short, Dionysus gets rubbed the wrong way by this and his courtiers convince him that Plato is out to wreck the conservative traditional society of Syracuse.
And he has Plato sold into slavery.
And some rich guy bails Plato out basically and buys his freedom and Plato escapes back to Athens.
Then Dionysus dies, Dionysus I dies, and Dionysus II comes to power and Dion, who is his uncle, Dion is the uncle of Dionysus II, he winds up with more influence.
He winds up with more influence at court. And so he basically implores Plato to come back and try again. And Plato comes back and he tries again now to shape Dionysus II, a monarch who's actually on the throne.
And the second letter is a letter to this Dionysus II of Syracuse, which Plato writes to him after Plato is forced to flee again.
And so Plato is forced, you know, at the risk of his life to flee for a second time.
Yeah, Soothark says that I think it was the second Dionysus who wanted to kill Plato and almost did, was very close to doing it.
Yes. And then, get this, he repents at some years later, Dionysus II has a change of heart, and he convinces Dion to beg Plato to come back for a third time to Syracuse.
You know, he agrees he's gonna let Plato basically experiment in Syracuse with his ideas for social engineering and so forth.
And it ends badly for a third time. And the third time, as Dionysus II basically, you know, conspires to execute both Plato and Dion.
Dion leads a coup d'etat against the government of his nephew and tries to take power directly, basically as a representative of Plato's philosophical project.
And Dion is killed in the process and Plato has to escape Syracuse, you know, for the third time. Right.
So he, he, this is very important.
This is the same geographical location where Parminides and Pythagoras and all these guys are.
So this is this is a huge stick for what for the Western, the Western civilization, like all these events are shaping the world today in a weird way in the rival effect way. Yeah.
But no, this is really important in terms of understanding the concept of the noble lie.
This is an idea that that Plato brings up in, I'm going to come back to the letters I know we're going on a tangent but it's still relevant to setting this up.
What Plato's misadventure in Syracuse is very important to understanding the noble lie as an applicable concept.
Before 14 to 415 in Republic, Plato introduces this idea of an ally that would be noble, a deception that would be, you know, that would be of merit and would have, you know, that would be virtuous a virtuous deception.
Okay.
He introduces this idea at 414 to 415.
This is a mix of the so called myth of metals where he's saying that, you know, we have this tripartite society with the guardians or the philosopher rulers at the top, the military class of basically, you know, noble minded nights in the middle,
the general citizenry of farmers and business people in the third tier. And he's saying that as part of getting people to accept this type of structure in society, which is of course a meritocratic structure because people are educated.
They all receive the same general education and it's throughout the course of their education that it's determined which class of society they belong in. But as part of getting people to accept this kind of meritocratic tripartite class division of society will inculcate them from
childhood with the myth that the gods have mixed one or another metal into their soul.
And the philosopher rulers have gold mixed into their soul. The noble warrior cast has silver mixed into its soul and the general populace of farmers and merchants have grown.
And so that's the context in which introduced. So in other words, this is bullshit. Okay, it's a lie. It's some myth, but children should be brought up with this myth because it's constructive to reinforcing what is actually a noble attempt to replace the arbitrary
aristocracy and kind of quasi feudal society of the time with a meritocratic system right so it's serving to actually reward individuals for their merit as expressed through their performance in the course of their education.
So that's what makes it a noble lie. And then this noble lie comes up two more times. Once in the context of how marriages will be set up with the view to eugenic breeding.
So, okay, so in the Republic, the philosopher rulers and the military class are all married to each other. They have kind of a common marriage. It's like a basically free love. Okay, people and the men and women in the ruling class, and the men and women who serve as soldiers basically have a communal life where
they're all sleeping with one another. The general populace though have, you know, have marriages and have families, but the marriages are arranged with a view to eugenic breeding in other words the people with the best genes should be the ones who get together in order to produce
one free from diseases and deformities and so forth and the brightest children and so forth. Plato is the father of the concept of eugenics, but he says to make this go down easier.
We'll tell the general populace that like, you know, we're going to hold certain lotteries that determine who they get to marry what group of people are their eligible mates.
And this is the second application of the noble lie in service of the eugenic breeding program. The third and final example of the noble lie is the most important though, and the most relevant to our general conversation.
And that's where Plato says, again, going back to his attack on Homer, and how all the sadism and brutality in the Iliad, for example, is deleterious to the development of the youth.
Plato says that, look, these religious myths that we have are ancient and we don't know whether what they're depicting is something that ever really took place.
We have little knowledge of vast antiquity. And so we should spin these myths. We should rewrite them in ways that are more constructive to the development of the youth and frame a religion that portrays gods and goddesses and so forth in a way that will serve as an ethical example for the children brought up with this religion.
And the guardians, the philosopher rulers don't have to believe in this religion. It's not true, but it's constructive for developing a society oriented toward actual discovery of the truth.
In other words, a society where science can flourish.
Okay, so now you got to understand, we're dealing now with an incredibly duplicitous person. This person is proposing restructuring the entire religion of the society based on lies and creating a false religion which the rulers themselves won't believe in, but which they'll get the majority of the population to believe in,
because that type of religion that I don't want to call it a cult, will actually foster scientific thinking in the long run, and will be more conducive to the development of reflective, critical and strong individuals, which seems a little paradoxical, right?
But it's the idea that you have to force people to be free. And on the way to doing that, on the way to forcing people to think for themselves, you need to give them certain constructive fables, myths, right?
And ideas that may be false, but that will be thought provoking and that will be, that will cultivate virtue in them. Okay.
So, so these are the different, you know, examples of the use of the noble lie and, as I said at the beginning, what I'm suggesting is that this entire theory of forms is itself a noble lie.
And to get back to that argument, right, we were talking about, you know, the sun, which if you stare straight at, and by the way, the metaphor of a sun that never sets is at the heart of the writings of Heraclitus.
So I think the Plato is getting the simile of the sun straight from out of his years as a Heraclitian in his youth. And in the context of this whole discussion of how,
unless you're ready for it, contemplating the good, the form of the good can blind you intellectually, it can drive you mad spiritually, right? And so you need something like the forms as a sort of safety net on the way to that.
In the context of all of that, let me read what Plato says in some key passages of these two letters, the seventh letter and the second letter, the one to Dionysus of Syracuse.
In the seventh letter, Plato writes,
This much at any rate I can affirm about any present or future writers who pretend to knowledge of the matters with which I concern myself, whether they claim to have been taught by me or by a third party, or to have discovered the truth for themselves.
In my judgment, it is impossible that they should have any understanding of the subject. No treatise by me concerning it exists or ever will exist.
If I thought that any adequate spoken or written account could be given to the world at large, what more glorious life work could I have undertaken than to put into writing what would be of great benefit to mankind and to bring the nature of reality to light for all to see.
But I do not think that the attempt to put these matters into words would be to men's advantage, except to those few who can find out the truth for themselves with a little guidance.
That is why any students of serious realities will shrink from making truth the helpless object of men's ill will by committing it to writing.
In a word, the conclusion to be drawn is this, when one sees a written composition, whether it be on law by a legislator or on any other subject, one can be sure if the writer, if the writer is a serious man, that his book does not represent his most serious thoughts.
They remain stored up in the noblest region of his personality.
And now one short passage from the second letter, his letter to Dionysus II of Syracuse.
Quote, take precautions, lest this teaching ever be disclosed among untrained people. It is impossible for what is written not to be disclosed.
That is the reason why I have never written anything about these things and why there is not and will not be any written work of Plato's own.
Farewell and believe. Read this letter now at once many times and burn it.
Wow.
So Plato never wrote his philosophy.
All these writings we have, the most voluminous intellectual work that survived the destruction of the Library of Alexandria and so forth, the corpus of Plato does not represent the teaching of Plato.
What Plato wrote were plays.
He was a tragedian. He was a trained playwright. Remember, he burned his plays when he met Socrates. He torched them and dedicated the burning of his plays to Prometheus and called for the God of Fire to inspire him in his next endeavor, which is his philosophical project.
But he did that at the theater of Dionysus and as someone who's coming from out of the Dionysian tragic poetic tradition, a tradition of ecstasy, of mystical frenzy, right, of the contemplation of beauty as the key to understanding the nature of the divine.
And so I think that Plato's unwritten doctrine, which he tells us exists, right, in the seventh letter and in the second letter, he says his true teaching remains unwritten.
So meaning what meaning we have to read between the lines of the dialogues that we want to understand, you know, what Plato actually thought.
And we have to read between the lines to understand what the hell Plato was trying to do in Syracuse or why Plato thought that noble lies needed to be employed for the sake of reshaping society beneficent.
Okay, so this is what I argue in the pharmacon artist that Plato and of course the name of that essay is a play on words right pharmacon, it's the snake poison.
That's also a medicine in the right dose, which is what Socrates is accused of dispensing is being accused of being a pharmacus. But obviously my title the pharmacon artist has con artist in it.
Oh, nice, nice.
He's a, and in a way I mean Alcibiades accuses Socrates of being a con man in symposium. Why would Plato write that.
He builds up this character, this great tragic martyr, seeker of truth in light, and he allows Alcibiades he gives him the stage with the main ads playing the Dionysian flute tunes in symposium to portray Socrates as a kind of
trickster con man, you know, basically magician, which doctor, right, because Plato is telling us something about himself, and who and what he really is, what he's up to.
Wow.
Now, when Plato talks about how what you want for a society is that you want them to think that their laws are not only divinely from God, but that they're most ancient and they go back to the beginning of time.
And when you weigh this up with what is being said.
And for example, the Old Testament, and there are there are some people who now are theorizing that the Septuagint came first, and the Hebrews came, regardless if that's true or not.
Even if it's even if it's not true, there could be the other and the other side that could be that this Old Testament myth fits so well with what Plato envisioned that the people in Alexandria said this is let's put this together as this Septuagint.
That's how Lamaic Empire, that is Greek, obviously, and they have the libraries and they have Plato's writings. Are they putting together what becomes the myth of the Western civilization as we know it Judeo Christianity.
That's the question I think is Plato the one who checks this.
I don't know. I don't know if you realize the profundity and
terror implicit in the question that you just framed. I mean,
this is perhaps the single most disturbing question that we could grapple with about the history of Western civilization and by extension the entire world has been conquered and dominated by the West.
Let me just stop for a second. All the hours of us talking as leading up to this question right here. It literally has been and this is this is like the question that Plato construct what we what became the myth of the West, the religion of the Western civilization as we know it, you know, universal church.
So, okay.
I answered this question, not in the pharmacon artist, although you know I'm developing an embryonic phase of it there I'm planting the seeds for it there, but I answered this question of yours at the heart of Iranian Leviathan.
In the series of chapters that goes from the one I mentioned earlier Emperor of noble lies, where I'm portraying Darius the Great as a noble liar in the style of the Platonic philosopher King, all the way through.
Hassan Sabah, the leader of the Order of Assassins at Alamut Fortress, claiming that nothing is true and everything is permitted, and that the entire war on with it so not its Sharia law was a noble lie.
Okay, in this series of chapters in Iranian Leviathan, I basic which includes a treatment of the origin of the Old Testament.
You're the influence of Mithraists, who were the patrons of Jewish Pharisees that set up the Second Temple State after Cyrus and Darius rebuilt the Temple of Solomon.
Okay, I have a whole treatment of that.
That chapter is comically titled Tekel Tekel Manish Ekel.
And it's about the relationship between the Persians and the Jews.
And how Judaism was created and why.
And you also have so many commonalities between the Mithraic Orders and the early Christians.
So much.
They're even using the same worship places.
Right.
So now, look, this is like a whole other conversation.
This could be, yeah.
Okay.
But in a nutshell, the answer to your question is that a case can be made
that people who understood very well what Plato's esoteric project was and people who knew how to deploy, noble lies in the most sophisticated way on the highest level or at the deepest level.
If you want to put it that way.
He engineered the Abrahamic revelation, the biblical religion as a catalyst for the transformation of society.
But the catalyst was not intended to get people to become good Jews or later good Christians or even later good Muslims.
The catalyst was intended to get people to go to the devil.
The purpose of the catalyst was to confront people with an image of divinity that ought to be rejected and resisted by the conscience of the human individual.
Wow.
It was a pharmacon.
Remember, pharmacon, it's poison.
If you don't take to it the right way, it will kill you.
It's a snake bite, like the snake in the garden of Eden.
Why would you tell a story like that, by the way?
If your point is to get people to believe in Yahweh, why do you even have the whole narrative of the serpent offering the fruit of the tree of knowledge to Adamic man?
Why?
Why even include the story about the fallen angels and how they taught humanity to rebel against the Elohim?
Why even have the Tower of Babel in there?
I mean, if you just want to instill paternalistic, patriarchal, collectivistic obedience into a society right like Confucius,
don't tell us about this serpent and about these rebel angels and about this Tower of Babel.
What are you trying to do here?
Instigate rebellion.
Give people models of challenging authority.
That's very Plato.
Wow.
My view is very radically divergent from the common understanding of the relationship between both Christian scholasticism and Plato,
and then later Islamic scholasticism and Plato, because Plato was as important to the medieval Muslim thinkers as he was to the Catholic scholastics.
Conventionally, it's believed, and even Nietzsche subscribed to this idea, that Christianity is Platonism for the masses,
and that the scholastics Aquinas before him, Augustine and so on and so forth, they basically adapted elements of Plato into aspects of the Christian faith by making them more amenable to a popular understanding.
But what you just did is you just answered the question that scholars have been dumbfounded by is that is the closer we get to the origins of Christianity,
the closer we get to the beginning, the more diverse it is, the more nostics there are, the more opposing there are.
There are people who literally say that Yahweh is evil and that Cain was good because he wasn't offering blood sacrifices.
They start off that way. They don't become that way later on. They start off that way, because you're seeing the duality within the stories.
You choose a side. You're choosing a side.
And so I believe it's a travesty.
You're right, dude.
And the Christian scholastics took to frame Plato as quote, a virtuous pagan, unquote.
Like, he would have been a Christian if he were alive today.
No, no.
Plato is out to create the devil.
That's his aim.
Plato wants to, he wants to basically promulgate Diabolane, what the Greeks call Diabolane, a dynamic tension, a throwing through of opposites.
This is what his dialectical method is about.
It's why his dialogue, it's why he wrote dialogues and it's why his writings are structured in the conversational and oppositional way that they are.
Because he wants people to set positions against one another.
He assumes all kinds of positions through the mouth of Socrates that he himself doesn't subscribe to and that over the course of his corpus contradict each other.
And he does that for the sake of provoking insight and catalyzing independent thinking.
He's literally separating goats from sheep in a sense.
Exactly.
Here's the story.
However you interpret this will determine if you're one of these types.
That's exactly it.
And in fact...
It's genius. It really is.
In fact, he comes close to saying this, you know, in the seventh letter that you can't get philosophy from some treatise.
That it's not like, you know, philosophy is not about subscribing to a worldview that some guy has written down in a treatise.
You have to have direct experiential knowledge of certain things about the nature of reality.
And you're only going to get that in dialogue and in a life in common, he says, with others also devoted to seeking the truth.
So Plato has this unwritten doctrine.
And this unwritten doctrine deploys all kinds of noble lies up to and including, I believe, the theory of forms.
And to my mind, Plato doesn't subscribe to the objective existence of these forms.
They're useful constructs to promote the rise of rational thought of the kind that eventually becomes scientific analysis.
Wow.
Really, Plato, really, Plato sees the world more like Heraclitus saw it.
That is amazing.
I have no... I don't even know what... I think I want to leave it right there because that's perfect.
That leaves the viewer with something to think about.
And because I think when we stick to the way we started off with talking about the Mithraist and how their religion sort of is this religion that influences all areas of the world and all religious aspects.
And obviously, Zoroaster comes along.
He transforms this movement and he shapes philosophy of the West.
And then we had this divide happening.
There's people looking at gods in different ways.
And which side do we devote ourselves to?
Plato comes along and answers that question in an inverse way.
Very secretive, very esoteric, but he does it.
That's it.
Absolutely.
And I think the takeaway is what you said as you put it.
His intention was to separate the goats from the sheep to find a way to basically pass society through that filter
and to test people's metal.
That's where the fricking question comes from, right?
It's the myth of the metals.
And our expression to test someone's metal comes from the myth of the metals, ultimately, to see what someone's made of.
What are you made of?
Right?
By the way, just as a nice concluding note, that's very much the question in Christopher Nolan's film, The Dark Knight,
which I think is the greatest of the Batman films.
Yes, it is.
What are you made of?
That's what that film turns around.
But that film also turns around the noble lie, the whole films about the noble lie.
Yeah.
But Batman as the guardian of Gotham, the philosopher king, the guardian of Gotham,
is forced to lie to the entire populace to take the blame for the murders committed by Harvey Dent,
so that Harvey Dent or Two-Face can retain his image as the white knight of Gotham.
Because if people were to know that this district attorney, champion of justice and hero fighting against corruption,
that he was driven by the Joker into becoming Two-Face and committing all these murders,
if people were to see Harvey Dent in that light, they would lose faith.
And, you know, it would unleash anarchy and chaos in the city.
And so the Joker, the trickster, forces Batman to become a noble liar in the guise of being the guardian of Gotham.
But yeah, what does that film turn around?
The idea of testing someone's metal, of asking, hammering someone the way Batman is hammered by the Joker,
and of asking them the question, what are you made of?
Show your face.
The one under the mask.
Plato wore masks throughout his entire philosophical career.
All of these characters in these dialogues are one or another mask of Plato, not just Socrates.
But the conversation we've been having is really ultimately about the face underneath those masks that Plato wore.
Wow. That is just phenomenal.
And I'm sure we will think of another thing to discuss in a future date.
But as of now, I think this completes this four-part series in the, what is behind Western esotericism,
and where does it come from, and where, how does it end up on Plato's lap for him to make their choice?
And it's like an IQ test.
He's like giving the world an IQ test.
Here you go.
Here's, take it or leave it.
Let's see where you're at.
Let's see how you interpret this.
And a test of character on ethos.
Test of ethos, right?
Because who within ethos would ever worship Zeus or Yahweh?
Yeah.
You don't have to be a genius, right?
I mean, in Plato's ideal state in the Republic, you have the philosopher,
but then the warrior cast, the warrior cast, they're in the positions that they are because they're virtuous.
They're noble.
It's why they're entrusted with a weaponry to protect society.
They're not geniuses, the people in the warrior cast, but they do have ethos.
Ethos defines them.
And so those people are not, you know, individuals who would worship a Zeus or Yahweh.
Right.
Yeah.
And that, and it's so geniusly gives them something to, to go to battle for.
Yeah.
So it helps.
It helps out.
And that's, it's so late.
It has so many different dimensions of playing the, what do you call it?
The puppet with the strings?
Like he's got so many puppets on different strings all by one person on top.
But they're all, they're all doing different things, different purposes.
It's really,
you know, as a really, as a last point, Neil, let me just say that people should think of my philosophical project in these terms.
Okay.
I learned from Plato.
I mean, people, a lot of people have framed me as a Nietzschean or something or a Heideggerian or first of all, I don't belong to any of these schools of philosophy.
I have my own philosophical project.
When I say I learned from Plato, I mean, I really learned from Plato.
My work is in the style of Plato.
My project is very much an esoteric project in the sense of Plato's esoteric and unwritten doctrine.
Well, I have links in the description.
Where else can they, what do you have anything coming up?
Any thing you want to promote?
Just for now, I am always writing a new book.
So I'm in the process of doing that right now.
But for now, let's just link in particular my YouTube, the Prometheism YouTube.
So that's the, you know, where people can remain most up to date with my work.
I'm showing it on the screen right now.
Go hit that subscribe button.
Links in the description.
And you have just attained trunosis.
You have just attained trunosis.
The demiurge has no power over you.
