Welcome back to the Gnostic Informant and you are about to attain true gnosis and today
we're going to go deep again.
As you know, I have Dr. Amon with me.
And if you haven't yet subscribed, go to Lady Babylon, hit that subscribe button.
This is, this is one, there's only one place in the world where you're going to find content
like this.
And I'm not joking.
This is a perfect, this is a real classical philologist who is trained in the ancient
classical Greek languages, who also studies the, the, the drugs.
What do I mean by that?
Well, I'll just pull, I'll just give you an example.
He wrote, kind of a commuse.
This is a big hit.
As you can see, you know, the times UK said, this is the last wild frontier of classical
studies.
And you can get it right here on Amazon, links in the description.
The ancient world is not what you think.
I mean, just imagine if we had the like, I don't know, Lord of the Rings, but it was
rated R and there's prostitutes and drugs everywhere.
That's the ancient world that we don't, that we lost through a thousand years of the church.
But the ancient world before the church was a different place and we lose a lot of the
context of that.
When this, and that's what Dr. Amon brings to the table.
He reminds, he's reminding the world of what the ancients were doing.
And he brings a lot of context that is needed in my opinion when I'm looking into stuff
that I do.
Also, he offers his services.
And as you can see, he's a PhD in classics, he's got five stars, perfect rating out of
378 ratings.
You can hit the link in the description if you want to learn classical Greek or Latin.
He does both.
Let's just go down real quick just to see some of these reviews.
Learning is easy to Professor David.
He makes it fun and interesting.
Learning is quick and very smooth.
That was me, by the way.
Four lessons I've done so far.
Knowledgeable is an understatement.
Amon is able to take me through ancient Greek in a way that other teacher could.
I am comfortable learning with Amon and look forward to continuing.
There is countless, countless people who have left five stars and who are continuing to
get learning languages from Dr. Amon.
So with that being said, make sure you hit those subscribes, check out those links.
And we are going to have an amazing, amazing show tonight.
We're going to go deep into the stuff that they do not tell you in church.
Let me repeat that.
You will not hear this in church.
Hit the intro.
All right, here's without further ado, Dr. Amon, what is going on?
Neil, the great informant of the gnosis.
Yes, it's good to see you and thank you for having me on.
It's always, I'm always jumping at the chance to come on and address your audience.
So thank you for having me.
Absolutely.
I can't wait to get into this topic because as you guys know in the thumbnail, gangster
Jesus, some of you might be like, come on, that's a cheap shot.
But wait, this is, there's something to this thing.
He is a boaster.
He is not playing around.
The Jesus you get in church is, you know, love your neighbor as you love yourself.
And the greatest thing you can do is love.
But that's, that's part of his schizophrenic, if you will, message that flips on a dime and
he'll just randomly snap and then brag about going after Jezebel and throwing her on a
table to rape her and then killing your children and then saying, I am the morning star, bitch.
And like, we're going to get into these texts right now.
You're probably running, what, what are you talking about?
What text is this?
And that's what we're about to bring you right now.
So let's get into it.
This is the Bible thug life, man.
This is the thug life of the Bible.
When I started dipping into the drugs and antiquity and the prostitution and these cult rights
and stuff.
Yeah, you see a lot of thuggery.
Yeah.
So this is a great topic.
Let's bring it all out.
All out.
Good.
Absolutely.
Good.
I want to, can I throw up first and I more want to present this to you and then you have,
you give me meal, your thing, because people like this love between us.
Yeah.
I'm going to pump up your energy.
We're going to bounce you back and forth.
All right.
Let's go.
That first email, the Peter kills Ananias, right?
Yeah.
Right.
So there was a certain guy named Ananias and his wife was Sapphira, right?
Anyway, he sold some land, some of his own goods he sold, right?
This is usually like a building upon a piece of land or something.
He's got some cash there going and he, like everybody else, he sells it, right?
And he only gave a part.
He only gave a part of it to Peter, right?
And so Peter says, Hey, what are you filled with Satan, you know, that you got this thing
in your heart, that you're lying to the spirit of God, that you, you kept some of this stuff
back, bro.
And yeah.
And that's where it gets weird because he falls down right away.
He falls down and dies.
Wow.
Yeah.
You're in this X Epsuchsen, X Epsuchsen.
And it uses a weird word there, uses a very weird word there, neo for to die.
It's used by the doctors on the side of the medical tax for losing a heart rate, a stable
heart rate, because they were all, they were all into the pulse and whatnot.
And so it has to do with some kind of cardiac event, right?
And so there he is.
That makes sense.
Why he hits the ground, right?
As dead.
And the text says that this, this message went out, man.
People stood in fear.
People were afraid because of this.
Yeah.
And then he brings in his wife.
Same thing happens to his wife.
She hits the ground.
And he tells her.
It's so good.
He can tell her.
He says, we just took your husband out and buried him just like we're going to bury
you.
And boom, she hits the ground.
Now what's funny that people don't point out is there are some neoniscoy, right?
There's some neoteroi there.
These are the new initiates.
These are the people who've just started into the cult, right?
Who were just in the family, calling people brother and they sit there and they do what
Peter tells them to do.
So somehow Peter had this interaction and in both cases, in both cases, he was able to
get them to die on cue, right?
When you sin against that pluma, that is a sin that is performed within the right.
That's the only thing that can't be pardoned is a sin within the right.
And if you took that poison without taking the antidote, you were dead.
And if Peter didn't give it to you, that's it.
Yeah.
And I want to throw something out here too because this is coming from the chapter where
these new initiates, they sold their property and they gave away most of the funds to the
church or the assembly and kept a little bit for themselves.
And that was enough.
That was not cool.
They were not playing around.
You're supposed to give all of it, you're not supposed to keep any of it for yourself.
That is it.
Where's all these conservative Republican Christians at today that are owning businesses
and you think they would ever, that's not the way, like what happened to that?
The idea that you can't have any private property.
That's gone now.
That's not the Christians today.
This is a whole different world back then.
Yeah.
According to our modern evangelical fairytale, it's our blessing by God who has given us
manifest destiny to be able to make as much capital as we possibly can.
But in antiquity, those Christians were instructed, you have to get rid of everything.
And what they said was you got to lay it at the feet of the rock.
You got to lay everything at the feet of the rock.
And so that's what they did.
And then it says they redistributed out what they needed for food and whatnot like that.
So yeah.
Right.
Remember, these people are dropping out though.
They're dropping out of society, right?
They're disappearing.
They're leaving families.
They're doing all this.
So we got kind of a radical group.
And when we see gangster Peter, right, making these hits and setting the stage for the
rock, Petros, yeah, that's his gang name, you know, he's got some friends.
They call them the sons of thunder.
Don't mess with these people.
We know that they're armed.
Where Peter's the one who jumps out and starts swinging the sword, right, cuts his ear off.
Yeah.
He's not supposed to be carrying a sword, by the way.
That's a no-no.
Right.
And there's no, you know, Ray in antiquity, they have laws against things, right?
So yeah, he's armed and he's there.
And he's there with the trafficking Jesus, with the boy and the naked boy.
But let's go to the, let's go to the next one.
Yeah.
All curses, right?
There won't be any curses anymore.
This is from Apocalypse.
Yeah.
And the throne of God, the lamb was in them, right, will be in them.
And the slaves, right, they'll serve them, right?
And they will look upon his face and they're, they're, they're foreheads, metopon, right
on their foreheads.
They're going to have to on them out to, they're going to have his name.
This thug leader has slaves and those slaves bear a brand as do any slaves, right?
This is, you know, we're not living in a slave culture, so this doesn't strike us.
But these are, that word Latreo is that word of service.
Jesus has slaves whom he imprints with his own name on their heads, right?
Now remember, we looked at Jesus as the laystace.
He calls himself, when he gets arrested, he comes out yelling, he's like, would you come
out against me armed like I'm a pirate, right?
This is the accoutrement of the pirate, right?
This is, he's got a brand that he carries, right?
And he brands you, you're his, right, and he's going to trade you off.
That brand will follow you.
You'll always be in service, bro.
So this is a part of the machinery of antiquity.
People don't realize it's baked into the language, you know what I mean?
Oh, that's crazy.
That is wild, actually.
That is just absolutely, I mean, he's, this is like, you're, you're getting branded.
You're getting, basically getting tatted basically for your gang.
And now you better die, you better be a martyr for this gang.
It's, it's radical.
This is not like some club that everybody was holding hands and doing hymns like your,
like your Sunday church.
This is like, you're going to get a brand on you and then you better go and die for
this faith.
Because if you don't, you're not real.
Yeah.
You better be a, this is like the real, I don't know, I was going to say the word jihadi,
but like, kind of, did you notice, did you notice the apocalypse?
He's constantly threatening, I'll, I'll wipe your name out of the book of life.
If you do this, I'll wipe your name out of the book of life.
They're not playing around.
This is not a light at all.
This is serious.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And why is he coming back?
People are like, Jesus, come back and resurrect me and the evangelicals are like, Oh, I'm a
dominionist, pre tribulations, right?
Just BS that has no, that has no meaning to it.
From the 1600s that they just made up, it's not, it's not biblical.
Like, like, like Bart Ehrman pointed out in one of Derek's videos that Jesus is coming
back.
He's going to look for people when he says Jezebel, he's talking about people, a specific
type of people who are profaners of the mysteries, people who are part, he's going to take them,
throw her out of bed, rape her, go look for her children and kill them.
Well, that's, that's, that's the return of Jesus.
There's no rapture.
There's no come to take my people who believe me.
No, it's come to kill the people who don't believe me.
It's the, it's the negative.
It's the opposite of that.
That's a thug hit right there, baby.
Kill that.
Not only that, kill that, kill that BI.
You know what?
And her children to knock them all off, knock them all off.
It's a hit.
But that's, that's, that's, that's your, that's your basic messiah, messianic, all messiahs
doesn't matter what sect or religion, that's the, the idea of the messiah.
That's what the messiah is supposed to do.
Yeah.
That's not, that's not nothing new that Christianity is bringing to the table.
That's just, that's the messiah.
That's the real messiah.
There is nothing new that Christianity brought to the table.
Yeah.
There is nothing new, right?
If you took a pin and marked out like you were redacting something for a lawyer or something.
If you went, took a pin, black pin and marked out everything that had precedent, the whole
thing would be dark, you know, except for Jesus went down to Bethany.
That's the only thing that, you know, just be his directions.
Right.
Right.
Yeah.
Love it.
Love it.
It's everything is, but you can't, you and I can't do anything original, right?
You don't, you see anybody else coming up with a religion that's new thing like that?
No.
You see with language, when you talk, when you're using a certain language, you cannot
come out of, you can't separate yourself from the linguistics that you're operating within.
No, it's like an amber and it traps you.
That language traps the meaning for, forever preserves it.
Yeah.
He's going to come back.
He's not, people think he's coming back and it's all going to be half resurrection and
I'm going to heaven.
You all can.
No, no, no.
He's going to come back to kill all of us.
The mission is to kill everyone.
Think about this.
Think about, let's look at some more sources.
What's that next one?
Yeah.
Don't do that.
Oh, I just wanted to bring this up because this is a quote, you know, revelation 22.
I am a fellow servant with you.
Right.
That word servant is the same word for slave, right?
Right.
Yeah.
No, no, no.
He's talking about bowing.
This is an angel responding to John who's bowing in front of him.
He says, don't do that.
He's like, you know, I'm a, I'm a, I'm also a slave, right?
And then he says worship God.
The only one that you're that slave to is the living God.
We are do Lloyd.
We are slaves, brah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Next one that.
Oh, look at this one.
Oh.
And by the way, isn't that, isn't there, isn't, isn't he basically calling him like the equivalent
of the B word, right?
Uh, he's, well, uh, that's an interesting question.
That's an interesting question.
I don't, uh, it's so cult tied up this word, that you even have dogs who are official priests.
So the, because the next one is father McCoy, right?
Those are people who are specific.
That's a technical term.
Yeah.
Those are people within the cult or within the community who are experts in drugs, right?
And, and so all of these are the pornoi.
Who do you think the pornoi are?
Those are the people that's the lady Babylon way, right?
And, and why do you think they're called phonase?
They're called murderers because they're performing their sacrifice.
And the last one, the a dola la trii, those who were in service of the image, the image
of the image, right?
These, these people are the people on the outside that, and what's going to happen to
them, right?
Let's see what the next one is.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And she'll take away the words of the book of the prophets.
God shall take away his part out of the book of life and out of the holy city and from
the things which are written in this book.
Yeah.
This is intense, man.
This is not the love your neighbor type of Jesus right here.
This is, he's going to wipe you off the face of the planet like you never existed, throw
you in the lake of fire.
That's what this is.
And when you say wipe off, you're right.
That's exactly off the LA is exactly that, right?
He's going to take out your portion, right from the tree of life.
You're not going to have any sort of access to this, right?
That's it, bro.
I'm going to kill you dead.
Is this a threat, Neil?
When you said gangster Jesus, and I was like, this is perfect.
This was Neil's idea by the way, I said, this is perfect gangster all over the place.
This is an example.
He's got a book and if you're not in it, right, you don't get anywhere.
You don't get anywhere without me in my book.
That's a gangster, bro.
Yeah.
It's gorgeous.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And it's like, there's no, this isn't about like doing anything or feeding the poor or
doing.
It's just about getting in line and do what I say.
That's the only thing that makes you or breaks you in the eyes of this God.
Do get in line, period.
I don't care what's, there's no objective morality.
Like you hear these Christians talk about today and no, no, no, no, no, no, it's get
in line, do as you're told or die.
It's when you think about it, it's really simple and it's kind of it's really dark because
that's what this whole faith is kind of based on is just following it.
You know what I mean?
It's not like, like, I hate to say like paganism is like this like huge umbrella term, but
like these other rights, then they don't operate that way.
There is no like, you better do this or else.
It's only within this biblical religion that you get that.
And it's so opposite of classical civilization, the drive towards investigation and study
and argumentation, you know, it's so contrary to that.
There isn't, there is an implied reason in pagan religion.
It's like when somebody tells you, don't believe what you're seeing, right?
Don't, don't, it's just bad press that's giving you this impression.
That's what Christianity does.
It says, don't use your reason.
Well, you know, you don't, I noticed about that too, multi polytheism, right?
Multiple gods, you give your devote devotion to the God that you align with, the God that
you look at, that you look up to, that you need help from.
But in monotheism, it's sort of, monotheism sort of aligns the world in a way that makes
it so that you have one king or one Caesar or one emperor.
And underneath that one emperor is the footstool, the world, the Roman empire, and everyone
is a servant to this one emperor.
That's why all of a sudden when you get this Christian Byzantine empire, it's, it's really
just like, all of it's privately owned by the Caesar, by, by the emperor, by the Constantine
or whoever, like, you know, all these different Constantine the six and Constantine the seventh
and, and just keeps going until another, and like, you can come get it from me, come get
it from me.
Like if you can assert this throne, you can have this world, but until then it's mine.
And these legions are mine, they're going to do what I say, and my will is be done.
And it, it follows the monotheistic religion that it's operating within.
So the religion sort of sets the tone of how the society operates, whatever theocracy,
like in the, and like, I, you know, I sound like I'm people, people will always say, but
you act like the pagan world is so perfect.
There were still problems, of course there was, but like, at least within this world
where you have all these different deities and different temples and, you know, the
temple of Ephesus was Artemis, the temple of Athena, the Acropolis, at least in this
world, it seems to be, there's, there was more, like you said, there's more debates,
more discussion, more, more diverse, like more, more metropolitan-y feeling going on.
You know, what is your thoughts on that?
And I could be wrong.
I think what you're describing is not the gang, right?
The gang, we have to have a certain code and we have to have a certain color and we have
to have a certain ethnicity and we take orders up and we don't question, we just kill, right?
That's the gang mentality.
And I think Christianity is very much, that's because when you, when you said it, gangster
Jesus, I thought, wow, Neil, you've captured it.
It is.
When you have paganism, on the other hand, there is no overriding authority.
There's no one central person who can tell you what's what.
Yeah.
I mean, think about it.
Paganism expressed itself in the chorus.
A chorus is a group of people who come together and sing and dance.
I mean, what is more, you know, what is more democratic than that?
The Christians did not.
And even Zeus, even Zeus doesn't have all the power.
Like Zeus might, might get, Eros might have power over Zeus or Athena might have power.
There's, there's different situations where sometimes Zeus doesn't have the
authority just to do whatever he wants.
Yeah.
So there is that, there's that.
I feel like that, that aspect kind of dictates the culture in a, in a really
effective way when you have that one authority on top, everyone follows suit.
Better do what that one authority says or else.
Yeah.
And it's funny because when the, when the Ottomans come and take
Constance and Opal, Mehmed II, what does he do?
He says, I'm Caesar now.
He just wants, he wants to continue playing the same game.
He's not changing anything up.
He just, we're Muslim now, but, but I'm going to be Caesar.
Even, even ask the Pope, call me Caesar.
Pope, the Pope's like, no, bro.
But like, well, you still, he's, they're, they're playing the same game.
Yeah.
And it's kind of, it's kind of crazy to think about the world.
Like that's how the world was for a long time.
What's the difference between a crusade and a gang war?
You know, it's always over, it's always over capital of some support, some, you
know, uh, some kind of rights to be able to run this black market in this area.
You know what I mean?
It's always just like, look at the, look at the history of the crusades.
It's the same thing.
It's the flow.
There is no ideal.
People that think crusaders were ideal, idealistic, um, you know,
I'm going to go fight for Jesus.
And there are people who have that soldier of Christ mentality today.
Let me tell you something.
There's no such thing as a crusade.
Crusades are just wars over turf and cash.
Right.
That's, that's all they are.
So I don't, I don't, I don't understand why, um, people can't see the
thuggery that's behind Christianity.
That's why Neil, I'm still really impressed that you made.
Well, the, the Godfather, what do you think a Pope is?
He's the, he's the Godfather.
This is, I mean, it's like literally the same thing.
Yeah.
You know, what's the difference?
You know, it's my ring, man.
Yeah.
On your knee.
Do what you told.
Lovely.
Let's go to the next source.
Let me see if I got any more cool gang.
All right.
So we have angels or slaves.
We got that.
We did that one, right?
Yeah.
Good.
Here we go.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's the next one.
Let's go to the next one.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay.
So for all of these people, look, it gives off a list, right?
Of people and notice right at the top, it's apistos.
These are people who don't subscribe to your notion of faith, right?
These are the people who don't just subscribe to your notion of faith.
So that's anybody.
We're not just talking about people think this is a list of bad things to do,
like murder, right?
Murder and, and lying.
These are bad things.
So Jesus is the good guy.
He doesn't follow it.
No, no, no.
He's saying anybody that doesn't follow us is abominable.
Yeah.
They're murderers, right?
They're, they're pharmacists.
Look, they're drug experts.
They're drug users.
They are wizard sorcerers.
He's calling everybody that, right?
And saying they're idolaters.
They're those image casters, right?
And by the way, he says the liars got no part.
Yeah.
The liars got no part.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They're going to be put in a lake.
Think of that imagery, though, a lake, which you burn it with fire and brimstone.
Yeah.
Now that sounds like that sounds like the pit of Tartarus, doesn't it?
Yeah.
No, this is the purging, right?
That Phaeoi, that, that brimstone that you're talking about.
Yeah, that's a powerful purgative.
Yeah.
And they're going to burn with it.
They're going to be purified in hell, right?
And that's the second death.
That's what you call the second death.
This is what Jesus brings.
This promise that if he comes back and you're not one of the faithful, right?
This is what you get.
So right away you got, um, look, there's no loving.
Here, where'd the loving go, right?
And evangelicals have such a good way of pulling that, of excusing this, right?
Of pulling this out of the hat.
They say, Oh, well, just the age of grace is over.
I'm a dominionist and the age of grace is over.
And, and that's why all of a sudden, no, no, no, let's just tell me what you've got.
You've got a picture of Jesus slaughtering all of humanity, all of humanity.
You know, I thought about this.
I thought about this.
And then even if Christian turned out to be true, which it's not, but let's just,
let's play along with this.
Even if this, this scenario actually comes about, I'm going, I'm saying sending
in that lake of fire.
I don't, this, this unit, this, this reality that you created, you're evil.
I'm not going to spend eternity at your feet worshiping you for this.
Yeah.
Kill me now.
And I'm done.
I, I'm out of this game because this is just, and it's like, you created me this
way.
So I don't know what your deal is.
You're the one that needs, this is, this is a you problem.
Get rid of me.
I'm done.
I don't care.
I'm like, that's to me is just evil.
I'm hoping, I'm hoping Neil that it's real as it can be.
So I can stand right in front of them.
And when it comes my moment of judgment, creamer, and they talk about the great
white throne and his judgment, I'm looking forward to standing right there.
I feel the same way for the great white throne and saying, you were arrested
with a naked boy.
I'm not following.
I wish I was behind you to watch it too.
I hope I don't go in front of you.
So I don't get to, I don't miss it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Let's see what else is going to happen to us.
Because the next quote.
Fire from Urino's.
Yeah.
And she'll go out to see the nations, which are in the, oh, in the four quarters
of the earth, Gog and Magog to gather them together to battle.
The number of whom is as the same as the sea.
And they went up on the breadth of the earth and compass the camp of the saints
about these are the bad guys, right?
That's, that's us.
It's everybody who's not faithful and the beloved city.
And they came from and fire from came down from God out of heaven.
This is that poor Urino's and notice it's got the Gog and Magog reference in
it, which all the evangelicals are going to be standing up saying, oh my God,
he's talking about Gog and Magog, right?
Gog, if you go back to Ezekiel, which I've gotten the bottom.
And you're going to say, wait a minute, you're not reading the Hebrew.
Yeah, you're right.
I'm reading the oldest version we have.
And you, son of man, son of man.
Now you know where he stole the title from, right?
Right.
That's from Ezekiel.
Yep.
Yeah.
Prophecy against Gog and say the Lord says these things.
He do look.
I am Episay.
I am against you.
Gog, the ruler of Ross, Ross.
And what is Ross?
Ross is later, uh, Ruth's on the Latin side.
These are the people who live, um, where we now talk about Russians.
Oh, yeah.
So, so when the Christian evangelicals get all, especially the, the dominionists
and those guys, and it's mostly guys because they hate women.
They're misogynists.
Um, it's built in, it's built into the DNA of the gang of Christianity.
Um, and they just happen to bring it out.
Those guys just happened to bring this before Doug Wilson is in that group.
Anyway, anyway, um, they bring out this, uh, uh, hatred.
It's a, it's a living hatred, but they say also, Oh, this, the Russians, right?
You notice the Christians are all excited about the Russians and they're like,
Hey, don't help Ukraine.
Right.
You know, I know, I know Christians on Twitter, Catholics and Baptist, both of them.
And they, and those people hate each other, but they, they're coming together
and backing up Russia because Putin, cause they all, they all understand something.
They all understand something that's really real.
That the Orthodox church of Russia has a better claim to the, to the, to the
Greek Orthodox church than, than the Catholic church does.
They have a better claim to Peter and Paul than, than Rome does right now.
That's the Orthodox church of Russia right now.
That's the original church that fled Constantinople in 1453 and a century
later, Ivan the terrible, his grandmother was the niece of the last Roman emperor.
Who flew, who died during the siege of Constantinople.
So you have a direct lineage.
That's why he called up the czar.
He's the first czar of Russia.
Yeah.
The Kaiser.
He's making us up.
He was, he was saying, I'm, I'm legitimately tracing myself back to the
Constantine dynasty.
Oh man.
That's so arouses me.
That's so arouses me.
Uh, so tell me a little, tell me a little bit more about these people.
So they tell you, they're like, Hey, in support of the roost.
Did, um, did you know what side you're on?
That's why I like this.
That's why I, I understand why these Christians, these Twitter Catholics are
like, Putin did nothing wrong.
I get why they're like that.
You're, you're right.
You're damn right.
You're on that side.
You should be on that side.
Let's get real.
You're, that's the side you're supposed to be on.
Yeah.
I'm supposed to be on the other side, the side of democracy, the side of Athena.
Yeah.
My own family wants everybody to die.
Right.
I mean, we all have family like this who are evangelicals or steeped in the
conservative fundamentalist Christianity or somehow influenced by it.
They want Vlad to sweep down and surround Israel because that's when Jesus is
coming back and according to them, right?
According to their bull, their BS, um, can't read the original text approach.
Right.
And, and they, that's why, you know, the Christians actually say now, people should
know this, this is a public service I'm doing.
Right.
People, people should know that the Christians are saying that there is no
America in the book of revelation.
Right.
There's no America.
So America must really fall before Vlad can sweep down and surround Israel.
Cause when he does that, the bear, when the bear does that, the text calls him,
then Jesus can crack, come in the world and boom, murder and mayhem can
take, take off like a, and they're going to push to get those things done so that
they can legitimately say, it's my religion.
I got to follow it.
I got to do as it's my religion.
And so, and that's why you get this push against degeneracy.
So they call it putans, putan cleaning up the degenerates, those degenerates, you
know, all those, all those, uh, those degenerate, uh, atheists and, and all
those, uh, you know, all those gays and all those LGBTQ degenerate.
That's what that, that this is what this is, this is their, this is the way they
see the world.
Yeah.
And so putan as out to them is on the, on the side of, of God in there to them.
Well, we know, we know it's, it's, he's, he's evil.
We know that.
You gotta know by the fact that he blows people up randomly with rockets, you
know, like mothers and children.
I mean, this is what I don't get.
You know, Jesus says directly, I'm going to take all those liars and I'm going
to feed them to the birds.
He's such a good gangster leader.
You know what I mean?
He's such a good mob boss.
He's like, Peter, Peter, take those people and feed them to the birds.
Right.
We, I mean, there's, there's nothing better than this.
What?
Yeah.
Yeah.
And I saw an angel right standing in the sun and he shouted in a great voice
saying, um, to all the birds flying around in midair.
He says, come now soon.
Assemble at the banquet, the great banquet of God.
And it goes on.
The text goes on to talk about feeding us to these birds.
Yeah.
Feeding us to these birds.
That's where we're going.
So it doesn't, it, it only makes sense that modern evangelicals can say, um,
what Putin is doing is good.
We can excuse lies.
Have you noticed Christianity that yells?
I heard the guy debating you talking about moral authority.
Right.
They think, oh, I'm for family values and moral authority.
You got none.
You got zero because you will take a liar and exalt, bring up that
liar to a position and you will bow to a liar.
And we all know, we all know that those liars get fed to those birds.
Right.
That's the life, right?
That's what I thought about this.
I thought about this hard is that I actually have this weird respect.
And I hate to say this, but like, at least the fundamentalist are consistent
and following what the text tells them, where you have these people on the
sidelines who I don't respect, who cherry pick and it's like a buffet of the
Bible's a buffet where they can just, I like this part.
I don't, I don't like that part.
So I'm going to somehow pretend it's not there or, or even just rationalize
it away by explaining it how I want to explain it.
And then you, and then what you're doing is you want, you are making it so
that the fundamentalists can stay legitimate.
Because if you, if you just, if the people on the sidelines who, who are
the moderates who are, you know, using the Bible, like, like a, like a salad bar,
if they actually just said, you know what, this, this text is, this text is
just evil.
I'm out of here.
Then there were, then the fundamentals would be looking like looking naked
in the middle of the street.
They would just be target, like they would be wide open.
There'd be no one to cover for them.
They'd have nothing.
That's cause they're the reason why that the, the fundamentalists are still around.
People, you get the moderates.
Do people push you, um, like to say, Oh, don't be so hard on the Christians.
You ever get any comment?
Like, don't, all the time.
Yeah.
You know what, but I was, I was, I went, I was at a church for years.
That really has an impact that really is like pushing, pushing ideas into the
world that are really negative impact, climate change, El Pro, uh, accepting
people who they are, all that stuff goes out the window.
And this is, these are churches at every corner that you can think of.
Like this is every city, every town has that.
It's not, it's not a small thing.
It's a big thing.
It's a big, it's a big pop.
It's a big population of people that are pushing these ideas.
I'm sorry, but I'm just going to, that's, that's where I'm at right now.
If you can convince me otherwise, but I've seen it, seen it first hand.
I know what I was, I was one of the people who, on the email list for January 6th,
say, Hey, everybody, we, if you need to bust, if you need to ride there, we'll
send you out there.
We need to support Trump.
I was one of those people who were on that email list.
I'm just saying, so I'm coming out of that world.
So that's why I do what I do.
You don't have to do it, but I do it, you know?
Yeah.
And it was a Christian flag that was first, you know, everybody listened to
what Neil said, right?
It was a Christian flag that went first into that, into that capital.
Those people, Neil, that tell you you're, you're being too harsh on the Christians.
Right.
Um, those are the people who in the first century AD, as Christianity was becoming
more and more radicalized, and people were saying, we have to burn down this
place, right, in order to get him to come back.
Um, that's the kind of, that's the kind of the person who stood back at the time
and said, Oh, don't be hard on the Christians.
That was the person who, uh, helped facilitate the fall, um, of Rome.
They, an order.
And when I say Rome, I mean, order.
That's a good point.
That was such a good point.
Exactly.
It's what I'm saying.
It's, it's the people who are the moderates that kind of cover for the
fundamentalist types that, that do the most damage.
Right.
Cause without, it's like that you, you're the gateway to that path.
You're the reason why that, that thing exists.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You know, you know, when the Taliban was, was gaining strength in Afghanistan, you
know, that there were a certain percentage of a population that said, Oh,
this is, this can't be that bad, right?
Whereas, uh, so it's, if we can, if, if we can, uh, show those people the future,
um, before it happens, they can correct, but that's unfortunate.
You know, unless you've got, unless you've got oracles and different sources,
you were talking earlier about polytheism, remember, people don't think this way,
but there's, uh, uh, there are oracles spread all over the place that give you
the voice of God, whether it's she or he, right?
It doesn't matter.
Um, and you can go obtain that voice in one place that's different from another.
That inherent flexibility of the system, of a system that is, uh, integrates the
populace that thrives on diversity, right?
That's what I'm saying.
That the, the layout of that system sort of produces, uh, a zeitgeist.
That's, that's not top bottom.
It's not patriarchal.
It's not, here's the one, one king on top and then the servants.
It's more like spread out.
You have these different, different institutions with their own certain types
of power that there's a balance happening.
You know what I mean?
More of a balance.
Balance.
That's a, that's a Greek idea, right?
Not, not today invented it, but that was big in their minds.
You have to achieve balance and become in thug life where you're selling
everything that you own and putting it at the feet of some thug who's going to
murder you if you don't give it all up.
Look at that.
Right.
By the way, how did people, how did Peter know that he didn't give it all up
unless he either had spies where he had access to the sale itself, which since Jesus
was so hooked into the, to the tax collectors, it's probably likely that
Peter knew exactly cause that, all of that has to be registered.
But not only that, it's a message to the next person coming.
So you remember what happened to Ann and I.
Is there enough, you better give me all that money.
You better not keep a penny for yourself.
And in eyes, you drop dead right away.
It's like a, it's when a mafia leaves the horse head in the bed.
It's a message.
That's what it is.
It's just a strike fear in the people.
Yeah.
If you come here and you join us, you get initiated.
Yeah.
You better give us all your riches, sell all your property and don't keep anything
for yourself.
Don't dare do that.
Are you dead?
But that's, that's intense, man.
If you are a modern Christian and you own property and you have, I don't know,
stocks, um, and you have a real Christian.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
You are an aberration that developed over 2000 years.
Yeah.
The doesn't, doesn't make sense to me, man.
But okay, let's let me get through one more.
We got Ponto Crotor, right?
What's this about?
Yeah.
Here's the Ponto Crotor.
Remember I said the Ponto Crotor is the title that's used by, um, uh, Hermes,
the Angulos, the messenger of Zeus.
Yeah.
Right.
Jesus in Revelation, not only calls himself that messenger.
He's the other.
But even the text itself, John says another angel, Jesus comes out at one
point, um, uh, with a sickle in his hand, we're going to look at it in a minute.
And then another, it says another angel steps out with a sickle.
So Jesus is very much putting himself into this specific role.
Right.
What's he got a sickle for?
You know what he's got a sickle for to cut your guts out.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And what are they all yelling?
You know, Jesus is Lord, et cetera, et cetera.
Okay.
Next one.
Kai.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And I saw the heaven, the heaven open.
Yeah.
Okay.
Here's the description of gangster Jesus.
Are you ready?
And I looked, I saw the heaven open, open.
Yeah.
And look, there was a white horse and there was one seated on the horse called
faithful and, and true.
And in his right hand, he holds a, um, sorry, with his right hand.
Oh, hang on.
The guy was in a clinic.
Kai polemic.
He, um, rules with righteousness and he polemic and he makes war.
He makes war.
Nobody talks about Jesus make war.
We don't have any murals of Jesus, the war maker, right?
But this is what characterizes the thug leader.
Yes.
Right.
Right.
He's literally calling himself the war monger.
Yeah.
And he's also injected in his eyes.
He's got the flocks.
He's got that purple, that burning purple in his eyes and it's the flocks.
Poor us.
That expression is used in Orphic, uh, mystery.
It's like Al Pacino with this, with the cocaine on his nose.
Yeah.
Exactly.
He's lit up.
He's lit up.
This is thanks to Jesus right here.
And he's got lots of gold.
He's got bling.
He's got bling.
He's got crowns, right?
He's got a ton of bling and he has a name, right?
Jesus has a tat, right?
And he has a name.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
The next one, the next one, Jesus has a tattoo on his thigh.
A name, king of kings and lord of, think about that.
You know, you got the old English tattoos.
Yeah.
He's got that old Aramaic tattoo going on.
King of kings and lord of lords.
You know, that, uh, but that's what is it?
That siriac, that siriac font.
You know what I mean?
He's got that tattoo with that siriac tattoo.
Why do you think he, why do you think he tattooed his thigh with it?
Cause he's a G.
He's Jesus, the G.
He's G-man.
Yeah.
Yeah.
This is so, this is so, I honestly, when you look at it this way though,
it almost makes sense.
It makes better sense.
It does.
The fairy tale.
Better sense.
Yeah.
That they come up with.
Can you imagine him flashing it like he lifts up his, he lifts up his gown and
he's like, Hey, take a look at this.
You know, in my fur.
Oh, and it's funny because they're ride or die.
They're martyrs.
They're going to ride or die for their click, for their gang.
They're not going to, you're not letting them, you're not going to get over on them.
They're going to die for that shit.
Like that's a mentality that you see in the mafia and the Italian and the Spanish
and like that's a, that's real.
Like that's, that's no joke.
And imagine though, you've got this drug using gang who's, who's, uh, who's
principal leaders or, or immune to Venoms, right?
And Jesus is like, I'll make you so that you can drink this stuff and it won't
hurt you at all, right?
So, you know, the drugs are there from the beginning.
You know, the drugs are there with them when he gets arrested.
So it's a part of the culture.
Your comparison to gang is, I think it's straight on, man.
Look at how the popes dictated their lives.
Like the, they had the Pope Alexander in the 16th, 15th century.
He had an enemy that wanted to be the pope and this guy does become pope.
It's Pope Julius.
He has two popes later, but this pope didn't want, didn't want to wait around.
He wanted to end this pope's life so he can become the next pope.
Well, he, he ended up apparently, according to the sources, he, uh, he had
an, uh, altar boy child and he was giving him poison every day.
Enough that it wouldn't kill him, but he would become immune to it.
And then he got him hired as the pope's wine checker.
So he would be able to drink the wine and poison in it and he wouldn't die.
Well, the whole operation failed.
The kid died.
But like that, but that tells you the mindset of this church, man.
This is like, these are like mafia bosses fighting over the throne.
Yeah.
And they're, when this is, this is the highest, highest Christianity has to
offer the papacy and the world, they're operating like my bosses.
Why do you think that is?
You think it's just a reality.
You know, it's just like, that's the way the things go when you got lots of money
involved and lots of power and sex, you know, you just, it's going to lean
toward this hierarchy of there's going to be one thug and he's going to run
everything.
Right.
So yeah, I didn't think, you know, I didn't think they were sitting around.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, right.
I, I didn't think that was the reason everybody was there.
Right.
We all know it's, you can take those altar boys into the basement.
You know what I mean?
And you can do things with that's power.
That's what they're asking.
That's real power, man.
Jesus has that.
Let me see that, that long, that long one that I had with him on the white
horse, just go back one.
No, maybe it's one more.
No, that's okay.
That's okay.
Let's just, I'm sorry.
This one.
Yeah, there we go.
Yeah.
And he's going to, he's going to destroy the nations, man.
He's going to rule them.
Says below, he's going to rule them.
And there's a little phrase in Rob doi.
See, did I, it's with a rod of iron, but that Rob done people don't recognize
that Rob done is a religious instrument.
It's used also by the Balkans, right?
And his is made of iron.
You know why?
So he can bang, bust your head open with it.
That's gangster.
This Jesus seated on a white horse.
He's gangster brought.
And by the way, we see in the beginning, he's got his bow and he's got that poison
with him.
So, and here again, he's called the Pantocrontor.
Oh, but one last thing from this.
Look at one, two, three, four, five lines from the bottom.
This is in verse 19.
Yeah, it says, pate tein leinon.
He is treading the wine press.
That leinon is the wine press.
And you should have one, Neil, that is the hymn to Linnaean Dionysus.
Yeah, look at this.
Look at this.
They call him Lyceus, right?
The releaser, the freer, right?
The, that lane route is the press for the wine.
And for those of you who think for those of you who think that they were
you know, God is comparing himself.
He's constantly saying, I'm this wine presser.
They didn't have wine, except in Canaan.
The Egyptians got it from the Canaanites, right?
Because in Canaan, which is not a Semitic word, it's a Hurrian word.
It's a Hurrian word and they were not Indo-European.
And it means, guess what it means?
It means purple.
Yeah, I've seen this before.
That's mind blowing.
Yeah, yeah, at the bottom, at the bottom, I just want you to
notice the last nine here, Rhexikhthon and Linnaean.
Linnaean is that God who treads out the grapes, right?
That's from Revelation.
And this is talking about Dionysus.
This isn't a hymn to Dionysus.
What is that word being Megasthenus?
And the second last word, Megasthenus.
Having incredible strength.
Oh, OK.
Nye is having incredible strength.
He's Rhexikhthon.
He is literally busting the earth or jamming something into the earth.
And guess what we have in one of these texts that I sent you, Nyeal,
it talks about Jesus with the Saturnian scythe or sickle jamming it down
into the earth.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah, here it is.
I see, behold, the white cloud and upon the cloud sat one unto the
Son of Man, having on his head a golden crown, a crusone, and the
Stefanon, crusone Stefanon, and in his hand a sharp sickle.
Drepanon.
Yeah, yeah.
He's got that sickle and he's about to jam it into the earth as his judgment,
right?
This is the exact same thing that Dionysus does.
I'm not kidding you.
For hundreds of years, the workers of Bacchus, they would hear this
and they'd be like, oh, yeah, he's Bacchus.
Yeah, that's that's what I'm trying to know.
So that's what I learned from you.
And this is what I'm trying to relate to people is that the language
in Greek in any doesn't matter what it is.
When you're speaking Celtic language in in Greek, it's going to ring bells
in people's ears in the Greek world, especially people
living in Phrygia, people living in Corinth or the church at Thessalonica.
These people are growing up in the Orphic mysteries.
They're all around them.
This is this is stuff that's this is familiar language to them.
And we lose this context when we, because we're in an English-speaking
world that's a thousand years removed from this.
We have no idea the context anymore.
It's gone, but that's what this is the work you've been doing that I'm
trying to trying to give to the people.
Like there's some context in this reason why they're using this language.
Sure, that's Saturnian.
Yeah, it's Kronos has the sickle.
He's the one who comes in, you know, they have the Thanatos, the God of death.
This this is all in Revelation.
It's not like this is not like I'm pulling out of the airs.
He even says Thanatos death and Hades gave up their dead and then
they're throwing them like a fire.
Right.
And even in the Christian, even in the Christian
manuscript or in the editions of the New Testament, you'll see Hades
capitalized, right?
Because he he's a person.
He's the king of the underworld, right?
And even see where it says the sea gave up its dead.
Yeah, I'm not I'm not kidding.
When I first read that, I remember thinking like, well, you have Hades
and you have you have death and Hades, the sea.
And I didn't know until recently, when I started reading the Orphic hymns,
there was a hymn to thought Thosala.
Yeah, him to the sea.
The sea is also a deity.
Yeah.
No, they got all there.
It's all in Revelation.
It's all there.
And it's all Saturnian, too.
And that's that's why when you read these hymns, you're shocked.
You're like, wait a minute, they're using the exact same symbols.
The image that they're using in Christianity, which only makes sense.
I mean, come on, they didn't sit around and Jesus didn't say,
let me make up something.
Yeah, let me just pull out of this.
Pull this out of the out of the void of some black hole.
Like these are ideas that come passed down from other ideas, the evolution.
All ideas come from something.
Yeah. Yeah.
All right, let's finish these quotes because I'm.
Yeah, these are great.
We're on fire right now.
So this is one Jesus kills and feeds to the birds.
We did this one, right?
Yeah, we did that one.
Oh, no, here's the one we got to read.
Here's.
Oh, OK.
This is like, this is admitting that you're on some G shit right here.
This is there's no hiding it.
These shall hate the whore and shall make her desolate naked.
She'll ease her flesh and burn her with fire.
For God had put in their hearts to fulfill his will.
Yeah, that's why I like to start with the ending of that one, right?
Which is at the bottom in Greek.
It literally just says they all said they can.
God gave into their hearts the idea, right, to follow his Nome, right?
His desire and what is his?
What is God's desire then?
What does he have in his mind to do?
They're going to me say something, they're going to hate her
and they're going to stripper naked and they're going to
consume her flesh.
And this word for flesh, sarks, there's a reason that Paul
associates it with sexuality.
He says, don't follow the flesh, follow the spirit.
This sarks is the fleshy pulp of a fruit.
When you bite into it and you get all that juice out of it.
That's what that's what they are consuming of her
after she has been thrown into this bed.
Right, she's going to be thrown into this bed and they're going
to cut the calcium, they're going to burn her up in the fire.
Now, this is what's weird, is that cut the cow is used
in religious concept context and it's used to burn that piece
of incense that you get that Smyrna that comes from between the legs
of Aphrodite, you burn that and it creates an odor, right?
So what is going on?
God is sitting there watching this orgy, this rape orgy, right?
That ends up in her getting totally consumed and it's what's in his mind.
And don't forget, don't forget this, but right before this or not
right before this, a few 15 chapters before this, he's coming out
and saying, nevertheless, talking to the church of Pergamon,
saying that woman, Jezebel, I will cast her on a bed.
And send my minions to rape her.
Yeah, that's the mistranslation in the English.
The Bart Ehrman pointed this out.
And I asked you about it and you were like, he's not on it.
Bart's spot on, that's what the Greek says.
And then it says, I will strike her children dead.
We're murdering children now?
And then he says on the bottom, I'm the morning star.
He say, right after he says, those are the people who will learn
of the deep things of Satan, I'm the morning star.
Yeah, that's like, what's he's saying?
You know, there's Satanists.
No, they had nothing on me.
I'm Lucifer.
Which that's how I'm reading you right now.
But like it's it's what it sounds like.
He moves in on the territory.
He takes it over.
He's the new leader, man.
He's the new.
You think you know about this stuff?
Yeah, watch this.
Yeah, now I'm going to kill you all.
Yeah, this and look at this and look and low.
A lamb stood on the Mount Sion and with him 144,000, having his
father's name written in their foreheads.
Now here's some more gang stuff right here.
And I heard a voice from heaven as the voice of many waters, as the voice
of the great thunder.
And I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps.
There's that Orphic imagery right there.
And they sung as it would the new song before the throne and before
the four beasts and the elders and no man could learn that song.
But the 144,000, which were redeemed, these which were not defiled
with the woman, for they are virgins.
What's Jesus doing with 144,000 virgins?
And I'll bet you they're branded with a with a with a tattoo on their
foreheads.
Yeah, of course they are because they're sex slaves.
Exactly.
That's the whole point of that verse.
Yeah, that's crazy.
Yeah.
And by the way, when it says they are virgins, that's that's not like
physically, that's that's like a cultically.
Like it means like they're mine.
They only belong to me.
Right.
Am I right about that?
They're Parthenon calls them.
I checked this one out.
They're Parthenon.
So it's it, you know, we talk about Athena Parthenos, right?
I'm saying in the context that he's saying, he's saying that these only
they only belong to me.
Nobody else has access to them.
They're my slaves.
Right, right, right, right.
No, exactly.
That's exactly that's dark.
Yeah.
That's why it troubles me when he's arrested in the Garden of
Gethsemane at 4 a.m. with a naked boy.
Mark says that that boy was assigned to him, right?
That he was it uses a verb that you only use with slaves and military.
Right.
You can talk about somebody in the military being assigned.
Right.
So it's like what's going on here that Jesus is attracting to himself.
These, you know, slaves who are, you know, in this case, they're virgins.
And, you know, is it and he's yelling, I'm not a pirate.
I'm not a kid trafficker.
You didn't have to come out with the big weapons.
I'm not a kid trafficker.
Right.
Yeah.
Peter, though, what do you think gang wise when Peter took off, right?
Jesus is there.
The boy takes off.
Peter starts swinging with a sword, knocks off that guy's ear and then takes off.
Uh, do you think it's just like, um, gang lord got taken down, right?
So, uh, we're going to step off and then does Peter just decide along the
way he's like, Hey, I've got the apparatus going here.
I've got enough followers that we can liquidate all of their cash and we can
drive, drive this, this gang forward.
I don't know.
What do you think?
He's the Petros.
He's the rock.
He's the under boss.
He's like under the Godfather, there's that, that, that, that, that, you know,
the main boss that's right underneath and get, he's the one doing that, making
sure everything gets done right.
And so I'm not surprised that he's pulling out a weapon.
Make sure things get done the way it needs to be done.
Like he can't, you know, and then, and then what happens?
Jesus, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Put it away.
Okay.
Okay.
Boss, you got it.
It's like a scene out of a scene out of a Godfather scene right there.
You know what I mean?
Like put the gun down, Tony.
That's Petra, but you know, he's the one who ends up starting the church, right?
He was the one who goes to the room.
And, uh, so that's, that's, that's the original Godfather, the first pope right
there, according to the tradition.
Are you muted?
You muted.
Peter ends up in and out of jail too.
So they, they're catching on to what he's doing.
I mean, he, he obviously is making a presence and he's able to get out of jail.
It, it makes you wonder, look, Judas was there, right?
We all know Judas was an informant, right?
No problem.
He's an informant.
How much, to what extent could those three guys that were with Jesus when he got
arrested with that naked kid, what were they, how much could they have been in it?
Do you think Peter could possibly have known that things were going down with
Judas?
Do you think that was, he just tried to make a show like, you know, if he can
kill Anna nice on the spot, he could have killed that guy that he swung at.
Was he just, was he just trying to, you know, make a show or something?
No, I think, I think he was ready.
I think he was ready for something to pop off.
I think there was something.
Yeah, I think you're, I think you're on.
And, and, you know, Dr.
Tabor talks about this is that people want to make it seem like Jesus and Peter
were a bunch of poor fishermen that had no, no, no, no, no.
This is, you know, people don't, people don't remember or talk about or write
about or fixate on people who are just randomly homeless.
Like this is probably some wealthy, like, you know, some sort of movement happening.
There's something going on here.
There's some, this is a movement.
This is not just some little group of people that magically blew up and became
the world, the state religion of the Roman Empire.
This is a systematic movement that's going on.
You've got to think if they, if they become so popular, they spread all
the way over to Rome.
Right.
And if you're thinking that Peter is taking people's goods and redistributing.
Yeah.
And he's, and he's taken everybody.
I mean, how many people, I mean, and it can be anybody, wealthy people, I'm
sure, also got involved.
Absolutely.
How much, if the movement is so big that it spreads to Rome and throughout Asia
minor, how much did people bring to Peter's feet?
I'll bet he had the most gold on the planet.
Yeah.
Oh, if you have, I'm going to Toronto in two weeks to talk to, uh,
Professor Kloppenborg at Toronto University, he wrote a book about this,
that's called Christ Associations, where he documented, he's looking at all
like the stellies and stones and, and like, in like imprints in, in catacombs.
And he's putting together the pieces of the puzzle.
And these are like early Christian labor or labor unions, basically.
They're organized.
They're all like the, like the city of Corinth, the stone masons had had a church
and they were organized.
The city of Alexandria, the wood carpenters, they had a church, they were
organized.
This is an organized network of assemblies.
And he even the first thing, the first thing he does in the first chapter is he
redefines that word Ecclesia.
We, we say church, but it really means assembly.
And this, it's a, it's a broader term than just church.
These are groups of people, networks of people that are organized.
There's a reason why they were so successful.
They were organized.
And they say, he says that up until, I guess, in like maybe the second or
third century, if you, if you had a loved one died, you had to go through
the assemblies and they're most likely Christians.
That's how they got their power.
They took, they infiltrated the, the, the, um, what do you call it?
When someone dies, uh, funeral home places, they were, they were the ones that
infiltrated and took those over.
You know what I mean?
But it kind of reminds me of like today where you see these funeral homes and
they got Italian names and it's like, maybe it's a mafia in front of it.
Like, like it's just like a front.
You know what I mean?
Who knows?
Throwing ideas out there.
No, it makes me wonder what makes me, I'm seriously thinking that though.
I'm not, I'm not getting around.
It makes you wonder how much cash was flowing back to those original
apostles and particularly Peter, because he's named as the keeper of the keys.
Right?
Like that's another thing.
Why is this gangster, uh, Magus, uh, involved with children and prostitutes
and tax collectors?
Why does he walk around in that, um, in that state saying, Hey, Peter, rock,
um, I'll give you the keys.
What, what is that?
What the, what does that mean?
Right?
We, we look through the, through the fairytale and we think, Oh,
I'll give you the keys, right?
What the, no, no, what's he, what did he mean when he's going to give him the
keys somehow he did?
Cause Peter ends up making a ton of money off the deal.
He got it, it got to the point where the church of Rome is claiming that they
came from like, this is Peter's thing, right?
Like that's, it's the point that he don't, he's put up as like the successor
almost, if you will, like the book of X starts off before you even get to Paul.
Peter's the one reviving dead people.
He's the one who's Peter resurrects a dead person in the book.
Forget about that.
It's not just Jesus resurrecting dead.
It's also Peter.
And then Paul does it too.
Yeah.
And he's battling, he's battling that Simon Magus who wants the piece of the
action, he wants any action.
And Peter's like, no, cut him out, cut him out.
Right.
He was a good, he was a good thug, man.
The Simonians were like another rival gang, if you will.
And so the, the, the history gets written by the victors.
The Simonians end up getting written in this, the text where Peter and Simon,
Simon, Magus, they have a show off.
They have a showdown.
It's like a, like a, like a Western gun, like a, you know, bit Billy Barton.
And, and what's his name and badass Billy Joe.
And they're having their little, they got their guns pointed at each other.
And Peter wins.
Peter shoots him down, dead, done.
And that's what happens.
It says in the text that Simon Magus, this is not an act.
This is an apocryphal text, but it says in the apocryphal text that Simon Magus
goes, let's see what you got, bro.
And he starts flying in the air and he's just flying.
Like, look how powerful I am.
Look how much power I got.
And Peter goes, really dog, really dog, boop, and makes them fall down dead.
And then Peter wins, dude.
Like, Peter is more powerful than Simon Magus.
And it's like, that's the message that you get.
But you almost, it almost makes you wonder, what's behind this message?
Or was there, was there a warring factions of Christians in Rome?
I think so.
The archaeology sure as hell shows us this.
The, the evidence shows us this, that there was more than one Christian group
going on in Rome, Simonians read Irenaeus and, and Hippolytus.
They're talking about the Simonians being all over Rome, worshiping Simon Magus
as a Christ.
Simon Magus was the Christ.
Yeah.
He was offering, and he was offering that female avenue as well, that you get
through the or through the Ophites.
You remember in selling his wife, Helen, and entering her into this, all the
stuff that the Nicolations were doing with their, brought with their wives.
Now, if this ecclesia, if this thing that, you know, we say church and we think
fairy tale, huh, and no, if this assembly that starts out is able to, you're able
to have others crop up, other unions crop up in other places that are, have the
same hierarchy and Paul, not as Paul, it's the same gangster stuff.
He's writing the church at Rome saying, Hey, thank you for the donations.
Right.
Thank you for, I understand that you're trying to help me.
This is what we're doing.
Right.
It's the, we will repay that gesture.
Don't worry.
Oh, the message.
We're, we're, everything's good over here.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's what it is.
Hmm.
And he's so hyped up on drugs for those of you like Paul and I'm talking to all
the, all the people who just drool all over Paul, the apostle was, no, what an
intellect, what a great guy.
He's doing his thing.
He's so drugged that he gets bitten by an ass, but it doesn't hurt him.
Doesn't hurt him at all.
And he shakes it off like, eh, because he knows what that venom is like.
Right.
He knows it because he's been shoving it.
If he's, I recently, I've recently come to the conclusion that that part of the
text is trying to say something to the certain people who are initiated into
these serpent, serpent sex of Christianity, the Nazis, the old fights.
That that's like a, a nod to them.
And that passage of acts where it's like Paul got bit by the serpent, nothing
happened.
And the people, those old fights are reading this text like, oh, shit.
Yeah.
Yeah.
He's one of us.
That's why Jesus says, I'm shocked that Jesus says, you know, you can expose
yourself to this stuff and it's not going to hurt you.
Right.
He can show these things, right?
And people are never understand.
They think fairy tale.
They think, um, Charlton Heston playing Moses and Easter.
Right.
They don't, they don't think, uh, what's the reality going on, man?
Paul was juiced.
Paul was juiced and there was money involved.
And there's a woman, a Lydian woman.
I think her name is Lydia involved in the purple trade, right?
That stuff keeps coming up and keeps coming up and keeps coming up.
So these early Christians were not only gangsters, but they were into the drugs,
man.
I'm going to throw this one up.
This is one of the last ones we have, but I got a real quick cause I drank so
much tea that I got to take a piss or throw this up so you can read it.
And I'll be right back.
Okay.
I will read it.
And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth.
Again, this is just like Dionysus does and gathered the vine of the earth and
cast it in the great wine press of the wrath of God.
And for those of you who think that they were, um, the Jews were
grapes, they weren't, it was a Canaanite industry.
And the wine press was trodden without the city and blood came out of the wine
press, even unto the horses bridles, but a space of 1,600 furlocked.
Oh my God, this blood is the blood that he's bringing out of you and me.
Bra, when he comes back, this is the blood that he's going to produce.
He's going to put us in that press and he's going to squeeze out blood.
That is not, that is not the savior that you and I see in church, right?
If they had a giant painting of a dude that was forcing your head into a wine
press and squeezing out your guts and blood and one giant mess that was as
high as, that was as high as a horse's bridle.
How high is a horse's bridle comes up, can come up to your chest, you know,
if you ever stand next to a horse, right?
So, and it says in, in Apocalypse, it says there, his garments are stained with
blood, stained with blood bra.
That is a dude that you and I can get behind and say, this, this guy is going
to take us all the way.
This is what gang members look for.
They look for that strong leader to take us all the way.
You know, unfortunately, Peter, God is ending.
They caught up with him, which they always do.
Gang leaders always get screwed in the end because they inevitably run a
foul because they're organized crime.
They inevitably run a foul of the civic authorities.
Jesus did it with the Romans, got himself crucified.
Peter did it, got himself crucified, right?
It's, it's almost like that hope of Roman civilization was to preserve that ethos,
that, that understanding of that the law governs.
And when you have a group that are organized crime, when you have a group
that's functioning based on that black market, you can't, you can't look at
Jesus's image when he's sitting there with Mary and she brings out this
stuff that is so expensive, you could have given it to the poor and fed a
whole bunch of people.
Instead, she uses it on him.
My question is, what is their gang doing with those resources, right?
These are black market resources and they're using them.
They're using them.
Jesus is in it deep.
So when he's arrested with that kid in the public park at four in the morning,
maybe it's not so strange.
Is that part of the bling?
Is that part of the thing?
You're with that kid.
You're in the right, getting hyped up.
You're entering that mode and he thinks he, he's genuine thinking he's the
son of God, right?
He's very genuine in that, right?
Yeah.
So good for him for Dionysus and Thug life.
I love it.
Yeah.
He's the, he's the cronion son, the son of Kronos.
Like he's trying to, that's what he's going for.
He's going, he's trying to set up a, a mystery right out of the culture that he's
in, like, you know, that's what it's at.
That's what it very much seems like.
That was the last slide.
But before I even get to, there's some questions people want to ask about the
Greek, um, before I even ask that, I just want one more time.
I just want to, while there's 120 people watching, go and hit the subscribe button
right now.
I want to get him over past 1000 subscribers tonight.
Let's do it.
So hit the subscribe, go hit Lady Babylon.
It's right.
It's not even in the description.
It's in the title.
You just hit that app button and click it and subscribe, do that.
And then by the way, um, if you wondering, what do you mean, what are you talking
about all these drugs in black market?
Well, the perfect book to explain this to you is the, I'm telling you, you read
this book, you'll have the context, you'll understand what we're saying.
And if you want to learn Greek, hit up the next link that's in there.
And it's, uh, you're going to five star 378 ratings background, check past legit
teacher, PhD in the classics, ready to teach if he's got, he's got a schedule.
So the, the, the time, uh, it'll, it'll fill up quickly.
So you better get in there quickly for someone else does.
And, uh, yeah.
So that's, that's what I want to do.
I just like people helping.
I like helping people pass their college exams.
That's what I like to do.
That's going to feel good to help them do that.
Yeah.
It feels really good.
And then to inspire them to say, Oh man, maybe this field is actually interesting.
Yeah.
Professors out there do everything they can to kill interest in the field by
doing the most boring stuff.
But yeah.
Yeah.
I'm going to, I've got to stick to my, I've got to stick to my oath to the devil.
So you got to go.
You got to go.
I understand.
I'm going to do that.
I'm going to, I'm going to do that.
I think Neil, it's an honor to have you on.
It's been an extreme honor, uh, an extreme honor.
And for those of you who are out there, who are following Neil and following, you know,
the program, uh, I've got a lot of, I cannot express to you how Neil has changed me.
Yeah.
For the better.
I can't, I can't describe that.
I like to say you, you learn somebody when you fight against them.
And I learned honor through fighting with Neil.
I want you guys to know that.
And this man loves the muse and he's, he's honorable servant.
So thank you, Neil.
Thank you.
Thank you.
And, uh, like I said, everybody go hit the subscribe and follow you over there.
You'll see me on the channel every once in a while, popping up on there.
And, uh, all right, take it easy.
I'll see you soon.
Okay.
Talk to you.
So yeah.
So, you know, he had to go and I apologize if you, uh, sent a super chat towards him.
I'll do my best to, uh, accommodate whatever I can stop scamming, man.
Thank you for the super chat.
Can you provide any insight into the meaning of the Greek word and the New
Testament, which translates English to demon also do any, it's a good question.
Cause you got the word daemon, which kind of just translates to God, but in the Christian
sense, it kind of becomes demon where it's like a bad God or like some sort of demonic spirit.
That's as best as I could do on answering that question, but, uh, I apologize that I'm
won't have to leave, but, uh, I really, you know, you know, some of the, I get people on,
they only have a certain amount of time to be here.
So I apologize for that.
Morrison prophecy.
Thank you for the super chat.
I finally caught one of these lives.
I love your channel.
I was raised evangelical and agree with everything you said this morning.
Cheers.
Awesome.
It's good to see you, Morrison.
Thank you for that.
Stop scamming, man.
Hello again.
Can you provide any insights on the Greek words for heaven and paradise the New Testament
uses and do not, and any question, right?
Our nose is heaven.
Paradise.
That's an, um, let me see what, uh, Perseus stuffs has for paradise.
Paradise.
I don't even know.
Paradise.
Paradise in Greek.
Paradisos.
Paradisos.
So, uh, let me see if I can share my screen.
Yeah.
So you have our nose, which is heaven.
It's the same one for the God, our nose.
And then Paradisos.
Parad, Paradiso, Paradiso, Paradiso, Paradiso.
Yeah.
That's the best I could do.
Sorry about that.
Thank you for the super chat.
I appreciate that.
I wish I could, uh, you know, I wish I was an expert in Greek and can help you out with that.
Thank you for that though.
Cthonious, my boy, Cthonious, who was Jesus's father?
God, to me, it's the Old Testament.
God, the Jews rejected him.
Did his God have a secret name?
Yeah.
I think you're right.
He claimed to be the son of, yeah, Yahweh, you know, he can, he claimed to be the son of
the Old Testament, the biblical God, you know, so that's a definite,
that's definitely, that's definitely the thing.
Thank you, Justina Carrion for the super sticker.
Let's see what else we got.
Melody Joy, thank you for the support.
And you had the, uh, the, um, membership.
I appreciate that.
Always good to see you here.
Melody's been here watching my channel.
Well, through Derek, but since the beginning,
under a thousand subscribers, Melody was watching.
And so I really, it's always good to see Melody in the chat.
Thank you.
Appreciate that.
One of the, the OGs of the, of the channel, for sure.
Let's see, I think that might be it.
But, um, I appreciate everybody.
This is, I like having Amon on.
Thank you for the super sticker.
By the way, go and subscribe to Drawing Down the Stars.
Might as well, uh, while you're, let me pull it up.
Let me pull up the channel.
Let me pull up the channel.
To Drawing Down the Stars.
Here's another good channel.
If you like, if you like the, the deep mystery religion stuff,
then you will like this channel right here.
Which is Drawing Down the Stars.
Hit that bell.
Hit that bell.
You're making a lot of content too.
And we're going to be doing some collabs together too.
So definitely, definitely go and subscribe to Drawing Down the Stars.
Absolutely.
That's a must.
Go and do that right now, everybody.
And, um, with that being said, I'm out for the night,
and I will be back tomorrow night with another one.
Wait, is it tomorrow night that I'm going?
Oh, tomorrow I'm going live with MythVision on Derek's channel, MythVision.
And we're going to have Dr. McDonald present the memesis theory to none other than Professor
Gregory Crane, who is the founder of Perseus Tuft's website.
So the found, this is going to be huge.
This is big.
This is gigantic.
The founder of Perseus Tufts, what we call Alice.
Is going to sit and attendants and listen to Dennis McDonald explain the memesis theory
of the New Testament, how the New Testament bowers from the Greek homers Odyssey and homers
Iliad.
This is going to be crazy.
I'm telling you, this is tomorrow and MythVision around one o'clock Eastern.
Be there.
With that being said, you have just attained true gnosis.
The Demiurge has no power over you.
