The
first century of Christianity is shrouded in mystery. What we know for sure, compared
to what we are told by traditional accounts, is wide-ranging and extremely problematic.
The earliest Christian documents we have are letters from Paul dating from the 40s and
50s and early 60s. Only seven of them are considered to be authentic and written by
one author, although it is entirely possible that others are written by someone Paul was
close to or even his secretary. These letters from Paul contain the most important details
about Jesus being crucified. We have letters from John and Peter, which may not be authentic,
but are nevertheless late 1st century, early 2nd century texts written by Christians,
and there is also an epistle from Jude, James, and an unknown author writing to an
assembly of Greek-speaking Hebrews. Outside of these letters, the only surviving 1st century
letter, which was not included in the biblical canon, is the epistle of Clement dated to 96 AD,
which we will discuss. The book of Revelation is also dated to this year and is considered to
be in close proximity to the Joe Hennine collection and possibly the same author who wrote John's
letters. Most scholars date to three synoptic Gospels for the late 1st, early 2nd century,
starting with Mark around 70, then Matthew between 85 and 95, and Luke Acts in the early to the
middle 2nd century. The Gospel of John is also dated by most scholars to be between the 90s
and 140s. All four of these Gospels did not have the names of authors attached to them until the
end of the 2nd century, so we don't even know if they really were written by Mark, Matthew, Luke,
or John. These titles were given by later Church Fathers. The earliest physical fragments of these
texts that we have are from the late 2nd and 3rd century, and the oldest full copy of the Bible
in existence is the Codex Sinaiticus from 325 AD. The Gospel of Thomas, which was once an important
early Christian text, is dated between the 1st and early 2nd century, some even arguing that it
could be the oldest, but was not selected among the biblical canon by the Church Fathers in the
4th century. Although its impact on early Christianity was massive, outside of that there
is a plethora of Gospels and texts produced by the early Christians in the 2nd century that will
be discussed later in the video. Please hit that like button and subscribe. Before we start,
I have some great news for everyone today. This video is sponsored by Atlas VPN. Now back to the video.
In the 4th century, Eusebius provides a detailed list of the early Church bishops in Antioch,
Rome, Alexandria, Athens, Corinth, Smyrna, and others. These lists show a direct continuation from
the apostles like Andrew, consecrating the father of the heretic Marcian, Philologus,
the 1st Bishop of Synope, as well as Andrew, consecrating the 1st Bishop of Corinth, named
Apollos, who is mentioned in Paul's letters. In Mark, being the 1st Bishop of Alexandria,
consecrated by Peter, with Peter being the 1st Bishop of both Antioch and Rome,
consecrating both Linus and Ivarius. And of course, they list James as the leader and 1st Bishop
of the Church of Jerusalem. And from them are the 70 apostles listed in Acts and names that look
familiar to people mentioned in Paul's letters. These elaborate lists of succession show what
appears to be a united Church that has a direct line of orthodoxy from Jesus down to Constantine.
However, the primary sources show this not only to be problematic,
but impossible in some cases. Many of the sources have conflicting lists with each other. People
considered to be alive in certain times are somehow alive in times when they should be dead.
And the surviving texts that we do have are so few and far between that it becomes a nightmare
to try to piece it all together. The truth is, early Christianity was far from united.
It was so diverse that I would argue Christians in the first two centuries were farther apart
than a Mormon is today with a Catholic.
On one side of the spectrum, you have Ebonites, Jewish law observing Christians,
who revere James the Just, but reject Paul as a liar. They follow strict dietary laws from the Torah,
keep the Sabbath and the commandments, and think Jesus is the Messiah, but not God.
You also have Elkicites from Parthia, who are also Torah observant, but also think that Jesus
was a giant 96-mile tall and 14-mile wide angel who was the Son of God, and his sister,
the Holy Spirit, was also the same size. And no, I'm not making this up.
On the other side of the spectrum, you have quite the opposite, Canites, who think the
Old Testament God is actually the devil, and Judas was the hero, and all the way to pagan
Christians like the Perate, who believed that Greek gods such as Zeus and Aphrodite
were actually the Archons who created the world, and Christ came to save the world from them.
There are many sects and denominations in between, such as the School of Callistus,
who gave way to the Noetians, people who were called Heretics at first for saying Jesus
Christ and God the Father were actually the same being, as well as Dositists who think Christ was
so divine that he could not have a flesh body and that he was just a phantom that just appeared to be
human. Dositists were the first main heresy of Christianity on record. And then there are some
sects that are so radical that you don't even know where to put them on the spectrum. The
Borba Rites, who are rumored to be one and the same as the Nicolations mentioned in Revelation,
are a group of Eastern Roman Christians of Syria and Egypt, who apparently put seamen and menstrual
fluids in their Eucharist, and engaged in orgiastic baptismal rites, took psychedelics,
spoke in tongues. Those guys definitely had the Holy Spirit.
There is no such thing as proto-Orthodox. This is a term used in hindsight of what ideas won the
battle for what would fit best for the Roman Church in the 4th century. Who we are told are the
heretics and who we are told are orthodoxy is not so clear when we examine the sources
and compare them to the central teachings of Jesus and even Paul too. I will be demonstrating this
in this video.
As most people know, Jesus lived in the first half of the first century, had a following of young
Jewish teens consisting of both male and female, and he was crucified under Pontus Pilate in Jerusalem
around 30 AD. Most of his life is shrouded in mystery. He wrote nothing down, and we have
zero contemporary primary sources or any archaeological evidence about him or his movement
that exists from the period in which he was alive. Everything we know about him is taken from Paul's
letters and what the Gospel authors say about him. All we know about his family is that his mother's
name was Mary and that James may or may not have been his brother. Paul tells us nothing about his
father and the earliest Gospel Mark doesn't even mention who his father's name is. It is not until
Matthew's Gospel written between 85 and 95 in which we get any mention of Joseph being the
father of Jesus. Kelsus, a Greek who was hostile to Christianity, claims that Jesus' biological
father was a Roman soldier named Pantera. Kelsus cites Jewish sources who he says he got this
information from, and the Talmudic fragments from rabbinic sources also agree with this.
According to Origen, Kelsus lived during the reign of Hadrian between 117 and 138.
Even if Kelsus wrote later, this would mean that Pantera and Joseph, as possible fathers of Jesus,
are nearly contemporary ideas to each other in the sources. If Joseph was really Jesus'
father's name, you would think Paul's letters in Mark's early Gospel would easily relate this.
And what reason would Jews have for deceptively telling Kelsus in the early second century
that his father was actually Pantera, a Gentile Roman born out of wedlock? It seems that there
would be much more incentive for Paul to hide this than there would be for Kelsus to lie about this.
Whether Joseph or Pantera is his father is impossible to know. I will leave that up to you
to decide. This is a topic for another video. The main question I want to explore in this video
is what did the earliest Christians believe and who were they?
Kelsus gives us a list of the sex and denominations of the church that were relevant in his day
in the early second century. He says,
Those of the great church receive as true the accounts of the creation in six days
and God resting on the seventh. They agree in regard to this first man and deduce their genealogies
from him. They accept the narratives about going of the children of Israel into Egypt
and their flight from it. I know some hold the Creator, the God of the Jews, to be different from
and opposed to the God which Jesus came from. In truth, their divisions are endless. They have
carnal and spiritual men. They call themselves Christians who wish to live in all things as the
Jews. There are among them, Sybalist, Simonians, Marcellians, Carpocrations, disciples of Mary
and Martha and Marcionites. But not withstanding all their divisions and abusive controversies,
you may hear them all saying the world is crucified unto me and I unto the world.
What I find so interesting about this passage is how he shows no knowledge of any Gnostic heresy
at this time. Although he does show knowledge of divisions, which is understandable, he considers
the Simonians, Marcellians, Carpocrations and Marcionites to be among the sects of the great
church. All of them are considered Gnostics and Heretics by later Christian writers.
You would think Kelsus would have said something about this if he knew this was the case,
and he mentions them as being Sybalist. I think this is very telling of how the early church was
divided, but yet all were within the church, wide-ranging doctrines that oppose each other,
yet all believed in the crucifixion. I will address every single sect listed by Kelsus,
plus others, and I think there is a good reason why Kelsus lists the Sybalist first.
The Sybillian oracles, texts written in Greek hexameter prose, are a wide-ranging phenomena
that is said to stretch back to the oracle of Delphi and spread throughout the Hellenistic world
into Asia Minor, Mesopotamia, Judea, North Africa and Italy. The Sybil was at first depicted as an
aged woman with the gift of prophecy, and that there were 12 of them. The Persian Sybil, the Libyan
Sybil, Delphic Sybil, Camarian, Erythrian, Sammian, Kumayan, Hellespontine, Phrygian, Turbotine,
Egyptian and Chaldean Sybil. Some lists replaced the Persian Sybil with the Hebrew Sybil.
Legend had it that the Kumayan Sybil, close to Rome, was a thousand years old and had given her
books to the fifth king of Rome in a Truscan king named Tarquinius Priscus, grandson of Numa
Populus, who succeeded Romulus. These oracles were entrusted to the priesthood of Jupiter
to be guarded by the Vestal Virgins and only consulted in times of crisis.
Regardless of the truth of their origins, these books became central to the religion of Rome
during the Republic era. Like the prophets of the Old Testament, these Sybils predicted future
catastrophic events and the demise of major cities by God. These texts were most likely used as a
form of political propaganda to sway public opinion during times of war. From the 3rd century BC
to the 1st century, we see a mixture of Greek and Jewish themes present in these texts.
Specifically in Alexandria, Egypt, where a large Jewish and Greek population coexist.
It is here in Alexandria where the collection of all 12 Sybils are gathered and put into one
collection. They show both Jewish and pagan influence, everything from Hesiod themes of the
golden age of Saturn, Homeric epics like the Iliad, predictions of Romulus, Cyrus the Great,
Alexander the Great, Caesar Augustus, as well as references to gods like Aries, Cronos, Aphrodite,
Zeus, and the Titans vs the Olympians. All the way to stories about Noah's Ark,
the Tower of Bevel, Moses getting the tablets on Mount Sinai, the Latin poet Virgil is mentioned
by name in the Sybillian oracles as a great teacher, sent by God to teach the world. And Virgil
himself cites the Sybillian books in his Aeneid and mentions Dephobi as the Kumayan Sybil.
To show some passages of the 3rd Sybilian oracle to give you an idea of what it's like.
The first one formed and filling with his name Anatoly, Hesperides, Notos, and Boreus.
The same as he who fixed the pattern of the human form and made wild beast and creeping things and
fowls. Sybilian oracles 3. Notice the blend between pagan and Jewish elements and how the
curator includes the many gods within his creation of the world. This type of genre
can also be seen along the book of Revelation, for example.
Thassala gave up the dead that were in it and Thanatos and Hades gave up the dead that were in
them and each person was judged according to what they had done. Then Thanatos and Hades were thrown
into the lake of fire. The lake of fire is the second death. Anyone whose name was not found
written in the book of life was thrown into the lake of fire. Revelation. If you read the
English translation, you might not know this, but most English translations are like playing a game
of telephone. Being filtered through Latin and different versions of English, the nouns are
translated into places when they are written as names. Not only that, Gaia, Aranos, Thassala,
Thanatos, and Hades are all gods that have hymns dedicated to them in the Orphic hymns.
The latter three, Thassala, Thanatos, and Hades are gods who rule over the dead, while Gaia and
Aranos rule over creation. Their functions in this book Revelation, Chapter 20, are exactly this.
Seeing Gaia and Aranos fleeing from God and Thanatos, Hades, and Thassala giving up their dead, here
Thanatos and Hades are being judged and casted into the lake of fire for being insubordinate to the
divine plan of God. Revelation was the last book to be accepted into the Christian biblical canon,
and even at present day, some Nestorian churches reject it. It was tainted because the heretical
sect of the Montanist relied on it, and doubts were raised over its Jewishness and authorship,
and it was not until 419 that it was included into the canon. The Montanists were led by
Montanus, a heretic who was also called Anostic, and he was a Sybilist. He was assisted by two women,
Prisca and Maximilla, who led a Christian Sybilist group called the Illuminati, enlightened ones.
Yeah, Illuminati, and these women were considered prophetesses and the voices of the Sybil.
They entered into states of ecstatic frenzies, spoke in tongues, and prophesied the future.
Montanus, despite being deemed a heretic, is credited with baptizing Trotellian,
who was also known as the father of Latin Christianity. Already we're starting to see that
the lines between heretics and orthodoxy are getting blurred, and if you think that's a lot,
just keep watching. The Sybil continues.
Here we see another theme that both the Sybil and the
Revelation have in common, prophecy of the birth of Christ under the reign of Augustus,
and the coming of the Antichrist, who is Nero. Here's how it is told in Revelation.
Let the person who has insight calculate the number of the
beast, for it is the number of a man. That number is 660 and 6, Revelation.
We know that the beast is Nero, because the Latin version gives the Dramatria of 616. The only name
in both Greek and Latin that have a Dramatria of 666 and 616, who also fits this role, is Nero.
The Antichrist, who caused the Seven-Year War between Rome and Judea to break out,
that results in the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem. The Sybil continues.
And then the generation tenth appeared of mortal men, from the time when the flood
came upon earlier men, and Kronos reigned, and Titan, and Iapetus, and men called them best,
offspring of Gaia and of Uranus, giving them names both of earth and heaven,
since they were very first of mortal men. So there were three divisions of the earth,
according to the allotment of each man, and each one having his own portion reigned,
and fought not, for father's oath were there, and equal were their portions. But the time,
complete of old age, on the father came, and he died. And the sons, infringing oaths,
stirred up against each other bitter strife, which one should have the royal rank and rule over all
mortals. And against each other, Kronos and Titan fought, but Rhea and Gaia, and Aphrodite,
fond of crowns, Demeter and Hestia and Dione, of fair locks, brought them to friendship,
and together called, all who were kings, both brothers and near kin, and others of the same
ancestral blood. But when the Titans heard that there were sons kept secretly, whom Kronos and
his wife Rhea begat, then Titans sixty youths, and this is the beginning of dire war, the Egyptian
kingdom, then that of the Persians, and of the Medes, and Ethiopians, and of Assyria and Babylon,
and then that of the Macedonians, Egyptian yet again, then that of Rome, God imparted first,
Thou many kingdoms have been together, gathered of mankind. For first of all, the house of Solomon
shall include horsemen of Phoenicia and Syria, and of the islands too, sibling oracles three.
Once again we see themes from Hessead of the Golden Age, and the war breaking out in heaven,
between Titans and Olympians, but it quickly evolves into themes found in Daniel, with the
succession of kingdoms of the Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans. Finally, we are told about
the house of Solomon as God's kingdom on earth. The Sibyl ends with this. These things I show thee,
the long walls of Assyrian Babylon, for Greece to proclaim to all the wrath of God fire sent,
and that I might to mortals prophesy of mysteries divine, and men shall say in Greece
that I am a foreign land of Ethre, born shameless. Others say that I am a Sibyl, born of Mother
Cersei and Father Nostos, sibling oracles three. Cersei is the sister of Medea, and the daughter
of Hecate, goddess of magic, who is in Homer's Odyssey and other Greek and Roman myths, and she
says her father is Nostos, an obvious Gnostic reference to the father of knowing. This is just
one tiny section of hundreds of pages and dozens of oracles written by pagans, Jews, and Christians,
living in Alexandria from 300 BC all the way until the 15th century, when they are strictly
written by only Orthodox Christians. They end up being used as political propaganda by the
Byzantines against the Muslims when they repurposed the Antichrist to be Muhammad. But the origins
of these very Orthodox Christian sibling oracles go back before Christianity even existed. During
a time when the Orphics, Platonists, Pythagoreans, and Jews clashed in Alexandria, especially during
the 2nd century BCE, it is during this time in Alexandria where Daniel and Enoch are written.
Texts that show close proximity to the Sibylian tradition about dreamlike oracles of future
events and messianic promises, Orpheus was credited by both Jews and Greeks in Alexandria
as being a great theologian who fathered Moses and was a son of the Sibyl. They also claim that
Noah's daughter was the Erythrian Sibyl called Thea Sibyl, the goddess Sibyl, and Heraclitus
in the 6th century BC said that her voice reaches through thousands of years. It is in this mixed
cultural environment of Alexandria where we get people like Aristobulus and Thilo and the soil
for Christianity to thrive in is laid down. It is not a mistake that Kelsus calls Christians Sibylist.
He is right on the money with this. These oracles which started off as Greek, then Roman, then Jewish,
and then towards the end of the 1st century and 2nd century were Christian and only written
by Christians. These Sibylian oracles are cited by Josephus, Justin Martyr, Clement,
and Origen and play a crucial role in the early church.
Not long before Kelsus wrote, we have the three earliest mentions of Christians by Roman authors.
The earliest mentioned by Roman writers and most detailed of the three would come from Pliny the
Younger in his letter to the Emperor Trajan in 112 AD. He says,
There have been some of this mad sect Christians whom I took notice of in particular as Roman
citizens that they might be sent to that city. After some time, as is usual in such examinations,
the crime spread itself and many more cases came before me. A libel was sent to me,
though without an author containing many names of persons accused. These denied that they were
Christians now or have ever been. They called upon the gods and supplicated to your image,
which I caused to be brought to me for that purpose with frankincense and wine. They also
cursed Christ, none of which things it is said can any of those that are ready Christians be
compelled to do. So I thought fit to let them go. Others of them that were named in the libel
said they were Christians, but presently denied it again, that indeed they had been Christians,
but had ceased to be so some three years ago. However, they assured me that the main of their
fault or the mistake was this that they were to on a stated day meet together at dawn and
sing a hymn to Christ as to a God alternately and to oblige themselves by a sacrament or oath.
Here we are told that these Christians will easily lie and reject Christ in order to save
their lives. Ironically, this goes against every Christian apologist claim about the so-called
martyrs who had died for something they know is true. Yet these Christians, when pressed,
will worship the image of Emperor Trajan and curse Christ in order to save their lives.
I do find one particular part of this useful for examining Christian practice. The passage about
them waking up at dawn and singing hymns to Christ is a rite commonly found among Orphics,
who also sing hymns to Lucifer or Iosphorus at morning at dawn and also oblige themselves to
oaths of piety. The next Roman source from this period comes from Tacitus. Nero fastened the guilt
and inflicted the most exquisite tortures on a class hated for their abominations
called Christians by the populace. Christus, from whom the name had its origin,
suffered the extreme penalty during the reign of Tiberius at the hands of one of our procurators,
Pontius Pilate, and a most mischievous superstition. Thus, checked for the moment,
again broke out not only in Judea, the first source of the evil, but even in Rome, where all
things hideous and shameful from every part of the world find their center and become popular.
A few years later, Suetonius would write something very similar. Punishment was inflicted on the
Christians, a class of men given to a new and mischievous superstition. From these two sources,
we can't really gather much about them, other than there seems to be a rumor that they were
blamed for the fire at Rome and that they held to strange superstitions. The only non-Christian
source in the first century that mentions Jesus is Josephus. But this text is considered by scholars
to be extremely problematic, to the point that it is considered to be either heavily edited or even
not authentic at all. Origin, who makes use of Josephus in his writings, never once mentions
the passage that talks about Jesus, which you would think he would. Even if there was a passage
about Jesus in Josephus, the text was so heavily edited that we can no longer tell what was actually
said. Josephus does, however, talk quite a lot about another biblical character, John the Baptist.
John the Baptist was considered a great prophet in his time and he was executed by Herod
sometime in the early first century. There are movements from Palestine known as Mandeism,
or Nazorianism, who venerate John as the Messiah, or greatest prophet that ever lived,
and they even place him above Jesus himself, who they consider to be somewhat of an imposter.
They do not consider Jesus to be the Son of God, let alone one with God. The name of the Mandeans
comes from the Aramaic Manda, meaning knowledge, which literally means these people were called
Gnostics in the Aramaic tongue. The core tenets of their religion shows heavy influences from
Zoroastrianism and the Syrian Magi. The central belief system of this particular religion goes by
the name Nasrta, which translates to Nessorian, which translates to Nessorian Gnosis, or a form
of a divine insight. Followers of this faith refer to themselves as Nasoriai, meaning Nazorians.
The community of Nazorians is split into two main groups, the Tarmiduta, which pertains to the clergy
and the Mandeuta, referring to general congregation. The term for the latter is derived from the word
Manda once again, meaning knowledge or Gnosis. Mandeans revered Adam, Abel, Seth, Enos, Noah,
Shem, Aram, and especially John the Baptist. And much like Zoroastrians, they worship one God,
who they call the King of Light, the ruler of heaven that oversees an army of angels in opposition
to a king of the underworld called Krun, who rules the demons.
They believe in baptism as a way of salvation from sins and initiation into heaven. The term
Baptist comes from the Greek baptize. Surprisingly, there are a group of ancient Greek Pythagoreans
and Orphics living in Corinth, ironically one of the main early Christian cities in which Paul writes
to. And in Corinth, these Orphics actually call themselves Baptists. A text from an author named
Eupolis, who lived in Athens between 446 and 411 BC, writes about these Baptists and claims that
Elkabiodes and Socrates were among the initiated and that they adopted foreign religious practices
from the Persians and Egyptians and engaged in nocturnal rites. It is entirely possible
that this group could have looked a lot like the Mandeans, with the difference being that these
were devotees of the goddess Cotus and Dionysus and not the King of Light.
Elkabiodes, who was a fellow student with Plato under Socrates, was an Athenian politician.
Eupolis wrote hostile polemics against both Socrates and Elkabiodes and especially was
not fond of the Corinthian Baptist cult. During the wars between Athens and Sparta,
Eupolis found himself, as fate would have it, serving under a fleet led by Elkabiodes
in the Sicilian expedition. And Elkabiodes had Eumopolis drowned in retaliation to his plays
about him. According to the sources from Xenophon and Plato, Socrates and Elkabiodes saved each
other multiple times from death during these wars. Elkabiodes was defeated by Lysander and
he fled to the Persian court of Archiserses II, but was killed along the way. Socrates, on the other
hand, was condemned by the Ellosinian herofans and Athenian religious authorities for leading the
youth astray in importing foreign gods. His martyrdom is very comparable to Jesus' death
and condemnation. His successor Plato wrote an entire dialogue about Elkabiodes
and massive dialogues about Socrates. Plato, in his Republic, expressed his discontent
with the religious order of his day. He states in Book 3 of the Republic that he wanted to replace
Homer and Hesiod with more righteous ideas and better examples for the youth to live by,
even going as far as desiring a heaven for the righteous and a hell for the sinners. Plato and
Aristotle after him claimed that Zooraster was a teacher of Pythagoras and how the pre-Socratic
masters got their wisdom from the Egyptians, Phoenicians, and Babylonians. It is certainly
possible that these Baptists in Corinth, who were charged with worshipping foreign gods,
may have already been on their way to something close to a protonosticism with influences from
the Magi. Aristotle tells us that several Magi even attended the funeral of Plato himself.
Aristotle was also charged by the religious leaders of Athens with blasphemy and was forced
to flee Athens and take his own life. Then Aristotle's successor, Theophrastus, also
was charged with blasphemy as well. Even Theophrastus's successor after that, Demetrius,
Philarium, was forced out of Athens, fled to Alexandria, Egypt, and according to Josephus,
was present during the creation of the Greek Pentateuch.
The reason why I bring all this up is to set you all up with what I think is the most
important question regarding early Christianity, something I have never yet hear anyone ask,
the question being, who was Paul writing to? If you haven't really thought deeply about this question,
you might just say, Paul is writing to the churches in Corinth, in Rome, in Ephesus.
But wait a second, if Paul is writing these letters in the 40s and 50s, and Jesus just
recently died in 33, then how is it possible that Jesus' disciples have already successfully
went across the entire Roman Empire in one decade, converted thousands of Greeks and
Roman pagans, set up assemblies and churches in major cities throughout Anatolia, Greece,
and Italy, and gained support from rich patrons? Weren't these just teenage fishermen?
To me, this is not only impossible, but would be a far greater miracle than Jesus
healing the sick and making wine from water. This would be the greatest miracle of all,
and yet it's not explained in any of the texts, other than a few vague verses in Luke
Acts, about 70 disciples, magically dispersing far and wide. Let's put the fairy tale aside
and get real for a moment. There must have been an existing order of religious culture
in these areas before Jesus and Paul. For starters, we know from the sources that there was a thriving
Hellenized Jewish community living throughout the urban cities of Greece, Egypt, and Turkey
between 200 B.C. through the Common Era, era stimulus of Alexandria, a Greek middle Platonist Jew
living in the 2nd century B.C., wrote about Orpheus and Mousseus as Jewish prophets among
the Greeks, as well as Plato and Pythagoras as God-fearing Greeks worthy of reverence.
And Thilo of Alexandria, his successor, wrote extensively on concepts like the logos
and God having an heir to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. Thilo also wrote on how the laws of
Moses and the Torah were not to be taken literally and were spiritual laws that could be interpreted
depending on the situation. They leaned heavily on the laws and philosophy of Plato, which dominated
the time period. These mixing of Platonic and Jewish ideas would set the stage for Christian
theology and would be heavily borrowed from by the Gospel authors and Paul. It is quite possible
that these Jewish communities who spoke Greek and adopted Greek customs followed Judaism to a
moderate degree, and were likely to be less interested in following Mosaic law in a fundamental
sense, and these would be the most likely to convert to Christianity. And it sure makes sense
that these very people would be more inclined to accept Paul's teachings. But I still don't think
this would be enough to explain the massive network of Christian churches existing so early on during
Paul's time. Professor John Kloppenborg's late academic sensation, known as Christ's associations,
does a thorough analysis and comparison between ancient Greco-Roman cults and associations
of deities in Athens, Corinth, Macedonia, Ephesus, and other cities throughout the Greco-Roman world
of the Hellenistic period through antiquity. He posits that the early Christ assemblies
throughout the Roman Empire would most likely operate in a similar manner to the assemblies
of devotees of other deities. He compares inscriptions on templates and stones from archaeological digs
of temples and dining halls. One of these groups that is described is known as the Cult of Theos
Hipsistos, or God Most High in Greek. This cult flourished in Corinth, Athens, Macedonia,
Phrygia, Cappadocia, from the 3rd century BC until the time of the Christian takeover of Roman
religion in the 4th century. These people, called Hipsisterians, were shipped one god,
either in the form of Theos Hipsistos, God Most High, or Zeus Hipsistos, Zeus Most High,
and sometimes Zeus Sebasius Hipsistos. Their theology seems to possess a platonic cosmology
of one perfect, nameless, unbegotten creator who creates the world with his lesser daemons and
angels. His temples usually possess no images of God, or just a symbol of an eagle with a wreath,
and very rarely in the form of a statue of Zeus. But most of these cults worshiped God with no
images, similar to the Temple of Jerusalem and how the Jews forbid the images of God.
These very Hipsisterians were in close proximity to the thriving Jewish communities
living in Greece and Turkey. It should also be noted that Hipsistos is the Greek title
for the God of the Old Testament, as Eleon is the same word in the Hebrew Bible.
It is highly likely that these very people are among the earliest converts to Christianity.
These are the people who the author of Acts refers to as God-fearers.
At Caesarea, there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion in what was known as the Italian
Regiment. He and all his family were devout and God-fearing. He gave generously to those in need
and prayed to God regularly. Acts 10
These God-fearers are Gentiles who worship God Most High, aka Theos Hipsistos. Gregory of
Naziansus, one of the 4th century Church Fathers, claims that his parents were once
Hipsisterians before converting to Christianity. Showing the close proximity of these groups,
he describes them as syncretic Jewish pagan groups that does not worship idols,
reveres lamps and fires, worships the almighty Pontocrator, and they keep the Sabbath
and adhere to dietary restrictions. But they do not circumcise and says that this cult formed
from the native Cappadocian cult of Zeus Sebasius, a Dionysian cult and integrated
with the cult of Yahweh Saboeth during a time when many Jews were moving to that region.
What early Christian assemblies had in common with the devotees of Theos Hipsistos
and the Dionysian Baptist groups in Corinth was that they all seemed to run in a similar
fashion, similar to modern-day unions. These members would often be given titles,
similar to titles found among Dionysiac groups such as Torchbearer, Thesmophorii,
Templebearer, Neophorii, and Christbearer, Christophorii. Oftentimes, inscriptions found
bearing at these ancient sites would be the names of members of these cultic associations.
Stone masons, silversmiths, goldsmiths, leather tanners, boat builders, fishermen,
tax collectors, etc. Depending on the location, these cultic associations looked a lot like
modern trade unions who got together on Sundays for mass, shared communal meals together,
held Eucharistic rituals, and buried their dead and shared catacombs. They had systems of
healthcare, they had egalitarian social networks, and rotated jobs in a democratic way,
similar to the ancient Athenian democratic associations. Women, plebeians, freed slaves,
people of lowly rank in the Roman Empire, were treated equally with patrician and equestrian
rank members. These progressive, egalitarian aspects of the cult was not only apparent in
Dionysian associations in times past, but Christians also had a biblical reason for this.
Jesus has quoted saying, Many who are first will be last, and many who are last will be first.
And again, I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone
who is rich to enter the kingdom of God. Jesus is also said to have given a parable
about workers in the field, not working the same hours, but getting the same pay,
which he says in Matthew 20, For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner, who went out early in
the morning to hire workers for his vineyard. He agreed to pay them a denarius for the day,
and sent them into his vineyard. About nine o'clock, he went out and saw the others standing
in the marketplace, doing nothing. He told them, You also go and work in my vineyard,
and I will pay you whatever is right. So they went. He went out again at noon,
and about three in the afternoon, and did the same thing. About five in the afternoon,
he went out and found still others standing around. He asked them, Why have you been standing here all
day, doing nothing? Because no one has hired us, they said. He said to them, You also go and work
in my vineyard. When evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, Call the workers
and pay them their wages, beginning with the last hired, and the going on to the first. The workers
who were hired at about five in the afternoon came and each received a denarius. So when those who
came were hired first, they have expected to be received more. But each of them also received
a denarius when they received that they began to grumble against the landowner. Those who were hired
last worked only one hour, they said. And you have made them equal to us, who have borne the
burden of the work and the heat of the day. But he answered one of them, I am not being unfair to
you friend. Didn't you agree to work for a denarius? Take your pay and go. I want to give
the one who was hired last the same as I gave you. So the last will be first and the first will be
last. Not only that, but the author of Acts relates that the new initiates would be required
to sell their homes and all their private property and give all their money to the feet of the Apostles
as Acts two states, they devoted themselves to the Apostles teaching and to fellowship,
to the breaking of bread and to prayer. Everyone was filled with all the many wonders and signs
performed by the Apostles. All the believers were together and had everything in common.
They sold property and possessions to give to anyone who had need. Every day they continued
to meet together in the temple courts. They broke bread in their homes and ate together with glad
and sincere hearts, praising God and enjoying the favor of all people. And the Lord added to
their number daily, those who are being saved, Acts two.
This egalitarian approach is what we find in these early Christian groups.
One of the earliest Christians on record mentioned in Kelsus is the Carpocrations.
The group was started by a man named Carpocrates who lived in the first century in Alexandria
within the Church of Mark. He was a student of Menander who was in turn a student of none other
than Simon Magus who was baptized by Philip and given the Holy Spirit by Peter according to Acts.
This Menander, according to Irenaeus, was rumored to have performed miracles with his baptism
in which his disciples did not grow old in appearance and that he gave them eternal youth.
Other first century Christian leaders who were initiated by Simon Magus were Cerdo,
Basilides, and Ceternius who started churches in Antioch, Syria and Rome.
Carpocrates, along with his wife Marcellina, started their own Christian church in Cephalonia,
called the Agape. He ran his assembly according to Acts that we just read where everyone was
required to sell their property and take a position among the assembly. Everyone lived
equally in this group. Food and water was evenly distributed among them and they dropped out of
Roman society to live reclusively, devoted to worshiping God, singing hymns, baptisms,
Eucharists, and reading the sayings of Jesus. These Carpocratian Christians are among the earliest
in the sources to show anything close to a Trinitarian theology. However, this Trinity was
slightly different, God, the Logos, and Zoe. At first this might sound heretical and strange,
but if you read the Gospel of John in Greek, it states that the Logos and Zoe were with God in
the beginning. Zoe is translated into English as life and since the English authors translate
Logos into word with a capital W, it can appear that life or Zoe is not important.
They translate this noun without a capital letter, making word look like it stands out and life not
even looking important. However, the oldest Greek fragments of John do not have any distinctions
between capital letters and lowercase letters, unless it's the start of a new passage. So translating
Zoe and Logos both as nouns is a valid way to translate the text. The correct translation
of the Gospel of John is as follows. In the beginning was the Logos and the Logos was with God
and the Logos was God. He was with God in the beginning. Through the Logos all things were
made. Without him nothing was made that has been seen. In him was Zoe and that Zoe was the light
of all humankind. The light of Zoe shines in the darkness and the darkness has not overcome it.
John 1. They were not alone in this Trinitarian doctrine of the Logos and Zoe. Other Christian
sects such as the Valentinians, Sathians, Nascines, as well as the Simonians and others had this doctrine.
I will talk more about these groups later in the video.
Marcellina, the wife of Carpocrates, was so influential in her time that she was invited
to Rome during the papacy of Anacetus in the 150s. This shows that the so-called Gnostics
were still a big part of the Church late into the 2nd century. She attracted large numbers of
followers and founded a sect known as the Marcellians mentioned by Celsus. During her time,
many women held high positions in the Church just as Mary and Martha held high positions
during Jesus' ministry. Marcellina and her followers believed in Antinomianism,
also known as Libertinism, the idea that obedience to laws and regulations is unnecessary
in order to attain salvation, something that Jesus also preached. But this is considered heretical
later, even though it lines up with the Pauline teachings in Galatians 4, the allegory on Christian
freedom about not being bound to the law. Tell me, you who want to be under the law,
are you not aware of what the law says? For it is written that Abraham had two sons,
one by the slave woman and the other by the free woman. His son, by the slave woman,
was born according to the flesh, but his son, by the free woman, was born as a result
of a divine promise. These things are to be taken figuratively. The woman represents
two covenants. One covenant is from Mount Sinai and bears children who are to be slaves.
This is Hagar. Now Hagar stands for Mount Sinai in Arabia and corresponds to the present city
of Jerusalem because she is in slavery with her children. But the Jerusalem that is above
freedom is free and she is our mother. Marcellina thought that Jesus was only a man,
but saw him as a model to be emulated, albeit one which a believer was capable of surpassing.
Marcellina's community appears to have sought to literally implement the foundational
carpocration teaching of social egalitarianism. The Marcellians in particular are reported to
have branded their disciples on the insides of their right earlobes with a tattoo and venerated
images of Jesus as well as the Greek philosophers such as Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle.
Marcellina thought that Mary Magdalene and Mary of Bethany were female followers of Jesus
who are mentioned in the gospels and who were believed to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
God that the other disciples did not know. In the formative years of Christianity,
women held significant positions within various sects serving as prophetesses, educators, healers,
evangelists, and leaders of congregations. Figures such as Mary Magdalene and Mary of Bethany
were notable female disciples of Jesus, referenced in the biblical narratives,
reputed to have understood the teachings of Jesus, the secrets of God's realm.
Women like Mary and her sister Martha set the example for the individuals such as Marcellina
and other women who took on preaching roles. The apostle Paul cites a doctrine in Galatians 3
likely recited during baptismal rites asserting the equality of Christ in all,
regardless of ethnic background, social status, or gender. There is neither Jew nor Greek,
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
By the end of the first century, figures like Marcian of Sinop were known to ordain women
as church elders on par with men. In the 100s, the Valentinians acknowledged the parity between
women and men. The Montanist movement identified two female prophets, Maximilla and Prisca,
as pivotal to their foundation. However, such spiritual leaders, including Marcellina, faced
heavy criticism from mainstream theologians who castigated them with accusations of insanity,
immorality, and demonic influence. Tertullian, an early Christian author, voiced his objection
to the active participation of women in religious matters.
Condemning their assertiveness and readiness to teach, debate, perform exorcisms, heal,
and possibly even administer baptisms. He particularly targeted a North African woman,
referring to her derisively as that viper. What I find ironic is that both Jesus and Paul
kept women in high standing in their ministries, like Paul traveling the Roman Empire with Thutus,
and writing to Priscus and Achilla, Rufus' mother as well, yet these heretics are condemned by the
later church for putting women in high places. This is also why many scholars, including myself,
don't think Timothy is an authentic Pauline letter, with its call to keep women away from
teaching and for them to cover their heads in church seems completely antithetical to the
early libertine Christians in anti-law egalitarian message of Christianity.
First Timothy seems way too concerned with bishop laws and regulations to be considered
an early Christian letter from the time of Paul. In fact, Marcian, an early bishop who I will speak
at great length about in this video, held in his possession the oldest known New Testament Bible,
including Luke X and the Pauline epistles, but not First Timothy or Second Timothy or Titus,
which I think proves that those texts are not authentic. The text is only used among the
proto-Orthodox types, like Irenaeus, who also taught that only bishops can have authority,
and that the bishops are the representatives of God on earth. First Timothy just happens to contain
a message that looks a lot like anti-nostic propaganda. Oh Timothy, guard what was committed
to your trust, avoiding the profane and idle babblings and contradictions of what is falsely
called gnosis. By professing it, some have strayed concerning the faith. First Timothy.
If this text truly was authentic and from Paul, Marcellina and the Carpocrations would never
have made it past the first century in the church, let alone would Marcellina be invited to Rome
by anesthetists in the 150s. These Carpocrations also were the first Christians to make images of
Jesus and Mary to venerate and worship. Among their doctrines was the process of apotheosis,
or deification, through retaining gnosis. This was considered the highest form of salvation
that a baptized Christian can attain. They believed that Jesus was one who attained the highest level
of gnosis and was begotten by God through his apotheosis. They also believed that Pythagoras
and Plato also attained gnosis and were also not only deified, but the Carpocrations also
made statues of Plato and Pythagoras and venerated them along the statue of Jesus.
The idea of being begotten by God would be completely foreign among Jews,
but to the Greco-Roman world, this was nothing new. Caesar Augustus, Alexander the Great,
Seleucus Nicanor, Demetrius Poliocretis, just to name a few are people who were considered to
attain apotheosis while being alive. When Demetrius Poliocretis entered the city of Athens, they had
images of him in the city next to Demeter and Dionysus so that he can be worshiped as a God.
The same can be said about Caesar Augustus and Alexander the Great.
Of these Carpocrations who attained apotheosis was the son of Carpocrates and Marcellina,
who were married and their child was named Epiphanes. Epiphanes died when he was just 17 years
old, but he was deified on the island of Cephalonia around 120 AD. In his short life,
he wrote a masterpiece called On Justice. Here are some passages from this text to give you an
idea of their doctrines. The righteousness of God is a kind of sharing along with equality.
There is equality in the heaven, which is stretched out in all directions and contains the
entire earth in its circle. The night reveals all the stars equally, the light of the sun,
which is the cause of the daytime and the father of light. God pours out from above upon the earth
an equal measure to all have power to see, for all see alike, since here is no distinction between
rich and poor. People and governor, stupid and clever, female and male, free men and slaves,
even the irrational animals are not accorded any different treatment. But in just the same way,
God pours out from above the sunlight equally upon all the animals. He establishes his justice
to both good and bad by seeing that none is able to get more than his share and deprive his neighbor
so that he has twice the light his neighbor has. The sun causes food to grow for all living beings
alike. The universal justice is given to all equally. In this respect, there is no difference
between the species of oxen and particular oxen, between the species of pigs and particular pigs,
between the species of sheep and particular sheep, and so with all the rest. In them,
universality manifests injustice. Furthermore, all plants after their kind are sown equally in the
earth. Common nourishment grows for all beasts which feed on the earth's produce. To all it is
alike. It is regulated by no law, but rather is harmoniously available to all through the gift
of him who gave it and commanded it to grow. The apparent themes of this text show heavy
influences from both Jesus and Plato. The stressing on equality coming from God is apparent
throughout the text and can be seen as the force behind the culture of early Christianity and
communal life. He goes on to say, as the laws could not punish men who were ignorant of them,
they taught man to transgress for a particularity of the laws cut up and destroyed, the universal
equality of the divine law. The idea that the law is given for the lawless and the righteous have no
need for the law is arguably the most central doctrine of Christianity itself. Jesus and Paul
taught that the law was only given for the lawless. Luke 11 states,
What goes into someone's mouth does not defile them, but what comes out of their mouth, that is
what defiles them. Now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law,
so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world held accountable to God. Therefore no one
will be declared righteous in God's sight by the works of the law, rather through the law we become
conscious of our sin, Paul. In him you were also circumcised with a circumcision not performed by
human hands. Your whole self ruled by the flesh was put off when you were circumcised by Christ.
You who have heard that it was said, an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, but I tell you,
do not resist an evil person. If anyone slaps you on the right cheek, turn to them the other
cheek also. Give to the one who asks you and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from you.
You have heard that it was said, love your neighbor and hate your enemy,
but I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you that you may be
children of your father in heaven. He causes his son to rise on the evil and the good and sends rain
on the righteous and the unrighteous Jesus. And there you have it, Jesus, like carpocrates,
like epiphanies, like Marcellina, using the sun as an example of God's equality of righteousness
for all under him. The carpocration ideas are biblically accurate and are aligned with Jesus
and Paul. The core doctrine of Jesus was that authority can only come from God and rejected
the scribes, Pharisees and Sadducees who obsessed over the law and the scriptures,
which are external rather than focusing on being righteous within. I also think it should be noted
that Jesus in the same passage says that you may be children of your father in heaven,
implying that anyone can be begotten by God, something that the carpocrations taught. Epiphanies
was not the first Christian to attain this level of salvation and became deified besides Jesus,
of course. His father, Carpocrates, was said to have attained perfection through gnosis.
Carpocrates' teacher, Menander, also declared to be a divine Messiah and had the power of God
in his quoted saying, The primary power continues unknown to all, but that he himself is the person
who has been sent forth from the presence of the invisible beings as a savior for the deliverance
of men. Also, Menander's teacher, Simon Magus, was a Samaritan and was also deified by his followers.
Simon Magus was deified in Rome along with his wife, Helena, and they were depicted in images
in the guise of Jupiter and Minerva. The opponents of Simon used this as a way to condemn them for
heresy. However, Simon told his followers, If anyone on seeing the images of either Simon or Helen
shall call them by the names Jupiter or Minerva, he is cast out as showing ignorance of the mysteries.
A statue of an old Etruscan god, Semosencus, that was still erected in Rome on Tiber Island
at that time was apparently also used to represent Simon. Some accounts say that he was so popular
in Rome that it was Emperor Claudius himself that erected this statue. This statue was designed
with the archetype of Apollo and had the club of Hercules, possibly denoting that Simon was the son
of God. It is also said that Simon was identified with Heracles Melchart and was called Shemesh
or son while Helen was identified with Selena Estarte and called Luna according to Clement.
This idea of initiates having nicknames or titles of gods is something practiced throughout many
Greco-Roman assemblies. We see this with Mark, Antony, and Cleopatra being Dionysus, Osiris,
and Aphrodite Isis. I would even go as far as say that the gospel writers themselves
linked Jesus to certain divinities by writing stories of him doing similar miracles and wonders
as the heroes and gods before him such as Jesus casting a legion into swine like surgery does
in Homer's Odyssey. Also casting a legion into swine where Jesus being called the true vine,
a title that Dionysus also has, and the light of the world, a title that Apollo also has. Simon
Magus was said to have met Helen in Samaria and that Helen was originally one of the disciples
of John the Baptist who considered her as his favorite and most beloved of the 30 disciples.
Simon Magus was opposed by a Christian named Docetius who was considered the standing one
and leader of the sect of Baptists but was eventually taken over by the Holy Spirit
and kneeled down to worship Simon Magus ordering his entire rank of 30 disciples to follow Simon
instead. After this Simon took Helen as his wife and left Samaria and traveled to Rome
and was met by Peter during the reign of Emperor Claudius.
Simon Magus wrote a lengthy text called The Great Declaration which was central to the
Valentinians and Sethians, both early Christian sects who I will discuss later. In this text are
found heavy influences of Zoroastrianism, Platonism, Peripatetic, Stoic, and Epicurean concepts with
a wide mixture of Hellenic and Hebraic ideas on top of Pythagorean numerology. The text begins
with Moses' proclamation that God is a consuming fire from Deuteronomy 4. Simon
wolfed together this concept with Heraclitus philosophy which posited fire as the fundamental
element of all existence. Simon referred to this foundational element as an endless power,
dunmus apparentos and proposed that it resides within human beings who are created of flesh and
blood. However, Simon argued that fire was not as simple as commonly perceived. In a matter akin
to the Stoics and Zoroastrians, he imagined it as an entity with intelligence. From this eternal
entity emanated the created universe that we are familiar with, structured with six foundational
elements or roots, each having an internal and external aspect, paired as such, mind and intention,
noose and epinoa equating to heaven and earth, voice and name, fone, anoma, the sun and moon,
reasoning and reflection, logeesmas and enthumesis, to air and water. These six roots were also termed
as six powers. Interwoven with all was the supreme endless power which is described as
that which is, was and will be. This power held the potential within every human being
could unfold to its vast extent, the insignificant could become significant and the minute could
expand endlessly. Simon taught that this minute essence within the body, not only to the spiritual
attuned, was akin to the kingdom of heaven and comparable to the mustard seeds potential for
growth. It is within our capacity to cultivate this essence and it is this very potential that
the phrase, that we may not be condemned with the world, 1 Corinthians 11 alludes to, for if one
does not actualize this divine likeness within oneself, it perishes with the physical demise.
Simon warned, echoing the biblical sentiment that the unproductive tree is destined to be
honed down and cast into the flames. The entire text presents an unusual amalgamation
between Greek and Jewish traditions, employing allegorical interpretations for both classical
Greek epics and the writings of Moses. It includes a symbolic reading of the Garden of Eden story
and equates the Pentateuch to the five human senses. There's also an esoteric discourse
on the oneness of all existence that mirrors the verses sung by a Brahmin in their hymns.
Its prose sheds light on the narrative involving Helen articulating a vision of singular power
that is split between the celestial and the terrestrial, self-curating and self-sustaining
and is simultaneously its own kin and consort embodying a singular indivisible origin of all
things. The Simonians put a big emphasis on baptism and levels of initiation. They claimed
that baptism, following by attaining the Holy Spirit, were separate, citing John that we were
to be baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire. The Simonians maintained that the normal water
baptism was a mere form and that they had the real baptism. For as soon as their neophytes
went down into the water, a fire appeared on it. This is also mentioned in the book of Acts,
that after Simon Magus and the Samaritan village was baptized by Philip, Peter came to the city
to lay hands on the initiates so that they can have also the Holy Spirit. This gives credibility
to the Gnostic idea that there are levels of salvation beyond just having faith in being a
Christian. Simon Magus would later be heavily opposed by the orthodoxy that began to emerge
in the latter half of the 2nd century. Writers like Irenaeus, Hippolytus, Justin Martyr claiming
that Simon met his demise in a horrible way. However, these stories about his demise in the
church are conflicting and don't make a lot of sense. For instance, a text known as Acts of Peter
which was written around the 3rd century depicts Peter as the main protagonist leading the Church
of Rome and being opposed by Simon Magus who is depicted as the main antagonist. This text seems
to be more reflective of a deeper layer that consists of the early Christian schism between
the Gnostics and orthodoxy of that time period. In this text taking place during the reign of Nero,
Simon Magus and Simon Peter have a magic duel in which Simon Magus shows he is capable of
levitation and flies high into the sky. Peter responds with his own cast of magic as he strikes
down Simon Magus down from the sky and instantly kills him. In another source by Hippolytus,
Simon Magus was in Rome with both Paul and Peter and was very successful in swaying people over
by his magical arts. Peter and Paul both reject him and then he leaves Rome and goes back to
Samaria where he tried to prove to the Samaritans that he is the Christ by having himself buried
with the promise that he would be raised up on the 3rd day. According to Hippolytus, Simon Magus
never gets raised up and thus meets his end. A 3rd century text called Pseudo-Clementines,
similar to the Acts of Peter, gives a legend about Clement of Rome and Peter as the main
protagonist against Simon Magus. In this text, it is during the reign of Claudius, not Nero,
that Simon Magus was opposed by Peter. After losing many magical duels, he jumps off a tall
building to his own death, not by the magic of Peter this time. This story can't even be true
because Clement would have been less than 10 years old during the reign of Claudius.
All three of these legends about Simon Magus' demise in Rome conflict with one another and
Justin Martyr relates that Simon Magus was rejected by Peter and Paul in Samaria before he ever went
to Rome at all. If that was the case, why would Simon Magus be welcomed into Rome by the church,
let alone Peter in the first place? The Book of Acts gives no such account of Simon's demise.
The Book of Acts leaves Simon Magus on a positive note as one of the earliest disciples to be
baptized by Philip and attain the Holy Spirit by Peter himself. That would be such a high
degree of salvation that rendering him a heretic would make the Holy Spirit and baptism useless.
Some Christians today might point to Simon's sorcery in his attempt to buy the Holy Spirit
with money as a clear sign that he was always a heretic and should be rejected as such. However,
this happens before Peter prays for him and lays hands on him to give him the Holy Spirit.
And if this makes Simon Magus evil, then what should we say about Paul, who not only hunted
down Christians before he was saved by the Holy Spirit, but also talks about how he opposed
both Peter and James to their faces? Simon Magus was saved before Paul, and the author of Acts
ends the narrative about Simon on a positive note with Peter, Simon and Philip preaching the good news
to the people of Samaria. If Simon was rejected at that time, there would be no time for Simon to
start his own sect of Christianity and travel to Rome and be accepted by the church there.
So many of his doctrines were central to the Valentinians and Scythians, and none of that
would be possible had his story ended there. Also, Acts was written in the early 2nd to
mid 2nd century, and the author would have known how evil Simon was by that time if this was the case.
What I think is more likely is that a political divide between the Christians took place sometime
between 140 and 150 AD, causing a schism between the followers of Marcian, Valentinus,
and the so-called Gnostics with the followers of Justin Marder, Taysin, and Aranaus. The latter group
seems to have won this schism, but I will speak more on this later in the video.
But due to this schism, it is likely that Simon Magus became the main target of criticism
due to his vast influences on the members of the church like Valentinus and Marcus Magus,
who used Simonian doctrines. Due to Simon being so early on and so many learning from him,
it would be strategic to cut out the branch from the root, which is Simon Magus.
The Simonian influence on the early Gentile church was so vast, it can be easily compared to the vast
influence of Paul. From this line of Simon Magus, we get Menander, Cerdo, Saturnius,
and the Carpelcretians who have already mentioned. Cerdo, Valentinus, Marcian, Marcus Magus were all
in Rome during the papacy of Hygenus, decades after the papacy of Clement, which shows that
this schism comes much later than reported by the Heresiologists. All of these early church figures
show dependence on Simon's doctrines, but are equally influenced by Pauline tradition as well.
These are Christians who reject the Old Testament Mosaic law, dependence, in favor
for a more spiritual approach to salvation. Another student of Simon Magus was Basilides.
This Basilides became a famous Christian mystic and teacher in Alexandria, Egypt,
during the first half of the second century. Basilides is arguably the face of Christian
Gnosticism. He takes Gnosis to another level. The logo of this channel, which is the symbol of
Abraxis, comes from none other than Basilides himself. He taught that the great Archon, Magus
Archon, known as Abraxis or Yaho, was the unbegotten Father and the Demiurge who had the highest
emanation of light in the universe and produced ions descended from his being,
resulting in multiple heavenly realms and angelic powers. With the Jewish God Yelda Boeth
identified as one of these angels, Abraxis had the head of a hawk, torso of a man,
and legs of serpents, signifying the three elements, air, water, and earth. His name
in Greek, Abrasax, equals seven letters for seven planets and days of the week. Consists of three
vowels and four consonants, which multiplies, gives the 12 lunar months of a solar calendar.
The Dramatria of the name Abraxis equals 365. He designates Abraxis more distinctly as the power
above all in the first principle, or Arche, the cause and first archetype of all things,
and mentions that the Basilidians refer to 365 as the number of parts in the human body,
as well as the days in the year. He says that Abraxis, the Arche, which is the monad,
gives birth to the mind Nus, which is the duod, or dyad, along with Sophia, the female principle
of Nus. This dyad produces the logos, which is Christ. The world, as well as 365 heavens,
was curated in honor of Abraxis, and that Christ was sent not by the maker of the world,
but by Abraxis, his true father. Theo's Hipsistos, who I mentioned earlier as a God worshiped by
monotheistic Greeks, was also a title given to Abraxis, as well as God Almighty, Pantocrator.
Pantocrator is used once by Paul and 2 Corinthians, and nine times in the Book of Revelation,
and I saw no temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, Pantocrator, and the Lamb,
are the temple of it. I will be a father to you, and you will be to my sons and daughters,
says the Lord Almighty, Pantocrator.
It is quite possible that this doctrine of Abraxis is rooted in deep ancient mystery rites.
Eusebius, the church historian under Constantine, writes about a Bronze Age priest,
named Sanconietin, from 1200 BCE in Phoenicia, cited by Philo in Biblos in the 1st century,
who says, The Phoenicians call it Good Daemon. In like manner, the Egyptians also surname
Keneath, and they add that the head of a hawk, because of the hawk's activity,
Ipice also, who was called among from the chief hero font and sacred scribe,
whose work was translated into Greek by Arius of Heracliplus,
speaks in an allegory word for word as follows. The first and most divine being is a serpent,
with the form of a hawk extremely graceful, which whenever he opens his eyes,
filled with light in his original birthplace. But if he shuts his eyes, darkness came on.
Ipice here intimates that he is also of a fiery substance, saying,
He shone through, for to shine through is a peculiar delight.
From the Phoenician phiricities also, took the first ideas of his theology concerning the god
called by him Ophion, concerning the Ophianade. Moreover, the Egyptians describe the world
from the same idea, engraved the circumference of a circle of the color of the sky and fire,
and a hawk shaped serpent stretched across the middle of it. And the whole shape is like Artheta,
representing the circle as a world and signifying by the serpent, which connects it to the middle
of the Good Daemon. Zoraster, also the Magian, in his sacred collection of Persian records,
says in express words, and God has the head of a hawk. He is the first, incorruptible, eternal,
uncreated, without parts, most unlike all else, the controller of all good, and he is also the
father of good laws and justice, self-taught, natural, imperfect, and wise, and the sole author
of the sacred power of nature. Eusebius inserts his passage, just after explaining
the mystical sacrifice of the Phoenicians, in which El, the god of the Hebrew Bible,
known to the Greeks as the Chronos, sacrifices his only begotten son as a ransom to the avenging
Daemons. Eusebius argues that this was a portent of Jesus Christ being crucified as a ransom for
the sins of mankind. Facilities asserted that it was knowledge or gnosis, not faith, that led to
salvation. This special knowledge or gnosis was an esoteric truth revealed to humanity
by the divine figure of Jesus Christ. Two facilities, faith had no role in achieving
salvation. He regarded faith as simply the soul's approval of concepts that don't arouse the sense
due to their absence. Furthermore, he saw faith as an innate attribute, not a deliberate choice,
suggesting that individuals inherently recognize truths intellectually without the need for proof.
Facilities also seemed to link various levels of honor with one's natural faith.
Facilities' own scriptural collection featured a unique gospel in addition to the Gospel of John,
which explicitly excluded the epistle of Titus as a forgery and incorporating only selected letters
from the Pauline corpus, which he thought were authentic. His canon also included a specific
text believed to have been authored by facilities or his immediate disciples, such as the interpretation
of the Gospels and the Exegetica. In contrast, the established Christian canon omitted the
synoptic Gospels, Mark, Matthew, and Luke, deeming them incompatible with the perfection of John's
Gospel, which incorporates Christ as the Logost and Sophia as Zoe, ascending from the Father,
who is a Braxis. Like Simon Magus, Paul and the Carpocrations, facilities' influence on the
Church of Rome as well as the Church of Alexandria was massive. In particular, the Saphians and
Valentinians who shared common ideas about God and creation and also used Pythagorean
math and Platonic philosophy to construct their Christian theology.
A central text among the Saphians and Valentinians was the Apocryphon of John,
an early Christian text revealed to the Apostle John that gives the secret account of creation.
The narrative opens with John immersed in sorrow and confusion following the death of Christ. However,
Christ manifests before John, transforming an appearance and soothing his distress
with a cosmic vision. The highest divine principle is the Monad, an ultimate divine entity
described as a singular sovereignty with no higher power. He embodies the absolute,
the everlasting, the boundless, the flawless, the sacred, and the self-sufficient. His existence
surpasses all understanding and is beyond any definitive measurement or description,
existing in a state of unimaginable perfection. The Monad brings forth a dyad, a female divine
aspect known as Barbello from his contemplation. She is known as the initial thought and the
Monad's reflection. While Barbello is feminine, she is also referred to in both maternal and
paternal terms, embodying the concept of the original parent and is characterized by a blending
of masculine and feminine traits. As the foremost and hierarchy of divine beings called the Ions,
Barbello's interaction with the Monad results in the emergence of additional Ions,
as well as the aspects of light and mind. Light, synonymous with Christ and referred to as
Christ the Autogenes, works alongside mind or noose in a creative capacity honoring Barbello
and the Monad by generating more Ions and forces. The narrative's harmony is disturbed by an Ion
named Sophia of the Epinoya who unilaterally embarks on a creative venture without the Monad's spirit
or a consort's collaboration. Her thought gives rise to Yelda Boeth, an imperfect and
malevolent being with the lion in head and his serpent body. Sophia, recognizing the flawed
nature of her creation, attempts to hide Yelda Boeth, keeping him oblivious to the higher realms of
the Ions. Despite his solitary origin and lacking the Monad's spirit endorsement, Yelda Boeth possesses
sufficient power to emulate the creative acts of the superior Ions, spawning a legion of archons
with similar deficiencies and crafting a lesser world for them, made from darkness yet infused
with light, pilfered from Sophia, wisdom incarnate. This realm, neither fully dark nor light, is in
murky creation. In his ignorance, Yelda Boeth proclaims himself the exclusive and envious deity
of this domain. Upon realizing her mistake, Sophia expresses remorse. The spirit of the Monad
and other divine powers in Ions seek to redeem Sophia and her aberrant creation. In this attempt,
Yelda Boeth and his archons are startled by the Monad's spirit and an image of this spirit is
inadvertently imprinted on their domain's surface. Eager to capture this essence, they fashion a human
atom in its likeness. Sophia and entities from the higher order perceive a chance to recover the
trapped light within Yelda Boeth's dominion and atom. They deceive Yelda Boeth into instilling his
spiritual essence into atom and limiting him and simultaneously depleting Yelda Boeth of the light
derived from Sophia. Yelda Boeth and the archons, observing Adam's radiant intellect and superiority,
attempt to restrain him. They place him in Eden, a deceitful paradise filled with sin and death,
hiding the true knowledge that can liberate the light within. Christ confides to John
that he prompted Adam to taste the fruit of knowledge and reveals Eve as a helper dispatched
by the higher order to free the light imprisoned in atom and Yelda Boeth's creation. As the story
unfolds, Yelda Boeth strives to recapture the essence of light, encouraging procreation to craft
new bodies filled with the false spirit which deludes humanity, keeping them in darkness and
servitude. John and the Savior engage in a dialogue where Christ elaborates on who will attain salvation.
Those touched by the true spirit will be saved while those ensnared by the false spirit will
face condemnation. Christ as an emissary for the higher realm reveals his mission to awaken and save
those trapped in Yelda Boeth's shadow, marking the enlightened, the special seal that protects
them from death. The Savior concludes with a warning, profiting from these divine secrets
would incur a curse. The Sethians, who produced this work, were a group of Christians that have
their roots in pre-Christian times before Jesus, among groups known as the Canites and Ophites,
who existed in Syria, Palestine, and Armenia before coming to Alexandria, Egypt. They were
said to have became Christians after meeting Peter and Mark. Their predecessors, the Canites,
were a group of Jewish Gnostics who believed that the Old Testament God was evil and that Eve
was the Savior and that Cain was the hero because he tilled the land, was a vegetarian and did not
believe in blood sacrifice of animals to appease a demonic God. Along with the Ophites, they believed
the serpent in the garden was Sophia, wisdom incarnate who came to save the world with Gnosis.
They, along with the Sethians, taught that Christ on the cross was analogous to the serpent on the
cross that Moses placed in the desert to avert from harm. The serpent on the rod was a serpent
coiled on the tree in the garden and Christ on the cross was the fulfillment of this prophecy.
And as I stated before, the Gospel of John was a favorite among these groups, which also states,
Just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness, so the Son of Man must be lifted up,
John 3, 14. They also believed that Judas was a hero who was given the most important task
by Jesus to turn him in so he could become the sacrifice of the world. They produced the Gospel
of Judas, which explains how Jesus met secretly with Judas to tell him that he was the greatest
among the disciples, that he would be remembered by the world who has no Gnosis and that he would
be called the worst and that they would remove him from the Twelve.
The Sethians employed a range of Middle Platonic, Zoroastrian metaphysics in their writings.
They also had a text attributed to the grandfather of Zoroaster, whose name is Zostrianos,
that explains the five levels of attaining salvation through five types of people,
which was revealed to him by the angel of Gnosis. The first type of person is materialistic with
a dead soul, mind, and body, and they suffer and are consumed by demons. The second type is
materialistic but has an immortal soul and they forget their eternal God and associate with
demons. The third type, the Sojourners, are far from wicked deeds if they possess an inward
discovery of truth. The fourth type is the one that repents, renounces dead things, and desires
immortal mind and soul, and they can receive another conception in every attainment. The fifth
and most powerful type is the saved person who has grasped the image that changes in every situation
and can become divine. Zostrianos offers up praise to God and asks the angel of Gnosis for wisdom
about the dispersion of the saved type of person who is mixed with and divided from them.
The angel of Gnosis tells him, some souls need help to escape reincarnation and if not,
they will keep descending into generation and become speechless due to the clutches of the body.
To avoid this fate, there are specific powers appointed for salvation. These powers are perfect
living concepts that will save whoever receives them, passing through the world in every ion.
Additionally, the text describes the self-generated ions as eternal lights that possess a variety of
beauty, trees, plants, human beings alive with every species, immortal souls, every shape and
species of intellect, gods of truth, angels dwelling in great glory with an indissoluble body,
and in generate offspring with unchangeable perception. These ions are perfect and individually
and at each ion there is a living earth, a living water, luminous air, and un-consuming fire.
Zostrianos explains that being baptized five times by the powers of the self-born
feignies caused him to become divine. Zostrianos urges the holy seed of Seth to awaken their divine
aspect, seek salvation by choosing the light over darkness.
The Sethians produced dozens of lengthy texts that were found among the Nag Hammadi courtesies
in the sands of Egypt that were thought to have been lost for 15 centuries. It would take me an
entire video to go through them all. The Sethians would go on to influence the Nassians and Valentinians
and Marcionites. One of the main criticisms laid against them by Irenaeus and Hippolytus
is that they were dositis, which means they believed that Christ did not come in the flesh
but was just a phantom. This is however not true. One of the central Sethian texts called Melchizedek
contains an anti-dosetic message that advocates for a Christology wherein the incarnation of Jesus
was a flesh and blood human who was born, ate, drank, and suffered and died. The text also shows
close proximity to the author of Hebrews, highlighting that these Christian heretics
were more biblically based than what they were made out to be. This is not to say that dosicists
did not exist and many of them certainly were on the Gnostic side, but this is not true for the
leading theologians described in this video. Even Origen was thought to hold some quasi-dositic views
on Christ's divinity. These Christian heretics were well connected in their time and well respected
by the masses. Marcion of Synope, who was deemed a heretic in the late 2nd century by Irenaeus,
was so influential and popular that he needs to be addressed before we discuss the Valentinians
and Nasines. Marcion claimed to have been taught by two teachers, Thutus, who traveled with Paul,
and Cerdo, who was a student of Simon Magus. It is thought that he met both of them through his
father, Philologus, who is one of the 70 disciples who actually met Jesus while he was alive.
Yes, you heard that right. Marcion's father, Philologus, is counted among the 70 disciples
from Luke, who physically met Jesus, and he was also the first bishop of Synope,
consecrated by Saint Andrew himself. Marcion's father, being one of the oldest saints to pass away,
makes Marcion the most interesting heretic of all. Marcion was also a close companion of
Valentinus and was welcomed to Rome under the papacy of hygienists in 138. His teacher, Cerdo,
taught that the god of the Old Testament was not the father of Jesus, but a different god,
and that the father of Jesus was the good god of justice who freed humanity from the
bondage of the law. Marcion seems to have adopted a similar view to this. Marcion posited that the
deity depicted in the Hebrew scriptures, who he labeled the demi-urge and identified as the
architect of the physical cosmos, was a provincial god of the Jewish people, characterized by a strict
authoritarian legal system that inflicted suffering and death as a punishment for human
transgressions. On the other hand, the deity that Jesus manifested was a wholly separate entity,
a universal divinity defined by kindness and love, offering humanity forgiveness and grace.
Marcion is known to have composed a work known as the antithesis, which has been lost to time,
where he drew distinctions between the Old Testament's demi-urge and the New Testament's
Heavenly Father. He showed how the Book of Kings depicts Elijah being called Baldi by some young
children, and then the god sends she-bears to devour the children for revenge. He argued that
this is not the god of goodness and justice, but a vengeful deity who admits time and time again
that he is a jealous god, thirsty for blood sacrifice and burnt offerings.
God is not in need of anything and can never be jealous, according to Marcion.
The Gospel of John chapter 8 contains passages that can be seen as Marcionite. For example,
you judged by human standards. I pass judgment on no one, but if I do judge, my decisions are true
because I am not alone. I stand with the Father who sent me. In your law, it is written that the
testimony of two witnesses is true. I am the one who testifies for myself. My other witness is the
Father who sent me. You are from below. I am from above. You are of this world. I am not of this
world. You are doing the works of your own Father. I know that you are Abraham's descendants,
yet you are looking for a way to kill me because you have no room for my word. I am telling you
what I have seen in the Father's presence and you are doing what you have heard from your Father.
Distinction there between his Father and their Father. If God were your Father,
you would love me, for I have come here from God. I have not come on my own. God sent me.
Why is my language not clear to you because you are unable to hear what I say?
You belong to your Father, the devil, and you want to carry out your Father's desires.
He was a murderer from the beginning, not holding to the truth, for there is no truth in him.
When he lies, he speaks his native language, for he is a liar and the Father of lies.
Jesus. You belong to your Father, the devil. It can be interpreted as that the Pharisees and
Sadducees are of a different Father than the one that Jesus was sent by, which is in line with
Marcy and I in Valentinian thinking. Marcyon is credited with being the first to establish a
collection of Christian scriptures. His compilation included just 11 texts,
partitioned in two categories, the Evangelicon, a condensed form of the Gospel according to Luke,
and the Apostolicon, a suite of 10 letters from Paul the Apostle, each slightly abbreviated in
comparison to the versions that would later become canon. Prominent early Christians like Irenaeus,
Tertolian, and Epiphanius mentioned that Marcyon deliberately modified Luke's Gospel and Paul's
letters to align with his own doctrinal stance, a view that Christian scholars used to support.
However, a number of modern scholars suggest that Marcyon's renditions might actually predate the
versions that ultimately became part of the biblical canon and that it was the other church
fathers that altered these letters. Marcyon having the original correct version, Marcyon thrived in
Asia Minor, the location of the seven churches of Asia mentioned in Revelation. Pergamon,
one of the churches mentioned, was known in the first century to have a large Jewish community
that strongly opposed Christianity. It is likely that Satan's throne and the synagogue of Satan
is a referencing to the Jews living in Pergamon in Asia Minor. I know your tribulation and your
poverty, but you are rich, and the slander of those who say that they are Jews and are not,
but are a synagogue of Satan. This throne of Satan is mentioned three times in Revelation
and twice regarding people claiming to be Jews. This aligns with Marcyon's attitude that the
church is for the Gentiles and Jews who reject Judaism. Revelation ends with the marriage between
the bride of Christ represented by the church who accepts Jesus in condemnation for Israel who lost
the temple. Marcyon's preference for the Pauline letters is indicative of his belief that Paul alone
was the true conveyor of Jesus' message as opposed to the twelve apostles and the early
Christian community based in Jerusalem who Marcyon believed were under the influence of the
demiurge. Marcyon's possession of Paul's epistles shows how close in proximity he was to Paul
and how connected he was. Remember, this wasn't a time when people can just fax an email content.
To have a copy of a letter so early on could only come from someone being in close connection to that
person. And the fact that he had all of the authentic epistles of Paul so early on shows that
Marcyon was extremely connected. When Marcyon traveled to Rome in the 130s, he joined the
Roman church and made a large donation of 200,000 cestresses to the congregation there,
a modern equivalent to 2 million when $175,000 today. Conflicts with the Church of Rome arose.
He was eventually excommunicated in 144 when he was opposed by Pius and Anacetus,
but he was still popular in the Eastern churches long past his death into the third century.
2
Valentinus, his companion in Rome, also a follower of Thutus and Paul,
was up for Pontifus Maximus, the highest bishop in Rome, against Pius, and he lost by a small,
narrow vote. Had he won that election, he would be on the list of popes inside your Catholic Bible,
and Marcyon would have never been excommunicated, and it is entirely possible that Christianity,
as we know it, would be completely different today. The bishop he lost to was the first to
oppose Marcyon, and considering how close he was to losing to Valentinus, it is entirely possible
that this created a division between them. He remained in Rome until the papacy of Anacetus,
but his movement declined after Marcyon was excommunicated. Thutilian writes,
Valentinus had expected to be a bishop, because he was an able man both ingenious and eloquent.
Being indignant, however, that another obtained the dignity by reason of claim which
confession had given him, he broke with the Church of the True Faith, just like those
restless spirits which, when roused by ambition, are usually inflamed with the desire of revenge.
He applied himself with all his might to exterminate the truth, and finding the clue
of a certain old opinion, he marked out a path for himself with the subtlety of the serpent.
Valentinus said that Thutus imparted to him the secret wisdom that Paul had taught privately
to his inner circle, which Paul publicly referred to in connection with his visionary encounter,
with the risen Christ, when he received the secret teaching from him. Such esoteric teachings were
downplayed in Rome after the middle of the second century, but these teachings of secret wisdom and
gnosis is something that comes up quite a bit in Paul's letters. Now to him who was able to establish
you in accordance with my gospel, the message I proclaim about Jesus Christ in keeping with
the revelation of the mystery hidden for long ages past. We declare God's wisdom a mystery that has
been hidden and the God destined for our glory before time began. I know a man in Christ who 14
years ago was caught up in the third heaven. Whether it was in the body or out of the body,
I do not know, God knows. And I know that this man, whether in the body or apart from the body,
I do not know, but God knows, was caught up to paradise. And I heard inexpressible things
that no one is permitted to tell. One can argue that Paul himself attained apotheosis by reaching
the third heaven. Elaine Pagels in her book, The Gnostic Paul, shows how the heretical teachings
of the so-called Gnostics are just as aligned with Paul's letters as the so-called proto-orthodox
teachings are. In fact, one can even make the case that the Gnostics are even more aligned with Paul,
especially the seven authentic Pauline epistles. More on this later. Valentinus was a neo-Pathagorean
Christian. Numerology and mysticism was at the core of his teachings. Hippolytus went as far as to
charge him with plagiarism of Pythagoras' teachings, in which he says, of some such nature as I who
have accurately examined their systems have attempted to state compenduously is the opinion
of Pythagoras and Plato. And from this system, not from the Gospels, Valentinus, as we have proved,
has collected the materials of heresy, I mean his own heresy, and may therefore justly be reckoned
a Pythagorean and Platonus, not a Christian. Valentinus, therefore, and Heraclion and Ptolemaeus
and the entire school of these heretics as disciples of Pythagoras and Plato following
these guides have laid down as a fundamental principle of their doctrine, the arithmetic system.
The Valentinian system, like the Scythian, taught that the Godhead was a triad, God the Father,
Logos, and Zoe, again, drawn from the Gospel of John as shown earlier for the Scythian triad.
This triad system is arguably the origin itself of Trinitarian theology, which does not get accepted
as doctrine until the 4th century. The Valentinians already had this doctrine, and they held the
conviction that the existence initiated within an entity they termed the Pluroma, akin to the
universe. At its core was the original progenitor, Bithos, or the primal father, who epitomized
the inception of all entities. After ions of solitude and introspection, Bithos gave rise to
30 ions. Celestial ideals manifested as 15 duos of counterparts. Among these was the ion Sophia.
You might be wondering where this Sophia comes from, and is it biblically accurate? It is
biblically accurate, and it can be found in any Orthodox or Catholic Bible. In the book of Wisdom
of Solomon, chapter 7 and 8, it says the following, I learned both what is secret and what is manifest
for Sophia, the fashioner of all things, a spirit that is intelligent, holy, unique,
manifold, subtle, agile, clear, unpolluted, distinct, and vulnerable, loving the good,
keen, irresistible, beneficent, humane, steadfast, sure, free from anxiety, all powerful,
overseeing all, and penetrating through all spirits that are intelligent, pure, and all
together subtle. For Sophia is more mobile than any motion, because of her pureness,
she pervades and penetrates all things. For she is a breath of the power of God,
and a pure emanation of the glory of the Almighty. Therefore, nothing defiled gains
entrance into her. She is a reflection of the eternal light, a spotless mirror of the working of
God and an image of his goodness. Although she is but one, she can do all things, and while
remaining in herself, she renews all things. In every generation, she passes into holy souls
and makes them friends of God and prophets. For God loves nothing so much as the person who loves
Sophia. The wisdom of Solomon also depicts Sophia as being in the beginning with creation,
forming Adam himself. Sophia's flaws, her curiosity, and fervor precipitated her descent
from the Pluroma, culminating in the emergence of earthly realm and humanity. Both intrinsically
imperfect, the deity of the Hebrew scriptures was equated by the Valentinians with the Demi-erj,
an inferior artisan responsible for crafting the physical cosmos. Humanity esteemed as the
pinnacle of creation in this corporal world as an amalgamation of spirit and matter. Redemption's
objective is to extricate the spiritual essence from its maternal entanglements. It was imperative,
according to Valentinian thought, to acknowledge the primal father as the fountainhead of divine
essence in the quest for gnosis or profound spiritual enlightenment. They believe that an
individual's acquisition of this deep-seated knowledge or gnosis bore beneficial repercussions
for the cosmos at large, aiding in the restoration of cosmic harmony.
The Valentinians posited that salvation was rooted in gnosis, not mere faith. Clement noted
that Valentinians considered Orthodox Christians to be naively faithful, whereas they themselves
were the bearers of gnosis. They viewed themselves as intrinsically redeemed by a virtue of innate
superior seed within them, positioning their spiritual gnosis as distinct from the faith
from the ordinary believer, as the ethereal is from the tangible. Valentinians' system
stresses the idea of not being a scholar of the law, but of being spiritually rich within.
One might be reminded of Jesus in the Gospel of Luke here.
Woe to you scholars of the law who have taken away the key of gnosis. You yourselves did not enter
and you stopped those trying to enter. The Valentinian idea of putting gnosis over faith
and the spirit over the law is something that Jesus himself preached in his time,
according to the Gospels. Jesus is portrayed in the Gospels with an attitude that shows
stoic and cynic leadings, and his parables align with middle Platonists and Pythagorean values.
These Valentinians, like the Orphic and Pythagoreans before them, held to the doctrines of transmigrations
of the soul, which is a lot like Vedic reincarnation. One might easily dismiss this as heresy,
however, the Gospel of Matthew declares that John the Baptist is the second coming of Elijah,
which could very easily be interpreted as transmigration, just as Jesus is the last Adam.
If John the Baptist is not literally Elijah, then the prophecy is failed and the Messiah never came.
I don't think Christians would say that, right? So you kind of have to say,
transmigration doctrine is valid under Christianity.
Valentinus had a student named Marcus Magus, who started his own sect, known as the Marcosians.
Although heretics now, they are credited greatly for helping spread Christianity
into France and Europe. His system was completely Pythagorean. His system tells of 30 ions,
divided into an Agduod, a Dekad, and a Dodecad. Of the fall and recovery of Sophia,
of the future union of the spirits of the chosen seed with angels as their heavenly bridegrooms.
Something that we just looked at from the Solomon wisdom text, which is also canon,
according to both Catholic and Orthodoxy. What Marcus added to the teaching of his predecessors
was a system of isopathy, similar to that of the later Pythagoreans about mysteries and numbers
and names. Marcus found in scripture and in nature repeated examples of the occurrence of his mystical
numbers 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 30. Marcus Magus points out that the gematria of the name
Jesus or Jesus in Greek totals 888, a perfect number that shows God's divine providence as the
logos, due to the Greek alphabet having exactly eight monads, eight decades, and eight hectonads.
That is that Jesus consists of all numbers in the alphabet and is thus the logos 888. It is said
by Hippolytus that Marcus Magus was delivering Eucharist with purple fluids in the wine that
contained a hallucinogenic drug that would cause his initiates to experience intense visions
that he would call the Holy Spirit. He even said that Marcus would have two cups ready,
one for the people to check beforehand and one with a sleight of hand would swap it out with
the drugged one and at the last second people would think that the Holy Spirit was taking them over
and giving them visions when he really drugs them. If this true or not, we can never know. But Marcus
Magus' trinity has a father, a mother, and a son, similar to the concepts in Wisdoms of Solomon,
Sophia, God, Messiah, and the Marcosians would thrive in France all the way to the fourth century
until they mostly were swallowed up by the Arians and Cathars.
Before I bring in the so-called proto-Orthodox fathers like Clement and Papius and Ignatius
and Polycarb, I want to talk about my favorite heretic of all. He is called the Nasin preacher.
The Nasin preacher, who led the Nasins, a group of charismatic,
fringian Christians who venerated the great mother. They are the first group that Hippolytus
discusses in his against heresies. These Nasins have doctrines that align closely
to that which is found within the sibling oracles and Greek magical papyri, a wide-ranging mixture
of pagan Jewish, Greek mystery cults, Platonic philosophy, and Dionysian revelry.
They represent Adam as Adamus, an androgynous dyad of both male and female, and equate him with
the Adamus from the Semithracian Mysteries, as well as Addis from the Phrygian Mysteries.
The name Nasin, which means people of the snake, is attributed to both the rod of Asclepius and the
staff of Moses. They believe, like the Ophites and Canites, that Christ on the cross was the
fulfillment of the serpent on the rod in the wilderness of Zion. And this, of course, is
presented by the Gospel of John. And like Pliny the Younger's Christians, they also sing hymns to
Christ at dawn, who they call Lucifer, just as Christ is called Lucifer or Morning Star
in the Book of Revelation. I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify to you about these things for
the churches. I am the root and the descendant of David, the Bright Morning Star, Revelation 22.
Furthermore, the Gospel of the Egyptians is central to them. They affirm that Venus and
Proserpina, both in love with Adonis, represent the natural world of production and regeneration.
But when Diana Selina passes over to Eclipse, then Adonis becomes Addis castrated. This represents
the threefold nature of Christ, who is neither male nor female, connected by his death, resurrection,
and apotheosis. Christ, they say, in all that have been generated, is portrayed Son of Man
from the unportrable Logos, which is the meaning of the great and unspeakable
Ellusinian mysteries of Dionysus and Demeter. They say that Christ is Mercury, the Logos of Zeus,
waving his wand, which guides souls out of Hades and into heaven. The Nassian preacher says to the
adepts, And as when in the magic caves recess, bats humming fly, and when one drops from ridge of
rock, and each to other things clings, I place a rock at the foundations of Zion.
This rock, he affirms, is Adam. The Nassian hymn was an ancient Orphic hymn to Addis,
repurposed for Jesus Christ by the Nassian preacher. And it goes like this,
Whether you are a child of Kronos, or their happy son of Zeus, or Rea, welcome O great one,
who is the sad song of Christ. The Assyrians call you thrice-desired Adonis, and all Egypt calls
you Osiris. Greek wisdom calls you the heavenly horn of the crescent moon. The Semithracians
call you veneral Adamus. The Ammonians call you Coribos, and the Phrygians sometimes call you
Papa. And at times they call you the dead one, or the god, or the barren one, or the goat herd,
or the harvested unripe ear of corn, or their fruitful one, who the almond tree begot. The man
who plays the pipe, the hymn continues in another verse, I will hymn Addis, son of Rea, not with
buzzing sound of trumpets, or idean pipers, with the accord of the voices of the curates,
but I will mingle my song with the polo's music of harps. Evo, hallelujah, in so much as thou art
pan, as thou art bacchus, as thou art the shepherd of brilliant stars. But Jesus said, Father, behold,
a strife of ills across the earth wanders from the breath of wrath, but bitter chaos
seeks to shun, and knows not how to pass it through. On this account, O Father, send me,
bearing seals I shall descend through ions, whole I'll sweep, all mysteries I'll unravel,
and forms of gods I'll show, and secrets of the saintly path, style gnosis, all in part.
Most of this sounds like a completely different religion than Orthodox Christianity of today,
but what do the earliest Christians, who the Orthodox and Catholics venerate as saints say?
The oldest text that we have, outside of Paul's epistles in biblical letters, is the Epistle
of Clement, the only surviving text in the first century that exists outside of the biblical canon
is Clement's epistle to the Corinthians. Clement lived from 35 to 99 AD, and he is so important,
he is considered one of the first popes, consecrated by Peter himself, and one of the first saints.
He is considered to be the first apostolic father of the church,
one of the three chief ones together, with Polycarp and Ignatius, and a co-laborer of Paul.
His epistle to the Corinthians shows no signs of any concern with the Gnostic heresy. He is mostly
concerned with the belief in the resurrection, and spiritual principles such as humility,
hospitality, and piety. He reminds the Corinthians that Christ belongs to the lowly of heart,
and not to anyone who would exalt themselves above the flock.
For Clement, there are no grounds for doubting the resurrection, and says that faith must be
accompanied by works. He shows much more concern for unity than for division and calling out heresy.
Clement, however, tells a story that is nowhere to be found in any Orthodox doctrines.
In verse 25, Clement talks about a portent that occurs in the east, in Arabia, where there is a
bird known as a phoenix, which has a lifespan of a thousand years, 500 years alive, which upon death
makes a nest out of frankincense and myrrh, and dies, and its decaying flesh becomes a
small grub, for 500 years, and after reaching full growth, takes up the nest, containing the bones
of its predecessor, and carries them all the way from Arabia to Heliopolis, rising into the sky
resurrected. It flies to the altar of Helios in Egypt, deposits them to the priest of Heliopolis,
and when the priests consult their records, they see that it arrived on the 500th year,
fulfilling the 1000 year cycle of death and resurrection of the phoenix.
Clement argues that this miracle was given by God as a symbol of death and resurrection of Christ.
He does not ever say that this is a myth or legend, but describes this as a real natural event that
happens. This is also found in Greek mythology before Christianity, and it turns out that among
the Nag Hammadi scriptures, within the texts known as the On the Origin of the World,
once again a text central to Valentinians and Sethians, and in this text we find the same
legend of an Arabian phoenix who has a lifespan of 1000 years and travels to Heliopolis.
This shows that Clement has a lot more in common with these so-called heretics and
gnostics than people think.
Ignatius of Antioch is sketch. Records can't even get his birth or death when he died within 40
years. Eusebius claims he died in 108, but the sources suggest that he lived much later and
died around 140. Most of the stories about him and his margaretum seem to be fabricated legends.
Of his epistles, many seem to be later forgeries, but some might be authentic.
There are some scholars who even doubt the so-called authentic ones as well.
But to be charitable, he seems to be concerned with the nature of Christ's divinity. There is one
physician who has possessed both flesh and spirit, both made and not made. God existing in flesh,
true life and death, both Mary and of God. First passable and then impassable,
even Jesus Christ our Lord. Ignatius. Letter to the Ephesians.
There are some Christian scholars who claim that Ignatius was an early opponent in Gnosticism.
However, the way they argue this is flawed. Ignatius only seems to be concerned with
dositis, and Christian scholars as well as some of the heresiologists tend to lump the
dositis in with the Gnostics, so then they can claim that any opposition to dositism
is also somehow an opposition to Gnosticism. But Ignatius aligns with Marcyon and Valentinus
in the sense that they all agree that Judaism and the Mosaic Law is not important for salvation.
Polycarp
Polycarp lived from 69 to 155 and was a disciple of John and the first bishop of Smyrna.
His epistle to the Philippians is dated to 108 during the reign of Trajan. Most of what is
contained in his epistle regards to conduct of members of the church. Stand fast therefore
in these things and follow the example of the Lord, being firm and unchangeable in faith,
loving the brotherhood, and being attached to one another. Join together in the truth,
exhibiting the meekness of the Lord in your inner course with one another and despising no one,
Polycarp. He also stresses the importance for women in the church, both wives and widows,
who he says, knowing that they are an altar of God. This inclusion of women in the church
is something that aligns once again with the Valentinians and Marcyonites and less
with the orthodoxy of the 4th century church, which became strictly patriarchal in its structure.
Lastly, Papias of Heropolis, who lived from 60 to 130 A.D. Most of what Papias writes about
is concerning the reliability of the gospel accounts and does not ever say anything about
a Gnostic heresy. He tells us that Peter told Mark about the sayings of Jesus,
Mark put them into a narrative and then Matthew came along and rewrote Mark in the correct order,
but he says that Matthew wrote Hebrew, which is clearly false. Even Eusebius criticizes the
reliability of Papias and calls him dumb for taking things that are allegorical to literal.
Justin Martyr, who lived from 100 to 160, is the beginning of the schism between the Gnostics
and the so-called proto-orthodoxy. Justin Martyr opposes Marcyon in the year 144,
and thus begins the first great schism of the church. However, even in Justin's writings,
he writes things that align heavily with the Carpocretian and Simonian thought.
Justin declared that Socrates and Heraclitus were Christians. His aim was to emphasize
that absolute significance of Christ so that all that ever existed of virtue and truth
may be referred to him. This is something that the heretics mentioned in this video
and also believed in. The old philosophers and law givers had only a part of the logos
while the whole appears in Christ. Christ marks the end of regulations of circumcision,
animal sacrifices, the Sabbath, and the laws as to food. Though Christ, the abiding law of God has
been fully proclaimed, in his character as the teacher of the new doctrine and promulgator of
new law, lies the essential nature of his redeeming work. Justin Martyr admits in his own writing
that he went to Athens Academy to be educated as a Pythagorean, but was not able to learn music,
math, and geometry. He then attended a peripatetic philosopher, but was put off, but the philosopher
was too eager for his fee. When he tried to become a Stoic, he was not satisfied with their ideas
about God, so he adopted Platonism. And the perception of immaterial things quite overpowered me.
And the contemplation of ideas furnished my mind with wings so that in a little while, I suppose,
that I had become wise, and such was my stupidity. I expected forthwith to look upon God, for this
is the end of Plato's philosophy. Sometime later, Justin met a Syrian Christian ascetic living in
poverty and said that he debated him about God and was converted due to being moved by the man's arguments.
So what can we conclude from all this? Irenaeus claims that the secret gnosis passed down by the
few who have the Holy Spirit is heretical, but says that only bishops can have true authority,
and are thus human representatives of God on earth. The faith preached to men, which comes down to
our time by means of the successions of the bishops, for it is a matter of necessity that
every church should agree with this church on account of its preeminent authority.
This view, in my opinion, is completely elitist, and it is at odds with the central teachings
of Christ who says, whoever has ears to hear, let them hear. For all those who exalt themselves
will be humbled, and those who humbled themselves will be exalted. Matthew 20.
So the last will be first, and the first will be last. Mark 4. If anyone has ears to hear,
let them hear. Matthew 22. When he was alone, the twelve and the others around him asked him
about the parables. He told them, the secret of the kingdom of God has been given to you,
but to those on the outside, everything is said in parables so that they may be ever seen,
but never perceiving, and ever hearing, but never understanding. Otherwise, they might turn and
be forgiven. Luke 14. For many are called, but few are chosen. All throughout the Gospels, Jesus
is preaching about secret wisdom and rejecting authority figures. The system of bishops getting
authority from other bishops is exactly the system of the Pharisees and Sadducees that Jesus
rejected. Even Paul in his epistle to the Corinthian says, If I speak in the tongues of men or of angels,
but do not have love, I am only a resounding gong or a clinging symbol. If I have the gift of prophecy
and can fathom all mysteries and gnosis, and if I have a faith that can move mountains,
but do not have love, I am nothing. If I give all I possess to the poor and give over my body at
a hardship that I may boast, but do not have love, I gain nothing. 1 Corinthians 13. 1 might think
Paul is talking negatively about speaking in tongues and having gnosis. However, if you read
this carefully, he places tongues and mysteries and gnosis above faith. And then he says that all
three of those levels of salvation are nothing without love. Gnosis, faith, and the Holy Spirit,
all being nothing without love. Paul is relating that those three are the gifts of the Holy Spirit,
talking about them in a positive light. Later in the epistle, Paul drives this home,
follow the way of love and eagerly desire gifts of the Spirit, especially prophecy. For anyone who
speaks in a tongue does not speak to people but to God. Indeed, no one understands them,
they utter mysteries by the Spirit. But the one who prophesies speaks to people further
strengthening, encouraging, and comfort. Anyone who speaks in a tongue edifies themselves,
but the one who prophesies edifies the church. I would like every one of you to speak in tongues,
but I would rather you prophesy. The one who prophesies is greater than the one who speaks
in tongues unless someone interprets so that the church may be edified. Now, brothers and sisters,
if I come to you and speak in tongues, what good will I be to you unless I bring you some revelation
or a gnosis or prophecy or a word of instruction? Paul is speaking the language of the mystic Gnostic,
one who interprets prophecy is the one with the gnosis, and the Gnostics and Heretics all had
this in common. They all entered into ecstatic states and spoke in tongues. Without gnosis,
however, how can one interpret prophecy? Justin Martyr opposed Marcian in 144 and led to the schism
between the Gnostics and Orthodoxy in the middle of the second century.
The church would go on to be led by the likes of Origen, Tertullian, Irenaeus, Hippolytus, Julius
Africanus, Cyril, Augustine, and Clement of Alexandria, and those names are usually listed as
the first generation of Christians, even though they're kind of like the third generation of
Christians. The Gnostic did not go extinct, however. A charismatic Gnostic named Peter
would start a sect of Christians known as the Eukites, and they spread throughout Mesopotamia
and Asia Minor. They would influence the Bogomiles and Cathars, who would survive in Europe
during the Middle Ages and be heavily persecuted by the Orthodox Catholic Church.
They believed that they were returning to the true spiritual wisdom of Christ and rejected
bishop authority as in modern day Pharisees. They were accused by Eusebius of engaging into
Orgiastic rituals. A prophet would rise up named Manny in the third century, who declared himself
to be an apostle of Jesus Christ, and would be revered from Europe all the way to China,
and he would start a new religion known as Manichaeism, which would incorporate the teachings of Buddha,
Zoroastrian, Jesus, and Krishna, all considered to be prophets alongside Manny. This religion would
thrive in India and China, as well as Arabia and Persia. This religion mixes ideas from the Magi,
the Brahmins, and Judeo-Christian prophets. Even Augustine temporarily was a convert.
This religion would even influence early Islam. When Theodosius became the emperor
in the late fourth century, he issued a decree of the death for all Manichaean monks living in
the Roman Empire, and declared Orthodox Christianity the only legitimate and legal religion for the
Roman Empire. The fact that the Christian persecution by Orthodox Christians against
Gnostics and Manichaeans is rich in irony. The real martyrs for Jesus turned out to be the
heretics, just as Jesus was considered a heretic, and the scribal authority class having dominance
over the aesthetic spiritual Christians living in poverty, just as the scribes and Pharisees in
the time of Jesus is completely antithetical to the message of Jesus, who opposed the scribes and
Pharisees for their ever obsession with the law and searching the scriptures for authority.
You search the scriptures for in them you think you have eternal life, and these are they
which testify of me, but you are not willing to come to me that you may have life, John 5.
And so, with all that being said, I want to conclude with this. Do I think the Gnostics and
those who are deemed heretics are right, and the heresiologists, or so-called orthodoxy,
like Irenaeus and Hippolytus, are wrong? Not necessarily. I don't think the answer to this
question is so black and white, but I do think that if there's anything I demonstrated in this
video is that there is much more nuance here regarding whichever these doctrines should be
considered correct or heretical. Are we basing this off Jesus' teachings, Paul, or what your
pastor or priest told you last Sunday? Let me know what you guys think in the comments, and you have
ascertained Trunosis.
