and welcome back to a new episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of this week's episode of
this week's episode of this episode of our combination of 2 season 2 and you're
about to attain trunosis. And today we're going to talk about the question I've been asking
Bible scholars for years and I cannot get to the bottom of this question. And there, if
it's about Mark 14 the grandest chapter of all the chapter is Mark. Mark is the first
most important gospel, in my opinion, is the mystery, the mystery being revealed.
But when we get to chapter 14, all of a sudden, all these mysterious things are happening.
Jesus' feet are being anointed. The Peter is being told that the cock will crow three times,
and then he will deny Jesus. And all these weird stuff that doesn't make sense in English.
And so I decided, if the Bible scholars aren't telling me what's going on at the end of Mark 14
with this little boy in the Garden of Gethsemane running away naked as Jesus is being arrested
by Judas and people bearing the torches, if the Bible scholars can't tell me what's going on here,
I'm going to turn it into the classicists. Because the classicists, they know the Greek.
So you can't learn a lot about classical Greek through the Koinei,
but you can learn a lot about the Koinei through the classical Greek because the
Koinei comes out of classical Greek. Does that make sense? So with that being said,
before we get into anything, I just want to let you guys know Lady Babylon.
Go and subscribe. Nobody on the internet is going as deep as Dr. Amon, who is my guest today.
Dr. Amon, how are you doing today?
Great, great, Neil. Thanks for having me. It's so nice to be here.
Absolutely. I'm looking forward to this. Links in the description for the channel.
Go and subscribe. And it's one of some of the best stuff out there.
Some of the, like I said, there's different types of scholars and you and people like Dr. Ruck
who are not afraid to step on people's toes and get a little dirty once in a while.
This is where it's at Lady Babylon. And yeah, check it out. But let's get into this topic of
Mark 14. What is this? I'm actually going to let you take it away for a little bit.
I'll jump in with a few questions here and there. But this is something that needs to be explained
a little more than just a couple of sentences. We need to go through, let's go through the Greek
systematically and describe what's going on here. And then maybe we can come to a conclusion.
Yeah, that's my, that's my bag to nail. I love it when you call up the sources and you're just
like, let's just look at what they said and see what we can gather from what they're saying.
We just listen in for a moment. So let's jump right into those sources. I want to, Neil knows,
I want to bring you the apocalypse, right? I want to show you. I want that thing revealed.
I want that sacred made profane so that you can get in there and Jesus's world
right there with him and see him for what he is. So let's go to the, let's go to the very first
passage. This is Mark, right? We're taking the Gospels here. Yeah.
And there was this kid, some kid was with him. And this verb soon accoluthae, right?
From soon accoluthae. Oh, this verb is what you talk about when you talk about slaves being assigned
to someone. So there's some slave kid assigned to him. Yeah. And he's petty, this is from Perry
Balo. Nice, nice, you know, standard, standard Greek just means to throw and Perry means around.
Yeah. He's thrown around himself. He's using something. What is he using? Seendona.
He's using a Seendona. And we have the word here for Seendona. This is everybody knows this
passage. This kid with this thing. Can we see some, Neil, can we see some of the,
yeah, look what kind of translations we have. Yeah. I just pulled out a whole plethora of
English so that nobody can say, but what about this one? Here we have all laid out for us.
Yeah. The NIV down to the King James. It says, oh, I'm sorry, this is the wrong verse. Okay, sorry.
Here, a young man wearing nothing but a linen garment was following Jesus. But if I'm not mistaken,
young man, we're talking, the word Neo, Neoniscos is young boy. Isn't that the right
correction, correct translation for that? It comes from the root, it comes from the root,
Neil, Neos, and that is the idea of the budding. The idea is not a specific age group. Could this
kid be an early teenager? Hmm. It's the bud. He's in the, in the, in the newness of his life.
And that's important because remember, it's their world, not our world. We're imposing our view on
it, right? They're looking at this budding kid wearing nothing, right? Put a linen garment.
Ooh, that's a little bit of a stretch, right? A garment. Doesn't say garment there, right?
Linen shirt. Look at the next one. A linen shirt. Oh, yeah. Nothing but a linen cloth. Yeah, right?
See all the different kind of clothing that you end up getting in this, right? Because we want to
dress Jesus, but hey, let's pull up Alice, Neil, like, you know, we love to do. And let's see,
let's see what that seam done is. Look at this. So seam done is the linen cloth of the translation
that we're looking at. But this is, this is from Persia's top. So we'd like to call Alice,
because we're going into Alice Wonderland. We're going into the sources. This is all the times
his words use in the context. Fine cloth, usually linen, okay? Use for mummies. Surgeon bandages.
Wait a minute. Herodotus uses this word. I don't know if you guys know how to read
the Perseus Toss, but there you see that HDT 286. Herodotus in book two, verse 86,
use this word for a surgeon bandage. And what's cool, Neil, is Helen talks about these drugs.
I was a grad student trying to figure this out. And one day I was reading a text that said they
take this bandage and they impregnate it, they put the medicine in it, and then wrap the wound.
And okay, so anyway, let's go back to the passage. It's a band, right?
This is a medical use for it. So you're saying Galen uses this word for medical.
Yes, and not just Galen, right? But it's just referring to a strip of cloth. And this kid,
if you go back to our original text, that first one, this kid is wearing it. He's seen very
specifically, he says epigumnu on his place of shame, on his place of shame. He's wearing it,
right? Let's keep reading it. Let's keep reading it. And they took possession of him.
They arrested him. They strong armed him. There it's talking about Jesus. Typically,
they try to say this was the boy. But it doesn't make sense if it's the boy with the next Greek
that we have. The one who was naked fled after leaving his bandage. Yeah, right? Why? Because
they're not trying to strong arm the kid, right? They're trying to strong arm Jesus.
And that's when Jesus says so importantly, which is our next text. Check out this next text.
This one? Yeah. Yeah. And Jesus answers them, right? And he said to them, did you come out here
against me as if I were a laystace? Having your clubs and your weapons, you know, you're going
to take me this way? Yeah, your clubs and your swords, right? What are you doing? It's that famous
passage. But everybody remembers the laystace, Robert or the pirate, right? Jesus is saying,
I'm a pirate, right? Look there at the very bottom under Roman numer number two. Yeah. And you see the
cupris, the pirate of Cyprus. Oh, the reference, the reference and lycophron to 1143, where we
are talking about abducting young women to be sold to others for things like slavery,
sexual gratification, you can sell to a temple, they could have been sold off as priestesses,
right? But these are Jesus does, you're not coming out against me like I'm with all these weapons,
like I'm a some kind of child trafficker. So that's what he's saying with me says you're that I
didn't know that that that brings a lot of context to what he's talking about. Yeah. Yeah. So now,
you know, what about Jesus and child children and child sack of child trafficking? And is there
anything else if we're just detectives saying this is the this is the evidence we have and from the
Garden of Gethsemane, we have that one piece of evidence, we have that kid's
penile wrap, we have the penile wrap of the child. Yeah, that's the only like fragment of history
that was left at the scene, right? Otherwise, we know Jesus is saying he's not a pirate and he's
got it covered with some stuff that you write that they don't know, right? We're not like look,
we're not when it's not like we're pulling stuff out of our space, like the text tells us there's
a little boy in him in with him in the garden, as he's being arrested, who runs away naked.
Like we're this is not like we're not like going to like some apocryphal text somewhere and like
pulling out some random this is in the text in Mark. And so we're just asking questions like
what's going on here? Is it an initiation? Is there I've heard people say there was a resurrection,
you know, they say, oh, you know, he wasn't there. He didn't go there with John and and whoever
else was there. He just was there in the cemetery and Jesus resurrected him. I've heard that theory,
but the text doesn't say that. We're just adding stuff to whatever we want to the text.
The text doesn't say that. It only says there's a little boy who ran away naked. So what's going on
here? And the best thing to do now that's why I love to hang with you is because it's just those
texts that matter. I can come up with a theory for what's going on. It doesn't do me any good.
If I just treat those texts, and that's what I want to jump. I want to jump. Okay, I didn't want to do
this originally, but the last slide that the last. Yeah, there. Hey, guys, let's just I want to cut
to the chase on this one. Look at this. This is I don't want to talk about the background of this
thing whatsoever. People classify the pseudo climate. You can take that and deal with it. What
you want. I'm interested in the language here and what what the Greek is saying. So yeah. So
Jesus is mad, man, right right off the bat. And he came back with her, this woman to the garden
where was the male? Where was the cemetery? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And right away he heard from the
cemetery, right from this tomb on Phone Megali, a great voice and approaching. You know, Jesus
moved off the stone from the doorway of the tomb and entering in there right there was this
neoniskos. You can see this on the one, two, three, four, fifth line down. Neoniskos. See the
neoniskos. Yeah, yeah. Okay. And there was a neoniskos there. And what is he doing? He's stretching
out his hand and waking him up. Isn't that cool? He's waking. Wait, do you realize that we heard a
voice and we entered a tomb where a kid has to be roused? Where he has to be roused? Okay. Wow.
Thank you. Okay. Probably smells like opium in here, right? Okay.
Right. Honeoniskos. And so the kid does what? He looks up at him and he loves him.
He loves him. And remember, this is in a text that itself says, hey, Jesus was here a fan.
Wake up, people. Jesus was a here a fan. And what is it? It's in the text, yeah. One who teaches
the rites of sacrifice and worship, right? In Rome, it's just the pontiff. Herodotus uses it for
the initiation at Elusis. Yes, yes. So this is a very specific role. We have another source from
Plutarch says that this is what they call the pontifix maximus in Rome or the Jewish high priest.
So this is somebody who's religious, who's doing rites, hero funds, specifically those mystical
rites that we call the mystery, that we call the mystery. So if you go back to that text,
here we go. Here we go. What is he doing? He's with the kid there and he rouses him up. The kid
looking at him loves him. And Elxato Paracalene started to ask him that he might be with him.
What? And coming out from the tomb, Jesus went into the home, the oikia, the estate
of the kid for this kid was wealthy. He was loaded. And after six days, Jesus gave him
instructions about how to look. And the kid came and wrapped around himself a scene done
he wrapped his scene down on his nakedness. Yeah. And he remained with him.
He remained with him for the night. Yeah, throughout the night. And now this is the kicker.
This is the kicker right at the end. And that guard there is telling you why did he stay with the
kid all night throughout the night? Because he was teaching him the musterion. Oh, mystery. Yeah.
And that's, that's what the chapter is leading up to. It's this, this scene in the garden. Yeah. Yeah.
I think it might be the longest chapter in Mark. I'm going to be wrong. It's one of the longest,
at least, but it leads up to this. And it's, it's very mysterious. There's something happening here.
And I think these, these Greek words are telling us, like, for example, you know, how we define
Hierophant, teaching the rites or the Sindon wearing the Sindon. So I'm, and I'm thinking in my head,
is there a relation to this? And this is another gospel, but like, I know this is like the
scholars say, don't compare gospel to gospel. They're two different writers, but like,
I can't help it. The, in John, you have the, the disciple whom Jesus loved. I wonder if this is
Mark's way of telling about who this character is, some sort of initiate, some sort of apprentice, maybe.
Yeah. And what's the connection with the boy having been assigned to Jesus? Like you buy a
slave to do something for a certain amount of time, you know, he's renting the person.
Right. And a lot of times the, these little kiddie slaves, they, they're involved in things that
aren't just for kids. And you think for yourself, you're sitting there and you think, oh, wait a
minute, I'm starting to make me a little bit nauseous. Yeah. Let's go back to the actual language.
Right. Because Jesus has a point where some people get upset at him. It's some of his own
followers and they say, Hey, stop treating the children like this says he was touching them.
And the word there is grabbing and also hop to pull hop to up. Here it is. Hop to.
I got it. Hop to. Yeah. Look at this people hop to. Can be, you know, it's not just touching
like, you know, touching. It's grabbing, right? It's, it's engaging something or attacking something.
Context and a wrestling. So yeah, that's a specific touch right there. And if, and if you look at number
five under Roman numer, number three, you see that it means to have straight up intercourse.
Oh my God. It can actually be used in that context. And it is used by Paul and Corinthians that way.
Wow. Okay. So my mind is officially blown right now. For those of you who think, you know,
for those of you who think, you know, coin a, Neil, can you take that off from
an appeal of vanity? Oh yeah. One second. It's got to go back down. Okay. Go ahead.
For those of you who don't think that, for those of you who think, you know, coin a.
Yeah. Kick up your stuff because yeah, you're going to need it. You're going to need it. He was,
so he's, he is in a situation where he's doing this to children and the, a group of his followers
stopped the parents from allowing it to take place and they say, Hey, stop doing this. And it says
they're upset and it uses Tima, which typically can be used in a kind of illegal sense. It's got
just a smidge of something judges say, right? Now let's tell you that that it's used by judges.
And so yeah. And so it's, it's a funny thing that they get these kids and Jesus steps up and
he says, he's angry and he says, no, you cannot enter into the kingdom
unless you are one of these children. Let's look at what he's talking about because it has this,
it has just a, just for us, it's just like, no, no, no, don't think that, don't think that,
right? But let's see what the Greeks were thinking. When he talks about his paideia,
what are these paideia people don't realize, right? Little children are following around Jesus,
why they need the prayer. He's going to, he's going to engage them. And he's going to enter into a
prayer and we see this in the performance of the mystery. And of course, that's why Jesus is so
out of this, you can't get into the kingdom unless you come by this avenue, right? Now,
what is this paidzo? What is it? What is this child thing in the, in the ancient Greek mind and the
ancient Mediterranean mind that was wrapped up in the, on the Hellenistic side with the Greek,
things are coming from their verbs. I want you to just take a look at this verb.
It is the base for child and it means to dance or play or play amorously. Wow. When you have the
word paideia in Greek, it is understood that there is a relationship between the teacher
and the teacher. And it has to do with touching and it has to do with the maturation of the bud,
right? You want to bring that bud to perfection. That's what they looked at
as purification, as education, excuse me, as education, as paideia. That's why they call
the horsemen who are hung the teachers of the princes. That's why they call them
pedarasts. That's a Greek word for that teacher, the pedarast. When Jesus is calling for paideia,
he is calling for victims of pedarasty. And we know that the, at least his attitude reflects this,
because when he gets called short on it, he says, you're going to end up scandalizing me,
right? Right? So for those of you who have the little Jesus blessed me and whatnot,
realize there's a tradition of directly touching children, of molesting children
associated with the rites and the mystery, okay? Neil, you know. Not a controversial statement.
Any classes this will say, yeah, this is part of the Greek world. This was normalized in the
Greek. I'm not saying I think we should bring it back or anything. I'm just saying that's the
reality of the fact. The Greeks were, you know what I'm saying? It's just the reality of it.
Actually, in fact, somewhere over here, I have a book titled Paralytes. And this scholar put
together like tons of texts of ancient Greek that are very, very graphic, sexual. And nine times out
of 10, it's an older male with a prepubescent boy. Nine times out of 10. That's what these texts are
portraying. We've got gods who have boys that pour their nectar. And we have gods
who are great mothers who bring their boys to maturation. These are essential to the mystery
rites. Both of the ones I just mentioned to you. Heracles performs mystery rites. The temples to
Heracles are temples where mystery rites are performed. Yes, fantastic. What about you thought
it was all athletics, right? So these are the same thing. They're doing the same things. When
you have the great mother and she's important, the great mother entering this whole equation,
you take that young boy Addis and you bring him into a point of burning off all of his
mortality, right? It's a process. And this idolatrous process involves a lot of drugs.
And I think, Neil, that's one of the areas that people, we can look at texts like this.
And we can say, oh my goodness, Jesus was a downright
magus. He was right in this, right in this magus tradition. Neil, why did, why did these magi
show up? I didn't say the three. These magi, why did they show up and say, brah, your child right
here, the one that was just born, we've been following his esterian. Yeah. And what we're
going to do is he's going to be the one who bears the, is that vessel that's straight up mystery,
that Christos, that's straight up mystery. There's a group of dudes imposing this upon him
from the beginning and giving him drugs. Jesus had drugs from the start. You cannot make these
drugs without the two bases that they gave him. They gave him frankincense and myrrh.
They gave him frankincense and myrrh and your preachers can preach all day. Anyone that knows
the orphic tradition, if you have a copy of the orphic hymns, those two oils are burnt in offering
to these pagan deities. You offer frankincense and then you do a hymn to Nyx, the goddess,
or a hymn to Hercules or something. Those are the two main oils that are burned in the orphic
fragments. That's what you're offering up before you take your incense and you offer it up to induce
because we know within the mystery, this is pretty cool. We know from later sources through the
Neopathagoreans that daemonace, demons function by smell. So the first Christian anti-drug laws
are specifically against drugs that are used to promote this process, to either drive away the
demons or to collect them. What are the pagans going to do? What can they do? Look at this.
I just flipped through a random page in the orphic hymns of Orpheus. Flip through a random page.
First thing it says, to Vulcan, offer fumigation of frankincense and manna.
I'm adding to what you just said. The point is, when you offered these frankincense and you lit it
up and the oil would burn, you're literally, the gods are smelling this and they would come
and they would listen to your hymn. That's how you contact with the gods in the Greek world.
No different in Christianity. Think of it this way. There's a place that you can go and you can buy
this smirna and this a woman puts on and in her vagina and it's a compound drug and what does it
smell like? It smells exactly like where it is. It is a place of bringing forward from death life.
It is a funk that they use in Ritu, in Rite, that involves the orgasmos, right?
So yeah, all of this stuff is, this is, I keep trying to convince people, Neil, that the pharmacy
and antiquity as we look at it, we're looking very, very two-dimensionally. When you blow it up
and look at it and say, look, they, they have this idea that comes from the Bronze Age,
that you can take a person and you can put them under the influence of certain drugs,
including venoms, you know, bee stings, spider, scorpion stings, all of these different venoms
that they're using. You can take a person and put them under that influence, right, and kick them
into a place called the Eremon, right, into the desert, where they will be forced to deal with
Lucifer, right, where they will be forced in that place. That kingdom is his kingdom. So yeah.
You mentioned, hold on a second, this is really deep, what you just said.
You mentioned the Magi tradition. In the, in the Zendivesta, which is a text that predates the
Gospels by a long centuries, very much, very old. There's a text where Zoroaster is in the desert
and he's roaming the desert and he's rushed by Anger Manu. And Anger Manu says, if you will
renounce the good God, Ahura Mazda, I'll give you the boons to rule all the nations.
And then Ahura Mazda, or then Zoroaster just starts chanting and then he makes Anger Manu leave.
Well, this is what you see in the Gospels, with Jesus in the desert being tempted by the devil,
who says, if you worship me, I'll give you all, I'll give you all the kingdoms of the world.
Exactly. This is coming from that tradition that you're talking about.
You see how it's part of the mystery and how it fits in and you see, oh, this is why they're doing
what they're doing. It's our Magi that, that, that recite these texts. There's a lot of drugs.
There's a lot of drugs and there are drug texts. I was reading one last month about this bites of
spiders and what to do and how to treat and what groups are using these types of drugs.
And the, the pharmacy is complex. It's really complex, but they are taking the human body
and they are turning it into a means of giving drugs to other people. So this whole thing about
people are shocked when they're like, what? I'm like, look, if you were in an ancient riot,
they're going to drug you beforehand. They're going to tie your hands behind your back,
restrain your ankles. They're going to sodomize you with a, a, an alabaster. It's a device.
By the way, that's also in Mark 14. Yes. Same chapter, same chapter that we're discussing
with the little boy. This chapter opens up with the alabaster, which is another mystery,
mystery religion term that you see thrown around there. And if you see how people translate,
it's always hilarious, right? I mean, they don't even make sense rationally. He busted the jar and
it was, that's how you do it. You break. No. And they're all mad. Remember the other things.
Remember, they're all mad because it was very expensive, right? What do you think that very
expensive stuff is for? That's the stuff that the initiates are using. That's the, that's the
hardcore. People aren't realized, but they have so many drugs in the ancient world. So many.
You can't even talk about arrows without talking the arrow poison that they're using in different
parts of the world. They're also getting high off it, but they're taking a person's body
and they're turning that person's body into the producer of the blood,
the hyma, which can also be ejaculate. Okay. So when Jesus' face is covered with that sticky stuff,
and it says it was his hedros, that it was his, originally it looks like sweat and it turns into
what looks like hyma. You know, that hyma is used especially in cold contexts
to the essence substance. You get the hyma, Zeus gets the hyma when he sucks the penis of
the invisible one. Doesn't this happen to Priapis too? Yeah.
Mm-hmm. And if you get that, yeah, no, he is that fanase. Yeah, fanase is that Priapis,
the invisible one is that Priapis, right? I mean, you said you were going to the wilderness.
You wanted to go, right? You took the drug, so they've got you and they've got you bound and
they've got you giving it to them. And by the way, the guy who's writing our letter,
whether it's Udo Clement or whatever, whoever is writing that letter says there are these dudes
who are doing things very good, who are doing things that are not, they're following the way of
Satan into the darkness, he says right here. Those carpocratians, too. Yeah, those carpocratians,
and what are they doing? They're doing unspeakable things with the flesh.
Deep things. And with, yeah. Puffed up with gnosis. It actually says puffed up gnosis.
This is so crazy, man. We're going deep right now. I'm loving this.
And Neil, you're so, you're even closer than you think with that puffed up because that's the
word for being, for bringing us its Pephocilmino on page on line five there, two, three, four, five.
Yeah. It's also used for snakes, making the noise of a hissing. Yeah. There might be a little bit
of terminology that's sneaking in here. These may be a specific group of people. For example,
they call the ioboloi ehidnon. Those are the poison throwers of the echidna, or the vipers.
The vipers are a group, a college of priestesses, and the ioboloi are the ones who pour the poison.
And by the way, these carpocratians are deriving their theology from biblical texts. They're not,
like, they get called heretics later on and in this text. But they're looking at Jesus as the
serpent in the desert that Moses held up. And John says, just as Moses held up a serpent in the desert,
so too shall the Son of Man be lifted up. The carpocratians, that's central to them.
They call themselves, they call them the ophites, the nascines. They're all snake,
nas means serpent in Hebrew. Ophite, serpent. These are, these nostics are getting their theology,
not just from making stuff up. They're getting it from the Bible.
Right. Right. And he is accused of being a mystic god in that process. The thing that I like about
the church as a classical philologist, I can completely ignore them. I can completely ignore
them. You can hit me with antinomy in this and this interpretation of that. It's all bullshit
because of the time, at the time that we have these documents that are talking about this cult
activity with Jesus, there are none of these people. They don't exist. Right. So if we go back
to that original context with your brain, the, the ophites, for example, yeah, the orphics,
that was the snake in the breast. That was their symbol. Right. Yeah. That was a snake in the breast.
So, and he says, the author of this letter says, Hey, um, you know that they're doing these things
and these awful things and we cannot, we cannot, uh, get involved. And he's like, even if he's
saying true stuff, you have to deny. Right. So there's probably, there might be a Christian
watching right now who's saying, Orphics, that's pagan. That has nothing to do with Christianity.
We'll check this out. Pseudopigrafa. This is all Bible. This is all Pseudopigrafa Bible text.
There's a whole section just dedicated to the Orphics. In fact, it goes even deeper than that.
The Orphics that were living in Alexandria, where are you going over who came first? Moses
or Orpheus? And then they, if you point to the text of Plato, Plato says, Mousseus is the son of Orpheus.
And so they're trying to wrestle with this idea that Moses can't be subservient to Orpheus. It's
got to be the other way around. And you see this back and forth happening in the first century,
where people are trying to claim Orpheus as their prophet. But we know the real Orpheus,
we know it really, Orpheus was a Dionysian high priest. He was the high priest of Bacchus
and the son of Apollo. He was connected, baby. Orpheus is the real deal. He's the poet. He's
the bard. He's the prophet telling the future. So you can't get these monotheists in the first
century are trying to claim him as one of their own. They're known. You can't do it down. This
is Bacchic. This is Pythagorean. This is, you know what I mean? This is, that's the real source.
Celsus is so gene. This is why I love Celsus. He's so brilliantly calls out the Christians.
You guys are just a degradation of the real thing. Just a degradation. He's like the real deal comes
out of Egypt. And the Christians are, they're Sybilist. But they're a degradation of the Sybilist.
And the Sybilist, the Sybilist religion is the religion of Rome. The Sybilian books. If you,
if you look at the history of the Sybilian books, the Sybilian books is what guides Rome and all
these wars against Carthaginians, against the Greeks, against whoever. The Sybilian books tells
them what to do. Go and import Magna Mater from Phrygia. Bring her into the temple. If you do this,
you'll win the war. And they're doing it. And it's all documented throughout history.
Third century, second century BCE, you see the Romans following these Sybilian books. And then
all of a sudden, third, second century, third century, the common era, all of a sudden, these
Sybilian books are just Christian now. They're not pagan anymore. They become Christianized.
So you see that this tradition, as Celsus points out, is a degradation of the original
pagan rites, these mystery rites.
Can I say, can I get an N?
Yeah.
Yeah, I fell out of there. Sorry about that. Am I back?
Yeah, you're, Ben, you're good.
Okay. It just my, you know, I was just wanting to say amen. Amen. Amen. And that locks it in.
I am the amen. I am the amen all over the world. There are Christians and they're
thanking the Lord Jesus Christ for their food. And they're saying in Jesus Christ's name, I pray, amen.
Don't realize that they are borrowing a pagan magic ritual in the pronunciation of that name.
That when they say amen, they are induced, they are introducing a Satanian or what I would call
Satanic magical device. When Jesus says the kingdom of Uranus, now you know why he talks
about the fire coming from Uranus because it's a pagan. Those are your mystery terms.
Those are your mystery terms. Jesus is not making up new stuff. For those of you out there who are
following the fairy tale of modern Christianity, be it Catholic or Protestant,
surprise, surprise. This is not a fairy tale and Jesus is there using the mystery in his own
direction. When he sits on the cross and he's yelling out, I'm thirsty. I'm thirsty. I'm thirsty.
Guess what? The physicians say this is what happens when you use the horned North African
viper venom. This is what you get. That's why they called it the dipsauce because it creates this
intense thirst. Not only is Jesus arrested with a naked boy, but he is on drugs and he's on mystery
drugs that we have reams of antidote in ancient Greek and Latin. We have reams of antidotes for
these things. The down and dirty picture of Jesus. Neil, do you think he's like the
Baptists who are out with their penis-shaped cups and their boys that they take out and
baptize? Do you think that's the group he's in? He's got his racket set up where he's got his
naked children, right? I want to go back to something you just mentioned because the oldest
source of the story of Moses that we have goes back to an Alexandrian priest in the fourth century
during one of the Ptolemy's reigns. He writes this story about Moses.
Supposedly, it's right before the Septuagint gets written. We had this story about this. The guy who
writes this story is an Egyptian pagan. He, in some of his texts, and I'm Corey's ancient fragments,
this is the text that I'm citing here, where he shows this guy is using this term,
hallelujah, amen, in some of his writings. Plutarch, in the first century, the second
century, the common era, he comments on this, on this exact person, and he says that he cites this
person. What's his name? Hang on, let me find his name. But anyways, while I'm finding his name,
this is what he says about him. He says that the word Amon, the god Amon, is the king of all the
gods of Egypt. He says that when Egyptians call on or call to any of the gods, not just Amon,
any of the gods, when they finish their prayers or when they're calling out to one another,
they use the term Amon. And we know that ancient Egyptian and ancient Hebrew, there is no vowels,
amen. So, some people, I'm one of them that this has been decided on by, a lot of scholars will
say that I'm going on fringe territory now. I don't care because I haven't heard any
better explanation of where that term comes from, better than what Plutarch says. It's in the
text, I'm Isis and Osiris, where he says that word Amon is the word that's used to
enchant and to call on any of the gods. So, I'm thinking that's your source right there.
So, when Jesus says, I am the amen, you can hear that he is deep in this thing. It's no wonder that
he would want to be called the Christ and what the Christ was because that is the one within
the right who is performing that mystery transformation, right? Oh my god, it's wonderful.
Drink of my blood, right? Love it. You know, they were doing that, right? So, it's not like
it's not like it's out of place. Beautiful. Yeah. Who's your amen?
Right, that term, amen. Yeah. It's fascinating though because I've only seen a few academics that
actually engage with this verse that Plutarch and I'm talking about from Isis and Osiris.
And the person that he cites is the person who writes the story about Moses,
pre-Bible. Like before the Septuagint is put together, this guy's writing stories about Moses
and it turns out that he's the guy who cites for this amen thing. So, I don't know. I don't know.
What do you guys think? And I'm interested to hear what people think about that.
We also have Olo Luzo. The verb in Greek, Olo Luzo, means to cry out in ecstasy. It can be,
it's usually like a... Oh, Hecateus. Sorry to cut you off. Hecateus of Abdera. I couldn't think of
the name but I found it now. Hecateus of Abdera. And going back, we're going back to ancient Egypt,
you know? Do you know how much it turns me on to have you quote Hecateus of Abdera?
That gives me hope for the world. I thought we were here to destroy it. You and I as two witnesses.
But that gives me hope, brah. And if anybody ever has anything bad about you, they can suck it
because you serve the muse, man. You bring back Hecateus. You're good. I love it.
You want to hear it? I got the passage from Plutarch right now. Plutarch says,
Moreover, the people believe that Amun is the name given to Zeus in the land of the Egyptians.
A name which we, with a slight alteration, hold on, you got to pause right there. Amun
with a slight alteration. He doesn't say what it is. It could be Amen. It could be Amzin.
He says slight alteration. Okay, remember that.
Pronounce Amun. But Menatho of Sabentus thinks that the meaning concealed or concealment
lies in the word. Hecateus of Abdera says the Egyptians use this expression, remember,
the altered form of Amun. So it's not Amun. It's an altered form of Amun. Like, come on,
dude, we have a slam dunk right here. I mean, let me finish this off. Egyptians express that
whenever they call to anyone for the word is a form of address, when they therefore
address the supreme God whom they believe to be the same as the universe as if he were invisible
and concealed and implore him to make himself visible and manifest, they use the alteration of
Amun. So great then was the circumspection of the Egyptians in their wisdom, touching that he has
to do with all the gods. And I've showed this to a couple of different academics and some of them
are like, wow, that's interesting. I think you're on to something. But I've never, it's just nobody,
it's like, that's it. It just ends there. Nobody's, everybody said, what does Amen mean? Oh, so,
it means so be it. It means so be it. According to who? Because that's, that's a later rendition.
Show me an ancient source before the Septuagint or before Christianity, where someone says that Amen
means so be it. What is your opinion now? You don't hear that until later. What's your opinion of
modern scholars? You've been interviewing them a bunch and you've had a whole, how about everything
from Harvard to, to whatever all over the place? What is your opinion? I don't want to come off as like,
some cocky amateur in my, in my house that's not these, these are I have respect for scholars,
because they put in the work and they are trained. But sometimes they're like this,
they only are looking at the thing that they're trained in. And they don't realize that some of
their stuff is overlapping. And some of these stuff, some of these scholars are overlapping with them.
And some of these scholars are, and they can't see it. That's why me and Derek try to bring
these scholars on together. Hey, look, you're looking at this. Hey, you're looking at this.
Look, here's two different pieces to a bigger puzzle. Not saying that I, not saying that I
know everything. And I'm not saying that at all. But I'm saying, I'm just saying my experience
was sometimes they can be like that. But I have respect for scholars. I love, they're, they're,
they're, they're brilliant people. Oh, of course, of course. But yeah, and I, that's what I'm,
that's all I'm getting at. I don't, if I can say it just for your audience.
I don't have any respect for scholars, especially the ones from the Ivy League,
especially the ones from the Ivy League. And it's not just me that thanks it. I have friends who
are professors. Well, you were a professor. You feel the same way. Yeah. And that's where I learned
as being a professor in going to international meetings. It's hilarious now. I went to,
I went to an international meeting in London and the London, I think we got bust up the Newcastle.
I can't remember where the actual meeting was, but the London Times came and of everybody's,
they, they watched and came to mind and said, this is the last frontier of classics,
because I was talking about drugs and I was talking about the pharmacological side. And
I fought for years against these classicists. Look, look at these texts. Somebody just opened
this text. You know, classicists mostly refuse to go to the New Testament. I don't know if you've
noticed it, but you, you're a religious studies scholars and whatnot. They're not classical
philologists. No. Classical philologists do not like to mess with the New Testament,
because they know, oh, there's a whole another group here who thinks they own the water, right?
It's like contested water. And if you go over there, China's going to shoot you with a missile or
something, right? So don't go over there. But yeah, Neil, if you can get these people to start
looking at it, like I would love to ask, why, why does nobody talk about the naked boy? I would
love to see you get with somebody from Harvard. You know, you just ask them straight out, a naked boy
seriously. Well, this is the thing. This is what, this is the thing about this. The God, everyone
agrees that the gospel of Mark is written where there's no, there's no extra fat. It's the shortest
of the gospels. It gets straight to the point. There is no extra biblical, there's no extra.
And they, it was five, like there's no extra information. Everything that Mark says has
some reason why it's there. Every, every syllable is there for a reason. So the fact that a little
boy runs away naked is not just like, I would just ignore that part. Just an extra information. No,
no, no, no, no, no, no. Mark is saying something here. We need to stop and look at it. What is
Mark trying to say? Not only that, not only that, Neil, I think that's a brilliant point, like something
that I would expect to, you know, that's what a scholar, you're doing what a scholar would do.
They're not doing their job. So you're doing it. You're exactly right about the concision of Mark.
I would take it even further and say, you've got more evidence because there is a much greater
concentration of Orphic mystery terminology in Mark than there is anywhere else. Almost
like you can take those areas that have that radiation, that Orphic radiation, and you can see
that other authors were saying, oh, we have to include this, but I'm going to blow it up into
something else. Right. You can, if you take a purple pen and you outline everything in the
Gospels that has to do with the mystery performance, you're going to see what's left over is the
garbage. Right. It's the, you can see consistently, if there's one thing we can say about Jesus,
just from an evidentiary standpoint, is the dude was way deep in a cult and he was way deep in a
mainstream death and resurrection mystery cult involving drugs and sex. Okay. If there's one
thing we can say from all of those purple markers, right, it's that. And I don't know,
do you ever get the sense that your guys in religious studies don't want to look at Jesus,
the Magus? Well, you know, I, so this is something that I've discussed with a lot of people is that
in religious studies in particular, just in religious studies, not in classicists and not
in, and not in full up, a lot of people, a lot of American biblical studies is
steered by the seminaries, by the churches, by the evangelical, the THD people,
not the THD, the THD people, the theology degree people. They're guiding the ship of biblical
in a lot of ways they are. I'm not saying that they had all the control, I'm not saying that it's
some, there's like a conspiracy to, you know, keep Christianity afloat. But I will say that there is
a lot of influencing by people with an agenda. And it's my personal opinion, feel free to disagree
in the comments. But that's how I see it right now. Do you think they've, this is something new,
or you think they've been doing this kind of crap for the last, I don't know, maybe 1600 years or
somewhere, somewhere around the times that Julian, the emperor, whom we both love, right? Neil's a
huge Julian fan, right? So am I. When that Christian soldier threw that spear into his back, fighting
over there with the Parthians. That was the, you were telling me just the other day about the
video about Julian. And I got to that part in his story. I had to take a stop and take a right,
like this changed history for the worst in my opinion. Because Julian was trying to bring back
that metropolitan Roman world where every city has their own God and every, everyone has the
right to worship their own God in their own way. And why did it take another 1500 years to get back
to that? And by the way, out of all people to rebuild and bring the Jews back to Jerusalem,
to where their temple is, he's the one that was going to do it. Julian was the last person that
said Jerusalem belongs to the Jews. And all the way up to 1948, no one did that, no Christian
emperor, no Christian emperor ever wanted to give Jerusalem back to the Jews. They wanted it for
themselves. But Julian was someone who understood that religion is personal. And so he's a hero,
in my opinion. We really lost a lot when Julian was taken down. Do you think that has anything to
do with the whole idea that they found Bacchic implements inside the temple and that temple
practice had become a, you know, there's a reason Plutarch, the priest of Apollo says
Judaism is Bacchic worship. And then he starts to talk about it in table talk, right? Then we lose
the rest of the document. As soon as he gets past the explains the pomegranates, he explains,
starts explaining the temple and what the priests are wearing and how it's all Bacchic.
You know what I think? We're talking about these academics who, they'll read this
passages by Tacitus and this is nonsense. But I think Tacitus is down to something
because you have this God Sabatios. Sabatios is identified as a form of Bacchus. But some
people have pointed out that Sabatios might be related to, he's the god of the Sabbath.
So you had this Sabbath God, who's like Bacchus, but a little bit more different, a little more,
you know, a little more institutional. And there's, there's, it's quite possible
that Yahweh has some links to Sabatios. It's a Phrygian father God. You know, he's like a Zeus.
He's like a Saturn. He's like Yahweh. Yahweh, Yahweh of the Sabbath might be the Sabatios.
There might be some connection there. That's all I'm saying.
Aren't they always trying to run out people? They're like, pull down that temple where all the
sex stuff goes on and stuff like that. And they're trying to change. I don't understand.
It seems like that's the inner mysteries are when, when you get deeper into any religion,
the inner mysteries is always something like some phallus or something. Some in the middle of a
temple or the Holy of Holies is supposed to be, there's the phallus, you know, the, the, the sacred.
There's a reason, you know, there's a reason we need the virgin, right? And all of the, all of the
imagery around the, the virgin mother, people think the virgin mother started with Mary. It doesn't.
It doesn't, right? Neither does her power to carry the purple. The, the nurse that stuck her
fingers into Mary's vagina on the Coptic side pulls out the burning purple. It burns her hands,
right? There's some transfer, you know, you were talking about symbols and you were talking about
Rome and how important Rome is that Roman mystery is the foundation. That's why you look at the
apocalypse and you see Rome, right? The, the, the seven hills are there for a reason. It's because
they developed the mystery and Numa is taking it from this girl named Egeria, who apparently lives
for a thousand years, but looks like she's a teenager the whole time. And he takes those books
and he buries them, right? When he dies, he's like, she told me everything. The future of the city of
Rome, what would happen? And it was huts, you know, I mean, it was nothing, well, it was more than
huts, but, um, and they buried those books, right? And on his instructions as death, they dug them
up years later, took them to the Senate and the Senate was like, Oh my God, we have to get rid of
these things. So when the Christians come along and they're calling them civilists,
you know, it's, those traditions are not, there's a, there's a reason for Peter and Rome,
right? And it's a mystic reason. It's a mystic reason that goes right back to Jesus getting
arrested with that kid. It's not odd. Heracles has one, right? God himself has one. He's
got his boy. You know, they talk about in that dirty poetry that you were talking about,
they talk about what it is to pull a Ganymede. That means to drink out of a boy's anus.
The nectar. Yeah. I read that. I saw that go from straight toe. And this is like, these were like
popular porn, basically. It's like the ancient version of porn. And that's what they were,
and that's the imagery is like Zeus and Ganymede and Apollo and Hayekinth. And
there's a lot of that going on. And it's just, that's the, this is what we, this is the context
that I think should be mandatory for people to realize before they even look at these texts.
Yeah. Look what you've done too. Your audience should appreciate the fact that you have not
had the benefit of Harvard education, yet you are able to swim those currents and access that
information. And now you're, you're, you're going beyond where they're capable of going.
And that's, you know, that's amazing. I would have you in, as my trench warrior anytime, anytime.
The sources don't lie. Yeah. And here's the thing, even if the sources are wrong,
even when Herodotus tells a story that might not be true, there's something that story tells
us something about the time. Right. So when Herodotus is saying that there's one eyed men
in gold guarding griffins living in the North where the hyperboreans are, that might not be a
true statement, but it tells us of how the Greeks thought of the Scythians. They thought of a magical
fairy land up there and it was dark and there's forests were scary and there was monsters creeping
out. That's how the Greeks thought of the, the North. Herodotus captures that. That's why I'm
saying even the primary sources, even if they're not true, they're, they tell us more about the
context of the time than any modern theory can tell us. There's a, there's a dragon that guards a
tree. Everybody knows about him. It's in the grove of Mars and on the tree hangs a skin,
right, of a ram and on it is written the sacred song. Right. That's the cibulations. They're
all captured there and that dude walks around. He's blind. First of all, but he walks around
with poison that he can spit. He can use on arrows. He can do whatever he wants. And if you get near
it, he'll kill you immediately. The Greeks couldn't conquer. They went to, they went to Troy with all
their big fights and we know about Bronze Age combat. We can put the limny and steel up here,
you know, harkening back to the Bronze Age with the combat. Yeah, but what's really, what's really
courageous? What's really courageous? It's Odysseus with his arrow poison. Having Cersei put him into
a death state and you didn't know that. You're like, what? That's not part of the, of the Odyssey.
Yes, it is. Cersei, like Jesus, turns a bunch of soldiers into pigs. Right. She raises from the
dead. Did you know she says, John Tsitsi says in lycophron is indicating the resurrection
of Odysseus. Odysseus is Jesus a long time, a millennium before Jesus was millennium.
He was the hero of the Greeks. That's what everybody thought of. He was the example.
What you're getting at is so true. And in fact, Derek Lambert was in the chat. I saw, he left
the comment asking if you've seen Dennis McDonald's, Dennis McDonald's. So Dennis McDonald's put
together all of the mimesis from Homer. That's in the Gospels. And so I want to just give you one
example. Just, just to get your reaction. It's about Cersei too, by the way. And I just want to,
if you don't mind, I just want to get your reaction. I think you really appreciate this.
I really do. I really think you will. So Dennis McDonald put this together. Look at this. Can
you read this or not? I'll read it to you if you can't see it. Yeah. No, I got it. Odysseus in his
crew sailed to the land of the Cyclops and of Cersei. Jesus and his disciples sailed to the
region of the garrisons. All right. So we have two people, two different stories, people sailing.
You might be, all right. That's not a big deal. But let's look at the sequence here. On the mountains
of the Cyclops is innumerable goats grazed. Cersei turned soldiers into swine. On the mountain,
now back to Mark. On the mountain, a large herd of swine grazed. Okay. Odysseus and his crew
disembarked. Jesus and his crew disembarked, the same Greek word. They encounter a savage,
lawless giant who lived in a cave. Jesus encounters a savage, lawless demoniac who lived among the
caves. Polyphemus usually was depicted nude. The demoniac was nude. Now Cersei recognizes Odysseus
and asks him not to harm her. Swear an oath. Orcon, not to plan another plot to hurt me.
The giant Ask Odysseus intended to harm. The demoniac recognizes Jesus and uses that same
root word, orcidso, right? Is that how you say it? Orquico? Orquizo, yes. Orquizo. You not to
torment me. So we have, all right. So we have these, the sequence of events is lining up here.
Let's keep going. The giant asks Odysseus his name. Jesus asks the demoniac his name. Odysseus
answers, nobody is my name. The demoniac answers Jesus. Legion is my name. Odysseus subdues the
giant with violence and trickery. Cersei's magic turned Odysseus's soldiers into swine.
Jesus subsdues 2,000 demons with divine power and sent them into the swine and drove the swine
into a lake. This is lining up perfectly. Polyphemus, the shepherd calls out to his neighbors.
The swine herds call out to their neighbors. The Cyclops is coming and the site asking Polyphemus
for stolen sheep. The garrisons come to the site to find out about their swine. Odysseus and his
crew embark. Jesus and his crew embark. And Odysseus tells the giant's proclaim that he had
blinded him. Jesus tells the healed demoniac to proclaim what God had done for him. Now this is
just so, it's the same story being retold through a different lens, through a different time,
through a different character. Odysseus and Jesus. You also had the idea of Jesus's feet
being anointed by Eurycleia. Jesus' feet are being anointed by Mary and then he says to her,
you're famed we told far and wide, which Eurycleia, the girl who anointed Odysseus' feet,
that name Eurycleia in Greek means famed far and wide. Jesus is only putting a pun on the name.
It's too much. It's too good. I thought you'd get a kick out of that.
Yeah, no, I get a big kick out of that. I like to stay in the shallow waters that are just
linguistic. So I'm thinking about his use of the verb there. I'm not impressed with the boarding
and the turn of phrases that are the same. I can do that with a whole bunch of texts. It doesn't
mean they're related. But the content of the progression of the narrative is you have to,
I have to agree, there's a lot of overlap there. It's the sequence of the events that line up.
They're not scared. They're lined up the sequence. You know what I mean? What if, Neil,
there's also a connection with the, for example, Jason, right? Jason, yeah, his name is Iason.
It is, I keep telling people this, it is the name Jesus and they don't, because they want to say no,
it's Joshua. And I want to say no, because this name is part of a religious right that predates.
It goes all the way back to Mycenaeus. Bronze Age, right? So it's not coming from the Hebrew.
It can't be. There is none. And to add to what you're saying, both of the roots of those words
have to do with healing. Jason Healer, Joshua, even Joshua in Hebrew has to do with healing.
So they're both, both of these words are coming from a common source.
I think that's what that Pulaskean is. I think that, I don't think it's that the Jews didn't have it.
I think it's that, just like the Egyptians, the Egyptians that absorbed it from 3000 BC.
Mediterranean language, all overlapping, all the Mediterranean languages.
And Neil and I are not just making up these Pulaskeans. These are a real people. And the
Georgians will tell you, these are the early Georgians who's, you know, anyway, good stuff.
After the Bronze Age collapse, it's the Pulaskeans that are populated in the Mediterranean.
It makes you think if there's some kind of movement, some of those migrations
cause that sudden change in the population. I don't know, because I mean, why are they calling
them Autochthonous, right? Why is everybody referring to them as the original people?
When we talk about Jewish migration, that's not unusual, right? It's, we watch, we sit down, Neil,
and we watch our, our, Charlton Heston, every Easter. We're about to have him come out.
And for all I know, he's doing it tonight. And he's spreading his arms and he's making
the seed part, right? We're moving these people, right? Guess what? These migrations happen all
the time, right? So this is a dynamic of the world. It wasn't that Jehovah is Jewish, right?
This is coming through. When Jehovah tells Moses, he's like, set up this tent and you're
going to go in this tent. My voice will be there. Boom. It's a Talistarian.
The second voice of God, right? Right. He's, he's working from tradition. He's not bringing
them out ex nihilo. That's what I'm saying. This, this was a, the way they, the way Leviticus
just prescribes how the priest is supposed to come in and, you know, sacrifice the bull
and sprinkle the blood seven times on the altar. These are straight from the ancient pagan world
on how to get an oracle from a different God, any God. Yeah. Whatever you set up their tent,
you set up their, their, their oracle with, with the, with the altar the same way. So the way,
the way they're worshiping Jehovah is no different than somebody in Phrygia is worshiping
Sabazios or somebody in the, in Libya worshiping Ammon. They're all doing it the same way.
Yes. And that Neil is what this letter of Pseudo-Clement mentions. It says they're showing them
the attitum. That's that space that you're trying to preserve for the oracle. You're
performing the mystery, right? So I don't know why Christians don't put more value and actually
looking at what their texts are saying, right? Rather than reading everything through the last
16, well, the last 1800 years of Christianity. They're afraid of being like a pagan.
Yeah. Like, why? That's if you want to do religion, do it right. Yeah. These are, these are ancient
traditions that are going back to before we had writing. And it's the same, it's the same traditions,
you know, evolving basically, evolving over time. So what are you scared of? It's the same. It's,
you're just following the history, you know, I would love to tell every Christian in the group,
if I could address every Christian out there and tell them, I've been to the texts and I can tell
you there is no such thing as eternal life. It does not exist. What Jesus himself promised
was Ionic life. And Ionic life is a place within the operation of the mystery.
So he was saying, straight up, get the same phrase in the Orphic. What is that,
that papyrus, devouring papyrus? And I proclaim Ionic life. Orphi says it.
It's the ion, right? And Christians don't get that because they hear just through an accident of
history and the translating. And it wasn't so accidental because the church fathers had a lot
of poll on how we'll set our doctrine and our ideas. And as soon as you get doctrine and ideas,
you're, excuse me, you're live, so I'm not going to be rude about it, but you're in a bad place.
Your vision is obscured from the actual evidence because that's what we get in the actual evidence.
So there's no salvation, right? There is the soter. There is the soteria. And the first soteria
is described in the Orphic hymns to this female divinity who is a virgin mother, right? So you
can see how the Orphics would be able to grasp. She's also the light bringer, the Luciferia.
Exactly. Right? The light bringer, which is what they call Diana up in the Crimea. People were
like asking the other day on the channel, where's the Diana of Nemus? Where is she from in Italy and
all that next, you know, we're talking about the lake and all that kind of stuff. All this stuff
is coming from that Diana who lives in the Crimea. And she has the right of sacrifice. Any stranger
that washes the shore, she kills them. She kills them in a right. Why? Because she was killed
in a right. They're perpetuating the same priesthood. So, and for those of you who are Christians,
the mystery is not a question. It's not a secret. The mystery is an operation
that these religions are doing. It is a practice. So when you hear mystery and Paul the Apostle is
talking about mystery, you are not hearing what they were saying. I tell this to my seminarians
every year because I feel bad. Feel bad for the Christians. I tell them, I say, you have not read
the Bible. You think you have, but you have not. Neil knows that once you start looking at the Greek,
then it all of a sudden opens up and I'm not talking about the stuff that comes canned
out of a seminary. I'm not talking that. I'm talking about the stuff that you need that'll
allow you to read ancient medical texts or ancient epics or anything like this.
This is, this is Kalamikis, Kalimakis written around the same time as the Septuagint was
translated, right? So it's that Alexandrian 3rd century BCE Greek. In here, there's a hymn to
Artemis. So this is, we're talking, and it says, she is quoting her saying, I want to be a virgin
forever and let me be the light bringer, Luciferia. The virgin light bringer, Soteria, a savior,
virgin, light bringer, all these tropes that you see with the Christ. It's already being
applied to these other gods way before Diana, who's Artemis, is a savior, virgin, goddess.
It's just, this is all, this is, it's, this is the way religion is done. Christianity can just
pop up out of nowhere and start this new thing that no one's heard of before and no one's done.
This is the, this is business as usual. Nothing different is going on here. Just, this became the
religion of the West, became the Roman Empire's state religion. So everybody thinks it's special
now, but like, it could have been, it could have been any of these, any of these traditions that
made it that way. You know? They called it the way. They called it the way. Oh, don't, oh, don't.
Yep. Yeah. And that's what, when you're walking it, when you're engaging that mystery,
you understand. And it puts you in a place where when he said Soteria, when he said salvation,
people would have understood, right? And then what's really creepy, what's really creepy,
you know, everything about this, that says that there are certain things that we have to deny,
right? Certain things we have to deny. I don't want you telling people. When Jesus is talking,
preaching, you get your funny Western vision of him standing on the hill in his sheet, right?
And he's not like this and he's like, my people, you know, blessed are the meek, right?
Wait a minute. Is this the same Jesus who walks around speaking in analog so that people won't
understand what he's saying? It's not so that they will. Jesus doesn't walk around saying,
I'm going to give you an example. It's a metaphor for you to figure out, right? So it'll further
explain what I'm saying. He doesn't say that. It says he purposely kept them. It's so that the
people who are outside, those who are not initiated, remember, he is a mystagogue. The letter says,
Jesus, the mystagogue, it's in there. So what do we, you know, he fits the profile perfectly.
And you got the hero fan thing, too. Yeah, yeah. All the titles that he's getting,
in the revelation, the author of the revelation calls him Lucifer. Yeah. Calls him the son of
the morning, the dawn. That's Lucifer. Right. He's the morning star. He's the morning star. He's
getting all the same titles. He's getting all these mystery religion titles. Yeah. Yeah. So if
he is, and if, you know, in the book of revelation, a lot of Christians don't realize it, but in the
book of revelation, he's wearing a woman's nightie. He's wearing a bra that is made for a woman. And
it says it's around his breasts. And it's the Greek word for the feminine breasts. Has it been used
for males before? That's where people are like, wait a minute, wait a minute. But the thing that
he puts around them that, that it's usually translated as girdle, that's a part of his kit
that is the morning star's kit. And the morning star is originally a woman. The morning star is
originally Urania. And so if Urania, the morning star has this kingdom, and the word Urania there
is the word for heaven, right? She is the one in charge of the heavenly kingdom. Jesus is just
taking that machinery and bringing it to himself. Does it make sense then that he has to be with the
naked boy at four a.m.? Yeah, because he's deriving an antidote for a cup that apparently at the time
he doesn't want to take. He knows how crazy this is, what they're doing. Right. He says that in the
same chapter he says, take this cup away from me. No one knows what he's talking about. It's all
there in chapter 14. He just brought it back full circle to me. All the language is there. So if you
were some, if you were an Alexandrian initiates in the first century, and someone brought this text
marked to you, you're reading 14, you would, you would know exactly what this is. You would say,
I know what's going on here. There wouldn't be this big question like we're here today in 2023.
No, no, no. The Greek ear of the first century would know what this is. They would understand
right away. And if you weren't in the group, you weren't initiated. Maybe you weren't one of those
boys that went through the process, but you were on the outside, and you knew this is a thing about
hearing, you know, and there's code. And you saw Romans coming into Alexandria, arresting
Christians for taking little kids off the street. Right. They're arresting Christians
for abducting and abusing children. Right. If you didn't have ears to hear, you'd be like those
cultists. Right. Well, you'd know, you'd know this is part of the deal. And people don't realize
my religion, the religion that I'm trying to replace my democracy with its deocracy,
that is built upon pederasty. It is built upon dudes getting arrested in public parks
at 4am and saying, why are you coming at me with all the weapons? I'm not dealing any kids here.
Dude, that's such, that's exactly what it is, man. That's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. Somebody actually
super chatted before you even brought up the secret mark chat GPT. Thanks for the super chat.
It's the same kid from the secret gospel of mark. This is before you even brought that up. So
kudos to chat GPT for being on it like that. Yeah. That's a good point. But um, yeah, this was
draw. Oh, snappy. Oh, thank you for the super chat. Love you guys. Please talk about what happens
in the sacred groves. Ammon gives us the mystery all the best. This is what it's all about. Because
we didn't even mention this. We're in the sacred grove to begin with this chapter. They go to get
sent me. That's a sacred grove. I've been there. I've been to Israel. I went to the Garden of
the Assembly. You know what's right next to it? A giant cemetery. It's a sacred grove. You don't
a sacred grove is a garden next to a cemetery. Period. They're in the sacred grove and snappy is
onto something here because mystery cults perform their rights oftentimes in a sacred grove. Yes.
And that Timonus that right that Timonus that place that you cut, it's literally the place that you
cut off from the what we would call the secular world, right? It's the place where that divinity
and all those places they have some source or some power. It's usually like a spring when Numa
whose name if you were to write it in Etruscan would say amen. When Numa went to his meetings
with Nigeria, the thousand year old purple using Etruscan Wates priestess who they say came.
Anyway, divine. They talk about a divinity. When he when he was doing his thing, it's the same
process, right? That they're entering into and that power he goes to he goes to Nigeria at a sacred
place at a place with a little spring, right? A garden. It's sometimes described as a garden.
Yeah. And it still exists. We have the niche in Rome where this was.
Gorgeous. Love it. But yeah, he's there in this cemetery. Notice every time he's getting caught
is in the cemetery. Even Cyprian, you know, comes stumbles out of the cemetery with the
says the venom coming out of his bottom out of his anus, right? Those places, those burials,
you know, those those wild centers, right? Yeah, this Garden of Gethsemane is a real,
you know, it's a real place to hang out with with naked boys. I mean, that's this is me.
When I was in Israel, I took got some footage of the garden and there's Christians flocking
around. Obviously Christians from all over the all over the world flocking here. That's
and supposedly in a thousand year old tree or whatever. But I was more interested and I want
to know what's going on inside this church right next to it. They build right next to it. It's a
Catholic church they got. And sure enough, they have the image of the arrest right in the middle
of the church is the image of the arrest. They had the different scenes going on. There's him
sitting there. And then look, they have there's there's the arrest right there. And there's
your there's your boy right there. So this is there this they got this place in they have a
church built all based on chapter 14. It's all the scenes of chapter 14 are on the walls in the
church. How come my kids not naked, Neil? He's supposed to be naked. You know, you know, they
would never that's that's revealing. That's probably in the that's probably in the back room.
They probably have that. That's the inner mystery. See how powerful it is. If you control the text
and you control the information, you can tell anybody anything you want. Neil, you were telling
me the other day, you were saying, Hey, there's this Antikythera thing, this computer thing
that the big school working out and then tons of dark ages that follow it. You know, it makes you
wonder. I think I just want to bring up your point. Oh, let me let me let me add to what you're
saying right now. Check this out. So I'm going to share my screen. I'm going to go over here.
And because no, this is such a good point. Antikythera mechanism. Okay, look at this.
This is a hand powered analog computer that used to predict astronomical positions
and eclipses decades in advance. Okay, this was received from a shipwreck and it's dated to the
third century BCE. Okay, second century BC. Sorry. All I'm saying is, if this is what the Greek world
was producing with paganism at the helm, why is it that it took a 2000 years after Christianity
rose out and became the central culture, as you will, where knowledge is considered evil?
Let's go right to Genesis one. The tree of knowledge is evil. You know, it's better to just
worship and pay your your 10% and, you know, you know, give all of our resources to the church and
let the church guide us through the as the light in the darkness. That was the way that people
lived in Western society for 1500 years. And there is no no one building computers.
They were already doing this before that. So I'm arguing that Christianity kind of held
the world back a little bit. My night might disagree. Go ahead. You feel free to disagree
all you want. That's my personal opinion is that I think there would be a lot quicker
advancements if we let if the metropolitan way continued. That makes sense.
Yeah, we certainly wouldn't have been putting guys like Galileo in prison and whatnot. And
that's what I don't get, Neil. Why does the modern American audience not understand that this thing
that you relish and that you celebrate worship and love because you know, you do democracy.
You love this thing called democracy. And you don't realize it didn't come from Christianity.
Christianity overthrew democracy. It's spirit across the world. Christianity suppressed.
It was a thing back in the fourth century Athens, the fourth century BCE Athens.
It was a literally literal democracy, more democratic than we ever know.
Yeah, it's radical. It's radical, right? When you are there and you have the ability to make
the choice that you don't have somebody telling you, this is your God, right? The things were
like screw everything. We're worshiping a virgin and people are free. People are free here and
people say debate. Oh, well, to what degree did they have freedoms? Forget you. The fact
is, they were fighting for that freedom. And that freedom is the same thing. You find it again
in this letter of Pseudo-Clement. He talks about the Eleutheria that is part of the mystery,
that complete unassailable freedom. And that is always, Bacchus is always protecting the virgin.
There's a reason and Athens is where that first theater is. People don't realize it. There are
no Christians that invented the theater. They didn't, doesn't happen, will never happen, right?
It was the Greeks who worshiped the virgin, who came up with democracy, who had the theater
constructed. And it was just a place to land the Bacchic procession. It was just a place to
land the Bacchic procession. That's where we get democracy. So when anybody stands up today and
tells you, God has blessed the USA, no, no, the virgin, right? The virgin has blessed us. Yeah,
yeah. We need to preserve that. We need to preserve that.
Yeah. Could this have been a Paul teaching? Because Paul was more of a mystery teaching
than Joshua. Mark traveling with Paul. It's interesting. It's interesting. Maybe. I'm not
really, that's, what do you think? Do you have any opinion on that? I will. Neil, I'm going to be super
rude, but you know my contract with the devil. I can't discuss. I'm going to take a break and
you, because I understand, hey, everybody who's out there, no criticism. I understand this is
part of how this runs as a way to feed Neil and to keep his journalism, because this is better
than, this is not just YouTube show. This is journalism that you're doing. This is historical
journalism. I'm going to give you a chance to answer all of your, take a break and come back and
yeah, you're fine. I'll be back. I'll be back. All right. So now this is a good question, Durin.
I thought, because yeah, Paul, he has a lot of, the way Paul is interacting with the world that
he's living in, is he is extending his hand to the pagan world and saying, you know, if you're
with a people in a crowd and they're offering a, you know, they're offering to, you know, meet
sacrifice to idols, we're all Romans here. Let's, let's chill. Let's, let's relax. So yeah, you might
be on to something there. This might be a Pauline thing for all we know. I'm not sure the question
is how much is the gospel of Mark connected to Paul and maybe there's a big connection. Maybe
there isn't. That's where the question is. So that's what I would look into. That's a good question
though. I never thought about that. How much is Mark taking from Paul? Good question, actually.
Really good question because we all, it's, it's already established that Mark comes after Paul.
So your, your question is, is a spot on. It deserves to be explored for sure.
Oh, let's see. The next one is from evangelicals never lie with a giant super chat. Wow.
Thank you. Thank you. I so appreciate this. Thank you that you did not have to do that.
And I appreciate it. And I really, really, I can't even say how much I appreciate it.
Ben, a while since I bought you don't says I bought you don't pissed me. Hold on.
Am I reading this right? Ben, a while since I bought you don't pissed.
Great stuff, dude. Very interesting. Well, I appreciate it so much. I really,
I can't even just words cannot describe how much I appreciate this. And uh,
yeah, I, you, you, and like, like, I don't know what type of before he left this.
You're the reason why I'm allowed to be doing this and drop daily videos. And I'm trying to
keep up that pace is just, I'm just working and you know, these, the days when I go live are
actually my days off from putting together like edited content. So the next video I have coming
out next, um, before I get to the next super chat, I just want to show you guys the next video.
I'll give, I'll actually, I'll show you my, um, thumbnail. That's what I'll do.
I'll show you the thumbnail, the thumbnail for my next video. Wait, do I even have it?
Um, maybe I don't have it with me. But anyways, the next video I'm doing is about Lucifer.
How does Lucifer become Satan? You're probably asking, what do you mean Satan is Lucifer?
No, no, no, no, no Lucifer started off as a totally different thing is from the Roman religion side.
Lucifer is Lucifer is the male version of Venus. How does Lucifer become Satan?
And how does Lucifer become the devil? How does Satan become the devil? All of that.
There's a, there's a three different questions that are being asked. There's aren't the same
Satan is in the, and there's a Jewish context of Satan being the accuser. There's also this root
word of set. There's also this different devil characters. There's also underworld gods like
Pluto and Hades. And then there's Lucifer, who's a light bringer who's not evil at all.
And then you also have fallen gods that get in trouble like Prometheus.
You have Apollo getting in trouble and falling down to earth and being,
so you have these different traditions. And that's my next video coming out next.
How does Lucifer become the devil? And Chthonius is, this is the last super chat I'm on, so you
don't have to, you can chill for this one. Chthonius says, if Jesus would have succeeded,
what would have happened to the boy, Ganymede, or sacrifice or initiate, would he have been holy?
Wow. Chthonius, Chthonius is going deep into the mysteries. I know Chthonius personally,
and this is someone who really, really likes to study this stuff. So, um, yeah, if Jesus would
have happened to the boy, Ganymede, or sacrifice or initiate, would he have been holy? Yeah,
right? Isn't that how that works? I'm guessing. Christine Wilson, next for the Super Sticker.
Appreciate you so much. Appreciate you so much. Amon, what do you think about all this?
I just came back to the devil. I heard you talking about the devil, and I love it, Neil.
That's the video that I'm coming out with, either tomorrow, let me just say, actually,
it won't be ready by tomorrow morning, but it might be ready by tomorrow evening. If not by
tomorrow evening, the next, the 21st morning, Tuesday morning, that video will be done.
Promise that. And it's, when does Lucifer become the devil? And it's deep, I'm going deep into
this one, because there's a lot of explaining to do. It's not simple. Yeah. Bring the dawn,
brother. Bring the dawn. Yeah. Yeah. Love it. Love it. People are shocked when they find out the
venous, you know, is the devil. People are kind of shocked at first. I don't know. You get down
there and she's got a skirt on, right? And you may think one way, you may have been taught one
tradition, but when you get down there, the devil and realize as you lift up that Mediterranean
short skirt, there is a large penis there. This is, this is Venus, the mother of the Roman people,
right? It's fantastic. And to go even deeper than that, because you know how in the Greek religion,
when you have two gods that, that, that mates, have sex, whatever, and create an offspring,
God, oftentimes those two, it's, it's, there's a reason for the genealogy. You have two different
priesthoods coming together. Venus and Dionysus have an offspring. You know exactly where I'm
going with this. Yeah. Go for it. Sing it, brother. This is one of the most important mystery,
religion gods of the ancient world. And it's hermaphrodite. So it's, no, no, as it hermes,
I'm sorry, is it hermes and aphrodite, not, not Bacchus. Yeah. Hermes and aphrodite created God
named hermaphrodite. Hermaphroditis. Hermaphroditis. Okay, thank you. And this is, this was a very
important deity in the ancient world of the mystery religions, because you're bringing together these,
these, you have the angelos. The word angel comes from angelos, messenger. Hermes was the logos.
He was the word of Zeus, the messenger. He was an angel. He was the angelos. And he
creates with aphrodite, who's Venus, the Luciferia, the Lightbringer, this goddess, Hermaphroditas.
So you have this important genealogies happening in the Greek, in the, because there's a deeper
meaning behind this stuff. Like for example, Thanes, this is going to get crazy right now.
You're about to say it's about to get crazy. Thanes is the, is the, the primordial being
that comes from chaos. He's the beginning. He's the, he's the, the highest God there is.
And then from Thanes, you get Eros and Nix. What is this? What is this? Come on, don't just jump out
like that. Tell us, what did Zeus do to Thanes? What did he do to him?
It's an orphic, in the orphic fragments. Remember that you were looking at?
Yeah. He, he, he blows them. Yes. Yeah. I was, I was getting there. I was getting there.
I was going to get, oh, I'm sorry. No, no, no. That's what I'm saying. Thanes. So there's,
there's weird, there is this secret mystery religion language about Thanes where they'll say
Thanes is Bacchus or Bacchus is Thanes. And then they'll say, this is in the Durveni
Papyrus, by the way, that Zeus was there from the beginning. Okay. That's weird. He's the,
he's the beginning and the end, the Alphan Omega. Oh, that's weird. Then it says that Thanes is
Priapus. So like, normal, any normal person's scratching their head going, what's going on here?
Why is, why are all these gods the same person? Why are they all mixed together? Well, it's because
that original light that came out of chaos, which is Thanes, when, when Thanes gives birth to
the next generation and it goes down to Saturn or to our nose, who is the heaven god, then to Saturn,
then to Zeus, then to Bacchus. And then Bacchus has a child with Venus, who's Priapus. They all
had that spark of Thanes within them. So when Zeus is the beginning and the end, they're talking
about Thanes. When, when, when Priapus is being called Thanes, when Bacchus is being called the
divine child, the savior, the king of all the universe. And you're like, wait a minute, I thought
that was the title for Saturn. That's because they're all had the spark of Thanes in them.
And that's deep right there. That's what that means.
It's Jehovah. I'm so hot now, Neil. I'm so hot. You just brought up Jehovah. And it's just, it's
like, oh, let's look at him and see, and see him for what he is. You know what I mean? He's sucking
the Edoian, right? That Zeus goes in and sucks that Edoian, right? It doesn't, it, you know,
don't let it surprise you. All these tyrant gods are subservient to the, the, the, the Thanes, the,
the primordial chaos, the light and the darkness, the lightbringer, the Lucifer. They're all
subservient to that. They're always bound to fail. People don't realize the poles are flipped,
right? And the good guy who brings you reason and doesn't lie to you is the one that years
saying is the devil, right? When it's your Jehovah who is destined to fall.
And this goes back to this, even the Sumerians told that Anki, Anki's the one, Anki's the one who
tells Arthahassis that Anu is going to wipe all you out. You better build an ark. This is the
story you get with Dukallion. Instead of Anki, it's Prometheus. Prometheus is the savior. He
tells the humans how to survive because Zeus is a tyrant who's going to kill you all. It
doesn't like you, but Zeus doesn't want any humans to live. He's going to kill everybody.
Build a boat, take your wife with you and you can, and I'll tell you how to survive.
I'll tell you how to eat from the tree of knowledge and become like a god. That's the side. That's
the good side. That was the father of the civil. Yeah, who did that. And Pulascus was her brother.
Ew, we're going back prehistory. It's in the genealogy. No, but this is what's so brilliant
about the Greeks is that in these myths, they're writing, they're giving us like,
not only scientific treatises about like Big Bang and like, I'm not saying Big Bang,
but like there's like these little scientific treatises injected in the text, but they're also
telling history that the, the Pulascians, the, the, um, in the genealogy of these gods is this
genealogy of historical tribes that existed in the Mediterranean world and they're, and they're
preserving it in the myths. Brilliant. It's brilliant stuff. It really is. You got to,
you got to hand it to the Greeks. Brilliant. They really were just amazing at preserving history
in the myths. Now historians and scholars can look at these myths and say,
oh shoot, they're telling the story about the Pulascians coming out of the Black Sea region after
a flood and, and populating the world. That's what they're doing. They're telling that story.
That's why whenever I read ancient texts, I focus on the material evidence. Just show me the dildos,
show me the drugs, show me the purple anuses, you know what I mean? Show me the, yeah, no, show me
the, it's all in the text, you know, kids cutting their testicles off and throwing them into the
home where they have to get all the clothing from because they're going to be dressed like
girls from now on. That's in the right. That's the mystery religion of the Phrygians.
To look at their identity, I guarantee you. On March 25th, every year, they would initiate
new eunuch priests to take care of the temple of Kaiboli and they had, they had to mimic what Addis
did and castrate themselves and then throw their testicles into the house. That's whoever,
whoever caught that testicle had to go, they, there was their duty to bring the clothing out,
right? Tell them. Let's run this by. I'm a eunuch priest. I just castrate myself. I throw my
testicles into your house. Now, what does that mean to you? It means I got to make sure that you
look nice. I've got to provide you with some good clothing. It is, it's my religious duty
to do it. I don't care if you've got any daughters or not, right? This is a something,
it's a religious duty. It's a sacred thing. And by the way, Lucian says some people who came just
to watch this because, you know, like you said, it's a, you know, it's a holy event. It's a festival,
right? Some people who come to watch get caught up in the process and end up out there naked in
front of the population cutting their testicles off. Wow. And this is, this is because they really
believe in these rights. Yeah. They're practicing the sacred ancient, and these Phrygian rights
weren't new. They were going, and they said that the Phrygians got their rights from Samoth race.
Yeah. Yeah. Yassion, this is the story that, and even Clement talks about this in his
explanation of the Greeks. Yassion laid with Demeter in a fall night, right before fall came,
and then Zeus struck him down with lightning bolt. But they say before that happened, he brought the
rights to Phrygia. Yassion, right? Jason or Jesus, same name. And there's actually some text that
spell Yassios with an S at the end. It's a title. It's a title, right? It's a title within the
cult. It's a healer. Right. Yeah. And it comes from, you're exactly right to point out that
yaho root. People think that it's used in magic, by the way, just those Greek letters,
iota, alpha, omega, is part of a magic ritual. It is the saying of the I am that I am, right?
And it's a healing. They, Paion, they, is one of the shots that they have with it in the rights.
So you can see these things. I mean, they're in the text. I'm telling you, you take those gospels
and cut out all the sections that have to do with Jesus performing mystery
as a magus and getting down on a young kid who's acting as the bridge, by the way, Neil,
the bridge, by the way, with the kid or the drugs, right? That kid is there administering
that drug to Jesus. That kid is the Ganymede, the cup, right? That kid is the cup. And Jesus
is taking that cup and it poisons his ass. And he ends up not getting the antidote and screaming
on the cross and dying early. Neil, we know for a fact, all the evangelicals out there, please
support this. We know for a fact, Jesus did not die of crucifixion. He did not die of crucifixion.
Ask the next religious historian, say this crazy guy said, Jesus didn't die of crucifixion.
That's what the texts say, right? Because the Romans were like, fuck, they even noted it.
They're like, oh, he was dead early. He's hanging up there. You know, he shouldn't be dead yet.
Quick, right, right. Right? What's going on? Right? You know what's interesting about that.
I'm going to go ahead and finish that thought. Well, he's screaming. I just want you to realize
he's there screaming, right? And he's yelling out his stuff about being thirsty. He's yelling
out a phrase which strangely enough looks like it's been lifted the sabbathon directly from
the magical papyri that you're contemporary that Paul is saying, throw your magic books out, right?
Guess what? Jesus is using one. Yeah, right. Look, look, look, you just nailed on what I was
about to say. So that sabbathon thing, right? Everyone's pointed out that it's in Psalm 22.
Okay. They chose that Psalm for a reason because it's pointing to the sabbathon.
My God, my God, why have you forsaken me? But the Greek, if you look at the Septuagint version,
there's something happening there with the sabbathon. But listen to this, though.
Put that aside for a second. You got the sabbathon on the cross. He's yelling out,
my God, why are you forsaking me? Psalm 22. But the other three Gospels, he's also,
all three of them have a different Psalm. So when one of them, it's this, my God, the other one,
it's LOI. Like all three, all four of the Gospels are from a different Psalm. Psalms are songs that
you sing. They're hymns. Orpheus, when Orpheus is killed by the Maynids, what is he doing?
He's singing hymns. Both Jesus and Orpheus die singing chants in hymns. It's Orpic. I'm telling
you it's Orpic. That's what it is. It's Orpic. Why is that? Is it just me or was Orpheus in his,
before he was torn apart by the crowd of his own followers? He was saying something about naked
boys, wasn't he? He didn't sweat at all. So this is Orpheus' metamorphosis. Actually, I think I had
a text right here somewhere. We can just catch people up. We can just catch people up. All right,
look at this up. Orpheus' metamorphosis, the last story about Orpheus, after the Eurydus story,
it says that Orpheus was so depressed about Eurydus that he decided to take up the thration rights
of plucking little boys' manhoods before they come of age, and that women were throwing themselves
at Orpheus and he was denying them because he was into this stuff now. I'm not just making this up.
This isn't the text. He's plucking his nectar, people. He's plucking his nectar and he's bringing
that kid. Galen has the descriptions of the pre-puberty boy, excreta, and the post-puberty.
He's getting that serious fluid. Why? Because we're cutting him and we're wrapping him with
wraps so that he can have venom concoctions administered directly. I mean, this is a great
way to fly, brah. Yeah, eunuchs. You thought all the eunuchs were made by carving. There's also
chemical ways, right? There's chemical ways for that transformation to find that feminine, to take
that masculine, and to bring out snappy. There's ways to do that, and they're involved in these
ways. This should make you, evangelicals, very scared at the same time, very upset that your own
dude was involved in this kind of activity. You're holding up signs that say, hey, save the children.
Guess what? Your guy at Putin is abducting them, and your guy, Jesus, was thick in it. Thick in it.
Yeah, welcome. Welcome to your Christian mystery. Yeah. I was pulling up the text before they say
that I'm a liar, that I'm crazy. You have to see it for yourself. It's book 11, I believe,
by the depth of Orpheus. So while the songs, let me see. Let me see if I can share my screen.
Let me see. Damn. Yeah, I'll share my screen right now.
Just read it to us, Neil. Just read it. I'm trying to find it, actually. It's somewhere in,
it's somewhere right before he dies. I know that. Let's see. Bacchus and Midas. Bacchus.
Here we go. I'll talk while you're looking. Oh, did you find it? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Look for it.
All right. Talk while I'm looking for it. So he's looking for this myth. It's basically the myth
that Orpheus was killed by his own menads, right? And that he was killed for that reason because he
swore off. He swore off the right. He stopped the mystery and declared that he would only worship
the sun. Yeah, Apollo, right? Yeah. So they cut his head off and threw it in the river and
he, you know, people will take credit for where that ended up and whatnot. I'll get it ready for
the next time we do all live because I don't, I gotta go to the bathroom anyway. We've been going
live for two hours and I'm sure you got stuff to do anyway. But yeah, listen. Look it up.
Orpheus is metamorphosis. The last thing he does before he gets killed is he takes on the
Thracian rites. This is what it says. This is not my words. This is Orpheus words. Takes on the
Thracian rites of plucking little boys' manhoods before they come of age. And he says that they're
women were throwing themselves at him and he was denying them. That's what it says.
Just saying what it says. But that's Orpheus. We just went full back circle at the beginning of
this text. What's happening in Mark 14? Something Orpheus happening. That's what it is. Something
mysterious. Something. Oh, sorry. You, I missed your super chat. Have you made a video on the
exiting Soul Trap? Have you spoken with Howdy Missak? I will look into that. That's a good
question. Thank you for the super chat. But yeah, back to full circle again. What is happening
in Mark 14? It's the mystery. That's what's happening. Last final thoughts on this.
My final thoughts, if I can have any, are that we need to just accept the evidence.
We don't need any ideas. We don't need any theories. We just need to look at the texts that are there
and to determine, okay, what are they using? How are they using it? It's just good detective work.
And in doing so, we can free people from the narrative that they've already been fed.
And that is causing this great, I mean, this is our duty, man. If Tom Jefferson were here,
he was a classicist. He'd be like, you people, you know, oh, Neil, Neil, when are they going to
listen? When are they going to listen? It's, oh, you know, um, yeah, that's all I can say. Hey,
have you heard from Anastasia at all? Do you have any updates? Everybody's
She's, uh, she was talking about how one of her friends who was a, who was a male stripper.
And I, it reminds me of what you said about Hercules. Hercules putting on the, you know,
putting on the costume of the garb of the women and, uh, then going to war because this male
stripper is dressed up ready to fight the Russians. She was posing pictures with them. I was like,
that's all the Ukrainians. I love the Ukrainians so much. They're the heroes of today. They're,
that's those are the Bacchic warriors right now. That's Hercules and Bacchus over there.
What is it, Neil? Do you think it's the tension? Like at a specific place and time, you know,
that you'll have this force attracted and you can really concentrate. I mean, the place where they
hung the fleece was sacred to Mars. So it's a, it's a war environment. Is it that war environment
that suddenly brings that virgin, you know, that somebody can be the receptacle then? I mean,
I don't mean to be creepy or culty or anything, but if you think about it, the people then who are
in that environment like Anastasia, it, she be, can become the receptacle for real freedom for
that actual spirit of Athena. Am I crazy or? No, that's what it is. That's that. I think of the
democracy versus whatever Russia, I mean, I guess it's like an oligarchy, right?
That's that Republican oligarchy, you know, where the, the billionaires are deciding the
fate of the people. Whereas the Ukraine has that like that, that symbol of lady liberty
holding up the, the, the, the scale in her hands and the sword in the other hand. And that's Ukraine
right now. That's Ukraine right now. Ukraine is embodying that spirit right now. That's the lady
with the scale and one hand and the sword on the other hand. Ukraine, that's who you are right now.
That's how I see it. She's the virgin male. I mean, if we're going to find Athena somewhere,
there ever be somewhere, you know what I mean? Oh, I can't, I can't wait. This is fantastic.
You know, it's, it's terrible to, it's terrible to see something beautiful and something that's so
dark. But I mean, that's what dawn is, right? That's what that's what the dawn bringers do.
Right. This is, I wish we could speak about all the cult. We didn't even get to the,
the, the, the panto clator and the connection to Mithras. Did you know here, I'll leave with,
I'll leave with this. Go ahead. Take your time. Take your time. I'll just tease. There's a direct
linguistic connection between Jesus Christ and Mithras. He is the unconquered son. Yeah, it's
gorgeous. Yeah, I'll show you the, it's the Bible, man. Nobody ever reads it. I don't know why.
Yeah. Oh, I also have the link for your YouTube in the description. I'm showing it right now.
Subscribe to Lady Babylon and what, what twice a week you're going live and you're doing deep
dives like you just heard today. So the, if you like what you heard today, Amon does this twice
a week. He's doing this and he's touching on different subjects in the ancient Greek world
that nobody's talking about. You'll not get this anywhere else, except for Lady. I'm, I'm not
kidding. I watch every time you're live. I'm watching every time. So I thank you for the
opportunity, Neil, to be able to speak. And you know, I want people to know Neil told me last
week, he was like, you realize we're at war. And I was like, Oh, this guy's crazy. What's he doing?
You know, I was like, what? And I got to thinking about it over a couple of days, right? And
he understood. He had a focus and he understood exactly what one of those watchers, one of those
watchers would give you in Sodom, the exact same thing. Those are the lightning bringers,
right? Those bring the fire from all on us. This is heavenly kingdom stuff, people. You don't
realize what's there. It's the apocalypse. Neil, you promised me we bring the apocalypse or we
don't do it. We are, we this is, this is exactly what that is. Neil and I are two witnesses for you.
Yeah. And we are witnessing to Jesus Christ, the selling pirate child rapist. Jesus Christ,
the kid selling child rapist. Druggy, he's on drugs, a lot of drugs, Jesus and drugs.
Yeah. That's what it is. Oh, shoot, I found it. Orpheus. Such was the grave,
grove of Orpheus drawn together. He surrounded the seven of my animals. He tried the cords and
was convinced on the notes, raised the voice, oh muse, was this it? But now, but now for the
gentler, I would sing for boys, the favorites of the gods, and even of maids, pay the penalties
for the wrong. Is that it? No, that's something else. Huh. All right, I'll find it next time.
It's somewhere in Orpheus, or something, somewhere in Ovid. I'll find it for next time.
And by the way, Neil, no, by the way, you know, it's really cool of it.
Oh, I found it. I found my Ovid. Okay. Okay, I can hide it now.
It's very cool. I'll, I'll.
So glad we held out this long. I found it right now. I have it saved right here.
Okay. It's so glad. It's so good that you're doing this with Ovid, that you're resurrecting Ovid.
Doesn't he get imprisoned in the most hostile place, the civilization at the time?
And it was for Julia, wasn't it? It was maybe for...
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Ovid. Yeah. Okay. Can you, can you read this for me?
Yeah.
Picks. Oh, the top part, the top part. This is from...
Yeah, with the love of women, with the love of women, perhaps because of his fortune and love,
or he may have plighted his troth forever, but scores of women were burning to sleep with the
bard and suffered the pain of rejection. Oh, yeah, that's right. You, yeah.
Women are throwing themselves at him and he's rejecting them. That's what that means.
Yeah. You, Elvis, Elvis is not available right before Orpheus gets killed, but keep going.
Orpheus even started the practice among the Thracian tribes of turning for love to immature males
in a plucking the flower of a boy's brief spring before he has come to his manhood.
Welcome to salvation, brothers and sisters. Welcome to salvation.
Welcome to the mysteries. Yeah.
So the answer, the answer to the question that we've been, the answer to the question of this,
of this stream, what is happening in Mark 14? Yeah. Yeah.
Mysteries. Yeah. Brilliant. Neil, that was the best thing ever produced. Yeah, I can't,
it's done. It's done. Thank you. You have just attained true gnosis.
You have just attained true gnosis.
The demiurge has no power over you.
