

OceanofPDF.com

ARCHITECTURE AND
PROGRESS
This volume proposes an interdependent relationship between progress and
obstacles in architecture and the built environment. It challenges the
positive notion of progress, and the conception of progress and obstacle as a
dichotomy.
For shapers of the world, finding 'the solution' is often a mark of
progress that becomes embedded in culture, society, and history. Progress is
ever-present. Through the exploration of diverse positions in history, theory,
and practice, this book explores the potential utility of the progressively
problematic rather than the natural tendency towards the progressively
solved. Chapters draw on historic spaces, technological advancement,
incorporation of the natural world, alterative production, and the
consideration of human experience both sensory and psychological.
Challenging the positive connotation of 'progress', the writings also explore
reversing the notion of obstacle from disruptive anti-tool to obstacle of
utilitarian method, a useful tool, pressing approach, and overarching value
system.
This will be interesting reading for upper-level students and scholars of
Architecture, Urban Design, Philosophy, and Sociology.
Mark Alan Blumberg is an Assistant Professor at the Auburn University
College of Architecture Design and Construction, USA. Mark researches
the spaces between cognition and representation through diagrams, and
between abstraction and analysis in mapping. His interests in the urban
scale and complexities serve as a connection between present

environmental, cultural, and societal conditions and potential future
outcomes of current decisions and practices.
Matt Hall is a Professor at the Auburn University College of Architecture
Design and Construction, USA, and partner in the design firms Superunison
and Obstructures. His work is concerned with the rift between intentions
and consequences, the dilemmas of decision making, and the uncertain
future contexts that all design is inevitably subject to. His is the co-editor of
Lewerentz Fragments (Actar, 2021) and an A+U feature issue on Swedish
architect Bernt Nyberg (2017), along with other publications on post-war
Swedish architecture. He has lectured, published, and exhibited
internationally on topics related to theory, criticism, and pedagogy.
OceanofPDF.com

ARCHITECTURE AND
PROGRESS
Exploring a Progressively Problematic Built
Environment
Edited by Mark Alan Blumberg and Matt Hall
OceanofPDF.com

Designed cover image: Nathan Matteson
First published 2026
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2026 selection and editorial matter, Mark Alan Blumberg and Matt Hall; individual chapters, the
contributors
The right of Mark Alan Blumberg and Matt Hall to be identified as the authors of the editorial
material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with
sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by
any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Blumberg, Mark Alan editor | Hall, Matthew (Matthew Scott), 1976-editor
Title: Architecture and progress : exploring a progressively problematic built environment / edited by
Mark Alan Blumberg and Matt Hall.
Description: Abingdon, Oxon : Routledge, 2026. | Includes bibliographical references and index. |
Identifiers: LCCN 2025028787 | ISBN 9781032767550 hardback | ISBN 9781032767536 paperback
| ISBN 9781003479932 ebook
Subjects: LCSH: Architecture--Philosophy | Progress
Classification: LCC NA2500 .A7145 2026
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2025028787
ISBN: 978-1-032-76755-0 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-76753-6 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-47993-2 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932
Typeset in Optima
by SPi Technologies India Pvt Ltd (Straive)
OceanofPDF.com

CONTENTS
List of Contributors
Acknowledgments
Introduction: Obstacles in Progress
Matt Hall and Mark Alan Blumberg
1 Ex, Est, Ut
Wes Jones
2 I Just Want to Say One Word to You, Just One Word: Plastics
Nathan Matteson
3 The Mediation of Doubt and the Doubt of Mediations
Michael Young
4 Drawing on History
Mustafa Faruki
5 Types and Specimens: Plants, Digital Assets, and Ecological World-
Building in Spatial Design
Sonia Sobrino Ralston
6 The Panecillo of Quito in 1903: Resisting Modernity in the Andes
Cristina Bueno
7 Proving Grounds: Speculative Scenography and Staging the Future
Constance Vale
8 Atado con Alambre: The Alternative Production of Ingenious
Architectures
Carolina Dayer and Jonathan Foote
9 Driven to Distraction
Matthias Altwicker
10 Syn(es)thetic Futures: Lessons from the Hermetically Sealed

Brian Ambroziak and Katherine Bambrick Ambroziak
11 Newer Babylons
Matt Hall
12 Unresolution: Fiction in the Space Between Inquiry and Invention
Mark Alan Blumberg
13 On Enemy Territory
Gregory Spaw and Patrick Rhodes
Index
OceanofPDF.com

CONTRIBUTORS
Matthias Altwicker is an architect and professor. His firm, Studio A+H,
works on New York City projects from new construction to adaptive reuse.
He is committed to research and has worked tirelessly on researching and
exhibiting new perspectives on public housing, open space, and housing
density to the broader public. He is the senior architect for 3XN-North
America, managing constructed projects in Canada and the US.
Brian Ambroziak is an Associate Professor and Chair of Architecture
Undergraduate Studies at the University of Tennessee, USA. His research
engages the creative process, the development of one's artistic conscience,
and focuses on the complex relationship between design and methods of
representation and visualization with an inherent bias towards writing and
collage.
Katherine Bambrick Ambroziak is an Associate Professor and Associate
Dean of Academic Affairs in the College of Architecture and Design at the
University of Tennessee, USA. Her research and teaching examine how
designers and users become conscious of their built and natural
environments. She focuses on spatial theory related to sensory response and
body perception, ritual theory, and contemporary memorial theory.
Mark Alan Blumberg is an Assistant Professor at the Auburn University
College of Architecture Design and Construction, USA. Mark researches
the spaces between cognition and representation through diagrams and
between abstraction and analysis in mapping. His interests in the urban
scale and complexities serve as a connection between present

environmental, cultural, and societal conditions and potential future
outcomes of current decisions and practices.
Cristina Bueno is Assistant Professor of History and Theory of
Architecture at Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Ecuador. She holds a
master's degree in the Architecture, Theory and Project Program from the
Escola Tècnica Superior d'Arquitectura de Barcelona and a PhD from the
Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Spain. Her architectural practice
combines urban form and theory, and her research focuses on the graphic
representation in the early cartography of Quito and how it shaped the
construction of the local territory.
Carolina Dayer, PhD, is an architect and Associate Professor at Aarhus
School of Architecture in Denmark. She is the co-editor of Confabulations:
Storytelling in Architecture (Routledge, 2016), Activism in Architecture:
Bright Dreams of Passive Energy Design (Routledge, 2018), and
Imaginaries on Matter: Tools, Materials, Origins (AADR, 2023). In 2021,
she exhibited the artistic-research project 'Insiders, Othered Histories' at the
On-Site Gallery in Denmark. She was design associate editor of the Journal
of Architectural Education from 2017 until 2021, during which she theme-
edited two issues: A/To Project and Built. She currently works on
intersections between cultures of maintenance and humor in construction
details.
Mustafa Faruki is the founding partner of theLab-lab for architecture, a
narrowly known purveyor of unbuilt work, unpublished volumes, and
unsolicited pleasures. His practice centers self-observation, feeling, and a
studied consideration of the resonance of our deeply entangled histories.

Jonathan Foote, PhD, is an architect and Associate Professor at Aarhus
School of Architecture, Denmark. He has lectured, chaired conferences, and
published widely on architectural drawing, materiality, and stone in the
humanities, including work on Michelangelo's paper template drawings and
the recent co-edited book Imaginaries on Matter: Tools, Materials, Origins
(AADR, 2023).
Matt Hall is a Professor at the Auburn University College of Architecture
Design and Construction, USA, and partner in the design firms Superunison
and Obstructures. His work is concerned with the rift between intentions
and consequences, the dilemmas of decision making, and the uncertain
future contexts that all design is inevitably subject to. His is the co-edtior of
Lewerentz Fragments (Actar, 2021) and an A+U feature issue on Swedish
architect Bernt Nyberg (2017), along with other publications on post-war
Swedish architecture. He has lectured, published, and exhibited
internationally on topics related to theory, criticism, and pedagogy.
Wes Jones is a partner in Jones, Partners: Architecture, a California-based
practice known for technologically inspired design. His work has been
exhibited widely and can be found in the permanent collections of major
museums around the world. Four monographs of this work have been
published over the years by Princeton Architectural Press and ORO
Editions. A recipient of the Rome Prize from the American Academy in
Rome, and the Arts and Letters Award in Architecture from the American
Academy of the Arts and Letters, he currently serves as a Professor in
Practice at the USC School of Architecture, USA.
Nathan Matteson is an Associate Professor at DePaul University's School
of Design, USA. A ruthlessly collaborative designer whose work merrily

ignores perceived boundaries between disciplines, his practice situates itself
at an intersection among dead ends, superhighways, and goat paths,
wringing its metaphorical hands over relationships among computation,
intention, materiality, and immateriality.
Sonia Sobrino Ralston is an Assistant Teaching Professor in Landscape
Architecture and Art + Design at Northeastern University's College of
Media, Art and Design, USA. Educated as a landscape architect and
architect at Harvard and Princeton, respectively, her work explores how
plants and information systems collide in the built environment.
Patrick Rhodes is an Associate Professor at the University of Sharjah in
the United Arab Emirates. His scholarship focuses on design-build and
community engagement through social, economic, and environmental
design, and has been awarded, published, and exhibited widely. Since 2013,
he has taught architecture in the heart of the Arab World.
Gregory Spaw is an Associate Professor at the American University of
Sharjah in the United Arab Emirates. Concurrent with his academic
engagement, Spaw is a principal of SHO Architecture, a design
collaborative that straddles the territories of teaching, research, and
practice. His scholarship and practice centers on digital visualization,
harnessing parametric workflows, intelligent material fabrication, and
responsive environment design.
Constance Vale is Chair of Undergraduate Architecture and Associate
Professor at Washington University in St. Louis, USA. She is also a
registered architect and founding partner of AVV A. Her research explores
intersections of architecture, theater, urbanism, and technology, examining

how artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies can shape more
equitable and resilient environments.
Michael Young is an Associate Professor at the Irwin S. Chanin School of
Architecture at the Cooper Union, USA. He is the author of The Estranged
Object (Graham Foundation, 2015) and Reality Modeled After Images:
Architecture and Aesthetics after the Digital Image (Routledge, 2022).
Michael was the recipient of the 2019-20 Rome Prize from the American
Academy of Rome.
OceanofPDF.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many thanks to Shane Elliott and Christine Hall for editorial assistance.
OceanofPDF.com

INTRODUCTION
Obstacles in Progress
Matt Hall and Mark Alan Blumberg
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-1
Progress is both innate and inevitable. To progress is to exist, but life can
unfold more or less progressively. Progress is ever-present. In any given
scenario, circumstances can become progressively worse or better. While it
is inherently human to strive for progress, within that pursuit lie obstacles,
foreign territory and the unexpected.
Our world consists of obstacles in progress, which become progressively
problematic as we advance, overcoming challenges only to uncover others
lying beneath. Culture tends to dismantle progress even as it is being made,
and this dismantling is often by design. Given the profound impact of
design on the world, it is pressing and relevant to critically examine its role
in human progress by asking: How do we define the progressively
problematic within the discipline of design?
The editors propose that progress and obstacles are interdependent,
challenging the conventionally positive notion of progress through diverse
positions in the history, theory, practice and representation of architecture
and the built environment. For shapers of the world, finding the solution is
often seen as a mark of progress, but perhaps historical case studies in the
past, provocative visions of the future and assessments of our complex
present context may have utility for thoroughly understanding, if not

breaking, the problematic cycle of our designs. To do so requires
intellectual and practical approaches to reveal that the byproducts of design
often produce more unknowns than knowns, most of which are discovered
when it is too late. Although progress is commonly understood as linear,
positive and durable, a more precise inventory of its consequences suggests
otherwise.
Progress
Philosopher and author John Gray situates progress as "any kind of advance
that is cumulative, so that what's achieved at one period is the basis for later
achievement that then, over time, becomes more and more irreversible."1
He acknowledges the durability of progress in tangible, empirical contexts
such as science and technology, but does not suggest that this definition of
progress extends to civilization itself. According to Gray, cultural progress
(relative to ethics, behaviors and governance) is fragile, never having a firm
footing and often losing ground. In contrast, technological development
often tends to progress in a more solid, cumulative way. This accepts the
improbability that, as a culture, we will choose to tackle our contemporary
problems by regressing technologically, as our relationship with it has
become existential, if not outright religious.
There is also a tendency to equate technological progress with moral
progress. Just as architectural movements have historically progressed via
their relationship to technology, so our notion of civilization is as much
defined (and secured) by its advanced technology as much as by any value-
based order. Within the context of this publication, the distinction between
technological and cultural progress is more thoughtfully explored when
intentionally blurred. Architecture and design are complex disciplines at the
intersection of technology and culture—serving both, mastering neither, yet

highly influenced by both areas of human production. They are professions
tangled between the calculable and the incalculable, subject to a
multifaceted array of often conflicting values. In this sense, architecture and
design are situated relative to both cultural and technological progress,
simultaneously shaped by and shaping both, with no clear delineation.
It is worth reminding ourselves of the consequences of not progressing.
From a technological perspective, one can easily imagine what the world
might look like if we refused to iterate relative to the tools and objects that
enable our lives. (Of course, this is relative and dependent on geography,
wealth and politics.) We continue the advance of technological innovation
and refinement—shaping and distorting, making some lives more
convenient, others more difficult, and all infinitely more complex.
Throughout history, various dogmatic positions, ranging from the economic
to the political and spiritual, have resisted progress. Illiteracy once
preserved the power of kings and gods, while notions of the collective
good, productivity, or mere profit kept (and continue to keep) millions
enslaved. It's clear that technology and information have been used to
coerce, control and profit rather than inform, enlighten and enrich. These
are of all forms of progress, demonstrating that progress is not universal
and not inherently positive. One can easily assume that a cultural issue,
right or privilege held dear is being repudiated at this very moment.
The rejection of cultural progress is becoming more probable by the day,
as evidenced by the current state of our polarization. Yet to renounce
technological progress risks earning the title of Luddite, primitivist or
romantic. In any case, there are few champions of the idea that we regress.
Our world seems defined by growth, and the advance of the technological
progress machine persists with seemingly unwavering continuity. Nothing
historically is more certain than the persistent march towards the smaller,

faster, cheaper and more abundant—at least for those who can afford it.
Conversely, there is nothing more simplistic than proposing that we simply
stop and accept the current state of technology. Repudiation of progress is
frequently dismissed as romantic, evident in those who reenact the past or
choose inefficient and outdated modes of living as an act of protest,
practicality, experience or aesthetics. An outright abandonment of
technology is naïve; virtually all forces of contemporary culture demand
submission to it. Try living without an internet connection.
Paul Kingsnorth offers a scathing critique of this ever-present reality:
"Romanticizing the past" is a familiar accusation, made mostly by
people who think it is more grown-up to romanticize the future. But
it's not necessary to convince yourself that Paleolithic hunter-gatherers
lived in paradise in order to observe that progress is a ratchet, every
turn forcing us more tightly into the gears of a machine we were forced
to create to solve the problems created by progress. It is far too late to
think about dismantling this machine in a rational manner—and in any
case who wants to? We can't deny that it brings benefits to us, even as
it chokes us and our world by degrees.2
The "choking" of our world has produced both freedom and slavery, with
an ever-shifting definition of each. It has led to advancement and
regression, enabling diverse civilizations while also destroying them. The
compression of variables (the solving of problems) creates order by
resolving issues, but problems persist no matter how diligently we attempt
to tame and control them. Progress is dependent on culture, defined perhaps
as our construct for keeping our most primal instincts at bay, metaphorically
holding the barbarians at the gate. To achieve this, culture must constantly
adapt, maneuver and advance—perhaps its most defining characteristic.

Civilization and Culture
The progressive human condition unfolds within a landscape of conditions
requiring actions and decisions, often framed as problems. We have evolved
to solve these problems using concepts, models and tools. Culture generates
concepts for addressing problems (ideas), which may become reliable
models (that sometimes require tools for execution). While the story of
human culture can be told via innumerable narratives, the development of
tools (technology) and their constant refinement presents a compelling
argument for human evolution.
This begs the question: Why do we constantly need to evolve our tools?
Invariably, it's due to the reliable flow of problems that culture presents. As
we evolve, so do our problems, and we race to catch up. In essence,
obstacles are both the generators and the consequences of problems. The
illusion we perpetuate is that we can actually solve these problems.
This brings us to question the fundamental nature and durability of
progress. Can progress be achieved without knowing and understanding
what obstacles it may overturn? Can it be achieved in one state while
simultaneously producing obstacles in another, or can it happen in
ignorance of the problems it will produce?
In A Short History of Progress, Ronald Wright describes the concept of a
"progress trap," where a solution appears beneficial in the short term but,
upon reaching a certain scale or intensity, results in catastrophic
consequences. He warns of the fatal acceleration of technological change
that occurs as our own ideas move much faster than our hands and minds
can truly comprehend. To avoid these traps, Wright advocates for the
"precautionary principle"—a slow and cautious approach to innovation. Yet
this principle is surely at odds with the demands and rapid pace of cultural
and technological evolution.

The human character is that we are very clever and are extremely good
innovative short-term thinkers, but we are extremely bad at foreseeing
the long-term consequences of what we are doing and also extremely
bad at limiting our immediate desires ... we tend to let things rip until
they crash.3
While this suggests a crash, the reality is that collisions seem to be
occurring constantly at various scales. Our misalignment of intention and
consequence stems from our inability or unwillingness to fully consider the
negative outcomes of our designs, if doing so is even possible. As Wright
puts it in his interview:
The trouble is that you can't really tell the difference between good
progress and bad progress until it's played out, by which time if you've
been mistaken in your idea of what true progress is it may be too late
by that point.
In addition to these traps, we are faced with the fact that our understanding
of function in the world of design is both limited and crippling. What
functions well in one context often fails in another. In a chapter titled "Art
and Science. Energy. Results" from his 1978 book The Nature and
Aesthetics of Design, David Pye delivers a scathing critique of function
where he makes the provocative claim that nothing truly works.
The concept of function in design, and even the doctrine of
functionalism might be worth a little attention if things ever worked ...
I have sometimes wondered whether our unconscious motive for doing
so much useless work is to show that if we cannot make things work
properly we can at least make them presentable ... never do we
achieve a satisfactory performance. Things simply are not fit for their

purpose ... Every thing we design and make is an improvisation, a
lash-up, something inept and provisional. We live like castaways. But
even at that we can be debonair and make the best of it. If we cannot
have our way in performance we will have it in appearance.4
Pye alludes not only to unintended consequences but also perhaps to
incompetence. His critique raises fundamental questions about the
responsibility of designers. What design professional has the foresight to
predict every adverse effect of their design? Which harms are intentional
compromises given the inability of a design to equally meet all criteria
equally as well? Do all designs ultimately become obstacles, or is the act of
design an obstacle in itself?
Our world never ceases to present us with obstacles, often giving us no
choice but to design our way around them. Some designers believe
themselves meticulous in measuring and responding to problematic
contexts and conditions. Yet most operate like bricoleurs, drifting from
problem to solution and somehow getting by, blind to the outcomes and
constrained by myopic views of what conditions matter. The ability to deal
with obstacles via design might be analogous to survival: we survive, more
or less, but not without the manifestation of obstacles that are co-dependent
on our progress. The relationship between progress and obstacle is never
neutral; its dance is categorically understood in a contextual way,
continually in flux according to vantage point, time, intention and
consequence.
Obstacle
Almost every object, process and human endeavor is impeded by
something, whether from an external context or an internal state. The first

obstacle humanity encountered was nature. We entered the world tool-less,
naked and afraid. We made progress by contending with our given
condition. Obstacles took the form of large rocks or saber-toothed tigers,
excessive heat or cold, hunger or infertile soil. For each of these "natural"
obstacles we have progressed beyond them, using technology as a lever to
dislodge them, inadvertently replacing them with obstacles of our own
creation.
Obstacles are evidence of progress. If progress is an aim, then the
obstacle is a result. Akin to the same story told from different vantage
points, each product of progress has multiple impacts. One party's progress
becomes another's obstacle, and, even for the party that progresses, the
artifacts of that progression are not always positive. Instead, they come with
more obstacles to overcome. This unyielding cycle of progress, solving
problems to create obstacles that then serve as future problems, is what
philosopher Vilém Flusser calls the "internal dialectic of culture," assuming
we define culture as "totality of all objects of use." In his chapter aptly
titled "Design: Obstacle for/to the Removal of Obstacles," from The Shape
of Things (1999), he sums up the dialectic:
I come across obstacles in my path (come across the objective,
substantial, problematic world); I overturn some of these obstacles
(transform them into objects of use, into culture) in order to continue,
and the objects thus overturned prove to be obstacles in themselves.
The more I continue, the more I am obstructed by objects of use.5
In essence, Flusser's central thesis is that "the world is objective,
substantial, problematic, as long as it obstructs." He elaborates upon this,
ultimately asking, why? The answer is simple: "they were projected as
designs on the part of people who went before. They are projected designs

that I need in order to continue and that obstruct me from continuing."6 In
other words, most obstacles in our technological history are designed,
produced and utilized in the name of progress. Yet, these leave traces or
traps that others must overcome. Each act of design can be thought of as
specific to a task or constituent, hyper-sensitive to a particular context, and
often violently indifferent to everything beyond it. The consequences are
felt by innocent bystanders left to deal with the scars of progress, setting up
future generations to deal with our "solutions." In another chapter, "The
Non-Thing 1," Flusser reconceptualizes the solution as problem removal, or
at least management as a process of "production," in the context of delaying
the inevitable:
'To live' means to proceed towards death. On the way, one came
across things that blocked one's path. These things called 'problems'
had therefore to be removed. 'To live' then meant: to resolve problems
in order to be able to die. And one resolved problems either by
transforming intractable things into manageable ones - this was called
'production' - or by overcoming them - this was called 'progress'.
Until eventually, one came up against problems that could not be
transformed or overcome. These were called 'last things', and one died
of them.7
In an effort to simply survive, progression may be desensitizing us to
consequence, isolating us within our desires and delusions. This forward
momentum we value may be hurling us into an abyss that we are unable to
design our way out of. The relationship between progress and obstacles is
clearly interdependent. It challenges the positive notion of progress; at best,
progress can be framed as neutral—a state rather than a process. It is a

general tool we can aim at the world, but we must use other tools, such as
design, to be precise in what we achieve.
We were naturally selected for forward movement, and in a Darwinistic
view, those who didn't progress in life rapidly moved towards death. If an
innate and instinctive drive to progress is our genotype, then perhaps the
obstacle is the phenotype. Every solution has a consequence; therefore, the
true record of our evolution is only evident in the wreckage and memory of
obstacles we've overturned—or inadvertently generated.
Primer
This publication does not aim to critique the general concept of progress in
its entirety. Instead, the goal is to offer a primer of perspectives through the
lens of the built environment—understood as both a game board for human
choices and as an active agent that directs, reflects and often determines our
range of choices. Design is more than just the backdrop to our actions; it is
the physical manifestation of our progress and our obstacles. As editors, our
task is not to prescribe this relationship but to open the dialog. In the pages
that follow, readers will encounter various positions on these questions,
situated within the design disciplines—architecture in particular. While
progress unfolds in every human context, design is uniquely situated to
contend with it (and just as uniquely complicit in its adverse side effects).
So what is architecture? Is it progress or obstacle—or both? Is
architecture an inescapable embodiment of the obstacles it blankets, or is it
a linearly developing scenario of if progress, then obstacle? These are not
questions or propositions this book intends to answer or fully support.
Rather, we hope to offer a series of critical, practical and speculative
approaches of addressing these questions as opening statements to broader
inquiry. The intent of reframing the co-dependent concepts of progress and

obstacle is to create space for contributors to explore how designers
command agency in navigating humanity's path through the perpetual
dystopia on the horizon. These conceptualizations of conflated
progress/obstacle relationships aim to frame polemics, propositions and
dialogs on how we have historically approached this relationship—and how
we might adjust our methods in a world that too often compounds its
mistakes rather than learns from them.
We contend that this volume of thought can be formalized into novel
modes of design thinking—approaches that move beyond the linear, the
predictable and those compartmentalized to a particular system, site or
"client." The writings offer potential shifts in architectural production that
do not limit themselves to utopian proposals. Instead, they engage with
dystopian potentials by analyzing past consequences, synthesizing current
realities with alternative circumstances and speculating on future
conditions. As dire as the past has been, and as uncertain as the future may
be, the design of the problem—rather than the solution—emerges as both an
ethical and a practical imperative to chart a better (or at least, less harmful)
form of progress.
Why do we progress? And specifically, within the context of architecture
and design, what are the consequences of being progressive? The
contemporary conditions of our age are neither clear nor universally shared,
yet we must contend with them. With each step forward there is something
to gain, and something to lose. For every vision of what the world should
be, there is another to contest it. For each work of architecture deemed
"complete," there are circumstances that render it unfinished, unprepared
and unsuitable for changing conditions.
The problems we die of may be of our own design, yet our designs may
be our only possibility of escape. Are the obstacles we seek to design our

way around the inevitable products of previous progress, or is there such a
thing as overturning them in a decisive act of permanent problem solving?
Somehow, we doubt it, but we'll leave that question to our contributors. Our
hope is that these essays will invite further questions, even if our
interrogation of progress fails to keep pace with our compulsion to act.
Notes
1. Niederhauser, Johannes, Statement by John Gray regarding his book
The Silence of Animals, "An Interview with John Gray: 'Human
Progress Is a Lie'", VICE Magazine, 2013,
https://www.vice.com/da/article/john-gray-interview-atheism/. ⏎
2. Kingsnorth, Paul, "Dark Ecology," in Confessions of a Recovering
Environmentalist Faber & Faber, London 2017, p. 141. ⏎
3. Chattopadhyay, Piya (host), TVO Today interview with Ronald Wright,
August 12, Ontario Public Television. ⏎
4. Pye, David, The Nature and Aesthetics of Design The Herbert Press,
London 1978, pp. 13-14. ⏎
5. Flusser, Vilém, The Shape of Things: A Philosophy of Design Reaktion
Books, London 1999, p. 58. ⏎
6. Flusser, Vilém, The Shape of Things: A Philosophy of Design Reaktion
Books, London 1999, p. 58. ⏎
7. Flusser, Vilém, The Shape of Things: A Philosophy of Design Reaktion
Books, London 1999, pp. 85-86. ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

1
EX, EST, UT
Wes Jones
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-2
Any discussion of progress will address three things—time, improvement,
and a goal toward which that improvement is directed. Each of these in turn
depends on a prior understanding of the role technology plays, because
technology provides the medium and framework for their measurement, and
progress is above all a concept of measurement. In fact, everything humans
have brought into the world—from ideas to space shuttles, Acheulean axes
to Shakespearian sonnets—is a gift of technology. And technology is the
gift humanity has brought to the world: it is everything besides humans and
nature. Progress is the name for technology's connection between them
through time.
This has not always been clear. Until the rate of technological change
increased to the point where it could become visible, progress was not a
thing. Technology was always there, but time was missing from the
equation so the improvements in technology could not be connected. Since
the Enlightenment, though, and the technological and scientific revolutions
it sponsored, progress has come to be expected, and that expectation has
come to define the world. Architecture's part in this has tracked that
technological development, but it has also been an agent for retrospectively
projecting the idea back into history, before a time when it had the meaning

it has today. The scale of architectural time allows the otherwise
disconnected moments of improvement to be linked up, even outside of
their own technological relevance. In this way the idea of progress is
broadened beyond simple improvement to a concept that could motivate,
and judge, a world.
Ideal: Substance [TIME]
Before there were clocks or calendars, or even recordings of the movement
of the heavens, architectural artifacts marked the passage of time. As one
generation's monuments became another's ruins these erstwhile bulwarks
against the passage of time instead became reminders of its inexorable flow.
Change was not a gauge for measuring what is thought of today as progress.
There was no value associated with it. Instead, the difference between the
city of Paestum and the Parthenon viewed today as progress was seen at the
time as simply different attempts to achieve an ideal presented by the gods.
Pitching the goal at a divine level meant its achievement was forever put
off. The marble temple better manifested the eidos that the wooden temple
more crudely approximated, purging the wood of its non-ideal, contingent
material effects, but it still paled before the ideal. Though tuned to ideality
and purged of idiosyncrasy, refined in proportions and finish, with
perceptual errors overcome by optical corrections and bright polychromy
obscuring brute materiality, the long series of temple forms from Paestum
to the Parthenon and beyond could never definitively solve the corner
triglyph problem or agree on the visually optimal ratio of column diameters
to height and spacing. This was not frustrating though because they were
not in fact seen as a series or understood within a framework of progress
that would have connected all the attempts and judged the differences as
improvement. Instead, each solution was offered on its own merits, without

comparison to the others; and it is only in retrospect that the timescale
offered by architecture could put them together as a series aiming at a
culminating form that is now understood to be the Parthenon.
These examples were produced within an ancient Greek worldview that
was more cyclical, and the passage of time was experienced as more like
what could be thought of as eternal recurrence or repeating cycles rather
than linear advancement. While advances in fields like philosophy
occurred, where knowledge and understanding grew through dialectic and
inquiry, these were seen more as advancements within particular crafts or
fields rather than part of a broader concept of progress, and time was not
credited as a factor in that movement. The past was just remembered or
forgotten, the present lived, and the future anticipated or feared. Works did
not happen quickly enough for anyone to see beyond the envelope of time
encompassing a single work or their own part in it. Depending on the scale
of the project or its importance, or the resources of its sponsor, its creation
might outlast generations of workers.
Conversely, the crafts producing those larger works were measured by
the skill of the workers. When that showed improvement, the judgment was
confined to the individual's efforts, isolating the example so that the
relationship between the compared works did not point beyond to larger
possible improvements that would be called progress today. In each case,
the difference between the work and the form guiding its production was a
closed loop: the ideal was the end, and improvement was limited to the
distance between the two in any individual project. Just as the effort was
circumscribed by the parameters of that ideal, so the judgment of the
difference between them was constrained to known factors of production.
Another work's shortcomings or success might be avoided or emulated, but
in either case its own steps were not seen as putting it on a trajectory

outside of that ideal. Even historians (such as they were) like Giorgio
Vasari, who would venture opinions on the relative merit of their subject's
work, did not couch these differences as tracing any larger path toward
some eventual, ultimate specimen.
The goal in this courting of ideality, as described by Plato, was harmony
with the world as given by the gods, evident in the logos naming the
essence of the thing, its form. In such a world nothing called to be an
improvement on another, even as each new thing strived to get closer to the
perfection of its form. The form itself, as granted by the gods, was never
questioned. Plato considered the form to be not just the model for judging
the quality of an instance, but also the means to recognizing and
understanding all examples of that type. Since the ideal was known by the
form it took, the primary basis for judgment of work in relation to ideality
was visual. It was through the "mind's eye" that the ideality in the
"intellectual realm" was apprehended, so it was through appearance that a
work connected with the ideal, and through form that its proximity was
measured. Functionality, logic and performance were united in form as
techné. While the performance of a thing might also be assessed by its
efficacy, or its rationality by its sensibleness, the final judgment of anything
related to a condition of ideality came down to form, and a preference based
on form would trump a more functional work with less ideal form. When
the wooden temple grew into its outsized marble apotheosis it lost most of
its sheltering functionality, but this was never questioned, and no attempts
were ever made to regain it.
Ideal: Substance [IMPROVEMENT]
The advent of the scientific and then industrial revolutions reversed this
preference for form-based judgment, introducing another standard that led

to the sense of progress understood today. Ideality fell from Olympus and
Heaven and settled into nature, where performance was what mattered.
Unlike the rarified milieu of the gods or Plato's intellectual realm, nature
was not beyond reach. The harmony with nature sought by the Greeks
meant something different to the new proto-scientists. As the measure of
this harmony switched from expression to efficiency and efficacy, human
effort began to know more success. In addition, the church introduced a
positive direction to time, giving history a beginning and an end, and
tasking humanity with an imperative to work towards salvation, so that
improvement and time were now wedded.
Work was no longer judged solely in comparison to a timeless,
unattainable perfection. Now the different attempts were compared to each
other as well as to the standard of nature, and the shape of a larger effort
began to emerge. Efforts judged as more successful provided suggestions
for others. A goal might be achieved by incremental improvement, each
attempt building on the previous. An idea of progress that might be
recognizable today began to emerge.
Nature's standards are tested over eons in an unforgiving environment,
through an evolutionary process that weeds out whatever performs less than
optimally. In nature survival is everything, so the relationship that united
such standards as techné is given a different valence. Where form had been
the standard for the Greeks, in nature it is function that rules. The focus on
efficacy broadened the field of relevant examples beyond simple visual
similarity. Form remained an important element but was understood as a
result rather than a cause. Eventually of course the completely
interdependent relationship between form and function in nature became
itself an ideal for later architects, but until then the reversal from their order

of priority under the Greek system led to loosening of the classical hold of
beauty and its policing of potentially disruptive variety.
The new criteria for judgment were as exacting as any intellectual ideal
the form had expressed, but were validated by actual stuff that could be
touched and analyzed and compared. The unbridgeable distance between
the intellectual ideal and the physical reality collapsed back into an
experienced reality and the direction of understanding reversed from
deduction to induction. The natural phenomena that provided the starting
point for ideas became the end point validating the result of those ideas.
Nature supplied both the inspiration and the test. Francis Bacon started this
process when he suggested turning to induction because he was no longer
interested in merely achieving harmony with a world given by God, where
the tradition of deductive reasoning remained trapped by its premises.
Bacon recognized nature as a treasure house of premises that must be
allowed to lead where they might. He saw knowledge as more than just a
source of harmony, but as a means to power—to give humanity the
dominion over nature promised by God.
This demanded more generalizable forms of measure, which could be
useful for comparison across previously isolated categories of inquiry and
creation when appearances could either be deceiving or even absent
entirely. This new standard became efficiency and was applied to endeavors
requiring the expenditure of energy. Since all endeavor requires energy,
whatever its form, function or goal might be, this meant that the
determination of the efficiency of the effort could be the basis for judgment
that cut across all categorical boundaries.
In nature the expenditure of energy is economized. When efficiency sets
the goal for any performance, the quality of expression and the measure of
functional efficacy diverge. Reflecting this, engineering and architecture

gradually became separate disciplines, evolving different judgment regimes.
One was devoted to quantifiable measurements of functional efficiency, and
the other to nonquantifiable considerations of expression. Both found their
models in nature, however.
Architecture was a canvas upon which the arts and technology forged a
new relationship apart from techné or the church's conflating them in the
mind of God. While the classical suite of forms continued to be the default
medium, the arrangement of those forms followed the emerging scientific
rationality into logical program-driven compositions and planning
organizations. Both science and art traditions supplied goals to this larger
project, with the planning being driven by a logic of efficiency while the
forms sought to demonstrate the geometric rationale underlying the
traditional ideals of symmetry and balance. New construction technologies
also contributed as more advanced geometric techniques informed
stereotomy and steel was gradually introduced behind the scenes, spurring
more complex and daring compositions. Progress was assessed by the
degree to which the classical forms were able to translate the discoveries of
the scientific worldview into the only vocabulary architecture knew. It was
not yet time to let go of those forms, which were still synonymous with
architecture in a way that building alone was not. That step awaited the
modern movement and its expression of the new materials and systems that
technology was discovering, and the culture's movement out of the
theocentric worldview that sponsored the classical forms.
Ideal: [THE GOAL]
Through continual advances in technology across every conceivable human
enterprise since then, and less continuous but still marked changes in
culture, progress has come to be expected as the natural state of things. The

once extraordinary effort put into "making progress" has become business
as usual. Only the most spectacular overnight advance or dramatic change
gets noticed today. The world has become obsessed with novelty and
innovation, but if it's not revolutionary it doesn't register.
This creates a dilemma for architecture's primary responsibility for
placing humans in their world, as previously exemplified in the Greek idea
of projection. Architecture is the greatest statement of human presence. To
the ancient Greeks, the orders personified human value. The buildings the
orders composed housed the gods that structured the world; the stoa
surrounding them were the upright citizenry, side by side in witness to the
democracy unfolding in the agora, all firmly establishing a supportive
environment while nature raged without. Even as that world changed from a
democratic pagan soap opera to an authoritarian Christian dramedy, the
conventions adapted and survived. Eventually they were unable to keep up,
though, and new forms were needed to support a new world. Modernism
extended architecture's duty to place humans in this rapidly changing new
world with updated conventions.
Those changes set in motion a new normal that didn't stop or even slow
down for the new forms. Indeed, the new forms seemed to increase the pace
of turnover, each time leading to a demand for yet newer forms. With each
iteration modernism struggled to keep up. Finally, when digital technologies
came online, the "will of the epoch" reached exit velocity and escaped
modernism's grasp entirely. Architecture and building were fully "liberated"
from the stability and presence they had provided since the ancient Greeks,
without any clear direction going forward or obvious world to support.
After 2000 years of abiding conventions and expressive congruence with
function, form was left to please itself or follow technology into an
uncharted future.

This future is uncharted because the new technologies are erasing the
limits of formal possibility. Between robotics, nanotechnology and
Artificial Intelligence (AI), technical progress is removing the last physical
and imaginative boundaries architecture depended on to describe
meaningful possibility. Those boundaries had served as a starting point for
new work and allowed it to understand improvement over time. While
architecture pretends to chafe against these constraints and in some quarters
celebrates its liberation from them, it needs them to prove its worth and
measure its progress. As the rate of change exceeds architecture's capacity
to react, though, the iterative idea of linear progress is lost, and liberation
starts to look more like abandonment. In response, architecture begins to
spew out work with no connection to earlier work and no hope of
improving upon those examples as a way towards something excellent and
worthy of the title.
The technical advances occurring now should be cause for optimism,
given today's general cultural bias towards novelty. And these current
trends are bringing the revolutionary sort of changes the culture craves. But
the culture that architecture is constitutionally bound to support is different
now from that which modernism celebrated when it was novel itself. While
today's culture is devoted to novelty, that devotion is tempered by an equal
helpless regard for irony that casts all earnestness and optimism as
suspicious. Consequently, modernism's own helplessly positive, hopeful
outlook, even when addressing the nastiest problems, has come to seem
dangerously naïve. World events and cultural shifts have not borne out its
sunny disposition, and it has been rendered defenseless by the postmodern
turn to critique and introduction of a cynical practice into architecture.
Given all this it becomes hard to understand how architecture could
sustain a progressive practice these days. When anything is possible but

criticality ensures that nothing will be good enough, and cynicism forestalls
any attempt at improvement anyway, how does architecture move forward?
When novelty is the highest value and solutions are avoided out of fear of
critique, what direction is forward? When difference rather than efficacy is
the rule for a technology that can do anything, what is better? Finally, when
all this is compounded by the current increasing rate of change that
condemns any example to obsolescence before it is even built, why even
bother?
In this case a general appreciation of progress as a linear process of
measurable improvement seems unlikely. When the possibility for
comparative judgment (to give difference its positive direction) is
eliminated, architecture becomes something more like conceptual art.
Conceptual art famously avoids any generalized standards for judgment that
would allow comparison between different works. In fact, most examples
are recognizable as such only by their label since they share no other
intrinsic feature, and no exhibitions of conceptual art show any discernable
pattern or improvement in quality from year to year. As the Guggenheim's
website puts it, "Conceptual art is based on the notion that the essence of art
is an idea, or concept, and may exist distinct from and in the absence of an
object as its representation." Likewise, architecture assumes for itself an
intellectual essence but has never previously relinquished the requirement
for that essence to be visible and particular. That has changed, and now
architecture must be labeled to be recognized as such, lest it become merely
synonymous with building.
Further, as conceptual art requires no skill by its practitioners, so in
architecture the range of skills traditionally required has narrowed to
professional concerns of economics and construction, while the disciplinary
concerns are lost in the cynical welter of critical possibility. Previously the

skills required by the discipline provided for ready comparison, from
draughtsmanship to design. This state lasted through the first introduction
of digital tools into architecture, when drafting gave way to building
information modeling (BIM) and sketching was done with a mouse rather
than a pencil, in perspectival three dimensions rather than orthographic two.
During the early digital period the relative mastery of the new applications
like Alias and Maya remained discernable in the results even though the
real work was done by the machine and to the untrained eye it all looked the
same. Oddly, this apparent similarity did not lead to comparative judgment
outside the question of the skill necessary for wielding these applications.
When everything started to look like it came from the same alien universe
there were no meaningful standards for comparison—because it was all so
alien. None of it had any connection to the lived experience of the viewers,
and the world it placed them in was unrecognizable.
As the technology improved the skill required to use it decreased, so that
even this basis for comparison eventually disappeared. Now its use is
widespread, and the variety of form requiring no skill to produce has
exploded. The early singular alien world it represented has been swallowed
within a universe of novelty and difference that continues to proliferate
untethered to any reality its authors or audience have known. Each example
seems determined to stake out its own new territory to distinguish itself
from its rivals and preclude any basis for comparison beyond its
chronological priority (which soon enough becomes a liability when the
next new thing arrives). Needless to say, it is hard to understand any kind of
progression among them. It is unclear where they are all heading, what they
are trying to achieve. The practitioners of this work explain that they aren't
going anywhere because they are already there. Comparison is pointless.

Progress aside, it becomes difficult to understand how they could all be
said to be architecture with no way to compare works. Beyond a common
association with building (which in the case of the early digital work was
itself a stretch), they all live in their own separate worlds. Like conceptual
art, sophisticated work today is dependent on an external frame for its
identity as architecture. Instead of a single architecture today, there are
multiple architectures—one by each practitioner. This is certainly a view
consistent with a culture of novelty, irony, and cynicism. But it still begs the
question of how any individual work could even identify itself as a singular
architecture or explain how it shares that label with other separate examples
when its abiding interest is differentiating itself from them. Perhaps the only
answer to this is the simple belief that there is such a thing as architecture,
recognizing some sense of lingering association among these various
examples even if it can't be pinned down. Architects still think they are
doing architecture even if they can't say what it is.
Ideal: Substance [TECHNOLOGY]
Admittedly this isn't much of an answer. Not only has technology sped past
the point where progress can be measured, but society has adopted an
attitude that suspects any attempt before it has even been made. And
architecture has compounded the problem by responding to society's
cynicism with its own defensive variety. This is the point in a Greek tragedy
where the deus ex machina would be introduced to resolve the dilemma.
The deus ex machina was a mechanical stage prop that allowed a god to
magically appear on stage, as if from Olympus or Hades, to resolve by fiat
the dilemma presented in the drama—a sort of dramaturgical sleight of
hand that avoided all the obstacles to resolution raised by the plot. Here the
plot has brought architecture to the threshold of non-existence, where it

hangs in the balance as an ongoing viable cultural practice, apart from
building construction. In the tragedies, the deus ex machina did not always
solve the problem positively. Sometimes it ratified a negative end, bringing
a god onto the stage to declare the tragic outcome to be their intention, often
as a punishment for hubris.
The deus ex machina embodies an idea that often occurs when facing
disaster or stuck in an unmanageable predicament. In these situations when
they are out of other ideas humans have appealed to a higher power for
help. At first this was probably a primitive form of hope, maybe expressed
through marks on the cave wall, but, as humans acquired the skills and
knowledge to advance their interests more positively, that higher power
often also took the form of a new, possibly just imagined, technology acting
on that hope. The ancient Greek's appeal to a god and his answer through
the machine dramatized a truth they would probably have been surprised to
know, that deus ex machina was in fact all along deus est machina. This
meant that, ultimately, humans had only their own resources to call on; even
when they interpolated a layer of religion between them and an answer, they
were working with a technology they had introduced and for which they
were ultimately responsible. This is a point which should be kept in mind as
architecture copes with its current crisis.
The current deus ut machina is Artificial Intelligence, coming down from
the cloud to fix everything. In fact, the current situation of architecture
looks a lot like something a Greek playwright might have come up with.
The protagonist, architecture, finds itself overwhelmed by the success of its
erstwhile support, which threatens to take over but has no idea what it's
doing or how to manage the consequences. The stage has been set to
provide the god with a clear landing zone: the barricades are down, chaos
reigns, and the clock is ticking. The canon has been questioned and the

discipline it embodied has lost its luster, the vocation has become merely
vocational, and the discourse has all but left the field to environmental
science and social justice issues. What the protagonist doesn't suspect yet is
that the god is not necessarily arriving to save the day. It might be here to
punish architecture for its hubris.
Artificial Intelligence will arrive on the stage by proliferating the exotica
believing itself to be architecture. Because of the way it will do that,
though, it may also lead to the dissipation of that belief and ultimately the
fading away of the label of architecture it preserves. As the increasing
volume of AI production grows and the work wanders into irredeemable
otherness, then the architectural belief that set each example on its way may
get left behind. If, on the other hand, the belief remains, then effort will be
required to justify the label of architecture after the fact. And the work this
will require may be what rescues architecture in the end.
In its current state, AI brings facility and speed to the game. What it
lacks, so far at least (probably not wise to bet against it long term), is
judgment. Architecture is ultimately, literally, judgment embodied, as the
record and culmination of the generative and curatorial judgments made
during the design process. Where judgment is lacking architecture suffers.
But unexpectedly, here is where AI might also enter the game on the side of
architecture, even though it does not exercise judgment. While AI is trained
on a synthetic compendium of data, with each datum itself reflecting the
judgment in its production and the set as a whole marked by the judgment
shown in assembling the training set, the AI goes on to blend these
examples without constraint. Then, after it has absorbed all this data and
recombined it in the infinite ways judgment would never consider, the
voluminous output must be winnowed down to useful alternates and then a
final choice made. Here the judgment required is highlighted. By moving

the exercise of judgment from the design process to the selection process,
that judgment is made more visible, and a more explicit explanation for the
choice will be necessary. In the first generation of this process, it will be
humans making the choices and offering well-understood reasons for them;
but by even the second generation the AI trained on the first generation's
decisions will be contributing novel, unforeseen choices that will force the
humans to look deeper into their default, heretofore intuitive decisions. If
the humans care about maintaining the belief in architecture and continue to
pay attention, recognizing their belief must be justified, they will discover
more about the architecture inspiring that belief than they would have
allowed themselves to consider without the help of AI.
Interestingly, this new "design" process recalls some earlier methods.
The generation and comparison of alternatives in design, for example, is
something that remains popular among the larger corporate firms which
have no native design signature or philosophy. This was the preferred late
modern design method taught in schools where the principals of those firms
were being trained. These schools were influenced by structuralism and
design methodology studies that wanted to turn architecture into a science,
or at least engineering. The generation of interns coming after, though, who
were asked to crank out these alternates, chafed because they were all
taught in contrast that design was a strictly linear process, moving from a
rich parti straight through to a finished design. Then came another
generation of architects who matriculated during the earliest days of the
digital revolution. These architects were raised in the critical tradition of
"versioning," a digitally enabled iterative design technique that believed no
single instance of any iterative design is preferable to any other since they
all contain the genetic code of the algorithm producing them. The corporate
method and the digital method together echo elements of the present

situation. The work of the digital kids was a primitive foreshadowing of
AI's current capabilities, legitimized by the economically expedient
selection practices of the corporate firms. Meanwhile the howl of untapped
architectural awareness, from the interns in the middle who preserved the
sense of architecture as a sacred vocation with mysterious effects, can still
be heard from desks below.
Either outcome—demise or salvation—will arrive much quicker than any
previous revolution in architecture, and the speed of this change will be a
major factor. AI is celebrated as much for the transparency of its interface
as the impressiveness of its effects. Unlike the elaborate design software
that transformed design from analog to digital, AI will not require users to
learn a complex array of menus, commands, tools, and protocols that take
years to master and change constantly. Instead, AI relies on natural
language for its user interface. This will facilitate the ease with which it can
be adopted and lead to much quicker widespread use. Further, this use will
happen much earlier in the design education process, where it will be taken
up by students who have not yet been enculturated in the discipline and/or
have not experienced any basis for judging results that will be let loose in
the world as "architecture" without being properly vetted.
In addition, AI's first forays into architecture will be affected by its own
incomplete development. Like any new tool, users will have to learn how to
work with it, whether that necessitates learning a whole language or not.
Initial efforts will be governed less by architecture's needs than AI's, and
this will push design in novel directions to conform to those requirements.
Such a move is not unprecedented: the introduction during the earliest
digital period of software from Hollywood intended to model dinosaurs led
to the spline-focused surface-modeled alien spaceships in architecture that
were as much an effect of what the computer demanded as what it allowed.

The so-called "advanced" architecture this produced in the schools followed
its advocates into the field when they graduated. There it informed what
even the large corporate firms came to think of as "innovative" and
"contemporary" without any corresponding architectural logic for judging
its worthiness.
Even if a sense of architecture survives this phase and AI enters the field
like any other tool, according to the interests of architecture rather than its
own idiosyncratic demands, it will still have a transformative effect. AI's
ease of adoption will finally bring about the end of whatever architectural
expertise remained after the earlier round of digital tools was introduced.
The ability to produce acceptable work will no longer be limited to those
who have put in the time and effort to gain even that mouse-drawn ability or
the judgment to wield it. Beginning at the earliest levels of the architectural
education, design will become a process streamlined into something more
like a prompt lottery, the acquisition of skills will be confined to the
keyboard, and the accumulation of knowledge will become a collection of
browser tabs.
With all design production operating at the same high level from the start,
architecture will become overwhelmed with possibilities out to and beyond
otherness, and there won't be important reasons to do anything. Imagination
and creativity will be outsourced, leaving humans with curation at best and
simple sensationalism at worst. The conceptual turn in art predicted this
moment: the ostensible artist has become an impresario and manager rather
than a creator. AI will be a further step in that trend, when the artist no
longer bothers to have an idea but just issues prompt or asks questions and
AI takes it from there. For architecture there will be no choice in the matter
since the pencils have been long abandoned and all the tools of the
profession have been sucked into the computer.

Conceptual art relies on wall texts to get its point across since the visible
media is merely the vehicle for the idea, with no intrinsic value. This is how
critical architecture started out, relying on accompanying texts to explain
the otherwise obscure moves since the imagery was solely concerned with
being cool but had no connection to any conventions that would signify that
coolness. Luckily for current and future rounds of AI-generated work, short
explanatory wall texts are a particular specialty. While a couple of
generations of alien work has weened current architects off feeling a need to
explain their work, this time around there is no strong architectural frame
like what the earlier critical architects relied on to backstop their work and
guarantee its identity as architecture. AI's users will have to go further to
signal their belief that architecture is what is being done.
Assuming architecture survives as at least a claim by its practitioners, it
will do so into a future when progress no longer exists to frame its
improvement. This doesn't necessarily mean that improvement won't
happen, just that it won't be able to add up to some larger idea of progress.
A sense of progress will of course continue to exist outside of architecture,
in the world made by technology that is judged objectively. We may yet get
flying cars and brain storage. But in architecture there will just be more
stuff. Some of it will be good, some of it will be bad, and most of it will just
be different. This could lead to a sense of disciplinary time that is not unlike
what existed before the industrial revolution. During those 2000 years, time
was experienced as just an endless now, with a past that can be remembered
and a future that is coming, but no sense of a present in relation to either. If
that is architecture's future, then while the rest of culture moves on with its
new toys, architecture may just cease to be a part of the story anymore.
OceanofPDF.com

2
I JUST WANT TO SAY ONE
WORD TO YOU, JUST ONE
WORD: PLASTICS
Nathan Matteson
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-3
Modernity has a problem with progress. Or, perhaps stated differently, the
problems that we face today from our unhealthy preoccupation with
progress are uniquely modern. This is not to suggest that progress itself is
uniquely modern, or even that it presents problems that have only begun to
appear during the modern era. But the problems hidden within our current
orientation towards progress are specific to this time, place, worldview and
no other. The historian Ronald Wright in his Short History of Progress
suggests that
most people in the Western cultural tradition still believe in the
Victorian ideal of progress, a belief succinctly defined by the historian
Sidney Pollard in 1968 as "the assumption that a pattern of change
exists in the history of mankind ... that it consists of irreversible
changes in one direction only and that this direction is towards
improvement."1

An Incomplete History
In the context of the Victorian era, one might be inclined to identify this
"one direction" as an essential drive for geographic expansion, or land
grabbing—the acquisition of empire. Whether the Raj, the Scramble for
Africa, or Westward Expansion, progress over the past two centuries has
often been in the service of the acquisition of land and the subsequent
extraction of its resources. This wasn't a new hobby of humanity either.
We've been merrily grabbing land to farm or pillage perhaps for as long as
we've been human. But the scale of the endeavor had changed. This version
of progress was built upon the bones of sturdier stuff. The economists of the
eighteenth century (Adam Smith, David Ricardo, Thomas Malthus)
provided the early theoretical foundations of what we call "growth" that has
had profound effects on the trajectories of perhaps every aspect of our lives
to this day. And progress "in the Western cultural tradition," then as now,
marches in step to the tune of economic growth and productivity. Defined
as a function of labor, capital, and technological change, economic growth
was bound to require progress to be made across all three. Within this
context, the notion of "irreversibility" that Pollard identifies is a powerful
one—if gains can never be reversed, then they are worth making at almost
any cost.
When the Western cultural tradition reached the post-war years of the
mid-twentieth century, economists had further abstracted these relationships
into objects such as the Cobb-Douglas production function and the Solow-
Swan growth model.2 Fast forward to the early twenty-first century and
these very basic functional forms have crept into integrated assessment
models (IAMs) of the interactions between the climate and the economy.
These models catch flak from myriad audiences: for example, appropriate
regulatory taxes to mitigate disaster are wildly overestimated, or economic

output continues to increase without abating even though the seas are on a
rolling boil. These hyper-rationalized, oversimplified, mathematically
concise and differentiable visions of production and economic growth can't
possibly capture the complexities of, for instance, real labor markets and the
damage caused by increasing volatility in the climate.3 Yet they further
entrench the irreversibility and unidirectionality that are fundamental to our
conceptualization of growth and progress.
This approach to knowledge, analytic and rational above all else, is
essential to our understanding of progress and how it functions within
modern culture. How, in fact, modern culture couldn't exist apart from it—
or it apart from modernity. Given modernity's obsession with the past, any
progress towards a better future must begin with an analysis of where we've
been:
Who can foretell the human course through time? But I think we can
answer [this question], in broad strokes ... If we see clearly what we
are and what we have done, we can recognize human behavior that
persists through many times and cultures. Knowing this can tell us
what we are likely to do, where we are likely to go from here.4
The belief that we can predict the future, and design our way to a better one,
if we understand our relationship to the past is critical to what makes
macroeconomics such a compelling myth about the modern world. And the
lens of rationality that we peer through, that limits and constrains our view
of the world, also impacts our capacity for designing new worlds—and
limits design's capacity to affect change.

A Poorly Conceived Parable
The brief snippet of conversation whence the title of this chapter comes,
uttered by Mr. McGuire in Mike Nichols's 1967 film The Graduate,
perfectly encapsulates the state of a world defined largely by economic
growth and industrialized design.
"Exactly how do you mean," you might be inclined to ask. This paean to
progress appeared on screen just a year before Pollard's pronouncement
about the nature of progress, nestled neatly in between the birth of the now
ubiquitous plastic bag and the polycarbonate helmets that took us to the
moon. Humankind's relationship with plastic was significantly different
then than it is now, nearly six decades later.
This line of dialogue, fictional though it is, represents an apex of
technological progress: the height of optimism about the possibilities
inherent in invention, the unfettered joy in discovering new utility, and the
near moral imperative to make such things available to the masses—even
while the artificiality of it all, the deafening thump of the drumbeat of
rational progress, begins to induce a soulless malaise. It's a classic
representation of the cycle of technological change, perhaps best known in
contemporary design culture in the formulation of philosopher Donald
Schön:
I would like to use "invention" to mean the process of bringing new
technology into being ... "Technology" will mean any tool or
technique, any product or process, any physical equipment or method
of doing or making, by which human capability is extended.
"Innovation" will mean the process of bringing invention into use, and
"diffusion" the spread of its use beyond the first instance.5

Born of a Victorian urge for empire,6 plastic was meant to extend our reach
through time and space.7 Telegraph cables covered in gutta-percha allowed
our invasive presence to be felt across oceans. Industrial cellulose allowed
us to create photographic records of untold numbers of innocuous activities
that still haunt us today. And NASA engineer Jack Kinzler's Lunar Flag
Assembly ensured that the United States could symbolically expand its
territory onto the moon using a nylon flag.
Plastic, as inescapable as it's become, littering everything both near and
far—from the insulation in the walls that surround us to the most distant
reach of seas we'll never explore, as likely to be found on top of Mount
Everest as at the bottom of the Mariana Trench, on earth as it is heaven (so
to speak), as both signifier and material—is the sine qua non of modern
progress. A great future in plastics, indeed.
Before Mr. McGuire had even uttered his one word, we'd recognized that
the diffusion of innovation in plastics had created a hell of a predicament.
By the time The Graduate hit the movie screens, researchers had found
plastic pellets chockablock inside birds in New Zealand.8 Another decade
gone by and the US had enacted the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act to regulate the disposal of solid and hazardous waste. By the late 1980s
the Basel Convention regulated the transportation of waste around the
globe. Now the legacy of plastic invention, innovation, and diffusion can
also claim credit for the Great Pacific Garbage Patch, drinking straw and
plastic bag bans, and ongoing existential dread over BPAs and PFAs.
But none of these nefarious knock-on effects was the intention of the men
and women who had spent their careers inventing new materials to aid in
the preservation of food, storage of memories, convenience of
communication, transmission of signals of all kinds, and in increasing the
efficiency of energy consumption. Certainly it wasn't the future of plastics

that Mr. McGuire had in mind. As far as plastics are concerned, we've
stumbled directly into what Ronald Wright would call a "progress trap":
Progress has an internal logic that can lead beyond reason to
catastrophe. A seductive trail of successes may end in a trap. [...]
Material progress creates problems that are—or seem to be—soluble
only by further progress. Again, the devil here is in the scale: a good
bang can be useful; a better bang can end the world.9
The future of plastics that Mr. McGuire dreamed of probably hewed closely
to Schön's "rational view of invention": "According to this rational model,
the process of invention is like other corporate activities—sales, accounting
or production, for example—and like other corporate functions, lends itself
to analysis, management and evaluation."10 Sounds delightful. And
productive! However, at some point the sales department decided that
designing plastic containers to preserve food so that we could satisfy the
nutritional needs of a growing population wasn't generating enough return
on capital, so we added micro-beads to our toothpaste, and now we're
clogging our infrastructure with fatbergs.11 How did the best of intentions
become a hellscape of off-gassing, gyres full of garbage, and microparticles
coursing through our bloodstreams?
Civilization is an experiment, a very recent way of life in the human
career, and it has a habit of walking into ... progress traps. A small village
on land beside a river is a good idea; but when the village grows into a city
and paves over the good land, it becomes a bad idea.12
Design is complicit in the creation of this hellscape with its problem-
mongering—defining each and every aspect of our over-rationalized
existence as a problem to be solved. Each problem solved begets a
modicum of progress and, lo, another problem to be solved and, behold, yet

another modicum of progress. This problem-mongering is facilitated by the
proliferation of new problem-"solving" techniques: predictive analytics,
machine learning, multivariate regression analysis all offer a degree of
leverage that can crack even the most "wicked" of problems.13 For
example, the UK Design Council's Double Diamond is less a design
process and more of an effective risk mitigation strategy that allows product
designers to rapidly build solutions for clients while protecting everyone's
bottom line.14 Let's say that another way: the Double Diamond is a
technological innovation that allows labor to ensure increased productivity
whereby users can spend more time rejuvenating the labor force while
simultaneously increasing capital through savings.
The growing number of wicked problems that we face is testament to our
inability to successfully, repeatedly apply rational tools against the
problems of the day to realize better futures. Rationality is running out of
road on its journey towards progress. After all, "the rational view of
invention and innovation is more nearly correct for more nearly marginal
inventions. The less significant the invention, the more the process tends to
be orderly and predictable."15
No Silver Bullets
If Wright is correct in supposing that progress traps are largely a matter of
inappropriate increases to scale, we're in for a world of hurt.16 As a point of
reference, the "fivefold surge" in population of the collapsed Mayan city of
Copan "in just a century and a half is exactly the same rate of increase as
the modern world's leap from about 1.2 billion in 1850 to 6 billion in
2000."17 How exactly are we to go about creating an environment in which
these 6 billion people (and counting) can live? Here are three things
practicing designers and educators should keep on their radar.

Degrowth is a growing intellectual movement that is highly critical of our
assumptions around the perceived necessity of economic growth. A startling
concept, and not without its detractors, degrowth suggests that economic
growth is not only a death sentence for the environment in which we live;
it's also by definition finite (at some point growth will end, likely
cataclysmically if nothing else is done), and it doesn't correlate to measures
such as happiness or satisfaction.18 Growth doesn't make us happy; it just
makes some of us wealthy. Central to this idea is the fact that the modern
economic machine that defines so much of our modern life is only about a
century old. Humankind existed long before modern economic growth, and
managed to build civilizations, create advanced technology, enjoy art and
culture, and so on. The world in which we live today depends heavily on a
growth-based economy—but it's possible to imagine a world that does not.
It may even be desirable. However, critics would point out that without
economic investment (investment made possible largely by economic
growth) into new energy technologies—decarbonization, carbon capture,
advanced renewable and nuclear power technologies—the future may be
grim indeed.
As in economics, so too in design: paradigms are expanding.
Participatory design isn't new, but is gaining momentum in many design
disciplines, including architecture and planning.19 Participatory design aims
to create more democratic design processes by increasing the number of
stakeholders involved in a design process, thus building deeper insights
through robust conversations in order to address greater breadths of issues
across longer timescales. Sounds too good to be true? Probably it is.
Participatory design is joined by a host of new(ish) design paradigms that
aim to subvert the hierarchical design practices of the past. Darlings of the
academy, can these paradigms that are by and large progeny of intellectuals

rather than industrialists—speculative design, design fiction, design futures,
planet-centric design—be expected to operate "at scale" in the built
environment? Perhaps not. But in a world where the average lifespan of
residential building in the US is a staggeringly short 61 years20—ten years
shorter than the average lifespan of a human, and a whopping 15 years
shorter than the average lifespan of a person living in the US21—can we
afford to continue with our same methods?
Dialogue is critical. As a design educator, the need for dialogue is
incredibly obvious. It's difficult to imagine design education without the
influence of Donald Schön's Reflective Practitioner, to imagine a classroom
without crits, a studio without conversation. But once the designer leaves
the academy, they enter an industry fueled by deadlines and bottom lines,
driven by productivity, preferring to demolish a 60-year-old house than to
create one to last for a century or more. The design industry is an
environment that doesn't, can't, won't always make time for dialogue and
conversation. But we must. The German philosopher Hans-Georg Gadamer
held that all understanding was mediated by language, and language always
requires an other—so that conversation is the necessary path to greater
understanding. Through conversation we expand our horizon of
understanding as it merges with the horizon of the other. The trick, and not
a trivial one, is to keep the conversation going.
It may be that not all of these are effective at redefining progress in a way
that sustains us into a long and indeterminate future. Perhaps none of them
are. But they have something in common, which is that they require us To.
Slow. Down.
Extremely complex societies can evolve in the absence of much
technological change, an idea that is highly counterintuitive to us because
our lives are so affected by rapid and powerful innovations.22

We are addicted to modernity. Most inventions are attempts by us
humans to project ourselves into matter beyond our bodies. This gives us a
sense of power, of permanence, the illusion that we will continue to exist.23
It's time for the cosmic pub lord to ring the bell and call time on a design
that arrogates itself to be the world's go-to solver of problems and improver
of lives; one that promotes the minimization of cognitive dissonance for the
sake of optimizing our own consumption and maximizing the profits of
others; whose primary purpose seems to be creating technology not for the
sake of making lives happier and more satisfying but for the sake of
creating growth itself. Whatever joy remains in our future depends upon a
slower, more humble design, a design that rejoices in the problems that it
finds (and creates) along the way, rather than wallowing in the malaise of
paving over them.
Notes
1. Ronald Wright, A Short History of Progress (House of Anansi Press,
2004), 3. ⏎
2. For those who know less about economics than I do (if you exist), the
Solow-Swan model looks something like this: Yt = AtLt
ɑKt
1-ɑ, and
suggests that increased economic output, Y, at some point in time, t, is
related to some combination of increased productivity, A, labor, L, or
capital, K. The exponents of this equation (and many like it) imply
"constant returns to scale," which is the phrase economists use to say
that if labor and capital change by the same amount, then their
contribution to output will change by that amount too. This is far from
obvious as one can easily imagine that doubling the population of the
globe while also doubling savings and seeing no change in levels of

productivity might in fact not double output—more capital might not
mitigate the issues of over population. The effects that these sorts of
assumptions have on our conceptualization of growth and progress can
be both insidious and profound. ⏎
3. The armchair philosopher (such as myself) might be inclined to
wonder whether they model an ideal economy, or whether they in fact
merely model the dynamics of empire-building and land-grabbing. ⏎
4. Ronald Wright, A Short History of Progress (House of Anansi Press,
2004), 2. ⏎
5. Donald Schön, Technology and Change: The New Heraclitus
(Delacorte Press, 1967), 1. ⏎
6. To bastardize Schön's invention-innovation-diffusion model:
fifteenth-century exploration provided the discoveries, economic
models devised in the eighteenth century provided the necessary
innovation upon that discovery, and Victorian expectations of progress
perpetrated their diffusion. ⏎
7. By "plastics" I mean primarily the invention of synthetic plastics. It's
well known that Mesoamericans were innovating with natural plastics,
to make balls of latex and such, as early as 1600 bce. ⏎
8. PC Harper and JA Fowler, "Plastic Pellets in New Zealand Storm-
killed Prions 1958-1977", Notornis 34 (1987): 65-70. ⏎
9. Ronald Wright, A Short History of Progress (House of Anansi Press,
2004), 7. ⏎
10. Donald Schön, Technology and Change: The New Heraclitus
(Delacorte Press, 1967), 4. ⏎
11. For those unfamiliar with the term (if such people exist), a "fatberg" is
a hard deposit of flushed non-biodegradable matter (e.g. wet wipes)
that clog our underground sewage systems. ⏎

12. Ronald Wright, A Short History of Progress (House of Anansi Press,
2004), 108. ⏎
13. And again we're confronted with the belief that a sufficient accounting
of past mistakes can probably point towards a better future. ⏎
14. Website: https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/our-resources/the-double-
diamond/. ⏎
15. Donald Schön, Technology and Change: The New Heraclitus
(Delacorte Press, 1967), 38. ⏎
16. Google's N-gram Viewer suggests that the ambiguous phrase 'at scale'
has grown in use seven-fold over a period of about 15 years. ⏎
17. Ronald Wright, A Short History of Progress (House of Anansi Press,
2004), 101. ⏎
18. Giorgos Kallis, Degrowth (Agenda Publishing, 2018), 88-97. ⏎
19. While participatory design (or co-design) is in the midst of a
resurgence, it was well known in Scandinavian planning projects as
early as the 1960s and 1970s. ⏎
20. CB Aktas, MM Bilec, "Impact of Lifetime on US Residential Building
LCA Results," International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 17
(2012): 337-349, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-011-0363-x. ⏎
21. Presumably these people were living in a residential building until it
was torn down around them. Did the Mayan cities collapse merely
because they decided to demolish them because they felt the need to
stimulate investment in the building sector? ⏎
22. David Webster, The Fall of the Ancient Maya: Solving the Mystery of
the Maya Collapse (Thames & Hudson, 2002), 77. As found in Ronald
Wright, A Short History of Progress (House of Anansi Press, 2004),
150n39. ⏎
23. Ailton Krenak, Life Is Not Useful (Polity, 2023), 6. ⏎

OceanofPDF.com

3
THE MEDIATION OF DOUBT
AND THE DOUBT OF
MEDIATIONS
Michael Young
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-4
Architects are asked to address a multitude of problems ranging from the
everyday pragmatic—program, structure, envelope—to the culturally
complex—environmental collapse, social injustice, technological
acceleration. An architect's primary agency in relation to these issues is
through the organization of space, form, and material—that is, through
design. This is why, when architecture is seen as falling short, as it often is,
the blame is typically laid on design. This fault can be expressed in several
ways, but one common complaint is a lack of realism.1 The design lacks an
understanding of the real ways people use space, the real behavior of
material over time, the real demands of construction, the real performance
of environmental forces, the real ways in which precedent is tied to history,
the real economies of a client's means, the real carbon footprint over a
building's lifespan, the real impacts on the community that architecture is
built within.
Considering the problems that architectural design faces, it is one thing to
translate a given programmatic function into a measurable area describable

through drawing; it is quite another to address through design how the
pressures of rising global temperatures due to energy consumption force
mass migrations that then face discrimination, exclusion, and exploitation in
the locales that drove the crisis in the first place. It should be obvious that
these problems are of different orders. Some form the basis of how the
profession values its services, what deliverables we charge for as architects.
Others, however, are so entangled with extra-architectural factors that an
architect can offer responses either so marginal or so speculative that the
impacts will only be understood years after the building has been built, that
is after it actually becomes "real." I'm going to do my best not to fall into
defending or denigrating architectural design if it fails at solving these
problems, but this does not let it off the hook, for it is affected by and in
turn affects cultural and environmental conditions. When architecture is
negligent in addressing realities, the shortcomings often begin with how
architects understand, translate, and imagine problems through
representation. Put simply, the problem of "problems" begins with how they
are mediated.
Throughout the following discussion I will attempt to use the term
"mediation" as opposed to "representation." There will be moments where
the terms unavoidably slip into an equivalence given how prevalent it is to
talk about architectural drawings and images as representations, but it is
important to articulate that mediation is both between things relationally
and a thing in-itself, as opposed to the traditional understanding of
representations as secondary images re-presenting a primary reality.
Furthermore, there is even the suggestion that mediation precedes what it
mediates. "Cultural techniques," as formulated by media historian Bernhard
Siegert, establish sensible distinctions between things, altering how the
world is sensed and made sense of. "In other words, the analysis of cultural

techniques observes and describes techniques involved in operationalizing
distinctions in the real. They generate the forms in the shape of perceptible
unities of distinctions."2
Mediation assumes distance; a separation between entities that cannot
relate directly and must be bridged in some manner.3 If the mediation is
transparent, if it disappears, there lies the belief that it has successfully
described reality as it appears to our unmediated senses. The effect of these
mediations is one meaning of "realism." If the medium is apparent in its
material, conceptual, and aesthetic qualities—the distance or difference of
its artifice laid bare—then the mediation is considered an "abstraction." As
we will soon find though, the distinctions between these are far from clear
as they twist and flip, overlap and intersect through various manifestations,
rarely sitting comfortably in opposition. It may even be posited that the
binary of real/abstract is itself generated by cultural techniques of
mediation.
Paradoxes of Mediation
Given the task of solving the problems of environments at a temporal and
spatial distance, architects are trained to substitute abstractions for the
appearances and behaviors of the world. The belief is that these translations
of phenomena into measurable information can be used to objectively
legitimize solutions, like the procedures found in the sciences via
mathematics. This process includes a plethora of cultural techniques, for
example: grids, metrics, diagrams, simulations, models, and language itself.
Much of what establishes architecture's disciplinary and professional
expertise lies in how abstractions mediate design concepts, which in turn
forms the basis for how architecture legitimizes and values its labor. Quite
often, these technologies of mediation are built on operations that compress,

project, or section three-dimensional reality into a two-dimensional plane,
processes which distance graphic representation from the three-dimensional
materiality of the world but are fundamental for architectural design. A plan
drawing is an abstract horizontal section cut, an image never to be visually
experienced in the built work, yet this diagrammatic notation allows
programmatic functions to be sequenced, areas calculated, structures laid
out, expenses budgeted, schedules organized, material quantities estimated,
building codes adhered to, property taxes valued, ownership determined,
etc. These medial processes are base techniques for architectural "problem
solving."
Abstract mediations, however, also have profound cultural implications,
as the dangers of oversimplifying complex problems tend to follow. The
metric translations of space into locatable, numerically described points is
part of what transforms the world into data, and from this, people, places,
and things are surveilled by governments, recorded by bureaucracies, and
exchanged as commodities.4 When these mediations become the basis of
knowledge and prediction, they in essence are substituted for material
reality, establishing value, power, and influence over the physical character
of the environment. These resulting aspects of abstract mediations should
not be surprising; they are direct extensions of their intended operations as
cultural techniques. Abstraction is not the cause; it is the outcome.
Abstractions visually appear different, distinct, and distant from what
they represent, but technologies of mediation can also strive for an ever-
increasing verisimilitude to reality. In these instances, the goal is to have the
artifice of technology disappear completely, to have it come closer and
closer to our biological senses. We call these images a form of realism, but
to point out the obvious, there is a high level of abstraction in their
operations. Imaging technologies associated with realism include the

histories of artificial perspective, the rendering of light and shadow in
chiaroscuro, the traditions of still life and trompe-l'œil painting, the
chemical/mechanical photographic processes, and the detection/storage of
photons in digital sensing/scanning. Consider stereoscopes and stereographs
for instance. Originating in the nineteenth century yet still very much with
us in the media of virtual and augmented reality, stereographs are double
images, mathematically constructed to match the binocular discrepancies of
two eyes to create illusions of depth. When one looks at these double
images through the technologies of stereoscopics, the images are no longer
out there in the world; the perceived distance is artificially altered so that
they feel as if they are in our eyes. Depth is no longer receding behind a
veil, a framed window, or a proscenium stage; it is in your sensorium. A
similar principle applies to stereophonics and the headphones we wear
when listening to music. Sound is no longer created by an identifiable
external source; it is instead sensed as if originating within our heads,
moving with us internally as a personal soundscape.
For many designers, verisimilitude is desired, for it brings the mediation
of design decisions closer to embodied experience. However, the
disappearance of the medium as a perceptible abstraction also triggers fears
that we will not be able to critically engage the image since we cannot
attend to its artifice, thus allowing it to persuade us to believing things to be
true even if they are false. Be they the seductions of commodity
commercialism, propaganda for political ideology, or the biased constructs
of artificial intelligence (AI), our image-saturated world holds grave
dangers in how it alters human relations and understanding. But, like
abstraction, realism is not the cause; it is the outcome. We have been
training our sensorium towards the realism of generative AI since at least
the emergence of the stereoscope, if not the techniques of artificial

perspective. The frequently expressed fears of a loss of criticality or a loss
of humanism through technological media are misplaced, for the human and
nonhuman are and always have been entwined and defined through cultural
techniques of mediation.5
There are other ways to consider the paradoxes of mediation that may
help the discussion. Considered within the aesthetic discourse of
modernism, abstraction has connotations to the formal, while the objects
and events of daily life are seen as aformal, as not-art.6 It follows that to
move art towards a more socially engaged practice is to reject the
formalism of abstraction and embrace informal material happenstance, the
action of events, the performance of ephemerality, the concrete directness of
the as-found, the shared spaces of the collective, the noise of the real. There
is a wide range of artists that could fall into this discussion. Art historian
Alex Potts references the multi-material assemblages of Robert
Rauschenberg, the art brut of Jean Dubuffet, the COBRA group and Asger
Jorn, and the happenings of Fluxus and Allan Kaprow. I would argue that
this approach can be extended to Fischli & Weiss, Rebecca Horn, Wade
Guyton, and Eva Hesse, among many others. These artists that practice an
aformal approach appropriate and recombine the stuff of the world.7 These
processes of decontextualization and recontextualization, extraction and
assemblage purposefully draw attention to the framing mechanisms of
media, often treating media itself as a found object in the world. Even
though traditional expressions of formalism may be rejected, all these
practices actively situate the concrete rawness of matter in tension with the
abstractions of mediations. Within the conversation of cultural techniques,
the use of language, number, procedure, diagram become tied to material
substrates of paper, pigment, chemicals, diodes, and the technologies of
press, print, photograph, scan. This art operates through conceptual and

aesthetic tensions between abstraction and realism, reveling in how the
concrete and symbolic alter each other.
To bring us back to architecture, there is a lesson to learn from these art
practices that focus attention on the chain of mediated relations.
Architectural mediation is more than simply one where the three-
dimensional is captured/flattened, designed, and then projected back out
into reality. It links concepts and objects, disciplines and discourses into
assemblages. What is important to trace is how these alter concepts,
sensations, and attention, what aesthetic qualities emerge, how and where
power is maintained or disrupted, and in which ways problems become
articulated. Can speculative fictions possess a critical edge and,
simultaneously, "instill radical curiosity" about the world to come?8 Can
they be understood as where "abstract realism" meets "real abstraction?"
Real Abstractions/Abstract Realisms
All technological mediations are abstractions in that they substitute their
artifice between a sensing agent and the sensed world. Yet, through these
processes, they also constitute much of what is referred to as realism. Given
this contradiction, let's open abstraction and realism to a general discussion
of how these terms are used in ethical, epistemological, and aesthetic
terrain.
Abstraction means different things depending on its context. Briefly,
when considered within philosophical ethics, it is commonly associated
with notions of transcendence as pure ideas that lie beyond the realm of the
senses. For Plato these are ideal truths such as "the beautiful" and "the
just." In epistemological modes of inquiry, abstraction is understood to
reveal deeper structures, ones we have knowledge of through mathematics.
It is these abstractions that are trusted as opposed to sensorial observations

of material, force, energy, etc. This use of abstraction undergirds the
management of social, political, and environmental relations through
computational data, affecting decisions of governance, economics,
distribution, communication, warfare, and entertainment, extending into the
most exemplary abstraction of the past two centuries: capital.9 It has been
posited that abstraction is the representation of the modern world,
specifically bureaucratic, legal, or technological practices.10
Within aesthetics, abstraction holds slightly different connotations that I
have written about in previous works.11 Often, abstractions disrupt expected
norms of recognition, creating a difficulty, an estrangement in
understanding what one is experiencing as opposed to a clear
interpretation.12 The term is used to describe art forms that do not resemble
the familiar appearance of the world to our unmediated senses. Although
these aspects do have associations with ethical and epistemological
abstractions as being "extra-sensorial," there is also the implication that,
through abstraction, art becomes self-reflexive on its processes,
emphasizing the medium itself.13 This approach has one of its most famous
formulations by the art critic Clement Greenberg, where "medium
specificity" defines art that self-consciously limits its efforts to only those
available in a medium.14 In his argument, painting, for instance, would
focus on flatness and the delimitation of flatness. For Greenberg, medium
specificity demands abstraction and is opposed to realism's desire to
represent visual resemblances as if the medium was completely transparent.
This version of abstraction, however, runs into some strange contradictions.
For example, take the interpretation that Boris Groys provides of Kazimir
Malevich's Black Square (1915). As an iconic early twentieth-century
abstract painting, Black Square is not representative of anything occurring
in the natural world. In this it opens the experience of the artwork to

multiple differing interpretations, one of which, however, is that the canvas
and paint are simply canvas and paint; that is, instead of looking through
the painting towards an external represented world, the viewer looks at the
reality of what literally is there as a material object in the world.15 In this,
the aesthetics of abstraction create the conditions of realism.
Realism in its many articulations is typically associated with what is
immanent to the material world. Realist philosophers believe that reality
exists independent of human perception or understanding, form and matter
are real in material objects. As an ethical stance, realism finds the basis for
behavior in the interactions of entities in the world, not in a transcendent
ideal. Knowledge, likewise, is best founded on close attention to the
processes of nature, regardless of human access or experience of them.
A major blow against realism was struck by Immanuel Kant in The
Critique of Pure Reason (1781), claiming that all knowledge of the external
world is structured by the subject perceiving it, thus it is impossible to ever
truly know anything "in itself." One outfall of this argument was that
"realism" began to be associated with naivety, and with this sentiment
lingered a distrust of representations that presented the world simply as it
appeared. This sentiment led to philosophical investigations into the
mechanisms of perception and belief, interrogating how conceptual
categories alter what is believed to be "real."
The parallel emergence of a psychology of perception in the nineteenth
century sought to understand the human sensorium by observing perceptual
responses through an assortment of technologies. The stereoscope,
zoetrope, phenakistoscope, praxinoscope, telestereoscope, and the
chronophotographic not only allowed the identification and study of blind
spots, persistence of vision, afterimages, and binocular fusion; they also
became the forerunners of the media that would later become cinema,

animation, and virtual reality.16 The technologically extended sensorium
brought to light questions of how important unconscious reactions are to the
sensing of reality. These experiments exposed a tension between the
"reality" effects of these mediations and the abstract artifice of the devices
creating and measuring the response.
Occurring concurrently, but different in expression and attitude, are
several nineteenth-century aesthetic movements. The writings of Gustave
Flaubert and the paintings of Gustave Courbet were considered Realism
because they produced a tension between what was depicted and how it was
represented.17 The content was the mundane background occurrences of
everyday life, articulated with specific details to the ordinary, but
simultaneously these works emphasized the artifice of the technique, the
mediums of language or painting. By directing attention to medial
structures such as syntax and pigment, Realism used a great deal of what
could be considered abstraction. Philosopher Jacques Rancière would go so
far as to claim that abstraction in modern art begins with Realism as an
"aesthetic redistribution of the sensible."18 It is important to point out that
the attribution of realism here is not that of naturalist representation.
Instead, both the psycho-perceptual machines and these nineteenth-century
aesthetic movements sought to increase the tension between sense and
sense-making, reality and its representation.
Do we find this tension in other manifestations of realism in art, Socialist
Realism for example? Socialist Realism provided the counterpoint to
abstraction in Clement Greenberg's 1939 essay "Avant-Garde and Kitsch."
Here, realism was positioned as consumable by the masses, used for
propagandist purposes, and adhering to notions of realism in its naïve
form.19 In Greenberg's argument, modern art was abstract and avant-garde
(American and Capitalist), while realist art was retrograde and populist

(Soviet and Communist). Even when the political/economic subtext and
bias of the time Greenberg was writing is discounted, this dichotomy still
lingers in many common definitions of the difference between abstraction
and realism in art. For example, it underlies many of the beliefs in
architecture that photorealistic rendering is populist propaganda while
abstract orthographic drawings are disciplinary and rigorous.
Boris Groys again offers a convincing counternarrative. For Groys,
Socialist Realism is positioned as the outcome of avant-gardist abstractions;
it is not naïve, but instead a sophisticated abstract code that conveys
meanings to those who could read them, and as such it influences political
behavior through aesthetics.20 Groys argues that this was exactly the
revolutionary drive of avant-garde abstract art, to shift political beliefs
through a fusion between art and life. A quick dismissive response would be
to now view both sides of Greenberg's argument—abstract avant-garde and
realist kitsch—as propaganda for different politics. Of greater interest,
however, is to try to understand how these art forms as cultural techniques
link aspects of abstraction and realism into different assemblages. It is the
cultural and political impacts of aesthetics that are at stake.
An aligned contemporary argument has recently been formulated as
"Neoliberal Realism," where in similar ways coded messages beneficial to
capitalist economies are conveyed through realism in photography from
advertising to fashion to fine art. Jörg Colberg builds from Groys, claiming
that many of the most celebrated art photographers today use realism to
support capitalist profits and agendas, with all of the oppressive, extractive
injustices that this entails.21 Although Colberg presents several compelling
points, specifically around the ways in which photographic realism operates
within the advertising industry, there is also something latent in his critique
that harkens back to realism as consumable propaganda for the masses à la

Greenberg. But, to dismiss photographic realism wholesale is to miss the
point of Groys' argument. For Groys, the political and social influence does
not stem from the simply representational: this art is not trying to represent
life; it is trying to transform it.22 The key questions lie in how the
mediations mobilize cultural techniques to stabilize or destabilize
assumptions regarding the appearances of reality. There may be nefarious
motives behind it, but it is to the mediated gaps and tensions that we must
critically attend. Two of the photographers that Colberg critiques—Gregory
Crewdson and Andreas Gursky—use realism in their photographs to open
exactly these possibilities of doubt through gaps and tensions between what
they image and how it is mediated.
There are two hybrid phrases to conclude this section: "real abstraction"
and "abstract realism." "Real abstraction" comes into cultural discourse
through the reflections of Alfred Sohn-Rethel on the economic theories of
Karl Marx.23 Labor is valued not for what is produced or used, but for how
it can be exchanged as capital. Physical action is abstracted from specific
material and temporal locations to become economic power, a key idea for
twentieth-century political and economic theory still debated today.24
Capital itself is the mediator, one which relates and allows exchanges
between things, people, time, and labor. In this guise, much of what counts
for spatial politics is solely that which can be counted. Real estate
investments, scanning and tracking surveillance, demographic
demarcations, climate fluctuations, economic exchanges, planetary shipping
regulation, target marketing, etc. are all monitored, recorded, and processed
as real abstractions. As discussed several times above, architectural
mediations are fully part of these techniques. The mathematical description
of a physical point in space through two interrelated projections describes
both the scanning of the environment by surveillance cameras, drones, and

satellites and the techniques of descriptive geometry as formulated by
Gaspard Monge. It matters little if the interpreter/compiler of this data is
human or machine; the outcome is real power consolidated through
abstractions.
"Abstract Realism" is a less established term loosely associated with art
movements as divergent as Surrealism and Conceptual Art describing
purposeful mixtures of abstraction and realism. Why I bring it up here is
that recent digital image making has added an interesting pressure on the
combination. The most prevalent "fear" of AI-generated images is that
humans cannot tell the difference between "real" photographs and
artificially generated images. This fear is not new, it has followed every
change in technologies of mediation; but what is important for this
discussion is that the most provocative work in AI art—Hito Steyerl, Trevor
Paglen, Mario Klingemann—not only reveals how data abstractions
determine much of reality as currently scanned, processed, stored, and
evaluated through digital sensing and computation; they also offer an
aesthetic of enstrangement.25
The images are often unstable, uncertain in their status. They are true and
false, human and machine made, nefarious and enchanting. Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) are constantly classifying images based on
the pattern recognition of pixel color adjacencies, algorithms both
deterministic and generic, operating through a series of yes/no
identifications.26 As the AI searches for solutions through massive training
sets of labeled images, what will win out is the average, the middle, the
generic. We can describe the results of these processes as a strange abstract
realism, but the machinic logic is looking for the probabilistically right
answer, the most normal, most generic answer. Possibly what is so uncanny
is not the distance from our expectations, but the proximity—the

recognition that these "alien" processes are built from the cultural history of
media, which have been training us to sense the world through techniques
and technologies constantly defining and redefining what is real.
Doubt
A standard critique is that realist aesthetics are in the service of those with
money and power, continuing a world that supports one group while
oppressing others. Rendered images in architecture are often produced to
convince investors of the "positive" change that a new project will bring.
They are used to assure the public that the new environment will be safer,
happier, more active and vibrant. Ultimately, they are sales pitches used
promotionally for wealth accumulation in real (royal) estate. As discussed
earlier, they are part of capitalist neoliberal propaganda. The reader may
protest that this is only one type of image making and should not be used to
dismiss speculative imagery wholesale, and I would absolutely agree with
this objection; but, if an image is used to propose a solution to problems
that operate at the levels of complexity we are discussing, it will most likely
do its best to convince the viewer that it is "good"—that is, it will try to
convince you that the world will be better if this architecture is built. And in
this, there is always something suspicious about how the theoretical meets
the image in relation to the scope of these problems. These propositions can
begin to feel like a gimmick, an empty promise that formulates positions
but has little relevance in the real world of lived space.27
Anarchist anthropologist David Graeber held that left-leaning politics
traditionally believes that reality can be redefined through the imagination,
while right-leaning politics condemns this approach as being disconnected
from reality.28 Theoretical posturing from the privileged distance of the
university can be seen as a kind of liberal balm to appease unease, while

conservative politics stresses solutions to real problems through pragmatics.
But, however important a pragmatic approach to problems every building
must address, if the practice of architecture is treated solely as a service
profession it will always be indebted to the individuals and institutions that
hire architects, a position which ultimately upholds corporate capitalism
and, given that these entities and ideologies are a primary source of the
crises that our environment currently faces, is very problematic.
What is necessary are acts of imagination that critically engage
contemporary crises through speculation about the near future. The genre of
art practice that goes under the moniker of Para-fictional offers examples.
This work purposefully blurs realities to situate a fictional proposition as
something fully believable in the world.29 Their critical edge comes from
moments of doubt addressed to political or social realities that the work
calls out for assumptions and biases. These practices include the work of
Walid Raad (The Atlas Group), The Yes Men, Michael Blum, Aliza Shvarts,
and others. In many ways this art revels in the uncomfortable sore spots that
architects experience in dealing with the too real image.
Para-fictional art posits interventions into reality through multiple
mediums: installations, film, video, news media, performance, scientific
notations, charts, maps, economic records, and of course the photographic
image. When Para-fictional art manipulates and combines this material it
introduces abstractions into the realism of the artifacts. However, this art
does not initially emphasize the difference—the seam—between what is
evidence and fabrication; instead it purposefully blurs the boundaries. The
tension such works create produces doubt at the conceptual level of what is
conveyed. Much Para-fictional work is difficult, requiring attention to be
focused and diffused throughout the media. The viewer initially accepts
what is being shown as real, but there is something off, and it is in which

ways, and to what, these doubts draw attention that constitutes the agenda
of the artwork.30
In a way these are lies proposed as truths, something that sounds simply
wrong, or at least suspicious, when situated within ethical standards. The
best Para-fictional art, however, uses the tension between truth and fiction
to open conversations about what it is that is driving a particular belief, and,
in the process, it asks the viewer to critically think about how they believe
in what they see. Furthermore, it does this not by dismissing aesthetics.
Instead, it places aesthetics right at the junction of fact and fiction to initiate
a more intense consideration about what is reality and how it is constructed
through media. Para-fictional Realism is adjacent to those discussed earlier
as Socialist and Neoliberal Realism, but with a difference. All three use
combinations of realism and abstraction for a political agenda; but, while
Socialist and Neoliberal Realism are medium specific to painterly and
photographic effects, respectively, Para-fictional work is medium
promiscuous. Its allusions are to the newsroom, the archeologist, the
anthropologist, the corporate board meeting, the archive, the courtroom. It
uses these and twists them against themselves to reveal systems of
mediation as things in-themselves, constructing both content and receiver
through cultural techniques chained together into assemblages. Para-
fictional work calls out the institutions and their operations that determine
the qualities of fact and fiction, which is a very different question than what
is ontologically true or false.
Traps of Enchantment
There are aspects of the discussion thus far that bring up the arguments of
Alfred Gell, specifically two essays: "Vogel's Net: Traps as Artworks and
Artworks as Traps" and "The Technology of Enchantment and the

Enchantment of Technology." Both essays ask a similar question: What is
the difference between art and not-art?—a question raised earlier in relation
to abstraction and realism in aesthetics, and fundamental to looking at
mediations as cultural techniques. Gell is an anthropologist, and he uses this
background to poke at the ways disciplines, institutions, ideologies, and
material objects construct differences between art and artifact, between
magic and technology, between science and religion. In both essays there is
a significant amount of attention paid to the mediations that disciplines use
to define and defend their borders. Gell is unconvinced by the explanations
that art theorists give for distinguishing art from the things of daily life, a
division that comes down to a series of assumptions about what is useful,
what is complete, what is intentional, what is symbolic, what is beautiful.
Instead, he articulates two intriguing ideas. First, that all artworks and
artifacts of cultural value exhibit "complex intentionalities" that include
their ability to operate functionally and meaningfully to those who know
how to attend to them. This demands a plurality of determinations that
change over time and between different cultures as opposed to any eternal
objective division. It means that the objects of everyday life can shift in and
out of consideration as "artworks" depending on both the institutions that
frame their reception and the interpretations that the objects discursively
generate. In Gell's words, "I would define as a candidate artwork any object
or performance that potentially rewards such scrutiny because it embodies
intentionalities that are complex, demanding of attention and perhaps
difficult to reconstruct fully."31
The second idea is developed in the "Technology of Enchantment" essay.
Here Gell debunks traditional western aesthetics as akin to religious belief
in magical powers. Art uses technology to conceal the labor that is put into
the art object, making it appear as if its qualities are the result of some

unknown, more powerful influence. When the observer of an art object
cannot imagine how it was produced it takes on a halo effect of value, it
becomes enchanted, and, as such, exerts outsized political influence.32
Technologies of enchantment, as described by Gell, can be considered as
cultural techniques. There are aspects here that should remind us of the
disappearance of apparent mediation described as "realism," but with an
important caveat. When technologies of enchantment become the
enchantment of technology, an uncertainty is raised regarding mediation.
The observer knows that the artwork is artificial given that the effects it
generates are in excess of the familiar, yet the enchantment remains. The
question here is never simply abstraction vs realism, for any mediation will
combine these in some manner; what is important is to identify how their
combinations destabilize and/or restabilize notions of the potentially real.
The problem of uncertainty is, therefore, not opposed to the notion of
knowledge and the pursuit of rational technical solutions to technical
problems, but is inherently a part of it. If we consider that the magical
attitude is a by-product of uncertainty, we are thereby committed also
to the proposition that the magical attitude is a by-product of the
rational pursuit of technical objectives using technical means.33
Enchantment is a trap, one we willingly fall into, especially when the
tensions of uncertainty are a key component. Gell's point is not to remove
the world of its magic, but to locate how enchantment happens in artworks
through cultural techniques, not the mystical manifestations of
transcendence or cult-like quasi-religious notions such as genius. To quote
Gell again, "Social relations are the relations which are generated by the
technical processes of which society at large can be said to consist."34 This
approach has implications for our discussion on the mediation of

architectural problems and the problems of architectural mediation.
Architecture can be considered a "cultural technique," both between things
and a thing itself. The questions to ask are not what it "solves" but what
assumptions it alters and adjusts, what relations it defines and redefines,
what power structures it conceals and reveals, what tensions it creates
between abstraction and realism, and, hopefully, whether it can offer an
enchantment of reality through the uncertainty of doubt. In the end, design
speculation is just this, a considered reflection of that which has yet to pass,
and a hope that it can be other than we assume it to be.
Notes
1. "Realism" is a loaded term with multiple definitions, several of which
will unfold across the length of the chapter, but for this first paragraph
it simply refers to "that which exists in the world.". ⏎
2. Bernhard Siegert, Cultural Techniques (New York: Fordham
University Press, 2015), p.14. ⏎
3. John Guillory, "Genesis of the Media Concept," Critical Inquiry, Vol.
36, No. 2 (2010): 321-323. ⏎
4. Bernhard Siegert, Cultural Techniques (New York: Fordham
University Press, 2015), p.102. ⏎
5. Bernhard Siegert, Cultural Techniques (New York: Fordham
University Press, 2015), pp.8-10. ⏎
6. Alex Potts, Experiments in Modern Realism (New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 2013), pp.9-11. ⏎
7. Alex Potts, Experiments in Modern Realism (New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 2013). ⏎

8. Matthew J. Wolf-Meyer, Theory for the World to Come (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2019) p.15. ⏎
9. Peter Halley, "Abstraction and Culture" (1991), in Selected Essays:
1981-2001, ed. Richard Milazzo (New York: Edgewise, 2013),
pp.163-164. ⏎
10. Pier Vittorio Aureli, Architecture and Abstraction (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2023), p.ix. ⏎
11. Michael Young, "The Aesthetics of Abstraction", in Aesthetics Equals
Politics, ed. Mark Gage (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2019). ⏎
12. Viktor Shklovsky, Theory of Prose, trans. Benjamin Sher (Champaign,
IL: Dalkey Archive Press, 1990), p.6. ⏎
13. Bernhard Siegert, Cultural Techniques (New York: Fordham
University Press, 2015). ⏎
14. Clement Greenberg, "Modernist Painting," in Clement Greenberg: The
Collected Essays and Criticism, Vol. 4, ed. John O'Brian (Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1993), pp.86-88. ⏎
15. Boris Groys, On the New (1992) (London: Verso, 2014), pp.104-105.
⏎
16. Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity
in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990),
pp.111-127. ⏎
17. Jacques Rancière, The Politics of Aesthetics: The Distribution of the
Sensible, trans. Gabriel Rockhill (London: Bloomsbury, 2004), pp.16-
19. ⏎
18. Jacques Rancière, The Politics of Aesthetics: The Distribution of the
Sensible, trans. Gabriel Rockhill (London: Bloomsbury, 2004), pp.16-
19. ⏎

19. Clement Greenberg, "Avant-Garde and Kitsch," in Art and Culture
(Boston, MA: Beacon, 1961), pp.15-17. ⏎
20. Boris Groys, The Total Art of Stalinism (1988) (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1992). ⏎
21. Jörg Colberg, Photography's Neoliberal Realism (London: MACK,
2020), pp.13-15. ⏎
22. Boris Groys, The Total Art of Stalinism (1988) (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1992), p.36. ⏎
23. Alfred Sohn-Rethel, Intellectual and Manual Labour (Atlantic
Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1978). ⏎
24. Alberto Toscano, "The Detour of Abstraction," Diacritics, Vol. 43, No.
2 (2015): 68-90. ⏎
25. One of the most influential aesthetic theories of the past century has its
origins in a neologism—ostranenie, put forward in the first chapter of
Viktor Shklovsky's O teorii prozy, written in 1917 and first published
in Moscow in 1925. There have been three English translations of this
term. The earliest appears in Lee T. Lemon and Marion J. Reis's
Russian Formalist Criticism: Four Essays (Lincoln, University of
Nebraska Press, 1965), where the chapter "Art as Technique"
translates the term as "defamiliarization." In the most recent
translation—Shushan Avagyan's On the Theory of Prose (Dallas, TX:
Dalkey Archive Press, 2021)—the relevant chapter, now titled "Art as
Device," renders it as "estrangement." The third attempt is by
Benjamin Sher in Theory of Prose: Viktor Shklovsky (Champaign, IL:
Dalkey Archive Press, 1990), where the term appears as
"enstrangement," which is also a neologism, enchantment plus
estrangement. ⏎

26. Anthony Downey (ed.), "The Return of the Uncanny: Artificial
Intelligence and Estranged Futures," from Trevor Paglen:
Adversarially Evolved Hallucinations (London: Sternberg Press,
2024), p.53. ⏎
27. Sianne Ngai, Theory of the Gimmick (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2020), p.1. ⏎
28. David Graeber, The Utopia of Rules (New York: Melville House,
2015), pp.86-88. ⏎
29. Carrie Lambert-Beatty, "Make Believe: Parafiction and Plausibility,"
October, Vol 129 (Summer 2009): 51-84. ⏎
30. Carrie Lambert-Beatty, "Make Believe: Parafiction and Plausibility,"
October, Vol 129 (Summer 2009): 51-84, p.78. ⏎
31. Alfred Gell, "Vogel's Net; Traps as Artworks and Artworks as Traps,"
Journal of Material Culture, Vol. 1, No. 1 (1996): 15-38, p.36. ⏎
32. Alfred Gell, "The Technology of Enchantment and the Enchantment of
Technology" (1992), in Anthropology, Art, and Aesthetics, ed. Jeremy
Coote and Anthony Shelton (Oxford: Clarendon, 1994), pp.40-41. ⏎
33. Alfred Gell, "The Technology of Enchantment and the Enchantment of
Technology" (1992), in Anthropology, Art, and Aesthetics, ed. Jeremy
Coote and Anthony Shelton (Oxford: Clarendon, 1994), p.57. ⏎
34. Alfred Gell, "The Technology of Enchantment and the Enchantment of
Technology" (1992), in Anthropology, Art, and Aesthetics, ed. Jeremy
Coote and Anthony Shelton (Oxford: Clarendon, 1994), p.57. ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

4
DRAWING ON HISTORY
Mustafa Faruki
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-5
Salvaging Chaos
It is September, and I write this essay awash in that month's familiar aural
landscape, where the sleeping bears of the architectural academy rise from
their summer hibernations serenaded by a chorus of faint scratching
interspersed with spasms of silence that can only warn of the first-year
drawing class, already in progress. And, while the sound of pencil tips
dragged and raised is—to the apoplexy of the orthodox—sometimes
suffused with the alternating clicks of mice and hotkeys, the pedagogical
agendas that drive these many and far-flung acoustic happenings emphasize
the importance of representation; a graphic vocabulary where, first line, and
then, not long after, plane and volume instigate communication by making
themselves available for plastic definition by a designer's ideational
projections in 2-D.
By thus establishing a compositional framework within which students
will rhetorize their studio experiments, "Drawing 101" makes explicit the
academy's emphasis on representation, the deployment of this, and the
resulting creation of meaning. Here, we see an underlying desire for
semiotic explication that references Gyorgy Kepes in Language of Vision
(1944), where the author outlines the conditions and possibilities of a

universal representation at the mid-century mark.1 It's unsurprising that
Kepes' 300-page argument for universal visual communication resonates
with architectural pedagogy. After all, the Hungarian-American artist,
theorist, and teacher advocated for a new visual literacy for artists and
designers in particular. An emphasis on universality therefore aligns with
the academy's commitment to establishing early benchmarks for visual
communication, while also occasionally sating a hunger for abstraction that
lingers in our techno-progressive Bauhaus roots.2
However, our agenda of communicating certain agreements to our
students with respect to representation frequently avoids addressing the
foundational progressive anxiety in Kepes' Language—specifically, his
depiction of a regressive "chaos," which he highlights in the very first
sentence of his introduction.3 While Kepes identifies near-historical
turmoil, alongside concomitant anxieties and optimism around 20th-century
technological progress as the instigators of his representational polemic in
Language,4 the architectural academy today—as far as drawing is
concerned—has largely dispensed with these and other too-dry, pedantic
foundations theorizing representation, opting instead to lazily graze on the
moist muffin-top of (formally driven) precepts blooming lusciously above.5
Here, we can imagine an appropriate intervention of the "readjustment of
conduct" encouraged by Meredith TenHoor's proposition with respect to
"tending to the apparatuses" of history. By blaming "technical disruption,
the shifting foundations of disciplinary institutions, and the unpredictable
tremors of capitalism"—all possible markers of progress—for the murder of
history/theory, we avoid these (alleged) murderers in our teaching. But what
if we embraced these markers: what if we learned about architectural
representation through a lens that reckons with history, rather than one that
ignores its occlusion? TenHoor's call for a more robust import into

architectural theory of questions not typically asked inside our discourse
has gained ground in the arena of studio culture, where educators such as
Ozayr Saloojee, Nathalie Frankowski and Cruz García, and Joyce Hwang
interrogate the fraught histories and politics of images, create new
pedagogies for anti-racist studio practices, and promote architectural
imaginaries that extend to include non-human species.
While these studios deploy representation to project their design
ambitions, the initiative to promote innovative, socio-historically positioned
agendas through interdisciplinary "import" appears not to extend into
syllabi addressing representation specifically. But this should not be the
case, especially if we take seriously the valuable admonition that it is not
only "crucial to articulate which modes of mediation will best aid an
architect in an accurate forecast of future projections, but also equally
important to dig deeper into the roles that representations play in the
construction of discourse."6 I wonder, then: What are the possible roles for
drawing—famously positioned by Sir Peter Cook as the motive force of
architecture—when it intentionally impacts historical pressures,
contemporary turmoils, and the advances, emergencies, and "chaos"
associated with progress?
Drawing and/as Reckoning
My curiosity around representation and its intersections with chaos, context,
and history surfaced several years ago when I began to reflect on drawing in
the historical-cultural moment. I believed it necessary to do so through the
prism of George Floyd's extrajudicial killing in May 2020, and the
aftermath of this, which saw broad and for the most part progressive
reactions to compound tragedies—about a tragic kind of violence that is
also tragically a commonplace. These reactions—ranging from curiosity to

condemnation to horror to rage—were augmented by the murder's viral and
videographic transmission in and through a quarantined and individualized
society, which peered out into itself desperately through Zoom-boxes. The
screen, now both communal life-line and proof of life, became also a tele-
communed death zone, where footage from CCTV and police body cameras
began to routinely disrupt corporatized, televised productions of remote
conviviality. Here, Americans found a landscape of basement-cum-studio
broadcasts, replete with appropriate levels of jocular informality and even
sporadic interruptions by children and pets, jarringly interspersed with
footage of the snuff variety.
In response to this constellation of events, the United States witnessed
agitations for a "reckoning" with respect to the protracted and insidious
permeation of white supremacy in every aspect of its society and its history.
This reckoning elicited some degree of allyship in various corners of the
architectural academy, where a culture of anti-racism-by-administration
pushed institutional strategies in response. While not designed to address
longstanding, inward-looking pedagogies directly, such moves risk giving
these cover beneath a much-needed change in demographic distributions.
That is to say: they circumvent TenHoor's call for "import" conceptually,
addressing this sideways (if at all), in quantitative (and perhaps even
cynical) terms while offering a carte blanche to educators by applying the
pressure of responsibility for "progressive" attitudes and actions on
bureaucratic rather than pedagogical levers. These reactions from the
academy to the unfolding events of the recent past have led me to the
question at hand: in our capacity as educators of drawing, are there
representational tactics that we can draw—tactics that foreground our own
impulses to address our volatile and sometimes chaotic present, one carried
forward from a history that is asking to be reckoned with?

This question led me to a note offered by Irene Cheng, Charles L. Davis
II, and Mabel O. Wilson to the editors of the Journal of the Society of
Architectural Historians when asked to reflect on the transformations
needed to write a critical history of race in modern architecture, specifically
with respect to the treatment of historical evidence:
[W]e must ... make visible the ways in which race explicitly affected
the legitimation and selection of the canonical buildings and spaces of
modernity. [And] we must develop, or adapt from other disciplines,
critical methods that will enable us to recognize the role of racial
thought in familiar objects and narratives, including—perhaps
especially—those in which race does not appear at first glance to be
operative.7
I wonder how educators of architectural drawing might push our teaching to
be inflected by this note? Can our commitments to progress vis-à-vis a
reckoning with the evidence of history dovetail with our pedagogical
imperatives? Could the space of our drawings—the "familiar objects"
which speak the narratives we choose to tell—offer an ulterior surface to
expose legitimations affected by race? And, are there critical methods
offered by practices adjacent to architectural drawing that illuminate
avenues for the recognition of racial thought?
Culture's Pull
While one could indict modernism's turn away from figuration towards
metaphysical association as the justification for architectural drawing's
incapacity to reckon with historical context in a coherent way,8 the
anecdotal ruminations of none other than Sir Peter himself offer a useful,
competing perspective:

I like to think of one's position—as a maker of drawings—being
pulled by the culture around you, or the culture that you've set up
around you, and that the drawing can sometimes push that culture. It's
involved in a dynamic condition.9
Cook suggests that manifestations of "culture's pull" act alongside craft and
creativity to ensorcell audiences into consuming our drawings as sublime.
This argument should emphasize the relevance in our drawings of the
gravitational "pull" of our present, in which conversations asking about
dismantling exclusionary practices based in our histories of racism have for
some time been underway.
Yet, this affirmation of culture's pull on drawing is not satisfying for the
question at hand: that is, what is this pull vis-à-vis the racial coming-to-
terms of our present moment? As a possible lens through which we might
explore this question, Cook's "culture pull" paradigm falls short, probably
because his understanding of culture hinges on some problematic
abstractions. The Tyrolean Walter Pichler's architectural visions, for
example, appear on paper by way of a negotiation with a "valley culture"
which Cook associates more broadly with valley regions of the former
Austro-Hungarian empire. On the other hand, drawings by, say, British
architect James Stirling exhibit a stoicism that is obviously the patina of
work emerging from the windswept and fog-filled realities that are Cook's
abstraction of the "culture" of the North Sea. This outline of culture—
emphasizing timeless qualities embedded in landscape and climate—
provides a striking aesthetic contextualization of both drawing and drawer
that is compelling and even beautiful. However, in doing so it administers a
sanitized, broad-strokes painting of culture in which both longstanding and
granular aspects of history—particularly the more inconvenient bits that

might disturb the picture-perfect alignment of the scene—are rendered
invisible.
Although it's tempting to dismiss Cook's understanding of our
representational culture and its "pull" as far too fast and loose, his
dehistoricized portrayal of this makes sense when we consider it in the
context of architectural representation and its imbrications with 20th-
century tendencies of a universalizing, metaphysically charged modernist
visual language so profusely posited by Kepes in 1944. Seen in this light,
the proclivity for abstraction makes sense, and for multiple reasons.10 After
all, it's through this modality that architects make sense of most things, to
ourselves and the worlds we encounter. This is partly because abstraction
allows us to gloss over aspects that we deem to be "given" or "typical"—
that is, not requiring representation. By liberating us from having to simply
represent, abstraction allows us to bypass imaging what we regard as
mundane (in our history or otherwise) and engage instead with the
challenge of communicating a sublime "higher truth"—architectural ideas
that require architectural drawings because any other language is
insufficient.
But if, as literary critic and philosopher Fredric Jameson famously tells
us, "History is what hurts, it is what refuses desire and sets inexorable limits
to individual as well as collective praxis," then the initial curb appeal of
Cook's abstracted cultural pull is somewhat degraded, inasmuch as it offers
both the drawing's author and audience a visually transmitted absolution.11
Cook's circumvention of history—inherited from an intoxication with
technical advancement-seen-as-progress that finds kindred spirits in
modernist antecedents from Moholy-Nagy to Kepes to Gropius at Dessau12
—renders the drawing reduced: innocent, eternal, and therefore unequal to
the formulation of a response to the near-historical "chaos" that, for Kepes,

was a call to arms, and whose response could be instantiated through
representation.
How then might we inflect our representation's cultural bend towards a
history that "refuses desire"? In her narration of the transatlantic slave
trade's unfinished past, Saidiya Hartman outlines an understanding of this
past that is instructive:
If slavery exists as an issue in the political life of black America, it is
not because of an antiquarian obsession with bygone days or the
burden of a too-long memory, but because black lives are still
imperiled and devalued by a racial calculus and a political arithmetic
that were entrenched centuries ago. This is the afterlife of slavery—
skewed life chances, limited access to health and education, premature
death, incarceration and impoverishment. I, too, am the afterlife of
slavery.13
While our cultural moment is pulling our drawing to look at our present, the
disruptive realities of this present are weighed down by a deeply embedded
history. It follows that a serious attention to our culture and the pulls of
progress must be projected through the lens of our history and its afterlives,
not outside of these; we must reflect on these as part of culture's pull. The
chaos of our moment is impelling us to reckon with—to draw—a literal,
contested, and damaging history in which racist violence has been (and is)
so given and so typical that to simply state that Black life matters amounts
to a politically charged and radical act. In this fraught scenario, our
drawings should reckon with the dysfunctional limitations of our history
and its presently occurring afterlives because these constitute our culture.
We should challenge our drawings to give these afterlives a voice, in the
same way that Pichler's imagery recalls stridently—for Sir Peter—the

culture of the valley. If Cook insists on the projection of our culture in
drawing, how might the evidence offered by our history and its afterlives
likewise be insisted into our representation? And could this insistence offer
us a drawn reckoning, or at least a step towards one?
Surviving Abstraction
In his description of Pichler's work, Cook elaborates on the former's
preoccupation with "the predicament of 'the body' ... whereby the soil, the
artifact, the bones ... and the threatened flesh become immersed in a series
of necrogenic speculations." Cook connects Pichler's joinery of
architectural elements and bones to—of course—"a very particular
'Austrian' mode of racing the pencil across the paper ... a form of attack"
that finds kindred spirits in the work of other regional practitioners.14
However, Cook's illumination of the surface of Pichler's drawing-cum-
ossuary points me not towards geography or local culture; instead, I see
them as in dialogue with the viscerally abstracted history that the artist
Torkwase Dyson names as a lodestone in her paintings, which represent
"the geographies, infrastructures and architectures that have structured and
delimited Black life." For Dyson, this visceral abstraction
prioritizes meaning that comes from living deeply in sensoria ...
whether it's the everyday act of loving the beauty we make,
transcendental meditation, or something more extreme, abstraction
helps me work the ins and outs of it all ... the art objects need to bring
new sites into ongoing freedoms but also create additional accounts
for our history.15
Dyson's meditations uncover obscured accounts of our history, which in
turn stimulate a "sensory threshold" whose appearance on the page is both

wraith and revelation—a ghost of history un-invisiblized in a "moment
when race fails to sustain its stability."16 The work challenges embedded
hierarchies by making them visible. In so doing, Dyson makes unstable a
world that is shadowed by the transatlantic trade in human bodies, a trade
whose promulgation and afterlife were/are "built to undermine" the very
senses she resuscitates through abstraction.17 This resonates deeply with
Marie-Louise Richards' discussion of the complementary workings of
"invisibility" and "hyper-visibility" in the constitution of race, where this
"is mediated by the work of abstraction, and establishes the double function
of race ... a poetics of race, a relation of form to matter." A tracing of this
"poetics of invisibility" reflects "a desire to put a discipline and practice of
architecture 'within reach',"18 inasmuch as it searches for racial tendencies
not in difference but in covert definitions embedded in whiteness,
abstractions that give shape to race. Dyson's space paintings present a
challenge to this race-making abstraction by offering a new language in
response, one in which "our ancestors' innovative means of self-liberation
... create new ideas that move us into freedom, now":
Part of my work is to know what came before me, what I inherit ...
My goal is to take on things that have already been practiced by Black
bodies and invent a form for them, so someone like you can come in
and take it further. This is abstraction as a form, a position, a politic,
which carries a deep intention to bring about revolutionary positions.
It's surviving abstraction, through abstraction.19
It is a useful way of working for architects in particular because it draws out
radical environmental histories in spatial terms: for example, in the
exhibition 1919: Black Water, Dyson generates a historical mapping of the
"hot" and "cold" zones whose specter and invisible demarcation in the

waters of Lake Michigan led to the drowning of Eugene Williams and the
subsequent Chicago "race riots" in the summer of 1919. Here, Dyson
deploys her praxis of "black compositional thought"—where an
understanding of "waterways, architecture and geographies" as formulated
by actions and limitations placed on black bodies instigates a search for
other abstractions pointing away from limitation, towards liberation that is
all about feeling.20
Dyson has emphasized the need for a revised black compositional
thought in drawing our responses to
increasing water levels, land being continuously exhausted, climate
migration, and global warming ... It's a matter of thinking about ...
representation as function, as tool, and as a new kind of visual thinking
that has to do with the agency of space and people taking that space to
liberate themselves.21
Dyson's leitmotif of "bird and lava"—where the latter evinces human-
sponsored forces of tremendous state change that compel the former to
develop vectors for securing survival—demonstrates this new kind of
thinking. The paintings "undrown" the histories of submerged towns
flooded by rapacious extraction and racialized displacement.22 By
abstracting the black body into a cipher through which threat and freedom
are in constant tension, the works find resonance in the architecture-and/as-
bone imaginings of Walter Pichler—whose "brooding" speculations
succeed in so enchanting Peter Cook.
Spatial Detectives
While Torkwase Dyson unveils historical progress through a visceral
abstraction, equally compelling precedents for an architectural drawing that

reckons with history exist in the realm of figuration. Stefano Boeri has
pointed to the "excess" of architectural surveys mapping urban
morphologies as a political act: conceptualized thus, representation
performs as evidence, propping up political agendas and rendering its
creators as "spatial detectives" who possess "the chance to be a political
actor. The extent of their political role depends on the reticence they have in
sharing ... the results of their work in the field."23 This outline has affinities
with the urban recordings of Chinese-American painter Martin Wong,
whose canvases poignantly reconstruct scenes of ruin and outposts of
resilience on New York City's Lower East Side. Wong, who described
himself as "the human instamatic," fits comfortably in this role of spatial
detective—but his scenographies of 1980s' New York are less a mimetic
exercise and more an analytical one, with each work communicating in
coded vocabularies that include astrology, graffiti, newspaper headlines,
and sign language. Rather than clarifying, Wong's detective work evinces
"an artist in an unending process of analyzing and interpreting his
environment, searching for points of access ... that are resonant with his
own experience."24 Like Dyson's paintings, Wong invents a critical-
historical (and personal) narrative code to intimate architecture's less told
lives, thus breaking open hermetically sealed accounts of history.
In her ink and watercolor drawings, Jennifer May Reiland carries forward
Wong's scenography, but reinvents Boeri's spatial detection as both
illuminating chronicle and historiography: Reiland's scenes not only
unearth and recount the layered histories of their protagonists; they also
challenge historical telling inasmuch as the drawings offer these copiously
spoken-for figures an alternative voice. Thus, the scenes of torture and
psychic ostracism endured by Justine in the Marquis de Sade's 1791 novel
capture, through Reiland's unfolding fiction told in vertical perspective, the

non-fictional violence-as-schadenfreude that historically marks as its site
the female body.25 Reiland's canvases draw from an unapologetically
adulterated well of past events, one compromised by grand historical
narratives as well as fragments of lore, superstition, and fablulation. In
Diana in Paris, the Princess of Wales appears in a frenetic urban scene,
where actual and fantastical events are chronicled in a cramped adjacency
that foreshadows the Princess's demise in an underground tunnel after
failing to outpace her suffocating paparazzi pursuers. She appears again in
Six Views of Diana and the Unicorn, After the Hunt, where her "private"
life as a public object of scrutiny and sexual anxiety is drafted through the
prism of The Hunt for the Unicorn, a series of early 16th-century Dutch
tapestries loaded with patriarchal allegory. And it is this suppressive
patriarchy that, in these and other accounts of Princess Diana's life, Reiland
impresses with architectural load—the stone and mortar of Kensington
Palace, Balmoral Castle, the Ritz hotel, and even an informal tent for the
press all share a heavy presence that record historical pressures impacting
the figural tale. The scenes position patriarchal violence inside the limits of
a familiar and usually canonical architecture that is—by implication—
always staid and rationalizing: Reiland's work reminds us how just the
image of the buildings we draw can act as both symbol and haunt.
Parallel Histories
In an essay about the imbrications of domesticity and spatial configuration,
Robin Evans implements an analysis of architectural interiority that
positions drawings of a building alongside art historical examples
representative of that building's temporal context.26 This analysis is useful
because it centers an ocular conflation of architectural drawing and figural
image, where Evans relies on the latter as a supplementary descriptor for

latent cultural tendencies unseen in architectural representation alone.
Thinking on this, I am both returned to the preceding overlay of Richards
and hyper-visible invisibility and also pulled towards Curry Hackett's
experiments with artificial intelligence (AI) in the imaging of spatial
moments drawn from an other, possible present. Hackett's verdant scenes
center the spaces of this alternative now in a context of black joy,
conservation, and eco-human coexistence—cultural loci arrived at via a
road untaken by history. As such, his prompts imply an absence in our own
reality that an "artificial" world urgently compels us to confront: Evans'
search for the revelation of cultural cues lost in drawing is here inverted, as
our own cognizance of the hand of AI pushes us to likewise record the
image's rhetorical anti-veracity. Hackett generates architectural imagery in
the tradition of challenges to space as seen in, for example, We Know How
To Order, a 2015 performance designed by Bryony Roberts and
choreographed by Asher Waldron of the South Shore Drill Team in
Chicago. The performance, which enters an all-black military drill and
dance team into the plaza of Mies van der Rohe's 1950 Federal Center,
instigates a sensorial undoing of the otherwise highly "rational" space it
occupies—a reaction likewise elicited by Hackett's AI experiments, which,
through the jarring representation of an alternative history, demand an
alternative telling of history outright.
For Hackett, his images
[make] a case for the so-called mundane, especially as it pertains to
Black ordinary life, to be a legitimate area of study in architecture and
design. To get us to think more expansively about the terms that we
use to describe and qualify and represent architecture.27

This ambitious agenda gets to the core of Cheng, Davis, and Wilson's call
for new methodologies that "make visible the ways in which race explicitly
affected the legitimation and selection of ... the spaces of modernity."
Hackett's relentless markings of quotidian black life not only emphasize the
absence of these from our typical view; his scenes also question the logics
that support this void, including a "canon" that sees black space as
fundamentally exterior to architectural discourse.
Of course, with new technologies come newer and more ominous pitfalls,
and artificial intelligence is no different, something unpacked by
Frankowski and García in a recent article, under the subheading
"Cowardice and AI." They warn of complacency, especially inside of an
architectural discourse whose sui generis combination of proclivities for
tech-rubbernecking and narcissism will naturally silo discussions around AI
inside of existing debates about "authorship" and conditions of labor that
seem to always be in "crisis"—while AI's contributions to weapons and
policing, for example, are left unconsidered.28 Hackett, whose reels must
take shape after sometimes hours of massaging prompts, is no doubt aware
of the challenges AI poses to the image making and the rapidly evolving
applications and workarounds that allow for images to be evermore
seductive. One hopes that, as his and similar experiments with these images
continue, a layer of criticality emerges with respect to the tools behind their
generation.
Bearing Witness
"What is the correct response to a ruinous history?"
Asked rhetorically and, in part, ironically, Zadie Smith's question is
prompted not only by the drawings of Kara Walker that detail meticulously
and without decorum the day-to-day violence of enslavement in the United

States, but also by the response to these drawings. Puzzled by criticisms of
prurience and sadism directed at Walker's imagery, in particular its
dramatization of an everyday that is simultaneously humdrum and
catastrophic in its relentless unfolding, Smith wonders at the alternative. As
architects charged with the education of drawing, we should wonder the
same. How exactly should we draw architecture in the context of our
history—and its relentless pressures on our present—correctly? Smith
concludes that Walker's task as a maker of drawings is, and should be:
To gather all the ruins of her own, and our, history—everything abject
and beautiful, oppressive and freeing, scatalogical and sexual, holy and
unholy—into one place, without attempting perfect alignment, without
needing to be seen to be good.29
Perhaps the first step towards reckoning with our history and its afterlives
in our drawings is to accept an outcome that is not just misaligned or
uncomfortable, but one in which we ourselves—and all of our notions
around "progress"—do not necessarily emerge as perfect, or even good. To
this end, we should resist "abstraction" when it appears as a cheap and
facile handmaid for petrified, prudish decorum; and, likewise, we should
challenge tendencies for "figuration" that liberate us from discomfort by
way of architectural representational politeness, where an abrogation of
history (that is either convenient or desirable) is conflated with architectural
convention in exchange for absolution. If our culture is pulling our
drawings to reckon with our history, then perhaps representation itself could
be liberated from decorum, so that our drawings can begin to import
questions and agendas that unearth the unspeakable, imperfect, everyday
devastation of our ruinous past. Rather than spiriting away discomfort to the
syllabus of a distant sociology seminar, and in its place underlining debates

around shape or attachments to historical styles, I am curious about how we
might—like Wong, Reiland, Hackett, or Dyson—create representations of
architecture that simultaneously represent intentional, meditated
ruminations about the world, its histories, anxieties and the fraught
relationships that are limited and pressured by these insistent realities. By
leaning into these realities and their discomfiting presence—by asking for a
bit more criticality of abstraction, and more veracity of figural
representations—perhaps we can not only add to the (necessary) work of
drawings "that conjure rich disciplinary and cultural references and
relationships as the background against which spatial inventions operate,"30
but also begin to rethink drawing as a tool, more globally: in particular, its
capacity for "racial thought" that Cheng, Davis, and Wilson emphasize as
latent in the conventional narratives of architectural learning.
One reason that Fascism has a chance is that in the name of progress
its opponents treat it as a historical norm. The current amazement that
the things that we are experiencing are "still" possible in the 20th
century is not philosophical. This amazement is not the beginning of
knowledge—unless it is the knowledge that the view of history which
gives rise to it is untenable.31
This rendering of progress is predicated on Walter Benjamin's "view of
history"—one that is fundamentally unable to bear serious scrutiny. As
constructors of architectural representations, can we bring the scrutiny
back? Rather than taking historical "progress" for granted in the same way
Cook modifies "culture" into geography, I wonder about the possible
outcomes when architectural drawing brings new explorations—new
scrutinies—of history's advance into view. How might drawings that

scrutinize history start to foster new reckonings of and challenges to what
historical progress might actually be?
To conclude this constellation of questions around history, progress, and
the possibilities and responsibilities of representation, I offer some
observations by Mahdi Sabbagh in his introduction to an anthology of
essays reflecting on the development of new solidarities with Palestine.
Sabbagh rests on the notion of "witnessing" as a productive tactic, not only
because of the importance of recounting in creating the "foundation for
undeniability" necessary for real solidarity to take root. Sabbagh notes that
witnessing "can also be applied as a spatial and visual lens to see buildings,
streets, cities, and how they operate and behave [allowing] the witness to
develop a spatial index of injustice."32 By dwelling on and thus bearing
witness to history, the practitioners mentioned in this chapter open up a
caesura that marks a rupture in the view of history's advance that Benjamin
finds so untenable. An exploration of these and similar drawing experiments
with history—where representation is expanded into a field of witnessing—
might be useful for students and educators of architectural drawing who
hope to import progressive visions that not just respond to culture's pull
around chaos and reckoning, but that also begin to scrutinize an
understanding of progress imaged uncritically as "historical norm."
Notes
1. Kepes' ocularcentric exhortations in 1944 are certainly a product of the
ashes of (World) war in which they were written and, as such, contain
a utopian optimism for universalism through (World) vision. But his
book is also a container for distinctively Western modernist notions of
technical progress, abstraction, and iconography—these distilled

through developments in the early Bauhaus which were further
developed later, primarily in Chicago. Gyorgy Kepes, The Language of
Vision (Chicago: Paul Theobold, 1969), 13-14. ⏎
2. In the opening paragraphs of his essay "Fear of the Mediated Image,"
Michael Young isolates a distinction layered over architectural image
making in which "images that abstract aspects from reality are given a
place of privilege, while images that 'look like' reality are devalued."
Young's essay elaborates on this "curious divide" through a discussion
of the photograph's tensioning of both the image and its veracity in a
regime where representation is a touchstone that captures both labor
and discursive practices. Michael Young, "Fear of the Mediated
Image," Cornell Journal of Architecture, 11, 2020, 148. ⏎
3. Michael J. Golec's expansion of Kepes' anxieties about this "chaos"
into the territory of psychology emphasizes his work as a call to
action: "Wherever Kepes mentions the need for 'readjustment' as a
response to his sense of an all-pervasive sense of disorder, chaos, and
what he identifies as a 'tragic formlessness,'" he is recalling
contemporaneous research conducted by the pragmatic psychologists
of the Chicago School. "Kepes' 'language of vision' can be considered
as a system of behavior from the point of view of pragmatics and a
theory of significant symbols. Change the symbol and you change, or
readjust, human conduct." Therefore, when Kepes expresses a desire
for "educating man to a contemporary standard," he is stating the
function of the symbol as a means to form a more coherent social
world. Michael J. Golec, "Chicago Schools: György Kepes and
Function in Design," Prometheus, 2, 2019,
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9sn5p5d6#main. Emphasis is mine. ⏎

4. Kepes' polemic around representation unsurprisingly echoes Walter
Gropius' lamentations, first published one year prior to Language, in
his chapter "The Architect in Our Industrial Society": "We sense that
our period has lost that unity, that the sickness of our present chaotic
environment, its often pitiful ugliness and disorder have resulted from
our failure to put basic human needs above economic and industrial
requirements." Walter Gropius, Scope of Total Architecture
(Springfield, OH: Collier, 1962), 71. Emphasis in the original. ⏎
5. This tendency is further specified with respect to architecture's "high
theory moment" in which "Jacques Derrida's ideas inspired many
architectural projects, but his work on the ethics of translation and
[later] on hospitality were largely ignored within practice. Later, Gilles
Deleuze's writing was used to justify blobby forms, but only theorists
seemed to care about his ideas about anti-fascist micropolitics."
Meredith TenHoor, "Import/Export," e-flux Architecture, November
2018, https://www.e-flux.com/architecture/history-
theory/225185/import-export/. ⏎
6. Michael Young, "Fear of the Mediated Image," Cornell Journal of
Architecture, 11, 2020. Emphasis is mine. ⏎
7. Irene Cheng, Charles L. Davis II, and Mabel O. Wilson, "Field Note:
Racial Evidence," Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians,
76 (4), 2017, 440-442. Emphasis is mine. An expanded discussion of
these "transformations" is opened up by these authors in Race and
Modern Architecture: A Critical History From the Enlightenment to
the Present (Pittsburg: University of Pittsburg Press, 2020), 10-12. ⏎
8. Martin Jay's synopsis of "form" vis-à-vis its perilous position as a
constituent of modernism is here worth noting: "form has been
synonymous with what Plato called ideas and Aristotle entelechies,

that is, with the most substantial essence of a thing rather than its mere
appearance. Here formal value has carried with it a metaphysical
charge, suggesting the revelation of a higher truth than is normally
evident in everyday perception. Force Fields: Between Intellectual
History and Cultural Critique (New York: Routledge, 1993), 62.
Emphasis is mine. ⏎
9. Peter Cook, "Real Is Only Halfway There," part of Is Drawing Dead?
Symposium at Yale University School of Architecture, February 10,
2012. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jpw3Lm8ZKOY. ⏎
10. Cook's through-line connecting an unfamiliar architectural artifact to
its own ascribed "foreign-ness" via its displacement from history into
the fields of timelessness and "nature" is not unlike the West's art
historical consumption of the culture of its non-Western other. Addison
Godel offers a persuasive description of this vis-à-vis British and
French intrusions into China, where increasingly aggressive colonialist
activity coincided with a degraded conception of Chinese people and
their culture. See "'Terrestrial Paradise' to 'Dreary Waste': Race and
the Chinese Garden in European Eyes," in Race and Modern
Architecture: A Critical History from the Enlightenment to the Present,
ed. Irene Cheng, Charles L. Davis, and Mabel O. Wilson (Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2020), 79-96. ⏎
11. Frederic Jameson. The Political Unconscious: Narrative as Socially
Symbolic Act (New York: Cornell University Press, 1981), 102. ⏎
12. A connection between these has been vigorously and famously made.
See Colin Rowe and Robert Slutzky. Transparency (Basel: Birkhauser
Architecture, 1997), 35-43. ⏎
13. Saidiya Hartman. Lose Your Mother: A Journey Along the Atlantic
Slave Route (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2008), 6.

Hartman's text is at once ontological and historiographical: she is
identifying a way of being that informs a way of seeing history—one
that is definitively ongoing. By foregrounding her emphasis on the
afterlife of history, I want both to ambiguate representations of the
"present" with those of the "past" specifically, and point to a
contradiction in notions "progress" more broadly speaking. ⏎
14. Peter Cook. Drawing: The Motive Force of Architecture (Chichester,
UK: Wiley, 2008), 154-155. Cook's volume begins with the
provocation that "the most memorable or definitive architecture comes
forth at a moment when a set of ideas exists as a form of attack" (10).
This drawing/attack metaphor abounds in The Motive Force, though
Cook's use of it twice—in consecutive sentences, no less—should
probably be taken as a sign of deep admiration, at the very least. ⏎
15. This and the preceding quote from "Torkwase Dyson," interview by
Leigh Raiford, OKTP (Paulson Fontaine Press), September 2023, 1.
https://paulsonfontainepress.com/wp-content/uploads/OKTP-Dyson-
2023-1.pdf. Emphasis added. ⏎
16. Marie-Louise Richards, "Hyper-visible Invisibility: Tracing the
Politics, Poetics and Affects of the Unseen," Field Journal, 7 (1),
2017, 46. ⏎
17. "A Brush With ... Torkwase Dyson," The Art Newspaper, hosted by
Ben Luke (October 3, 2023. https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=o5Mas-g5wHI. ⏎
18. Marie-Louise Richards, "Hyper-visible Invisibility: Tracing the
Politics, Poetics and Affects of the Unseen," Field Journal, 7 (1),
2017, 43. Emphasis is mine. ⏎
19. Tiffany Marie Tucker, "Liberation Through Abstraction," Cereal, 20,
2020. https://www.readcereal.com/articles/liberation-through-

abstraction#1478. ⏎
20. Irene Sunoco, ed., Black Water (New York: Arthur Ross Gallery,
Columbia University, 2019), exhibition catalog, p. 15. ⏎
21. Irene Sunoco, ed., Black Water (New York: Arthur Ross Gallery,
Columbia University, 2019), exhibition catalog, pp. 15-16, emphasis
added. ⏎
22. Torkwase Dyson, Here, 14 September-26 October 2024, Pace Gallery,
Los Angeles. ⏎
23. Stefano Boeri, "Architecture Is/As Politics," Perspecta, 45, 2012, 57.
⏎
24. Dan Cameron, "Brick by Brick: New York According to Martin
Wong," in Sweet Oblivion: The Urban Landscape of Martin Wong, ed.
Amy Scholder (New York: Rizzoli, 1998), 3-5. ⏎
25. Reiland's drawings call to mind Stan Allen's identification of Michele
Marchetti's San Rocco covers as the most cogent distillation of
Hedjuk's agendas behind the "degree-zero" axonometric, where these
are "committed to a disciplinary discourse, and in conversation with
history, but at the same time not over-burdened by that history. They
wear their erudition lightly and are open to a wide range of
references." Stan Allen, "John Hedjuk's Axonometric Degree Zero,"
Drawing Matter, September 2019. https://drawingmatter.org/john-
hejduks-axonometric-degree-zero/. ⏎
26. Robin Evans, "Figures, Doors, Passages," Architectural Design, 48
(4), 1978, 267-278. ⏎
27. Kriston Capps, "An Architect Uses AI to Explore Surreal Black
Worlds," Bloomberg UK (interview), September 23, 2023. ⏎
28. Nathalie Frankowski and Cruz Garcia, "Cowardice as Architectural
Theory," The Avery Review, 68, 2024. ⏎

29. Zadie Smith, "What Do We Want History to Do to Us?," New York
Review of Books, 67 (3), 27 February 2020. ⏎
30. Amy Kulper, "Drawing Forth Difference," Journal of Architectural
Education, 70 (1), March 2016. ⏎
31. Walter Benjamin, "Theses on the Philosophy of History," in
Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt (New York: Mariner, 2019), 200. ⏎
32. Mahdi Sabbagh, "Renewing Solidarity," in Their Borders, Our World:
Building New Solidarities with Palestine, ed. Mahdi Sabbagh
(Chicago: Haymarket, 2024), 10-11. ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

5
TYPES AND SPECIMENS
Plants, Digital Assets, and
Ecological World-Building in
Spatial Design
Sonia Sobrino Ralston
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-6
At some point during my education as a landscape architect, I was sitting in
the studio faced with an empty 3D file, faced with what felt like the
impossible task of modeling a plant. The exercise was part of a course that
develops basic skills to represent and understand ecology, invaluable to the
work of landscape architects who use vegetation as a primary tool to shape
space. The exercise, to that end, aimed to teach students how to use 3D
tools for vegetation as part of coursework and, later, as part of professional
practice. Faced with deadlines and a lack of knowledge of algorithmic
modeling tools, but with an interest in modeling spatial proposals in
computer-aided design (CAD) software in great detail, I decided to modify
and download a tree that came from SketchUp's 3D Warehouse that
resembled the species I was going to "plant" in my digital space.1
The tree I set out to replicate was a spicebush (Lindera benzoin). As I
worked on modifying the shrub, painstakingly using Rhinoceros 3D to edit

branches to better replicate its structure, a friend passed by my desk.2 As an
earnest suggestion to make my task easier, my colleague said: "Why don't
you just select a tree for your project that's available in the V-Ray library?"3
At the time, I didn't have an answer. I had known about the hundreds of
digital tree assets in the V-Ray software's built-in Chaos Server, a library of
assets ranging from furniture to people to plants, and I knew that I could use
them to quickly make high-resolution, realistic renders of a space. And yet,
something about orienting my design process around what was available in
the digital library felt off. If plants like trees, shrubs, and ground cover were
meant to represent my meaningful ecological considerations, selecting
plants based on this asset library made me wonder how this library was
formed in the first place: What algorithms did it use? How did it develop its
plant list? Who owns those plants anyway? And, what's more, if this small
project was a rehearsal for other academic and professional projects—often
dealing with brownfield sites or ideas of repair—what would it mean to
deploy vegetation to represent progressive politics and climate-driven
questions that came from a library I knew little about?
Designers across the spatial disciplines—from landscape, architecture,
and urban design—use vegetation in rendered images for many reasons,
sometimes from an apolitical standpoint driven by solely aesthetic choices,
or with specific ecological motivations. Fundamentally, the rendering in
general intends to transmit an "experiential" view of an architectural
proposal to its viewer as a type of visual communication tool.4 But much of
the computational and representational power afforded to vegetation is
mediated through software. Spatial designers, as it has been argued, might
be understood primarily as software users; the limitations of software have
the capacity to delimit what designers might represent, or even know, and
rendering plants is no exception.5 Scrolling through a library of trees in the

software's window, users can easily place a tree in the frame to add to the
composition to support their intended effect. Unconstrained by real-world
considerations like soil or climate, the digital space of the render allows for
impossible ecological realities to emerge in service of the image.6 This
phenomenon is not just limited to plants, but is also germane to the use of
digital assets of people, furniture, and more, placed to give the rendering
scale, atmosphere, and meaning, eliciting an experiential reading from the
viewer.7 When making a rendered image, it's not unusual for digital assets
to make it more appealing without becoming concerned about issues of
provenance in terms of the digital file, or its ecological relevance.
While this practice is common, it does demand questions about how
designers deploy assets, especially those that use greenery to signal
ecological and climatic politics. In recent years, landscape architecture and
architecture generally have become increasingly concerned with
environmental and ecological design in light of worsening climate change
and an interest in environmentally just futures.8 From buildings coated in
greenery with trees on terraces and vines coating window apertures, to
landscapes of former industrial sites matted in trees that promise to
remediate soil, plants in the digital rendering become shorthand for visions
of environmental progress, not just compositional tools. Through the use of
plant assets on the digitally modeled planes of landscapes and buildings,
designs that are represented with robust vegetation move beyond spatial
proposal to the realm of ecological world-building. By creating speculative
worlds where the designs aim not just to represent a proposal but to instead
shape a more ecologically and socially robust future, designers model and
design the world itself.9 And yet, building in the space of the software
world is still shaped by the limitations, or ideology, of the software itself.10
To that end, digital plant assets do not just adorn the edges of the frame, but

instead also adopt the aesthetic language of plants made available in a piece
of software to signal and digitally enact a lush speculative future.
As ecological assets in the digital space of the render become part of
progressive visions of new futures, environmentally considered or
otherwise, the lush libraries of digital plants are integral to making these
visions possible. And yet, the usage of digital assets in progressive
representations of green futures demands problematization. Drawing from
the history of botanical collections and the development of the digital plant
asset, I examine and critique what it means to click and place a rootless
plant in a digital model. If living plants are sessile, rooted, and intrinsically
connected to place, digital plants and the online libraries that host them and
the algorithmic soils that generate them are also worth understanding as
agents in digital space that shape our visions of reality, present and future.
Flat, Flattening Files
Digital plants are a product of concomitant research in ecology and
computer graphics. In a moment of burgeoning computational power in the
1960s, new research allowed for the digital structures that formed the basis
of computer graphics as well as ecosystems theory that have since
concretized into the robust digital software infrastructures that we have
today. The lineage of the theories of ecosystems and plant collections,
however, is one that is closely associated with the history of colonial
bioprospecting and western ontologies of information. The flat files of
physical herbaria of the era of colonial bioprospecting in many ways are
reflected in the flattened digital plant model. Optimized to be sifted through
at high speeds and held in the walled gardens of corporate ownership, the
digital plant model echoes not just the content of botanical knowledge
production but also the practices through which it emerged.

Since the 1970s, research in the allied fields of computer graphics and
ecology formed the first digital plant models. Against the context of a
bioinformatic revolution where phenomena from human biology to ecology
were translated for the first time into digital systems, cybernetic theories
and systemic organization of the environment were of growing
importance.11 In many ways, the advent of digital computing became an
opportunity to test ecosystems theories that were first proposed in the 18th
century as a way to systematize environmental processes into quantifiable
components.12 Abstracted mathematical models of plant physiology
emerged from this work to describe and simulate plant growth
systematically.
Operating first as purely mathematical abstraction, the work to codify
plant growth eventually led to the development of three-dimensional
models that form the basis of contemporary digital plant assets. Biologist
Aristid Lindenmayer developed the eponymous L-systems in the 1960s,
first to describe the growth of multicellular organisms through fractals that
was later applied to the growth and structure of plants. This work and other
projects by mathematicians and ecologists spurred advancements in
computer graphics to develop three-dimensional, procedural botanical
models.13 By the 1990s, multiple procedural modeling algorithms were
created to generate trees using new, dedicated software. For example, plants
derived from L-systems were transformed into 3D models, as demonstrated
by Lindenmayer and his student Przemysław Prusinkiewicz in The
Algorithmic Beauty of Plants (1990).14 In the span of thirty years, abstract
mathematical models had transformed into three-dimensional plant models
that allowed multidisciplinary artists and designers to begin to cultivate
plants on their screens.15

In the 1990s, several companies formed to create graphical user
interfaces (GUIs) for digital artists in the film and animation industries to
build their own tree assets.16 Formed in 1996 by Oliver Deussen and Bernd
Lintermann at the University of Karlsruhe, Germany, Xfrog was a notable
collaborative enterprise between computer scientists and plant specialists
that aimed to simplify the processes of replicating plant life realistically.
Driven by Deussen and Lintermann's research, the Xfrog system involved
paring down complex L-systems into simpler node and rule systems so that
users could model plants based on general categories, including "spiral
phyllotaxis, branching structures, foliage, global deformations, tropisms,
and growth."17 The aim of the interface was to give users a high degree of
control and specialization of their own plants while making sure that they
accurately simulated real plant characteristics. Understood in another light,
the Xfrog model simplified plant life itself; by developing a standardized
system for tree modeling, users replicated and optimized living beings
through algorithms. Easily modifiable for the experienced graphic artist,
plants could become agents within their digital worlds in the fields of
animation, film, and games.18
By 2001, the company's main output—and its most lasting effect on
spatial design—were its libraries of standard plant assets for ease of use.
Rather than model specialized plants as in film and games, early proponents
in architecture such as the offices of Zaha Hadid and Frank Gehry saw the
digital plant assets as an opportunity to shore up their renders with highly
realistic trees.19 Since then, large libraries of plants designed by Xfrog have
become widely used by practices, academics, and students alike, offering a
digital collection of thousands of high-fidelity plant models. Built into the
rendering engines that practitioners use regularly, an incomplete world of
plants unfolds in the space of a Chaos Server pop-up window when using

V-Ray.20 Alternatively, thousands of high-fidelity models, including 650
species in Xfrog World or 300 species in Xfrog Americas, can be purchased
directly from the company for $600.21 By clicking online offerings or
running rendering software, the flattened digital plant file becomes an asset
to adorn otherwise blank digital landscapes.
Even though the software allows users to place a bevy of plants at the
click of a button, there are notable limitations. Of the millions of plant
species in the world, the libraries offered by Xfrog or other similar digital
plant companies like SpeedTree or Quixel "preclude meaningful variation,"
as ecological game theorist Alenda Chang argues.22 Plants from a library
only offer a select number of plants that are limited in their reflections of
the tree's growth, life, and death. A digital asset might include one tree,
frozen in place, that is infinitely replicated across a project to save
computational power. The loss of variability of species, and of individuals
within a species, creates a homogenized digital landscape where the digital
plants become proxies for a community of plants whose complexity cannot
be captured within a single file. One digital tree becomes representative of
an entire species, littering the models of forward-looking spatial designs
with the same tree, copied over and over.
Aside from the limitations of visual variability and the inability to
represent multiple species in multiple states, limited geographic variability
echoes longer histories of colonial bioprospecting. At the time of writing
(early/mid-2025), Xfrog's purchasable packages of plants from across the
world have been created with roughly 200 to 300 plants in each continent.
Painstakingly modeled to provide geographic variability to their datasets,
it's worth understanding how this method of collecting and owning
botanical knowledge has a history that long predates digital computation.
Housed in the centralized server of the Xfrog database in Los Angeles, the

software company inadvertently replicates centuries of colonial patterns to
document, categorize, and recreate far-flung landscapes within a closed
collection. Approaching the landscape as a site from which to extract
botanical information that is ordered into binomial systems and monetized
as standard formats is highly aligned to the history of modern botany. While
having digital files that speak to geographic variability allows a designer to
use plants from a general region, it's worth understanding what it means to
flatten botanical information into a file as it relates to the history of western
scientific knowledge production.
The flattened files of the digital plant library are reminiscent of the
specimens contained in herbaria, where dried plants glued to sheets of paper
form much of the taxonomic organization in botany itself. Since the
colonial era, collectors have traveled across the world to pick samples of
living plants and carry them back to herbaria in imperial seats of power to
document and categorize all botanical life on the planet.23 By finding and
naming the plant, colonial bioprospecting became a means to promote
western scientific supremacy over botanical knowledge, and in many ways
served as the basis for information systems as we know them.24 Type
specimens, meant to be the material manifestation of a plant's binomial
name (Acer rubrum, for example), are one special herbarium sheet that
become the representative sample of its entire species, as well as the
physical reference for a plant's name.25 On a piece of paper measuring 11¾
inches wide by 16½ inches long (30 × 42 cm), a small sample from a tree
might represent the entirety of its species. Significant work in the field of
botany has aimed to monitor the continued impact of colonial
bioprospecting today as herbaria in seats of imperial power continue to own
the biological resources of colonized countries, and colonized countries
have fewer resources to maintain their own databases.26

Thinking back to the digital plant file, standardized and light like the
sheets of paper in herbaria, many of these questions are reopened in digital
space. While the digital plant is curated with a selection of the most popular
species for digital animation, the herbarium contains the plants that were
deemed worthy of collection in the field by botanists on colonial missions
as they attempted to consolidate the edges of empire (for example, Figure
5.1). Ultimately, these two types of files have similarities in how they affect
environmental knowledge through their ownership and production.

FIGURE 5.1 A dried specimen of Melilotus officinalis,
commonly known as yellow sweetclover, on a herbarium
specimen sheet. Collected by Bruno Klinger, June 6, 1970 in

Colorado. Specimen held in the Kathryn Kalmbach Herbarium.
Public Domain. ⏎
While not all spatial designers are concerned about the historical
underpinnings of botanical information, it does affect what types of
landscapes might be composed using digital libraries. Using a plant may
offer representational opportunities, with a clean selection and placement of
objects into the neat Cartesian space of a digital model. But the ease of its
placement in digital space may encourage a lack of reflection on plants and
their embedded histories. In using digital libraries, plants may be placed in
and accidentally geographically transplanted to sites that are ecologically or
culturally inappropriate. Plants grow in particular soils, light conditions,
regional conditions, and climates, to name a few real-world limitations that
are easily shirked in digital space. But aside from that, designers might
consider how the image of a plant might become a form of representational
colonialism. Digitally harvesting a plant outside its context, soil, and
climate is also enacting a type of flattening and loss that occurs in the
digital clearinghouses of botanical knowledge.
The parallels between digital plants and herbaria reveal the core
assumptions of the representations we use in world-building projects, and
shape the futures we build with them. If our approach to ecosystems is one
that aims to systematically represent nature in bounded entities controlled
within digital and physical libraries, the approaches of designers building
worlds with them are necessarily constricted.27 By fixing and optimizing
entire worlds into flattened files—whether fixed in their physical
dimensions or in their byte size—designers risk approaching ecological
knowledge via the limited structures afforded through the infrastructures of
colonial knowledge production, starting with the herbarium through to the
digital library. As media artist Tega Brain argues, working within the realm

of the system means losing the possibility to engage with the messy,
unpredictable assemblages on the ground.28 If the future is the currency
with which architects and landscape architects design, we ought to use our
present tools with caution to shape futures that avoid replicating harmful
environmental relationships stemming from infrastructures built in the
past.29
Uprooted and Unruly Digital Ecologies
With the click, drag, and release of a mouse, a tree can be planted anywhere
in a digital file. As architectural and landscape designers develop their
designs, digital vegetation is an intoxicating possibility to signify progress,
environmentally considerate thinking, and preferable futures. While it may
be desirable to imagine the future with lush ground cover made possible
through lightweight digital models, it might be worth making our
approaches to digital design space less frictionless. The world, after all, is
full of friction: from designing in polluted sites, social and ecological
injustice, or the devastation wreaked by industrial activity at large, the
reality we design in is one full of instabilities and unruly spaces. If we can
design proposals that "stay with the trouble," as Donna Haraway suggests,
staying with the troubles posed by using digital assets developed by an
algorithm could pose generative lines of questioning.30 Foregrounding
designs that focus on landscape remediation using digital modeling
software, we might start with the roots of the digital plant as a space to
represent our unruly realities.
In the last decade, the American Society of Landscape Architects (ASLA)
has focused on developing accessible information to describe and represent
complex concepts such as sustainability, remediation, and other landscape
processes. In 2017, ASLA enlisted a digital technologist to create an

animated video titled Building a Park Out of Waste that proposed reusing
demolition waste from a building to support the development of a park on
its footprint.31 As the site is slowly disassembled, the hypothetical park is
built up. The video begins with the deconstruction of the site, breaking the
building down into piles of concrete, wood, and glass. The ground is then
excavated, and new soil is brought in to support plant beds with mulch
processed from demolition material. In the final seconds of the video, trees
suddenly appear, resulting in a finalized design proposal that seemingly
effortlessly transforms a disused building into a vibrant public space. The
animation overall does well to describe the complicated nature of the
project by pulling out specific materials and detailing the long process of
demolition and park construction. And yet, the trees suddenly appearing at
once somehow cheapens the material friction that the video attempted to
convey. The mature trees, placed without evidence of their roots on top of a
flat plane on a digital model, seem placeless and timeless.
In digital space, it makes very little sense to model tree roots: a computer
would expend a lot of processing power to render something you wouldn't
see. For this reason, most plant libraries omit the roots, showing the plants
from the ground up. The moment the plants meet the soil on the surface of
the plane is where the viewer is meant to imagine the roots, soil, and
microbial interactions that occur below, and account for the roots' depth and
spread in their designs. Without the spatial information of roots, however,
trees can be placed anywhere. In architectural proposals, this might
manifest as an impossibly placed tree on a skyscraper without adequate soil
depth for the tree to grow. But even in the ASLA animation, landscape
interactions are invisible to the camera, and healthy, mature trees emerge
from the site instantaneously. In reality, the growth of saplings into mature
trees would be slow and, meanwhile, the social life of a newly opened park

would occur. Friction between human activity, soil made of demolition
waste, and the social and economic life of the site would shape the trees'
growth. Trees might not survive, or might grow into strange forms
contorted by pollution, wind, or human activity. That is to say, a designed
space is not a straightforward teleology of construction to completion. The
ways that roots grow and change the soil underfoot would help develop a
fruitful friction to demonstrate that plants are temporally and materially
bound.
I am not, however, advocating for developing models so detailed that
they are simulations or digital twins. As the natural continuation of the
ecosystem models of the 1970s from which algorithms for plant growth first
emerged, the possibility of capturing the computational complexity of the
natural growth of plants is enticing to test and imagine future scenarios. Our
contemporary computational capacity to run large-scale, complex
simulations (think of the supercomputers at Oak Ridge National Laboratory
in Tennessee focused on modeling ecosystem interactions) makes it
possible to model not just complex geometry as visual representations, but
to mirror the real landscape interactions that occur in them through
algorithms.32 In fact, entire ecologies surrounding the computational
infrastructure of supercomputers and data centers have formed, where water
and electricity from the earth are converted into energy to power them.
Powering models to understand climate risk as they over-consume
resources and inflict harm becomes an absurd paradox.33 Digital twins aim
to accurately represent the future drawing from immense computational and
infrastructural power from a systems-based perspective of reality.
As designers, image-making tools are not scientific models; they are
representations. And for the most part, our representations—like in the
ASLA video building a park out of demolition waste—are shown as a

straight line from beginning to completion, where plants help to adorn
future visions for sites once they are completely formed. Despite being the
theoretical and conceptual basis for a project full of greenery and
ecologically robust futures, the digital plant is often a final pasted addition,
a rootless tree missing half of its organismal body. Including rooted plants
and not just lightweight digital models is not an argument for realism;
rather, it is an argument to take seriously the ecological actors of plants as
living, changing, and rooted beings in speculative proposals.
Methodologically prioritizing the digital plant might make our digital
models more unruly, but this unruliness is a productive way of thinking
through the ecological messes and their broader impacts on social, political,
and economic proposals we make for spaces to begin with.
Worlding, Cultivating
Returning to my experience in the studio mentioned at the beginning of this
chapter, I sat looking at the digital plant library wondering if I should
change my plant selection. In the end, I decided to stay with my time-
intensive, overly detailed geometry with an excessive number of polygons
that made my computer lag. With graphics card fans spinning noisily, I—
unknowingly at first—began to develop a methodology for thinking with
digital plants in a way that I had longed to think with their physical
counterparts. As landscape architecture education aims to convey, plants are
living actors that designers learn from; understanding their parameters and
protocols is not a simple set of inputs and outputs, but rather a way to
become immersed in a broader network of beings that live, grow, and die in
response to environmental conditions. Plants are not just objects adorning
the edges of the screen to support a visual future-making argument, but

rather are the result of careful study and observations drawing from a
broader practice of situated engagement.
Since my first experiments modeling the branches, trunk, and leaves of a
plant, I have developed my own non-algorithmic ways of cultivating my
own digital plants into not just a library but rather more a garden. Inspired
by Anna Tsing's "arts of noticing," the slow process through which I spend
time with and model plants has become a method to think of ecological
actors as spatial and agential.34 While this isn't necessarily a fast way to
work, for me, it's a way to world and cultivate ecological relationships on
the screen that require slow, meaningful engagement with plants as opposed
to defaulting to the quick clicks made possible in corporate digital libraries.
In 2023, I created a project titled "Uncommon Knowledge: Practices and
Protocols for Environmental Information" that proposed methods of
representing the environment as its own form of information system, where
I developed my own digital plant models to support this argument (Figure
5.2).35 Sited on the banks of the Columbia River in The Dalles, Oregon, the
speculative proposal focused on the site of Google's first hyperscale data
center, where the company had recently come to pay for improvements to
the small town's water infrastructure in service of their operations.36 In
December of 2022, after years of advocacy by groups in response to gag
orders on local newspapers, Google revealed that it consumed 29 percent of
the town's total water yearly to cool its servers—a figure that is set to rise
with the new computational stresses stemming from the artificial
intelligence (AI) boom.37 The data center complex is built on three sites in
The Dalles, including a former Martin Marietta Superfund site. The site, at
the intersection of massive hydroelectric power and transportation
corridors, has grown from long path dependencies stemming from the
dispossession of Indigenous lands during westward colonial expansion in

the 19th century.38 In response to this palimpsest of infrastructural and
colonial violence that occurred under the guise of technological innovation
and progress, I proposed and represented a project that focused on latency,
natural intelligence, and the slow technology of plants (Figures 5.3 and 5.4).
FIGURE 5.2 A top-down view of digital plants modeled by the
author as a series of wildflowers in a point cloud. From
"Uncommon Knowledge: Practices and Protocols of
Environmental Information," 2023. Image courtesy the author. ⏎

FIGURE 5.3 One of the speculative sites designed as part of the
project using "hand" modelled plants. Pictured in the foreground
is a wildflower endemic to the Columbia River Gorge that is
intersecting with the point cloud from a LIDAR dataset. From
"Uncommon Knowledge: Practices and Protocols of
Environmental Information," 2023. Image courtesy the author. ⏎
FIGURE 5.4 A speculative design for the site near the superfund,
where yellow sweetclover was proposed to be planted alongside
other species as a type of sensor or indication of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) pollution. The flower is shown
bending and wilting here in an attempt to model its death. From
"Uncommon Knowledge: Practices and Protocols of
Environmental Information," 2023. Image courtesy the author. ⏎
The speculative proposal was future-oriented, but in many ways aimed to
undo representations of progress using plants that defaulted to digital
proxies. In the four speculative counter sites I designed near the data center,
I selected plants endemic to the Columbia River Gorge and modeled them
in detail using Blender—an open-source, mesh-based animation software.
Referencing multiple image sources from local botanists, I wanted to make
digital plant assets that were the equivalent resolution of the architectural

elements that I designed, including boardwalks, bird blinds, and
buildings.39 Drawing from the work of artist Macoto Murayama, who
develops construction detail-style drawings of plants, I represented plants
and their chemical relationships as a kind of information infrastructure,
playing on the botanical type sheet of the herbarium.40 Modeling from root
to stem to stamen, I aimed to show the complexity of herbaceous and
woody plants to demonstrate how a user might be able to read the landscape
itself as a type of information repository.
The resulting work included 3D animations of the trees in situ with the
other elements of the proposal, including data servers crossed with bird
blinds and laboratory spaces as gardens. Drawing from media artists Christa
Sommerer and Laurent Mignonneau's 1992 "Interactive Plant Growing"
installation that was an aesthetic inspiration for the original Xfrog plants, I
painted the plants as a single color in order to reference the history of
digital plant graphics.41 Intermixed with high-resolution LIDAR data of the
site, my hand-modeled plants collided with the scale of the Columbia River
basin represented as a point cloud. Seeing underground to the roots of the
plants, I alluded to the complex landscape processes happening below the
surface. With this mix of digital plants, platforms, pavilions, and territorial
data, I deliberately clashed resolutions between plants and the
infrastructural territories of information.
Each plant that was featured in the project aimed to take on an
informational meaning or purpose about the site and drew on scientific
research on plant physiology. In this way, I hoped to frame the plants as
sensors or real-time indicators of slow environmental harm, rather than just
entourage in my images. On a site just outside the boundaries of the
Superfund where soils were polluted from years of aluminum smelting, I
modeled a yellow sweetclover (Melilotus officinalis).42 Yellow sweetclover

grows in the disturbed soils of the Columbia River Gorge, and is a
hyperaccumulator of PAHs, chemical by-products of aluminum smelting.43
As I spent time carefully modeling its root structure and flowers, I began to
feel my understanding of the plant shift. The plant's hypertolerance of
pollution is often understood through the lens of environmental remediation
—where plants are enlisted to fix the unfixable problems of industrial
pollution in the soil; but for me, its demise became more important to
represent.44 I started to experiment with ways to model its death: after all, if
the plant was tolerant of pollution, its death due to an overabundance of it
was the important signal to make evident. In the end, the animation I
developed was not necessarily one that accurately simulated plant life or
death with a high degree of realism (Figure 5.5). It was, however, a way to
engage with the timescales and entanglements of industrial and colonial
harm, and its latent effects on plants.

FIGURE 5.5 A specimen of yellow sweetclover presented in the
style of a construction drawing, complete with annotations that

describe its status as a hyperaccumulator species. From
"Uncommon Knowledge: Practices and Protocols of
Environmental Information," 2023. Image courtesy the author. ⏎
Since the development of this project, I have represented all kinds of
plants through bespoke Blender models as the central representational
medium of my practice. I have modeled endemic and rare plant species
from New York to Timișoara (Romania) as well as weeds and dying trees
from Oregon to Boston (Figure 5.6). These plants may not necessarily be
found widely or are not plants that are deemed charismatic, and therefore
are not typically seen as useful or profitable in digital plant libraries. I have
developed ways of modeling plants slowly and painstakingly, without the
use of algorithmic software, to try to become closer to and understand my
subject matter more deeply. As a means to co-labor with the plants, not just
in the physical space of a garden but also in a digital format by paying close
attention to their scale and structure, I have developed a respect for the
plants' complexity of natural intelligence and the labor they do to support
critical, life-giving infrastructure in the environment.45 In some ways, using
my hand-modeled method goes against the technological progress made in
modeling plants, but sometimes it is worth pushing back against the ease
and availability of using a digital library that you can buy access to.
Developing plant models has helped me question what roles plants play in
envisioning the future not just as a progressive, green teleology, but rather
something messy, complicated, and rooted in my own reality. Instead, the
act of modeling has allowed me to think through what kinds of progress and
futures are possible if we show the frictions that lie in plants' broader
environmental, social, and political contexts.

FIGURE 5.6 A field of wildflowers and weeds, with species
endemic to the Columbia River Gorge. From "Uncommon
Knowledge: Practices and Protocols of Environmental
Information," 2023. Image courtesy the author. ⏎
Coda: Types and Specimens
In another studio space, but this time as an educator, I worked with
landscape architecture students at the University of Pennsylvania who were
interested in digital animation to represent their speculative design
proposals. Many of them were eager to delve into the world of plants, or at
least to represent them in ways that complemented their visual
representations of environmentally just futures, climate-oriented designs,
and progressive visions of worlds that could be. Sitting in a windowless
basement room, graphics cards fans whirring in unison, I introduced
students to the slow methodology of modeling plants that I had used myself
in years prior in a class called "Types and Specimens: Representing the
Situated Information of Plants through Digital Media."46 While students
opened Blender for the first time, they were also reading about the history
of botanical information systems and the ways that plant libraries arrived in
their Rhinoceros window. Together, over the course of a semester, students

started to model their own digital ecologies, from weeds in Philadelphia, to
flowers blooming in their grandparents' gardens, to aquatic plants swaying
in the currents of Florida's Lake Okeechobee. As we moved through the
semester, students began to learn animation skills, but also learned to think
intimately at the scale of the plants and the situated information embedded
within them as the starting point for visions of progress otherwise.
As a designer and now as an educator, representing the messiness and
complexity of the environment on screens is not a pursuit of realism, but
rather a way to encourage ecological world-building that takes seriously the
different actors we enlist in our narratives. If the history of digital plants is
inflected with a systems worldview growing from long-standing
relationships to botanical information systems like herbaria and ecosystems
modeling, our visions of designed futures are necessarily framed by and
embedded in these systems. We don't have to do away with digital plant
libraries altogether—in fact, these libraries are quite useful to save time and
resources—but we do have to carefully consider how these models shape
our capacity to imagine what's real and what's possible. By developing a
close relationship to plants by touching them in the field and touching them
with our cursors on our screen, we might help create progressive visions for
the future that aren't just a blanket of green digital proxies, but rather
oriented towards the protocols and assemblages of the environment itself.
Notes
1. SketchUp's 3D Warehouse, software owned by the Trimble Company,
is an open online library where users can upload and download 3D
models free of charge, and is widely used as an asset library.
https://3dwarehouse.sketchup.com. ⏎

2. Rhinoceros is a CAD modeling software package commonly used in
academic and professional settings across the spatial disciplines,
including architecture, landscape architecture, urban design, and more.
Developed by Robert McNeil & Associates, it allows users to design in
3D with relative ease. https://www.rhino3d.com/. ⏎
3. V-Ray is a rendering software package that is a plugin or extension
that can be used in 3D modeling. Created by the Chaos Group, it is
predominantly known for its highly accurate light calculations as well
as its extensive asset libraries that are included in the package.
https://www.chaos.com/vray. ⏎
4. In the sense of Lucia Allais' argument on the role of architectural
rendering as delivering "experiential" qualities of realism. Lucia
Allais, "Rendering: On Experience and Experiments," in Design
Technics: Archaeologies of Architectural Practice, ed. Zeynep Çelik
Alexander and John May (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2020), 1-44, 4. ⏎
5. See Aaron Tobey, "Architect as User: Software and the Value of
Work," Journal of Architectural Education 73, no. 2 (July 3, 2019):
146-55. ⏎
6. Alenda Y. Chang, "Games as Environmental Texts," Qui Parle 19, no.
2 (December 1, 2011): 57-84, 59. ⏎
7. For an extended discussion of the politics of representations of virtual
humans in architectural drawing, see Galo Canizares, "Technologies of
the Virtual Other: Bodies, Users, and Avatars," Journal of
Architectural Education 74, no. 2 (July 2, 2020): 237-49. ⏎
8. Since the emergence of the term "anthropocene" and its widespread
adoption in the humanities, architecture has followed suit, taking the
so-called "ecological turn" in full force. While there is no way to point

to an exact moment in which this took full force, we might glean some
understanding of when it became important to architecture schools
from James Graham et al., eds., Climates: Architecture and the
Planetary Imaginary (New York: Columbia Books on Architecture and
the City/Lars Müller, 2016). ⏎
9. Arturo Escobar, Designs for the Pluriverse: Radical Interdependence,
Autonomy, and the Making of Worlds (Durham, NC; Duke University
Press, 2018), 4. ⏎
10. Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, "On Software, or the Persistence of Visual
Knowledge," Grey Room 18 (2005): 26-51, 43. ⏎
11. See Hallam Stevens, Life Out of Sequence: A Data-Driven History of
Bioinformatics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013) for an
overview of this moment. ⏎
12. For a brief overview of the history of ecosystems theory and its
relationship to ecology at large, see Frank N. Egerton, "History of
Ecological Sciences, Part 59: Niches, Biomes, Ecosystems, and
Systems," Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America 98, no. 4
(2017): 298-337. ⏎
13. Fumio Okura, "3D Modeling and Reconstruction of Plants and Trees:
A Cross-Cutting Review across Computer Graphics, Vision, and Plant
Phenotyping," Breeding Science 72, no. 1 (March 2022): 31-47. ⏎
14. Fumio Okura, "3D Modeling and Reconstruction of Plants and Trees:
A Cross-Cutting Review across Computer Graphics, Vision, and Plant
Phenotyping," Breeding Science 72, no. 1 (March 2022): 31-47, 33. ⏎
15. Alenda Y. Chang, Playing Nature: Ecology in Video Games
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2019), 118-19. ⏎
16. Oliver Deussen and Bernd Lintermann, Digital Design of Nature:
Computer Generated Plants and Organics (Berlin: Springer, 2005),

and Oliver Deussen et al., "Realistic Modeling and Rendering of Plant
Ecosystems," in Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference on
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, SIGGRAPH '98
(New York: Association for Computing Machinery, 1998), 275-86. ⏎
17. Xfrog Corporate History Presentation, 2014,
https://vimeo.com/108610818. ⏎
18. Digital plants in the gaming industry and an equivalent software,
SpeedTree, have been well covered by Alenda Y. Chang in "Between
Plants and Polygons: SpeedTrees and an Even Speedier History of
Digital Morphogenesis," Electronic Book Review (December 15,
2019). ⏎
19. "What Is Xfrog?, https://www.xfrog.com. ⏎
20. For an extended discussion of using collections of digital assets in a
global, all-encompassing sense, see Alice Bucknell, "No More Real,"
in Cover Me Softly, ed. Oana Stanescu, Chase Galis, and Something
Fantastic (Cologne: Walther König, 2024), 350-67. ⏎
21. As at the time of writing. Pricing can be found on the company
website, https://www.xfrog.com/. ⏎
22. Alenda Y. Chang, "Between Plants and Polygons: SpeedTrees and an
Even Speedier History of Digital Morphogenesis," Electronic Book
Review (December 15, 2019). ⏎
23. For an introduction to colonial botany and herbaria, see Londa L.
Schiebinger, Plants and Empire Colonial Bioprospecting in the
Atlantic World (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004), and
Pierre Bélanger, A Botany of Violence: Across 529 Years of Resistance
and Resurgence (Novato, CA: Goff Books, 2021). ⏎
24. Zeynep Çelik Alexander, "Managing Iteration: The Modularity of the
Kew Herbarium," in Iteration: Episodes in the Mediation of Art and

Architecture, ed. Robin Schuldenfrei (Abingdon: Routledge, 2020). ⏎
25. See Lorraine Daston, "Type Specimens and Scientific Memory,"
Critical Inquiry 31, no. 1 (2004): 153-82. ⏎
26. Daniel S. S. Park et al., "The Colonial Legacy of Herbaria," Nature
Human Behaviour 7, no. 7 (2023): 1059-68. ⏎
27. Tega Brain, "The Environment Is Not a System," A Peer-Reviewed
Journal About 7, no. 1 (July 6, 2018): 152-65. ⏎
28. Tega Brain, "The Environment Is Not a System," A Peer-Reviewed
Journal About 7, no. 1 (July 6, 2018): 152-65, 160. ⏎
29. For a discussion of infrastructure shaping the future, see Akhil Gupta,
"The Future in Ruins: Thoughts on the Temporality of Infrastructure,"
in The Promise of Infrastructure, ed. Nikhil Anand, Akhil Gupta, and
Hannah Appel (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2018). ⏎
30. Donna Haraway, Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the
Chthulucene (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2016). ⏎
31. American Society of Landscape Architects, Building a Park Out of
Waste, Designing our Future: Sustainable Landscapes, 2017,
https://www.asla.org/sustainablelandscapes/Vid_Waste.html. ⏎
32. Matt Lakin, "Exascale's New Frontier: ExaBiome," Oak Ridge
National Laboratory (blog), September 23, 2024,
https://www.olcf.ornl.gov/2024/09/23/exascales-new-frontier-
exabiome/. ⏎
33. For more on the environmental costs of big data infrastructure, see Mél
Hogan, "Big Data Ecologies," Ephemera 18, no. 3 (August 2018):
631-57 and Mél Hogan and Gwendolyn Blue, "Big Cloud
Solastalgia," in Digital Technologies for Sustainable Futures, ed.
Chiara Certoma, Fabio Iapaolo, and Federico Martellozzo (Abingdon:
Routledge, 2024), 32-45. ⏎

34. Anna Tsing, The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility
of Life in Capitalist Ruins (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2015), 17-25. ⏎
35. Sonia Sobrino Ralston, "Uncommon Knowledge: Practices and
Protocols for Environmental Information" (Master's Thesis, Harvard
Graduate School of Design, 2023). ⏎
36. Mike Rogoway, "Google's Water Use Is Soaring in The Dalles,
Records Show, with Two More Data Centers to Come," Oregon Live,
December 17, 2022, https://www.oregonlive.com/silicon-
forest/2022/12/googles-water-use-is-soaring-in-the-dalles-records-
show-with-two-more-data-centers-to-come.html. ⏎
37. Hugh Langley, "Google's Water Use Is Soaring. AI Is Only Going to
Make It Worse," Business Insider, July 24, 2023,
https://www.businessinsider.com/google-water-use-soaring-ai-make-it-
worse-data-centers-2023-7. ⏎
38. See Richard White, The Organic Machine (New York: Hill and Wang,
1995); Adam Diller, "PROJECT 02: Media, Power, and Ecology at the
Google Data Center in The Dalles" (PhD Thesis, Temple University,
2021); and Ashton Bree Wesner, "Contested Sonic Space: Settler
Territoriality and Sonographic Visualization at Celilo Falls," Catalyst:
Feminism, Theory, Technoscience 4, no. 2 (2018). ⏎
39. For botanical reference images, I was indebted to Paul Slichter, a
retired ecologist on the Columbia River Gorge's personal educational
website. See Paul Slichter, "Flora and Fauna Northwest," May 16,
2023, http://science.halleyhosting.com/nature/index.htm. ⏎
40. See Murayama Macoto, Narcissus tazetta L., 2014, Inkjet Print, 150 ×
100 cm, 2014, https://macotomurayama.com/portfolio/narcissus-
tazetta-l. ⏎

41. Oliver Deussen and Bernd Lintermann, Digital Design of Nature:
Computer Generated Plants and Organics (Berlin: Springer, 2005),
239-43. ⏎
42. Geraghty & Miller Inc., "Preliminary Remedial Investigation Report:
Martin Marietta Reduction Facility The Dalles, Oregon," March 1988.
⏎
43. Z. D. Parrish, M. K. Banks, and A. P. Schwab, "Effectiveness of
Phytoremediation as a Secondary Treatment for Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons (PAHs) in Composted Soil," International Journal of
Phytoremediation 6, no. 2 (2004): 119-37. ⏎
44. For a comprehensive introduction to phytoremediation in landscape
architecture, see Kate Kennen and Niall Kirkwood, Phyto: Principles
and Resources for Site Remediation and Landscape Design (New
York: Routledge, 2015). ⏎
45. For more on the concept of hybrid labor, see Alyssa Battistoni,
"Bringing in the Work of Nature: From Natural Capital to Hybrid
Labor," Political Theory 45, no. 1 (2017): 5-31,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0090591716638389. ⏎
46. Thank you to Catherine Seavitt Nordenson for the opportunity to teach
Landscape Architecture and Regional Planning (LARP) 7400 in the
spring of 2023 at the University of Pennsylvania's Weitzman School of
Design, and to the wonderful students whose collective work is
pictured here. ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

6
THE PANECILLO OF QUITO IN
1903
Resisting Modernity in the Andes
Cristina Bueno
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-7
Ecuador is literally besieged and blocked by the stupendous progress
of the 20th century. For this reason, it will be impossible for Ecuador
to escape the imperative demands of the civilization of the greater
nations. The inter-Andean and intercontinental railroad, the Panama
Canal, the opening of trade routes to Australia and Japan, the great
merchant fleet from California that is visiting the entire Pacific coast to
the south, an opulent and powerful maritime station in the Galápagos
Archipelago, an endless stream of immigration, etc., etc. are things that
are already approaching, that are already arriving, and whose noise
deafens the whole world. The current generation will not pass without
seeing these marvels completely realized.1
This political speech by Quito's Mayor Francisco Andrade Marín, delivered
in 1905, was imbued with an idea of progress. It implied the provision of
complex devices for displacement and international communication since
the beginning of the 20th century. His tone seemed antagonistic to a

photograph of Quito from the same year (Figure 6.1). There, its urban hill,
the Panecillo, appeared static as the perfect setting for a population with
immutable rituals.
FIGURE 6.1 Photograph of the cemetery in Quito, with the
Panecillo as background, 1901. Source: Paul Grosser, Archivo de
Fotografía Patrimonial. Instituto Nacional de Patrimonio Cultural
(Code: 5505). ⏎
Just like the photograph of the Panecillo hill, its cartographic
representation has been revealing. In the early cartography of Quito, the
engraving of the Panecillo was crucial for understanding the city. Usually
on the left of city plans, it worked as an organic edge that accentuated the
legibility of the urban layout in the colonial center (see Figure 6.5). But in
1903, two unique maps depicted the city without this iconic hill. Both maps
were related to the possibility of improving the infrastructure in Quito.
Omission of the hill was unusual in the cartographic history of the

Ecuadorian capital. Therefore, the void in the 1903 urban representation
was as eloquent as the silence in Andrade Marín's political discourse about
specific characteristics of this place in the Andes. It seemed to indicate that
the hill was an uncomfortable reminder of modernization efforts.2
The Panecillo: More than a Hill
The Panecillo combines a series of geographical features that delicately
define the landscape. As a result of a partial eruption by the adjacent
Pichincha volcano, it acquired a rounded shape, becoming a strategic
location at a specific elevation. In the middle of the extended high plateau
of Quito, it became the geometrical center between the Turubamba and
Iñaquito valleys. Consequently, it attracted settlements before the colonial
era.
From approximately ad 500 until the 15th century, the indigenous Quitu-
Cara people settled in scattered chiefdoms within this large high valley
divided precisely in two by the prominence of the Panecillo hill.3
Concentrated mainly to the south, the more fertile side of the valley, the
Quitu-Cara seemed to recognize large-scale symmetry as a manifestation of
the Pachamama, the Andean worldview that sought harmony between
nature, community, and cosmos. Furthermore, being near the Equator and
having less height than the volcanoes around it, the hill enabled observation
of the sun from its summit during solstices as it rose and set behind the
surrounding peaks. From there, one could observe how the sun "leapt" from
volcano to volcano depending on the season.4 It was a site of appreciation
of the territory, but also a place for staying still to appreciate time itself.
Later, around ad 1500, the Incas, worshippers of the sun, noted this sacred
significance and superimposed their own system of beliefs to enhance this
condition. According to some ethnohistorians, Yavirak, as the mountain was

called during the Incas' brief occupation, became one of their four sacred
mountains in Quito, and an essential actor in quadripartition, the system of
occupation that would transform the city into a defensive stronghold of the
Incan Empire. Thus, beyond just being a landmark, the Panecillo has held
great symbolic importance since the time of ancient cultures.
Background to Progress in Ecuador
The struggle between the concept of progress and of mountains is not new.
The word "progress" derives from walking forward. It implies dynamism.
In contrast, mountains have been perceived as permanent obstacles. Before
the Italian Renaissance scholar Francesco Petrarch's ascent of Mont
Ventoux in France, mountains were labelled "horrible countries"; they were
a cause of disconnection, inhospitable places, difficult to tame.5
The term "progress" in Spanish was coined around 1570, coinciding with
the arrival of Europeans in the Americas.6 Therefore, although in the Andes,
pre-Columbian cultures perceived mountains as the horizon, as refuge, the
source of water, and connection to the sacred; for the European travelers
who arrived in the new continent, they represented a land in turmoil.
Volcanoes, glaciers, and unprecedented floods represented the forces of
nature opposed to the modern efforts to control the territory. For the
Western conquerors, manipulating the new surroundings meant both to
dominate nature and to recreate Western civilization in a different
environment.
With industrialization and the implementation of new networks such as
railroads and pipes, the possibilities to control this territory became a
reality. The aims of progress and its rhetoric were disseminated in Ecuador
by the conservative president Gabriel García Moreno. During his terms
from 1862 to 1865 and from 1869 to 1875, García Moreno realized the

aspirations of progress of the Ecuadorian elites by conceiving the landscape
as a collection of natural resources to exploit and export, improving the
means to do so efficiently.7
Contemporary authors specializing in modern infrastructure in Quito
noted that the pivotal moment for progress in the city occurred at the turn of
the 20th century. Jorge Benavides Solís identified the beginning of modern
architecture in Quito in 1896, when a group of foreign professionals from
various disciplines arrived in the city to provide technical support for public
projects or to join the academic staff of the National School of Fine Arts.
Inés del Pino considered the beginning of modernity to be the year 1906,
when, after the coup d'état led by the liberal Eloy Alfaro, he initiated a
series of public infrastructure projects. These projects were all contracted to
European or North American companies, which possessed extensive
experience in industrial construction. It was also the year in which the local
newspaper, El Comercio, was established, publicizing sewerage, potable
water, and roadworks. The government utilized the media to promote
progress as a form of propaganda; modernization was shown as a means of
acquiring social benefits, reflecting the political values inherent to Alfaro's
liberal government. Consequently, the process of modernization in Quito
was intertwined with foreign experts taming the territory. Simultaneously, it
was promoted as a value that enhanced the political image of the ruling
government, regardless of its political affiliation. By 1903, these complex
facets of modernization in Quito were starting to emerge due to the
numerous advancements in public infrastructure overseen by Mayor
Francisco Andrade Marín.
1903: A Pivotal Year in Cartography
In a volume titled Damero, Alfonso Ortiz Crespo compiled a remarkable
series of city plans that show the Panecillo as an important element in

Quito's represented image. The collective analysis of these maps
demonstrates that the hill has been a remarkable physical presence in the
city's geography and a significant constant in the collective imagination of
its inhabitants.
However, two maps from 1903 omitted the hill.8 Created respectively by
Antonio Gil and Henry Grant Higley, these maps were related to
modernizing infrastructures in the Andes. Gil's map was limited to drawing
the land parcels of Quito, under hygienist criteria (see Figure 6.2). In
contrast, Higley's map established graphic and contextual links with the
railway construction that would be implemented five years later, a living
promise of connection and movement (see Figure 6.4). In these maps where
the hill ceased to appear, the city of Quito ceased to be recognizable. The
loss of this landmark was destabilizing both geographically and
conceptually. The city could only be understood through the strategic
definition provided by its hill.

FIGURE 6.2 Map of the city of Quito, Antonio Gil, 1903.
Source: Centro Cultural Biblioteca Ecuatoriana Aurelio Espinosa
Pólit, in Ortiz Crespo, Alfonso, Damero. Quito: Fondo de
Salvamento FONSAL, 2007 (Code: 915.4 O775d.). ⏎
Additionally, these maps marked a pivotal moment as from them
onwards the cartographic representation of Quito began to consider the city
south of the hill. This shift in urban representation revealed that progress
had arrived in the city. Indeed, according to the Urban Planning
Department, between 1903 and 1906 the population of Quito increased by
2,000, while the area occupied by the city expanded to 30 hectares to the
north and south of the Panecillo, facilitated by the new infrastructure
developments in paving, roads, potable water, and sewage systems.9
In contrast to 1906, the year 1903 was not recorded in history as one of
significant changes in the modernization process. However, during that
year, the potential economic growth of the public projects under discussion

was already becoming apparent. It is the cartography of this year that
documented the importance of these possibilities in the construction of
territorial imaginaries. From this perspective, the omission of the Panecillo
blurred the topographical characteristics of Quito, allowing for the
avoidance of complicated discussions regarding what the possibility of
progress meant for Andean cities at the beginning of the 20th century.
The Omission to Promote Hygienism
The Rationalizing Plan
During his tenure as Intendente General of the province of Pichincha, under
President Leonidas Plaza Gutiérrez, Antonio Gil commissioned a map of
Quito. The resulting "Plano de la ciudad de Quito" was engraved by J. D.
Laso in September 1903, which displayed the parcels and street names that
made up the city in that year. However, what was surprising was the
orthogonality and the perfection of the square forms of each block (Figure
6.2). The city depicted by Gil appeared to be drawn based on a Cartesian
grid of mathematical precision. The absence of topography, including the
prominence of the Panecillo, exaggerated the abstraction and rationalizing
power of the grid as a tool for control in the Andes.
Indeed, the colonial center of Quito, like that of other cities in the region,
was laid out according to an orthogonal grid implemented by the Spanish
Crown. According to the earliest available plan of Quito from around 1573,
issued by the Ley de Indias (Figure 6.3), the territory was to be divided
according to a perfectly regular and homogeneous grid based on square
blocks of 500 feet (150 meters) on each side, which in turn had to be
subdivided to be allocated to a colonist.10 This grid served as a model for
road and parcel layout, and was the first rationalist method to efficiently

divide the territory into small portions controlled by a Spanish owner.11
However, the execution of this ideal in the rugged topography of Andean
cities was either problematic or outright impossible. The deep ravines, hills,
mountains, and volcanoes rendered this type of diagram indifferent to the
context. This demonstrated the Spanish Crown's ignorance of the conquered
territory in the New World, ruling from a distance.
FIGURE 6.3 Diagram of the city of Quito, Anonymous, circa
1573. Source: Mapoteca Histórica de Límites, Cartografía y
Límites, Unidad Técnica de la Dirección de Relaciones Vecinales
y Soberanías, Subsecretaría de América Latina y el Caribe del
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Movilidad Humana. ⏎
Just like in the anonymous plan of 1573, the quasi-Platonic grid of Gil's
map seemed artificial due to its complete omission of topography. The
ravines breaking the surface, the slopes of the Pichincha volcano to the east
of the city, and the Panecillo to the south were all missing. Consequently,

Gil's map appeared to represent a simple plan. And, like all plans in the
Americas, it was a contract to civilize the territory; everything that was not
mapped was understood as wild.12 Here, the cartographer interpreted the
topography, including the Panecillo, as part of the wilderness that should
not be considered under the progressive gaze of a 20th-century city. In fact,
Gil's plan exhibited characteristics typical of a diagrammatic scheme of
intentions; in his cartographic compilation of Quito, Alfonso Ortiz
highlights "its small format, the lack of scale indication, and the
simplification of details."13 Thus, rather than an urban survey, Gil's map
represented a Platonic ideal of an orderly city. As a scheme aspiring to
perfection from an illusory starting point, it functioned as a model.
The Hygienist Plan
Antonio Gil's grid was not only rationalist but also contained a hygienist
aspiration as part of an urban modernization strategy. This theme was
visible through the title of the plan, which specified "for the use of the
Police Force." Within the plan, the only institutions that appeared with
names were those of the Clergy and the Police, the latter appearing in
capital letters in the southern corner of the lot belonging to the Convent of
San Francisco.
European hygienist processes were initially associated with
industrialization to apply newly acquired knowledge in health matters. They
had to do with concerns about the quality of working conditions for factory
workers. In contrast, with incipient industrialization in Andean cities, the
reinterpretation of these processes related to the beautification of the city
and the people. This is why, in the Andes, hygienism took on a tint of social
cleanliness. From the beginning of the colony, hygienism was in the hands
of the Clergy, and later, until the 19th century, it came under the control of

the Police - the institution that was initially responsible for urban and social
beauty.14 Therefore, in a corporative way, it ensured that streets and squares
were clean and that it was the indigenous people who cleaned them. The
Police also identified individuals who deviated from the conservative
dictates of the city, succumbing to temptation outside of morality, such as
alcohol or gambling, as well as those who fell outside health dictates, such
as lepers.15 Similarly, the Police supervised personal and moral cleanliness,
which ascended through social scales from the individual, the family, and
the citizenry.
Informed by what was happening in Europe, in Ecuador, public medical
institutions began to take charge of hygienist activities at the beginning of
1901. However, control practices typical of the Police were adopted. In fact,
both institutions worked together in mutual support. One of the most
frequent practices in controlling epidemics was home medical visits. These
visits had the explicit purpose of checking the cleanliness inside the houses
and monitoring personal hygiene practices, and it was the Police that
determined which families should be visited. In this sense, Gil's plan was
extremely efficient because, unlike other plans of the time, it showed the
numbering of each block and each house. Thus, it facilitated the Police in
locating undesirable elements and zoning the city according to hygiene
criteria. It was a graphic mechanism for the identification, classification,
and implementation of modernist hygiene processes.
Antonio Gil, the Hygienist Man
Antonio Gil was a political man particularly close to the issue of public
health, despite being linked to the liberal party of Ecuador. Hygiene, health,
and moral policies were initially advocated by conservative men as they
were innately linked to clerical authority. However, under the mandate of

the liberal president Eloy Alfaro, progressive strategies in science were
understood as new possibilities to modernize the isolated rural population
living in the interior of the Andes, so health policies were implemented for
public benefit. Particularly aligned with these policies, Gil held the position
of General Intendant of Guayas under this president between 1895 and
1906. In that role, he had to contain the bubonic plague that had struck the
Ecuadorian coast. To do so, in Guayaquil, Ecuador's commercial port, he
established the Superior Board of Maritime and Urban Health in 1898. To
contain the illness, it was said that siphons were installed throughout
Guayaquil. In Ecuador, health policies emerged as solutions to combat
waterborne epidemics since European medical advances indicated that
fluids carried diseases.16
Quito, a colder Andean city less vulnerable to contamination from
stagnant water, did not see the need for sanitation institutions until 1903,
when municipal hygiene doctor Manuel Jijón Bello described how the
water from the springs descending from the Atacazo volcano that supplied
Quito was contaminated by livestock processes and poor sewage
management. From this year, the Superior Council of Health and Hygiene
was established in other cities of the Ecuadorian interior. Under this
council, "the period from 1902 to 1906 was one of great municipal activity
in promoting the potable water supply project."17 On January 13, 1903, the
project for constructing a domestic potable water system for Quito was
assigned, concluding a competition that had lasted two years. The winner
was Durini, but the project faced delays and remained abandoned for three
more years. Finally, the contract was awarded to the German engineer
Alfonso Vernimmen in 1905, and construction began hastily in July of that
year.18 In 1906, when Eloy Alfaro took office and declared infrastructures
for "potable water, drainage, and paving as national and charitable works,"

the Superior Council of Health and Hygiene was replaced by the Potable
Water and Drainage Board of Quito.19 Although the construction of the
network did not commence in 1903, supervision and control projects for
filling ravines, drainage, and pipelines preceding the potable water network
were carried out.
Antonio Gil's map was linked to the aspiration for a potable water supply
network. In addition to creating a parcel map intended for the Police to
control the city under hygienist terms, it allowed Gil to create a subsequent,
much more complete and detailed plan. Eleven years later, when Leonidas
Plaza returned for his second term in 1914, he reappointed Gil as General
Intendant, this time of the province of Pichincha, where Quito is located,
and as Intendant of the Municipality of the city. In that position, he created
a map to a scale of 1:6000 that included the old water pipelines, the new
ones, and even the public faucets. Additionally, this new representation
extended the depiction of the city to the south of the Panecillo, and included
contour lines and the ravines descending from the Pichincha volcano.
Hygiene and Extractivism
Antonio Gil became well known for being one of the first entrepreneurs to
colonize the Galápagos Islands at the end of the 19th century. Indeed, in
1893, he founded the Santo Tomás hacienda on Isabela Island after an
unsuccessful attempt to settle on Floreana Island. On the slopes of Cerro
Azul, the hacienda initially had 27 settlers and 80 slaves. There, Gil
systematized agricultural exploitation, then livestock farming, and finally
the production of turtle oil, which was in high demand in Guayaquil.20
In the Galápagos, water supply problems have been frequent. The water
sources work seasonally, and, at that time, Isabela Island had only a few
wetlands that were used for consumption.21 As Octavio La Torre describes,

"people as well as animals suffered greatly from the water shortage" at the
Santo Tomás hacienda. Gil solved significant water supply issues through
rudimentary "barrels in each slave's house to collect rainwater and a pond
in the main house" (that of Gil).22 Despite the water scarcity, Gil managed
to develop a moderate amount of agriculture. By 1911, he had finished
constructing a masonry reservoir to supply the entire hacienda. Thanks to
this system, his hacienda continued to prosper through a mechanism of
systematic predation of giant tortoises, introduced cattle herds, cod fishing,
and sulfur extraction. To this day, there is no potable water system on
Isabela Island, but Gil's property remained in the collective memory
throughout the 20th century as an enterprise of progress and benefit for the
island. Its devastating extractivist methods were only uncovered much later.
Gil's Plan: Abstract, Ideal, Authoritarian, and
Neat
Antonio Gil's 1903 plan of Quito depicted a city aligned with Western
rationalism, evident in the colonial grid layout. At the same time, the
hygienist references showed the idea of progress as control over the
physical and moral cleanliness of the individual and of society. But the
water's path still ran under different rules. In fact, Manuel Jijón Bello spoke
of the initial water distribution in Quito as "a labyrinth ... without order or
measure," a system outside of scientific norms.23 He described water as a
resource in a wild state, and the Panecillo was part of this untamed universe
connected to water.
Before being named "Panecillo" by the Spaniards, the hill was called
"Yavirac," a term coined by the Incas. The water slopes contoured the hill
from west to east and contribute to its rounded shape. Some theorists have
argued that the toponymic basis for the name Yavirac was yahuirca, a

mythological equivalent of an anaconda.24 In fact, the Panecillo's circular
base and gradually ascending platforms resembled a coiled serpent. In
Quechua, Yavirac has also been defined as a waterfall from the heart of a
mountain. This theory was substantiated because the Incas worshipped
water and installed palaces of virgins with pools for priestly initiation on the
north face of the Panecillo. In the 20th century, the laundries and public
pools that were located there, fed by the old springs, were evidence of this
relationship with water.25 From this perspective, the hill represented the
value of water as a source of life, as it had for ancestral cultures. It was an
uncomfortable reminder of the stricter aspirations of urban control, just as it
was for the initial settlers. By omitting the hill, Antonio Gil's plan brought
order to the labyrinth described by Jijón Bello, rationalizing and
partitioning it. The omission of the Panecillo showed that the ancestral
values related to the natural landscape of the Andes clashed with the
Western modernity of the 20th century.
The Omission to Promote the
International Connection
The Representation of a Pseudo-European City
Unlike Antonio Gil's map, which omitted the Panecillo because it was
considered irrelevant in an orthogonal scheme, a second map that appeared
that year (1903) also omitted the hill, but this time in a very detailed plan -
a highly precise panoramic representation by Henry Grant Higley (Figure
6.4).

FIGURE 6.4 Map of the city of Quito, Henry Grant Higley,
1903. Source: Mapoteca Histórica de Límites, Cartografía y
Límites, Unidad Técnica de la Dirección de Relaciones Vecinales
y Soberanías, Subsecretaría de América Latina y el Caribe del
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Movilidad Humana. ⏎
This map minimized the entire topography of Quito. Preceding the
establishment of the Ecuadorian Military Geographic Institute in 1922, the
graphic interpretation of all geographic features was quite free, and Higley
chose subtlety.26 Delicate curved lines simulated undulations of the relief,
somewhat more frequent in the upper part of the map, in what would be the
slopes of Pichincha, and on the left corresponding to the beginning of the
Panecillo hill. These curved lines lightly shaded the sides of the ravines as if
they were harmless streams, but they were deep trenches in the rugged
territory of the Andes. While the geographical features were muted, the
author exaggerated the historical monuments. To achieve this, Higley
stretched the heights of these buildings and incorporated a lot of detail,

color, and even the suggestion of shine on the domes and facades,
emulating the sunlight they received from the east. This was possible
because the map was a superior panorama. In other words, it was not a
traditional orthogonal map where only the rooftops of the city's layout
could be seen; rather, it depicted the city from a slightly inclined high view,
also allowing a side view of the buildings.
This type of cartographic representation was very common in the United
States during the 19th century as it made maps easier to understand for a
broader audience not initiated in cartography.27 Additionally, Higley's map
was accompanied by a series of photographs that emphasized the beauty of
Quito's historical landmarks. Therefore, it was a kind of highly precise
tourist guide that highlighted places to visit. It was a detailed map that
deliberately flattened the surface of the Andes. The subtext was that Quito
was a readable city of high historical value and a harmless natural
landscape.28 This description matched the observations of various travelers
who categorized Quito within the parameters of a European city. For
example, Charles Reginald Enock noted that it was "a third-rate European
city,"29 among other things, for having "some kind of order despite its
topography."30
The International Movement in Higley
The level of detail of the monuments on both sides was a feature of
Higley's map that had already appeared in another city plan. This was the
first map to introduce accurate elevations, and was commissioned by
Dionisio Alcedo y Herrera in 1734 (Figure 6.5).31 This plan was a bird's-
eye view set at a 30-degree angle from the horizontal, allowing for both the
physical space's coverage in plan and, at the same time, the lateral sides of
buildings to be seen.32 However, unlike Higley's map, here the Panecillo

was not only present but was also so significant that it received the same
level of detail as the constructed infrastructure, showing its features on
several sides of its elevation.33 The Pichincha volcano, with less detail,
appeared as imposing background scenery. The other significant hill to the
east of the city, Itchimbía, was not visible but seems to have served as a
location for the cartographer to create this map. Thus, the image of the city
conveyed by Alcedo y Herrera was that of a fabric defined on all sides by
its marked topography. Under this subtext, the Panecillo contained the city
and established a vertical counterpoint to its buildings.
FIGURE 6.5 Map of Quito, Dionisio Alcedo y Herrera, 1734,
showing the Panecillo on the left, traditionally an inevitable
landmark in the city's representation. Source: Instituto Geográfico
Nacional de España, Creative Commons,
https://www.ign.es/web/catalogo-
cartoteca/resources/html/023397.html). ⏎

In Quito's cartography, maps from a bird's-eye view, like those of Alcedo
y Herrera, typically utilized other hills in the city for positioning and
depicting the city without any obstacles.34 In contrast, Higley's map was a
cartographic view, meaning the city was depicted at a 60-degree angle from
the horizontal. The vantage point from which the illustration was made was
no longer a high point on the land but a virtual point in the sky.
Additionally, in this view, the streets receded in perspective towards a
single vanishing point on a high level of the Pichincha volcano. Therefore,
the colonial roads, ideally orthogonal, converged to this vanishing point on
the volcano. The cartographer seemed to be flying towards the northern part
of the city. The graphic movement in this representation suggested that, to
advance, one should head north. There was an implicit displacement that
moved the observer away from the location of the Panecillo. However, the
hill did not appear. As a significant topographical barrier, the hill was a
difficult element in terms of the construction of a city. The expense,
challenge, and technology required to incorporate the hill into the urban
fabric rendered it an object to "avoid." The modernistic project was very
fond of simplistic solutions, preferring to ignore reality rather than
incorporate complexities; therefore the concept of "omission" in the modern
project was not an oversight but an intended "avoidance."
Without the natural boundary of the Panecillo, the edges of the urban
fabric were not territorial limits but graphic limits. The photographs of
emblematic buildings, the national coat of arms,35 and the legend for
important buildings obscured the three hills surrounding the urban area: San
Juan, Itchimbía, and the Panecillo. Consequently, the city was portrayed as
open to growth, without topographic obstacles and unfinished in terms of
possibilities. On the lower and right sides, Higley's map featured peripheral
vignettes of advertisements for merchandise (see Figure 6.4). All the ads

indicated that they were importers from Europe and the United States.
Some specified that the businesses were from England and Germany and
sold a variety of products such as liquor, medicine, and hats. It was
suggested that the city was a favorable place to attract foreign investors.36
The map seemed to encourage visiting Quito and investing there. Thus, the
implicit movement in the map's perspective representation implied that the
city was open to the world through commercial exchanges.37 It included the
modern idea of connection, from a region rich in natural resources to be
exploited by experts from abroad. According to Capello, this commission
directly alluded to the recent use of cartography to promote a vision of the
capital as a "global centrality in physical, metaphorical, and - increasingly
- tourist terms."38
Reference to the Construction of the Railroad in 1903
To complete the lower part of the advertising rectangle framing the map,
Higley included a small inset, a scaled-down version of a map created by
Higley himself. Titled "Guayaquil/Quito Railway of Ecuador. South
America," it depicted the entire route of the railroad project that was under
construction to connect the capital city, Quito (in the Andes), and the
country's largest city, Guayaquil, on the coast. The conservative president
García Moreno, the mastermind and main promoter of the railroad, began
its construction in 1873 with the section from Guayaquil to Yaguachi, but
the project was halted in 1875 following his assassination. However, in
1898, the project was resumed under new foreign contractors, English and
American.39 In February 1900, torrential rain hampered the construction, so
in 1901 the route had to be redirected through the valleys of Chan Chan and
Alausí to Quito. In the same year, the automobile was introduced to the
area.

By 1903, when Higley's map was created, the railroad had extended to
various Andean cities (such as Alausí, Guamote, Riobamba, Ambato, and
Latacunga), thus shortening the journey time between Guayaquil and Quito.
Additionally, the remaining section to be constructed was the one
connecting Guamote to Quito. This section was the easiest to execute as,
once it reached the mountain range, the project could be resolved with a
gradient of less than 12 percent which had characterized all previous
ascents. Moreover, just before Guamote, the Chan Chan valley was
associated with rain, humidity, poor soil, and, additionally, diseases
common in tropical areas with high temperatures, such as yellow fever. This
is why the project could not employ Andean indigenous workers, who
feared the epidemics of this valley, and had to resort to workers from
Jamaica, Barbados, and Puerto Rico.40 Finally, the arrival of the railroad in
Guamote ensured a source of fuel for energy thanks to available coal
mines.41 Nevertheless, in 1903, private car services were implemented to
cover the remaining section of the railroad, reducing the journey time from
five days to two and a half.42 This revealed a new idea of efficiency in
transportation processes. The construction of the railroad between Quito
and Guayaquil was completed in June 1908, but by 1903 the project was
advanced enough to predict its economic growth benefits. It was pure
potential.
Henry Grant Higley was deeply involved in the railroad project, and was
known as one of the expert technical engineers who would advise on its
construction.43 In fact, Higley and his partner, named Slater, had created a
panoramic map for Guayaquil in 1900, and this map was used by workers
on the project during its execution.44 However, Higley's personal
involvement in the project went beyond technical consultancy. When he
passed through Mosquito, Nicaragua, in 1894, he created a map of the

banana plantations, but, since he owned some of the plots, his map reflected
his personal interests (Figure 6.6).45 Higley was an enigmatic entrepreneur
and technician who had previously profited from his vision of land as a
resource, incorporating economic aspirations into his maps.46 It seemed that
he was interested in the development of the railroad, which promised
significant profits around the stations in the Andes, areas that were
previously disconnected. The 1903 map was commissioned by the
successful businessman Dr. Julio Esaú Delgado, whose name appeared
under the title of the map in Figure 6.4, "Quito 1903." Delgado was a
Colombian entrepreneur and close friend of the liberal president Eloy
Alfaro. The map reflected both Higley's and Delgado's personal interests.

FIGURE 6.6 Map of Mosquito Coast, Henry Grant Higley, 1894.
Source: Library of Congress Geography and Map Division
Washington, D.C. 20540-4650 USA dcu. Digital Id:

http://hdl.loc.gov/loc.gmd/g4852m.ma001018. Creative
Commons. ⏎
The reference to the railroad in Higley's map was a mark of cutting-edge
transportation infrastructure. Just as projects like the Panama Canal were
advertised, the railroad was presented as the infrastructure that would
integrate the Andean city into a new network of high-speed international
connections. The presence of this small map served as propaganda for
Quito's favorable conditions for foreign trade. In fact, Enock described
Quito as a city "remote and inaccessible until it was connected by the
railroad to the outside world."47 At the same time, it showcased another
facet of progress: international connection as a profit-making machine for
foreign entrepreneurs.
Political Rhetoric on International
Connection Progress
The subtext of Higley's map conveyed the nuance of the vision of progress
in the liberal political discourse of the time. At the turn of the century, a
new wave of republican leaders adopted a modernizing zeal in their
political speeches. These speeches continued to imply that advancement
meant surpassing a state of savagery. However, this unidirectional process
was no longer explained solely by the control and homogenization of
territory, but as a shift toward internationalization.
Delving deeper, the speeches of national and local leaders focused on
promoting movement and connection. These concepts, repeated in the
rhetoric of the liberal leader Eloy Alfaro from the late 19th century and in
that of Quito's municipal leaders, such as Francisco Andrade Marín, were
attractive and sufficiently ambiguous to fit the expectations of various

sectors.48 For Eloy Alfaro, who continued the activities started by the
conservative president García Moreno for the railroad, the railway was a
means to advance society. Specifically, he aimed to bring the rural Andean
population out of isolation and instill values of labor and efficiency.
Andrade Marín, while leading the Quito City Council in 1905, emphasized
that the Andean railroad would link Quito with the port of Guayaquil,
describing it as a technology of movement toward the world. What was
crucial was to anchor oneself to the international network of transportation
infrastructure to meet the "demands of the civilization of larger nations." He
mentioned the idea that progress required connecting to a global network of
exchanges.
The railroad also opened Quito to tourism: 20 years after the railroad was
inaugurated, the census showed that, between 1921 and 1923, "4,365
foreigners of 42 nationalities arrived, with an average of 145 visitors per
month and 90 who settled as residents."49 Despite the potential to directly
link Quito to Guayaquil, the primary users of this infrastructure were major
foreign entrepreneurs moving goods, labor forces, and tourists from abroad.
Thus, the areas around industries connected to Quito's railroad ended up
consolidating into "worker neighborhoods."50 However, by 1914, after six
years of railroad operation, the center of Quito was not connected at the
urban level and did not seem to benefit from internal migration within the
country.51 What mattered was the image. It was about consolidating a
graphic memory of a future Quito ready to welcome foreign investors and
their businesses as part of an electoral political campaign focused on
modernity.52

The Image of Progress
To ensure that the Panecillo did not appear on his map, Higley covered this
area of the city with the legend of public buildings and two photographs;
the upper photo featured the Military Complex, a prison located at the base
of the hill; and the lower photo showed the Sucre Theater with the Panecillo
in the background. The hill was present as a backdrop behind the
constructed monuments. In this way, Higley avoided representing the hill as
a static mass counter to the dynamic will or as an obstacle to the city's
openness.53 Instead, it was presented as a picturesque element within the
exotic scenery of the Andean landscape. The Panecillo's omission revealed
the intention to remove it from the idea of an untamed landscape. Thus, the
hill was to be remembered only as a photograph. In this way, Higley turned
it into a sort of mirage.
The hill's symbolic importance was linked to permanence. In contrast to
the subtext of movement, rationalism, and international connection
embedded in the map, the hill could not move, change, or dissolve. Beyond
that, its omission revealed the incompatibility of the Andean relief with the
conceptual drive for progress. Like the other volcanoes surrounding Quito,
the Panecillo was a reminder that geological time imposed itself on the
immediacy of technology and human advancements.
Conclusion
Progress lay in the externalization of a human function into a manufactured
artifact.54 However, this process could be violent as it involved an excision.
In the 1903 cartography of Quito, this extraction was literal. A geological
prominence that gave meaning to the city was erased. This created an
absence that highlighted the darker aspects of progress in Andean cities; the

hygienist phenomenon sought to cleanse the territory of its savagery, both
physically and socially, while the process of internationalization deepened
the rifts between major foreign entrepreneurs and isolated, impoverished
Ecuadorian populations.
Conceptually, these two forms of modernization represented the
rationalization of elements in the Andean landscape that, according to
Andean cosmology, were meant to flow freely: water and pathways. The
water running through ravines was enclosed in pipes, and the ancient paths
were converted into high-speed roads.
In 1903, all the symbolic value assigned to the Panecillo hill by the
ancestral cultures that inhabited the Andes was violently removed from the
graphical memory of the capital in favor of presenting Quito as a city of
progress. In this way, the more progressive efforts of the 20th-century
authorities blurred the ancestral tradition by repeating violent procedures
that concealed the intrinsic characteristics of the Andes.
Notes
1. "El Ecuador está literalmente sitiado y bloqueado por el estupendo
progreso del siglo 20. Al Ecuador, por lo mismo, le será absolutamente
imposible sustraerse a las imperiosas exigencias de la civilización de
las naciones mayores. El ferrocarril interandino y el intercontinental, el
canal de Panamá, la apertura de vías mercantiles para Australia y
Japón, la gran marina mercante que desde California está visitando
hacia el Sur todas las costas del Pacífico, una opulenta y poderosa
estación marítima en el archipiélago de Galápagos, una interminable
corriente inmigratoria, etc., etc., son cosas que ya se acercan, que ya
llegan, y cuyo ruido asorda al mundo entero. No pasará la actual

generación sin que ella vea esos portentos completamente realizados."
Speech by the President of the Municipality of Quito, D. Francisco
Andrade Marín (inauguration of avenue 24 de Mayo, Quito, 1905). ⏎
2. The graphic omission of geographical features in colonial Latin
American cartography was common. This typically occurred when
drawing remote regions that were difficult to access or deemed
dangerous for colonists. Only what was under political control was
depicted; consequently, omission defined the wild. This explains why
the Amazon rainforest and the rugged terrains at certain altitudes were
not illustrated until well into the 20th century. The complexity of these
territories exceeded Western control and understanding. ⏎
3. Antonio Narváez, La experiencia urbana y metropolitana de Quito
(Quito: Municipio de Quito, Departamento de Planificación, 1976), 17.
⏎
4. Hugo Burgos, Quito prehispánico (Quito: Colegio de Arquitectos de
Pichincha del Ecuador, 2008), 20. ⏎
5. John Grand-Carteret, La montagne à travers les âges: rôle joué par
elle, façon dont elle a été vue 2 (Grenoble: Dumas, 1903), 31. ⏎
6. Joan Corominas, Breve Diccionario Etimológico abreviado de la
lengua española (Madrid: Gredos, 2012), 477. ⏎
7. Jorge Benavides Solís, La arquitectura del siglo XX en Quito (Quito:
Banco Central del Ecuador, 1995), 17-20. ⏎
8. Alfonso Ortiz Crespo, Damero (Quito: Fondo de Salvamento
FONSAL, 2007), 149. ⏎
9. Jorge Benavides Solís, La arquitectura del siglo XX en Quito (Quito:
Banco Central del Ecuador, 1995), 24. ⏎
10. These specifications accompanied the plan from around 1573, the
original of which is located in the Real Academia de Historia in

Madrid, with a copy in the Archivo del Banco Central del Ecuador. ⏎
11. In Quito, the grid has been explained as descending from the Roman
castra or the Islamic advances that had merged with Hispanic elements
by the 16th century. Other, less diffusionist theories explain it as the
most evident strategy given the level of geometric and mathematical
knowledge of Western society at that time. See Jaime Salcedo,
Urbanismo hispanoamericano de los siglos XVI, XVII y XVIII (Bogotá:
Editorial Javeriana, 2018); Reuben Rose-Redwood, "Genealogies of
the Grid: Revisiting Stanislawski's Search for the Origin of the Grid-
Pattern Town," Geographical Review 98, no. 1, 42-58; Carmen de
Tomás Medina, "The City Cutting Spanish-American Born in the New
Low Spanish Medieval Pueblas," Estoa 6, no. 11, 145-156. ⏎
12. To delve deeper into this aspect, see Ernesto Capello, "Mapas, obras y
representaciones sobre la nación y el territorio: de la corografía al
Instituto Geográfico Militar," in Celebraciones centenarias y
negociaciones por la nación ecuatoriana, edited by Valeria Coronel
and Mercedes Prieto (Quito: Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias
Sociales FLACSO y Casa de la Cultura Ecuatoriana, 2010), 77-122. A
very visible example of this approach in Ecuador occurred in the
Amazon jungle, impenetrable and a refuge for tribes unfamiliar with
Western civilization, which was not mapped until well into the 20th
century. See Ana Sevilla, "El Ecuador en sus mapas: estado y nación
desde una perspectiva espacial" (doctoral thesis, Facultad
Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales FLACSO, 2011), 55-62.
https://repositorio.flacsoandes.edu.ec/xmlui/handle/10469/5132. ⏎
13. Ortiz Crespo, Damero (Quito: Fondo de Salvamento FONSAL, 2007),
149. ⏎

14. Eduardo Kingman Garcés, La ciudad y los otros. Quito 1860-1940:
higienismo, ornato y policía (Quito: Facultad Latinoamericana de
Ciencias Sociales FLACSO, 1940), 277. ⏎
15. Fernando Jurado Noboa, Calles, Casas y Gente Del centro histórico de
Quito (Quito: FONSAL, 2004), 26. ⏎
16. Eduardo Kingman Garcés, La ciudad y los otros Quito 1860-1940:
higienismo, ornato y policía (Quito: Facultad Latinoamericana de
Ciencias Sociales FLACSO, 1940), 290, 297. ⏎
17. Manuel Jijón Bello, "Reseña Higiénica de la Ciudad de Quito," Anales
de la Universidad Central 16-18, no. 117-128 (1902-1903), 466. ⏎
18. Wilson Miño Grijalva, Ferrocarril y modernización en Quito: un
cambio dramático entre 1905 y 1922 (Quito: Universidad Andina
Simón Bolívar, 2018), 62. Final del formulario. ⏎
19. Eloy Alfaro, Decreto Supremo sobre Agua Potable, Canalización y
Pavimentación de la Ciudad. Internal Regulations of the Board in
charge of executing those works (Quito: Imprenta Municipal, 1906), 2.
Cited by Wilson Miño Grijalva, Ferrocarril y modernización en Quito:
un cambio dramático entre 1905 y 1922 (Quito: Universidad Andina
Simón Bolívar, 2018), 41. ⏎
20. Carlos Rene Garrido Cornejo, "Colonización y desarrollo agropecuario
en las Islas Galápagos, 1832-1924: Nuevos aportes a la historia
humana del archipiélago", Siembra 11, no. 1 (2024): 8. ⏎
21. Carlos Rene Garrido Cornejo, "Colonización y desarrollo agropecuario
en las Islas Galápagos, 1832-1924: Nuevos aportes a la historia
humana del archipiélago", Siembra 11, no. 1 (2024): 11. ⏎
22. Nicolás Martínez, cited by Octavio Latorre, El Hombre de las Islas
encantadas (Quito: Fundacyt, 1999), 208. ⏎

23. "The distribution of drinking water in Quito is something like a
labyrinth; it goes to public buildings, charitable houses, convents,
monasteries, etc., without order or measure; many of the remnants
from the public fountains and basins are taken by private individuals,
some by contract with the Municipality and others without any right:
in a word, there is no scientific distribution system." Manuel Jijón
Bello, "Reseña Higiénica de la Ciudad de Quito," Anales de la
Universidad Central 16-18, no. 117-128 (1902-1903), 466. ⏎
24. Hugo Burgos Guevara, "Los cuatro cerros sagrados del Quito Inca,"
Boletín de la Academia Nacional de Historia 91, no. 188 (2013): 303-
324. According to Burgos Guevara, Yavirac was a distortion of
Yahuirac, which resonated with Yahuirca. In Quechua, yahuirca means
serpent, and is understood as "a mythological being, like a malignant
guaca, ultimately equivalent to the anaconda, goddess of the waters in
Amazonian rivers.". ⏎
25. Javier Gomezjurado Zevallos, El Panecillo en la Historia (Quito: PPL,
2016), 19. ⏎
26. The Ecuadorian Military Geographic Institute was responsible for
standardizing the representation of topography using contour lines. ⏎
27. To delve deeper into the map, see Ernesto Capello, City at the Center
of the World: Space, History, and Modernity in Quito (Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2011), 34-40. ⏎
28. The links between Quito's cartography and the tourism industry were
detailed by Ernesto Capello in "Mapas, obras y representaciones sobre
la nación y el territorio: de la corografía al Instituto Geográfico
Militar," in Celebraciones centenarias y negociaciones por la nación
ecuatoriana, edited by Valeria Coronel and Mercedes Prieto (Quito:
Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales FLACSO y Casa de la

Cultura Ecuatoriana, 2010), 112. Capello (107) describes a
representation of Quito as a city that is both traditional and modern. ⏎
29. Enock defined Quito in this way, alluding to its picturesque quality,
Spanish architecture, and orthogonal layout with courtyards. Charles
Reginald Enock, Ecuador: geografía humana, su historia antigua y
moderna, topografía, recursos naturales, industrias y desarrollo social
(Quito: Corporación Financiera Nacional, 1981), 293. ⏎
30. For Enock, the Jesuit priest Mario Cicala, and other travelers, the hills
of the city were noted for functioning as borders. Kingman provides a
synthesis of the descriptions of Quito made by travelers during the
16th and 18th centuries. See Eduardo Kingman Garcés, La ciudad y
los otros. Quito 1860-1940: higienismo, ornato y policía (Quito:
Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales FLACSO, 1940), 104.
⏎
31. Herrera's plan of Quito served as a graphic justification for the need to
build the Puente de la Merced, located four blocks north of El
Panecillo under his mandate. For this reason, the level of detail in this
plan focused on accurately representing the bridge and, alongside it,
the streets, houses, and churches. See Ángel Justo Estebaranz,
"Dionisio de Alcedo y Herrera: el puente de La Merced y el plano de
la ciudad de Quito de 1734," Laboratorio de Arte: revista del
Departamento de Historia del Arte 22, no. 22 (2010): 263-275. ⏎
32. According to Richard Kagan, there were three types of early map:
cartographic or perspective (profile), bird's-eye view, and orthogonal.
Although differentiating these categories can be ambiguous, they can
be summarized as follows: in bird's-eye view maps the observer's eye
is positioned at 45 degrees from the horizontal line, cartographic or
perspective maps at 60 degrees, and orthogonal maps are projections at

90 degrees. Richard Kagan, Imágenes urbanas del mundo (Madrid: El
Viso, 1998). ⏎
33. Cristina Bueno García, "El Panecillo de Quito: de monte-artificio a
artefacto urbano" (doctoral thesis, Universitat Politecnica de
Catalunya, 2023), https://upcommons.upc.edu/handle/2117/408158. ⏎
34. Blanca Espigares Rooney provides a review of the history of maps in
"Cartografías superpuestas: secciones urbanas de Granada" (doctoral
thesis, Universidad de Granada, 2015), 48-50. ⏎
35. The national coat of arms is surrounded by 16 Ecuadorian presidents,
including then president Leonidas Plaza at the top. According to
Capello, the references to the presidents, the Ecuadorian flag, and
mention of the Battle of Pichincha highlight Quito as a city of "cultural
and secular significance and its role in history." Ernesto Capello,
"Mapas, obras y representaciones sobre la nación y el territorio: de la
corografía al Instituto Geográfico Militar," in Celebraciones
centenarias y negociaciones por la nación ecuatoriana, edited by
Valeria Coronel and Mercedes Prieto (Quito: Facultad
Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales FLACSO y Casa de la Cultura
Ecuatoriana, 2010), 108. ⏎
36. Ernesto Capello, City at the Center of the World: Space, History, and
Modernity in Quito (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2011),
38. ⏎
37. Ernesto Capello, "Mapas, obras y representaciones sobre la nación y el
territorio: de la corografía al Instituto Geográfico Militar," in
Celebraciones centenarias y negociaciones por la nación ecuatoriana,
edited by Valeria Coronel and Mercedes Prieto (Quito: Facultad
Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales FLACSO y Casa de la Cultura
Ecuatoriana, 2010), 106. ⏎

38. Ernesto Capello, "Identidad colectiva y cronotopos del Quito de
comienzos del Siglo XX," in Historia social urbana: Espacios y flujos,
edited by Eduardo Kingman Garcés (Quito: FLACSO, Sede Ecuador,
2009), 131. ⏎
39. The railroad was a project where the main and secondary actors were
essentially international. Eva Loewenfeld, "The Guayaquil and Quito
Railway," Southwestern Social Science Quarterly 27, no. 1 (1946): 78.
⏎
40. Eva Loewenfeld, "The Guayaquil and Quito Railway," Southwestern
Social Science Quarterly 27, no. 1 (1946): 78. ⏎
41. F. W. Bennet, "Guayaquil and Quito Railway," Bulletin of the
American Geographical Society 35, no. 4 (1903): 361-364.
https://doi.org/10.2307/197954. https://www.jstor.org/stable/197954.
364. ⏎
42. Andrea Carrión, Ana María Goetschel, and Nancy Sánchez, Breve
historia de los servicios en la ciudad de Quito (Quito: Centro de
Investigaciones Ciudad, 1997), 24-25. ⏎
43. Ernesto Capello, City at the Center of the World: Space, History, and
Modernity in Quito (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2011),
37. ⏎
44. César Santana Moncayo, "Mapas, croquis e historia: el desarrollo
urbano de guayaquil, Ecuador en 326 años (1547-1900)," Revista
Científica ECOCIENCIA 9 (2022): 309. ⏎
45. The Mosquito map, held in the US Library of Congress, employs the
same strategy of incorporating advertisements on the sides to hint at
benefits for exportation, and thus foreign trade. ⏎
46. Cartographer, florist, and investor, he was interested in the
development of the railroad. For more on Higley, see José Angel de

Jesús Sánchez Duarte, "Análisis deconstructivo de la ciudad de
Guadalajara: una vista urbana de Henry Grant Higley en 1908" (thesis,
Universidad de Guadalajara, 2022), 51-54. ⏎
47. Charles Reginald Enock, Ecuador: geografía humana, su historia
antigua y moderna, topografía, recursos naturales, industrias y
desarrollo social (Quito: Corporación Financiera Nacional, 1981),
290. ⏎
48. Kim Clark, La obra redentora: el ferrocarril y la nación en Ecuador,
1895-1930 (Quito: Universidad Andina Simon Bolivar, 2004), 19. ⏎
49. Wilson Milo Grijalba, Ferrocarril y Modernización en Quito; un
cambio dramático entre 1905 y 1922 (Quito: Universidad Andina
Simón Bolívar Sede Ecuador, 2018), 58. ⏎
50. Eduardo Kingman Garcés, La ciudad y los otros. Quito 1860-1940:
higienismo, ornato y policía (Quito: Facultad Latinoamericana de
Ciencias Sociales FLACSO, 1940), 219. ⏎
51. Wilson Miño Grijalva, Ferrocarril y modernización en Quito: un
cambio dramático entre 1905 y 1922 (Quito: Universidad Andina
Simón Bolívar, 2018), 49. ⏎
52. The map was reprinted in 1970 under the promotion of Cervecería
Victoria, with its commercial vignette appearing in the upper-right
corner. The map had become a piece of propaganda about tradition.
What mattered was the image of progress. Higley aimed to portray
Quito as a place of rich historical significance, yet oriented towards the
progress of internationalization. ⏎
53. Alain Borie, Pierre Micheloni, and Pierre Pinon, Forma y deformación
de los objetos arquitectónicos y urbanos (Barcelona: Reverté, 2008),
60. ⏎

54. Michel Serres explains this very simply in a YouTube video, using the
example of the printing press as the externalization of memory into
books. See Agora des savoirs, "Michel Serres: Darwin, Bonaparte et le
Samaritain, une philosophie de l'histoire," November 22, 2016
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8qh44YFczto). ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

7
PROVING GROUNDS
Speculative Scenography and
Staging the Future
Constance Vale
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-8
Speculative fiction dominates the development of emerging technology.
There is a direct relationship between fiction and invention, wherein the
"sociotechnical imagination" is predictive and drives innovation through
self-fulfilling narratives. Government agencies, the tech industry, and
filmmakers most commonly drive these narratives,1 favoring compelling
storylines and greater capital gains rather than assessing technology's
impact on the built environment or its social and environmental
ramifications. Architects bring a different perspective that can address these
concerns, examining how to shape technology impactfully rather than
merely accept and adapt to it within architecture, cities, and public spaces.
Architects are ideally positioned to do this, as our capacities in image-
making and co-creation enable us to project sociotechnical fictions. In
applying these capabilities, how can architects effectively contribute to
informing sociotechnical fictions in ways that frame the ethical questions
they raise in public discourse?

To examine this question, this chapter analyzes the immersive stagecraft
used to train machines known as "proving grounds," with a focus on their
use in the ongoing development of urban artificial intelligence (AI) and
autonomous vehicles (AVs). Employed chiefly in military and automotive
industry experimentation, proving grounds reproduce "the real" to examine
how agents, vehicles, systems, and strategies perform in controlled
environments. All too often, these testing facilities reflect predictive
dystopias modeled on worlds without architects. Few include architects in
the design or testing process at all. In order to change the way that we
envision possible futures, it is crucial to challenge the role of these
platforms, see them as possible sites of architectural invention, and
advocate for their potency in staging sociotechnical narratives that elucidate
the spatial potentials and perils of emerging technology.
The Sociotechnical Imagination
Within the realm of emerging technology, narratives are powerful devices
that dominate the development of the future. In his book Smart Cities: A
Spatialized Intelligence, Antoine Picon identifies a direct relationship
between fiction and invention, wherein the "sociotechnical imagination" is
predictive and drives innovation through self-fulfilling narratives. In some
cases, novelists, scriptwriters, and film directors define these narratives,
with science fiction directing technological evolutions through imaginative
portrayals.
However, this space of invention is blurring further with everyday reality,
wherein computer scientists, tech entrepreneurs, corporate entities,
government agencies, and the media are generating speculative future
narratives.2 This is evident in the case of Elon Musk, who described and
later realized the mass production of electric vehicles, reusable private

rockets in space exploration, and brain-machine interfaces to enhance
human cognition through companies like Tesla, SpaceX, and Neuralink. In
such cases, the speculative narrative is authored by and driven to benefit
those who speculate (in the financial sense of the term) on their potential, a
reality even more concerning as such figures become direct actors in
national politics.
Problematically, in the late capitalist present, our shared stories are
restricted to being projected by those who have the authority to elevate
them. Dominant stories of the past are often written by those in power and
presented as absolute truth while marginalizing alternative perspectives.
Similarly, projective narratives can embed existing power structures in their
frameworks. To avoid such continuations of power, it is necessary to have
new authors without financially compromised interests, who can advocate
for more inclusive stories that tackle complex issues like the global climate
crisis, systemic inequities, or technological ethics. The following section
reveals some key reasons why architects are positioned to take on this
critical role.3
The Role of the Architect in Constructing
Fictions
Given the significant influence these narratives have on the evolution of
emerging technology, architects should actively explore how to contribute
to them rather than simply accepting, and thereby endorsing, the narratives
advanced by government agencies, the media, tech entrepreneurs, and other
corporate and private interests, which often overlook concerns about the
built environment, public space, and social and environmental issues
altogether.

While filmmakers and tech industry leaders have proven exceedingly
capable of projecting speculative fictions about technology, it is not their
exclusive domain. As a form of culture, architecture tells stories—our
primary activity as architects centers on representing something that does
not yet exist but might. To reference Robin Evans, architects don't make
buildings but, instead, create images, objects, and other devices to translate
into building.4 Central to this, we rely on the "enabling fiction"5 of
representation to propose powerful narratives and argue for the existence of
the things we envision through that representation.
This narrative capability of architecture is even more present today than
in preceding periods, given the nature of our tools and the ways we work
within images. In the contemporary world, fictions are powerful tools,
particularly with the immersive media at our fingertips. Architects are adept
at using emerging technology in image-making and storytelling, and, as
such, our discipline is uniquely positioned to shape immersive visual
narratives.
Like filmmakers or tech entrepreneurs, architects bring a collaborative
perspective, but one that puts us in a better position to lead this charge. As
co-creators who work with multiple constituencies through community
engagement, coordinators who direct teams of disciplines, and curious
generalists, architects are equipped to approach these narratives from
various vantages, further enhanced by our practice of bringing together
competing forces like culture, context, technology, function, aesthetics, and
more. Some architects also operate in research universities and non-profits,
detached from financial incentivization or profit. It is increasingly pressing
that architects harness our capabilities in this respect, given the
omnipresence and opacity of technology and the scale and scope of
problems we need to confront in the face of seemingly intractable

ecological crises and systemic injustice. That is, architects could deploy our
representational capabilities to challenge systems of power and propose
distributive models of agency to address technology's implications and
innovate in the built environment.
Positioning architects to create sociotechnical narratives raises two key
questions: How can architects expand the scope of our field's influence and
participate in directing the development and spatial implementation of
emerging technology? And how can we challenge existing power structures
and construct collaborative design methods to propose possible future
implementations of technology in the public realm?
Centering Architecture's Periphery
In order to gain a foothold in defining the sociotechnical imagination,
architects should define our discipline more broadly, as not only realizing
singular buildings but also designing the spatial implementation of
technology in the built environment. Such repositioning might involve
situating architects as projective thinkers and project coordinators who
design scenarios, perhaps as actors embedded in government agencies
developing policy and planning, or perhaps as internal contributors in tech
corporations, or as key contributors to film and video game design that form
projective societal discussions about the future of technology.
Redistributing our field's expertise in interdisciplinary partnerships
recognizes architecture as a key player in not only designing the built
environment but also in designing what kind of world we want to share by
addressing issues so complex that they require multiple intelligences and
robust collaborations.
As one avenue to engage such a widened scope, architects might expand
our role to working with those things just outside the periphery of our

discipline, in the strange and uncanny type known as "proving grounds."
These constructions are not conventionally accepted as architecture, but are
so close to the kind of immersive image-making going on in contemporary
practice and so potentially impactful on the built environment that they
warrant serious study in architecture today. Employing proving grounds in
this context allows for examining their potential as imaginative spaces of
public discourse within which architects can conduct research and
collaborate with communities to shape technology, its spatial distribution,
and its ramifications on civic space.
Defining Proving Grounds
Employed chiefly in military and automotive industry experimentation,
proving grounds are testing environments used to situate scenarios to train
for and predict possible futures. A proving ground is a controlled
environment where things that are typically dangerous are rendered safe so
they can be tested, assessed, and improved to minimize potential risks to
human life. This is particularly useful in relation to high-stakes, high-risk
scenarios, especially in cases where it is necessary to gauge the
performance of novel equipment or procedures in complex and
unpredictable environments.
To understand the complexity of these training spaces—and, more
importantly, to challenge them—it is worthwhile to break down the
compound word and examine the roots of "proof" and "ground." According
to the Oxford English Dictionary, "ground" is used in geology, ideology,
architecture, and art. In all its denotations, the stability of "ground" is in
question, based on the material composition in the architectural or
geological context, the foundations of an idea, or figure-ground reversal in
art's shifting stability. The Earth is in great flux, soil can be unstable, and

the authority that determines what is fact or defines the justification for a
motive throws intellectual grounds into question. "Proof" is outlined across
law, mathematics, and art. The legal standard for proof is rendered with a
preponderance of the evidence used to establish a fact or ascertain the truth.
In mathematics, a proof constructs the connection between a theorem and
premises through a series of logical steps. In the arts, proof can refer to a
test used to examine required changes prior to final printing. At its core,
proof necessitates the destruction of mystery and the construction of
certainty.
However, to ascertain truth or fact in the context of proving grounds, one
needs to construct a fiction. That is, for all the investment of "proof" in
veracity and scientific certainty, the "ground" in question must be artificial.
Proving grounds constitute such an intentionally unstable ground in that
they are not the real thing they pose as being; they are instead a particular
variety of "Potemkin Village" made to create a contained world in order to
test possible futures.
Typically, proving grounds are conceived and built by engineers and
contractors without input from architects, urban designers, landscape
architects, or other spatial design fields. Given the lack of input from these
fields, proving grounds often inadvertently reflect predictive dystopias
modeled on worlds without designers. In turn, architects have not
historically had an interest in these experimental platforms, overlooking
them as having little to no architectural value in terms of their design or
discursive potential. With this in mind, locating proving grounds in relation
to architecture's existing working space might be useful in assessing their
relevance to our field.

Locating Proving Grounds in Architecture
Bringing proving grounds into a relationship with architecture allows for
this emphasis on fiction and multiple potentialities to be heightened. Proof
and its requisite ties to truth, fact, certainty, logic, and precisely predictable
outcomes can be challenging to discern, particularly in architecture. The
ground, as it were, is shaky at best. While some architectural concerns are
measurable and controllable, many factors are based on actions of
unpredictable actors and systems, followed by subsequent reactions, for
which it is challenging to account. Moreover, architecture is a cultural
practice and is not merely demonstrative but also engages audiences,
provokes questions, and creates dialogues. In this space of fiction that is so
vital to proving grounds, there is ample room for the projective explorations
of architecture.
Building on this relationship between proving grounds and architecture
through fiction might be further helped by a better understanding of the
working space that such constructions could occupy within the world of
representation or building. We might categorize proving grounds,
particularly those built to a scale, as models. When built to a scale, proving
grounds are large enough to be classified as buildings, but they are variably
lacking the requisite program, structure, systems, or even sometimes
interiors required for human use or habitation. They are also rarely as
singular as a building; an entire environment must typically be built to train,
inclusive of infrastructure, landscape, and wider swaths of the built
environment. Perhaps it is more apt to think of proving grounds not as
models or buildings but as related to scenic designs, ones built not for use in
a performance but to assess performance. That said, they do not sit
comfortably here either. These are immersive stagecraft with engineered

illusionism made to trick not an audience but, instead, the actors being
tested within them.
Proving grounds might be best categorized as simulations. While
simulations are found in the sciences, they are also deployed in the creative
arts, particularly in fields that employ the techniques of worldbuilding, such
as filmmaking, game design, and architecture. One cannot create a
convincing game environment without defining all the parameters of its
model world. Similarly, all rules, properties, orders, systems, spaces, and
more must be specified in the proving ground. Like film sets or gaming
environments, proving grounds have the potential to stage stories or even
create co-constructed stories, wherein both users and designers are engaged
in activating a story together. This is precisely what has been overlooked or
underestimated concerning proving grounds: the powerful potential to
become narrative vehicles.
These proving grounds possess certain properties of interest to
architecture, specifically in their ability to translate the urban environment
into scenic constructions. However, they cannot do much in terms of
exploring the architectural and spatial implications of introducing AVs and
urban AI technologies in cities. To explore architectural issues, we might
look back to the discipline of architecture for a useful example: Cedric
Price's unbuilt "Fun Palace," a theater planned for London's East End,
designed for and with director Joan Littlewood. Designed as a "laboratory
of fun" and "a university of the streets," the project was conceived as a steel
space frame structure with a completely flexible program that gantries
could rearrange as its users wished.6 The interior was to be filled with
movable walls, floors, plug-ins, and circulation, as well as heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems made to emit
atmospherics for theatrical and participatory adaptability.7 The result is

more of a scenic design inside a flexible soundstage than conventional
architecture. This operability forms its strength as a simulation, which
functions as a medium to generate environments and stage events through
the agency of the architect and the public, informing its transformations.
This example offers ways to consider how architectural and urban issues
might be explored, wherein space and atmosphere can be transformed over
time. This operable platform mediates the environment, enabling multiple
actors to participate in its redesign over time. In addition, its design is
infrastructural, a system that facilitates its transformation. These properties
are helpful to keep in mind when considering what kinds of proving
grounds architects might create.
Machine Scenography
The Autonomous Future of Mobility is a project that I have undertaken over
the past several years that exemplifies proving grounds as architectural
enterprises exploring sociotechnical imaginaries. This larger project frames
a series of nested ones, all exploring architecture understood through the
lens of scenography for imagining possible futures. I consider this work to
be parafictional. Within parafiction, there is a range: at one end, those
adjacent to fiction that depart further from the world as we know it; and, at
the other end, those that are careful to reconstruct "the real" so closely that
they are adjacent to non-fiction. The first examples within The Autonomous
City Series are more fictional, while the final example, the Mini City, is
closer to non-fiction.
All subprojects within The Autonomous Future of Mobility respond to the
rapid changes occurring in AI and AVs, examining their impacts on cities
and mobility systems. All perform this investigation via a worldbuilding
exercise, constructing sociotechnical narratives questioning how AVs and

AI are spatially implemented. This research also considers that, while
automobiles have been a transformative technology that has dramatically
improved our lives by reducing the time required to travel and the effects of
distance, they have also led to catastrophic consequences. The ramifications
of automobiles include inordinate vehicle crash fatalities, environmental
and atmospheric damage, military conflicts related to resource control,
insufficient infrastructure to support individual travel, and economic
injustice and segregation in cities as a result of the expansion of highways
and the use of eminent domain.8 While AVs promise to improve our lives
with increased safety and by promoting ridesharing and electric vehicles,
they also present tremendous risks. Primarily, the safety of AVs remains
relatively unproven, and their spatial implementation has not yet been
adequately explored.
The Autonomous City Series
Autonomous City I, the first in the series, studies Amazon's AI patents,
clustering them into an urban context that need only respond to autonomous
agents.9 Amazon intends to deploy their patented AI systems in a
distributed network of facilities and mobile units, many of which hook into
existing infrastructural systems. In contrast, Autonomous City I benefits
from clustering these AI agents and systems into a city that need only
respond to machine vision and robotic operations, as seen in the plan
drawing (Figure 7.1).10 This post-human urban strategy results in a hyper-
density that would be unnavigable for humans. Like Giovanni Battista
Piranesi's Campo Marzio dell'antica Roma, the plan drawing in Figure 7.1
characterizes instauratio urbis, eliminating the axial organization of typical
cities in favor of a horror vaccui of artificial intelligences. The imagined
city seen in the detailed axonometric drawing and rendering is fully

autonomous architecture, a post-human landscape in which AI delivers new
materials, builds, cleans, maintains, and operates it in its entirety. The
human is removed from the center, remote from the city, and displaced from
its spectacle (Figures 7.2 and 7.3).
FIGURE 7.1 Plan drawing of Autonomous City I, composed
entirely of a selection of Amazon's AI patents circa 2018. ⏎


FIGURE 7.2 Axonometric detail drawing of Autonomous City I
showing a selection of unmanned city operations. ⏎

FIGURE 7.3 Axonometric rendering of Autonomous City I
demonstrating a free field of clustered structures and systems
made possible due to the lack of need for human navigation. ⏎
The next in this series, Autonomous City II, serves as a preliminary study
for an AV proving ground that is later iterated and built as the Mini City.
Autonomous City II creates a highly variable environment, maximizing
urban, off-highway scenarios for the vehicle to encounter, as seen in the
axonometric rendering (Figure 7.4).11 In the spirit of Colin Rowe and Fred
Koetter's Collage City, this study collects and fuses existing and imagined
urbanities from a number of cities, indexing a range of conditions for future
analysis.12

FIGURE 7.4 Axonometric rendering of Autonomous City II. ⏎
The resulting projective city maximizes urban conditions with multiple
grid systems at play, establishing disrupted networks that challenge
traditional modes of urban orientation, depicted in the model photographs
(Figures 7.5 and 7.6). Building forms are based on motherboard parts,

alluding to the digital systems that underlie spatial matrices in smart cities
today. The project highlights key paradoxes: whether smart cities are
designed for people or machines, spatial networks or data warehouses; and
whether the people democratically govern them or are algorithmically
coded and under the control of the entities that own and use the data.

FIGURE 7.5 Aerial detail model photograph of Autonomous City
II. ⏎

FIGURE 7.6 Photograph of details from Autonomous City II
model, taken from the Campo Marzio fragment, looking toward
the Paris fragment. ⏎
Autonomous City III builds on its predecessor, examining the space
surrounding the miniature AV proving ground, and envisioning its
operational use by the research team and in potential public engagement.13
Taking cues from Dutch artist and architect Constant Nieuwenhuys's New
Babylon, the spatial organization of Autonomous City III explores the
shifting boundaries between human and machine agency in reconfigurable
arrangements that allow for creative exchange, scenarios of which can be
seen in the diorama models (Figures 7.7 and 7.8). Where Autonomous City
II asked critical questions about the purpose and control of smart cities,
Autonomous City III offers a vision for the social and ethical implications of
proving grounds as sites of design in and of themselves. It considers
whether privatized research facilities, typically hidden from public view,
might evolve into transparent arenas of public discourse, thereby fostering

greater accountability and inclusivity in the development of autonomous
systems.
FIGURE 7.7 Photograph of Autonomous City III in four diorama
models, studying the architectural design of an experimental
platform for autonomous driving. Autonomous City III focuses on
the city's modular construction in stage flats and risers,
reconfiguring the platform to form the surrounding research
spaces. Entourage is built at 1:8 scale for repurposing in the
testing platform. ⏎

FIGURE 7.8 Photograph of a detail from Autonomous City III in
one of its four diorama models, studying the architectural design
of an experimental platform for autonomous driving. ⏎
To do this, Autonomous City III mocks up experimentation scenarios,
configuring the platform in various arrangements for iterative testing with
adjacent data analysis and model-building stations, as shown in the tableaux
(Figures 7.9 and 7.10). Simultaneously, it explores how the broader public
might be invited to witness, critique, and even participate in the
development of autonomous technologies in observation areas overlooking
active testing zones, extended reality (XR) interfaces that allow visitors to
envision AV navigation systems, mock-ups of possible alterations to the
built environment, and interactive demonstrations and workshops that
explore AV systems in action. The proving ground transforms into a hybrid
space: part laboratory, part exhibition, and part participatory theater for

educational and civic engagement. Through speculative scenarios,
Autonomous City III demonstrates how proving grounds might operate not
only as testing platforms but also as spaces of public discourse that
democratize narratives of technological innovation.14


FIGURE 7.9 Aerial photograph of Autonomous City III as a
tableau, studying the architectural design of an experimental
platform for autonomous driving. ⏎
FIGURE 7.10 Detail photograph of Autonomous City III as a
tableau, studying the architectural design of an experimental
platform for autonomous driving. ⏎
Mini City: Autonomous Vehicle Proving
Ground
The WashU Mini City builds on the Autonomous City Series with increased
stakes in studying key problems created by AVs and other forms of urban
AI.15 The Mini City is an operable model, an immersive scenic design that
stages events, both in miniature and full scale (Figures 7.11 and 7.12). It is a
1:8 scale (the same scale as an F1/10 model AV) proving ground for
autonomous driving that accommodates a model AV with a full perceptual
stack situated in a research lab. The project is an interdisciplinary

collaboration between architect Constance Vale and computer scientist
Yevgeniy Vorobeychik at the McKelvey School of Engineering at
Washington University in St. Louis (WashU).
FIGURE 7.11 Axonometric rendering of the Mini City, an
architectural design of an experimental platform for autonomous
driving. ⏎

FIGURE 7.12 Plan of the Mini City at the McKelvey School of
Engineering at WashU. ⏎
From an engineering perspective, the testing platform enables
intermediate-scale physical experimentation that can evaluate the limits of
autonomy to increase safety at significantly lower costs and with a greater
scope of stress testing than full-scale facilities. This allows for explicitly
adversarial testing, causing the cars to malfunction or crash without
incurring the unnecessary risks and costs associated with full-scale testing.
From an architectural perspective, the proving ground is an environment
that stages speculation about how AVs can be integrated into cities to
improve public health and safety, encourage equitable access to public
transit, and support climate resilience. Addressing these challenges involves
simulating sociotechnical narratives that explore the introduction of AVs
and urban AI in cities, with consideration given to their spatial
implementation. The model city takes on the qualities of realism essential
for research to be applied to full-scale AVs in real-world scenarios. The
project's representation tactics include composite digital and hand
fabrication techniques to achieve equivalency with urban environments
(Figure 7.13). Material qualities like color, texture, sheen, opacity,
translucency, albedo, and luminosity are tuned to sensing technologies and
layered onto architectural form and urban space. The design process
accounts for machine vision, remote sensing, and navigation technology,
calibrating to these systems rather than human optics. For example, the
level of detail is determined by camera resolution and LIDAR indexing,
with relatively low pixel data and laser points at about 1-inch (2.5-cm)
spacing, thus reducing the need for details smaller than they can detect.
Additionally, interior spaces and levels above the first floor are not
necessary to describe for this training.

FIGURE 7.13 Street entourage prototypes at 1:8 scale, built for
the Mini City experimental platform for autonomous driving. ⏎
Despite the platform's equivalency to real-world environments, the
limitations of machine sensing create a training facility that is decidedly
constructed, which human optics can detect instantaneously. The model's
false facades are made to deceive, compressing the urban scale with
foreshortened floor heights and city blocks. The model need not be hyper-
detailed, just enough for the sensing apparatus to be able to train at its low
resolution, creating an uncanny effect.
Importantly, the Mini City's immersive environment can be transformed
over time, like a film set. Facades and roadways are built in low relief,
based on stage flats and risers typically used in theatrical productions. This
modular construction is designed to facilitate changing conditions for

staging a wide array of physical simulations, allowing various actors to
create different scenarios (Figure 7.14, Figure 7.15 and Figure 7.16).
Building form, public space, material characteristics, and atmospheres can
be controlled and altered, maximizing the urban, off-highway scenarios for
the miniature AV to encounter. Given its scenic and operative capacities,
events play a central role in shaping the model; they can be scripted,
animating the Mini City as an urban stage set attuned to the sensing
capabilities of autonomous vehicles.
FIGURE 7.14 Photograph of research assistants staging the 1:8
scale Mini City experimental platform for autonomous driving. ⏎

FIGURE 7.15 Streetlamps designed to receive electrical wiring
in the 1:8 scale Mini City. ⏎

FIGURE 7.16 Photograph of a detail from the 1:8 scale Mini
City experimental platform for autonomous driving. ⏎
This operability of the Mini City extends beyond its ongoing
reconfiguration for experimentation to its role in staging academic and
public engagement concerning AVs and AI in cities. We have invited the
academic community and the public to participate in active testing sessions
and discussions about autonomous driving and smart technologies. We also
envision future augmented reality (AR) components to demonstrate the
performance of navigation systems and design interventions. A forthcoming
exhibition will demonstrate parallel research related to this project in other
scales and digital testing environments. This layered role as a laboratory,
participatory theater, and exhibition hall situates the platform as a public
space structured around discussion and the building of trust. That is, the
project reimagines the relationship between research and public
engagement, proposing a future in which testing facilities become catalysts
for collective reflection and action, encouraging interactive discourse in

rethinking and transforming space and technology in relation to their
implications for society.
The latest phase of this project, An Index of Urban Artificial Intelligence
and Mobility Networks, extends the research at the Mini City to urban and
territorial scales. Research involves analyzing multimodal transportation
hubs and smart cities, as well as gathering data on AV ridesharing fleets,
autonomous trains and buses, new technologies in infrastructure, and public
policy surrounding autonomous driving under development by
corporations, institutions, and governments. This compendium of
information is fueling projective urban and architectural speculation on
innovations in public space, infrastructure, facades, and signage to be built
for testing with the scale model AV in the testing platform.
This ongoing research phase explores the interfaces designers might use
to guide interactions between humans and autonomous agents, aiming to
increase public safety. In this effort, we are looking at how to modulate
access ways and apertures in urban spaces and buildings shared between
humans, AVs, drones, and autobots, creating robotic portals in facades and
designing surface textures and patterns to communicate agents' operations
and sensing protocols to human actors. To achieve this, we are creating
drawings of interrelated digital systems and operable facade elements in
both 2D and 3D models that can be inserted into the Mini City to create
feedback loops between AI testing and environmental design.
Our study also investigates what opportunities autonomous mobility
offers designers to innovate in the built environment in ways that improve
public health. We are exploring how networked traffic information might
reduce roadways' scale, affording more room for public and green space
and promoting healthier cities. To do this, we are drawing into existing
transit networks to identify possible alterations to complex systems, using

traffic simulation and modeling software to test the impact of these changes,
and creating mockups in the Mini City.
We are also exploring how cities can implement AVs sustainably to
support climate resilience. This involves examining ways to connect AV
ridesharing with transit hubs to encourage multimodal travel and reduce
energy consumption, congestion, emissions, and sprawl. To implement this,
we are designing key attributes of a multimodal hub and considering how
those can integrate into existing networks by drawing and constructing a
model that plugs into the Mini City.
We are also researching how cities can incorporate AVs in ways that
encourage equitable access to public transit. This access is crucial for
people with disabilities, older adults, and people with lower incomes who
may not own a personal vehicle. Our study assesses how AVs can connect
public transit to those living outside existing routes or how autonomous
buses might be able to operate without set routes in response to real-time
data. This facilitates a reduction in the need for individual vehicle
ownership, which could, in turn, decrease the scale of infrastructure,
allowing cities to avoid perpetuating and even reverse the destruction of
neighborhoods along racial and economic lines. This study relies on traffic
simulation and modeling software.16
Speculative Scenography
Technologies like AVs and smart cities significantly impact the built
environment, and accounting for their effects is crucial to human safety and
trust, the health and sustainability of cities, and equitable access to and
implementation of transit. The consequences of this technology are even
more challenging to address, as cities and corporations gather real-time
feedback and form closed loops with little room for public input. Such

processes relate to what Picon describes as a new urban intelligence based
on emerging technology, "leading to the transition from the networked city
to the event-city." He goes on to explain:
Even more than urbanists' plans, it is the narratives and scenarios that
are inspired by them that allow cities to set objectives for themselves.
The often-denounced crisis of urban planning is revealed to be
contemporary with the rise in power of an event-based city, in which
reality and fiction are often difficult to distinguish.17
Architects and other spatial designers can effectively operate in this space,
working with other disciplines and engaging the public in design processes
to challenge the fictions being written into space and propose alternatives.
While cities fill with vast fleets of artificially intelligent actors feeding data
streams, they become hyper-stimulated by a cycle of events. Our
representations must follow suit in order to foster open, dialogical, political
exchange.
The operational quality of the digital models that architects design within
follows the event-city's narrative structure, much like animations, films,
and video games. A useful articulation of this kind of media can be found in
German filmmaker and media theorist Harun Farocki's 2014 lecture
"Computer Animation Rules," in which he stated, "A computer animation is
less a reproduction and more a production ... or creation of a model
world."18 Many of today's architectural models do not deal with
representation so much as theatrical production design or worldbuilding.19
In hybridizing architectural and scientific research, The Autonomous
Future of Mobility is scenography for machines used to train AVs, for
designers to test AI's implications in the built environment, and for
interactive performances for scholars, students, and the public to engage in

discussions, exhibitions, and workshops. The project examines how
architectural models can operate as interfaces that enact sociotechnical
narratives. The model has affinities with what Trevor Paglen describes as
"activations and operations"20 or what Benjamin Bratton refers to as the
"instrumental and mediational"21 highlighting how image recognition and
data feedback loops operate in cities today. In response to these
functionalities of the contemporary world, the model is not a static
architectural representation. Instead, it is an operable platform, a physical
simulation that can move and change over time, connecting digital and
material data. The Autonomous Future of Mobility is not merely a
reproduction of the world; it is a production, a performance taking place in
a world unto itself.
The Autonomous City Series and the Mini City provide examples of how
architects can inform the sociotechnical imaginary and participate in
authoring and co-authoring narratives that shape the future of the built
environment relative to technology. These projects frame speculative
fictions as spatial, collaborative enterprises, positioning them as places for
public discourse that can facilitate conversations addressing the ethical
questions that technologies like AVs and smart cities raise and their law and
policy implications. The Mini City proposes opportunities for collective
agency in designing proving grounds that better consider our shared ground.
In this way, the project aims to create an inclusive testing environment that
becomes a site of public imagination, activating space through its
operability. By envisioning models as activated objects informed by a logic
of events, situations, and scenarios, the project recognizes architects as key
contributors to the changes occurring in emerging technology.22
This research supports the position that proving grounds are vital spaces
for architects to engage with in examining the implications of emerging

technologies for the built environment and civic life. By participating
directly in the sociotechnical imagination, the narratives we can create
engage with the event-based nature of cities, much like those of computer
scientists, tech entrepreneurs, corporate entities, government agencies, and
the media.23 Critically, architects' narratives are co-creations, informed by
multiple constituencies through public engagement, approached from
various vantages, and often operate in research spaces that are free from the
incentivization of profit.
As parafictional scenic designs, proving grounds replace static objects
with mediated environments that activate space through performance, in
both the theatrical and operative senses. Envisioning architectural models as
spaces of performance affords new opportunities for architects to participate
in the changes taking place in emerging technology. We might see this as
what James Bridle describes as a "return to the communal and the social,"
facilitated through "greater collaboration with our technologies" and one
another.24 In this way, we might advance collective agency in addressing
how technologies are integrated into the built environment.25
Notes
1. Antoine Picon, Smart Cities: A Spatialised Intelligence (Chichester,
UK: Wiley, 2015), 34-37. ⏎
2. Antoine Picon, Smart Cities: A Spatialised Intelligence (Chichester,
UK: Wiley, 2015), 31-32. ⏎
3. Constance Vale, "Image Fictions: Fabricating Worlds," in Expanding
the View: Prospect(s) for Architectural Education, Association of
Collegiate Schools of Architecture Annual Conference Proceedings,
ed. Lynne Dearborn et al. (New York: ACSA Press, 2021), 416. ⏎

4. Robin Evans, "Architectural Projection," in Architecture and Its
Image: Four Centuries of Architectural Representation, ed. Eve Blau,
Emil Kaufman, and Robin Evans (Montreal: Canadian Centre for
Architecture, 1989), 369. ⏎
5. Robin Evans, "Translations from Drawing to Building," in
Translations from Drawing to Building (London: Architectural
Association, 1997), 154. ⏎
6. Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) label from 9 + 1 Ways of Being
Political: 50 Years of Political Stances in Architecture and Urban
Design, September 12, 2012-March 25, 2013. See also "Cedric Price
Fun Palace for Joan Littlewood Project," MoMA,
https://www.moma.org/collection/works/842?
artist_id=7986&page=1&sov_referrer=artist. Accessed March 5, 2022.
⏎
7. Bevin Cline and Tina di Carlo, in Terence Riley, ed., The Changing of
the Avant-Garde: Visionary Architectural Drawings from the Howard
Gilman Collection (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2002), 44. ⏎
8. Constance Vale, The Autonomous Future of Mobility, The Mildred
Lane Kemper Art Museum Teaching Gallery at Washington University
in St. Louis, Missouri, 2020. ⏎
9. Autonomous City I, winning competition entry exhibited in The
Institute of Patent Infringement, organized by Matthew Stewart and
Jane Chew, Dutch Pavilion, Venice Biennale, Italy, February 19-April
16, 2018; the V&A, London Design Festival, September 15-23, 2018;
and Het Nieuwe Instituut, Rotterdam, Netherlands, October 9-28,
2018. ⏎
10. Amazon's AI patents include: automated loading systems, data centers
with angled hot aisle venting, expandable data centers with side

modules, inflatable data centers, robotic tossing of items in the
inventory system, airborne fulfillment centers using unmanned aerial
vehicles for item delivery, aquatic storage facilities, automated item
return machines, automated materials handling facility, entity
monitoring for Kiva robotic floors, ground-based mobile maintenance
facilities for unmanned aerial vehicles, high-density automated storage
retrieval system, inventory system with mobile drive unit and
inventory holder, mobile robot manipulator, mobile storage units for
delivery, modular, multi-function smart storage containers, multi-level
fulfillment center for unmanned aerial vehicles, reading station
structures, six degrees of freedom aerial vehicle, systems and method
of removing debris from warehouse floors, and systems and method
for inventory management using mobile drive units. ⏎
11. Autonomous City II, exhibited in Decoys and Depictions: Images of
the Digital, Des Lee Gallery, St. Louis, curator Constance Vale,
October 4-November 16, 2019. ⏎
12. Sampled cities include New York; Chicago; Kuwait City; Washington,
D.C.; Berlin; St. Louis; Paris; Cagliari; Seattle; San Francisco; Petare;
and Piranesi's speculative design for Campo Marzio. See also Colin
Rowe and Fred Koetter, Collage City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1978). ⏎
13. Autonomous City III, exhibited in the Farrell Learning and Teaching
Center, St. Louis, curator Jamie Ryan, March 12-June 11, 2021. ⏎
14. This section is informed by previous writing in Constance Vale, "The
Autonomous Future of Mobility," in Expanding the View: Prospect(s)
for Architectural Education, Association of Collegiate Schools of
Architecture Annual Conference Proceedings, ed. Lynne Dearborn et
al. (New York: ACSA Press, 2021), 172-174. ⏎

15. Formally known as the WashU Mini City, an interdisciplinary
collaboration between Constance Vale and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik.
Supported by a National Science Foundation, National Artificial
Intelligence Research Institutes Planning Grant, for "Trustworthy
Autonomous Systems Engineering (TRASE) Institute," 2021, PI:
Bruno Sinopoli, Co-PIs: Yevgeniy Vorobeychik et al.; Here and Next
Seed Grant, Tier 1 Spark Funding, Washington University in St. Louis,
2024, PI: Constance Vale, Co-PI: Yevgeniy Vorobeychik; Faculty
Research Support Grant, Washington University in St. Louis, 2022, PI:
Constance Vale; Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research
Interdisciplinary Seed Grant, Washington University in St. Louis,
2020, Co-PIs: Constance Vale and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik. ⏎
16. Adapted from Constance Vale, "The Autonomous Future of Mobility,"
in Expanding the View: Prospect(s) for Architectural Education,
Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture Annual Conference
Proceedings, ed. Lynne Dearborn et al. (New York: ACSA Press,
2021), 172-174. ⏎
17. Antoine Picon, Smart Cities: A Spatialised Intelligence (Chichester,
UK: Wiley, 2015), 54. ⏎
18. Doreen Mende and Tom Holert, "Editorial: 'Navigation Beyond
Vision, Issue One'," E-flux Journal no. 101 (June 2019),
https://www.e-flux.com/journal/101/274019/editorial-navigation-
beyond-vision-issue-one/. ⏎
19. Constance Vale, "Image Fictions: Fabricating Worlds," in Expanding
the View: Prospect(s) for Architectural Education, Association of
Collegiate Schools of Architecture Annual Conference Proceedings,
ed. Lynne Dearborn et al. (New York: ACSA Press, 2021), 416. ⏎

20. Trevor Paglen, "Invisible Images (Your Pictures Are Looking at You),"
New Inquiry, December 8, 2016, https://thenewinquiry.com/invisible-
images-your-pictures-are-looking-at-you/. ⏎
21. Benjamin H. Bratton, "Introduction: Logistics of Habitable
Circulation," in Paul Virilio, Speed and Politics (Los Angeles, CA:
Semiotext(e), 2006), 17. ⏎
22. Constance Vale, "The Autonomous Future of Mobility," in Expanding
the View: Prospect(s) for Architectural Education, Association of
Collegiate Schools of Architecture Annual Conference Proceedings,
ed. Lynne Dearborn et al. (New York: ACSA Press, 2021), 177. ⏎
23. Constance Vale, "Image Fictions: Fabricating Worlds," in Expanding
the View: Prospect(s) for Architectural Education, Association of
Collegiate Schools of Architecture Annual Conference Proceedings,
ed. Lynne Dearborn et al. (New York: ACSA Press, 2021), 416. ⏎
24. James Bridle, "Failing to Distinguish between a Tractor Trailer and the
Bright White Sky," E-flux Journal no. 101 (June 2019), https://www.e-
flux.com/journal/101/271654/failing-to-distinguish-between-a-tractor-
trailer-and-the-bright-white-sky/. ⏎
25. Portions of this text are adapted from the manuscript for Constance
Vale, Digital Decoys: An Architectural Index of Deceptions
(Barcelona: Actar, forthcoming). Supported by MacDowell Fellowship
and Washington University in St. Louis Provost's Office Faculty
Grant. ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

8
ATADO CON ALAMBRE
The Alternative Production of
Ingenious Architectures
Carolina Dayer and Jonathan Foote
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-9
In the main street of a town, there was a large pothole that impeded passing
cars. This generated long queues of at least 20 minutes. Rather quickly, the
locals realized that they could creatively appropriate the inconvenient
situation. Near the pothole, shops started to appear, selling fruit, drinks, cell
phone accessories - products that drivers could buy while waiting. One day,
the town elected a new mayor who decided to fix the fault. To his surprise,
the locals were strongly opposed as it would mean the end of their business.
The mayor had no alternative but to accept that the pothole should remain.
This story, told by the Argentine professor, columnist, and business
administrator Claudio Zuchovicki, summarizes what happens when
precarity ignites practices of social production.1 It exemplifies a common
phenomenon in the Global South, where things happen spontaneously
around moments of disruption. The quick reaction to figure things out
produces unexpected networks of exchange, unique configurations, and,
when it comes to the built environment, distinct spatial practices.

In Argentina, a particular expression is used to refer to such situations
that are sticky and have no logical or apparent solution: atado con alambre,
or "fixed with wire." This common saying, indicative of cultural everyday
practices, is also employed by architects and non-architects to refer to
decisions made at construction sites and design development phases. To
resolve a predicament with 'wire' is to keep it working for another day, and,
when that day comes, a better solution will present itself. Sometimes that
day never comes, or, as in the case of the pothole story, when a solution
appears another may already have become a better opportunity. Each act of
resolution under such a paradigm is characterized by a personal touch of
creativity and a surplus sense of pride and effectiveness. Often, these
fabrications and resolutions are culturally recognized as witty and
humorous due to their graceful execution and unconventional pragmatism.
Such practices, highly present in self-built domestic constructions and
repairs, are not unique to Argentina. All across the globe, as scarcity and
precarity grow, this form of ingenuity increasingly populates urban and
suburban built environments, offering not just solutions but character and
unmapped cases of practical wisdom. Similarly, formalized architecture
design practices are often faced with economical and logistics constraints
that contribute to an attitude towards thinking astutely in order to get the
most out of the least. "Poor architecture," as Italian architect Lina Bo Bardi
explained in 1984, is not about poverty but about the capacity to express the
maximum through minor means.2
Examining three case studies from the South America, this chapter
exposes ingenious architectures that operate in environments of material
and economic scarcity. Connecting with a long tradition of related practices,
from ad-hoc to hacker to bricoleur, these architectures work with what is
within reach, not accepting materials not for what they supposed to be but

for what they could be. They salvage what they can from the residue of
mass materials, developing shrewd and cunning use of stuff. In contrast to a
regime of industrialized supply chains, ingenious architectures see materials
as part of an at-hand ecology. Perhaps it is even a new kind of
contemporary vernacular, showing another way of using resources, relating
to the environment, and benefiting the social aspects of a place.
Atado con alambre
In the Global North, the expectation of fixing life with a roll of cheap wire
is hardly imaginable. Rather, thousands of off-the-shelf solutions and ready-
mades emerge from the vast entanglement of oversaturated consumer
society. This has led, in advanced societies, to the alternative notion of
"home remedies" - do-it-yourself (DIY) solutions that are generally of
lower status when compared to the predominant options available through
consumer gateways and networks. Within architecture, in the early 2000s
the promise of "mass customization" led to the belief that technology had
finally given us tools to bridge the gap between the droning same-ness of
consumer society and the specific needs of individual consumers, giving
rise to a "bespoke" approach to design and construction.3 Yet, nothing in
these regimes empower individual and communal agencies beyond their
capacity to make consumer choices which are ultimately controlled by
architects and manufacturers operating with exclusive, digital means. Even
if today the focus on digital fabrication has waned, exceptional architecture
studios with small-scale projects continue to grapple with the luxury of
time, money, and use of the best crafts and materials for one-off projects.
Larger studios, in close collaboration with industry, struggle to fit within a
project's budget and time the attention needed to be inventive with details.
Building information modeling (BIM), building codes and regulations

complicate matters even more, and built solutions become highly repetitive
and standardized from project to project.
The operating paradigms between large and small studios in the Global
North hardly recognize the built production that is administered and
executed by non-architects, what Bernard Rudofsky called the "communal
vernacular."4 Although the production of the communal vernacular today is
not as pretty, organized and gradual as Rudofsky's examples, it is also not
very present in affluent countries. Where it happens, mostly in the Global
South, it is messy, precarious, sometimes humorous and witty (Figures 8.1
and 8.2). Where economic issues and less invasive industrial systems exist,
examples of the communal vernacular and its influence to architects have
much to teach us.


FIGURE 8.1 Added exhaust duct for a barbecue shop in La Plata,
Argentina. Photograph by author. ⏎
FIGURE 8.2 Membrane over roofs in São Paulo, Brazil, to
simplify repair work of localized leaks. Photograph by author. ⏎
To solve building problems atado con alambre provides an entry point
for examining what could be understood as a contemporary communal
vernacular. One can begin by taking a closer look at the phrase. Atado, from
the verb atar, denotes an act of tying or binding together. Rather than
binding with traditional material such as string or rope, generally derived
from plant materials, alambre (wire) references an archetypical material of
industrialized society. Impossible to produce autonomously, wire can
nonetheless be manufactured at a cost that practically anyone can afford.
Unlike the Global North, where metal wire is often highly specified and
marketed, a roll of bendable steel wire in Argentina is a general-purpose

staple of any household. The applications are endless. It is the quintessential
"at-hand" tool - able to bind just about anything with only the most
minimal means, creatively employed by individuals in the service of their
immediate needs and community.5 A roll of steel wire, then, is what Ivan
Illich, might wittingly call a "convivial tool" - "those which give each
person who uses them the greatest opportunity to enrich the environment
with the fruits of his or her vision."6 Following Illich, to solve a problem,
atado con alambre is fundamentally unproductive in the industrial sense of
efficiency; rather, it fosters "conviviality" in the "autonomous and creative
intercourse among persons, and the intercourse of persons with their
environment."7 A roll of steel wire is thus the ultimate convivial tool for
cleverly binding situations, relationships and, for architects, tricky
construction problems.
The dominant, industrialized approach to problem solving in the design
fields, particularly in the Global North, is embodied in the engineer, a
highly trained professional who imagines ideal and efficient solutions.
Arguably, the first engineer-architect in the Western context was Filippo
Brunelleschi. Using ingenious devices of his own invention, he rationalized
space by demonstrating mathematical perspective, initiated the construction
of the world's largest masonry dome at Santa Maria del Fiore in Florence,
and took control of medieval construction labor through a series of novel
building site protocols. He was also the first to be awarded a patent, one of
the legal foundations of industrialized society.8 Reflecting on the power
structures set by Brunelleschi at the construction site, Brazilian architect-
historian Sérgio Ferro wrote that "the complete separation between
construction labourers and the 'inorganic' (material, instrumental., etc.)
conditions of their labour" occurs at this time in history. Design, Ferro
argues, was formed to validate its capacity to "re-unite" labor on the

construction site.9 Such positioning of the discipline and its inherent control
over those who build buildings has since then shaped the state of
architecture as a form of capitalist production.10 To what extent this has
been done has tended to point to a well-known use and abuse of laborers
and a consequential erasure of their creativity and autonomy.11
In contrast to the engineer, Claude Lévi-Strauss famously described the
figure of the "bricoleur" as one who re-claims creativity and autonomy in
the shaping of the built environment. In La pensée sauvage from 1962, he
wrote:
The "bricoleur" is adept at performing a large number of diverse tasks;
but, unlike the engineer, he does not subordinate each of them to the
availability of raw materials and tools conceived and procured for the
purpose of the project ... the rules of his game are always to make do
with "whatever is at hand."12
In a more recent work, Irénée Scalbert examined the bricoleur in relation to
the figure of the architect, positioning bricolage as a "state of mind and
mode of design that embraces the rise of ecology." Moving away from an
emphasis on form in the practice of architecture, he sees bricolage as "a life
process ... [that] values flair, wisdom and forethought, resourcefulness,
deception and vigilance, opportunism, skills, and experience."13 It is
something quite close to the Roman notion of sollertia (from the Greek
metis), a kind of cunning intelligence which was described already by
Vitruvius as one of the fundamental skills of the architect.14 In other words,
the architect-bricoleur works cunningly with the residue of mass materials
and the left-overs of capitalism - collecting, assembling, and making do
with what is at hand. Ultimately, unlike the engineer, for whom materials
are realized through abstract, mathematical means, the architect-bricoleur

works with materials that are pre-constrained, concrete, and within a
specific context. It is a subversive practice that takes back power from the
traditional dependence of architecture on the separation of design and
construction.
The figurative aspect of atado con alambre obviously encompasses much
more than can be actually fixed with wire, to include practically any
material or resource that has been used before and is at hand. This is not
only a matter of ecological consequence. Just as industrialization creates
competition for scarce commodities, so do alternative, convivial practices
such as bricolage lead to abundant, cultural surplus - a reconnection
between architects and the work of the building site. In their 1960s' effort
with Arquitetura Nova, Sérgio Ferro, Rodrigo Lefèvre, and Flávio Império
considered how to empower workers through the use of technologies
known to them and through the design of buildings that would allow them
to perform autonomously within a particular set of skills. Throughout his
work, Ferro consistently held the belief that the "combination of autonomy
and solidarity can bring much joy in construction."15 For better or worse,
the messy and unstable dynamics that continue to shape life in the Global
South, not without important issues, can allow, more so than in the Global
North, for convivial exchanges in collaboration not just between architects
and workers but also environments.
As has been pointed out in relation to tools, Illich's notion of conviviality
is an ethical value that goes beyond the interaction between persons to also
consider interaction with environments, both built and natural.16 To extend
forms of collaboration beyond interpersonal relations implies looking at and
sympathizing with what is there, what is available; what are its qualities,
potentials, identities, and even problems. Bricolage and atado con alambre
are not forms of individual intelligence, but rely on and are validated within

the everyday life of a community. In the 1950s, Alison and Peter Smithson,
in searching for new ways of rethinking architecture, wrote about how
encountering mundane realities could allow for "an openness as to how
prosaic 'things' could re-energise our inventive activity."17 Making
architecture, they implied, should not just rely on obscure, isolated design
processes; it should be open to the existing ordinary worlds that make up
everyday life. Being attentive to existing environments, built and natural,
thus nurtures forms of conviviality among all participants of an
architectural project because it allows for collective and careful alliances
between workers, things, places, and design.
Many efforts by different groups of practicing architects, often small,
continue to show forms of resistance that support workers' emancipation
and production in the complicated and complex network of realizing and
defining architecture. Three cases from South America briefly examined
below look deeper into how such architects are working with material
scarcity and at-hand conditions to foster a new kind of convivial practice.
The insights result from a series of interviews and site visits with the
architects, who generously opened their doors and offered their reflections.
By understanding socio-economic situations, they make the most out of the
least. Without raising loud political, environmental or discursive flags,
emerging practices in South America offer alternative ways of working in
times of global crises.
Vagueness
Wonder is induced by the beautiful, the horrible, and the skillfully
made, by the bizarre and rare, by that which challenges or suddenly

illuminates our expectations, by the range of difference, even the order
and regularity, found in the world. - Caroline Walker Bynum18
At the reception of the Debut Award of the Lisbon Architecture Triennale of
2022, Anna Juni from vão, an architecture practice in São Paulo, started by
explaining their company name, which in Portuguese means both a
structural span and something vague. Exemplifying what vão is with images
of Lina Bo Bardi's Museo de Arte de São Paulo (MASP), Anna recalled that
their practice embodied both the engineering and structural efforts of what
it takes to make a span and the possibilities of free occupation generated by
the space Bo Bardi allowed to exist below the generous concrete structure
spanning a side of São Paulo's Avenida Paulista (Figure 8.3).19

FIGURE 8.3 Space beneath the expansive Museo de Arte de São
Paulo, designed by Lina Bo Bardi. Photograph by author. ⏎
To be vague, the vão architects argued, is to allow architecture to be
experienced in a multiplicity of forms. Vão's vagueness is also present in

how they work and organize their studio: they teach, they collaborate with
artists, they look at each project as an individual entity, they collaborate
with builders and acknowledge their skills, they research, and so on. While
vagueness is often associated with lack of precision, it can also be
associated with the acts of wondering, moving slowly, being attentive.20
One could connect this form of wonder to what historian Caroline Walker
Bynum wrote in her study on medieval notions of wonder: "wonder was a
response to something novel and bizarre that seemed both to exceed
explanation and to indicate that there might be reason (significance-not
necessarily cause) behind it."21
In our conversation with Anna Juni, Enk te Winkel and Gustavo
Delonero in November 2022, the architects explained:
When we talk about our work, we like to talk about processes. We
don't like to show the work as a great idea that emerged from nowhere.
Ideas emerge from possibilities and impossibilities. Ideas emerge to
justify and to enable that something is done, they don't emerge from
an aesthetic dream detached from a reality.
In their early award-winning project Subsolanus (Under the Sun) from 2016
- co-authored with Marina Canhadas and realized at the LIGA gallery,
Espacio para Arquitectura in Mexico City - vão's architects aimed to bring
natural air from the rooftop of a building, where the association held
conferences and meetings, to its ground floor, where a small exhibition
space existed. The installation on the existing building, designed by
Augusto Álvarez, stretched 30 meters high (Figure 8.4). The competition
call was entitled Geometrías Invisibles, and it called for an installation
piece at the very small gallery. Within the constraint of smallness, the
architects imagined instead a large, yet minor intervention full of air that

would acknowledge the area winds and the invisibility of such movements
into the little room while connecting to the rooftop activities. Such an idea,
they explained, came from a set of accidental and known references that
connected with São Paulo's everyday urban life and their studies from
architecture school.

FIGURE 8.4 Subsolanus installation by vão in Mexico City.
Photo courtesy of vão. ⏎

Inspired by situations they would normally encounter in the city, the
project emerged from two scenarios: a humorous arrangement of discarded
materials found randomly on the street (Figure 8.5) and the common
practice by homeless people of drying clothes/bedding at metro ventilation
openings (Figure 8.6). These encounters reminded the architects of
Rudofsky's published photographs of wind structures in West Pakistan, and
they related these references to the atmospheric conditions of Mexico
City.22 Because the gallery was so small, it seemed the only possible
intervention was to fill it with air. The project was realized with very little
money (2,000 USD) and a lot of courage, as they recalled. Silver tape,
plastic membranes and a minimal steel structure brought not just air to the
small gallery but also public attention and visibility due to its unimagined
scale (Figures 8.7 and 8.8). The effort was possible due to a lot of
mentoring, consultations and interactions with the engineer Rui Furtado, the
constructor BonifÁcio López, and a former professor, Marta Bogéa.

FIGURE 8.5 Arrangement with discarded materials found in the
streets of São Paulo by vão. Photo courtesy of vão. ⏎
FIGURE 8.6 Drying bedding over metro ventilation grills. Photo
courtesy of vão. ⏎

FIGURE 8.7 Subsolanus installation detail by vão in Mexico
City showing plastic membrane. Photo courtesy of vão. ⏎

FIGURE 8.8 Subsolanus installation detail by vão in Mexico
City showing steel structure. Photo courtesy of vão. ⏎
Vão's light, humorous way of working can be found in many of their
built projects, where a sense of wit and joy surrounds their decisions. This
form of knowledge appears to rely on both their formal education and the
diverse conditions they encounter in their everyday life, confronted by
socio-political and economical struggles and a constant vibrancy in the
cultural practices of making ends meet. Like a bricoleur working with what
is available, they humbly augment the convivial life of the city through the
built environment.
Differential Thickness
Marginal objects, objects with no clear place, play important roles. On
the lines between categories, they draw attention to how we have
drawn the lines. Sometimes in doing so they incite us to reaffirm the

lines, sometimes to call them into question, stimulating different
distinctions.23
- Sherry Turkle
The Argentinean parrilleros (grillers) who sell sausages and other meat on
the city's streets have a particular technique to attract customers. They place
a small lump of fat in the fire to expand the reach of the smoke in the hope
of attracting more customers within a larger radius. Something local and
marginal, as Turkle argues, becomes expansive by increasing the possibility
of how far it can stretch. Spatial practices as such are important to Juan
Pablo Berbery, an architect and teacher working in the capital, Buenos
Aires. Juan Pablo's studio is called OTRO ("Other") and he is a member of
the collective Dispositivos Nómades, which studies and documents urban
nomadic devices such as those that the grillers and other businesses build
and move around cities. His interest in urban and suburban socio-cultural
artifacts and built conditions manifests also in the way he practices the
discipline.
The project Casa Yaraví in Moreno, exemplifies Juan Pablo's approach.
Moreno is a city bordering Buenos Aires that he associates with the Guaraní
term yeré, which he explains is something that surrounds and protects
something else.24 A yeré can be a good friend or an enclosure around a
house to protect it from wind and heat. He considers Moreno to be this
bordering structure of the capital, wanting to have a bit of the center but
always remaining on the periphery. The project is located in a modest
middle-class neighborhood, and he was commissioned to essentially make a
yeré, an open carport for one vehicle on one side of a house and a gallery
for drinking mate (a herbal infusion) or similar outdoor activities on the
other. The project's minimal budget entailed that most materials had to be

found, and labor was conducted by the architect himself together with his
cousin.
Leftovers from another construction site determined the materials to
begin the work. More than 200 French roof tiles were transformed into two
columns, one at the front and one at the back. The architect's aim was to
maximize the space on the ground floor with minimal disruption, and, if
needed, to expand the compact carport to fit two cars if needed for visitors.
Garages/carports in Argentina are extremely versatile spaces - used for
anything from birthday parties and Sunday barbecue lunches to gym classes
organized among neighbors. The garage embodies a space quality that Juan
Pablo likes to call "differential thickness." The columns to allow room for
such spaces were then made by covering the stacked French tiles with
cement mortar to try to erase their identity as much as possible (Figure 8.9).
Two holes were made in each tile to tide them structurally with reinforcing
bars, a literal example of atado con alambre (Figure 8.10).

FIGURE 8.9 Column project at Casa Yaraví by OTRO, Buenos
Aires Photo by Federico Cairoli. Courtesy of Juan Pablo Berbery.
⏎
FIGURE 8.10 Construction of column project at Casa Yaraví:
using a tuna can to smooth the mortar joints. Photo courtesy of

Juan Pablo Berbery. ⏎
The two columns sit on small, non-visible concrete bases. They are
topped with a steel beam that connects to a flexible joint to allow for
discrete movement due to wind and other factors. The beam is helped by a
steel cable connected to the column's foundation at one end and the existing
roof of the house at the other. From this beam, two smaller ones hang
perpendicular on one side and on the other side rest on the party wall of the
lot (Figures 8.11 and 8.12). The new garage and gallery coverings are made
from a simple steel frame with a corrugated metal sheet. The witty,
seemingly fragile structure lightens the entrance and the back of the house,
maximizing the space and responding to the clients' needs with the minimal
use of materials.

FIGURE 8.11 Drawings of Casa Yaraví project by OTRO
showing the two new additions at the front and back of the house.
Drawing courtesy of Juan Pablo Berbery. ⏎

FIGURE 8.12 Column project at Casa Yaraví. Photo courtesy of
Federico Cairoli. ⏎
Like the bricoleur, when it comes to designing buildings, Juan Pablo
Berbery's approach encourages the accumulation of partial fragments. He
begins projects by understanding different spatial situations that involve
people, physical components and their performance to make "life" happen.
In his design thinking, he insists on expressing the weight of things and
their potential associations. Within this vibrant intellectual position,
fragments, pieces, devices can respond to different problems, and in their
material and structural accumulation can create new spatial possibilities.
Differential thickness is a concept that Juan Pablo employs to expand on
what perhaps anthropologist Lucy Suchman called "situated action."
Suchman elaborates on this notion to explain that
the course of action depends in essential ways upon the action's
circumstances. Rather than attempting to abstract action from its
circumstances and reconstruct it as a rational plan, the approach is to
study how people use their circumstances to achieve intelligent
action.25
Suchman gives agency to particular actions to indicate that fragments and
smaller units of execution are determinant of larger plans (or designs) and
not just subordinates. Differential thickness is then the space of architecture
to embody many places, to reach out far and near, to transform thin
materials into thick ones, and the capacity of exercise intellectual
permutations that shuffle and recombine known things into unexpected and
surprising ones.

Opportunism
Sometimes we have to talk to explain what is it that we are not yet
sufficiently clear about, but in the conversation it appears with great
force and that's good. We are made by others.26
- Solano Benitez
While opportunism can be associated with morally selfish acts, in
architecture it can also be a form of knowledge that finds chances among
defined systems or seemingly useless materials or conditions. Forms of
positive opportunism at many scales are found the built work of Argentine
architect Agustín Berzero, based in Córdoba, capital of the eponymous
province. During an interview at his house in the city, when asked, for
example, about the kitchen table at which we were seated, which was a
concrete slab, he responded that he had made it from an earlier table which
he did not like and, to give it a purpose, he used it as a framework for the
present one. The house he built for himself mostly comprises exposed
thermal bricks, a common and inexpensive material produced in Córdoba
that defines mostly low-cost constructions by non-architects (Figure 8.13).
Agustín used this material in multiple ways, such as for load-bearing walls
and as a thin screen on the front facade that provides security and privacy to
the house. He created the screen by cutting each thermal block (on-site) into
three parts. By thinning the bricks, he reduced the weight of the screen and
maximized the use of the material. The house, which is full of details made
with recycled/repurposed items and a clever use of materials is a modern
monument to opportunism. Agustín believes that each project is indeed an
opportunity to do something graceful, joyful. Instead of repeating solutions

from project to project, each exercise is a chance to investigate materials
differently.
FIGURE 8.13 Agustín Berzero's house in Córdoba, Argentina
showing thermal blocks cut to make a thin screen. Photo courtesy
of Federico Cairoli. ⏎
As Solano Benitez quoted above, a project appears by both the architect
and the conditions - materials, labor, time - in a conversation. In two
projects, he has been exploring how to articulate brick bonding so that all
the plumbing and electricity infrastructure can be built concurrently within
the wall section. To make this happen, in the Tres Casas project, Agustín
Berzero developed a bonding typology that works vertically, leaving linear
ducts to embed the various tubes and pipes needed to supply the house
(Figure 8.14). Working closely with construction workers, they tested the
bonding detail on site, which proved to work well. The brick walls work
simultaneously with concrete columns and slabs that together provide
stability to the entire spatial system (Figure 8.15). Agustín challenges

himself to make a wall section that simultaneously considers aspects of
structural and infrastructural resolution driven by several factors. One of
them is the desire to honor the skill of bricklayers by avoiding any post-
demolition to install pipes on the walls. Another factor is the desire to
reduce the use of materials by avoiding any rendering or plastering of walls.
To attain this, wall resolution must be done in the tidiest, most skilled way.
And a third aspect is the concurrent planning of workers' schedules,
bricklayers, plumbers and electricians, so they can all work in the most
efficient way as the walls go up. The resourceful handling of workers' time
reduces costs for the client while providing the workers with a clear
understanding of the project's logic, which they appreciate as they are not
faced with surprises when tasks are disconnected for each other's field of
expertise.
FIGURE 8.14 Brick bonding of Tres Casas project in Córdoba by
Agustín Berzero. Photo courtesy of Agustín Berzero. ⏎

FIGURE 8.15 Brick walls showing vertical bonding and concrete
columns of Tres Casas. Photo courtesy of Agustín Berzero. ⏎
In Agustín Berzero's Casa Cerámica project in Córdoba, another
experiment with brick walls occurs. In this case, the use of thermal ceramic
blocks, which are thicker than regular bricks, opened up the opportunity for
the architect to imagine with its hollowness (Figures 8.16 and 8.17). The
vertical cavities are obtained by making strategic cuts in some of the blocks
where the required ducts need to go through the wall. Again, the decision
was made with the desire to avoid any post-demolition of the wall to install
infrastructural elements. For Agustín, the premise of working with scarcity
in the most graceful way is manifest in all the projects he undertakes.

FIGURE 8.16 Construction of Casa Cerámica in Córdoba by
Agustín Berzero, showing internal cavities for service pipes and
ducts. Photo courtesy of Agustín Berzero. ⏎

FIGURE 8.17 Construction of Casa Cerámica by Agustín
Berzero. Photo courtesy of Agustín Berzero. ⏎
The practice of "turning things around," just like the atado con alambre
expression, has its own formalized significance in Spanish: buscarle la

vuelta, which means to look for the right "turn" so something can work, so
something can fit well. In the constant movement of searching for
something through conversations around models, one can realize and
discover structural and spatial qualities of different architectural
components. This practice of "turning things around" resonates with the
work of Argentinean architect Rafael Iglesia, who saw architecture in
constant potency towards new arrangements and opportunities. Speaking
about his work, Ana María Rigotti explains that Iglesia understood
architecture components as
objects that assert themselves in their autonomy and matter and refer to
playful, childish experiences, to the simple logic of support and
balance of wooden blocks, puzzles, chopsticks, playing cards ...
always out of tune with the logic of codes and reconsidering the
elements as interchangeable pieces to assemble.27
The playful nature of Iglesia's approach to architecture is embodied in
Agustín's methodology.
"Unconcludingly" ...
For both the philosopher and the humourist, nothing is to be taken for
granted: everything can be looked at with a questioning, experimental,
even irreverent eye.28
- John Morreall
Morreall's observation puts the humorist and the philosopher in the same
pot. Although from quite different disciplines, they both deal with
understanding human conditions and, for this reason, the approach is the

same. Perhaps one could make a similar observation between architects and
non-architects involved in shaping their built environment. Instead of
seeing a formal divide, separated by education, certification, and access to
specialized tools, we could frame their approaches through the common
pursuit of conviviality. As the practice of architecture in the Global North
faces its dependence on economic growth and accumulated capital -
arguably in place since Brunelleschi - it must discover alternatives to the
continued complicity in the status quo. Such emerging architects as have
been exposed here, only a few of the many unheralded practices throughout
the Global South, work with humor and wit and embed themselves in their
communities, thus offering inspiration for doing more with less - for fixing
difficult life situations with just a spool of metal wire.
Notes
1. Claudio Zuchovicki in an interview with Mario Pergolini on the
Vorterix radio show, March 20, 2023. Here and throughout, all
translations into English are by the authors unless stated otherwise. ⏎
2. Lina Bo Bardi and Marcelo Carvalho Ferraz (eds.), Lina Bo Bardi. 4th
ed. (São Paulo: Instituto Bardi Casa de Vidro: Romano Guerra, 2018),
220. ⏎
3. Bob Sheil, "Manufacturing Bespoke Architecture," Nexus Network
Journal, 14 (2012): 441-456. ⏎
4. Bernard Rudofsky, Architecture Without Architects: A Short
Introduction to Non-Pedigreed Architecture (Albuquerque: University
of New Mexico Press, 1964), 5. ⏎
5. Martin Heidegger refers to this as Zuhandenheit (readiness-to-hand) in
Being and Time, translated by John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson

(New York: Harper Row, 1962), 98-102. ⏎
6. Ivan Illich, Tools for Conviviality (New York: Marion Boyars, 2021),
21. ⏎
7. Ivan Illich, Tools for Conviviality (New York: Marion Boyars, 2021),
11. ⏎
8. Frank D. Prager, "Brunelleschi's Patent," Journal of the Patent Office
Society, 28 (February 1946): 109-135. ⏎
9. Sérgio Ferro, Architecture from Below: An Anthology, edited by Silke
Kapp and Mariana Moura, translated by Ellen Heyward and Ana
Naomi de Sousa (London: MACK, 2024), 29, 30. ⏎
10. Pier Vittorio Aureli, "Do You Remember Counterrevolution? The
Politics of Filippo Brunelleschi's Syntactic Architecture," AA Files, 71
(2015): 164. ⏎
11. Sérgio Ferro, Architecture from Below: An Anthology, edited by Silke
Kapp and Mariana Moura, translated by Ellen Heyward and Ana
Naomi de Sousa (London: MACK, 2024), 30-31. ⏎
12. Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind (La pensée sauvage) [1962],
translated by George Weidenfeld and Nicolson Ltd (London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1966), 11-14. ⏎
13. Irénée Scalbert, "The Architect as Bricoleur," Candid: Journal for
Architectural Knowledge, 4 (07/2011): 69-88, 87, 77. ⏎
14. Marco Frascari, "The Compass and the Crafty Art of Architecture,"
Modulus 22: The Architectural Review at the University of Virginia
(1993): 6-7. Vitruvius, On Architecture, I,1,17. ⏎
15. Marina Meneguetti, "Interview with Sérgio Ferro," Architectural
Review (February 8, 2023). https://www.architectural-
review.com/essays/profiles-and-interviews/interview-with-sergio-ferro.
⏎

16. Ivan Illich, Tools for Conviviality (New York: Marion Boyars, 2021),
11. ⏎
17. Alison and Peter Smithson, "The 'As Found' and the 'Found'," in The
Independent Group: Postwar Britain and the Aesthetics of Plenty,
edited by David Robbins (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 201-202. ⏎
18. Caroline Walker Bynum, "Wonder," American Historical Review, 102,
1 (1997): 1-26, 21. https://doi.org/10.1086/ahr/102.1.1. ⏎
19. Authors' interview with Anna Juni, Enk te Winkel and Gustavo
Delonero at their architecture studio in São Paulo, November 25, 2022.
⏎
20. According to the online Dizionario Etimologico, the Latin divagare,
from which the term "vague" derives, means slowing down, or moving
away from the main road to go somewhere else. ⏎
21. Caroline Walker Bynum, "Wonder," American Historical Review, 102,
1 (1997): 1-26, 24. ⏎
22. Bernard Rudofsky, Architecture Without Architects: A Short
Introduction to Non-Pedigreed Architecture (Albuquerque: University
of New Mexico Press, 1964), 92-93. ⏎
23. Quoted by Lucy A. Suchman in Plans and Situated Actions: The
Problem of Human-Machine Communication (Palo Alto, CA: Xerox
Association, 1985); originally in Sherry Turkle, The Second Self:
Computers and the Human Spirit (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984),
34. ⏎
24. The Guaraní term as shared by Juan Pablo Berbery in a conversation
with his friend and architect Quique. November 24, 2023. ⏎
25. Lucy A. Suchman, Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of
Human-Machine Communication (Palo Alto, CA: Xerox Association,
1985), 35. ⏎

26. Solano Benítez and Gloria Cabral, Archives: Journal of Architecture, 6
(A Coruña: C2C Proyectos Editoriales de Arquitectura, 2020), 51. ⏎
27. Claudio Solari, Rafael Iglesia: Lecturas en la construcción poética
(Buenos Aires: Diseño, 2020), 57. ⏎
28. John Morreall, The Philosophy of Laughter and Humor (Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1987), 2-3. ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

9
DRIVEN TO DISTRACTION
Matthias Altwicker
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-10
A quantifiable understanding of the environment - how architecture
responds to it, how architecture impacts it - has taken an outsized position
in the profession since the mid-1990s. Meeting environmental performance
standards and certification forms an immense part of the responsibility of
today's architect. With these standards adopted and codified by
governments, municipalities, and private clients, they have become as
critical to the profession as health, safety, and welfare codes.
This standardization of environmental responses creates an illusion that
this should be considered progress. In almost all cases, the response to
environmental performance has left architects in the position of controlling
the environment rather than understanding it. Do we give away ownership
of decisions on materials and systems to experts who can use the
quantifications to make decisions? Do we invest time and knowledge in our
understanding of these standards to manage them and use them to our
advantage, even at the expense of other project goals we may have? Or do
we instead try to understand the environment, and discover new ways to
interact with it beyond quantifiable science? How architects respond to the
increased pressures and responsibilities generated by environmental

concerns is the primary decision we make today, and the path forward has
many forks in it and distractions along it.
Biosfera and Definitely Maybe
The Biosphere - the conception of synchronized elements of the natural
world - is less than 100 years old, first appearing in the lectures of Russian-
Ukrainian mineralogist Vladimir Vernadsky and published in Biosfera (The
Biosphere) in 1926. Its broader influence began to take root in the western
world in the 1960s, paralleling the political directives for the quantitative
measurement of the environment that developed out of a scientific-
industrial directive that itself was a response to the 1973 oil crisis.
Vernadsky provided the scientific community and ecologists with a newly
conceived notion of the interrelationship of planetary processes in Biosfera.
It posits that all parts of the earth, not just the living ones, are inextricably
linked in a self-regulating complex system that maintains life on the planet.
With this thesis, Vernadsky simultaneously asks two things of scientists and
researchers: The first is that everything in the Biosphere needs to be
measured. The second is that our understanding of the Biosphere must
extend through time, from the beginning of life back to the pre-geological
stages of planetary evolution. He was not concerned with degradation of the
environment by human development because degradation happened as part
of the natural world.
For Vernadsky, one of the problems with gaining a complete picture of
the environment was the disparate understandings of how to look at the
environment. For him, "Observations of nature gives indications of this
mechanism in the biosphere"1 - and this measuring and observing natural
phenomena could allow us to better understand the things we could not
measure or were unable to measure. While this appears on the surface to

indicate an approach based in quantification, the nuance of the work is
about the gaining of knowledge, not only through measurement but through
a variety of observations.
Arkady and Boris Strugatsky's science fiction novel Definitely Maybe: A
Manuscript Discovered Under Unusual Circumstances picks up on these
concerns and offers a parable to all professionals, including architects, who
deal with the measuring of the environment. First published in 1976 (and
written in the same year as the oil crisis), it uses the authors' familiarity
with Vernadsky's work on the Biosphere as a basis for the novel's unseen
protagonist - the homeostatic universe. In the novel, this universe subtly
adjusts the lives of scientists poised to complete breakthrough research in
fields of understanding the environment. The distractions are in human
form - cerebral, comic, erotic, mundane - and present themselves as minor
adjustments to the path of human thought, so subtle as to (almost) avoid
suspicion and detection. Yet they lead the scientists away from pushing their
breakthroughs forward. The novel is structured around two groups of
scientists, each a reflection of various attitudes towards science (and
parallel concerns of scientific research): the believers - those who accept
the scientific parameters and allow them to guide their choices; and the
dialecticians - who seek a deeper understanding of the environment through
their connection to it, both through experience and study.
Believers
The first group in Definitely Maybe, the main characters, are scientists and
researchers - Malianov (an astrophysicist), Vecherovsky (a mathematician),
and Weingarten (a biologist) (Figure 9.1). Each is committed to their
research for their own intellectual reasons, and they neatly reflect the
sciences critical to the Vernadskyian multilayered system of the Biosphere.

It is the character of Vecherovsky - himself a surrogate for Vernadsky -
who analyzes the situation of distraction as a theorist of progress, and who
defines the homeostatic universe to his colleagues:
If only the law of nondecreasing entropy existed, the structure of the
universe would disappear, and chaos would reign. But, on the other
hand, if only a constantly self-perfecting and all-powerful intelligence
prevailed, the structure of the universe based on homeostasis would
also be disrupted ... a constantly developing intelligence can have but
one goal: to change nature. That is why the gist of the Homeostatic
Universe consists in maintaining the balance between the increase in
entropy and the development of reason. That is why there are no and
can be no supercivilizations, since the term supercivilization is used
for intelligence developed to such a degree that it transcends the law of
nondecreasing entropy on a cosmic scale. And what was happening to
us now was nothing other than the first reaction of the Homeostatic
Universe to the threat of humanity becoming a supercivilization. The
universe was defending itself.2

FIGURE 9.1 Malyanov, Snegovoi, and Vecherovsky consider the
seemingly random proceedings. Still from Days of Eclipse, 1988;
Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, screenplay. (image courtesy
Sputnik/Lenfilm) ⏎
Of the believers, Vecherovsky remains calm about the distractions
happening to all of them as he has already theorized why they are
happening. This calms him down and he presents himself as the voice of
reason to the rest of the scientists. Malianov, on the other hand, only sees
his work going off-track, and is increasingly bothered by the distractions
which continue throughout the novel - many of them coming from the other
scientists themselves. He is resentful that he cannot get his brilliant work
finished. Weingarten, the third believer, is also the one who has been
dealing with the distractions the longest. His approach is to continue his
work at a level that will avoid the distractions but continue to satisfy his
mind. The believers represent certainly the basic positions of scientific
research within a centralized, authoritarian decision-making process, one in
which ordinary people have no role. The characters are very much a
reflection of scientists under the environmental approaches of the early
20th-century Russian regimes, changes in the management of the
environment and ecology of Russia that impacted the research agendas of
its scientists.3
Dialecticians
The second group in Definitely Maybe are those considering the events and
questioning themselves about how to respond to them: Snegovoi, a
physicist and colonel; Gubar, an engineer and craftsman; and Glukhov, an
Orientalist. Together with the scientists, they characterize the problems with

the scientific community that Vernadsky believes lead to a
misunderstanding of the Biosphere.
preconceived ideas, long a part of geological thought, seem to
contradict the method of empirical generalization in science,
generalizations which constitute the fundamental discoveries of natural
scientists. One of these conceptions is that geological phenomena are
accidental coincidences of causes, essentially blind, and obscure
because of their complexity and number. This preconceived idea is
only partly related to certain philosophical-religious interpretations of
the work; mainly it is based upon incomplete logical analysis of our
empirical knowledge.4
The dialecticians questioning themselves and their experiences - rather than
the science - creates a strong counterpoint in the book to the believers.
Snegovoi, the most vocal of them, is the first to state his paranoia - that his
interrupted research is caused by secret matters they cannot explain. When
he is later killed, the others discover that he is both a member of the
military and a scientist, which to them calls his science and very being into
question. It propels the characters into trying to resolve the events in their
head. Gubar, whose distractions are headaches keeping him from writing
and a newly discovered son, sees positive energy in the distractions that
allow him to keep researching without drawing any conclusions.
The third character in this group, Glukhov, the pure scholar, has decided
to become "one with nature, not to dig around in it". In this way he
articulates similar observations made by a group of scientists in the 1970s
led by chemist James Lovelock and microbiologist Lynn Margulis that
formed the beginnings of the Gaia principle - a self-regulating system
between living and non-living.5 This was the first time in the 20th century

that the concept of the self-regulating system was articulated. It was also a
concept that was presented simultaneously as a spiritual belief system, as a
way to bring individuals into connection with the scientific principles
behind the theory. Glukhov articulates this as only a scientist who has
undergone a change in his thinking can:
You must choose life! What else? Surely not your telescopes and test
tubes. Let them choke on your telescopes! And interstellar gases! You
have to live, love, feel nature - really feel it, not dig around in it!
When I look at a tree or a bush now, I feel. I know that it is my friend,
that we exist for each other, that we need each other.6
This method of connection to the earth was especially prevalent in Russia at
the time Definitely Maybe was written. What informed this diverse set of
attitudes towards science and discovery? Arkady and Boris Strugatsky (born
1925 and 1933) grew up and lived through major transformations in
Russian/Soviet society until their deaths (in 1991 and 2012, respectively).
Their professional work in the military and at university as they began their
writing careers brought them into contact with a wide variety of opinions on
the changes taking place their home country.7 They came into contact with
people whose work was directly impacted by the shifting changes and
approaches to its environment and ecology. The country implemented
various environmental approaches to land and ecology during the life of the
Strugatskys. Under Lenin, over 6 million hectares of land were preserved to
protect the environment. Under Stalin, the industrial and productive agenda
outweighed the preservation of resources and drove large portions of the
preserved land into deep contamination. In parallel, the autonomy of the
scientific community (of which Vernadsky was a part) was lost.8

During the Cold War, leaders from Khrushchev to Brezhnev to
Gorbachev constantly altered environmental agendas, always driven by two
critical parameters: the role of the environment in relation to military
concerns and food production. These two goals worked to regenerate
pastoral pride and agricultural archetypes in the 1970s and 1980s - local
ecological groups who, like Glukhov, saw a different set of values in the
environment. The characters in the parable of Definitely Maybe pick up
clearly on this changing environmental policy and its seeming lack of effect
on human difficulties. Indeed, all the main characters in the story are the
result of the return of the autonomous scientific community under
Khrushchev's de-Stalinization.9 Here, Weingarten represents the scientific
research system tied to the government, with Malianov representing a
broader, more global significance of Nobel Prize research, much like his
colleague Vecherovsky, whose research is done in perfect isolation toward a
greater goal.
The book poses important questions about how humans are deeply
complicit in distracting themselves from achieving the goals that we hold
for our work and our world, while also offering possible ways of engaging
with those questions. As each character reacts to a situation, they respond
and adapt in different ways. The situation of these scientists is like that of
architects today - professionals who need to respond to the hard facts of
specialists (with specialized knowledge) while maintaining a focus on the
larger goals of the work. The larger goals necessarily incorporate
considerations of environmental performance, but also need to embody a
much more holistic view of the homeostatic universe.

The Biosphere and Architecture
The questions posed by Vernadsky, articulated by the Strugatskys, remain at
the forefront of an architect's task today: what to measure and, more
importantly, what the value of the measurements should be. There are over
600 sustainability certifications for projects worldwide, each with a various
standards and different ranges of focus, from single-attribute product
certifications to multiple-attribute building certifications (Figure 9.2).10
Large-scale impacts within the measurement of comfort and energy,
building scale measurement of construction to site effects, and detail and
component measurements are all part of the scope of the architect.
The majority of the certifications place the largest focus on criteria
within the environmental dimension which accounts for an average of
52% of the overall weighting across the certifications. The social
dimension accounts for 43% of the overall weighting across
certifications, with a large focus on the indoor environment
represented by the health aspect ... economy is only represented in the
certifications to a very low degree (an average of 5% of the overall
weighting). However, the aspects in the environmental and social
dimensions can potentially have an impact on the economic value of
the building and thus the economic dimension could be argued to
indirectly become a focus through the other dimensions.11

FIGURE 9.2 Global Distribution of Primary Sustainable
Certifications. Guide to Sustainable Building Certifications;
SBi/GXN, 2018 (image courtesy GXN) ⏎
Sustainability certifications can be categorized into three types: single-
attribute product certifications, multiple-attribute product certifications, and
multiple-attribute building certifications. Product certifications focus on one
or more sustainability aspect or quality of a product's performance, such as
energy efficiency rating, reduced water usage or sustainable procurement of
natural resources, such as timber. They may also extend to a range looking
at various characteristics of a product, such as life-cycle cost, quality
control, and energy usage. Product certifications, in general, improve
possibilities for comparison but can mislead about the overall sustainability
of the product. Multiple-attribute building certifications seek to establish a
holistic rating that goes beyond aggregating individual components of the
project.
This articulates the difficulty architects face in balancing scales of
measurements of detail and urban qualities and impacts. How do architects
deal with these parameters? Architects are inherently problem solvers, so it
is not a surprise that the profession has embraced a quantifiable approach.
The basis of all codes/certification is human comfort. Is this even

measurable? And what about human performance that is necessary to put
comfort levels in place and make them operational?
Hard Technology = Believers
One response would be analogous to the efforts of the scientists in
Definitely Maybe - ongoing study and quantification toward improvements
that benefit the researchers and the human interests in the studies. Scientific
research and development around the built environment have primarily
worked in the realms of technical solutions to problems. Much like the
certifications themselves, the research agendas occur at three scales: the
building, the planning, and the material.
In the United States, environmental building standards began to influence
development and construction as early as the inaugural Earth Day in April
1970, when New York and Michigan adopted environmental standards into
their Bill of Rights. This was prescient, as the 1973 oil crisis accelerated
small, measurable changes that occurred over the next 15 years. These
changes were large and impactful - speed limits for automobiles, permanent
daylight saving time, and energy department tax credits all reduced oil
consumption by 37%. Additional American Society of Heating,
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) code
developments based on increased ventilation exchanges and the elimination
of chemical elements in many materials further improved the health of
buildings and environments.12 However, despite their success in specific
areas, they had no directives or impact on the construction industry.
The first established environmental assessment method for buildings was
Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Methodology
(BREEAM) in 1990, which grew out of a government-funded research
entity that used the scientific-industrial directive as a way to tie together

policy and standards toward a common goal. In its earliest manifestations it
was about both better building performance and safety - along with
protecting government financial investment.13 The scale of this
environmental response - a single building - is easy to understand but has
minimal impact. The certified buildings being constructed each year make
up just 1-2% of the total building stock, meaning it will be generations
before there is a tipping point between certified and uncertified buildings
globally.14
The language of assessment and improvement was adopted from that of
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), started in 1972.
Although the broad gesture sought to begin the development of a global
energy policy, much of the document focuses on developing countries and
their "underdevelopment" as an environmental risk to the inhabitants and
the investments in those countries by other countries. The UN was using the
concepts of the Biosphere as a way to contextualize its work with an eye
towards larger-scale, centralized methods of management:
As far as deliberate weather modifications were concerned, there was
support for the Executive Director's proposal that action in this area
should be initiated; one representative called for legal studies
concerning this subject. Another representative suggested that an
international technological assessment should be carried out of all
future large-scale projects which were likely to change· the climate.
Yet another representative suggested that expert groups should
evaluate the likelihood and magnitude of the effects of changes in the
micro- and macro-climate on man and the biosphere.15
Environmental reporting from the 1970s onward, including the Brundtland
Report of 1987 (Our Common Future), insisted that "it is obvious that the

problems cannot be solved by one group, one group working in separation.
That is impossible."16 Rather than encouraging cooperation, this tended to
centralized thinking and planning on both the policy and the planning level,
continuing the fascination of politicians and architects with global-scale
environmental solutions. Projects as wide-ranging as Atlantropa by Herman
Sörgel in 1932, The Transformation of Nature by the Stalin regime in 1949
(Figure 9.3), or Eneropa by Rem Koolhaas' Office for Metropolitan
Architecture (OMA) in 2010 all use the language of reorganization and
control as a path to improving environmental performance and quality of
life.
FIGURE 9.3 Territorial reorganization under the guise of the
environment: "We Shall Overcome the Dry Season Too"; Stalinist
Propaganda Poster, 1949 (courtesy Wikimedia/Russian State
Library) ⏎

What there is very little of in these proposals is an agenda to understand
the biosphere; instead, we see the extreme investment of thought on how to
change the Biosphere. These agendas tended to develop without significant
impact on either economic or social levels. They also could not survive
financial stress, whether temporary shocks to labor markets or large-scale
slowdowns such as the 2008 crisis.
At the material scale, the construction industry needed to adapt to the
certifications and performance standards. On the base level, it has done so
with increased product verifications and studies that are subject to the
required third-party testing for approval; on another level, they have needed
to develop new products to meet those criteria. Perhaps the most interesting
and significant changes have been on the component level. Concrete is well
known as the worst material system for embodied carbon and circular
performance - in addition to being poor based on simpler metrics related to
thermal transfer. In response, the concrete industry has developed recycled
concrete aggregates, lightweight insulating aggregates, and reinforced
thermal bridging elements to improve the thermal performance of the
overall assembly system. Unfortunately, the building material assemblies
that exist globally have changed very little over time, and the expectations
of most developers have remained focused on minimal improvements.
Building an all-glass building with better-performing recycled glass and the
air-conditioning system powered by photovoltaics is indicative of the many
problems that the hard technology approach brings to architecture.
Soft Environmentalism = Dialecticians
The efforts of the dialecticians in Definitely Maybe - those searching for a
balance between humanity and science - parallel the soft environmentalism
movement. First championed and outlined by Denton Morrison, it offered

an alternate approach to the hard technological approach championed by
both government decisions and those that put business first.
The general enthusiasm, idealism, and even euphoria over the
environment that peaked around Earth Day facilitated the rapid
development of the legislative and regulatory means of implementing and
enforcing environmental reforms. Implementation of these reforms rapidly
changed this mood to one of realism as a stream of conflicts arose over the
substance, costs, methods, and rates of environmental protection.17
As mentioned earlier, environmental building standards began to
influence development and construction from the first Earth Day in 1970,
with New York and Michigan introducing environmental standards into
their Bill of Rights. As these developments continued through the 1973 oil
crisis, they had an impact on oil consumption and policy related to it. In the
20-year period after the crisis, oil consumption was reduced by 37%
through relatively simple changes in policy - for example, the
implementation of speed limits on the interstates, improved automobile
standards for efficiency, and the introduction of daylight saving time.18 Yet
the impact of these changes was minor within the bigger picture and did not
change problematic societal habits and activities.
Morrison's environmentalism advocated for an emphasis on local
production or sustained provision of local basic needs, which in turn would
create a focus on improved quality of life, not economic growth. Support
for local works, resources, and economies plays a large role in many
certifications, both to minimize embodied carbon levels by reducing
material travel times or by requiring local labor to be used for construction
teams. The Living Building Challenge in particular focuses on the social
impacts of sustainability, and it remains the certification with the least
certified buildings among the major ones.

Architects
Medicine, architecture, law, education, transportation, social work, and civil
engineering have all followed the path of increasingly professionalized,
more restricted, and less beneficial application of their skills. Our reaction
to their increasing damage and failure to achieve their aims has been to
escalate their technological, bureaucratic, and energetic growth. Such
fundamentally wrong assumptions can be countered only by de-
professionalizing the social agencies, setting limits to their operation, and
reassuming individual responsibility for their purposes.19
Today many architects immerse themselves in the entire building project,
and doing so requires a reframing of what the practice might be. While it
may include having certification-qualified architects on staff, this would be
the minimum level of engagement. Practices such as Gray Organschi
Architecture (GOA), based in New Haven, USA, embed research on carbon
transects and fabrication processes into their design process, allowing them
to use scientific approaches to architecture to better understand the issues
directly and to create new methods of communicating these concerns to
their clients. Architects emerging from the era of environmental movements
similarly reframed their practices to involve methodologies that would
understand the broader impacts as a way to better control them. Christopher
Alexander understood well all aspects of a development project, from
financing to construction, to supervision and decision making - in this way
controlling the product and the values it was intended to hold. The method,
more than the science, became the focus of the work.
At the same time that Alexander's research and development office began
to flourish, in 1973 the US National Academy of Sciences completed a
study of strategies for research in the environmental realm. Recognizing the
absence of an orderly development of research, the study posited two key

positions. The first was that of a collective conscience - that research is
necessary as a means of preventing problems through knowledge. This
leads to the second position: that risk taking needs to be considered as part
of both development and prevention models, not only on the side of safety
and business protection but also to allow flexibility in standards and
research. This flexibility is based on decision-theory thinking that does not
allow for rational decisions to be made under conditions of uncertainty.20
At the end of the novel Definitely Maybe, Glukhov (the engineer/soldier)
and Gubar (the scholar) retire to "the quiet life, for irresponsibility".
Weingarten (the biologist) accepts his appointment as head of a
government-funded research institute, where he will "do ten Nobel-winning
projects ... It's sort of like my birthright. The right of Weingarten to have
freedom of scientific curiosity."21 Malianov (the astrophysicist), despondent
and overwhelmed by events, gives up his research and breaks off contact
with the others, leaving Vecherovsky to work alone, in resistance while
understanding the futility of his approach:
The laws of nature must be studied and then put to use ...This law did
not manifest itself before our time, though it may be no accident that
Newton got caught up in interpreting the apocalypse and Archimedes
was cut down by a drunken soldier. The problem is that the law
manifests itself in only one way - through unbearable pressure.
Pressure that threatens your mind and even your life. But nothing can
be done here. Perhaps with time we will learn to channel the pressure
into harmless areas, and maybe even harness it to our own goals.22
Vecherovsky's attitude to the situation changed subtly over the course of the
novel; it could be understood as change from believer to dialectician. This
gives us much insight into a path forward for architects. Both hard

technology and soft environmentalism need quantification and science to
further their goals, but for architects the hopefulness of Vecherovsky's last
statement is to see that, with time, there is a way to direct the pressures
toward one's own goals. We need to set the goals, not the standards, and
then move forward with our work. If those goals are simply meeting
numerical values, then we are not seeing the totality of the way our work
connects with the entire environment, with the Biosphere. If we understand
the complex interactions of the Biosphere and become overwhelmed by the
complexity, we have not reframed the situation as one that is beneficial to
the work. Then the setting of standards will not only fail to have significant
environmental impact, but will also keep us from finding other avenues to
move our work forward.
Notes
1. Vladimir I. Vernadsky, The Biosphere, trans. David B. Langmuir
(Copernicus Publishing, 1926/1998), p.59. ⏎
2. Boris and Arkady Strugatsky, Definitely Maybe: A Manuscript
Discovered Under Unusual Circumstances (Melville House
Publishing, 1976/2014), p.103. Days of Eclipse, the film adaptation of
Definitely Maybe, uses different spellings for some characters (e.g.
Malianov/Malyanov, Snegovoi/Snegovoy). ⏎
3. Charlie Alexander, "Revisiting Soviet Environmental Policy 1953-
1982: A Leninist Concern for the Preservation of Nature" (Master's
Thesis, University of Bristol, October 2021). ⏎
4. Vladimir I. Vernadsky, The Biosphere, trans. David B. Langmuir
(Copernicus Publishing, New York 1926/1998), p.142. ⏎

5. Pey-Yi Chu; "Commentary: Vladimir Vernadsky, The Biosphere
(1926)" in The Future of Nature: Documents of Global Change, ed.
Libby Robin, Sverker Sörlin, and Paule Warde (Yale University Press,
2013), pp.161-173. ⏎
6. Boris and Arkady Strugatsky, Definitely Maybe: A Manuscript
Discovered Under Unusual Circumstances (Melville House
Publishing, 1976/2014), p.87. ⏎
7. Erik Simon, "The Strugatskys in Political Context" in Science Fiction
Studies (Vol. 31, No. 3, 2004), pp.378-406. ⏎
8. Elizabeth Tammaro, "Communism's Futures: Intelligentsia
Imaginations in the Writings of the Strugatsky Brothers" (Master's
Thesis, University of Central Florida, 2017). ⏎
9. Peter M. Langrind, "An Overview Of Environmental Law in the USSR
(Practicing Law And Doing Business In The Soviet Union" in NYLS
Journal of International and Comparative Law (Vol. 11, No. 3 1990):
Art. 16. ⏎
10. Kaspar Guldager Jensen and Harpa Birgisdottir (eds.), Guide to
Sustainable Building Certifications (SBi/GXN, 2018), p.15. ⏎
11. Kaspar Guldager Jensen and Harpa Birgisdottir (eds.), Guide to
Sustainable Building Certifications (SBi/GXN, 2018), p.16. ⏎
12. Michael L. Ross, "How the 1973 Oil Embargo Saved the Planet
OPEC" in Foreign Affairs (October 15, 2013).
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/north-america/2013-10-
15/how-1973-oil-embargo-saved-planet. ⏎
13. Richard Reed, Anita Bilos, Sara Wilkinson, and Karl-Werner Schulte;
"International Comparison of Sustainable Rating Tools" in Journal of
Sustainable Real Estate, (Vol. 1, 2009): 1-22. ⏎

14. World Green Building Council, The Business Case for Green Building:
A Review of the Costs and Benefits for Developers, Investors and
Occupants (2013). ⏎
15. United Nations Environment Program, "General Report of the
Governing Council," 28th Session Supplement No. 25 (A/9025), June
1973). ⏎
16. United Nations, Our Common Future: Report of the World
Commission on Environment and Development (Oxford University
Press, 1987). ⏎
17. Denton E. Morrison, "Whither Environmentalism? The Soft, Cutting
Edge of Environmentalism: Why and How the Appropriate
Technology Notion is Changing the Movement" in Natural Resources
Journal (Vol. 20, No. 2, 1980): 275-298. ⏎
18. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, "The 1973 Oil Crisis: One
Generation and Counting" in Chicago Fed Letter (No. 86, October
1994). ⏎
19. Tom Bender, "Sharing Smaller Pies" (February 1975)
https://tombender.org/societyworthlivingforarticles/smallerpies.html.
⏎
20. National Research Council, Environmental Quality and Social
Behavior: Strategies for Research: Report on a Study Conference on
Research Strategies in the Social and Behavioral Sciences on
Environmental Problems and Policies (National Academies Press,
1973). ⏎
21. Boris and Arkady Strugatsky, Definitely Maybe: A Manuscript
Discovered Under Unusual Circumstances (Melville House
Publishing, 1976/2014), pp.140, 121. ⏎

22. Boris and Arkady Strugatsky, Definitely Maybe: A Manuscript
Discovered Under Unusual Circumstances (Melville House
Publishing, 1976/2014), pp.140-141. ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

10
SYN(ES)THETIC FUTURES
Lessons from the Hermetically
Sealed
Brian Ambroziak and Katherine Bambrick
Ambroziak
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-11

Part One: Quantitative Dimensions
Icarian Vantage Points: It's Hard to Be Down
When You Are Up (scale 30,000′ - city)
Since the Scientific Revolution of the 16th century, science and technology
have incrementally removed us from reality into the realm of the inherently
abstract form of the image and the word, the signified. Examples such as
the mapping of the human genome and the colliding of super particles in
Lucerne demand a complete trust in numbers and theoretical models over
direct observation. Trust in mathematical models and systems of indirect
observation have become all-consuming, crossing over into all disciplines
and becoming part of our collective culture. Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, in
his seminal work The Little Prince, comments on this phenomenon that he
portrays as "grown-ups" who align themselves with higher knowledge and
"serious pursuits," the world of words and numbers, over that of drawing
and imagination. He writes,
The grown-ups advised me to put away my drawings of boa
constrictors, outside or inside, and apply myself instead to geography,
history, arithmetic, and grammar. That is why I abandoned, at the age
of six, a magnificent career as an artist.1
The theorist and psychologist Rudolf Arnheim expands upon this
dependence on scientific exploration and a disregard for more creative
individualistic pursuits when he writes:
Western education has been concerned foremost with words and
numbers. In our schools, reading, writing and arithmetic are practiced

as skills that detach the child from sensory experience, and this
estrangement intensifies during the high school and college years as
the demands of words and numbers grow and childish things must be
put aside. Only in kindergarten and first grade is education based on
the cooperation of all the essential powers of the human mind;
thereafter this natural and sensible procedure is dismissed as an
obstacle to training in the proper kind of abstraction.2
In architecture, this transformation from subjective realities and direct
observation to a world whose meaning and legitimacy is derived from
quantitative dimensions and objective geometries was a long time in the
making. But it can now easily be argued that the designer of the 21st
century, assuming the role of Icarus perched some 30,000 feet (over 9000
meters) in the air, fully embraces this technological realm. Taken for
granted, the plan and the aerial image provide a puzzle that is first and
foremost a set of geometries, lines, and forms that detach themselves from
the scale and the speeds of human experience and provide an image largely
devoid of phenomenal meaning.
For the past century, society has been consumed by scientific pursuits
and by the acts of classifying and calculating. Ultimately, as technology has
evolved and we have collected "more and more information," we have
found ourselves in a world, as Jean Baudrillard commented, with "less and
less meaning."3 This has never been truer than in the digital age, where our
understanding of place and origins has moved further away from ancient
texts and worn photographs towards new software that promise landscapes
in their entirety and drawings that convey information over emotion.
Transformed into a place without qualities, Robert Musil's primary
character in his novel The Man Without Qualities, Ulrich, has been replaced
by the mechanical eye of astronauts Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. The

flickering transmissions that arrived in our living rooms at 4:17:42 p.m.
Eastern Daylight Time, July 20, 1969 were a final dramatic step in a
perceptual voyage to visualize our environment. Brunelleschi's linear
perspective ultimately has been transformed into an infinite holistic
perspective devoid of qualitative possibilities (Figure 10.1).
FIGURE 10.1 Hermetically Sealed Box Syndrome (HSBS):
Suburbia, How Did We Get Here? Tetra Images/Alamy Stock
Photo. ⏎
If we consider for a moment the perceptual transformation that occurred
in the representation of our natural environments, we witness one of the
primary reasons for this shift: advances in and increased trust in science and
technology. In The Vision Machine (1989), theorist Paul Virilio describes
the perceptual transformation in detail, writing:
It was partly thanks to the information provided by the Entrepreneur,
the first battlefield observation balloon, that General Jourdan won the

victory of Fleurus in 1794. In 1858 Nadar took his first pictures from a
balloon. During the American Civil War, the Union forces equipped
balloons with an aerial mapping telegraph. Soon the army was rigging
together the most varied combinations: camera kites, camera pigeons,
and camera balloons. The bombardier of the mid-twentieth century
caught quantitative glimpses, abstractions of the rhythmic pulsations in
the cities below.4
Our perception of the horizon-horizontal was metamorphosed with the
emergence of modern aviation (Figure 10.2). Virilio goes on to ask "Do we
construct the representation or represent the construction?"5 as a way of
acknowledging the intense amount of data that generate the images with
which we read context. His writing considers the speed and data-driven
nature of contemporary society which implies that, at best, society typically
relies on second-hand images of the reality in which we reside.

FIGURE 10.2 Norden Bombsight in the Nose of a B-29. Bill
Chizek Photography/Alamy Stock Photo. ⏎
The dialectic set-up between an all-observing eye, a quantitative glimpse,
and a reemergence of the view from 5 foot 6 (168 cm), the qualitative
phenomenological experience, is taken to its poetic extreme in Wim
Wenders's film Wings of Desire (1987), which follows the path of Damiel
and Cassiel, two angels who observe the world from above, providing
comfort to those in need (Figure 10.3).
FIGURE 10.3 Bruno Ganz, Wings of Desire, 1987: The View
from Above. Cinematic/Alamy Stock Photo. ⏎
The film opens with a shot looking down on Berlin, and a metaphorical
fall that takes us from this privileged point of view into a landscape of
trapeze artists and confused souls. Seen from above on the wings of
Heinrich Strack's angel in Berlin (or any metropolis for that matter) is, as

the theorist Michel de Certeau writes in The Practice of Everyday Life
(1988),
a theoretical (that is, visual) simulacrum, in short, a picture, whose
condition of possibility is an oblivion and a misunderstanding of
practices. The voyeur-god created by this fiction, who, like Schreber's
God, knows only cadavers, must disentangle himself from the murky
intertwining daily behaviors and make himself alien to them ...The
ordinary practitioners of the city live down below, below the thresholds
at which visibility begins. They walk - an elementary form of this
experience of the city; they are walkers, Wandersmanner, whose
bodies follow the thicks and thins of an urban "text" they write without
being able to read it.6
Certeau comments from a view atop the Twin Towers in Manhattan, "It is
hard to be down when you are up."7 Consistent with Certeau's critique of
the aerial view, Wenders searches for meaning in the streets below, and
generates his poetic text from the acts of the ordinary practitioner. He
provides us with this contrast as he moves the angels from their perch into
the urban realm: an auto dealership where Damiel and Cassiel discuss
events on a particular day throughout history; a moment when Cassiel
follows a disoriented elderly man against the backdrop of a prominent
Berlin Wall trying to find histories ... the lost Roman roads, and the
experience of simple pleasures. As the story progresses, we begin to place
increased value on instances that, while increasing our understanding of the
potential of the city, cannot be mapped. Certeau refers to these moments as,
"wandering lines ... indirect or errant trajectories obeying their own
logic."8

Probably no single work better represents the perceptual transformation
that occurred as the city street became but a pixel among millions than
Charles and Ray Eames's film Powers of 10. This 1977 short documentary
portrays a universe that is seamlessly interconnected and captures the
essence of the perceptual shift made possible by technological advances.
The film begins with a carefully constructed composition of a man
picnicking in a Chicago park. Captured in a state of sleep, the man in the
image looks away from the most recent scientific revelations. Our eye is
directed away from the copies of scientific journals and down his arm,
where we observe timepieces separated by a copy of J.G. Ballard's The
Voices of Time. The camera begins to pan out until we realize that the man
is picnicking in a park with a female companion. The narrator in the film
describes that,
The path continues upward to a view of 100 meters (102 m), then 1
kilometer (103 m), and so on, increasing the perspective that now
includes the picnic in the context of Soldier Field on Chicago's
lakefront. Ultimately, we journey to a distance of 1024 meters, or the
size of the observable universe, before we begin our voyage back to
where we began to the picnic. Then the journey continues to views of
negative powers of ten—10 centimeters (10−1 m) until we are viewing
a carbon nucleus inside the man's hand.9
A common tendency when viewing this visual masterpiece is to be
swallowed up by the technological achievement of the Eames as they
transition without interruption from one scale to the next. However, we
would argue that the true poetic motivation is defined by the intentional
placement of Ballard's text in the man's hand.

In referencing the Voices of Time, Ballard commented that it is the one
story by which he would wish to be remembered as it focuses on many of
the themes that concern him:
the sense of isolation within the infinite time and space of the universe,
the biological fantasies and the attempt to read the complex codes
represented by drained swimming pools and abandoned airfields, and
above all the determination to break out of a deepening psychological
entropy and make some kind of private peace with the unseen powers
of the universe.10
Ultimately, it is the scale of the everyday picnic that tells us the most about
the Eames's intent. Embedded within a scientific structure, the Eames's
grant us access to a seemingly anonymous picnic in a park that reveals
something about the human psyche and our fragile place within a greater
universe, a concept that science will never be able to fully dissect. The
daydream represents the realm of the qualitative within the quantitative
time signature of Ballard's framework. As such, the Eames's somewhat
hidden agenda is not one of vertical conquest, but exactly the opposite: an
attempt to obtain an honest reading of the planet on which they reside, and
to reveal qualities of the everyday, oftentimes hidden by scientific pursuit,
such as time - the ruin, temperature, and emotion.
Profane Landscapes: Domestic Space
(scale two 150′ - house)
In charting a collective perceptual history, the defining mechanism for
change has almost always been the introduction of new technologies. Often
funded and primarily used by the military, these technological advances

typically allow for greater efficiency and speed of seeing. Without regard to
cultural traditions so lamented by Ballard, society embraces such changes,
idealizing and appropriating them into the humanities and reinterpreting
them through artistic acumen. The most recent example of such a
technological appropriation can be seen with the proliferation of artificial
intelligence (AI) in the architectural academy in its infant stage.
While such examples are seemingly endless, no technological moment
affected the discipline of architecture and the transformation from a more
qualitative realm to a quantitative, where the symbol ultimately overtook
the physical reality, than that which occurred on July 17, 1902. With the
introduction of the first modern air-conditioning system, Willis Haviland
Carrier launched an industry that, it was claimed, would fundamentally
improve the way we live, work, and play.11 Or would it? Carrier's "package
unit" replaced/negated the window as the performative aperture for natural
ventilation, erasing any opportunity to appreciate thermal aesthetics and our
ability to perceive diurnal and climatic shifts. In so doing, it challenged the
relationship between interiority and exteriority, the metaphorical sacred and
profane. The constant 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20°Celsius) and 40 percent
relative humidity made irrelevant the ruthless simplicity of the dog trot
(roofed passage) and made thoughtful design decisions such as solar
orientation and cross-ventilation bygone concerns. Ads for the new
technology show this new machine seemingly being worshipped (Figure
10.4). As well, it becomes painfully obvious that, once the view to the
actual world had been blocked, something needed to fill the vacancy. So,
adding injury to insult, we became consumed by a new portal - the
television, and now the monitor (laptop/smartphone/virtual reality[VR]
headset). The retooling of our domestic realm and our workspaces
compromised our sensory perceptions; and, inundated by visual cues and a

pixelated spectrum of RGB, we eventually found ourselves in a state of
dystopic numbness.
FIGURE 10.4 Advertisement for Carrier and York Air
Conditioning: A Strange Kind of Worship. Personal Collection of
Author. ⏎

During a recent visit to our family's lake house, we were reminded of the
damage caused by this technology, whose unimaginable byproduct might be
titled hermetically sealed box syndrome or HSBS. Drifting on a pontoon
around the edge of the lake, our rest was disrupted by the various non-
designers in the company who would routinely point out nondescript glass
facades and comment, "That's a really pretty house." Clearly, the idea, the
signifier, had abolished any true connection to reality. The "window"
carried with it such a strongly signified image-caricature of a Pella six-over-
six frame that nothing else seemed possible. This symbol of home
ultimately translated to the siding, the Doric-framed entry, and the falsely
picturesque yard. As such, the houses are the same, randomly placed, and
maintain no connection to the sun or the prevailing winds. Similar to
Icarus's vantage that removed him from the qualitative, the ability to
mechanically regulate "air" in the hermetically sealed box superseded the
atmospheric possibilities so unknowingly cherished by one's subjective self.
One only needs to look 50 years earlier at a painting by American artist
Andrew Wyeth, Wind from the Sea (1947), to understand what has been lost
(Figure 10.5). Throughout his 60-year career, Wyeth painted lonely rural
landscapes, closely observed portraits, and crisp interior still lives in a
characteristically realistic and finely detailed style. Wind from the Sea is one
of the artist's earliest paintings of a window. The scene captures a moment
on a hot summer day when Wyeth opened the seldom-used window in an
attic room. The painting is eerily alive with movement as the wind blows
the curtains into the space. The tattered, transparent fabric is light and airy,
with small embroidered birds along the edges that seem ready to dart into
the house. In contrast, the sun-bleached wooden sill looks sturdy and solid.
The interior of the room is dim, while the landscape beyond is stark and
bright. The tree-lined view includes no figures, but, as in so many other

works by Wyeth, a strong sense of their presence is evident. Two well-worn
tire tracks running across the dirt lead the viewer's eye toward the sea in the
distance. The close vantage point and the tightly cropped frame at the edge
of the painting create the illusion that the viewer is, themselves, looking out
a window. Wyeth's masterpiece can be celebrated as an outlier, one that
combats perceptual numbness by privileging the coolness of the breeze, the
patina of centuries past, the sound of the attic floorboards, and the smell of
the country.
FIGURE 10.5 Andrew Wyeth, 1917-2009, Wind from the Sea,
1947, tempera on hardboard, overall: 47 × 70 cm (18½ × 279/16
in); framed: 66.4 × 89.5 × 7 cm (26⅛ × 35¼ × 2¾ in). Gift of
Charles H. Morgan. National Gallery of Art, Washington
2009.13.1. ⏎
Another valuable precedent that champions the qualitative, a warning of
what is being lost in contemporary design as a result of HSBS, can be found
in Hans Baumgartner's photograph titled Student Housing, taken in 1936

and referenced by the architect Peter Zumthor in his manuscript
Atmospheres. What makes the ideal café, or, as Zumthor terms it, the
"Magic of the Real"? Based on the visual argument put forth by this
photograph, it has little to do with quantitative dimensions, R-values, or
lumens. Rather, we strain to hear the whispered conversation between the
two main figures. The overscale windows let in an emotionally charged
light filtered by the cigarette smoke. The viewer is asked to hear the
clanking dishes in the kitchen and feel comfortable in the space. The
numbness and sterile reality created by the hermetically sealed box have no
place in such an image. Zumthor asks himself,
Can I achieve that as an architect - an atmosphere like that, its
intensity, its mood. And if so, how do I go about it? And then I think:
yes, you can. And I think: no you can't. And the reason I can is
because there are good things and things that are not so good in the
world.12
As such, one would argue, the designer's primary ambition resides simply
in the possibility of altering perception so as to be able to discern the "good
things."

Part Two: Reclaiming the Qualitative
Noplace/Everyplace: The Perception Chamber
(scale 5′6″ - mind)
Salvation calls.
In the late 1960s, three protagonists entered an anechoic chamber at the
University of California in Los Angeles. Artists Robert Irwin and James
Turrell, in collaboration with scientist Edward Wortz from the Garrett
Corporation, a leading West Coast defense industry, were participating in
the highly publicized Art and Technology Program of the Los Angeles
County Museum of Art (LACMA), whose simple aim was to encourage
mutually enlightening conversations that would, ideally, result in new
work.13 What resulted was a documented experience that would offer a cure
to an otherwise dystopian wasteland of predetermined realities.
The anechoic chamber was designed to eliminate the sensory stimuli of
light and sound reflections. The team would spend time in isolation,
initially for short periods and then building up to approximately six hours.
Their working hypothesis was that there would be a phase shift, or a change
in the quality of perceptual experience, produced by a combination of
sensory deprivation and sensory heightening. They described that, while in
the chamber, the research subject would become aware of sensations
usually beyond the range of normal attention, including the sound of blood
coursing through one's veins near the ears, the cracking of bones in one's
feet, breathing and occasional stomach gurgling, retinal and aural
hallucinations, and so on. Summing up the transformative impact of the
experiment, Irwin wrote:

I think what happens is we set up such a very strong kind of a
structural expectation and expectation-fit ratio that we tend to use as
much to block out information—and I think for good reason most of
the time: we block out that information which is not critical to our
activities. And after a while, you know, you do that repeatedly, day
after day, and the world begins to take on a kind of fairly uniform look
to it. So that what you're seeing is simply the fact that the sense
mechanism is extremely complicated, and we don't use it fully all the
time. We edit from it very severely, in time to only see what it is we
expect to see. So, it's not maybe a matter of seeing more or better; it's
a matter of simply seeing things you didn't previously see or placing
the emphasis somewhere else, the basic information you're taking in or
acknowledging is altered so that when you construct that into a mental
picture, make your picture of the world, it's simply not the same
picture. I mean, it's not made up of the same information, so therefore
it's not the same picture. It is an altered one.14
Additionally, this perceptual shift was not limited to the time spent in the
chamber, but had an impact on participants' experience in feeling their
environment after they came out, as Irwin goes on to describe:
I'd walk down the same street that I'd walked down coming in, and the
trees were still trees, and the street was still a street, and houses were
still houses, but the world did not look the same - it was very, very
noticeably altered.15
Irwin, Turrell, and Wortz were heavily influenced by the writings of
behavioral psychologist Arthur Deikman, and their experiences in the
anechoic chamber closely mapped to his studies on contemplative

meditation. Foregrounding his research, Deikman claimed that we
understand the world around us through a kind of short-hand simplification,
a perceptual behavior. He described this process as a psychological
mechanism that condenses the infinite number of images and data that we
are presented with on a daily basis into a few hierarchically significant
ones. Once simplified, our immediate environment requires only part of our
attention, the rest of which is filled with unrelated thoughts. Contemplative
meditation challenges this, requiring that the subject "relinquish his
customary mode of thinking and perceiving. Thoughts must be stopped,
sounds and peripheral sensations put out of one's mind, and the
contemplation of the meditative object be conducted in a nonanalytic,
nonintellectual manner."16 Deikman's research led him to formulate his
"Perceptual Expansion Hypothesis" and develop the concept of "de-
automization."
De-automization is a liberating process that leads to a third explanatory
hypothesis for the meditation phenomena: perceptual expansion - the
widening of perceptual intake to encompass "new" external stimuli, with a
new perceptual route strongly implied. Perceptual expansion is made
possible by de-automization of the selective gating and filtering processes
that normally are in constant operation.
There is a developmental concept implicit in such a hypothesis; namely,
that our earliest experience is probably one of being in more direct contact
with numerous, vivid, primitively organized stimuli. As we mature, a
learning process takes place in which stimuli and percepts are organized
towards a high level of differentiation based on formal characteristics. This
learning process not only takes place at the expense of the vividness and
variability of sensory stimuli, but also possibly involves a loss of perceptual
functions other than those to which we are accustomed.17

Similar to Deikman's interest in de-automization is the writing of Aldous
Huxley in The Doors of Perception (1954). However, unlike Deikman,
Huxley accelerates the perceptual transformation with the addition of an
external drug: peyote or mescaline. Huxley writes that, "Administered in
suitable doses, [peyote] changes the quality of consciousness more
profoundly and yet is less toxic than any other substance in the
pharmacologist's repertory."18
To be shaken out of the ruts of ordinary perception, to be shown for a
few timeless hours the outer and the inner world, not as they appear to
an animal obsessed with survival or to a human being obsessed with
words and notions, but as they are apprehended, directly and
unconditionally, by Mind at Large - this is an experience of
inestimable value to everyone and especially to the intellectual ... [We
must] intensify our ability to look at the world directly and not through
that half opaque medium of concepts, which distorts every given fact
into the all too familiar likeness of some generic label or explanatory
abstraction.19
Huxley's experiment leads him to speculate about what he terms a
"reducing valve," a mechanism that protects us from being overwhelmed
and confused by the mass of largely irrelevant and useless knowledge that
we encounter on a daily basis. He writes,
To make biological survival possible, the Mind at Large has to be
funneled through the reducing valve of the brain and nervous system.
What comes out at the other end is a measly trickle of the kind of
consciousness which will help us stay alive on the surface of this
particular planet. To formulate and express the contents of this reduced

awareness, man has invented and endlessly elaborated those symbol-
systems and implicit philosophies which we call languages. Every
individual is at once the beneficiary and the victim of the linguistic
tradition into which he has been born.20
Huxley goes on to suggest that "certain persons [such as artists], however,
seem to be born with a kind of by-pass that circumvents the reducing
valve."21
While I would argue that this "by-pass" is not inherent, but comes about
through a lifetime of practiced observation, this unique ability possessed by
the artist is an ability to comprehend and portray the world in a way that a
majority of people cannot. In the words of Matisse, "When I eat a tomato I
look at it the way anyone else would. But when I paint a tomato, then I see
it differently." To focus on the non-narrative components of a work and
become obsessed by the patterns and shifts in texture and color is a
wonderful possibility, one that holds the key to unlocking our reliance on
the signified - a predetermined existence registered in our mind from a life
of experience and expectations. Clearly, based on the research of such
artists and scholars as Irwin, Deikman, and Huxley, one can easily posit that
there is a profound benefit acquired by immersing oneself in a meditative
environment that alters one's "reducing valve."
Anechoic Chamber: CALANDO I
There is a striking contrast between the hermetically sealed box of the air-
conditioned house and the encapsulated space of the anechoic chamber.
HSBS suggests a denial of engagement with the exterior world, the removal
of sensory aesthetics, resulting in perceptual numbness. This is
symptomatic of a society so invested in data technology that we've taken

this notion of the reducing valve to an extreme. The anechoic chamber
similarly removes sensory stimuli, but without simultaneously filling our
consciousness with extraneous matter; it enables us to refocus our
perceptual energy and find a new appreciation of the qualitative.
To explore these assumptions, we introduced a design/build anechoic
chamber as a preliminary exercise in a recent joint architecture-interior
architecture studio. The research goal was to simulate the Irwin-Terrell-
Wortz experience (without Huxley's hallucinogens) and to assess the effects
of sensory isolation on our own sensory acuity, as well as on a sample
group of young designers. Performatively, our aim was to achieve total
silence (0 dB) and to separate the occupant as much as possible from their
physical environment. Working closely with physicists and sound engineers
from the University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK), the chamber went
through numerous design iterations and yielded a capsule-like space that
could hold one occupant at a time (Figures 10. 6 and 10.7).22 Each student
was responsible for logging a minimum of one continuous hour and
documenting their thoughts through structured reflection.

FIGURE 10.6 Anechoic Chamber Showing External Cladding,
CALANDO I: Atrium of UTK College of Architecture and
Design. Photograph by David Matthews. ⏎

FIGURE 10.7 Anechoic Chamber with Cladding Removed,
CALANDO I: Atrium of UTK College of Architecture and
Design. Photograph by David Matthews. ⏎

FIGURE 10.8 Entering the Anechoic Chamber, CALANDO I:
Atrium of UTK College of Architecture and Design. Photograph
by David Matthews.
Based on a series of these sessions, the construct proved to impact the
way in which participants perceived familiar spaces in unexpected ways.
Most participants reported that their sense of time, color, temperature, and
sound became much more acute. A few suggested that this effect lasted a
few hours afterwards, that their breathing became more paced, and that they
perceived greater layers of space. Such reflection draws upon the Irwinian
moment, upon exiting the anechoic chamber, when color itself emanates a

sort of energy and the "expectation-fit ratio" that we use on a daily basis is
shattered.
By embracing a current trajectory of total sensorial disruption and
isolation, a claim is staked on humanity's state of numbness, pushing it to
its extremes into one of profound feeling and experience. Through the fog
of data and automized thought processes, is it possible to see the world
from 5′-6″, to look again through Wyeth's window? If I may be so bold to
encourage - yes, "Yes, it is."
Personal Notes from the Chamber*
The door was sealed shut and, like the Apollo crew some half century
before me, I was isolated and alone but not nervous. Layers of black inside,
an almost euphoria of nothingness. The blackness is so intense that it
becomes an infinity. Also, the body that I was experiencing was quite strong
but completely perceptual as there was no physical object to be abstracted
through sight. I strained to locate familiar noises in the world I had just
departed. It was no use, and I moved on to more important things like
positioning myself in the woven hammock and preparing for the one-hour
mission. For a brief moment it occurred to me that I was back in the womb,
and an overwhelming emotion of innocence made me smile. It was then that
the machine went to work on my perceptual being. First, I felt the hairs on
the back of my neck for some strange reason, perhaps triggered by the smell
of the residue of the mounting material for the acoustic panels. And then
came my heartbeat; the blackness of this rhythm was accompanied by a
warm sensation, a redness. I became aware of the vessels and veins
extending out from my chest and into my arms. Finally, silence consumed
my being and I found myself alone, floating. I felt complete absentness but

was not consumed by the thought of such an existence as I, for a short
period of time, felt nothing and, as such, thought nothing.
Upon exiting the chamber, the light was overwhelming. I immediately
put my sunglasses on but that did little to help. And I was quite disoriented
by the cacophony of sounds emanating from the atrium, the woodshop, and
the outside world as I left the building within which the chamber was
housed. The immediate effect upon exiting was that space seemed to flatten
out; my surroundings seemed as if they were being permeated on a two-
dimensional panorama. I became hyper-aware of the space around me.
The slight breeze was incredibly refreshing and provided the perfect
counter-stimulus to the stillness of the chamber. Of course, I was on the
prowl for elements that would respond or stimulate my deprived senses, and
the chirping of birds was one of the first stimuli I welcomed. I tried at this
point not to squint so as to not diminish the contrast of the two very
different experiential realms. It was after about two minutes of adjusting to
this newly rediscovered reality that the most honest experiential notes
appeared. I went to the center of the courtyard and lay on my back in the
long winter grass, its bifurcated green stalks like soft blades. The thickness
of my body seemed to sink deep into the landscape and the coolness was
almost overwhelming on my backside. My eyes fixed on the cloudless blue
sky which was infinite in every way. While this would have been a pleasant
experience on any occasion, what seemed different to me at this moment
was the isolation of all the different items: the ground, the grass, the sky, the
sun, the breeze, shadows, temperature, sounds. I became hyper-aware of
each individual component and was able to appreciate the experience as an
ensemble rather than an overload of multiple senses. I speculate that such
overloads, more often than not, cause us to see less.

After staring at the sky and falling into a truly engaged meditative state, I
continued to enjoy the effects of my time in the chamber. Walking along the
street, I observed two students having an argument. One of the students was
wearing a hijab of the most brilliant oranges and pinks. I'm not certain if
the chamber was still altering my perception of the current experience, but
the tails of the head garment were flowing in the wind and establishing a
visual rhythm in slow motion that seemed to correspond to the
conversation. The other student was speaking in a dialect that was not
totally clear and at times almost seemed like a repeating mantra. It was only
as the second student turned to walk away that I noticed the shirt he was
wearing, a light blue, seemed to be reflecting the sky above. Perhaps the
best way to describe it was almost as an afterimage of the sky I had first
observed immediately after leaving the chamber.
*A common misconception is that, after spending an hour in an anechoic
chamber a switch will be flipped, and the world will forever be changed.
After logging approximately 12 hours, I have found that it takes practice to
gain the most from this unique environment and to best leverage one's
meditative state. After several sessions, one begins to better understand
one's breathing patterns and can more easily regulate external thoughts.
Notes
1. Antoine de Saint-Exupery, The Little Prince (New York: Harcourt,
2000), 2. ⏎
2. Rudolf Arnheim. "Growth" in Towards a Psychology of Art: Collected
Essays (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966). ⏎
3. Jean Baudrillard, Simulacra and Simulation (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1994), 79. ⏎

4. Paul Virilio, The Vision Machine (London: British Film Institute,
1994). ⏎
5. Paul Virilio, The Vision Machine (London: British Film Institute,
1994). ⏎
6. Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1966), 93. ⏎
7. Michel de Certeau. The Practice of Everyday Life (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1966), 92. ⏎
8. Michel de Certeau. The Practice of Everyday Life (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1966), 93. ⏎
9. Powers of 10, directed by Charles and Ray Eames (Eames Office and
IBM, September 4, 1977). ⏎
10. Andreas, "The Voices of Time - 1960 - Dystopian Novelette by J.G.
Ballard," Reißwolf blog, January 15, 2021,
https://reiszwolf.wordpress.com/2021/01/15/the-voices-of-time-1960-
dystopian-novelette-by-j-g-ballard/. ⏎
11. "The Invention that Changed the World," 2025,
https://www.williscarrier.com/weathermakers/1876-1902/. ⏎
12. Peter Zumthor, Atmospheres (Basel: Birkhauser Architecture, 2006),
19. ⏎
13. Robert Irwin, Notes Towards a Conditional Art, ed. Matthew Simms
(Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2011), 80. ⏎
14. Robert Irwin, Notes Towards a Conditional Art, ed. Matthew Simms
(Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2011), 108. ⏎
15. Robert Irwin, Notes Towards a Conditional Art, ed. Matthew Simms
(Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2011), 107. ⏎
16. Arthur J. Deikman, "Implications of Experimentally Induced
Contemplative Mysticism" in Meditations on a Blue Vase: The

Collected Papers of Arthur J. Deikman (Napa, CA: Fearless Books,
2014), 200. ⏎
17. Arthur J. Deikman, "Implications of Experimentally Induced
Contemplative Mysticism" in Meditations on a Blue Vase: The
Collected Papers of Arthur J. Deikman (Napa, CA: Fearless Books,
2014), 200. ⏎
18. Aldous Huxley, The Doors of Perception (HarperCollins, 1954), 9-10.
⏎
19. Aldous Huxley, The Doors of Perception (HarperCollins, 1954), 73. ⏎
20. Aldous Huxley, The Doors of Perception (HarperCollins, 1954), 23. ⏎
21. Aldous Huxley, The Doors of Perception (HarperCollins, 1954), 24. ⏎
22. The anechoic chamber was constructed as part of a joint-studio with
Professor David Matthews at the University of Tennessee College of
Architecture and Design. Twenty-three students participating in the
undergraduate architecture and interior architecture programs provided
creative input as well as their blood, sweat, and tears in its
construction. The seven-sided structure maintains minimal contact
with the ground and contains six layers of sound insulation as well as a
carefully integrated cooling system. ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

11
NEWER BABYLONS
Matt Hall
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-12
Constant Nieuwenhuys' New Babylon proposed a utopian world in which
humankind was free to roam and create within a layered city of organic
networks, where every need and desire was solved through automation—an
outsourcing of all production unrelated to play. Like many visionary
architectural schemes, New Babylon was primarily a visual exploration:
models, collages and intense aesthetic studies—a grand and provocative
production of aesthetic possibility rather than premise. Utopian schemes
tend to skip the hard part, often blind to the problematic nature of the
production and struggle required to realize and sustain them. New
Babylon's promise, durability, critique and influence present a dichotomy
between aesthetic progress and actual progress, illuminating a tendency to
be seduced by surface over substance, where optics become a means to an
end.
The relationship between utopian progress and pragmatic production is
intrinsic yet distant. They are codependent, yet their outcomes seem
mutually exclusive. The benefits of progress are clear selling points, but the
warranty for the detriments is rarely honored—those side effects are often
outsourced, managed at a comfortable distance. This observation applies
even to the most quotidian forms of architectural production, where best-

case scenarios are rendered as optimistic stage sets, seldom devoting
attention to the rendering of potential negative outcomes. Every design has
side effects; how can we better predict them, or allocate our design talents
toward imagining them more precisely, as a kind of process of elimination?
New Babylon was both critique and proposal. It negated culture's
relationship with functional production to explore the production of culture
itself. The project's premise and potential influence on contemporary
practice present a provocation, not only questioning utopian aims but also
the very concept of "solutions" as we seek newer Babylons in a never-
ending pursuit of more: more comfort, convenience, security, meaning,
power, wealth—and, for the design professions, more novelty. This is a case
study grounded in skepticism toward any solution claiming absolute or final
status, prescribing a healthy dose of doubt for architects to apply to their
own work by recalibrating the balance between the conditions for design
and the conditions of their designs. To address a progressively problematic
world, the architect must walk the margins of their work—establishing a
self-critique that examines both the premise and the project in order to
illuminate a more comprehensive inventory of consequences. No design can
fully escape critique, and theoretical projects offer a unique venue for the
criticism of process rather than outcome. Instead of investigating Constant's
formal, spatial and aesthetic decisions, we might instead probe the
motivations behind them to more critically interrogate the project's premise
and imagine other outcomes. As Jorgensen and Wilson aptly state in their
essay "The Utopian Failure of Constant's New Babylon:" "New Babylon's
failure lies in Constant's failure to fully imagine the conditions by which it
might come into being, as if automation could be the single cause by which
utopia could be realized."1

This assessment could apply to myriad architectural projects and
theoretical projections that reduce complexity to simple concepts, to which
they maintain strict allegiance—a form of intellectual consistency in the
context of a rapidly shifting and inconsistent context. A compelling and
clear concept does not guarantee a thoughtful design, especially when the
concept is about form rather than performance, or when forms lack
comprehensive information. Conceptual motivations may seem inherently
neutral, even benevolent, until they are projected into the world, where they
may steadily diminish the potential for resistance, restraint, dialog and
refinement. There is also the question of who gets satisfied: the designer or
the recipient of the design, who is more often a victim of it rather than a
beneficiary. This is not to posit that Constant's work was a failure, or that
concepts have no place in design. On the contrary, the provocation here is to
subject our concepts to the worst possible consequences, and to use our
imagination to conjure potential problematic circumstances rather than
novel aesthetic scenarios. With this in mind, we can now interrogate New
Babylon for what it doesn't consider or achieve—and what its premise
might foreshadow about our contemporary condition, and the futures we are
building.
Egalitarian Free-Range Utopia
We are now gradually arriving at a stage in human culture where all
those useful functions of life, due to automation, industrialization and
mechanization, fade into the background and where every man is left
more or less empty handed as a utility animal, as a productive being.
Energy is released. A surplus energy, which will have to be used in a
different way. For the first time man is given the opportunity on a

massive scale to free himself from that compulsion to labor which has
turned the earth into a vale of tears.2
-Constant Nieuwenhuys
Constant Nieuwenhuys developed New Babylon from 1959 to 1974, a
sprawling project that shifted forms but maintained its primary premise: the
masses occupy a nomadic, non-transactional world unencumbered by any
concept or notion of work, responsibility or duty. The project stands in
opposition to "functionalism," which in Nieuwenhuys' context represented
an increasingly alienating capitalist "spectacle," a concept borrowed from
the Situationist International, of which he was at one time a member. While
the audience can be trusted to understand this concept, a simplified reading
of Guy Debord's thesis is that our world is mediated by images: images of
what we might become based on what we consume. As we surrender our
agency to an ever-exploiting force, we transition from being concerned with
who we are to what we have.3 We, in short, become what we own and exist
to own more, participating uncritically and almost involuntary in the
"spectacle." Modernism, functionalism and capitalism are all complicit, yet
the role of individual human agency seems diminished as a subject to an
overarching and exploitive system. As postmodern critiques go, it was a
substantial one that still holds some validity today, even if only as cultural
critique rather than revolutionary exploit.
It should not be forgotten that, once the functions are established, play
will succeed them.4
Constant's solution to the capitalist spectacle, built on the back of an
exploited working class, is to supplant it with all-providing automation. It is
apparently not the vulgar abundance or the spectacle of consumption that is

problematic, but rather the method of production. How this shift is achieved
isn't addressed in the premise or project, aside from a suggestion that it lies
"underground," forming the foundation of automated industry. The ground
becomes a network of circulation, replacing the street as the primary artery
of urban interaction. This diagram resolves all that is messy before
ascending into the free-range and free-plan creative roaming of the layers
above.
The post-revolutionary context is thus the starting point where
Nieuwenhuys can focus on the spatial and aesthetic forms the built
environment may take—a negation of architecture as praxis to instead
explore it as an aesthetic. He approached the project via the perspective of
art rather than architecture, so an investigation of potential over outcome
seems reasonable, if not self-admitted. Constant's 25-year project was not
without critique in its time. In the lecture "New Babylon 10 Years On," he
stated:
I seldom encountered any genuine sympathy for the ideas
underpinning this project and I was constantly having to defend myself
against accusations of utopianism or technocracy, depending on
whether the attack came from the right or the left. My models appeared
to sow confusion instead of fostering understanding for my efforts to
visualize a world that was fundamentally different from the world in
which we live or the worlds we know from history.5
Here, Constant demonstrates a keen awareness that his work invites critique
and accepts that it was based in visualizations rather than concrete
proposals. While it's clear he avoided tackling the transformation of the
production systems that sustain civilization, his premise was prophetic—
and it's proving to be quite durable. The scale of automated production,

along with the delivery and consumption of physical goods, suggests the
spectacle is alive and well. So too is the premise that it can all be
outsourced to economies and contexts less environmentally, economically
and ethically restrained. The developed world continues to prosper, both in
concentrations of wealth and in time available to play (aka consume). The
average working hours in the U.S. have steadily decreased since 2020, no
doubt due to the pandemic;6 yet, well before this event, statistics show a
steadily decline in working hours for over 150 years.7 In addition to
working less, the nature of our working lives is in constant flux, as is our
technological relationship to production and delivery. The gap between
unskilled labor and high-skill or knowledge work continues to widen, along
with disparities in wealth, health outcomes and opportunities to achieve
security, let alone success. The future is now, and it's clearly not for
everyone.
Perhaps the major difference between Constant's vision and our
contemporary context is that the burden of production remains directly tied
to the human condition. The blood, sweat and tears of the wage slave still
fuel the supply of cheap goods, as shopping for them continues define our
leisure time. Work is also transforming. Automation has been advancing
since the industrial revolution, yet we still need humans to turn screws—or,
in the future, humans to maintain robots that turn screws. In architecture,
building information modeling and new artificial intelligence (AI)-driven
tools are continually evolving how we visualize, communicate and deliver
projects. Technology has always transformed and advanced all aspects of
work, but never at this pace. Rarely do we ask what we sacrifice with each
new convenience or advancement, and neither, in general, does Constant.
Work, in this vision, seems to have no intrinsic value relative to the human
condition. It simply disappears or moves underground.

Unlike the premise of New Babylon, our society is not truly liberated
from work, but the privileged are now more capable than ever of
negotiating work on their own terms. Constant's vision of freedom and
creativity in a layered city can be currently contextualized as our networked
digital world, where nomadic exploration takes the form of clicking,
scrolling and swiping through a seemingly endless world of content to
satisfy any desire or interest. Creativity may be less about artistic
exploration and more about how to find the best deal, best date, best how-to
video, or how to become the wittiest or most offensive troll. Cynicism
aside, our level of connectivity and access to knowledge has unprecedented
consequences as our experiences are increasingly reduced to entertainment.
The Dictatorship of Experience
Is New Babylon a place where we are free to be creative or, conversely, a
context where we are forbidden to work? Is it the freedom to roam, or an
oppressive environment in which one can never stay put? Rem Koolhaas
observed that "there is a scale to Nieuwenhuys' work that is quite
unrealistic in the current circumstances. You might call his underlying
narrative an almost authoritarian dissemination of a kind of liberation
ideology."8 In this sense, one is forced to be free, a highly suspect premise.
Subjecting New Babylon to realism may be unfair, but what good is a
utopian provocation if it can't suspend doubt? While provocative visions of
the future need not be executed to test their potential, counter-fictions,
critiques and foils to such visions can offer productive insights into where
they may go wrong, and how they might actually be achieved.
Constant's New Babylon was an exploration of possibility based on the
premise that one can skip one existential struggle to introduce another—the
transition from all work to all play—and, even more radical, the elimination

of our traditional relationship with housing as we return to a hunter-gather
society, reconceptualized as creator-roamers. His provocation lies not in
how this shift is achieved, or even maintained, but what it might look like.
As Koolhaas observes, "It was above all the aesthetic of the work that
impressed me. It affected me much more than the narrative behind it."9 He
further elaborated, distancing the aesthetic from the ethic:
you can say that from the 1960's the utopian ideal and the architecture
grew apart completely. Of course, that is because of the domination of
market economics, the sworn enemy of utopian ideas. That widens the
gap between Constant and the present even further. It does not
however diminish the importance of the political dimension, though it
does make it less plausible. On the other hand though, you have the
aesthetic, many aspects of which are still plausible.10
This raises multiple questions. Is progress in architecture limited to only
aesthetic considerations, surrendering the design of substantial
improvement to crafting of the appearance of improvement? What is
architecture's relationship to its own production—is it simply a means to an
end? How do Koolhaas and Nieuwenhuys define the aesthetic? If New
Babylon is a utopia emerging from a post-revolutionary society, could the
revolution itself be part of the design premise, or become the design
process?
The profession rarely lacks visionary ideas; it more often lacks the
processes to achieve them, let alone reliable tools to assess their validity
and impact. This is not to suggest that idealistic design lacks utility.
Temporary distance from reality can illuminate theoretical modes of
thought not yet bound by constraints. With each step away from reality,
freedom to explore emerges, but at the risk (and reward) of venturing into

territory not on any relevant map, redefining the landscape through
unconstrained exploration, a creativity without consequence. Yet every plan
and rendering is, by nature, a projection into the unknown future—the
foreshadowing of a potential reality. It's fiction until, suddenly, it's not. In
this lies the inherent tragedy of architecture: it is always a prototype, only
tested in the field when it is too late to change course. New Babylon exists
in the safety of theory, as most ideas do, but once realized design is
positioned to create as many problems as it solves. This is a relatively
durable model: the designer seduced by their own ideas, blind to their
impact, convinced by the authority of expertise that they know what is best
for society, culture and the environment. Consequences can't always be
premeditated, but we may only know what's best if we understand what's
worst.
Architects continue to act is if they believe in utopia—in the form of the
best-case scenarios, even if the nature of their idealism is often limited to a
single project, theory or rendering. To abandon this may be to reject the
very notion of innovation, let alone hope—to surrender to being a manager
or estimator of impact. A de-aestheticizing of our approach risks reducing
design to a reductive numbers game of only that which can be measured.
For the banalities of practical architecture, progress may mean more
efficiency, durability, profit or ecological responsibility—metrics that can
be measured. How then do we establish and understand progress in
aesthetics, which cannot? Perhaps aesthetics is all the profession is good for
—after all, if architects don't consider such things who will? If such is the
case, the profession could use better arguments for them. These might begin
with defining what aesthetics are, how they relate to our work and the
manifold systems of estimating, measuring and experiencing them. While
there is feasibly no greater used and under-defined term in architectural

discourse than "experience," it often lacks a shared definition or discourse.
It is subjective, and thus simultaneously full of promise and ripe for failure.
Philosopher Vilém Flusser defines aesthetics as "capable of being
experienced," in opposition to habit, which he argues is not experienced but
simply enacted.11 To encounter the aesthetic is to break from habit. To play
is to break from work; to be surprised suggests a break from the familiar.
New Babylon proposes a perpetual break from habit—a permanent
transformation in which habit becomes aesthetics, outsourcing all that is not
worth experiencing. Yet the potential oppression and often violent
extraction related to producing and sustaining the aesthetic dream state
must also persist. Any aspect of the human condition tied to function or
necessity is conspicuously absent. What if work is rewarding or one finds
meaning in it? What happens when "roaming and being creative" ceases to
be an aesthetic experience and is reduced to habit? Perhaps Constant's
project ultimately serves to eliminate all labor, only to evolve humankind
into a new form of it. If so, what is the aesthetic of labor and how does it
temper other experiences, from the creative to the consumerist? What then
is the worth of our experiences and how do they relate to our identity,
agency and our ability to shape the world rather than being subject to
someone's design of it?
Robert Nozik's hypothetical "experience machine" presents a
provocative lens. The machine would allow individuals to feel as though
they are having any experience they desire, curated from a massive
database of millions of others' lives. Every two years, one disconnects
briefly to choose the next two years of experiences. In an estimation of the
consequences of such a machine, Nozik writes:
It will seem to some, trapped by a picture, that nothing about what we
are like can matter except as it gets reflected in our experiences. But

should it be surprising that what we are is important to us? Why should
we be concerned only with how our time is filled, but not with what
we are? ... plugging into an experience machine limits us to a man-
made reality, to a world no deeper or more important than that which
people can construct.12
Nozik's machine questions whether experiences come ready-made or
require effort to construct. Are they generated from the architect's spatial
and formal exploits? Perhaps they are more the product of knowledge
workers, algorithms and programs? What is the state of design when it
considers that they may also be individually and personally built from the
ground up? Utopian visions rely on the generalization and perfection of
future people, thus the potential destruction of their diversity, dissent and
individuality. Utopia ultimately demands a form of cultural collectivity, the
absence of which is paradoxically why such visions seem impossible to
realize. Constant clearly understood this, and this a priori is both the
enabler of his project and its potential horror. In "The Path to Unitary
Urbanism" he states:
All attempts this century to initiate cultural reforms have failed
because they took the individual as their starting point. The collective
imagination was not taken into account, was misunderstood or
despised. Nevertheless, the face of our world today is largely the result
of collective effort.13
As experience becomes increasingly mediated by technology, the
"established functions" Nieuwenhuys referred to are likely destined to be
outsourced within a gig economy where engagement with the extradomestic
world can be almost entirely avoided. This suggests a Newer Babylon where

space and form matter little, as the design aim is to atomize the individual
into the collective mist. Will the future truly be a collective "Unitary
Urbanism," evolving us towards neutrality in a collective stew of shared
perspectives and efforts, or into Our Babylon, where the tyranny of the
lowest common denominator demands the collective reality?
Our Babylon: The Collective City
Welcome to 2030. I own nothing, have no privacy, and life has never
been better.14
- Ida Auken
In 2016 Ida Auken, a member of the Danish Parliament, published a short
essay on the World Economic Forum website describing life in the year
2030. In her seemingly utopian projection, she outlines a collective city—
not her city, but "our" city. She owns nothing: no car, no house, no clothes
—admitting that this may "seem odd ... but it makes perfect sense for us in
this city." Products have become services. Inhabitants have access to all the
things they need in daily life, for free of course. She lays out an order of
events starting with digitized free communication, then free clean energy,
and a dramatic drop in the cost of transportation. The new transportation
will be driverless, perhaps even flying—yet somehow without traffic jams
or congestion.
The programmatic and spatial consequences of Auken's utopia are
fascinating. "In our city we don't pay any rent, because someone else is
using our free space whenever we do not need it. My living room is used
for business meetings when I am not there," she writes, suggesting a sort of
hot-room typology in which every domestic space is for hire—and every
human act must therefore be premeditated, scheduled, programmed and

coordinated. Even the idea of a kitchen is questioned: "Why keep a pasta-
maker and a crepe cooker crammed in our cupboards we can just order
them when we need them." Imagine the potential for app development ...
This transformation of products into services is assumed to usher in an
age of "durability, repairability and recyclability," as though any designed
object, now owned by a service organization instead of a private individual,
would automatically be fed by a magical, clean-energy, post-planned-
obsolescence ethic. There are multiple instances where "environmental
problems seem so far away," repeating how "clean" everything is. But if
history and our current context tell us anything, it's that "far away" does not
mean "nonexistent," and "clean" here must mean "filthy" somewhere else.
To be charitable, Auken's provocative vision is earnest, optimistic and
clearly aimed at suggesting a world—like Constant's—that is open to some
other form of humanity. Yet that humanity remains undefined and
reductively collective. She does not explicitly suggest a world without
work, but does hint at a changed relationship with it, stating it can be done
at "any time." The only real concern posited in Auken's writing is for those
who choose not to live in "our city." These are the Neo-luddites, described
as feeling obsolete, left behind to live in smaller "self-supplying
communities" or "abandoned houses in small 19th-century villages."
The most compelling vision of both the 2030 Collective City and New
Babylon is the counter-narrative—the potential landscapes of production,
revolt and resistance that serve as both foil and lifeblood to each utopia.
These forces are often overlooked in design, as our concern gravitates
toward results rather than the complexities of getting there. Much like the
fetish for urbanization, the city runs on the back of an increasingly
conglomerated agricultural industry. The machine that feeds utopia is surely
not a pleasant place. We need not think or look too hard to discover these

waste-scapes and badlands—the loading docks, water treatment plants and
sanitation departments of both New Babylon and the Collective City are
just as worthy of design and most definitely will have an aesthetic. Artificial
cleanliness is possible, but the garbage must go somewhere.
These scenarios are issued as proclamations, much like the architect's
typical "concept statement," which seems to guarantee only the things a
project will not address. In Auken's vision, all interactions seem reduced to
transactions; in Nieuwenhuys' all actions become pure creative hedonism.
Both seem to fall squarely within the discourse of "Unity Urbanism," as
articulated by the Situationist International. As declared in a manifesto-like
paper in Internationale Situationniste from 1959, "[Unitary Urbanism] is
not a doctrine of urbanism but a critique of urbanism." The exploitation of
the worker is, of course, derided, but the exploitation of established forms
of urbanism are ripe targets for subversion and exploitation. The theory, like
many, is binary: if the established is bad, then its détournement must be
good.
As a result, it is just as important that we exploit the existing decors—
through the affirmation of a playful urban space such as is revealed by
the derive—as it is that we construct completely unknown ones. This
interpenetration (employment of the present city and construction of
the future city) entails the deployment of architectural détournement.15
The future city—the revolutionary city—is always on the horizon, never
fully grasped. To attain it would be to achieve something worth keeping: to
progress. But the tragedy is that revolution, often necessary, can never
realize its aims without condemning its modus operandi. The city may itself
be revolutionary without any utopian or political overlay. It evolves and
expands as an organic entity with both grids of authority and undercurrents

of subversion. The city is the streets, the streets are the people, the people
are the politics, and the plurality is the spectacle. Its unknowns are built
into its flexibility and evolving nature. It needs no forced or assumed
collective identity to progress, and, even if that were possible, problems will
surely persist.
Constant positioned architecture not as an aim, or even a result, but as a
gameboard for play with a loose tolerance, fewer rules, and less order. His
work was not concerned with solving problems, but proposed what the city
could be post-problem solved. This may be the most honest expression of
architecture: it can do nothing, it can change nothing, but it can provide
critiques and open avenues for myriad somethings. It is dialectic between
influencing culture and culturally influenced—just one force in the broader
feedback loop. Before concluding her essay with the assertation that life in
"our city" is such a good life, Auken writes:
Once in a while I get annoyed about the fact that I have no real
privacy. No where I can go and not be registered. I know that,
somewhere, everything I do, think and dream of is recorded. I just
hope that nobody will use it against me.16
Both New Babylon and this vision of the 2030 city feel more like fodder for
Black Mirror scripts than possible futures. They're compelling until they're
occupied by the complex and uncertain nature of individual behavior.
Utopia is always for the "we," and it invariably requires the sacrifice of the
individual. Design must necessarily generalize, but in doing so it risks
marginalization and reduction. Auken's statement above may mistake
annoyance for fear—a refusal to contend with the potentially horrifying
consequences of a collectively defined vision of human interaction,
domestic life, ownership and agency. These may be outdated concerns if a

newer Babylon emerges as one of hyper-individualistic curated satisfaction
—where the collective merely fuels individual desire, rather than the other
way around.
New Babylon may free us from work so we can roam, but an alternative
consequence that negates collective identity is that we are now free to stay
put and consume our precisely curated individual worlds. This world does
not have renderings—it is a rendering. It requires no architect to visualize
or estimate its spatial and material reality, as such a reality may no longer
need to exist. It is a world reduced to an appliance—a portal to access a
digital Your Babylon, precisely calibrated to each person individually.
Your Babylon: The Individual City
The door opens for me according to my motion—it senses so I don't have
to. The door handle used to be the handshake of the building, but we don't
even fist bump anymore. Not for fear of a virus—one need not fear
touching when there is nothing tangible left. The world opens according to
my values, so give me convenience or give me death. Automatic faucet,
soap, air dry. Automatic driving, garage door, robot vacuum. Sense my
sense of heat and cool me. Anticipate my hunger and feed me. Surround my
attention with surfaces of screens so I can consume constantly. The senses
are outsourced to sensors, freeing me from the burden of feeling. The
paralysis of choice is no longer relevant if I need not choose at all. I only
need to accept my truth (or my program) and the requisite facts are
delivered to match a virtual me—calculated and constructed from the
unredacted archive of my digital path. There is no longer any present
without a digital footprint.
I think, therefore I appear to be. But nothing truly is, apart from my
precisely yet involuntarily constructed bubble. A bubble might suggest

something light, floating, fluctuating and transient, fragile. My bubble is
harder than any material, though it has none. My world is one of programs.
My recreation is a program, my work is a program and my dwelling is a
program—all designed to free me from feeling, choosing, struggling ...?
Reality is no longer tangible; my life no longer determined by happenstance
and choice, but haptics and calculations. My architecture is not a stage set
but a surface that gains meaning entirely through what is projected upon it
or emanates visually from it.
This is a story of humanity redefined in an alternative immaterial present.
A world without gesture, nuance, individuality or agency—yet still a
paradise of infinitely variable aesthetic experiences, where the only habit is
the interface. The world is tailored to me: my AI, my worldview layered
over "reality" via augmented perception. I have no need to search or
discover because the path is already laid out, following to the most precise
calculation of my every desire. Cooperation, communication, work,
struggle, purpose—all antiquated concepts. I'm free to roam my personal
virtual world or project it onto the worlds of others, warping theirs to fit my
perspective, desire and need. As they to do to me. Our disconnect allows
this. Our atrophy to harsh realities sustains it. Our apathy secures it.
As this brief fiction suggests, contrary to being creative, perhaps we will
just be lazy. Applying Nozik's experience machine in the context of New
Babylon as a digital plug-in, a dongle mediating between our brains and the
tangible world, we might imagine a revolution of convenience. No need for
designers, no need for understanding humanity or individuality. Only a
program, an algorithm, a dataset. Perhaps these are the inevitable
immaterial conditions of every future design.
Your Babylon is a counter-utopia—a speculative fiction that explores the
shadows to provide warnings, insight and opportunities as a counterbalance

to the optimism and excitement that fuels the design exploit. These shadows
fuel a voyage along the problematic margins of any premise, and thus the
edge condition becomes the project: one where the detrimental aspects of
the design become the concept. Here, the goal is not to achieve the solution,
but to articulate the predicament. This may require playing out the design
via an individual experience, something Constant and Auken did not
consider. They present their concept from the top down—a proclamation.
From the margins of doubt and the perspective of the potential occupants of
these projects we may yield diverse narratives that have utility in design
decision making.
Margin Walking
Auken and Nieuwenhuys give us no clear sense of the border between the
landscapes of roving creatives and the hidden systems of automated
industrial production. For Nieuwenhuys, the models were pure formal play
—collages of layered, networked cities, free from authoritarian grids or
systems of logic that might impede the dérive of its inhabitants.17 They end
like paintings in a gallery: bounded by a neutral white wall, isolating the
artistic endeavor from the corruption of reason and reality, outsourcing
measurable outcomes or consequences. These cities float, unmoored from
the climate, topography or ground—yet there is so much grey area in that
distance.
For the sake of argument, the utopias discussed here are presented in
binaries: consumption vs. production, play vs. work, distance vs. proximity,
utopia vs. reality, outsourcing vs. owning, collective vs. individual. But
reality lies in the grey area between these extremes. Auken expresses
"concern" for those who don't live in "our city," as if the choice were black
and white. Yet considerable territories exist between these binaries: retreat,

refusal and resistance. For designers, these forms of margin-walking hold
value. They suggest utility in non-participation. Architectural polemics and
projects often call for attack, or at least action, but retreat might offer clarity
to understand or better consider how to attack, reducing casualties and
unintended consequences. The boundaries between consumption and
production, intention and consequence, benefit and detriment are minefields
we cross at the peril of our clients and constituents.
Auken and Constant are presenting theory in the form of a concept—a
way to imagine action in the world. Neither Auken nor Constant advanced
their visions into models—or forms of action in the world. While their
designs may be unrealized, the discourse isn't. It's been published,
disseminated, discussed and continues to influence. Design need not
become reality to instigate progress; and, from another vantage point, these
visions aren't potential dystopias, prototypes—models for potential futures.
Every speculative future has winners and losers, which aligns with the state
of the world, drastically amplifying the distance between the best and the
worst. If we are interested in the image of progress, the architectural
profession can render those indefinitely. Real progress (if there is such a
thing), however, comes at a cost: the willingness to recalibrate our attention
and examine the arguments against our work, not just the arguments for it.
After hitting rock bottom, perhaps there's a chance to claw our way back
toward an architectural etic that facilitates more space for freedom, play and
creativity, while refusing to ignore the vast consequences that lie in the
shadows.
Notes
1. Jorgensen, Darren, and Wilson, Laetitia, "The Utopian Failure of
Constant's New Babylon," InVisible Culture, no. 27, 2017,

https://doi.org/10.47761/494a02f6.90e24d1d. ⏎
2. Nieuwenhuys, Constant, "Another City for Another Life,"
Internationale Situationniste, no. 3, 1959. ⏎
3. See Debord, Guy, Society of The Spectacle/La société du spectacle,
Gallimard, Paris, 1967. ⏎
4. Nieuwenhuys, Constant, "Another City for Another Life,"
Internationale Situationniste, no. 3, 1959. ⏎
5. Nieuwenhuys, Constant, "New Babylon Ten Years On," Lecture for
the Faculty of Architecture, University of Technology, Delft, 1980. ⏎
6. Spargue, Shawn, "Why Are Average Weekly Hours Worked
Declining?" Beyond the Numbers, vol. 13, no. 3, U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, https://www.bls.gov/opub/btn/volume-13/why-are-average-
weekly-hours-worked-declining.htm, 2024. ⏎
7. Giattino, Charlie, and Ortiz-Ospina, Esteban, "Are We Working More
than Ever?" Our World in Data., https://ourworldindata.org/working-
more-than-ever, December 16, 2020. ⏎
8. Koolhaas, Rem, and Gielen, Pascal, Constant New Babylon, "The
Topsy-Turvy as Utopian Architecture," Hatje Cantz, Berlin, 2015, p.
247. ⏎
9. Koolhaas, Rem, and Gielen, Pascal, Constant New Babylon, "The
Topsy-Turvy as Utopian Architecture," Hatje Cantz, Berlin, 2015, p.
247. ⏎
10. Koolhaas, Rem, and Gielen, Pascal, Constant New Babylon, "The
Topsy-Turvy as Utopian Architecture," Hatje Cantz, Berlin, 2015, p.
247. ⏎
11. Flusser, Vilém, Writings, "Habit the True Aesthetic Criterion," edited
by Andreas Strohl, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 2002.
⏎

12. Nozik, Robert, Anarchy, State, and Utopia, Basic Books, New York,
1974. ⏎
13. Nieuwenhuys, Constant, "The Path to Unitary Urbanism," 1960,
Fondation Constant/Stichting Constant,
https://stichtingconstant.nl/system/files/1960_the_path_to_unitary_urb
anism_0.pdf. ⏎
14. Auken, Ida, "Welcome to 2030. I own nothing, have no privacy, and
life has never been better," World Economic Forum,
https://medium.com/world-economic-forum/welcome-to-2030-i-own-
nothing-have-no-privacy-and-life-has-never-been-better-
ee2eed62f710, 2016. ⏎
15. Situationist International, "The Situationist Case for Unitary
Urbanism," Internationale Situationniste, no. 3, 1959. ⏎
16. Auken, Ida, "Welcome to 2030. I own nothing, have no privacy, and
life has never been better," World Economic Forum,
https://medium.com/world-economic-forum/welcome-to-2030-i-own-
nothing-have-no-privacy-and-life-has-never-been-better-
ee2eed62f710, 2016. ⏎
17. The dérive, or "drift" was the Situationist technique for experiencing
the city through other motives for movement beyond functional tasks,
shopping or commuting to playfully explore, subvert and establish
unique and individual understandings and critiques of our relationship
with the city. ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

12
UNRESOLUTION
Fiction in the Space Between
Inquiry and Invention
Mark Alan Blumberg
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-13
One way we occupy the world is in the space between the obstacles we
come across and the progression beyond them. The development of the built
environment incorporates the conditions and struggles of a given society,
trajectories of thought that formalize into philosophical inquiries and
resolutions, and, for the purposes of this text, the resultant architectural
typologies that emerge from the combination of these two factors. This
chapter utilizes these instigations in an experiment with fiction as a tool to
explore the imagination of architectural typology.
The story inquires whether, in a societal circumstance of catastrophic
failure, humanity could reframe the notion of progress from something
inherently beneficial to an objective of basic survival. In the fiction, an
improbable typology - a facility developed for human euthanasia called the
"Terminal Terminal" - emerges as a mark of progress. It is the architecture
that accompanies a solution to a world that has come apart at the seams due
to a presupposed hyperbolic pandemic and the potential chain reaction of
globally scaled failures that follow. The Terminal Terminal evolves from a

proto-typology as a military-run facility into a cultural anchor that demands
as much presence in the urban fabric as the cathedrals, universities, and
temples of finance we know today. If it can be understood as an active
driver of progress, architectural typology becomes as much a driver of
society as philosophical, intellectual, political, cultural, and economic
forces. It serves as an example of how a fictional typology may allow for
inquiry into our uncertain future to better respond to and perhaps even
predict architecture's progression relative to relevant and contemporary
crises.
Throughout history, the circumstances of humanity have emerged via
disparate trajectories ushering in philosophical inquiry, and vice versa. To
name a few, religion as an ideological foundation and means of societal
control in the Middle Ages; education and the dissemination of knowledge
as moral responsibility and diffusion of power during the Enlightenment;
and class struggle and economic growth through the late Modern Era.
Margaret Meek Lange uses these as potential causes of societal and cultural
phenomena throughout time, and posits them as buttressing foundations in
attributing causality to historical development. This is termed "progress."1
Though it may go without saying, these significant human conditions are
accompanied by philosophical reflections, and these work together as
factors in the emergence of their respective architectural typologies.
Further, the architectures embedded in the built environment and their
various evolutions are concretized evidence of the societal progress
humanity has made in response to the multitude of circumstantial obstacles
it has faced.
For example, it may be argued that, during the Middle Ages, societal
progress was primarily controlled through religion. The great cathedrals and
mosques built during that period are architectural evidence of this societal

condition. Additionally, the Enlightenment period's morality and ethics are
other examples of societal circumstance. The spread of educational systems
and the resultant proliferation of schoolhouses, university campuses, public
libraries, and printing facilities throughout the Enlightenment are
architectural and urban evidence of an ethical progression toward pluralism
in society based on moral responsibility and a free and accessible system of
education - a diffusion of the authoritative rule of the clergy.
The Industrial Revolution and its subsequent Modern Era could be
considered as focused on economic growth. Steam engines, railroads,
factories, worker housing, and stock trading markets are all evidence in the
built environment of an economically driven concept of progress through
modernity. The amalgamation of the built architectures, urbanisms, and
infrastructures of these eras culminates in our present physically habitable
spaces that shelter humanity's progress.
Ideological development, moral responsibility, and economic growth are
past (and current) drivers for society that fuel progress. In the last 50 years
we have come to understand the Computer Age, or the Information Age, as
our circumstance and driver of society; and, arguably, we are currently at
the cusp of the age of artificial intelligence (AI) defining our current engine
of development - for better or worse. The hyper-connective quality of the
internet, paired with an increasingly globalized circumstance, has
compressed world geography into the spatiality of handheld devices
dependent on data centers - a supporting yet rarely experienced
architectural typology.
Each one of these circumstantial and philosophical impetuses provides a
foundation that defines historical development and contributes to the
formalization of the architectural typologies that organize, construct, and
express the tangible contexts of our built environments. Architectural

typology becomes the reduction of these complexities into conceptual
architectural components. These serve to organize the processes of society
into manageable and navigable volumes of space and function that are
ultimately transposed as formalized cultural tokens embedded in the built
environment. Architects use typology to fundamentally abstract
organizational and formal principles that occur after historical development
has become concretized as architecture. Therefore, typological formulation
plays a role in the causations of societal progress and culture.
Another causal role is that of catastrophe and struggle. Of the many
crises humanity faces, perhaps the most fresh is that of the COVID-19
pandemic. This event shifted humanity's circumstances, affecting our
communication, our connections with each other, and our relationship with
existing architectural typologies. Material between us increased, the space
between us expanded, and the organization of our lives was adjusted. Masks
placed a material barrier between us that changed our experience of direct,
face-to-face communication in visual, oral, and aural ways. A 6-foot (2-
meter) radius of space was, at the very least, recommended; this made space
a recognizable buffer, initiated a condition of isolation, and hindered direct
touch - arguably a necessity of humanity. Finally, quarantine mandates
spatially reorganized our relationship with the workplace and with our
homes. The isolating policies of the pandemic brought into question the
necessity of the commercially leasable office space typology and
reconfigured the housing typology as potentially a convenient hybrid of
work and domestic space.
For all we know, the COVID-19 pandemic was mild relative to the
potential virulence of future novel viruses run rampant. What would result
were a pandemic ten times as impactful to cripple the world? How far into
other fundamental societal structures would the chain reaction extend if

initiated by a pandemic far worse than our most recent experience? Would
catastrophe ensue - and could this catastrophe expand into the status of an
"era"? As a case study in utilizing fiction as a tool for understanding the
forces and consequences of new architectural typologies, the pandemic
serves as an accessible and available context to project alternative futures
that may open up space for inquiry and shape the way that we progress.
Fiction is a method of establishing context for exploring a specific
architectural typology as a progressive societal agent. It allows for
hypotheticals to be examined with imaginative invention and freedom of
inquiry. The story that follows posits an era of catastrophic failure as a
circumstance of humanity - a dystopian context. The intent is to use a
projected possible scenario and the resulting typology as a form of inquiry.
While every story is perhaps designed to raise questions, for the architect,
these may be used as predictors of consequences, or as a method to forecast
new circumstances, typologies, and thus novel philosophical inquiry.
Does an era defined by systemic disintegrations of societal support
structures reframe the notion of progress, and, if so, how? When
circumstances malignantly progress, such as in the case of a hyperbolic
pandemic, how might architecture/the built environment progress
benignantly? Can architecture progress even in the face of what might be
understood as regressive circumstances? At that point, an architecture that is
regressive by standards developed within progressive circumstances may be
seen as progressive within regressive circumstances. Is this a neutralization
of the concept of progress from innately beneficial to necessarily benign?
Or can the discipline of architecture create malignant progress to match the
regressive circumstances in which it finds itself?

Fiction
Terminal Terminals: A Future History of an
[Im]Probable Typology
We are at the end of an era at odds with itself. In the years and decades
leading up to the turn of the 22nd century, we endured bitter obstacles that
yielded sour solutions, offering sweet relief in portions too large to swallow.
Our first pandemic - COVID-19 from March 2020 to May 2023 -
conditioned us into what we called the "new normal", a normal that we
could live within, and even thrive. This new normal wasn't that much
different from the old normal relative to what we know now. The new
normal inflated our sense of autonomy as we were able to isolate in our
cocoons of home, first through the mandated quarantines, then through
what we thought was personal choice. We rejoiced in the freedom to work
from home. By isolating ourselves from the annoyances of daily commutes,
loud coffee shop chatter, slow service, and difficult coworkers, we became
conditioned to love the space between us and our neighbors - rather than
loving our neighbors themselves. Those of us who were able to take full
advantage of this part of the new normal became accustomed to the
autonomy it allowed, and we fought to keep it going.
At the scale of the individual or family, this space between each other
was like a warm blanket separating us from the emptiness of a winter chill.
But the first pandemic also sparked isolationist ideologies at much larger
scales. A seed was planted at the scale of nations by supply chain failures
and governmental regime changes as a globalized network of trade that had
worked relatively smoothly for nearly a century started to unravel in efforts
to contain COVID-19. This national isolation, though gradual and hard to
perceive at first, went largely unnoticed until the arrival of SARS-CoVid-

Theta-7X (Hypervariant) in December 2028, violently thrusting humanity
into the devastating second pandemic of 2029. We thought there would be
another century between pandemics, so we weren't prepared for what
happened next.
We still don't know where Theta-7X originated. All we know is that it
amplified the severity of the omicron variant from years before, had ten
times the bonding affinity, would lay dormant in any given host for up to
six months before becoming active, and, once activated, its virulence was
unmatched - and it killed painfully. In the dormant months, Theta-7X
would simply be a docile contagion ... undetectable, spreading from host to
host to host, and waiting to activate. Once activated, Theta-7X went straight
for the lungs, causing aggressive inflammation. Our alveoli would fill with
fluid, causing acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) that would
deprive our organs of vital oxygen and hinder the expulsion of carbon
dioxide, labor our breathing to painful levels, and stiffen our lungs, taking
away their elasticity. Our lung tissue would rapidly start to break down,
causing tissue necrosis due to hyperinflammation requiring mechanical
ventilation almost immediately.
From here the virus hit all of us in different ways; no two cases were the
same. Theta-7X could send our immune systems into overdrive, triggering
an exaggerated immune response, flooding the body with inflammatory
chemicals that destroyed healthy tissue; or it would destroy immune cells
directly, crippling our natural defenses and allowing secondary infections to
take hold. The virus might have attacked our cardiovascular system,
damaging our endothelial cells lining blood vessels and causing widespread
clotting and strokes, and depriving our organs of blood and oxygen, leading
to rapid tissue damage. Or it might have targeted our nervous system,
crossing the blood-brain barrier, causing our brains to become inflamed,

leading to seizures, paralysis, rapid cognitive decline, or all the above, and
damaging nerve centers controlling vital functions like breathing, heart rate,
and digestion. Finally, the virus might have hit our gastrointestinal and our
renal systems, attacking the kidneys and liver, causing multi-organ failure
through a combination of direct viral damage and systemic inflammation. In
severe cases, the virus would damage blood vessels in the gut, leading to
internal bleeding.
The most terrifying aspect of Theta-7X was that it behaved almost like a
sentient parasite, calibrating its impact to drain as much life from its host as
possible, seemingly to prolong its own survival. Death did not come quickly
with Theta-7X; the virus clung to life within its host, feeding off the body
and causing immense suffering to sustain itself. The disease was a chronic
existence of painful breathing for months and months before it started
attacking our immune system, cardiovascular system, nervous system, or
other organs. We suffered. We hoped for a cure through stinging inhalations
and exhalations that felt like shattered glass in our chests. But no cure came
in the first year. Or the in the second year. Our vaccines were useless
against this virus for the first five years of the pandemic. Theta-7X and the
suffering it caused simply became a way of life. Death, as a concept,
became tangible. We saw it every day staring at us through the suffering
eyes of our loved ones. Death became the sweet relief in a portion too large
to swallow. But society knew what had to be done.
In March of 2032 U.S. Congress legislated the Provisional Euthanasia
Act of 2032 (PEA2032). It passed by a narrow majority in the House of
Representatives only after months of heated debate and violent protests
around the country. The vice-president dutifully, though hesitantly, cast the
tie-breaking vote in the Senate on March 23, 2032, making human
euthanasia based on measurable criteria for mass suffering legal. What was

unheard of two years prior became a reality once it became clear that a cure
for Theta-7X was a distant, if not impossible, hope. Medical resources for
palliative care dwindled to near non-existence, while psychological and
emotional relief for families took priority. The indignity of suffering
through a Theta-7X death became unbearable - both to witness and to
endure. Meanwhile, arguments for personal autonomy and the right to die
grew increasingly compelling. Above all, the imperative to reduce
unnecessary suffering became paramount. In such a period of intense
regression of life at a global scale, it became dichotomous that such a
morbid potential as human euthanasia came to be known as progress in the
fight against the suffering that Theta-7X caused.
By June of 2032 our hospitals were more than overrun with annex
structures assembled by military operations, facilitated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and operated by the Centers for
Disease Control (CDC). Any open space around any given hospital was
occupied by all sorts of temporary structures. Rapid-deploy tents, inflatable
structures, frame-supported soft-wall structures, containerized units,
shipping container conversions, modular and mobile medical tents and
units, expandable medical trailers, decontamination tents, and isolation
units filled parking lots, parks, streets, and sidewalks around every hospital
in the nation.
Within these fields of annexed operations, the first legal instances of
human euthanasia would take place on June 17, 2032, in the twilight hours
just as the bright white illumination of LED floodlights powered up with a
percussive thump of electricity in an otherwise quiet evening. With only
immediate family in attendance, they watched their loved ones through the
fuzzy translucence of frame-supported polyvinyl chloride (PVC) strips.
Dressed in full hazmat gear, they stood silently as other hazmat-clad figures

administered a painless cocktail of euthanasia drugs. Under the flickering
glow of old fluorescent lights, on balmy summer nights in hospital parking
lots across the nation, the right to die was quietly ushered into society.
The military, the CDC, and FEMA were the three entities in charge of
building and operating the initial Departure Processing Facilities (DPFs)
within the contexts of the annexed operations that surrounded our hospitals.
Little credence was offered to ritual, procession, empathy, or compassion in
these early models of the Terminal Terminals. These proto-typologies took
on a purely utilitarian approach in the interests of efficiency, concerns for
clinical sterility, and separation from those still in healthy society. The DPF
structures and operations required direct access to a loading area for
discreet transfer of the euthanized remains from the facility to vehicular
transport. For this reason, the DPFs were typically located with direct
access to a road on the perimeter of the annex shantytowns that occupied
hospital parking lots and adjacent road infrastructure. Dependent on
specific site conditions, the DPF modules were either incorporated within
the boundaries of the original hospital annex operations or they were
affixed to the annex outside of its original boundary as if it was a parasite
clinging to its host. In either case, a metal-arched deployable tunnel clad in
thick, bright white vinyl and lit on the inside with strips of cool LED lamps
reached from the controlled entry of the DPF to the center of the annexed
area. In some cases, an annex was large enough to warrant multiple centers
to which the DPF entry tunnels extended.
For those patients who were conscious on their way to their departure,
these long, illuminated vaults of white PVC became their final spatial
experience of threshold. Architecturally, this experience is broken down
into three distinct parts: entry to the tunnel, the tunnel itself, and the tunnel
exit/arrival in the DPF proper. These three threshold experiences define

what eventually became known as the entering - the architectural entry
component of the overall Terminal Terminal typology that we know today.
Phenomenologically, this three-part entering sequence first disconnects us
from the world in which we live - by changing the light in our eyes, the
sounds in our ears, and the air on our skin - before ultimately connecting us
to the world in which we die. In the early, deployed structure models of
Terminal Terminals, the mouth of the entry tunnel facilitated this initial
disconnection through a vestibuled space defined by two simple, sequential
planes of transparent PVC strips through which the gurneys were pushed
and the facilitators and family members followed.
Secondly, the next threshold - the tunnel itself - began its formalization
as the deployed corridor, positively pressurized with filtered air and lit so
sufficiently that no shadow would fall on any surface interior of the tunnel.
The consistency of the bright white light inside the tunnel replaced the
variegated and gradated light of the living world that shifted and adjusted
based on time of day, shadows cast by clouds, trees, a plane moving
overhead, or whether the sky was overcast or clear. The filtered air being
pumped into the PVC tunnels created a slight breeze pushing against the
patients' faces as if its intent was to blow the debris of life from their skin.
And, finally, the thick vinyl walls of the tunnel muffled the exterior sounds
and reverberated the interior footsteps into the patients' ears. Light, air, and
sound became the first reacclimating conditions that marked a departure
from the living world for the patients.
***
The architectural conditions described above were not the intended results
of designing the solution for how patients enter departure processing.
Rather, the solution of entry into the Departure Processing Facilities was

based wholly on the necessity for a centralized location among the mess of
lightweight, prefabricated, modular medical facilities hastily built to solve
previous problems of dwindling space available for Theta-7X patients, and
a conditioned and closed pathway to the DPFs themselves. The
phenomenological biproducts of urgent and hastily constructed solutions -
the two thresholds described above - have survived architecturally
typological evolution over 80 years to define what we know as the
"enterings" of our Terminal Terminals at the turn of the 22nd century.
However, the last component of the entering experience - the threshold
connecting the tunnel to the DPF - was not formalized until well after these
initial deployable models of the Terminal Terminal had evolved well
beyond their initiating forms.
While Theta-7X was the initial generator of the need for the Terminal
Terminal, it would prove not to be the lone sustaining progenitor for the
further development of the typology. The challenges presented by Theta-7X
on a global scale worked only to exacerbate the previous obstacles of
positive societal progress. While the world was busy simply trying to keep
Theta-7X at bay and save as many lives as possible, the many results of
ignored climate change, massive decreases in arable land, consolidation of
resource accessibility, mass urbanization, supply chain breakdowns,
exhaustion of natural resources, global economic catastrophes, isolationist
and nationalist ideologies, sea level rise, the effects of various failures to
initiate sufficient renewable energy infrastructure, drought, dwindling water
supply, hegemonic industrial agriculture systems, mass automation in the
labor force, and insufficient mass access to health services and medical
support, among many other post-modern global shifts, effectively strained -
and ultimately collapsed - society's capacity for supporting its population
centers. The globalized world found itself under-resourced and incapable of

supporting its human population. Though we knew how to extract, process,
and develop basic resources such as food, water, and shelter, we no longer
had the infrastructural capacity or connective networks to sufficiently and
effectively provide these necessities at the speed and efficiency we had
become accustomed to prior to Theta-7X and its global effects. We find
ourselves here in the year 2100, 81 years past COVID-19's trigger of the
"Great Isolation" during which the global populations started to consolidate
into enclaves of unsupported, and de-resourced, humanity. This entry into
the 22nd century also marks almost 70 years of the Provisional Euthanasia
Act of 2032 (PEA2032), the conspicuously humane advent of freedom-of-
lifespan for those who chose to engage its options of escaping the realities
of a world devoid of support.
As the conditions described above became more and more tangible in our
day-to-day lives (if you could call what we were living through "life"), the
hospital parking lot annex proto-typology of the Terminal Terminal was
given the chance to develop further into a more permanent architectural
reality three years further into the pandemic when the Euthanasia Act of
2035 (EA2035) was legislated, making freedom-of-lifespan available to the
broader population who were suffering from the ancillary global effects of
the pandemic. Our world had simply become unbearable to live in for those
of us for whom it may be more difficult to move around; to take the extra,
often near impossible, steps of finding the resources required for simple
survival. For many of us, our world had become something to escape as
opposed to something within which to simply be - to live. The Terminal
Terminal at this point broke free of its hospital annex sites and entered its
tenure as a municipal utility to be run by local authorities. EA2035 thrust
the Terminal Terminal into the hands of the purveyors of the built
environment - architects, landscape architects, urban designers, planners.

Cities all over the U.S. began planning for the addition of a new type of
civic structure within their building fabric. As a municipal service, sites
were centralized within city boundaries for equal access to all who wanted
to take advantage of their newly granted freedom-of-lifespan. Central
locations within cities were earmarked as potential sites for Terminal
Terminals. Larger cities such as New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Atlanta,
etc. chose several points of centrality within their dense or sprawling
fabrics. As soon as the potentiality of the specific site locations became
publicly known, the other side of the human euthanasia issue became
visible and tangible. The concept of human euthanasia in general was, of
course, not accepted by all citizens in the first place. Further, the potential
of expanding the applicability of euthanasic practices outside of the original
intentions as relief from disease into relief from the general regression of
society and the decline of the survivability of everyday life pulled even
more pronounced protest. Protests became dense and rampant around the
sites that were chosen for the Terminal Terminals. Twenty-four hours a day
protestors picketed and chanted mantras against the development of the
Terminal Terminals, claiming euthanasia as immoral, sinful, unethical, and
against the natural order of things. It became clear that the protests were not
going away.
Each site became surrounded with dense crowds of protestors throughout
their design and construction periods. To facilitate the material
manifestation of freedom-of-lifespan facilities while simultaneously
facilitating freedom-of-speech for the protestors, architects designed zones
of protest into the site plan for each Terminal Terminal. These formalized
almost as moats filled with protestors, disconnecting the city fabric from the
"sites of passing" - the sites proper for the new DPFs. Terminal Terminals
around the country started to incorporate a protected "outer ring" intended

specifically for the protestors to voice their displeasure at the idea of human
euthanasia. This zone, this outer ring, soon became known as "the outering"
section of the procession from the living city to the sites of passing. From
the city, the euths - those of us who had decided to act on our freedom-of-
lifespan - would first encounter the outering, enduring the chants and
displeasure of the protestors as we passed through them in a narrow
protected corridor before reaching the mouth of the entering - the light-
filled tunnel that has survived from the initial proto-typology of the hospital
annex DPF.
So here we have identified two of the typological components for the
Terminal Terminals. In order of procession from the city, we first encounter
the outering - the space intended for protest against the very thing that
humanity deemed as a progressive step forward among unimaginable
suffering caused by society's failures in progressing past previous obstacles.
The second typological component we encounter is the entering - the light-
filled corridor left over from hospital parking lot annexes that
phenomenologically disconnects the euths from the experience of the city
and its life-filled stimuli and holds them in a space of blank transition;
washing them with light, air, and muffled sounds. The third typological
component - the passaging - remains inaccessible to anyone not intending
to practice their right-to-lifespan, and therefore is beyond the scope of this
exploration. The passaging - death's architectural formalization in Terminal
Terminals - was always intended to parallel the mystery associated with
departing the living world. It is unknown what happens beyond the far end
of the entering, and it is outside the boundaries of this unresolved history of
the Terminal Terminal.

Unresolution
Part of the allure of the future is its unresolved status - its characteristic of
being unknown. This potential of unresolution allows imaginative invention
to emerge from the inquiry of both our history and our potential futures.
Architects operate between givens and possibilities; much like humanity's
situation between obstacles and progress. Their role often requires diverse
exploration in the space between universally understood forces and an
uncertain future. Fiction is a tool for activating the space between the past
and the future, or obstacles and progress. It serves as a method for inquiry
and invention. Design itself can be said to be the practice of establishing a
set of inquiries based on relevant circumstances, and ultimately inventing
myriad possible solutions which result in an optimal final condition.
Perhaps this suggests that embedded within the processes of architectural
design are trajectories of fictional exploration that unfold as inquiries that
establish foundational frameworks for novel architectural typologies.
How this tool is used is based on our values. While our profession often
lacks foresight, it may be because our designs are imagined as (and limited
by) an aim for realization. For the author of fiction, realization, clarity, and
a precise inventory of cause and effect are not their responsibility. The
reader is left to interpret the meaning and decide how it may or may not
shape their worldview, and thus their method of progression. The fiction
presented here is prefaced by intent, yet not concluded with consequences.
If it is indeed a tool for inquiry, it may be the reader who initiates the
questions, much like an occupant or culture must contend with a work of
architecture in reality. What the next typology is remains unknown, but,
rather than surrender to the reactionary, architects act through the projection
of possibilities unlimited by clear goals and criteria. Through such an act
they may develop new processes for understanding obstacles to progress

before they occur, and, when they do, have a more facile method at their
disposal for playing the possibilities as open fictions to chart more diverse
courses for reaction.
Note
1. Meek Lange, Margaret, "Progress", The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Summer 2023 Edition), Edward N. Zalta and Uri
Nodelman (eds.),
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2023/entries/progress/. ⏎
OceanofPDF.com

13
ON ENEMY TERRITORY
Gregory Spaw and Patrick Rhodes
DOI: 10.4324/9781003479932-14
The word "manifesto, from the Latin manifestus and the Italian manifestare,
means to make obvious or to make public. The root of the last bit of the
Italian origin, stare, means to be rigid. So, when an artist, architect, or
anyone else puts forth a manifesto, they are presenting a set of ideas to the
world that is fixed. More than that, the manifesto bemoans the current state
of things and promises a tomorrow that never comes. They are generally
pretentious, lofty, arrogant, and make statements rather than asking
questions, while aiming high and almost certainly falling short. They tend
to be bursting with answers bent on solving problems when the thing that
drives us is problem posing. For all of their rigidity, they are static, soon
become stale, and eventually dead. Worst of all, they take time to write
when you could be out doing the actual work. I think if you asked us, we
would say that we don't particularly like manifestoes. But this is a
manifesto - or is it? It may more accurately be called an anti-manifesto, less
about grumbling over the obstacles in life than accepting them, keeping
them close, and celebrating the irritation they bring and the agitation in
them that keeps us awake. It is probably closer to a manifest rather than a
manifesto - the things we need to keep going. In the age of discovery, a
ship's manifest was more than a mere inventory of supplies and equipment;

it was an instrument of measure of the time and the distance remaining until
you die. For us, the following list is like that. Like the ship where you will
find that manifest, it is always moving, in constant flux, flexible and
reflexive, able to take advantage of the changing winds. It marks and
measures the fine line between success and failure, between the vitality and
the stagnation of the work, acknowledges and takes stock of the obstacles
ahead, and resolves to face them head on. It motivates us to get up, to get
going, and to do the work. While it may read as a sharp critique of the
academy and the profession, it is more of a critical self-reflection - an
accounting of our own failures and lessons learned, a memento mori, and a
reminder of the most crucial things we need, and need to avoid, in order to
progress.
Incompetence
* Architecture may be incapable, ill-equipped, or ill-suited to address
society's core concerns, from poverty to climate change to social
justice.
One of the most pervasive and persistent fears among people who make
things is that they may not know what they're doing. However, for those
with a certain level of experience and expertise who know how to make,
they may be ignorant or incapable of knowing what to make exactly or,
more importantly, why to make it. Aggravating the condition for those of us
on the ground is our inability to rely on the voices of a profession that have
been historically skeptical of, oblivious to, misguided about, or unwilling to
adequately engage with the fundamental social, economic, and
environmental crises we increasingly face, either ethically or practically.
Since at least the 1920s, the masters of our profession have espoused with a

kind of Dunning-Kruger-like certainty that architecture's most important,
yet enigmatic, contribution to the happiness, harmony, and progress of
society is through aesthetics and form.
In a social media post in 2014, Patrik Schumacher upheld these
convictions by stating that "FORM is our specific contribution to the
evolution of world society," while deriding critics for moralizing,
paralyzing, and arresting his "explorations" when we are unable to
"instantly demonstrate a manifest tangible benefit for the poor - as if the
delivery of social justice is the architect's competency."1 In agreement,
either wittingly or unwittingly, Edwin Chan is currently promoting the
ability to enrich people's lives, develop strong communities, and generate
"moving spiritual experiences" through what he calls "social sculpture" -
otherwise known as society's "silver lining."2 Chan's allusion to clouds is
fitting though, as Kenneth Frampton pointed out in a 2016 interview on
what he considered to be "spectacular starchitecture"- that the success of
architects "depends on their not being grounded."3
Following a global pandemic, years of societal upheaval, and a shift in
the global political discourse toward the right, Frampton has reversed
himself and thrown in the towel on architecture while conceding that its
current predicament is due to its continuing failure to realize a social and
ecological vision and its inability to cultivate local culture through the
branding of star architects. He laments that if we do not soon turn away
from our rampant consumerism and toward organizing for the social good,
"we have no hope surviving as a species let alone as a profession."4
Meanwhile, a concerning view among many everyday architects is that, if
we walk away from profitable, socially acceptable, and politically expedient
work, there won't be much left to design.5 From a profession that accounts
for 40 percent of the world's carbon emissions, is dominated by white males

(over 70 percent), and traditionally serves the wealthiest 2 percent of
society, these viewpoints evidence architecture's ongoing cognitive
dissonance - that our problems and the power to change them come from
within, and that we have no shortage of work left to do.
Complacency
* Despite our incompetence, we are compelled to make.
FIGURE 13.1 Neonomads taking in the expanse of the Rub al
Khali. Photograph by the Authors.
In 2014, archaeologists determined that paintings found in a remote
Indonesian cave were nearly 40,000 years old and the earliest form of
figurative art ever found. While scientists still debate the intentions of the
stenciled paintings made by spitting moistened pigment over human hands,
they suggest that these paintings and others like them found all over the
world were a necessary part of the cultural fabric for ancient people and

served as a kind of "social glue."6 Made tens of thousands of years before
the development of written language in an isolated part of the world when
humans were confronted daily with their own mortality in the face of the
relentless passage of time, these paintings seem to be reaching across the
millennia to simply say "We are here; we exist." Since our beginnings,
humans have been compelled to make as a part of our very nature -
something that Hannah Arendt referred to as Homo faber ("man the
maker"),7 and coming from a place that the ancient Stoics called the
commanding part of the soul.8
Across the history of human material culture, many of our artifacts have
had no apparent utilitarian value or practical use, and have been made in an
effort to express, experience, explore, and seek out a greater or higher
understanding beyond ourselves and our world. Thomas Aquinas defined
this as a "natural" process motivated by both intellect and a desire to gain
self-knowledge from external things through which we draw intelligible
concepts to better reflect and see ourselves. He suggested that we "proceed
from objects to acts, from acts to faculties, and from faculties to essence."
By describing our motivations as natural, Aquinas meant that our actions
are determined by our constitution as human and are not optional, driven
toward good and our general welfare.9

FIGURE 13.2 Neonomads MIG welding on the frame of the
prototype three shelter. Photograph by the Authors.
Although this philosophy has underpinned science and education from
the empiricists through to modern times, many of our institutions, including

academia, have become corrupted by complacency, the avoidance of
progress, and self-satisfaction with the status quo. Philosopher and
cognitive scientist Daniel Dennett compares academic scholarship to
"Chmess" - a hypothetical, intertextual, and self-referential game where,
rather than being derived from and applied to life, knowledge is applied to
other knowledge, and conclusions drawn from others' conclusions rather
than empirical experience.10 For a growing segment of modern society,
higher education has become an evil and what Aquinas may have referred
to as an object of avoidance. In a lecture given at Harvard in 1837, called
"The American Scholar," Ralph Waldo Emerson eviscerated the attending
students and faculty for living in a "degenerate state" detached from, aloof,
and irrelevant to the concerns of society as mere thinkers or, worse, parrots
of other thinkers, disconnected from doing and from life experience.
Emerson imagined a new kind of thinking that, rather than lazy theoretical
discourse, comes with a duty to raise and guide each other bound by facts
that are active and present in the living world. This new thinking he
envisioned takes the form of work through which we learn and discover
new things through experience, often confronted by our own ignorance,
while our new language takes the form of questions rather than answers.11
"We will feel the salt of the sea not by reading about it in a book, but by
plunging ourselves into the ocean."12
The words obstacle, manifesto, and complacency are curiously related -
meaning, respectively, to stand against, to make your position known to
others, and to be pleased with the position you hold. The danger of standing
in one place for too long, however, is that you might remain there, never to
move again - an obstacle to yourself. Inspired by Emerson, Thoreau,
Dewey, and so many others compelled to learn by doing despite that, as
Aquinas admits, we can never completely know the essence of anything; we

will move, we will plunge ourselves into the ocean and continue to express,
to experience, to explore, to seek out, and to learn by making.
Terrain
* We occupy the edge, the margin, and the periphery while taking full
advantage of the freedoms we find there.
There is a scene in David Lean's 1962 epic masterpiece, Lawrence of
Arabia, in which Lawrence and an Arab caravan have crossed an expanse of
desert so deadly that the locals refer to it as the anvil of the Sun, only to
find that one of their party has fallen behind during the night. Despite
protests from the Bedouin that their lost friend's fate is sealed and any
attempt at rescue would keep them from their eventual goal, a defiant
Lawrence turns back into that landscape to face almost certain death, while
roaring, "I shall be at Aqaba. That is written!"
The idea that humanity holds possession and stewardship of the Earth, its
terrain, oceans, and all of its natural resources by divinely ordained right is
an ancient one and, while wildly arrogant, still persists. Once isolated by
natural barriers like a mountain range, a desert, or a body of water, people
have cut passes, dug canals, scorched earth, and busted sod to expand,
annex, conquer, and bring nature to its knees to stake and claim as their
own, by providence. This human condition has been made no more evident
than when, in the nineteenth century, it became enshrined in the budding
American national identity as Manifest Destiny. But, what pulls us out into
the terrain is a deeper, more primal, and perhaps more innately human
longing just to see. More than a simple wanderlust and, although not
uniquely American, there is something about the freedom of being
American that is formed by the ease of movement, the open road, and the

urge once in a while to light out for the territories. From out of Africa to the
Vikings, the Inuit, Bedouin, the Maasai, and the Sami to modern migrants
and homesteaders, drifters, and perpetual travelers, we have always been on
the move. We inhabit every speck of land, no matter how small, lethal, or
remote - from arctic Utqiagvik, Alaska to the tiny South Atlantic Island of
Tristan da Cunha. We swim oceans, cross deserts on foot, and scale
mountain peaks for no apparent practical purpose. We test our bodies and
minds in the most extreme environments on the planet for no other reason
but to feel what it is like to have done it. We often don't make it, and we go
despite knowing that. Early in the spring of 1845, a 27-year-old Henry
David Thoreau quit a good income making pencils for the family business
and went to the woods. He went to confront the hardships he found there
and to live deliberately, to learn what it had to teach, and not, when he came
to die, discover that he had not lived.13
FIGURE 13.3 Neonomads hiking to the prototype four shelter
site with building components. Photograph by the Authors.

The sea's only gifts are harsh blows and, occasionally, the chance to feel
strong. Now, I don't know much about the sea, but I do know that that's the
way it is where I am. And I also know how important it is in life not
necessarily to be strong but to feel strong, to measure yourself at least once,
to find yourself at least once in the most ancient of human conditions,
facing blind, deaf stone alone, with nothing to help you but your own hands
and your own head.14
When we first dreamed up Neonomads and were faced with the prospect
of deploying a shelter into our own Sun's anvil, the Empty Quarter of the
Rub al Khali in the Arabian Peninsula, we immediately thought of
Pathfinder, Spirit, Opportunity, Curiosity, Perseverance, and all of the
other landers and rovers discovering the landscapes of Mars. The
comparison is not necessarily hyperbolic. For thousands of years, the
Bedouin have traversed the Arabian Desert and are the only masters of its
more than 650,000 square kilometers of deadly sands. The first foreign
explorers weren't able to breach the Quarter until 1931, with the first
accurate Western maps made by Wilfred Thesiger between 1946 and 1950.
Since then, only a few extreme adventurers have attempted its crossing,
leaving the rest of us to wonder at its edge. We began the project with no
site, no client, and no real purpose but to go out and see. Although it was a
series of brutal negotiations between the known and the unknown, between
success and absolute failure where we often found ourselves between a rock
and a hard place, we hoped to allow people to get a little farther out to
experience a little-known people and place, to penetrate the desert, to learn,
and to live as few of us have done before.

Technology
* It is neither technophobic nor technophilic in its production.
FIGURE 13.4 A manual hydraulic pipe bender used in
conjunction with laser-cut jigs and bending reference plane
toward the fabrication of the Neonomads prototype two shelter.
Photograph by the Authors.

FIGURE 13.5 A student utilizing augmented reality via a
HoloLens 2 headset to tweak positioning of an aluminum tube
prior to being bent by a six-axis robot and external positioner.
Photograph by the Authors.

While there may be broader chicken and egg questions of whether
particular analog or digital tools drive our processes and constructions, or
whether we simply seek out viable tools to manifest our designs, this type
of question doesn't really interest us. We consider ourselves free-range,
working by hook or by crook. Being grounded, resourceful, and clever to
make things happen has proven to be far more valuable than being a
disciple of a particular way of working or utilizing a specific set of tools.
The work isn't bogged down at the altar of a particular technoevangelist or
neo-luddite. We are aware, and have had to sit through sermons of the false
idol/ideal(ism) of Patrik Schumacher. And, unfortunately, we are not of the
privileged class of Williams and Tsien that once pined at the loss of
"Slowness" due to the "efficiency" of the "computer" as "tools of the hand
disappear."15 This is not to say that there hasn't been incredible work
produced by both of these offices, but it is quite clear that they are operating
in the rarified air via particular and ideal modes that they have had the
luxury of growing accustomed to over multiple decades.
As a counterpoint, we are opportunists working in a rough and ready
manner. Be it hardware, software, analog, or digital, we don't much care as
long as the technology can facilitate what needs to be done. A sketch on a
scrap piece of stock can prove to be just as valuable as a complete digital
model, depending on the particular situation and the construct to be built.
This mentality is something we try to instill in our student collaborators as
well. This get-it-done attitude has led students to fashioning their own
vacuformer via a kitchen oven and small shopvac to create a thermoform
mold to be used with a rotomolder of their own making. Ingenuity along
similar lines led students to utilize a 55-gallon (208-liter) plastic drum and
personally fabricated marble ball bearings for use with cardboard wheels to
serve as a device for transporting materials for a desert design build. For the

Neonomads subsequent series of desert shelters, the general approach,
beyond computer visualization, utilized analog jigs, a plethora of
metalworking tools, and extensive amounts of MIG welding. Digital
fabrication tools such as a large-format laser cutter were also employed in
support of the overall fabrication effort, but typically for very specific tasks
that would be impossible to achieve through other means. Exo-Skeleton, a
reimagined pinup surface, on the other hand was designed and fabricated
almost entirely through digital means. The computer model facilitated an
iterative design approach and eventually, through a custom parametric
definition, generated unique KUKA Robot Language (KRL) code for each
of the tubes, which were then bent robotically. However, analog tools were
critical in the fit, finishing, and assembly of the structure.
Surrender
* It necessitates the grit of its collaborators to find success.

FIGURE 13.6 Neonomads prototype three shelter onsite and in
use at night. Photograph by the Authors.
FIGURE 13.7 Neonomads prototype four shelter onsite and in
use at dusk. Photograph by the Authors.
Architecture and the business of architecture is not easy. We often tell
students who are questioning their choice of study that there are much
easier ways to make a living, ways that subsume far less of their time and
that do not take the same mental toll. Yet, in the vast majority of instances,
and for reasons that we often aren't privy to, they keep at it. While, for a
multitude of reasons, not everyone should continue to study architecture,
for those who do, grit is quite possibly the most important quality they can
possess to find success. Psychologist and MacArthur Fellow Angela
Duckworth's research on the value of grit seems to support such an
assessment.16 In architectural practice, projects take time; there is hardly
any instant gratification. Instilling perseverance in our students is critical

both for their immediate and their long-term growth. If architecture is hard,
then the act of physically designing and building architecture is
exponentially so. This is especially true when students often start a design
build studio with little to no practical knowledge of how things are built,
and even less experience of the processes and realities of building. But then
again, these are exactly the reasons we teach design build. In juxtaposition
to typical architectural design studios where viability and reality can be
skirted, physical artifacts don't lie. They are or they aren't. They do or they
don't. One way or another, they must be resolved.
With these very real constraints ever present, resilience becomes all the
more important on a day-to-day basis when the scale of the task at hand
often feels insurmountable. This is where the importance of showing up and
getting stuck in really matters. In this way we have to be relentless, like
Hemingway, showing up, day in and day out, attacking the keys of his
Underwood.17 Due to the particular demographics of the students that we
instruct, there is often an initial skepticism about attending university to
then engage with such physically demanding work. This hesitation means
that, as faculty members, we must uncharacteristically lead from the front,
at least for a time, until the students find their niches and assume positions
of leadership. No matter the particulars of our individual roles, our
collective determination is what allows us to dig deep and push a project
forward. By the time the photographic documentation of the particular
project in question is taking place, the traces of its circuitous route and all
the points of potential surrender along the way have been polished over,
leaving few discerning marks to the casual observer. However, by their very
nature, the processes and the eventual outcomes of design build projects are
the byproducts of taxing efforts by all involved - with little glory but with
plenty of blood, sweat, and tears expended. No doubt it is due to this shared

trauma that the experiences and lessons carried on are far more visceral and
the collective bond is that much stronger.
Iteration
* It is iterative, preferring the small, the fast, and the frequent in order
to fail more often and learn more deeply.
Our work is perpetually in progress and our process is inherently iterative.
Long ago we came to realize that the first time we do something, it's
typically a bit garbage. That is why we're not in the habit of doing things
only once. We therefore stack the deck and build opportunities for multiple
passes into the problems we pursue. Our cyclical approach happens
internally within projects, but also from project to project. In these
instances, we serve as the continuity, and the problems we engage with are
meaty enough that we can gnaw on them for years. For example, what
might start as a foray into bending steel tube utilizing a manual hydraulic
bender toward a preliminary concept for a design build project might
subsequently dramatically reduce scale and serve as an introductory
modeling project for an option studio, before finally, a few years later,
serving as a new research trajectory exploring the potential of multiplanar
tube bending facilitated through the accuracy of a six-axis robot and an
external positioner. Gradually, this refined technique has found its way back
into the instruction of an advanced digital fabrication elective, where the
workflow has facilitated the development of a micro design build project.
This way of working is antithetical to the typical modus operandi of
design builds. They are one and done. Design builds projects are moon
shots. The vast expenditures of resources - including capital, materials, and
time, along with the attention and oversight they garner - means failure is

not really an option. So, through remarkable force of will and resolve
emanating from the courageous space monkey (faculty member/s) strapped
in, projects more often than not escape the pull of gravity, and space is
delivered. Inversely, we have basked in the spectacle of a design build
project gone awry, disintegrating in the atmosphere, and somehow have
lived to tell the tale.18 While this was in no way pleasant, the scars of the
experience have shaped our approach going forward. We have embraced
small ball. We have found ways for design build, like our other work and
instruction, to become iterative as well. This iterative approach to design
build gives us more opportunities to get things right, provides moments to
step back and critically look at what is and isn't working, and eases the
collective pressure we feel.
FIGURE 13.8 The completed Exo-Skeleton micro design build
pinup board. Photograph by the Authors.

The End
* The work is unabashed, it is true, and it does not end.
We are nomads.19 Not like some traditional Bedouin, as described by
Wilfred Thesinger in Arabian Sands,20 but new nomads, defined by global
hypermobility, rootlessness, and an aesthetic and ethical reflexivity.21 We
feel akin to one of sociologist Richard Sennett's foreigners - painfully and
unavoidably adaptive, unable to take for granted ways of life that seem so
natural to natives.22 Constantly on the move since birth and having lived in
many places for no more than a few months to a year, we are itinerants,
finding ourselves perpetually in-between. Unlike stereotypical nomads, we
adhere to few borders, fewer memberships, and can be assigned to no fixed
territory. We do not claim affiliations to nations, governments, or
institutions, but to tribes - discovered, formed, and joined organically as we
have moved, found mostly in late-night design studios. Conditioned by this
instability, we have a ceaseless and almost nostalgic longing for home; a
home we have never really known. The work, we have discovered, has
become a search for belonging. Looking back at past projects, we have
come to realize that they all, in some way, revolve around the same themes
of place, community, memory, and disappearance. We are captivated by
loss, whether to time or to the horizon left behind us. Much of that work
requires that we get into a car and drive out into the landscape to where, as
Jean Baudrillard puts it, "snapshots aren't enough."23
At some point when we reach the sea of sand of the Rub al Khali where
the road ends, we will have to get out of the car and walk, like the old ones.
We will carry the architecture on our backs, away from modern society and
the things of humankind, walking back to the basics, to the past, back to the
elements of earth, air, water, and fire; back to Semper's hearth.24 Our

sincerest intention is that, through this process, our students, our new tribe,
will find some thing, whatever it is, and that it will latch onto them and go
deep to the bone, and last. Samuel Mockbee called this thing being "snake
bit";25 and, just like that, you have to go out in the wilderness to get it and
you'll never see it coming. We can only hope that they will carry this thing,
this lesson, memory, this value with them for the rest of their lives, and
return to it, now and then, as they continue their own work. We have
learned over time that this thing cannot be taught and must be experienced,
and it is hard won. It may be the only reward. Out there, finally, in the
isolation and scarcity of the desert, under the stars and around a fire where
stories are told, we find ourselves and each other. We find belonging. We
make our tribe. Through our stories, our memories, and passing down to
those who come after us what we have learned, the work will never end.
Progress
* We find the courage to persevere despite the risk of hardship and
failure that our obstacles promise.
Defined as onward momentum, to advance or develop toward a more
improved condition, or any movement forward through space and time,
"progress" is often expressed through optimism or with the hope and
confidence that future efforts will work out and lead, inevitably, to some
measure of success. But, as William Cain points out in his writings on the
American Dream, while "the greatest American dreamers say Yes ... their
power comes first from saying No."26 The motivation to affect great change
begins with the rejection of the past and the status quo, a dissatisfaction
with who we used to be and the staleness of who we are, and a hunger for
something more, something better, something new that may be just around

the bend up ahead. Our shared goal of a life fulfilled by freedom and
happiness is not achieved easily, without struggle, or by simply finding it by
chance on the path beneath us - it is a pursuit. We start from behind, we
give chase, and there are no guarantees that we will overtake it.
Risk and its relationship to progress have been integral parts of the
human experience from the beginning, and perhaps the single greatest
consideration in every human endeavor to advance civilization, from the
spice trade to the space race. The Chinese symbol for risk, in fact, is a
combination of symbols for danger and opportunity.27 Risk has been a
primary catalyst in shaping our present society and the dividing line
between modernity and what came before.28 Risk can be measured, its
origins defined, and its impacts predicted. Over the millennia, untold
resources have been expended toward understanding risk and developing
risk-taking capacities in religious, political, military, sports, and corporate
cultures. And yet we teach our students to avoid risk at all costs. The
emphasis in modern education on academic achievement that is measured
in points and scores develops in our students the practical belief that
intellect is more important than character, that potential is tied to Grade
Point Average (GPA), to be uncomfortable with the unknown, and that it is
wiser to avoid failure, even though it is the best way to learn.

FIGURE 13.9 A Neonomad hiking structural components out to
the site with the help of a custom-fabricated backpack and two
poles. Photograph by the Authors.

To combat the fear of failure that is so prevalent and deep-seated among
students, we should be establishing studio environments that demand
ambition and accept failure while exemplifying the spirit of entrepreneur
and engineer Andy Grove's catchphrase, "Make mistakes faster." The more
we put students in the position of making their own decisions, the more
risks they will take. As decision-making marks the end of deliberation and
the beginning of action, it always includes risk.29 But, instead of asking
students to chase innovative (but likely failing) solutions to the most critical
issues we face, the only "risk"-taking in many academic design studios is
through formal and aesthetic agendas, where the priority is on designing
beautiful objects rather than meaningful processes.
Our focus on form and individual artistic skill has led to an emphasis on
self-satisfaction and a lack of social consideration in the way that we teach
architecture.30 In order to progress, we must develop the kind of risk-taking
in students that affects society beyond a mere visual presence, that
considers the lives of ordinary people and the issues they face, that takes
responsibility for its impacts and failures, that listens. We must push for
expanded roles for architects, more relevant forms of practice, more
effective ways to engage emerging markets and diverse populations, for
innovation, for invention, for the freedom to fail. To progress we must look
back to the humble humanism that made architecture the "mother of all
arts" so socially relevant prior to the beaux-arts revolution, while situating
ourselves at the heart of culture rather than its margins, where we can
operate with agency. And then perhaps, by looking back and remembering
who we were and what we valued, we can finally move forward.

FIGURE 13.10 Neonomads joining bent tube sections into a
structural loop for the prototype two shelter. Photograph by the
Authors.

FIGURE 13.11 Neonomads prototype two shelter canopy test
fitting with tape demarcating the proposed extents of the base
platform. Photograph by the Authors.
Notes
1. Winston, Anna. "'Architecture is not art' Says Patrik Schumacher in
Venice Architecture Biennale Rant." Dezeen, 18 March 2014,
https://www.dezeen.com/2014/03/18/architecture-not-art-patrik-
schumacher-venice-architecturebiennale-rant/. ⏎
2. Sloan, Kami. "Architecture's Social Structures for Humanity: Edwin
Chan's Silver Lining." VENÜ Magazine,
https://venumagazine.com/architectures-social-structures-for-
humanity-edwin-chans-silver-lining/. ⏎
3. McQuillan, Thomas. "On the Grounds of Modern Architecture: An
Interview with Kenneth Frampton." Architectural Histories, 4, no. 1
(2016): 20. ⏎
4. "The future of architecture in an ever-changing world." Thames &
Hudson, 5 September 2020, originally at
https://thamesandhudson.com/news/the-future-of-architecture-in-an-
ever-changing-world/ (no longer available). ⏎
5. Adam, Robert. "Architects Won't Save the Planet." Building Design
Online, 27 June 2023, https://www.bdonline.co.uk/opinion/architects-
wont-save-the-planet/5123866.article. ⏎
6. Vergano, Dan. "Cave Paintings in Indonesia Redraw Picture of Earliest
Art." National Geographic, 8 October 2014,
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/article/141008-cave-art-
sulawesi-hand-science. ⏎

7. Arendt, Hannah. The Human Condition. University of Chicago Press,
1958, 153-159. ⏎
8. Inwood, Brad. Ethics and Human Action in Early Stoicism. Oxford
University Press, 1985, 30-33. ⏎
9. Boulter, Stephen. "Aquinas on Action and Action Explanation." In
New Essays on the Explanation of Action, pp. 257-275. Palgrave
Macmillan, 2009. ⏎
10. Dennett, Daniel C. "Higher-Order Truths about Chmess." Topoi, 25
(2006): 39-41. ⏎
11. Emerson, Ralph Waldo. "The American Scholar." In Handbook of
Research on Teacher Education, pp. 69-78. Routledge, 2008. ⏎
12. Sorenson, Michael. "There Are Mountains in the Clouds." Horses, 16
April 2024, https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=RrUqhfGgL3o&list=PLzWqPKYrVHQT0BEnW0eQHocyuw59G2
wzQ&index=12. ⏎
13. Thoreau, Henry D. Walden, or Life in the Woods. Ticknor and Fields,
1854. ⏎
14. Levi, Primo. The Complete Works of Primo Levi. Norton, 2015. ⏎
15. Williams, Tod and Billie Tsien, "Slowness." 2G: International
Architecture Review, 9, no. 1 (1991): 132-137. ⏎
16. See for example Angela Duckworth. Grit: The Power of Passion and
Perseverance. Scribner, 2016. ⏎
17. Waldstein, David. "You Can Buy Hemingway's Typewriter: But Would
You Use It?" New York Times, 7 December 2023,
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/07/style/ernest-hemingway-
typewriter-auction.html. ⏎
18. Rhodes, Patrick, Gregory Spaw, and Lamya Al Qassimi. "A Perfect
Failure: Speculation, Risk, and Beginning Again Through Design-

Build." Journal of Architectural Education, 75, no. 1 (2021): 115-120.
⏎
19. "Nomad." n. 1: a member of a people who have no fixed residence but
move from place to place usually seasonally and within a well-defined
territory. Merriam-webster.com, September 2017. ⏎
20. Thesiger, Wilfred. Arabian Sands. Longmans, Green and Co., 1959. ⏎
21. D'Andrea, Anthony. "Neo-Nomadism: A Theory of Post-Identitarian
Mobility in the Global Age." Mobilities, 1, no. 1 (2006): 95-119. ⏎
22. Sennett, Richard. The Craftsman. Yale University Press, 2008, 13. ⏎
23. Baudrillard, Jean. America. Translated by Chris Turner. Verso, 1988, 1.
⏎
24. Semper, Gottfried, and Harry Francis Mallgrave. The Four Elements of
Architecture and Other Writings. Cambridge University Press, 1989. ⏎
25. Dean, Andrea Oppenheimer. "Experiencing the Rural Studio:
Interviews with Students, a Teacher, and a Client." In Proceed and Be
Bold: Rural Studio After Samuel Mockbee, pp. 160-167, Princeton
Architectural Press, 2005. ⏎
26. Cain, William E. "American Dreaming: Really Reading The Great
Gatsby." Society, 57, no. 4 (2020): 453-470. ⏎
27. Damodaran, Aswath. Strategic risk taking: a framework for risk
management. Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008, 4 - 6. ⏎
28. Bernstein, Peter L. Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk.
Wiley, 1996, 1. ⏎
29. Buchanan, Leigh, and Andrew O Connell. "A Brief History of
Decision Making." Harvard Business Review, 84, no. 1 (2006): 32. ⏎
30. Bashier, Fathi. "Reflections on Architectural Design Education: The
Return of Rationalism in the Studio." Frontiers of Architectural
Research, 3, no. 4 (2014): 424-430. ⏎

OceanofPDF.com

INDEX
Note: italic page numbers refer to figures.
3D Warehouse (SketchUp) 48
1919: Black Water (Dyson) 41
abstract avant-garde 30
abstraction: introduction 32; mathematical abstraction, operation 50;
meanings 28; outcome 27; realism, contrast 34; search 41; survival
40-41
abstract realism 28-31
activations, description 102
acts of imagination, need 32
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), cause 168
advanced architecture, production 16
aesthetic reflexivity 185
aesthetics: definition 158-159; placement 33
aformal approach, usage 28
After Hunt 42
afterimages, study 29
afterlife 40-41
aggregates, usage 133
alambre (wire), archetypal reference 108
Alcedo y Herrera, Dionisio 73
Alexander, Christopher 135
Alfaro, Eloy 66, 76
Algorithmic Beauty of Plants, The (Prusinkiewicz) 50

algorithms: product 159; qualification 31; usage 48, 55
American, being (freedom) 179
American Dream 186
"American Scholar, The" (Emerson) 178
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning
Engineers (ASHRAE) code developments 132
American Society of Landscape Architects (ASLA): animation 54-55;
information accessibility focus 54; video building 55
Andes, modernity (resistance) 64
Andrade Marín, Francisco 64, 66, 76, 78
anechoic chamber: cladding removal, display 150; design 146; entry 151;
exit 150; external cladding, display 149; personal notes 150-152;
usage 148-150
annexed operations, fields 169
anti-racism-by-administration, culture (impact) 38
Aquinas, Thomas 176
Arabian Sands (Thesinger) 185
architects: building project immersion 135-136; fiction construction role
84-85; observation 122; practice 110
architectural components, structural/spatial qualities 122
architectural conditions, description 170
architectural design, problems 25
architectural discourse 158
architectural drawing, ocular conflation 42-43
architectural enterprises, usage 87-88
architectural imagery, generation 43
architectural interiority 42-43
architectural learning, conventional narratives 44

architectural mediation, importance 28
architectural practice 183
architectural problem solving (techniques), medial processes (usage) 26
architectural projects, assessment application 155
architectural proposal, experiential view 49
architectural surveys 41-42
architectural typologies 166-167
architectural vision 39
architecture: advanced architecture, production 16; art/technology,
relationship 11; cultural technique 34; periphery, centering 85;
positioning 161; progress/obstacle determination/differentiation 6;
proving grounds, location/relationship 86-87; rendered images, usage
31-32; responsibility, dilemma 11-12; survival 17; technological
development, relationship 8
architecture-and/as-bone imaginings 41
Arendt, Hannah 176
Arnheim, Rudolf 138
Arquitetura Nova 109-110
art brut 27
artificial cleanliness, possibility 161
artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelligence) (AI):
advantages/disadvantages 15; agents/systems, clustering 88; AI-
driven tools 157; biased constructs 27; design process, changes 15-
16; exotica 15; experiments 43; impact 14; searches 31; spatial
implementation 88; urban AI, development 83
artificial intelligences, horror vaccui 88
artistic exploration 157
artwork, experience/interpretations 29

assemblage, process 28
assessment language, adoption 133
atado con alambre (fixed with wire) 105, 106-110; figurative aspect
109-110
Atlantropa (Sörgel) 133
Atlas Group, The 32
atmosphere, rendering 49
Atmospheres (Zumthor) 146
augmented reality (AR): components 98; usage 181
Auken, Ida 160, 161, 163; vision 160
aural hallucinations 146
authoritarian decision-making process 128
authoritarian dissemination 157
authorship, debates 43
automobiles, ramifications 88
Autonomous City I 88; axonometric detail drawing 89; axonometric
rendering 90; plan drwing 89
Autonomous City II 88; aerial detail model photograph 92; axonometric
rendering 91; model, detail (photograph) 92
Autonomous City III 93-94; aerial photograph 95; detail (photograph) 94,
96; photograph (diorama models) 93
Autonomous City Series 88, 93-94, 97-100, 102
autonomous/creative intercourse 108
Autonomous Future of Mobility, The (Blumberg) 87-88, 102
autonomous mobility, usage 99
autonomous vehicles (AVs) 83; changes, occurrence 88; city
incorporation 100; integration 97; introduction, architectural spatial

implications 87; proving ground 88, 93, 94, 97-100; safety, proof
(absence) 88
"Avant-Garde and Kitsch" (Greenberg) 30
Avenida Paulista (São Paulo) 110
Bacon, Francis 10
Ballard, J.G. 142
banana plantations, map 76
Bardi, Lina Bo 110
Basel Convention 20
Baudrillard, Jean 139, 186
Baumgartner, Hans 145
believers 127-128; hard technology, equivalence 132-133
Benavides Solís, Jorge 66
Benitez, Solano 118, 120
Benjamin, Walter 44-45
Berbery, Pablo 115
Berlin Wall 142
Berzero, Agustín 118, 120, 122; house, thermal blocks 120
binocular fusion, study 29
biological survival 148
Biosfera (The Biosphere) 126-127; architecture, relationship 130, 132;
misunderstanding 129; multilayered system 127
"bird and lava" leitmotif 41
black America, political life 39-40
"black compositional thought," praxis (deployment) 41
Black Mirror scripts 161-162
Black ordinary life 43
Black Square (Malevich) 29

Blender: models, plant representation 58, 60; opening 60-61; usage 58
blind spots, study 29
blood-brain barrier, crossing 168
Blum, Michael 32
body, predicament 40
Bogéa, Marta 114
botanical information: historical underpinnings 52; systems 61
botanical knowledge, western scientific supremacy (promotion) 52
botanical type sheet, playing 58
brain-machine interfaces 84
brain system, valve reduction 148
Brain, Tega 52
branches, modeling 56
branching structures, usage 50-51
Bratton, Benjamin 102
Brezhnev, Leonid 130
bricoleurs 4, 109
Bridle, James 102
Brundtland Report of 1987 133
Brunelleschi, Filippo 109, 122
brute materiality, obscuring 9
bubble, suggestion 162
Building a Park Out of Waste (video) 54
building information modeling (BIM) 106
Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment
Methodology (BREEAM) 132
buildings: codes 106; proving grounds classification 87; scale
measurement 130; temporal context 42-43

buscarle la vuelta 122
Cain, William 186
CALANDO I 148-150, 149-151
camera resolution, importance 97
Campo Marzio dell'antica Roma (Piranesi) 88
capitalism: complicity 156; left-overs 109
capitalist spectacle 155-156; solution 156
capital, mediator role 31
carbon transects, usage 135
Carrier and York Air Conditioning, advertisement 144
Cartesian space 52
cartographic representation, commonness 72-73
Casa Cerámica project (Berzero) 122; construction 123, 124
Casa Yaraví (column project) 116; completion 119; construction 117;
drawings 118
Casa Yaraví (Moreno) 115
catastrophic failure, societal circumstance 165
causes, accidental coincidences 129
CCTV footage, usage 37
cemetery (Panecillo background) (Quito) 65
Centers for Disease Control (CDC), problems 169
Certeau, Michel de 141
Chan Chan valley, associations 75-76
Chan, Edwan 175
Chang, Alenda 51
change, pattern (existence) 18
Chaos Server: pop-up window, space 51; usage 48
Cheng, Irene 38, 43

Chicago, race riots 41
Chmess 178
chronophotographic, usage 29
cities, event-based nature 102
civilization: culture, relationship 3-4; experiment 21
cleanliness: checking 70; moral cleanliness 70-72; physical cleanliness
71-72
climate-oriented designs 60
climatic politics, signaling 49
clouds, allusion 175
Cobb-Douglas production function 19
COBRA group 27
coded vocabularies, usage 42
Colberg, Jörg 30
Cold War 130
Collage City 88
Collective City 160-162
collective determination 184
collective imagination 159
collisions, occurrence 3-4
colonial bioprospecting: history 50, 51; impact 52
colonial violence, palimpsest 56
Columbia River Gorge: disturbed soils, yellow sweetclover growth 58;
foreground 57; wildflowers/weeds (field) 60
commodities, competition 109-110
communal vernacular, growth 106
communication, coded vocabularies (usage) 42
complacency 175-176, 178

computational data, usage 28
computational stresses 56
computer-aided design (CAD) software 38
"Computer Animation Rules" (Farocki) 102
computer graphics, allied fields 50
conceptual art (Conceptual Art) 31; skill requirement, absence 13; wall
text reliance 16-17
conceptual motivations 155
conduct, readjustment 37
constraints 183-184
construction: site, leftovers (impact) 116; teleology 55
consumer society, droning same-ness 106
contemplative meditation 147
context, establishment 167
contextual links, establishment 67
convivial tool 108
Cook, Peter 37, 38-41, 44-45
Copan, population surge (problem) 21
counter-utopia 163
Courbet, Gustave 29
COVID-19 pandemic: impact 166-168; trigger 171
"Cowardice and AI" (Frankowski/García) 43
creation, survival 9
creator-roamers, reconceptualization 157
Crewdson, Gregory 30
critical-historical (personal) narrative code, invention 42
critical methods, impact 38
Critique of Pure Reason, The (Kant) 29

cultivation, aspect 55-60
cultural moment, impact 40
cultural reforms, initiation 159
cultural surplus 109-110
cultural techniques 33
culture: abstraction 39; dialectic 161; functional production, relationship
(negation) 154-155; modification 44-45
culture, pull 38-40; affirmation 39
Curiosity (Mars lander/rover) 180
cybernetic theories 50
Dalles, The 56
Damero (Ortiz Crespo) 67
data feedback loops 102
Davis II, Charles L. 38
de-automatization 147
Debord, Guy 155-156
decision-making, impact 188
decision-theory thinking, basis 135
decontextualization, process 28
Definitely Maybe: A Manuscript Discovered Under Unusual
Circumstances 126, 127, 130, 132, 135
degenerate state 178
degrowth, movement (growth) 21-22
delivery, technological relationship 156
Delkman, Arthur 147
Delonero, Gustavo 111
del Pino, Inés 66
democratic design processes, creation 22

Dennett, Daniel 178
Departure Processing Facilities (DPFs) 172; building/operation 169-170
depiction/representation, tension 29-30
depth, observation 27
design: architectural design, problems 25; changes, AI (impact) 15-16;
climate-oriented designs 60; democratic design processes, creation
22; foregrounding 54; formation 109; function concept 4;
improvisation 4; negative outcomes 4; process 83; production,
operation 16; speculative proposals 60; talents, allocation 154
de-Stalinization 130
deus ex machina 14
Deussen, Oliver 50
deus ut machina 14
Dewey, John 178
dialecticians: impact 128-130; soft environmentalism, equivalence 134-
135
dialectic set-up 140-141
dialogue: creation 86; importance 22
Diana in Paris 42
differential thickness 114-117; concept, expansion 117
digital assets 48
digital design space, friction (absence) 54
digital ecologies 54-55
digital model: Cartesian space 52; operational quality 101-102
digital modeling software, usage 54
digital plants: file, examination 52; graphics, history 58; herbaria,
parallels 52; library, flattened files (usage) 51-52; top-down view 56
digital space: placement 52; tree roots, modeling (avoidance) 54-55

digital twins, future drawing representation 55
direct touch, hindering 167
disorientation 151-152
Dispositivos Nómades 115
distance, mediation assumption 26
distraction 126; human form 127
domestic realm, retooling 143
domestic space 143, 145-146
Doors of Perception, The (Huxley) 147
Double Diamond (UK Design Council), risk mitigation strategy 21
doubt 31-33
doubt, mediation 25
drawing 37-38; culture pull, affirmation 39; maker 38
drawing-cum-ossuary points 40
Dubuffet, Jean 27
Duckworth, Angela 183
Dunning-Kruger-like certainty 175
Dyson, Torkwase 40, 42, 44
dystopian context 167
Eames, Charles/Ray 142
Earth Day 132, 134
ecological motivations 49
ecological politics, signaling 49
ecological responsibility 158
ecological world-building 48; realm, spatial proposal 49
ecology: formation 50; rise, embracing 109
economic growth 166; defining 18-19
ecosystem models, continuation 55

Ecuadorian Military Geographic Institute, establishment 72
Ecuador, progress (background) 66
educational systems, spread 166
efficiency, automobile standards (improvement) 134
egalitarian free-range utopia 155-157
eidos, manifestation 9
El Comerico 66
electric vehicles, mass production 84
emblematic buildings, photographs 75
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 178
eminent domain, use 88
Empty Quarter 180
encapsulated space 148-149
enchantment, traps 33-34
enemy territory 174
Eneropa (Koolhaas) 133
Enlightenment: morality 166; technological/scientific revolutions 8
Enock, Charles Reginald 73
environment: physical character 27; quantifiable understanding 126;
responses, standardization 126; systemic organization 50
environmental agenda, alteration 130
environmental building standards 132
environmental response, scale 132
epistemological abstractions 29
Esaú Delgado, Julio 76
Espacio para Arquitectura (Mexico City) 112
"established functions" (Nieuwenhuy) 159
estrangement, intensification 138

ethical abstractions 29
ethical reflexivity 185
ethics 166
European hygienist processes 69-70
Euthanasia Act of 2035 (EA 2035) 171
euthanastic practices 172
euths, disconnection 172
Evans, Robin 42-43
event-based nature 102
event-city, transition 101
events, response 37-38
Exo-Skeleton micro design build pinup board 185
expectation-fit ratio 150
experience, dictatorship 157-159
experience machine 159
experiential notes, appearance 152
experiment, transformative impact 146
exploration, moralizing/paralyzing/arresting 175
extended reality (XR) interfaces 93-94
extra-architectural factors 25
extraction, process 28
extractivism, hygiene (relationship) 71
extradomestic world, avoidance 159
extra-sensorial associations 28-29
fabrication processes, usage 135
fact/fiction, aesthetics placement 33
failure, option (absence) 184-185
Farocki, Harun 102

Fascism, chance 44
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), problems 169
Ferro, Sérgio 109-110
fiction 167-170; construction, architect (role) 84-85; enabling 84;
invention, relationship 83-84; method 167
figural image, ocular conflation 42-43
figuration, tendencies (challenge) 44
Fischli & Weiss 28
fixed with wire see atado con alambre
flat/flattening files 50-52
Flaubert, Gustave 29
Floyd, George 37
Flusser, Vilém 5, 158-159
Fluxus 27
foliage, usage 50-51
forward-looking spatial designs, models (littering) 51
Frankowski, Nthalie 37
freedom, forcing 157
freedom-of-speech, facilitation 172
functionalism: complicity 156; doctrine, attention 4; opposition 155-156
Fun Palace (theater plan) 87
Furtado, Rui 114
future city 161
future-oriented speculative proposal 58
future, romanticizing 2-3
Gadamer, Hans-Georg 22
Gaia principle 129
Ganz, Bruno (Wings of Desire) 141

garages/carports (Argentina), space versatility 116
García, Cruz 37
García Moreno, Gabriel 66; assassination 75; railroad activities 76, 78
Gehry, Frank 51
Gell, Alfred 33
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) 31
geographical features, mutedness 72
geographic variability, limitations 51
geography, culture (modification) 44-45
geological phenomena 129
geological thought 129
Geometrías Invisibles 112
get-it-done attitude 182
Gil, Antonio 48, 67-70; General Intendant of Guayas position 70, 71;
grid, hygienist aspiration 69; hygienist role 70-71; plan (1903) 71-
72; Santo Tomás hacienda (Isabela Island) founding 71
glass facades 143
global deformations, usage 50
Global North: architecture 122; metal wire, presence 108
global pandemic 175
Global South: life, shaping 110; practices 122
goal: discussion 8, 11-14; pitching 9
good/bad progress, differentiation (inability) 4
Gorbachev, Mikhail 130
Grade Point Average (GPA), potential 188
Graduate, The (film) 19-20
Graeber, David 32
graphical user interfaces (GUIs), creation 50-51

graphic limits 75
graphic links, establishment 67
Gray, John 1
Gray Organschi Architecture (GOA), carbon transects/fabrication
processes (usage) 135
"Great Isolation" 171
Great Pacific Garbage Patch 20
Greek worldview 9
Greenberg, Clement 29, 30
greenery, usage 49
green futures, demands 49
Gropius, Walter 39
ground, definition 86
growth-based economy, dependence 22
growth, usage 50-51
Groys, Boris 29; counternarrative 30
Guayaquil, panoramic map (creation) 76
"Guayaquil/Quito Railway of Ecuador. South America" (scaled-down
map) 75
Gursky, Andreas 30
Gutiérrez, Leonidas Plaza 68, 71
Guyton, Wade 28
Hackett, Curry 43, 44
Hadid, Zaha 51
hand modelled plants, usage 57
happenstance, impact 162
hard technology, believers (equivalence) 132-133
harmony, achievement 10-11

Haviland Carrier, Willis 143
hazmat gear, usage 169
Heaven, ideality (relationship) 10
herbaria: digital plants, parallels 52; specimens, presence 51-52
Hermetically Sealed Box Syndrome (HSBS) 139, 143; design 145-146;
engagement denial suggestion 148-149
hermetic seals, lessons 138
Hesse, Eva 28
higher truth, communication (challenge) 39
Higley, Henry Grant 67, 72; international movement 73-76; railroad
project involvement 76
Higley, Henry Grant (map): creation 75-76; peripheral vignettes 75;
railroad reference 76
history: aspects 39; cultural bend, representation (inflection) 39-40;
desire refusal 39-40; importance 36; parallel histories 42-43; view 44
HoloLens 2 headset, usage 181
homeostatic universe 127
Homo faber ("man the maker") 176
Horn, Rebecca 28
horror vacui 88
hot-room typology 160
human euthanasia, concept (problems) 171-172
humankind, existence 22
human longing 179
human presence (statement), architecture (usage) 11-12
Hunt for the Unicorn, The 42
Huxley, Aldous 147-148
hygiene, extractivism (relationship) 71

hygienism: promotion, Panecillo omission (impact) 68-72; social
cleanliness 70
hygienist plan 69-70
hyperaccumulator species, yellow sweetclover example 5
hyper-density 88
hyper-invisibility, workings 41
hyper-visible invisibility, overlay 43
Icarian vantage points 138-143
ideality: apprehension (intellectual realm) 9-10; courting, goal 9-10
ideal truths 28
ideational projections 36
ideological development 166
Illich, Ivan 108, 110
image-making 85
image recognition 102
immersive stagecraft, usage 83
immune systems, changes 168
[im]probable typology, future history 167-170
improvement: discussion 8, 10-11; language, adoption 133
Incan Empire (Quito stronghold) 66
incompetence 175
Index of Urban Artificial Intelligence and Mobility Networks, An 98-99
Indigenous lands, dispossession 56
individual city 162-163
individual consumers, needs 106
induction, approach 10-11
industrialization, impact 109-110
industrial pollution, problems 58

Industrial Revolution 166
information: absorption 147; accessibility (ASLA focus) 54; western
ontologies 50
infrastructural violence, palimpsest 56
infrastructure, scale (decrease) 100
ingenious architectures, alternative production 105
innovation: driving 83; meaning 20
inquiry: epistemological modes 28; invention, space (fiction) 165
instauratio urbis, characterization 88
instrumental/mediational reference 102
insulating aggregates, usage 133
integrated assessment models (IAMs) 19
"Interactive Plant Growing" (Sommerer/Mignonneau) 58
interdisciplinary partnerships, field expertise (redistribution) 85
international connection, promotion 72-76
international movement (Higley) 73-76
invention: fiction, relationship 84; inquiry, space (fiction) 165; rational
view 20-21; space, blurring 84; term, usage 20
invisibility: poetics 41; workings 41
irritation, celebration 174
Irwin, Robert 146, 147
Irwin-Terrell-Wortz experience, simulation 149
Itchimbía 75; visibility, absence 74
iteration 184-185
Jameson, Fredric 39
Jorn, Asger 27
judgment, criteria 10-11
Juni, Anna 110, 111

Kant, Immanuel 29
Kaprow, Allan 28
Kepes, Gyorgy 36-37, 39
Khrushchev, Nikita 130
Kingsnorth, Paul 2
Kinzler, Jack 20
knowledge workers, product 159
Koetter, Fred 88
Koolhaas, Rem 133, 157; aesthetic definition 158
labor: conditions 43; force, mass automation 171; markets, shocks 133;
re-uniting, capacity 109
Lake Okeechobee, aquatic plants (presence) 61
landscape architecture education, aim 55
landscape remediation 54
language 148; mediation 22
Language of Vision (Kepes) 36-37
La Plata (Argentina), barbecue shop (exhaust duct addition) 107
large-scale slowdowns, shocks 133
Laso, J.D. 68
latent cultural tendencies, supplementary descriptor 42-43
La Torrie, Octavio 71
Lawrence of Arabia (film) 178
leadership positions, assumption 184
Lean, David 178
leaves, modeling 56
Lefèvre, Rodrigo 109
Lenin, Vladimir 129
Lévi-Strauss, Claude 109

Ley de Indias 68
LIDAR indexing 97
lies, truth proposals 32-33
life, representation (absence) 30
light-filled corridor 172
Lindenmayer, Aristid 50
Lintermann, Bernd 50
Lisbon Architecture Triennale, Debut Award 110
Little Prince, The (Saint-Exupéry) 138
Living Building Challenge 135
living/non-living, relationship 129
long-term consequences, forseeing (inability) 3
López, BonifÁcio 114
Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) 146
Lovelock, James 129
L-systems, usage 50
Lunar Flag Assembly 20
machine: learning, usage 21; scenography 87-88
Malevish, Kazimir 29
Malthus, Thomas 18
Manifest Destiny 179
manifesto, etymology 174
manual hydraulic pipe bender, usage 180
Man Without Qualities, The (Musil) 139
marginal objects 114
margin walking 163
Margulis, Lynn 129
María Rigotti, Ana 122

Martin Marietta Superfund site 56
Marx, Karl 31
mass customization, promise 106
mass materials, residue 109
material qualities 97
mathematical abstraction, operation 50
Matisse, Rene 148
meaning, rendering 49
mediation: architectural mediation, importance 28; paradoxes 26-28;
representation, contrast 26
mediations: abstractions 28; cultural techniques 33; doubt 25; effect 26
meditation: phenomena 147
Melilotus officinalis (dried specimen) 53
metis 109
Mexico City, atmospheric conditions (reference) 112
Mignonneau, Laurent 58
Mind at Large 148
mind's eye, usage 9-10
Mini City 88, 102; AV proving ground 94, 97-100; axonometric
rendering 96; detail (photograph) 101; plan 97; research 98-99;
staging, photograph 99; street entourage prototypes 98; streetlamps,
design 100
Mith, Adam 18
Mockbee, Samuel 186
modern art, Greenberg perspective 30
Modern Era 166
modernism: aesthetic discourse 27-28; complicity 156; indictment 38-39
modernity: progress problem 18; resistance 64

modernization: changes 68; impact 66; strategy 69
Moholy-Nagy, László 39
Mont Ventoux, ascent 66
moral cleanliness 71-72; supervision 70
morality 166
moral responsibility 166
Morreall, John 122
Morrison, Denton 134-135
Mosquito, banana plantations (map creation) 76
Mosquito Cost (map) 77
motivations, description 176
movement, ease 179
multiplanar tube, bending 184
multiple-attribute building certifications 130, 132
multiple-attribute product certifications 132
multiple species, representation 51
multivariate regression analysis, usage 21
Murayama, Macoto 58
Museo de Arte de São Paulo (MASP) 110; space 111
Musil, Robert 139
Musk, Elon 84
narratives, racial thought (role) 38
national coat of arms 75
natural resources, exhaustion 171
nature: dominion, God (promise) 11; energy expenditure, economization
11; laws, study 136; standards, testing 10
Nature and Aesthetics of Design, The (Pye) 4
necrogenic speculations 40

Neoliberal Realism 30, 33
Neo-luddites 160
Neonomads: bent tube sections, connection 188; desert shelters 182;
hiking 179; MIG wielding 177; presence 176; prototype 182-183;
prototype shelter canopy test fitting 189; structural components,
carrying 187
nervous system: targeting 168; valve reduction 148
networked city, transition 101
New Babylon (Nieuwenhuy) 93, 154, 160-162; context 162;
development 155-157; existence 158; exploration 157; premise,
contrast 157
"New Babylon 10 Years On" (Nieuwenhuy) 156
"new normal" 167
New World, conquest (Spanish Crown ignorance) 68
Nichols, Mike 19
Nieuwenhuy, Constant 93, 154, 155-157, 159, 163; aesthetic definition
158; architecture, positioning 161; capitalist spectacle solution 156;
"established functions" 159
non-architect: low-cost constructions 118, 120; observation 122
nondecreasing entropy 127-128
non-narrative components 148
Noplace/Everyplace 146-148
Norden Bombsight 140
Nozik, Robert 159
Oak Ridge National Laboratory supercomputers 55
objects, racial thought (role) 38
obstacles: encounters 5; examination 4-6; progress evidence 5
off-highway scenarios 98

oil crisis (1973), response 126-127
Olympus, ideality (relationship) 10
open-source mesh-based animation software, usage 58
open space, occupation 169
operations, description 102
opportunism 118, 120, 122
opportunists, impact 181-182
Opportunity (Mars lander/rover) 180
optical corrections 9
orthodox, apoplexy 36
orthogonal grid, usage 68
Ortiz Crespo, Alfonso 67, 69
OTRO ("Other") 115, 117-118
Our Common Future (Brundtland Report 1987) 133
outering 172
Pablo, Juan 115
Pachamama, manifestation 65
Paglen, Trevor 102
Panecillo (Quito) 64; initial name (Yavirac) 72; natural boundary,
absence 75; significance 65-66; symbolic importance 78
Panecillo (Quito) omission: blurring issue 68-72; impact 72-76;
irrelevance 72
panoramic representation 72
paparazzi, suffocation 42
paradigms, expansion 22
para-fictional art interventions 32; truth/fiction tension, usage 32-33
para-fictional work, medium promiscuous 33
parallel histories 42-43

paranoia 129
parrilleros (grillers) 115
Parthenon 9
passaging 172
past: dominant stories 84; modernity obsession 19; romanticizing 2-3
Pathfinder (Mars lander/rover) 180
"Path to Unitary Urbanism, The" (Nieuwenhuy) 159
pedantic foundations 37
Perception Chamber 146-148
perception, psychology (parallel emergence) 29
perceptual errors 9
"Perceptual Expansion Hypothesis" 147
perceptual shift 147
perceptual transformation 140
Perseverance (Mars lander/rover) 180
personal cleanliness, supervision 70
Petrarch, Francesco 66
phenakistoscope, usage 29
philosophical inquiry, ushering 165
physical action, abstraction 31
physical cleanliness 71-72
physical counterparts 55
physical herbaria, flat files 50
Pichincha volcano: appearance 73-74; perspective 74-75
Pichler, Walter 39, 40
Picon, Antoinie 83, 101
Piranesi, Giovanni Battista 88
planning organizations 11

plants 48; binomial name 52; branches/trunk/leaves, modeling 56; digital
harvesting 52; endemic plants, selection 58; usage, representational
opportunities 52
plastic, litter 20
Plato 9-10, 28
"poetics of invisibility" 41
police body cameras, usage 37
Police Force, usage 69-70
political act 42
political influence, impact 33-34
Pollard, Sidney 18
polychromy 9
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) pollution, indication 57
polyvinyl chloride (PVC): strips, usage 169, 170; vaults 170
post-demolition, avoidance 120, 122
post-planned-obsolescence ethic 160
Potable Water and Drainage Board of Quito, impact 71
potable water system, construction 70-71
Powers of 10 (Eames/Eames) 142
power structures 109
Practice of Everyday Life, The (Certeau) 141
praxinoscope, usage 29
precarity, growth 105-106
precautionary principle 3
predictive analytics, usage 21
Price, Cedric 87
problematization, green futures (demands) 49
problems: creation 158; solving 3

procedural modeling algorithms, creation 50
product certifications 132
production 5; burden 157; technological relationship 156
profane landscapes 143, 145-146
profit, incentivization 102
program-driven compositions 11
progress 56, 186-189; aims/rhetoric 66; appreciation 13; background 66;
concept 166; concept, neutralization 167; defining 1-3; discussion 8;
evidence, obstacles (impact) 5; idea 64; image 78; measurement 8;
notions 44; obstacles 1; problem 18; reason 6; risk, relationship 186-
187; term 165-166; term, coining 66; trap 20-21; trap, concept 3;
Victorian ideal, Western belief 18
progressive attitudes, responsibility (pressure) 38
progressive visions, importation 45
projection, Greek idea 11-12
projective city, impact 88, 93
proof: roots 86; veracity investment 86
propaganda, form 66
proto-typology 165
proving grounds 83, 85; architecture, relationship 86-87; classification
87; defining 85-86; location 86-87; simulation categorization 87
Provisional Euthanasia Act of 2032 (PEA2032) 169, 171
prurience, criticisms 44
Prusinkiewicz, Przemysław 50
pseudo-European city, representation 72-73
pure scholar, role 129
Pye, David 4
qualitative, reclaiming 146-148

quantitative dimensions 138-143
quasi-Platonic grid 68-69
quasi-religious notions 34
Quito see Panecillo; cartography, hills (usage) 74-75; diagram 69; Gil
plan (1903) 71-72; infrastructure 66; map 67, 73, 74; population,
increase 68; potable water system, construction 70-71; readable city,
subtext 72; topographical characteristics, blurring 68; tourism
(opening), railroad (impact) 78; water scarcity 71
Quito City Council, leading 76, 78
Quitu-Cara, large-scale symmetry 65
Quixel 51
Raad, Walid 32
race, constitution 41
race-making abstraction 41
racial thought, role 38
railroad: construction (1903 reference) 75-76; Higley involvement 76
Rancière, Jacques 30
random proceeding, consideration 128
rationality, limitations 21
"rational view of invention" 20-21
Rauschenberg, Robert 27
readjustment of conduct 37
real abstraction 28-31
realism: articulations 29; qualities 97; sensible, aesthetic redistribution 30
realist kitsch 30
reality: critique 2-3; potential reality, foreshadowing 158; redefining 32;
systems-based perspective 55; temporary distance 158
reckoning 37-38

recontextualization, process 28
recycled concrete aggregates, usage 133
reducing valve: alteration 148; usage 148
Reflective Practitioner (Schön) 22
regressive chaos 36-37
regulations, complication 106
Reiland, Jennifer May 42, 44
rendered images, usage 31-32
renewable energy infrastructure, initiation 171
representation: inflection 39-40; mediation, contrast 26; roles 37
representational tactics 38
resilience, importance 183-184
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 20
resources, expenditures 184-185
retinal hallucinations 146
revolutionary city 161
Rhinoceros 3D, usage 48
Ricardo, David 18
risk, progress (relationship) 186-187
Roberts, Bryony 43
robots, maintenance 157
Rowe, Colin 88
Rudofsky, Bernard 106, 112
Sabbagh, Mahdi 45
sadism, criticisms 44
Saint-Exupéry, Antoine de 138
sales pitches, usage 32
Saloojee, Ozayr 37

Santa Maria del Fiore (Florence), masonry dome (construction) 19
Santo Tomás hacienda (Isabela Island), Gil founding 71
São Paulo (Brazil): discarded materials, arrangement 113; metro
ventilation grills, dry bedding 113; roofs, membrane 108; urban life
112
SARS-CoVid-Theta-7X (Hypervariant): arrival 168; impact 171;
problems 168-169
scale: reduction 184; rendering 49
scarcity, growth 105-106
scene, picture-perfect alignment 39
Schön, Donald 20, 22
Schreber's God 141
Schumacher, Patrik 181
scientific-industrial directive 126-127, 132
scientific rationality 11
Scientific Revolution 138
self-fulfilling narratives 83-84
self-liberation, means 41
self-regulating complex system 126-127
self-regulating system, concept 129
self-supplying communities 160
Sennett, Richard 185
sensible, aesthetic redistribution 30
sensing technologies, usage 97
sensorial observations 28
sensory deprivation/heightening, combination 146
sensory threshold, stimulation 40-41
Shape of Things, The (Flusser) 5

Short History of Progress, A (Wright) 3, 18
Shvarts, Aliza 32
Siegert, Bernard 26
single-attribute product certifications 132
situated action 117
Situationist International 161
Six Views of Diana and the Unicorn 42
skepticism 184
SketchUp 38
skill requirement, technology (impact) 13
slavery, afterlife 40
Slowness, loss 181
Smart Cities: A Spatialized Intelligence (Picon) 83-84
Smithson, Alison/Peter 110
Smith, Zadie 43-44
Snegovoi, paranoia 129
social cleanliness 70
social glue 176
Socialist Realism 30, 33
social sculpture 175
societal support structures, systemic disintegrations 167
societal upheaval 175
sociotechnical imaginaries (exploration), architectural enterprises (usage)
87-88
sociotechnical imagination 83-84
soft environmentalism, dialecticians (equivalence) 134-135
Sohn-Rethel, Alfred 31
sollertia, Roman notion 109

Solow-Swan growth model 19
solutions, concept 154-155
Sommerer, Christa 58
Sörgel, Herman 133
soul, commanding part 176
South America, case studies 106
South Shore Drill Team 43
space: open space, occupation 169; perception 149-150; versatility
(Argentina) 116
Spanish Crown, orthogonal grid 68
spatial design: ecological world-building 48; effect, continuation 51
spatial designers, concerns 52
spatial detectives 41-42
spatial disciplines, designers (relationship) 49
spatial practices, importance 115
spatial proposals, modeling 48
spatial terms, environmental histories 41
specimens 48, 60-61
spectacle 156
speculative design 57
speculative fiction, impact 83
speculative scenography 83, 101-102
speculative sites 57
speculative worlds, creation 49
SpeedTree 51
spicebush (Lindera benzoin), replication 48
spiral phyllotaxis, usage 50-51
Spirit (Mars lander/rover) 180

spoken-for figures 42
Stalin, Joseph 129-130
stereographs, usage 27
stereoscopes, usage 27, 29
stereotypical nomads 185-186
Stoics 176
stories (staging), proving grounds (usage) 87
Strack, Heinrich 141
street entourage prototypes (Mini City) 98
Strugatsky, Arkady/Boris 127, 130
Student Housing (Baumgartner) 146
Subsolanus (Under the Sun) 112; installation 112; installation detail 114,
115
Suchman, Lucy 117
Sucre Theatre, image 78
supercivilization 128
Superior Board of Maritime and Urban Health, establishment 70-71
supply chain breakdowns 171
Surrealism 31
surrender 182-184
sustainability certifications 132
sustainable certifications, global distribution 131
syn(es)thetic futures 138
technical advancement-seen-as-progress 39
technical advances, optimism 12
technical progress, impact 12
technological change, cycle (representation) 20
technological innovation 56

technological progress, apex (representation) 19-20
technology 14-17, 180-182; meaning 20; usage 109-110
"Technology of Enchantment and the Enchantment of Technology, The"
(Gell) 33
telestereoscope, usage 29
TenHoor, Meredith 37-38
Terminal Terminal 165, 167-170; development 172; sites 171-172;
typological components 172; typology, architectural entry component
170
terrain 178-180
territorial reorganization ("We Shall Overcome the Dry Season Too") 134
testing process 83
text, intentional placement 142
theoretical posturing 32
theoretical projections, assessment application 155
theoretical (visual) simulacrum 141
thermal bricks, exposure 118-119
thermal bridging elements, usage 133
Thesinger, Wilfred 185
Theta-7X see SARS-CoVid-Theta-7X
Thoreau, Henry David 178
three-dimensional procedural botanical models, development 50
three-dimensional reality, compression/projection/sectioning 26
three-part entering sequence, disconnection 170
time, discussion 8-10
topographical barrier 74-75
topography, absence 68
tortoises, systematic predation mechanism 71

transcendence, mystical manifestations 34
Transformation of nature, The 133
tree roots, modeling (avoidance) 54-55
Tres Casas project 120; brick bonding 121; vertical bonding/concrete
columns 121
tropisms, usage 50
trunk, modeling 56
truth/fiction, tension (usage) 32-33
Turkle, Sherry 114, 115
"turning things around" practice 122
Turrell, James 47, 146
turtle oil, production 71
two-dimensional panorama 152
two-dimensional plane, change 26
types 48, 60-61
"Types and Specimens: Representing the Situated Information of Plants
through Digital Media" 60-61
typological evolution 170
"Uncommon Knowledge: Practices and Protocols for Environmental
Information" (Blumberg) 56
unconscious motive 4
undeniability, foundation (creation) 45
understanding, language mediation 22
"Unitary Urbanism" 159, 161
United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) 133
United States, agitations (reckoning) 37-38
University of Karlsruhe 50
unresolution 165, 172-173

uprooted/unruly digital ecologies 54-55
urban AI, development 83
urban conditions, maximization 88, 93
urban fabric, edges/territorial limits 75
urbanization, fetish 160-161
urban modernization strategy 69
urban morphologies, mapping 42
urban spaces, ways/apertures (access modulation) 99
utopia 161-162; counter-utopia 163
"Utopian Failure of Constant's New Babylon, The" (Jorgensen/Wilson)
155
utopian visions 159
utopia (Auken), programmatic/spatial consequences 160
vagueness 110-112, 114
Vale, Constance 94
valley culture 39
vão 110-112, 112-115
variables, compression 3
Vasari, Giorgio 9
vegetation, designer usage 49
verdant scenes 43
verisimilitude, desire 27
Vernadsky, Vladimir 126-130; multilayered system 127
Vernimmen, Alfonso 71
Victorian progress ideal 18-19
Virillo, Paul 140
virtual reality (VR) headset, usage 143
Vision Machine, The (Virillo) 140

vision, persistence 29
visual communication, benchmarks (establishment) 36
visual future-making argument, support 55
visualization, basis 156
visual resemblances, representation 29
visual variability, limitations 51
Vitruvius 109
"Vogel's Net: Traps as Artworks and Artworks as Traps" (Gell) 33
Voices of Time, The (Ballard) 142
Vorobeychik, Yevgeniy 94
V-Ray, usage 48, 51
Waldron, Asher 43
Walker Bynum, Caroline 111
Walker, Kara 43-44
wall resolution 120
WashU Mini City 94, 97-100
water supply, decrease 171
wealth accumulation, promotion 32
weeds (field), endemic species (Columbia River Gorge) 60
We Know Hot To Order (Roberts/Waldron) 43
Wenders, Wim 140-142
western aesthetics, debunking 33-34
Western education, concern 138
Western rationalism 71-72
western scientific knowledge production, history 51
wicked problems, growth 21
wildflowers (field), endemic species (Columbia River Gorge) 60
Williams, Eugene (drowning) 41

Wilson, Mabel O. 38, 43
Wind from the Sea (Wyeth) 145, 145
wind structures (West Pakistan), photographs 112
Wings of Desire (Wenders) 140
Winkel, Enk te 111
witness, bearing 43-45
wonder: inducing 110; response 111
Wong, Martin 42, 44
work: awareness 156; concept/notion, freedom 155-156; judgment 10
worker neighborhoods, consolidation 78
workers, empowerment 109
working hypothesis 146
world: choking 3; harmony, achievement 10-11; mediation ruminations
44; obstructions 5; progressive visions 60-61; society, evolution
(FORM contribution) 175
worlding 55-60
Wortz, Edward 146, 147
Wright, Ronald 3-4, 18, 21
Wyeth, Andrew 145
Xfrog: database, centralized server 51; model, usage 50-51; plants,
aesthetic inspiration 58; purchasable packages 51; system 50
yahuirca (mythological equivalent) 72
Yavirac (Panecillo name) 72; waterfall 72
Yavirak (sacred mountain) (Quito) 65-66
yellow sweetclover (Melilotus officinalis): modeling 58; proposal 57;
specimen, presentation 59
yeré (meaning) 115

Yes Men, The 32
yes/no identifications 31
Your Babylon 162-163
zoetrope, usage 29
Zoom-boxes, usage 37
Zuchovicki, Claudio 105
Zumthor, Peter 146
OceanofPDF.com

