
REVIEW OF DIFFERENTIATION
a
a
a
a
a
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

BRIEF TABLE OF INTEGRALS
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Eighth Edition
DIFFERENTIAL
EQUATIONS
with Boundary-Value Problems
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Eighth Edition
DIFFERENTIAL
EQUATIONS 
with Boundary-Value Problems
DENNIS G. ZILL
Loyola Marymount University
WARREN S. WRIGHT
Loyola Marymount University
MICHAEL R. CULLEN
Late of Loyola Marymount University
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Differential Equations with
Boundary-Value Problems,
Eighth Edition
Dennis G. Zill, Warren S. Wright,
and Michael R. Cullen 
Publisher: Richard Stratton
Senior Sponsoring Editor:
Molly Taylor
Development Editor: Leslie Lahr
Assistant Editor:
Shaylin Walsh Hogan
Editorial Assistant: Alex Gontar
Media Editor: Andrew Coppola
Marketing Manager: Jennifer Jones
Marketing Coordinator:
Michael Ledesma
Marketing Communications Manager:
Mary Anne Payumo
Content Project Manager:
Alison Eigel Zade
Senior Art Director: Linda May
Manufacturing Planner: Doug Bertke
Rights Acquisition Specialist:
Shalice Shah-Caldwell
Production Service: MPS Limited,
a Macmillan Company
Text Designer: Diane Beasley 
Projects Piece Designer:
Rokusek Design
Cover Designer:
One Good Dog Design
Cover Image: ©Wally Pacholka
Compositor: MPS Limited,
a Macmillan Company
Section 4.8 of this text appears in
Advanced Engineering Mathematics,
Fourth Edition, Copyright 2011,
Jones & Bartlett Learning, Burlington,
MA 01803 and is used with the
permission of the publisher.
© 2013, 2009, 2005 Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the
copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in
any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical,
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning,
digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or
information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
the prior written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011944305
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-82706-9
ISBN-10: 1-111-82706-0
Brooks/Cole
20 Channel Center Street
Boston, MA 02210
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning 
solutions with ofﬁce locations around the globe, including Singapore,
the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. Locate
your local ofﬁce at international.cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson
Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit
www.cengage.com.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store
or at our preferred online store www.cengagebrain.com.
Instructors: Please visit login.cengage.com and log in to access
instructor-speciﬁc resources.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be emailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 16 15 14 13 12  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


3
v
Contents
1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
1
Preface
xi
Projects
P-1
1.1
Deﬁnitions and Terminology
2
1.2
Initial-Value Problems
13
1.3
Differential Equations as Mathematical Models
20
Chapter 1 in Review
33
2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
35
2.1
Solution Curves Without a Solution
36
2.1.1
Direction Fields
36
2.1.2
Autonomous First-Order DEs
38
2.2
Separable Equations
46
2.3
Linear Equations
54
2.4
Exact Equations
63
2.5
Solutions by Substitutions
71
2.6
A Numerical Method
75
Chapter 2 in Review
80
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
83
3.1
Linear Models
84
3.2
Nonlinear Models
95
3.3
Modeling with Systems of First-Order DEs
106
Chapter 3 in Review
113
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
4
vi
●
CONTENTS
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
116
4.1
Preliminary Theory—Linear Equations
117
4.1.1
Initial-Value and Boundary-Value Problems
117
4.1.2
Homogeneous Equations
119
4.1.3
Nonhomogeneous Equations
124
4.2
Reduction of Order
129
4.3
Homogeneous Linear Equations with Constant Coefﬁcients
132
4.4
Undetermined Coefﬁcients—Superposition Approach
139
4.5
Undetermined Coefﬁcients—Annihilator Approach
149
4.6
Variation of Parameters
156
4.7
Cauchy-Euler Equation
162
4.8
Green's Functions
169
4.8.1
Initial-Value Problems 
169
4.8.2
Boundary-Value Problems 
176
4.9
Solving Systems of Linear DEs by Elimination
180
4.10 Nonlinear Differential Equations
185
Chapter 4 in Review
190
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
192
5.1
Linear Models: Initial-Value Problems
193
5.1.1
Spring/Mass Systems: Free Undamped Motion
193
5.1.2
Spring/Mass Systems: Free Damped Motion
197
5.1.3
Spring/Mass Systems: Driven Motion
200
5.1.4
Series Circuit Analogue
203
5.2
Linear Models: Boundary-Value Problems
210
5.3
Nonlinear Models
218
Chapter 5 in Review
228
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
231
6.1
Review of Power Series
232
6.2
Solutions About Ordinary Points
238
6.3
Solutions About Singular Points
247
6.4
Special Functions
257
Chapter 6 in Review
271
6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONTENTS
●
vii
7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
273
7.1
Deﬁnition of the Laplace Transform
274
7.2
Inverse Transforms and Transforms of Derivatives
281
7.2.1
Inverse Transforms
281
7.2.2
Transforms of Derivatives
284
7.3
Operational Properties I
289
7.3.1
Translation on the s-Axis
290
7.3.2
Translation on the t-Axis
293
7.4
Operational Properties II
301
7.4.1
Derivatives of a Transform
301
7.4.2
Transforms of Integrals
302
7.4.3
Transform of a Periodic Function
307
7.5
The Dirac Delta Function
312
7.6
Systems of Linear Differential Equations
315
Chapter 7 in Review
320
8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
325
8.1
Preliminary Theory—Linear Systems
326
8.2
Homogeneous Linear Systems
333
8.2.1
Distinct Real Eigenvalues
334
8.2.2
Repeated Eigenvalues
337
8.2.3
Complex Eigenvalues
342
8.3
Nonhomogeneous Linear Systems
348
8.3.1
Undetermined Coefﬁcients
348
8.3.2
Variation of Parameters
351
8.4
Matrix Exponential
356
Chapter 8 in Review
360
9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
362
9.1
Euler Methods and Error Analysis
363
9.2
Runge-Kutta Methods
368
9.3
Multistep Methods
373
9.4
Higher-Order Equations and Systems
375
9.5
Second-Order Boundary-Value Problems
380
Chapter 9 in Review
384
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

viii
●
CONTENTS
10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
385
10.1
Autonomous Systems
386
10.2
Stability of Linear Systems
392
10.3
Linearization and Local Stability
400
10.4
Autonomous Systems as Mathematical Models
410
Chapter 10 in Review
417
11
FOURIER SERIES
419
11.1
Orthogonal Functions
420
11.2
Fourier Series
426
11.3
Fourier Cosine and Sine Series
431
11.4
Sturm-Liouville Problem
439
11.5
Bessel and Legendre Series
446
11.5.1 Fourier-Bessel Series
447
11.5.2
Fourier-Legendre Series
450
Chapter 11 in Review
453
12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
455
12.1
Separable Partial Differential Equations
456
12.2
Classical PDEs and Boundary-Value Problems
460
12.3
Heat Equation
466
12.4
Wave Equation
468
12.5
Laplace's Equation
473
12.6
Nonhomogeneous Boundary-Value Problems
478
12.7
Orthogonal Series Expansions
483
12.8
Higher-Dimensional Problems
488
Chapter 12 in Review
491
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONTENTS
●
ix
13
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN OTHER COORDINATE SYSTEMS
493
13.1
Polar Coordinates
494
13.2
Polar and Cylindrical Coordinates
499
13.3
Spherical Coordinates
505
Chapter 13 in Review
508
14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
510
14.1
Error Function
511
14.2
Laplace Transform
512
14.3
Fourier Integral
520
14.4
Fourier Transforms
526
Chapter 14 in Review
532
15
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
534
15.1
Laplace's Equation
535
15.2
Heat Equation
540
15.3
Wave Equation
545
Chapter 15 in Review
549
APPENDIXES
I
Gamma Function
APP-1
II
Matrices
APP-3
III
Laplace Transforms
APP-21
Answers for Selected Odd-Numbered Problems
ANS-1
Index
I-1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xi
TO THE STUDENT
Authors of books live with the hope that someone actually reads them. Contrary to
what you might believe, almost everything in a typical college-level mathematics
text is written for you, and not the instructor. True, the topics covered in the text are
chosen to appeal to instructors because they make the decision on whether to use it
in their classes, but everything written in it is aimed directly at you, the student. So
we want to encourage you—no, actually we want to tell you—to read this textbook!
But do not read this text like you would a novel; you should not read it fast and you
should not skip anything. Think of it as a workbook. By this we mean that mathemat-
ics should always be read with pencil and paper at the ready because, most likely, you
will have to work your way through the examples and the discussion. Before attempt-
ing any of the exercises, work all the examples in a section; the examples are con-
structed to illustrate what we consider the most important aspects of the section, and
therefore, reﬂect the procedures necessary to work most of the problems in the exer-
cise sets. We tell our students when reading an example, copy it down on a piece of
paper, and do not look at the solution in the book. Try working it, then compare your
results against the solution given, and, if necessary resolve, any differences. We have
tried to include most of the important steps in each example, but if something is not
clear you should always try—and here is where the pencil and paper come in again—
to ﬁll in the details or missing steps. This may not be easy, but that is part of the learn-
ing process. The accumulation of facts followed by the slow assimilation of under-
standing simply cannot be achieved without a struggle.
Speciﬁcally for you, a Student Resource Manual (SRM) is available as an op-
tional supplement. In addition to containing solutions of selected problems from the
exercises sets, the SRM contains hints for solving problems, extra examples, and a re-
view of those areas of algebra and calculus that we feel are particularly important to
the successful study of differential equations. Bear in mind you do not have to pur-
chase the SRM; by following my pointers given at the beginning of most sections, you
can review the appropriate mathematics from your old precalculus or calculus texts.
In conclusion, we wish you good luck and success. We hope you enjoy the text
and the course you are about to embark on—as undergraduate math majors it was
one of our favorites because we liked mathematics that connected with the physical
world. If you have any comments, or if you ﬁnd any errors as you read/work your
way through the text, or if you come up with a good idea for improving either it or
the SRM, please feel free to contact us through our editor at Cengage Learning:
molly.taylor@cengage.com
TO THE INSTRUCTOR
In case you are examining this book for the ﬁrst time, Differential Equations with
Boundary-Value Problems, Eighth Edition can be used for either a one-semester course,
or a two-semester course that covers ordinary and partial differential equations. The
shorter version of the text, A First Course in Differential Equations with Modeling
Applications, Tenth Edition, is intended for either a one-semester or a one-quarter course
in ordinary differential equations. This book ends with Chapter 9. For a one semester
course, we assume that the students have successfully completed at least two semesters
of calculus. Since you are reading this, undoubtedly you have already examined the
Preface
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

table of contents for the topics that are covered. You will not ﬁnd a "suggested syl-
labus" in this preface; we will not pretend to be so wise as to tell other teachers what to
teach. We feel that there is plenty of material here to pick from and to form a course to
your liking. The textbook strikes a reasonable balance between the analytical, qualita-
tive, and quantitative approaches to the study of differential equations. As far as our
"underlying philosophy" it is this: An undergraduate textbook should be written with
the student's understanding kept ﬁrmly in mind, which means to me that the material
should be presented in a straightforward, readable, and helpful manner, while keeping
the level of theory consistent with the notion of a "ﬁrst course."
For those who are familiar with the previous editions, we would like to mention
a few of the improvements made in this edition.
•
Eight new projects appear at the beginning of the book. Each project includes
a related problem set, and a correlation of the project material with a chapter
in the text. 
•
Many exercise sets have been updated by the addition of new problems to
better test and challenge the students. In like manner, some exercise sets have
been improved by sending some problems into retirement.
•
Additional examples and ﬁgures have been added to many sections.
•
Several instructors took the time to e-mail us expressing their concerns
about our approach to linear ﬁrst-order differential equations. In response,
Section 2.3, Linear Equations, has been rewritten with the intent to simplify
the discussion.
•
This edition contains a new section on Green's functions in Chapter 4 for those
who have extra time in their course to consider this elegant application of
variation of parameters in the solution of initial-value and boundary-value prob-
lems. Section 4.8 is optional and its content does not impact any other section. 
•
Section 5.1 now includes a discussion on how to use both trigonometric
forms 
in describing simple harmonic motion.
•
At the request of users of the previous editions, a new section on the review
of power series has been added to Chapter 6. Moreover, much of this chapter
has been rewritten to improve clarity. In particular, the discussion of the
modiﬁed Bessel functions and the spherical Bessel functions in Section 6.4
has been greatly expanded.
•
Several boundary-value problems involving modiﬁed Bessel functions have 
been added to Exercises 13.2.
STUDENT RESOURCES
•
Student Resource Manual (SRM), prepared by Warren S. Wright and Carol D.
Wright (ISBN 9781133491927 accompanies A First Course in Differential
Equations with Modeling Applications, Tenth Edition, and ISBN 9781133491958
accompanies Differential Equations with Boundary-Value Problems, Eighth
Edition), provides important review material from algebra and calculus, the
solution of every third problem in each exercise set (with the exception of the
Discussion Problems and Computer Lab Assignments), relevant command
syntax for the computer algebra systems Mathematica and Maple, lists of
important concepts, as well as helpful hints on how to start certain problems.
INSTRUCTOR RESOURCES
•
Instructor's Solutions Manual (ISM) prepared by Warren S. Wright and
Carol D. Wright (ISBN 9781133602293) provides complete, worked-out
solutions for all problems in the text.
•
Solution Builder is an online instructor database that offers complete, worked-
out solutions for all exercises in the text, allowing you to create customized,
y  Asin(vt  f)  and  y  Acos(vt  f)
xii
●
PREFACE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PREFACE
●
xiii
secure solutions printouts (in PDF format) matched exactly to the problems you
assign in class. Access is available via 
www.cengage.com/solutionbuilder
•
ExamView testing software allows instructors to quickly create, deliver, and
customize tests for class in print and online formats, and features automatic
grading. Included is a test bank with hundreds of questions customized di-
rectly to the text, with all questions also provided in PDF and Microsoft
Word formats for instructors who opt not to use the software component.
•
Enhanced WebAssign is the most widely used homework system in higher
education. Available for this title, Enhanced WebAssign allows you to assign,
collect, grade, and record assignments via the Web. This proven homework
system includes links to textbook sections, video examples, and problem spe-
ciﬁc tutorials. Enhanced WebAssign is more than a homework system—it is
a complete learning system for students. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to single out a few people for special recognition. Many thanks to
Molly Taylor (senior sponsoring editor), Shaylin Walsh Hogan (assistant editor), and
Alex Gontar (editorial assistant) for orchestrating the development of this edition and
its component materials. Alison Eigel Zade (content project manager) offered the
resourcefulness, knowledge, and patience necessary to a seamless production process.
Ed Dionne (project manager, MPS) worked tirelessly to provide top-notch publishing
services. And ﬁnally, we thank Scott Brown for his superior skills as accuracy reviewer.
Once again an especially heartfelt thank you to Leslie Lahr, developmental editor, for
her support, sympathetic ear, willingness to communicate, suggestions, and for
obtaining and organizing the excellent projects that appear at the front of the book.
We also extend our sincerest appreciation to those individuals who took the time out
of their busy schedules to submit a project:
Ivan Kramer, University of Maryland—Baltimore County
Tom LaFaro, Gustavus Adolphus College
Jo Gascoigne, Fisheries Consultant
C. J. Knickerbocker, Sensis Corporation
Kevin Cooper, Washington State University
Gilbert N. Lewis, Michigan Technological University
Michael Olinick, Middlebury College
Finally, over the years these textbooks have been improved in a countless num-
ber of ways through the suggestions and criticisms of the reviewers. Thus it is ﬁtting
to conclude with an acknowledgement of our debt to the following wonderful people
for sharing their expertise and experience. 
REVIEWERS OF PAST EDITIONS 
William Atherton, Cleveland State University 
Philip Bacon, University of Florida
Bruce Bayly, University of Arizona 
William H. Beyer, University of Akron
R. G. Bradshaw, Clarkson College
Dean R. Brown, Youngstown State University 
David Buchthal, University of Akron
Nguyen P. Cac, University of Iowa 
T. Chow, California State University—Sacramento 
Dominic P. Clemence, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical 
State University 
Pasquale Condo, University of Massachusetts—Lowell 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Vincent Connolly, Worcester Polytechnic Institute 
Philip S. Crooke, Vanderbilt University 
Bruce E. Davis, St. Louis Community College at Florissant Valley 
Paul W. Davis, Worcester Polytechnic Institute 
Richard A. DiDio, La Salle University 
James Draper, University of Florida 
James M. Edmondson, Santa Barbara City College
John H. Ellison, Grove City College 
Raymond Fabec, Louisiana State University 
Donna Farrior, University of Tulsa 
Robert E. Fennell, Clemson University 
W. E. Fitzgibbon, University of Houston 
Harvey J. Fletcher, Brigham Young University 
Paul J. Gormley, Villanova 
Layachi Hadji, University of Alabama
Ruben Hayrapetyan, Kettering University
Terry Herdman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Zdzislaw Jackiewicz, Arizona State University 
S. K. Jain, Ohio University 
Anthony J. John, Southeastern Massachusetts University 
David C. Johnson, University of Kentucky—Lexington
Harry L. Johnson, V.P.I & S.U. 
Kenneth R. Johnson, North Dakota State University 
Joseph Kazimir, East Los Angeles College 
J. Keener, University of Arizona 
Steve B. Khlief, Tennessee Technological University (retired) 
C. J. Knickerbocker, Sensis Corporation 
Carlon A. Krantz, Kean College of New Jersey 
Thomas G. Kudzma, University of Lowell 
Alexandra Kurepa, North Carolina A&T State University
G. E. Latta, University of Virginia 
Cecelia Laurie, University of Alabama 
James R. McKinney, California Polytechnic State University
James L. Meek, University of Arkansas 
Gary H. Meisters, University of Nebraska—Lincoln 
Stephen J. Merrill, Marquette University 
Vivien Miller, Mississippi State University 
Gerald Mueller, Columbus State Community College 
Philip S. Mulry, Colgate University 
C. J. Neugebauer, Purdue University 
Tyre A. Newton, Washington State University 
Brian M. O'Connor, Tennessee Technological University 
J. K. Oddson, University of California—Riverside 
Carol S. O'Dell, Ohio Northern University 
A. Peressini, University of Illinois, Urbana—Champaign 
J. Perryman, University of Texas at Arlington 
Joseph H. Phillips, Sacramento City College 
Jacek Polewczak, California State University Northridge 
Nancy J. Poxon, California State University—Sacramento 
Robert Pruitt, San Jose State University 
K. Rager, Metropolitan State College 
F. B. Reis, Northeastern University 
Brian Rodrigues, California State Polytechnic University
Tom Roe, South Dakota State University
Kimmo I. Rosenthal, Union College 
Barbara Shabell, California Polytechnic State University 
Seenith Sivasundaram, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University 
xiv
●
PREFACE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Don E. Soash, Hillsborough Community College 
F. W. Stallard, Georgia Institute of Technology 
Gregory Stein, The Cooper Union 
M. B. Tamburro, Georgia Institute of Technology 
Patrick Ward, Illinois Central College 
Jianping Zhu, University of Akron
Jan Zijlstra, Middle Tennessee State University 
Jay Zimmerman, Towson University
REVIEWERS OF THE CURRENT EDITIONS 
Bernard Brooks, Rochester Institute of Technology
Allen Brown, Wabash Valley College 
Helmut Knaust, The University of Texas at El Paso    
Mulatu Lemma, Savannah State University 
George Moss, Union University 
Martin Nakashima, California State Polytechnic University—Pomona
Bruce O'Neill, Milwaukee School of Engineering 
Dennis G. Zill
Warren S. Wright
Los Angeles
PREFACE
●
xv
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Is AIDS an Invariably 
Fatal Disease?
by Ivan Kramer
This essay will address and answer the question: Is the acquired immunodeﬁciency
syndrome (AIDS), which is the end stage of the human immunodeﬁciency virus
(HIV) infection, an invariably fatal disease?
Like other viruses, HIV has no metabolism and cannot reproduce itself outside of
a living cell. The genetic information of the virus is contained in two identical strands
of RNA. To reproduce, HIV must use the reproductive apparatus of the cell it invades
and infects to produce exact copies of the viral RNA. Once it penetrates a cell, HIV
transcribes its RNA into DNA using an enzyme (reverse transcriptase) contained in the
virus. The double-stranded viral DNAmigrates into the nucleus of the invaded cell and
is inserted into the cell's genome with the aid of another viral enzyme (integrase). The
viral DNA and the invaded cell's DNA are then integrated, and the cell is infected.
When the infected cell is stimulated to reproduce, the proviral DNA is transcribed into
viral DNA, and new viral particles are synthesized. Since anti-retroviral drugs like zi-
dovudine inhibit the HIV enzyme reverse transcriptase and stop proviral DNA chain
synthesis in the laboratory, these drugs, usually administered in combination, slow
down the progression to AIDS in those that are infected with HIV (hosts).
What makes HIV infection so dangerous is the fact that it fatally weakens a
host's immune system by binding to the CD4 molecule on the surface of cells vital
for defense against disease, including T-helper cells and a subpopulation of natural
killer cells. T-helper cells (CD4 T-cells, or T4 cells) are arguably the most important
cells of the immune system since they organize the body's defense against antigens.
Modeling suggests that HIV infection of natural killer cells makes it impossible for
even modern antiretroviral therapy to clear the virus [1]. In addition to the CD4
molecule, a virion needs at least one of a handful of co-receptor molecules (e.g., CCR5
and CXCR4) on the surface of the target cell in order to be able to bind to it, pene-
trate its membrane, and infect it. Indeed, about 1% of Caucasians lack coreceptor
molecules, and, therefore, are completely immune to becoming HIV infected.
Once infection is established, the disease enters the acute infection stage, lasting
a matter of weeks, followed by an incubation period, which can last two decades or
more! Although the T-helper cell density of a host changes quasi-statically during the
incubation period, literally billions of infected T4 cells and HIV particles are
destroyed—and replaced—daily. This is clearly a war of attrition, one in which the
immune system invariably loses.
A model analysis of the essential dynamics that occur during the incubation
period to invariably cause AIDS is as follows [1]. Because HIV rapidly mutates, its
ability to infect T4 cells on contact (its infectivity) eventually increases and the
rate T4 cells become infected increases. Thus, the immune system must increase the
destruction rate of infected T4 cells as well as the production rate of new, uninfected
ones to replace them. There comes a point, however, when the production rate of T4
cells reaches its maximum possible limit and any further increase in HIV's infectiv-
ity must necessarily cause a drop in the T4 density leading to AIDS. Remarkably,
about 5% of hosts show no sign of immune system deterioration for the ﬁrst ten years
of the infection; these hosts, called long-term nonprogressors, were originally
Project for Section 3.1
P-1
Cell infected with HIV
Thomas Deerinck, NCMIR/Photo Researchers, Inc.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

thought to be possibly immune to developing AIDS, but modeling evidence suggests
that these hosts will also develop AIDS eventually [1].
In over 95% of hosts, the immune system gradually loses its long battle with the
virus. The T4 cell density in the peripheral blood of hosts begins to drop from normal
levels (between 250 over 2500 cells/mm3) towards zero, signaling the end of the
incubation period. The host reaches the AIDS stage of the infection either when one
of the more than twenty opportunistic infections characteristic of AIDS develops
(clinical AIDS) or when the T4 cell density falls below 250 cells/mm3 (an additional
deﬁnition of AIDS promulgated by the CDC in 1987). The HIV infection has now
reached its potentially fatal stage.
In order to model survivability with AIDS, the time t at which a host develops
AIDS will be denoted by t  0. One possible survival model for a cohort of AIDS
patients postulates that AIDS is not a fatal condition for a fraction of the cohort,
denoted by Si, to be called the immortal fraction here. For the remaining part of the
cohort, the probability of dying per unit time at time t will be assumed to be a con-
stant k, where, of course, k must be positive. Thus, the survival fraction S(t) for this
model is a solution of the linear ﬁrst-order differential equation
(1)
Using the integrating-factor method discussed in Section 2.3, we see that the 
solution of equation (1) for the survival fraction is given by
(2)
Instead of the parameter k appearing in (2), two new parameters can be deﬁned for
a host for whom AIDS is fatal: the average survival time Taver given by Taver  k1 and
the survival half-life T12 given by T12  ln(2)k. The survival half-life, deﬁned as the
time required for half of the cohort to die, is completely analogous to the half-life in
radioactive nuclear decay. See Problem 8 in Exercise 3.1. In terms of these parameters
the entire time-dependence in (2) can be written as
(3)
Using a least-squares program to ﬁt the survival fraction function in (2) to the
actual survival data for the 159 Marylanders who developed AIDS in 1985 produces
an immortal fraction value of Si  0.0665 and a survival half life value of T12 
0.666 year, with the average survival time being Taver  0.960 years [2]. See Figure 1.
Thus only about 10% of Marylanders who developed AIDS in 1985 survived three
years with this condition. The 1985 Maryland AIDS survival curve is virtually iden-
tical to those of 1983 and 1984. The ﬁrst antiretroviral drug found to be effective
against HIV was zidovudine (formerly known as AZT). Since zidovudine was not
known to have an impact on the HIV infection before 1985 and was not common
ekt  et>Taver  2t>T1>2
S(t)  Si  [1  Si]ekt.
dS(t)
dt
 k[S(t)  Si].
P-2
●
PROJECTS
IS AIDS AN INVARIABLY FATAL DISEASE?
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
_16
16
48
80
112
144
176
208
240
272
Survival time t(w)
S(t)
Survival fraction data
Two-parameter model fit
FIGURE 1
Survival fraction curve S(t).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

therapy before 1987, it is reasonable to conclude that the survival of the 1985
Maryland AIDS patients was not signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by zidovudine therapy.
The small but nonzero value of the immortal fraction Si obtained from the
Maryland data is probably an artifact of the method that Maryland and other states
use to determine the survivability of their citizens. Residents with AIDS who
changed their name and then died or who died abroad would still be counted as alive
by the Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. Thus, the immortal
fraction value of Si  0.0665 (6.65%) obtained from the Maryland data is clearly an
upper limit to its true value, which is probably zero.
Detailed data on the survivability of 1,415 zidovudine-treated HIV-infected
hosts whose T4 cell densities dropped below normal values were published by
Easterbrook et al. in 1993 [3]. As their T4 cell densities drop towards zero, these peo-
ple develop clinical AIDS and begin to die. The longest survivors of this disease live
to see their T4 densities fall below 10 cells/mm3. If the time t  0 is redeﬁned to
mean the moment the T4 cell density of a host falls below 10 cells/mm3, then the
survivability of such hosts was determined by Easterbrook to be 0.470, 0.316, and
0.178 at elapsed times of 1 year, 1.5 years, and 2 years, respectively.
A least-squares ﬁt of the survival fraction function in (2) to the Easterbrook
data for HIV-infected hosts with T4 cell densities in the 0-10 cells/mm3 range yields
a value of the immortal fraction of Si  0 and a survival half-life of T12  0.878 year
[4]; equivalently, the average survival time is Taver  1.27 years. These results clearly
show that zidovudine is not effective in halting replication in all strains of HIV,
since those who receive this drug eventually die at nearly the same rate as those who
do not. In fact, the small difference of 2.5 months between the survival half-life
for 1993 hosts with T4 cell densities below 10 cells/mm3 on zidovudine therapy
(T12  0.878 year) and that of 1985 infected Marylanders not taking zidovudine
(T12  0.666 year) may be entirely due to improved hospitalization and improve-
ments in the treatment of the opportunistic infections associated with AIDS over the
years. Thus, the initial ability of zidovudine to prolong survivability with HIV dis-
ease ultimately wears off, and the infection resumes its progression. Zidovudine
therapy has been estimated to extend the survivability of an HIV-infected patient by
perhaps 5 or 6 months on the average [4].
Finally, putting the above modeling results for both sets of data together, we ﬁnd
that the value of the immortal fraction falls somewhere within the range 0  Si  0.0665
and the average survival time falls within the range 0.960 years  Taver  1.27 years.
Thus, the percentage of people for whom AIDS is not a fatal disease is less than 6.65%
and may be zero. These results agree with a 1989 study of hemophilia-associated AIDS
cases in the USA which found that the median length of survival after AIDS diagno-
sis was 11.7 months [5]. A more recent and comprehensive study of hemophiliacs
with clinical AIDS using the model in (2) found that the immortal fraction was Si 
0, and the mean survival times for those between 16 to 69 years of age varied be-
tween 3 to 30 months, depending on the AIDS-deﬁning condition [6]. Although
bone marrow transplants using donor stem cells homozygous for CCR5 delta32
deletion may lead to cures, to date clinical results consistently show that AIDS is
an invariably fatal disease.
Related Problems
1. Suppose the fraction of a cohort of AIDS patients that survives a time t after
AIDS diagnosis is given by S(t)  exp(kt). Show that the average survival
time Taver after AIDS diagnosis for a member of this cohort is given by
Taver  1k.
2. The fraction of a cohort of AIDS patients that survives a time t after AIDS
diagnosis is given by S(t)  exp(kt). Suppose the mean survival for a cohort
of hemophiliacs diagnosed with AIDS before 1986 was found to be Taver  6.4
months. What fraction of the cohort survived 5 years after AIDS diagnosis?
PROJECTS
IS AIDS AN INVARIABLY FATAL DISEASE?
●
P-3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3. The fraction of a cohort of AIDS patients that survives a time t after AIDS diag-
nosis is given by S(t)  exp(kt). The time it takes for S(t) to reach the value of
0.5 is deﬁned as the survival half-life and denoted by T12.
(a) Show that S(t) can be written in the form 
.
(b) Show that T12  Taver ln(2), where Taver is the average survival time deﬁned
in problem (1). Thus, it is always true that T12  Taver.
4. About 10% of lung cancer patients are cured of the disease, i.e., they survive
5 years after diagnosis with no evidence that the cancer has returned. Only 14%
of lung cancer patients survive 5 years after diagnosis. Assume that the fraction
of incurable lung cancer patients that survives a time t after diagnosis is given
by exp(kt). Find an expression for the fraction S(t) of lung cancer patients that
survive a time t after being diagnosed with the disease. Be sure to determine the
values of all of the constants in your answer. What fraction of lung cancer patients
survives two years with the disease?
References
1. Kramer, Ivan. What triggers transient AIDS in the acute phase of HIV infection
and chronic AIDS at the end of the incubation period? Computational and
Mathematical Methods in Medicine, Vol. 8, No. 2, June 2007: 125-151.
2. Kramer, Ivan. Is AIDS an invariable fatal disease?: A model analysis of AIDS
survival curves. Mathematical and Computer Modelling 15, no. 9, 1991: 1-19.
3. Easterbrook, Philippa J., Emani Javad, Moyle, Graham, Gazzard, Brian G.
Progressive CD4 cell depletion and death in zidovudine-treated patients. JAIDS,
Aug. 6, 1993, No. 8: 927-929.
4. Kramer, Ivan. The impact of zidovudine (AZT) therapy on the survivability of
those with progressive HIV infection. Mathematical and Computer Modelling,
Vol. 23, No. 3, Feb. 1996: 1-14.
5. Stehr-Green, J. K., Holman, R. C., Mahoney, M. A. Survival analysis of 
hemophilia-associated AIDS cases in the US. Am J Public Health, Jul. 1989, 79
(7): 832-835.
6. Gail, Mitchel H., Tan, Wai-Yuan, Pee, David, Goedert, James J. Survival after
AIDS diagnosis in a cohort of hemophilia patients. JAIDS, Aug. 15, 1997,
Vol. 15, No. 5: 363-369.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Ivan Kramer earned a BS in Physics and Mathematics from The City College of
New York in 1961 and a PhD from the University of California at Berkeley in theo-
retical particle physics in 1967. He is currently associate professor of physics at the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County. Dr. Kramer was Project Director for
AIDS/HIV Case Projections for Maryland, for which he received a grant from the
AIDS Administration of the Maryland Department of Health and Hygiene in 1990.
In addition to his many published articles on HIV infection and AIDS, his current
research interests include mutation models of cancers, Alzheimers disease, and
schizophrenia.
S(t)  2t>T1>2
P-4
●
PROJECTS
IS AIDS AN INVARIABLY FATAL DISEASE?
Courtesy of Ivan Kramer
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Allee Effect
by Jo Gascoigne
The top ﬁve most famous Belgians apparently include a cyclist, a punk singer, the in-
ventor of the saxophone, the creator of Tintin, and Audrey Hepburn. Pierre François
Verhulst is not on the list, although he should be. He had a fairly short life, dying at
the age of 45, but did manage to include some excitement—he was deported from
Rome for trying to persuade the Pope that the Papal States needed a written constitu-
tion. Perhaps the Pope knew better even then than to take lectures in good gover-
nance from a Belgian. . . .
Aside from this episode, Pierre Verhulst (1804-1849) was a mathematician who
concerned himself, among other things, with the dynamics of natural populations—
ﬁsh, rabbits, buttercups, bacteria, or whatever. (I am prejudiced in favour of ﬁsh, so
we will be thinking ﬁsh from now on.) Theorizing on the growth of natural popula-
tions had up to this point been relatively limited, although scientists had reached the
obvious conclusion that the growth rate of a population (dNdt, where N(t) is the
population size at time t) depended on (i) the birth rate b and (ii) the mortality rate m,
both of which would vary in direct proportion to the size of the population N:
(1)
After combining b and m into one parameter r, called the intrinsic rate of natural
increase—or more usually by biologists without the time to get their tongues around
that, just r—equation (1) becomes
(2)
This model of population growth has a problem, which should be clear to you—if
not, plot dNdt for increasing values of N. It is a straightforward exponential growth
curve, suggesting that we will all eventually be drowning in ﬁsh. Clearly, something
eventually has to step in and slow down dNdt. Pierre Verhulst's insight was that this
something was the capacity of the environment, in other words, 
How many ﬁsh can an ecosystem actually support?
He formulated a differential equation for the population N(t) that included both
r and the carrying capacity K:
(3)
Equation (3) is called the logistic equation, and it forms to this day the basis of much
of the modern science of population dynamics. Hopefully, it is clear that the term
(1  NK), which is Verhulst's contribution to equation (2), is (1  NK)  1 when
N  0, leading to exponential growth, and (1  NK) : 0 as N : K, hence it causes
the growth curve of N(t) to approach the horizontal asymptote N(t)  K. Thus the size
of the population cannot exceed the carrying capacity of the environment.
dN
dt  rN1  N
K,  r  0.
dN
dt  rN.
dN
dt  bN  mN.
P-5
Project for Section 3.2
Dr Jo with Queenie; Queenie is on the left
Courtesy of Jo Gasoigne
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P-6
●
PROJECTS
THE ALLEE EFFECT
The logistic equation (3) gives the overall growth rate of the population, but the
ecology is easier to conceptualize if we consider per capita growth rate—that is, the
growth rate of the population per the number of individuals in the population—some
measure of how "well" each individual in the population is doing. To get per capita
growth rate, we just divide each side of equation (3) by N:
This second version of (3) immediately shows (or plot it) that this relationship is a
straight line with a maximum value of 
(assuming that negative popu-
lation sizes are not relevant) and dNdt  0 at N  K.
Er, hang on a minute . . . "a maximum value of 
" Each shark in
the population does best when there are . . . zero sharks? Here is clearly a ﬂaw in the
logistic model. (Note that it is now a model—when it just presents a relationship be-
tween two variables dNdt and N, it is just an equation. When we use this equation
to try and analyze how populations might work, it becomes a model.)
The assumption behind the logistic model is that as population size decreases, indi-
viduals do better (as measured by the per capita population growth rate). This assump-
tion to some extent underlies all our ideas about sustainable management of natural
resources—a ﬁsh population cannot be ﬁshed indeﬁnitely unless we assume that when
a population is reduced in size, it has the ability to grow back to where it was before.
This assumption is more or less reasonable for populations, like many ﬁsh pop-
ulations subject to commercial ﬁsheries, which are maintained at 50% or even 20%
of K. But for very depleted or endangered populations, the idea that individuals keep
doing better as the population gets smaller is a risky one. The Grand Banks popula-
tion of cod, which was ﬁshed down to 1% or perhaps even 0.1% of K, has been pro-
tected since the early 1990s, and has yet to show convincing signs of recovery.
Warder Clyde Allee (1885-1955) was an American ecologist at the University
of Chicago in the early 20th century, who experimented on goldﬁsh, brittlestars, ﬂour
beetles, and, in fact, almost anything unlucky enough to cross his path. Allee showed
that, in fact, individuals in a population can do worse when the population becomes
very small or very sparse.* There are numerous ecological reasons why this might
be—for example, they may not ﬁnd a suitable mate or may need large groups to ﬁnd
food or express social behavior, or in the case of goldﬁsh they may alter the water
chemistry in their favour. As a result of Allee's work, a population where the per
capita growth rate declines at low population size is said to show an Allee effect. The
jury is still out on whether Grand Banks cod are suffering from an Allee effect, but
there are some possible mechanisms—females may not be able to ﬁnd a mate, or a
mate of the right size, or maybe the adult cod used to eat the ﬁsh that eat the juvenile
cod. On the other hand, there is nothing that an adult cod likes more than a snack of
baby cod—they are not ﬁsh with very picky eating habits—so these arguments may
not stack up. For the moment we know very little except that there are still no cod.
Allee effects can be modelled in many ways. One of the simplest mathematical
models, a variation of the logistic equation, is:
(4)
where A is called the Allee threshold. The value N (t)  A is the population size below
which the population growth rate becomes negative due to an Allee effect—situated at
 dN
dt  rN1  N
K
N
A  1.
1
N dN
dt  at N  0?!
1
N dN
dt  at N  0
1
N dN
dt  r1  N
K  r  r
K N.
*Population size and population density are mathematically interchangeable, assuming a ﬁxed area in
which the population lives (although they may not necessarily be interchangeable for the individuals in
question).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PROJECTS
THE ALLEE EFFECT 
●
P-7
a value of N somewhere between N  0 and N  K, that is, 0  A  K, depending on
the species (but for most species a good bit closer to 0 than K, luckily).
Equation (4) is not as straightforward to solve for N(t) as (3), but we don't need
to solve it to gain some insights into its dynamics. If you work through Problems 2
and 3, you will see that the consequences of equation (4) can be disastrous for endan-
gered populations.
Related Problems
1. (a) The logistic equation (3) can be solved explicitly for N(t) using the technique
of partial fractions. Do this, and plot N(t) as a function of t for 0
t 
10.
Appropriate values for r, K, and N(0) are r  1, K  1, N(0)  0.01 (ﬁsh per
cubic metre of seawater, say). The graph of N(t) is called a sigmoid growth
curve.
(b) The value of r can tell us a lot about the ecology of a species—sardines,
where females mature in less than one year and have millions of eggs, have
a high r, while sharks, where females bear a few live young each year, have
a low r. Play with r and see how it affects the shape of the curve. Question:
If a marine protected area is put in place to stop overﬁshing, which species
will recover quickest—sardines or sharks?
2. Find the population equilibria for the model in (4). [Hint: The population is at
equilibrium when dNdt  0, that is, the population is neither growing nor
shrinking. You should ﬁnd three values of N for which the population is at equi-
librium.]
3. Population equilibria can be stable or unstable. If, when a population deviates a
bit from the equilibrium value (as populations inevitably do), it tends to return to
it, this is a stable equilibrium; if, however, when the population deviates from
the equilibrium it tends to diverge from it ever further, this is an unstable equi-
librium. Think of a ball in the pocket of a snooker table versus a ball balanced on
a snooker cue. Unstable equilibria are a feature of Allee effect models such as
(4). Use a phase portrait of the autonomous equation (4) to determine whether
the nonzero equilibria that you found in Problem 2 are stable or unstable. [Hint:
See Section 2.1 of the text.]
4. Discuss the consequences of the result above for a population N(t) ﬂuctuating
close to the Allee threshold A.
References
1. Courchamp, F., Berec L., and Gascoigne, J. 2008. Allee Effects in Ecology and
Conservation. Oxford University Press.
2. Hastings, A. 1997. Population Biology—Concepts and Models. Springer-Verlag,
New York.


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
After a degree in Zoology, Jo Gascoigne thought her ﬁrst job, on conservation in
East Africa, would be about lions and elephants—but it turned out to be about ﬁsh.
Despite the initial crushing disappointment, she ended up loving them—so much, in
fact, that she went on to complete a PhD in marine conservation biology at the
College of William and Mary, in Williamsburg, Virginia, where she studied lobster and
Caribbean conch, and also spent 10 days living underwater in the Aquarius habitat in
Florida. After graduating, she returned to her native Britain and studied the mathemat-
ics of mussel beds at Bangor University in Wales, before becoming an independent
consultant on ﬁsheries management. She now works to promote environmentally sus-
tainable ﬁsheries. When you buy seafood, make good choices and help the sea!
Copper sharks and bronze whaler sharks
feeding on a bait ball of sardines off the
east coast of South Africa
Courtesy of Jo Gascoigne
Doug Perrine/Getty Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P-8
●
PROJECTS THE ALLEE EFFECT
Project for Section 3.3
Wolf Population Dynamics
by C.J. Knickerbocker
Early in 1995, after much controversy, public debate, and a 70-year absence, gray
wolves were re introduced into Yellowstone National Park and Central Idaho. During
this 70-year absence, signiﬁcant changes were recorded in the populations of other
predator and prey animals residing in the park. For instance, the elk and coyote pop-
ulations had risen in the absence of inﬂuence from the larger gray wolf. With the
reintroduction of the wolf in 1995, we anticipated changes in both the predator and
prey animal populations in the Yellowstone Park ecosystem as the success of the
wolf population is dependent upon how it inﬂuences and is inﬂuenced by the other
species in the ecosystem.
For this study, we will examine how the elk (prey) population has been inﬂu-
enced by the wolves (predator). Recent studies have shown that the elk population
has been negatively impacted by the reintroduction of the wolves. The elk population
fell from approximately 18,000 in 1995 to approximately 7,000 in 2009. This article
asks the question of whether the wolves could have such an effect and, if so, could
the elk population disappear?
Let's begin with a more detailed look at the changes in the elk population inde-
pendent of the wolves. In the 10 years prior to the introduction of wolves, from 1985
to 1995, one study suggested that the elk population increased by 40% from 13,000
in 1985 to 18,000 in 1995. Using the simplest differential equation model for popu-
lation dynamics, we can determine the growth rate for elks (represented by the vari-
able r) prior to the reintroduction of the wolves.
(1)
In this equation, E(t) represents the elk population (in thousands) where t is measured
in years since 1985. The solution, which is left as an exercise for the reader, ﬁnds the
combined birth/death growth rate r to be approximately 0.0325 yielding:
In 1995, 21 wolves were initially released, and their numbers have risen. In
2007, biologists estimated the number of wolves to be approximately 171.
To study the interaction between the elk and wolf populations, let's consider the
following predator-prey model for the interaction between the elk and wolf within
the Yellowstone ecosystem:
(2)
where E(t) is the elk population and W(t) is the wolf population. All populations are
measured in thousands of animals. The variable t represents time measured in years
from 1995. So, from the initial conditions, we have 18,000 elk and 21 wolves in the
year 1995. The reader will notice that we estimated the growth rate for the elk to be
the same as that estimated above r  0.0325.
 E(0)  18.0, W(0)  0.021
 dW
dt   0.6W  0.05EW
 dE
dt   0.0325E  0.8EW
 E(t)  13.0 e0.0325t
 E(10)  18.0
E(0)  13.0,
dE
dt  rE,
A gray wolf in the wild
P-8
Damien Richard/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Before we attempt to solve the model (2), a qualitative analysis of the system
can yield a number of interesting properties of the solutions. The first equation
shows that the growth rate of the elk 
is positively impacted by the size of
the herd (0.0325E). This can be interpreted as the probability of breeding in-
creases with the number of elk. On the other hand the nonlinear term (0.8EW) has
a negative impact on the growth rate of the elk since it measures the interaction
between predator and prey. The second equation 
shows that the wolf population has a negative effect on its own growth which can
be interpreted as more wolves create more competition for food. But, the interac-
tion between the elk and wolves (0.05EW) has a positive impact since the wolves
are finding more food.
Since an analytical solution cannot be found to the initial-value problem (2), we
need to rely on technology to ﬁnd approximate solutions. For example, below is a set
of instructions for ﬁnding a numerical solution of the initial-value problem using the
computer algebra system MAPLE.
e1 := diff(e(t),t)- 0.0325 * e(t) + 0.8 * e(t)*w(t) :
e2 := diff(w(t),t)+ 0.6 * w(t) - 0.05 * e(t)*w(t) :
sys := {e1,e2} :
ic := {e(0)=18.0,w(0)=0.021} :
ivp := sys union ic :
H:= dsolve(ivp,{e(t),w(t)},numeric) :
The graphs in Figures 1 and 2 show the populations for both species between 1995
and 2009. As predicted by numerous studies, the reintroduction of wolves into
Yellowstone had led to a decline in the elk population. In this model, we see the popula-
tion decline from 18,000 in 1995 to approximately 7,000 in 2009. In contrast, the wolf
population rose from an initial count of 21 in 1995 to a high of approximately 180 in
2004.
dW>dt  0.6W  0.05EW
(dE>dt)
The alert reader will note that the model also shows a decline in the wolf popu-
lation after 2004. How might we interpret this? With the decline in the elk population
over the ﬁrst 10 years, there was less food for the wolves and therefore their popula-
tion begins to decline.
Figure 3 below shows the long-term behavior of both populations. The interpre-
tation of this graph is left as an exercise for the reader.
Information on the reintroduction of wolves into Yellowstone Park and central
Idaho can be found on the Internet. For example, read the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service news release of November 23, 1994, on the release of wolves into
Yellowstone National Park.
20000
18000
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
1995 1997 1999 2001
Year
Elk population
2003 2005 2007 2009
0
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
1995 1997 1999 2001
Year
Wolf population
2003 2005 2007 2009
0
PROJECTS
WOLF POPULATION DYNAMICS
●
P-9
FIGURE 1
Elk population
FIGURE 2
Wolf population
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P-10
●
PROJECTS
WOLF POPULATION DYNAMICS
Related Problems
1. Solve the pre-wolf initial-value problem (1) by ﬁrst solving the differential
equation and applying the initial condition. Then apply the terminal condition to
ﬁnd the growth rate.
2. Biologists have debated whether the decrease in the elk from 18,000 in 1995 to
7,000 in 2009 is due to the reintroduction of wolves. What other factors might
account for the decrease in the elk population?
3. Consider the long-term changes in the elk and wolf populations. Are these cyclic
changes reasonable? Why is there a lag between the time when the elk begins to
decline and the wolf population begins to decline? Are the minimum values for
the wolf population realistic? Plot the elk population versus the wolf population
and interpret the results.
4. What does the initial-value problem (1) tell us about the growth of the elk pop-
ulation without the inﬂuence of the wolves? Find a similar model for the intro-
duction of rabbits into Australia in 1859 and the impact of introducing a prey
population into an environment without a natural predator population.
20000
18000
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1990
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
2050
2060
2070
2080
Year
Elk and Wolf Populations
Elk
Wolf 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
C. J. Knickerbocker
Professor of Mathematics and Computer Science (retired)
St. Lawrence University
Principal Research Engineer
Sensis Corporation
C. J. Knickerbocker received his PhD in mathematics from Clarkson University in
1984. Until 2008 he was a professor of mathematics and computer science at
St. Lawrence University, where he authored numerous articles in a variety of topics,
including nonlinear partial differential equations, graph theory, applied physics, and
psychology. He has also served as a consultant for publishers, software companies,
and government agencies. Currently, Dr. Knickerbocker is a principal research engi-
neer for the Sensis Corporation, where he studies airport safety and efﬁciency. 
FIGURE 3
Long-term behavior of the populations
Courtesy of C. J. Knickerbocker
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bungee Jumping
by Kevin Cooper
Suppose that you have no sense. Suppose that you are standing on a bridge above the
Malad River canyon. Suppose that you plan to jump off that bridge. You have no sui-
cide wish. Instead, you plan to attach a bungee cord to your feet, to dive gracefully
into the void, and to be pulled back gently by the cord before you hit the river that is
174 feet below. You have brought several different cords with which to afﬁx your
feet, including several standard bungee cords, a climbing rope, and a steel cable. You
need to choose the stiffness and length of the cord so as to avoid the unpleasantness
associated with an unexpected water landing. You are undaunted by this task, because
you know math!
Each of the cords you have brought will be tied off so as to be 100 feet long
when hanging from the bridge. Call the position at the bottom of the cord 0, and
measure the position of your feet below that "natural length" as x(t), where x increases
as you go down and is a function of time t. See Figure 1. Then, at the time you
jump, x(0) = -100, while if your six-foot frame hits the water head ﬁrst, at that time
x(t) = 174 - 100 - 6 = 68. Notice that distance increases as you fall, and so your
velocity is positive as you fall and negative when you bounce back up. Note also
that you plan to dive so your head will be six feet below the end of the chord when
it stops you. 
You know that the acceleration due to gravity is a constant, called g, so that the
force pulling downwards on your body is mg. You know that when you leap from the
bridge, air resistance will increase proportionally to your speed, providing a force in
the opposite direction to your motion of about bv, where b is a constant and v is your
velocity. Finally, you know that Hooke's law describing the action of springs says
that the bungee cord will eventually exert a force on you proportional to its distance
past its natural length. Thus, you know that the force of the cord pulling you back
from destruction may be expressed as
The number k is called the spring constant, and it is where the stiffness of the cord
you use inﬂuences the equation. For example, if you used the steel cable, then k
would be very large, giving a tremendous stopping force very suddenly as you passed
the natural length of the cable. This could lead to discomfort, injury, or even a
Darwin award. You want to choose the cord with a k value large enough to stop you
above or just touching the water, but not too suddenly. Consequently, you are inter-
ested in ﬁnding the distance you fall below the natural length of the cord as a func-
tion of the spring constant. To do that, you must solve the differential equation that
we have derived in words above: The force mx on your body is given by
mx  mg + b(x) - bx	.
Here mg is your weight, 160 lb., and x	 is the rate of change of your position below
the equilibrium with respect to time; i.e., your velocity. The constant b for air resis-
tance depends on a number of things, including whether you wear your skin-tight
pink spandex or your skater shorts and XXL T-shirt, but you know that the value
today is about 1.0.
b(x) 
0
kx
x  0
x  0
P-11
Project for Section 5.1
100 ft
Bridge
Bungee
174 ft
x = −100 
x = 0
x = 74
Water
FIGURE 1
The bungee setup
Bungee jumping from a bridge
Sean Nel/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This is a nonlinear differential equation, but inside it are two linear differential
equations, struggling to get out. We will work with such equations more extensively
in later chapters, but we already know how to solve such equations from our past
experience. When x  0, the equation is mx = mg - bx	, while after you pass the
natural length of the cord it is mx = mg - kx - bx	. We will solve these separately,
and then piece the solutions together when x(t) = 0.
In Problem 1 you ﬁnd an expression for your position t seconds after you step off
the bridge, before the bungee cord starts to pull you back. Notice that it does not
depend on the value for k, because the bungee cord is just falling with you when you
are above x(t) = 0. When you pass the natural length of the bungee cord, it does start
to pull back, so the differential equation changes. Let t1 denote the ﬁrst time for which
x(t1) = 0, and let v1 denote your speed at that time. We can thus describe the motion
for x(t)  0 using the problem x = g - kx - bx	, x(t1) = 0, x	(t1) = v1. An illustration
of a solution to this problem in phase space can be seen in Figure 2.
This will yield an expression for your position as the cord is pulling on you. All
we have to do is to ﬁnd out the time t2 when you stop going down. When you stop
going down, your velocity is zero, i.e., x	(t2) = 0. 
As you can see, knowing a little bit of math is a dangerous thing. We remind
you that the assumption that the drag due to air resistance is linear applies only for
low speeds. By the time you swoop past the natural length of the cord, that approx-
imation is only wishful thinking, so your actual mileage may vary. Moreover,
springs behave nonlinearly in large oscillations, so Hooke's law is only an approx-
imation. Do not trust your life to an approximation made by a man who has been
dead for 200 years. Leave bungee jumping to the professionals.
Related Problems
1. Solve the equation mx + bx	 = mg for x(t), given that you step off the bridge—no
jumping, no diving! Stepping off means x(0) = -100, x	(0) = 0. You may use
mg = 160, b = 1, and g = 32.
2. Use the solution from Problem 1 to compute the length of time t1 that you freefall
(the time it takes to go the natural length of the cord: 100 feet).
3. Compute the derivative of the solution you found in Problem 1 and evaluate it at
the time you found in Problem 2. Call the result v1. You have found your down-
ward speed when you pass the point where the cord starts to pull.
4. Solve the initial-value problem
For now, you may use the value k = 14, but eventually you will need to replace
that with the actual values for the cords you brought. The solution x(t) repre-
sents the position of your feet below the natural length of the cord after it starts
to pull back.
5. Compute the derivative of the expression you found in Problem 4 and solve for
the value of t where it is zero. This time is t2. Be careful that the time you compute
is greater than t1—there are several times when your motion stops at the top and
bottom of your bounces! After you ﬁnd t2, substitute it back into the solution you
found in Problem 4 to ﬁnd your lowest position.
6. You have brought a soft bungee cord with k = 8.5, a stiffer cord with k = 10.7, and
a climbing rope for which k = 16.4. Which, if any, of these may you use safely
under the conditions given?
7. You have a bungee cord for which you have not determined the spring constant.
To do so, you suspend a weight of 10 lb. from the end of the 100-foot cord, caus-
ing the cord to stretch 1.2 feet. What is the k value for this cord? You may neglect
the mass of the cord itself.
x	(t1)  v1.
x(t1)  0,
 mx  bx	  kx  mg,
FIGURE 2
An example plot of x(t)
against x	(t) for a bungee jump
60
40
20
20
40
_20
_20
0
_40
_60
_80
_100
_40
x(t)
x'(t)
P-12
●
PROJECTS
BUNGEE JUMPING
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PROJECTS
BUNGEE JUMPING
●
P-13
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Kevin Cooper, PhD, Colorado State University, is the Computing Coordinator for
Mathematics at Washington State University, Pullman, Washington. His main inter-
est is numerical analysis, and he has written papers and one textbook in that area. Dr.
Cooper also devotes considerable time to creating mathematical software compo-
nents, such as DynaSys, a program to analyze dynamical systems numerically.  
Courtesy of Kevin Cooper
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Collapse of the Tacoma
Narrows Suspension Bridge
by Gilbert N. Lewis
In the summer of 1940, the Tacoma Narrows Suspension Bridge in the State of
Washington was completed and opened to trafﬁc. Almost immediately, observers no-
ticed that the wind blowing across the roadway would sometimes set up large verti-
cal vibrations in the roadbed. The bridge became a tourist attraction as people came
to watch, and perhaps ride, the undulating bridge. Finally, on November 7, 1940, dur-
ing a powerful storm, the oscillations increased beyond any previously observed, and
the bridge was evacuated. Soon, the vertical oscillations became rotational, as ob-
served by looking down the roadway. The entire span was eventually shaken apart by
the large vibrations, and the bridge collapsed. Figure 1 shows a picture of the bridge
during the collapse. See [1] and [2] for interesting and sometimes humorous anec-
dotes associated with the bridge. Or, do an Internet search with the key words
"Tacoma Bridge Disaster" in order to ﬁnd and view some interesting videos of the
collapse of the bridge.
The noted engineer von Karman was asked to determine the cause of the col-
lapse. He and his coauthors [3] claimed that the wind blowing perpendicularly across
the roadway separated into vortices (wind swirls) alternately above and below the
roadbed, thereby setting up a periodic, vertical force acting on the bridge. It was this
force that caused the oscillations. Others further hypothesized that the frequency of
this forcing function exactly matched the natural frequency of the bridge, thus lead-
ing to resonance, large oscillations, and destruction. For almost ﬁfty years, resonance
was blamed as the cause of the collapse of the bridge, although the von Karman
group denied this, stating that "it is very improbable that resonance with alternating
vortices plays an important role in the oscillations of suspension bridges" [3].
As we can see from equation (31) in Section 5.1.3, resonance is a linear phe-
nomenon. In addition, for resonance to occur, there must be an exact match between
the frequency of the forcing function and the natural frequency of the bridge.
Furthermore, there must be absolutely no damping in the system. It should not be
surprising, then, that resonance was not the culprit in the collapse.
If resonance did not cause the collapse of the bridge, what did? Recent research
provides an alternative explanation for the collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge.
Lazer and McKenna [4] contend that nonlinear effects, and not linear resonance,
were the main factors leading to the large oscillations of the bridge (see [5] for a good
review article). The theory involves partial differential equations. However, a simpli-
ﬁed model leading to a nonlinear ordinary differential equation can be constructed.
The development of the model below is not exactly the same as that of Lazer and
McKenna, but it results in a similar differential equation. This example shows an-
other way that amplitudes of oscillation can increase.
Consider a single vertical cable of the suspension bridge. We assume that it acts
like a spring, but with different characteristics in tension and compression, and with
no damping. When stretched, the cable acts like a spring with Hooke's constant, b,
while, when compressed, it acts like a spring with a different Hooke's constant, a. We
assume that the cable in compression exerts a smaller force on the roadway than
when stretched the same distance, so that 0  a  b. Let the vertical deﬂection
(positive direction downward) of the slice of the roadbed attached to this cable be
The rebuilt Tacoma Narrows bridge (1950)
and new parallel bridge (2009)
Collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge
Project for Section 5.3
AP Photo
P-14
Sir Armstrong/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

denoted by y(t), where t represents time, and y  0 represents the equilibrium posi-
tion of the road. As the roadbed oscillates under the inﬂuence of an applied vertical
force (due to the von Karman vortices), the cable provides an upward restoring force
equal to by when y  0 and a downward restoring force equal to ay when y  0. This
change in the Hooke's Law constant at y  0 provides the nonlinearity to the differ-
ential equation. We are thus led to consider the differential equation derived from
Newton's second law of motion 
my  f(y)  g(t),
where f(y) is the nonlinear function given by 
g(t) is the applied force, and m is the mass of the section of the roadway. Note that
the differential equation is linear on any interval on which y does not change sign.
Now, let us see what a typical solution of this problem would look like. We will
assume that m  1 kg, b  4 N/m, a  1N/m, and g(t)  sin(4t) N. Note that the fre-
quency of the forcing function is larger than the natural frequencies of the cable in
both tension and compression, so that we do not expect resonance to occur. We also
assign the following initial values to y: y(0)  0, y	(0)  0.01, so that the roadbed
starts in the equilibrium position with a small downward velocity.
Because of the downward initial velocity and the positive applied force, y(t) will
initially increase and become positive. Therefore, we ﬁrst solve this initial-value
problem
y  4y  sin(4t),
y(0)  0,
y	(0)  0.01.
(1)
The solution of the equation in (1), according to Theorem 4.1.6, is the sum of the
complementary solution, yc(t), and the particular solution, yp(t). It is easy to see
that yc(t)  c1cos(2t)  c2sin(2t) (equation (9), Section 4.3), and yp(t)  
(Table 4.4.1, Section 4.4). Thus,
y(t)  c1cos(2t)  c2 sin(2t)
.
(2)
The initial conditions give
y(0)  0  c1,
y	(0)  0.01  2c2  ,
so that c2  (0.01  )2. Therefore, (2) becomes
(3)
We note that the ﬁrst positive value of t for which y(t) is again equal to zero is 
.
At that point, 
Therefore, equation (3) holds on [0, 
].
After 
becomes negative, so we must now solve the new problem
(4)
Proceeding as above, the solution of (4) is
(5)
  cost0.01  2
5  4
15 sint cos(2t).
 y(t) 0.01  2
5cost  1
15sin(4t)
 y  y  sin(4t),  y
p
2  0,  y	
p
2  0.01  2
3.
t  p
2, y
p>2
y	(p
2)  (0.01  2
3).
t  p
2
  sin(2t)
1
20.01  1
3  1
6 cos(2t).
 y(t)  1
20.01  1
3sin(2t)  1
12sin(4t)
1
3
1
3
 1
12sin(4t)
1
12sin(4t)

f(y) 
by  if y 
 0
ay  if y  0	,

PROJECTS
THE COLLAPSE OF THE TACOMA NARROWS SUSPENSION BRIDGE
●
P-15
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P-16
●
PROJECTS
THE COLLAPSE OF THE TACOMA NARROWS SUSPENSION BRIDGE
The next positive value of t after 
at which y(t)  0 is 
at which point
so that equation (5) holds on 
.
At this point, the solution has gone through one cycle in the time interval 
During this cycle, the section of the roadway started at the equilibrium with positive
velocity, became positive, came back to the equilibrium position with negative ve-
locity, became negative, and ﬁnally returned to the equilibrium position with positive
velocity. This pattern continues indeﬁnitely, with each cycle covering 
time units.
The solution for the next cycle is
(6)
It is instructive to note that the velocity at the beginning of the second cycle is
(0.01
), while at the beginning of the third cycle it is (0.01 
). In fact, the
velocity at the beginning of each cycle is 
greater than at the beginning of the pre-
vious cycle. It is not surprising then that the amplitude of oscillations will increase
over time, since the amplitude of (one term in) the solution during any one cycle is
directly related to the velocity at the beginning of the cycle. See Figure 2 for a
graph of the deﬂection function on the interval [0, 3p]. Note that the maximum
deﬂection on [3p2, 2p] is larger than the maximum deﬂection on [0, p2], while
the maximum deﬂection on [2p, 3p] is larger than the maximum deﬂection on
[p2, 3p2].
It must be remembered that the model presented here is a very simpliﬁed one-
dimensional model that cannot take into account all of the intricate interactions of
real bridges. The reader is referred to the account by Lazer and McKenna [4] for a
more complete model. More recently, McKenna [6] has reﬁned that model to provide
a different viewpoint of the torsional oscillations observed in the Tacoma Bridge.
Research on the behavior of bridges under forces continues. It is likely that
the models will be refined over time, and new insights will be gained from the
research. However, it should be clear at this point that the large oscillations caus-
ing the destruction of the Tacoma Narrows Suspension Bridge were not the result
of resonance.
2
15
4
15
 2
15
 y(t)  sint0.01  8
15  4
15 cost cos(2t)  on  [2p, 3p].
 y(t)  sin(2t)1
20.01  7
15  1
6 cos(2t)  on  [3p>2, 2p],
3p
2
[0, 3p
2 ].
[p>2, 3p>2]
y	(3p
2 )  0.01  2
15,
t  3p
2 ,
t  p
2
0.2
y
t
0.0
2
4
6
8
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
FIGURE 2
Graph of deﬂection function y(t) 
Related Problems
1. Solve the following problems and plot the solutions for 0
t
6p. Note that reso-
nance occurs in the ﬁrst problem but not in the second.
(a)
(b) y  y  cos(2t), y(0)  0, y	(0)  0.
y  y  cost, y(0)  0, y	(0)  0.


Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PROJECTS
THE COLLAPSE OF THE TACOMA NARROWS SUSPENSION BRIDGE
●
P-17
2. Solve the initial-value problem 
where
and 
(a) b  1, a  4, (Compare your answer with the example in this project.)
(b) b  64, a  4,
(c) b  36, a  25.
Note that, in part (a), the condition b  a of the text is not satisﬁed. Plot the solu-
tions. What happens in each case as t increases? What would happen in each case
if the second initial condition were replaced with y	(0)  0.01? Can you make any
conclusions similar to those of the text regarding the long-term solution?
3. What would be the effect of adding damping (cy	, where c  0) to the system?
How could a bridge design engineer incorporate more damping into the bridge?
Solve the problem 
where
and
(a) c  0.01
(b) c  0.1 
(c) c  0.5
References
1. Lewis, G. N., "Tacoma Narrows Suspension Bridge Collapse" in A First Course
in Differential Equations, Dennis G. Zill, 253-256. Boston: PWS-Kent, 1993.
2. Braun, M., Differential Equations and Their Applications, 167-169. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1978.
3. Amman, O. H., T. von Karman, and G. B. Woodruff, The Failure of the Tacoma
Narrows Bridge. Washington D.C.: Federal Works Agency, 1941.
4. Lazer, A. C., and P. J. McKenna. Large amplitude periodic oscillations in sus-
pension bridges: Some new connections with nonlinear analysis. SIAM Review
32 (December 1990): 537-578.
5. Peterson, I., Rock and roll bridge. Science News 137 (1991): 344-346.
6. McKenna, P. J., Large torsional oscillations in suspension bridges revisited: Fixing
an old approximation. American Mathematical Monthly 106 (1999):1-18.
f(y) 
4y if y 
 0
y if y  0	,
y  cy	  f(y)  sin(4t), y(0)  0, y	(0)  1,
f(y) 
by if y 
 0
ay if y  0	,
y  f(y)  sin(4t), y(0)  0, y	(0)  1,
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dr. Gilbert N. Lewis is professor emeritus at Michigan Technological University,
where he has taught and done research in Applied Math and Differential Equations
for 34 years. He received his BS degree from Brown University and his MS and
PhD degrees from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. His hobbies include
travel, food and wine, ﬁshing, and birding, activities that he intends to continue in
retirement.
Courtesy of Gilbert N. Lewis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Murder at the Mayfair Diner
by Tom LoFaro
Dawn at the Mayfair Diner. The amber glow of streetlights mixed with the violent
red ﬂash of police cruisers begins to fade with the rising of a furnace orange sun.
Detective Daphne Marlow exits the diner holding a steaming cup of hot joe in one
hand and a summary of the crime scene evidence in the other. Taking a seat on the
bumper of her tan LTD, Detective Marlow begins to review the evidence.
At 5:30 a.m. the body of one Joe D. Wood was found in the walk in refrigerator in
the diner's basement. At 6:00 a.m. the coroner arrived and determined that the core body
temperature of the corpse was 85 degrees Fahrenheit. Thirty minutes later the coroner
again measured the core body temperature. This time the reading was 84 degrees
Fahrenheit. The thermostat inside the refrigerator reads 50 degrees Fahrenheit.
Daphne takes out a fading yellow legal pad and ketchup-stained calculator from
the front seat of her cruiser and begins to compute. She knows that Newton's Law of
Cooling says that the rate at which an object cools is proportional to the difference
between the temperature T of the body at time t and the temperature Tm of the envi-
ronment surrounding the body. She jots down the equation
(1)
where k is a constant of proportionality, T and Tm are measured in degrees Fahrenheit,
and t is time measured in hours. Because Daphne wants to investigate the past using
positive values of time, she decides to correspond t  0 with 6:00 a.m., and so, for
example, t  4 is 2:00 a.m. After a few scratches on her yellow pad, Daphne realizes
that with this time convention the constant k in (1) will turn out to be positive. She
jots a reminder to herself that 6:30 a.m. is now t  12.
As the cool and quiet dawn gives way to the steamy midsummer morning,
Daphne begins to sweat and wonders aloud, "But what if the corpse was moved into
the fridge in a feeble attempt to hide the body? How does this change my estimate?"
She re-enters the restaurant and ﬁnds the grease-streaked thermostat above the empty
cash register. It reads 70 degrees Fahrenheit.
"But when was the body moved?" Daphne asks. She decides to leave this ques-
tion unanswered for now, simply letting h denote the number of hours the body has
been in the refrigerator prior to 6:00 a.m. For example, if h  6, then the body was
moved at midnight.
Daphne ﬂips a page on her legal pad and begins calculating. As the rapidly cooling
coffee begins to do its work, she realizes that the way to model the environmental tem-
perature change caused by the move is with the unit step function (t). She writes
Tm(t)  50  20(t  h) 
(2)
and below it the differential equation
(3)
Daphne's mustard-stained polyester blouse begins to drip sweat under the blaze
of a midmorning sun. Drained from the heat and the mental exercise, she ﬁres up
her cruiser and motors to Boodle's Café for another cup of java and a heaping plate
dT
dt  k(T - Tm(t)).
dT
dt  k(T  Tm),  t  0,
Project for Section 7.3
P-18
The Mayfair diner in Philadelphia, PA
© Ronald C. Saari
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of scrapple and fried eggs. She settles into the faux leather booth. The intense
air-conditioning conspires with her sweat-soaked blouse to raise goose ﬂesh on her
rapidly cooling skin. The intense chill serves as a gruesome reminder of the tragedy
that occurred earlier at the Mayfair.
While Daphne waits for her breakfast, she retrieves her legal pad and quickly
reviews her calculations. She then carefully constructs a table that relates refrigeration
time h to time of death while eating her scrapple and eggs.
Shoving away the empty platter, Daphne picks up her cell phone to check in with
her partner Marie. "Any suspects?" Daphne asks.
"Yeah," she replies, "we got three of 'em. The ﬁrst is the late Mr. Wood's ex-wife,
a dancer by the name of Twinkles. She was seen in the Mayfair between 5 and 6 p.m.
in a shouting match with Wood." 
"When did she leave?" 
"A witness says she left in a hurry a little after six. The second suspect is a South
Philly bookie who goes by the name of Slim. Slim was in around 10 last night
having a whispered conversation with Joe. Nobody overheard the conversation, but
witnesses say there was a lot of hand gesturing, like Slim was upset or something."
"Did anyone see him leave?"
"Yeah. He left quietly around 11. The third suspect is the cook." 
"The cook?"
"Yep, the cook. Goes by the name of Shorty. The cashier says he heard Joe and
Shorty arguing over the proper way to present a plate of veal scaloppine. She said
that Shorty took an unusually long break at 10:30 p.m. He took off in a huff when the
restaurant closed at 2:00 a.m. Guess that explains why the place was such a mess."
"Great work, partner. I think I know who to bring in for questioning."
Related Problems
1. Solve equation (1), which models the scenario in which Joe Wood is killed in the
refrigerator. Use this solution to estimate the time of death (recall that normal liv-
ing body temperature is 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit).
2. Solve the differential equation (3) using Laplace transforms. Your solution T(t)
will depend on both t and h. (Use the value of k found in Problem 1.)
3. (CAS) Complete Daphne's table. In particular, explain why large values of h give
the same time of death.
h
time body moved
time of death
12 
6:00 p.m.
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
4. Who does Daphne want to question and why?
5. Still Curious? The process of temperature change in a dead body is known as
algor mortis (rigor mortis is the process of body stiffening), and although it is not
PROJECTS
MURDER AT THE MAYFAIR DINER
●
P-19
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

perfectly described by Newton's Law of Cooling, this topic is covered in most
forensic medicine texts. In reality, the cooling of a dead body is determined by
more than just Newton's Law. In particular, chemical processes in the body con-
tinue for several hours after death. These chemical processes generate heat, and
thus a near constant body temperature may be maintained during this time before
the exponential decay due to Newton's Law of Cooling begins.
A linear equation, known as the Glaister equation, is sometimes used to give
a preliminary estimate of the time t since death. The Glaister equation is
(4)
where T0 is measured body temperature (98.4 F is used here for normal living
body temperature instead of 98.6 F). Although we do not have all of the tools to
derive this equation exactly (the 1.5 degrees per hour was determined experimen-
tally), we can derive a similar equation via linear approximation.
Use equation (1) with an initial condition of T(0)  T0 to compute the equa-
tion of the tangent line to the solution through the point (0, T0). Do not use the
values of Tm or k found in Problem 1. Simply leave these as parameters. Next, let
T  98.4 and solve for t to get
(5)
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Tom LoFaro is a professor and chair of the Mathematics and Computer Science
Department at Gustavus Adolphus College in St. Peter, Minnesota. He has been involved
in developing differential modeling projects for over 10 years, including being a princi-
pal investigator of the NSF-funded IDEA project (http://www.sci.wsu.edu/idea/) and
a contributor to CODEE's ODE Architect (Wiley and Sons). Dr. LoFaro's nonacade-
mic interests include ﬂy ﬁshing and coaching little league soccer. His oldest daughter
(age 12) aspires to be a forensic anthropologist much like Detective Daphne Marlow.
t  98.4  T0
k(T0  Tm).
t  98.4  T0
1.5
P-20
●
PROJECTS
MURDER AT THE MAYFAIR DINER
Courtesy of Tom LoFaro
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Earthquake Shaking of 
Multistory Buildings
by Gilbert N. Lewis
Large earthquakes typically have a devastating effect on buildings. For example,
the famous 1906 San Francisco earthquake destroyed much of that city. More re-
cently, that area was hit by the Loma Prieta earthquake that many people in the
United States and elsewhere experienced second-hand while watching on televi-
sion the Major League Baseball World Series game that was taking place in San
Francisco in 1989.
In this project, we attempt to model the effect of an earthquake on a multi-story
building and then solve and interpret the mathematics. Let xi represent the horizontal
displacement of the ith ﬂoor from equlibrium. Here, the equilibrium position will be
a ﬁxed point on the ground, so that x0  0. During an earthquake, the ground moves
horizontally so that each ﬂoor is considered to be displaced relative to the ground.
We assume that the ith ﬂoor of the building has a mass mi, and that successive ﬂoors
are connected by an elastic connector whose effect resembles that of a spring.
Typically, the structural elements in large buildings are made of steel, a highly
elastic material. Each such connector supplies a restoring force when the ﬂoors are
displaced relative to each other. We assume that Hooke's Law holds, with propor-
tionality constant ki between the ith and the (i  1)st ﬂoors. That is, the restoring
force between those two ﬂoors is
F  ki(xi1  xi),
where xi1  xi is the displacement (shift) of the (i  1)st ﬂoor relative to the ith ﬂoor.
We also assume a similar reaction between the ﬁrst ﬂoor and the ground, with pro-
portionality constant k0 . Figure 1 shows a model of the building, while Figure 2
shows the forces acting on the ith ﬂoor.
mn
mn1

m2
m1
ground
kn1
kn2

k1
k0
FIGURE 1
Floors of building
mi1
mi
mi1
ki(xi1  xi)
FIGURE 2
Forces on ith ﬂoor
ki1(xi  xil)
Project for Section 8.2
Collapsed apartment building in San
Francisco, October 18, 1989, the day after
the massive Loma Prieta earthquake
P-21
s76/ZUMA Press/Newscom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We can apply Newton's second law of motion (Section 5.1), F  ma, to each
ﬂoor of the building to arrive at the following system of linear differential equations.
As a simple example, consider a two-story building with each ﬂoor having
mass m  5000 kg and each restoring force constant having a value of k  10000 kg/s2.
Then the differential equations are
The solution by the methods of Section 8.2 is
where 
and 
Now suppose that 
the following initial conditions are applied: 
(0)  0. These correspond to a building in the equilibrium position with the ﬁrst
ﬂoor being given a horizontal speed of 0.2 m/s. The solution of the initial value
problem is
where 
See Figures 3 and 4 for
graphs of x1(t) and x2(t). Note that initially x1 moves to the right but is slowed by the
drag of x2, while x2 is initially at rest, but accelerates, due to the pull of x1, to over-
take x1 within one second. It continues to the right, eventually pulling x1 along until
the two-second mark. At that point, the drag of x1 has slowed x2 to a stop, after which
x2 moves left, passing the equilibrium point at 3.2 seconds and continues moving left,
draging x1 along with it. This back-and-forth motion continues. There is no damping
in the system, so that the oscillatory behavior continues forever.
c2  4  v2
20.1>[v2
1  v2
2v1]  0.0317  c4.
 x2(t)  4  v2
1c2 sin v1t  4  v2
2c4 sin v2t,
 x1(t)  2c2 sin v1t  2c4 sin v2t,
x2	
x1(0)  0, x1	(0)  0.2, x2(0)  0,
v2  23  15  0.874.
v1  23  15  2.288,
  4  v2
2c4 sin v2t,
 x2(t)  4  v2
1c1 cos v1t  4  v2
1c2 sin v1t  4  v2
2c3 cos v2t
 x1(t)  2c1 cos v1t  2c2 sin v1t  2c3 cos v2t  2c4 sin v2t,
  d2x2
dt2   2x1  2x2.
 d2x1
dt2   4x1  2x2
m1
d 2x1
dt 2  k0x1  k1(x2  x1)
m2
d 2x2
dt 2  k1(x2  x1)  k2(x3  x2)
o
o
mn
d 2xn
dt2  kn1(xn  xn1).
P-22
●
PROJECTS
EARTHQUAKE SHAKING OF MULTISTORY BUILDINGS
0.1
0.2
t
1
2
3
4
5
−0.1
x2(t)
0.05
0.10
x1(t)
t
1
2
3
4
5
−0.05
−0.10
FIGURE 3
Graph of x1(t)
FIGURE 4
Graph of x2(t)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If a horizontal oscillatory force of frequency 
or 
is applied, we have a sit-
uation analogous to resonance discussed in Section 5.1.3. In that case, large oscil-
lations of the building would be expected to occur, possibly causing great damage
if the earthquake lasted an appreciable length of time.
Let's deﬁne the following matrices and vector:
Then the system of differential equations can be written in matrix form
Note that the matrix M is a diagonal matrix with the mass of the ith ﬂoor being
the ith diagonal element. Matrix M has an inverse given by
.
We can therefore represent the matrix differential equation by
Where 
the matrix M is called the mass matrix, and the matrix K is the
stiffness matrix.
The eigenvalues of the matrix A reveal the stability of the building during an earth-
quake. The eigenvalues of A are negative and distinct. In the ﬁrst example, the eigen-
values are 
and 
The natural frequencies
of the building are the square roots of the negatives of the eigenvalues. If 
is the ith eigen-
value, then 
is the ith frequency, for i  1, 2, . . . , n. During an earth-
quake, a large horizontal force is applied to the ﬁrst ﬂoor. If this is oscillatory in
nature, say of the form F(t)  G cosgt, then large displacements may develop in the
building, especially if the frequency g of the forcing term is close to one of the natural
frequencies of the building. This is reminiscent of the resonance phenomenon studied
in Section 5.1.3.
vi  1li
li
3  15  5.236.
3  15  0.764
A  M1K,
X  (M1K)X  or  X  AX.
M1 
m1
1
0
o
0
0
m1
2
0
0
0
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
0
0
o
m1
n 
M d2X
dt2  KX  or  MX  KX.
 X(t) 
x1(t)
x2(t)
o
xn(t)
K 
(k0  k1)
k1
0
o
0
0
k1
(k1  k2)
k2
0
0
0
k2
(k2  k3)
0
0
0
0
k3
0
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
0
0
0
kn2
0
0
0
0
(kn2  kn1)
kn1
0
0
0
o
kn1
kn1
 M 
m1
0
o
1
0
m2
0
0
0
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
0
0
o
mn
,
v2
v1
PROJECTS
EARTHQUAKE SHAKING OF MULTISTORY BUILDINGS
●
P-23
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P-24
●
PROJECTS
EARTHQUAKE SHAKING OF MULTISTORY BUILDINGS
As another example, suppose we have a 10-story building, where each ﬂoor has a
mass 10000 kg, and each ki value is 5000 kg/s2. Then
The eigenvalues of A are found easily using Mathematica or another similar computer
package. These values are 1.956, 1.826, 1.623, 1.365, 1.075, 0.777,
0.5, 0.267, 0.099, and 0.011, with corresponding frequencies 1.399, 1.351,
1.274, 1.168, 1.037, 0.881, 0.707, 0.517, 0.315, and 0.105 and periods of oscillation
(2p/v) 4.491, 4.651, 4.932, 5.379, 6.059, 7.132, 8.887, 12.153, 19.947, and 59.840.
During a typical earthquake whose period might be in the range of 2 to 3 seconds, this
building does not seem to be in any danger of developing resonance. However, if
the k values were 10 times as large (multiply A by 10), then, for example, the sixth
period would be 2.253 seconds, while the ﬁfth through seventh are all on the order of
2-3 seconds. Such a building is more likely to suffer damage in a typical earthquake
of period 2-3 seconds.
Related Problems
1. Consider a three-story building with the same m and k values as in the ﬁrst exam-
ple. Write down the corresponding system of differential equations. What are the
matrices M, K, and A? Find the eigenvalues for A. What range of frequencies of
an earthquake would place the building in danger of destruction?
2. Consider a three-story building with the same m and k values as in the second
example. Write down the corresponding system of differential equations. What
are the matrices M, K, and A? Find the eigenvalues for A. What range of fre-
quencies of an earthquake would place the building in danger of destruction?
3. Consider the tallest building on your campus. Assume reasonable values for the
mass of each ﬂoor and for the proportionality constants between ﬂoors. If you
have trouble coming up with such values, use the ones in the example problems.
Find the matrices M, K, and A, and ﬁnd the eigenvalues of A and the frequen-
cies and periods of oscillation. Is your building safe from a modest-sized period-
2 earthquake? What if you multiplied the matrix K by 10 (that is, made the
building stiffer)? What would you have to multiply the matrix K by in order to
put your building in the danger zone?
4. Solve the earthquake problem for the three-story building of Problem 1:
,
where F(t) = G cosgt, G = EB, B = [1
0
0]T, E = 10,000 lbs is the amplitude
of the earthquake force acting at ground level, and g = 3 is the frequency of the
earthquake (a typical earthquake frequency). See Section 8.3 for the method of
solving nonhomogeneous matrix differential equations. Use initial conditions
for a building at rest.
MX  KX  F(t)
A  M1K 
 
1
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
1
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
1
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
1
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
1
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
1
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
1
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
1
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
1
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
0.5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Modeling Arms Races
by Michael Olinick
The last hundred years have seen numerous dangerous, destabilizing, and expensive
arms races. The outbreak of World War I climaxed a rapid buildup of armaments
among rival European powers. There was a similar mutual accumulation of conven-
tional arms just prior to World War II. The United States and the Soviet Union en-
gaged in a costly nuclear arms race during the forty years of the Cold War. Stockpiling
of ever-more deadly weapons is common today in many parts of the world, including
the Middle East, the Indian subcontinent, and the Korean peninsula.
British meteorologist and educator Lewis F. Richardson (1881-1953) developed
several mathematical models to analyze the dynamics of arms races, the evolution
over time of the process of interaction between countries in their acquisition of
weapons. Arms race models generally assume that each nation adjusts its accumula-
tion of weapons in some manner dependent on the size of its own stockpile and the
armament levels of the other nations.
Richardson's primary model of a two country arms race is based on mutual
fear: A nation is spurred to increase its arms stockpile at a rate proportional to the
level of armament expenditures of its rival. Richardson's model takes into account
internal constraints within a nation that slow down arms buildups: The more a
nation is spending on arms, the harder it is to make greater increases, because it
becomes increasingly difﬁcult to divert society's resources from basic needs such
as food and housing to weapons. Richardson also built into his model other factors
driving or slowing down an arms race that are independent of levels of arms expen-
ditures.
The mathematical structure of this model is a linked system of two ﬁrst-order
linear differential equations. If x and y represent the amount of wealth being spent on
arms by two nations at time t, then the model has the form
where a, b, m, and n are positive constants while r and s are constants which can be
positive or negative. The constants a and b measure mutual fear; the constants m and
n represent proportionality factors for the "internal brakes" to further arms increases.
Positive values for r and s correspond to underlying factors of ill will or distrust that
would persist even if arms expenditures dropped to zero. Negative values for r and s
indicate a contribution based on goodwill.
The dynamic behavior of this system of differential equations depends on the
relative sizes of ab and mn together with the signs of r and s. Although the model
is a relatively simple one, it allows us to consider several different long-term out-
comes. It's possible that two nations might move simultaneously toward mutual
disarmament, with x and y each approaching zero. A vicious cycle of unbounded
increases in x and y is another possible scenario. A third eventuality is that the arms
expenditures asymptotically approach a stable point (x*, y*) regardless of the initial
level of arms expenditures. In other cases, the eventual outcome depends on the
starting point. Figure 1 shows one possible situation with four different initial
 dy
dt  bx  ny  s
 dx
dt  ay  mx  r
P-25
Project for Section 8.3
Weapons and ammunition recovered during
military operations against Taliban militants
in South Waziristan in October 2009
NICOLAS ASFOURI/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

levels, each of which leads to a "stable outcome," the intersection of the nullclines
dxdt  0 and dydt  0.
Although "real world" arms races seldom match exactly with Richardson's model,
his pioneering work has led to many fruitful applications of differential equation models
to problems in international relations and political science. As two leading researchers in
the ﬁeld note in [3], "The Richardson arms race model constitutes one of the most impor-
tant models of arms race phenomena and, at the same time, one of the most inﬂuential
formal models in all of the international relations literature."
Arms races are not limited to the interaction of nation states. They can take place
between a government and a paramilitary terrorist group within its borders as, for ex-
ample, the Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka, the Shining Path in Peru, or the Taliban in
Afghanistan. Arms phenomena have also been observed between rival urban gangs
and between law enforcement agencies and organized crime.
The "arms" need not even be weapons. Colleges have engaged in "amenities
arms races," often spending millions of dollars on more luxurious dormitories,
state- of-the-art athletic facilities, epicurean dining options, and the like, to be more
competitive in attracting student applications. Biologists have identiﬁed the possi-
bility of evolutionary arms races between and within species as an adaptation in one
lineage may change the selection pressure on another lineage, giving rise to a counter-
adaptation. Most generally, the assumptions represented in a Richardson-type
model also characterize many competitions in which each side perceives a need to
stay ahead of the other in some mutually important measure.
Related Problems
1. (a) By substituting the proposed solutions into the differential equations, show
that the solution of the particular Richardson arms model
 dy
dt  2x  4y  8
 dx
dt  y  3x  3
P-26
●
PROJECTS
MODELING ARMS RACES
dx/dt = 0
y
x
dy/dt = 0
1
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
6
FIGURE 1
Expenditures approaching a stable point
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

with initial condition x(0)  12, y(0)  15 is
What is the long-term behavior of this arms race?
(b) For the Richardson arms race model (a) with arbitrary initial conditions
x(0)  A, y(0)  B, show that the solution is given by
x(t)  Ce5t  De2t  2
C  (A  B  1)3
where
y(t)  2Ce5t  De2t  3
D  (2A  B  7)3
Show that this result implies that the qualitative long-term behavior of such an
arms race is the same (x(t) : 2, y(t) : 3), no matter what the initial values of x
and y are.
2. The qualitative long-term behavior of a Richardson arms race model can, in
some cases, depend on the initial conditions. Consider, for example, the system
For each of the given initial conditions below, verify that the proposed solu-
tion works and discuss the long-term behavior:
(a) x(0)  1, y(0)  1 : x(t)  10  9et, y(t)  10  9et
(b) x(0)  1, y(0)  22 : x(t)  10  9e6t, y(t)  10  12e6t
(c) x(0)  1, y(0)  29 : x(t)  12e6t  3et  10, y(t)  16e6t  3et  10
(d) x(0)  10, y(0)  10 : x(t)  10, y(t)  10 for all t
3. (a) As a possible alternative to the Richardson model, consider a stock adjustment
model for an arms race. The assumption here is that each country sets a desired
level of arms expenditures for itself and then changes its weapons stock pro-
portionally to the gap between its current level and the desired one. Show that
this assumption can be represented by the system of differential equations
where x* and y* are desired constant levels and a, b are positive constants.
How will x and y evolve over time under such a model?
(b) Generalize the stock adjustment model of (a) to a more realistic one where
the desired level for each country depends on the levels of both countries. In
particular, suppose x* has the form x*  c  dy where c and d are positive
constants and that y* has a similar format. Show that, under these assump-
tions, the stock adjustment model is equivalent to a Richardson model.
4. Extend the Richardson model to three nations, deriving a system of linear differen-
tial equations if the three are mutually fearful: each one is spurred to arm by the ex-
penditures of the other two. How might the equations change if two of the nations
are close allies not threatened by the arms buildup of each other, but fearful of the
armaments of the third. Investigate the long-term behavior of such arms races.
5. In the real world, an unbounded runaway arms race is impossible since there is
an absolute limit to the amount any country can spend on weapons; e.g. gross na-
tional product minus some amount for survival. Modify the Richardson model to
incorporate this idea and analyze the dynamics of an arms race governed by
these new differential equations.
 dx
dt  b(y*  y)
 dx
dt  a(x*  x)
 dy
dt  4x  3y  10
 dx
dt  3y  2x  10
 y(t)  32
3 e2t  4
3e5t  3
 x(t)  32
3 e2t  2
3e5t  2
PROJECTS
MODELING ARMS RACES
●
P-27
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

References
1. Richardson, Lewis F., Arms and Insecurity: A Mathematical Study of the Causes
and Origins of War. Pittsburgh: Boxwood Press, 1960.
2. Olinick, Michael, An Introduction to Mathematical Models in the Social and
Life Sciences. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1978.
3. Intriligator, Michael D., and Dagobert L. Brito, "Richardsonian Arms Race
Models" in Manus I. Midlarsky, ed., Handbook of War Studies. Boston: Unwin
Hyman, 1989.
P-28
●
PROJECTS
MODELING ARMS RACES
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
After earning a BA in mathematics and philosophy at the University of Michigan and
an MA and PhD from the University of Wisconsin (Madison), Michael Olinick
moved from the Midwest to New England where he joined the Middlebury College
faculty in 1970 and now serves as Professor of Mathematics. Dr. Olinick has held
visiting positions at University College Nairobi, University of California at Berkeley,
Wesleyan University, and Lancaster University in Great Britain. He is the author or
co-author of a number of books on single and multivariable calculus, mathematical
modeling, probability, topology, and principles and practice of mathematics. He is
currently developing a new textbook on mathematical models in the humanities,
social, and life sciences.
Courtesy of Michael Olinick
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
1.1 Deﬁnitions and Terminology
1.2 Initial-Value Problems
1.3 Differential Equations as Mathematical Models
Chapter 1 in Review
The words differential and equations certainly suggest solving some kind of
equation that contains derivatives y, y, . . . . Analogous to a course in algebra and
trigonometry, in which a good amount of time is spent solving equations such as
x2  5x  4  0 for the unknown number x, in this course one of our tasks will be
to solve differential equations such as y  2y  y  0 for an unknown function
y  (x).
The preceding paragraph tells something, but not the complete story, about
the course you are about to begin. As the course unfolds, you will see that there is
more to the study of differential equations than just mastering methods that
mathematicians over past centuries devised to solve them.
But ﬁrst things ﬁrst. In order to read, study, and be conversant in a specialized
subject, you have to master some of the terminology of that discipline. This is the
thrust of the ﬁrst two sections of this chapter. In the last section we brieﬂy examine
the link between differential equations and the real world. Practical questions
such as
How fast does a disease spread ? How fast does a population change?
involve rates of change or derivatives. And so the mathematical description—or
mathematical model—of phenomena, experiments, observations, or theories may
be a differential equation.
1
Introduction to Differential Equations
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
A Deﬁnition
The equation that we made up in (1) is called a differential
equation. Before proceeding any further, let us consider a more precise deﬁnition of
this concept.
DEFINITION 1.1.1
Differential Equation
An equation containing the derivatives of one or more unknown functions (or
dependent variables), with respect to one or more independent variables, is said
to be a differential equation (DE).
To talk about them, we shall classify differential equations according to type, order,
and linearity.
Classiﬁcation by Type
If a differential equation contains only ordinary de-
rivatives of one or more unknown functions with respect to a single independent
variable, it is said to be an ordinary differential equation (ODE). An equation in-
volving partial derivatives of one or more unknown functions of two or more inde-
pendent variables is called a partial differential equation (PDE). Our ﬁrst example
illustrates several of each type of differential equation.
EXAMPLE 1
Types of Differential Equations
(a) The equations
an ODE can contain more
than one unknown function
(2)
are examples of ordinary differential equations.
dy
dx  5y  ex,  d2y
dx2  dy
dx  6y  0,  and  dx
dt  dy
dt  2x  y
b  b
DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY
REVIEW MATERIAL
●The deﬁnition of the derivative
●Rules of differentiation
●Derivative as a rate of change
●Connection between the ﬁrst derivative and increasing/decreasing
●Connection between the second derivative and concavity
INTRODUCTION
The derivative dydx of a function y  (x) is itself another function (x)
found by an appropriate rule. The exponential function 
is differentiable on the interval
(, ), and, by the Chain Rule, its ﬁrst derivative is 
. If we replace 
on the
right-hand side of the last equation by the symbol y, the derivative becomes
.
(1)
Now imagine that a friend of yours simply hands you equation (1)—you have no idea how it was
constructed—and asks, What is the function represented by the symbol y? You are now face to face
with one of the basic problems in this course: 
How do you solve such an equation for the function y  (x)?
dy
dx  0.2xy
e0.1x2
dy>dx  0.2xe0.1x2
y  e0.1x2
1.1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(b) The following equations are partial differential equations:*
(3)
Notice in the third equation that there are two unknown functions and two indepen-
dent variables in the PDE. This means u and v must be functions of two or more
independent variables.
Notation
Throughout this text ordinary derivatives will be written by using
2u
x2  2u
y2  0,  2u
x2  2u
t2  2u
t,  u
y  v
x.
1.1
DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY
●
3
*Except for this introductory section, only ordinary differential equations are considered in A First Course
in Differential Equations with Modeling Applications, Tenth Edition. In that text the word equation and
the abbreviation DE refer only to ODEs. Partial differential equations or PDEs are considered in the
expanded volume Differential Equations with Boundary-Value Problems, Eighth Edition.
either the Leibniz notation dydx, d2ydx2, d3ydx3, . . . or the prime notation y, y,
y	, . . . . By using the latter notation, the ﬁrst two differential equations in (2) can be
written a little more compactly as y  5y  ex and y  y  6y  0. Actually, the
prime notation is used to denote only the ﬁrst three derivatives; the fourth derivative
is written y(4) instead of y. In general, the nth derivative of y is written dnydxn or
y(n). Although less convenient to write and to typeset, the Leibniz notation has an ad-
vantage over the prime notation in that it clearly displays both the dependent and
independent variables. For example, in the equation
it is immediately seen that the symbol x now represents a dependent variable,
whereas the independent variable is t. You should also be aware that in physical
sciences and engineering, Newton's dot notation (derogatorily referred to by some
as the "ﬂyspeck" notation) is sometimes used to denote derivatives with respect
to time t. Thus the differential equation d2sdt2  32 becomes ¨s  32. Partial
derivatives are often denoted by a subscript notation indicating the indepen-
dent variables. For example, with the subscript notation the second equation in
(3) becomes uxx  utt  2ut.
Classiﬁcation by Order
The order of a differential equation (either ODE
or PDE) is the order of the highest derivative in the equation. For example,
is a second-order ordinary differential equation. In Example 1, the ﬁrst and third
equations in (2) are ﬁrst-order ODEs, whereas in (3) the ﬁrst two equations are
second-order PDEs. First-order ordinary differential equations are occasionally writ-
ten in differential form M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0. For example, if we assume that
y denotes the dependent variable in (y  x) dx  4x dy  0, then y  dydx, so by
dividing by the differential dx, we get the alternative form 4xy  y  x.
In symbols we can express an nth-order ordinary differential equation in one
dependent variable by the general form
,
(4)
where F is a real-valued function of n  2 variables: x, y, y, . . . , y(n). For both prac-
tical and theoretical reasons we shall also make the assumption hereafter that it is
possible to solve an ordinary differential equation in the form (4) uniquely for the
F(x,  y,  y, . . . , y(n))  0
first order
second order
 5(     )
3
  4y  e x
dy
---
dx
d 2y
----
dx2
d 2x
---
dt2  16x  0
unknown function
or dependent variable
independent variable
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

highest derivative y(n) in terms of the remaining n  1 variables. The differential
equation
,
(5)
where f is a real-valued continuous function, is referred to as the normal form of (4).
Thus when it suits our purposes, we shall use the normal forms
to represent general ﬁrst- and second-order ordinary differential equations. For example,
the normal form of the ﬁrst-order equation 4xy  y  x is y  (x  y)4x; the normal
form of the second-order equation y  y  6y  0 is y  y  6y. See (iv) in the
Remarks.
Classiﬁcation by Linearity
An nth-order ordinary differential equation (4)
dy
dx  f (x, y)    and    d 2y
dx2  f (x, y, y)
d ny
dxn  f (x, y, y, . . . , y(n1))
4
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 2
Linear and Nonlinear ODEs
(a) The equations
are, in turn, linear ﬁrst-, second-, and third-order ordinary differential equations. We
have just demonstrated that the ﬁrst equation is linear in the variable y by writing it in
the alternative form 4xy  y  x. 
(b) The equations
are examples of nonlinear ﬁrst-, second-, and fourth-order ordinary differential equa-
tions, respectively.
nonlinear term:
coefﬁcient depends on y
nonlinear term:
nonlinear function of y
nonlinear term:
power not 1
(1  y)y  2y  ex,
 sin y  0,
and
d 2y
----
dx2
 y 2  0
d 4y
----
dx 4
(y  x)dx  4xy dy  0,  y  2y  y  0,  x3 d 3y
dx3  x dy
dx  5y  ex
is said to be linear if F is linear in y, y, . . . , y(n). This means that an nth-order ODE is
linear when (4) is an(x)y(n)  an1(x)y(n1)  
 
 
  a1(x)y  a0(x)y  g(x)  0 or
.
(6)
Two important special cases of (6) are linear ﬁrst-order (n  1) and linear second-
order (n  2) DEs:
.
(7)
In the additive combination on the left-hand side of equation (6) we see that the char-
acteristic two properties of a linear ODE are as follows:
•
The dependent variable y and all its derivatives y, y, . . . , y(n) are of the
ﬁrst degree, that is, the power of each term involving y is 1.
•
The coefﬁcients a0, a1, . . . , an of y, y, . . . , y(n) depend at most on the
independent variable x.
A nonlinear ordinary differential equation is simply one that is not linear. Nonlinear
functions of the dependent variable or its derivatives, such as sin y or 
, cannot
appear in a linear equation.
ey
a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  g(x)    and    a2(x) d 2y
dx2  a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  g(x)
an(x) d ny
dxn  an1(x) d n1y
dxn1  
 
 
  a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  g(x)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solutions
As was stated before, one of the goals in this course is to solve, or
ﬁnd solutions of, differential equations. In the next deﬁnition we consider the con-
cept of a solution of an ordinary differential equation.
1.1
DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY
●
5
DEFINITION 1.1.2
Solution of an ODE
Any function , deﬁned on an interval I and possessing at least n derivatives
that are continuous on I, which when substituted into an nth-order ordinary dif-
ferential equation reduces the equation to an identity, is said to be a solution of
the equation on the interval.
In other words, a solution of an nth-order ordinary differential equation (4) is a func-
tion  that possesses at least n derivatives and for which
We say that  satisﬁes the differential equation on I. For our purposes we shall also
assume that a solution  is a real-valued function. In our introductory discussion we
saw that 
is a solution of dydx  0.2xy on the interval (, ).
Occasionally, it will be convenient to denote a solution by the alternative
symbol y(x).
Interval of Deﬁnition
You cannot think solution of an ordinary differential
equation without simultaneously thinking interval. The interval I in Deﬁnition 1.1.2
is variously called the interval of deﬁnition, the interval of existence, the interval
of validity, or the domain of the solution and can be an open interval (a, b), a closed
interval [a, b], an inﬁnite interval (a, ), and so on.
y  e0.1x2
F(x, (x), (x), . . . , (n)(x))  0    for all x in I.
EXAMPLE 3
Veriﬁcation of a Solution
Verify that the indicated function is a solution of the given differential equation on
the interval (, ).
(a)
(b)
SOLUTION
One way of verifying that the given function is a solution is to see,
after substituting, whether each side of the equation is the same for every x in the
interval.
(a) From
we see that each side of the equation is the same for every real number x. Note that
is, by deﬁnition, the nonnegative square root of 
.
(b) From the derivatives y  xex  ex and y  xex  2ex we have, for every real
number x,
 right-hand side:   0.
 left-hand side:  
 y  2y  y  (xex  2ex)  2(xex  ex)  xex  0,
1
16 x4
y1/2  1
4 x2
 right-hand side:     xy1/2  x 
1
16 x4
1/2
 x 
1
4 x2  1
4 x3,
 left-hand side:    
 dy
dx  1
16 (4  x3)  1
4 x3,
y  2y  y  0; y  xex
dy>dx  xy1/2; y  1
16 x4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note, too, that in Example 3 each differential equation possesses the constant so-
lution y  0,   x  . A solution of a differential equation that is identically
zero on an interval I is said to be a trivial solution.
Solution Curve
The graph of a solution  of an ODE is called a solution
curve. Since  is a differentiable function, it is continuous on its interval I of deﬁni-
tion. Thus there may be a difference between the graph of the function  and the
graph of the solution . Put another way, the domain of the function  need not be
the same as the interval I of deﬁnition (or domain) of the solution . Example 4
illustrates the difference.
6
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
1
x
y
1
(a) function y  1/x, x  0
(b) solution y  1/x, (0, )
1
x
y
1
FIGURE 1.1.1
In Example 4 the
function y  1x is not the same as the
solution y  1x
EXAMPLE 4
Function versus Solution
The domain of y  1x, considered simply as a function, is the set of all real
numbers x except 0. When we graph y  1x, we plot points in the xy-plane cor-
responding to a judicious sampling of numbers taken from its domain. The ratio-
nal function y  1x is discontinuous at 0, and its graph, in a neighborhood of
the origin, is given in Figure 1.1.1(a). The function y  1x is not differentiable at
x  0, since the y-axis (whose equation is x  0) is a vertical asymptote of the
graph.
Now y  1x is also a solution of the linear ﬁrst-order differential equation
xy  y  0. (Verify.) But when we say that y  1x is a solution of this DE, we
mean that it is a function deﬁned on an interval I on which it is differentiable and
satisﬁes the equation. In other words, y  1x is a solution of the DE on any inter-
val that does not contain 0, such as (3, 1), 
, (, 0), or (0, ). Because
the solution curves deﬁned by y  1x for 3  x  1 and 
are sim-
ply segments, or pieces, of the solution curves deﬁned by y  1x for   x  0
and 0  x  , respectively, it makes sense to take the interval I to be as large as
possible. Thus we take I to be either (, 0) or (0, ). The solution curve on (0, )
is shown in Figure 1.1.1(b).
Explicit and Implicit Solutions
You should be familiar with the terms
explicit functions and implicit functions from your study of calculus. A solution in
which the dependent variable is expressed solely in terms of the independent
variable and constants is said to be an explicit solution. For our purposes, let us
think of an explicit solution as an explicit formula y  (x) that we can manipulate,
evaluate, and differentiate using the standard rules. We have just seen in the last two
examples that 
, y  xex, and y  1x are, in turn, explicit solutions
of dydx  xy1/2, y  2y  y  0, and xy  y  0. Moreover, the trivial solu-
tion y  0 is an explicit solution of all three equations. When we get down to
the business of actually solving some ordinary differential equations, you will
see that methods of solution do not always lead directly to an explicit solution
y  (x). This is particularly true when we attempt to solve nonlinear ﬁrst-order
differential equations. Often we have to be content with a relation or expression
G(x, y)  0 that deﬁnes a solution  implicitly.
y  1
16 x4
1
2  x  10
(1
2, 10)
DEFINITION 1.1.3
Implicit Solution of an ODE
A relation G(x, y)  0 is said to be an implicit solution of an ordinary
differential equation (4) on an interval I, provided that there exists at least one
function  that satisﬁes the relation as well as the differential equation on I.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

It is beyond the scope of this course to investigate the conditions under which a
relation G(x, y)  0 deﬁnes a differentiable function . So we shall assume that if
the formal implementation of a method of solution leads to a relation G(x, y)  0,
then there exists at least one function  that satisﬁes both the relation (that is,
G(x, (x))  0) and the differential equation on an interval I. If the implicit solution
G(x, y)  0 is fairly simple, we may be able to solve for y in terms of x and obtain
one or more explicit solutions. See (i) in the Remarks.
1.1
DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY
●
7
y
x
5
5
y
x
5
5
y
x
5
5
−5
(a) implicit solution
x2  y2  25
(b) explicit solution
y1 


25
x2,
5  x  5
(c) explicit solution
y2  25  x2, 5  x  5
(a)
FIGURE 1.1.2
An implicit solution
and two explicit solutions of (8) in
Example 5
FIGURE 1.1.3
Some solutions of DE
in part (a) of Example 6
y
x
c>0
c<0
c=0
EXAMPLE 5
Veriﬁcation of an Implicit Solution
The relation x2  y2  25 is an implicit solution of the differential equation
(8)
on the open interval (5, 5). By implicit differentiation we obtain
.
Solving the last equation for the symbol dydx gives (8). Moreover, solving
x2  y2  25 for y in terms of x yields 
. The two functions
and 
satisfy the relation (that is,
x2  12  25 and x2  22  25) and are explicit solutions deﬁned on the interval
(5, 5). The solution curves given in Figures 1.1.2(b) and 1.1.2(c) are segments of
the graph of the implicit solution in Figure 1.1.2(a).
Any relation of the form x2  y2  c  0 formally satisﬁes (8) for any constant c.
However, it is understood that the relation should always make sense in the real number
system; thus, for example, if c  25, we cannot say that x2  y2  25  0 is an
implicit solution of the equation. (Why not?)
Because the distinction between an explicit solution and an implicit solution
should be intuitively clear, we will not belabor the issue by always saying, "Here is
an explicit (implicit) solution."
Families of Solutions
The study of differential equations is similar to that of
integral calculus. In some texts a solution  is sometimes referred to as an integral
of the equation, and its graph is called an integral curve. When evaluating an anti-
derivative or indeﬁnite integral in calculus, we use a single constant c of integration.
Analogously, when solving a ﬁrst-order differential equation F(x, y, y)  0, we
usually obtain a solution containing a single arbitrary constant or parameter c. A
solution containing an arbitrary constant represents a set G(x, y, c)  0 of solutions
called a one-parameter family of solutions. When solving an nth-order differential
equation F(x, y, y, . . . , y(n))  0, we seek an n-parameter family of solutions
G(x, y, c1, c2, . . . , cn)  0. This means that a single differential equation can possess
an inﬁnite number of solutions corresponding to the unlimited number of choices
for the parameter(s). A solution of a differential equation that is free of arbitrary
parameters is called a particular solution.
y  2(x)  125  x2
y  1(x)  125  x2
y  225  x2
d
dx x2  d
dx y2  d
dx 25    or    2x  2y dy
dx  0
dy
dx  x
y
EXAMPLE 6
Particular Solutions
(a) The one-parameter family 
is an explicit solution of the linear
ﬁrst-order equation 
on the interval (, ). (Verify.) Figure 1.1.3 shows the graphs of some particular
solutions in this family for various choices of c. The solution y  x cos x, the blue
graph in the ﬁgure, is a particular solution corresponding to c  0. 
xy  y  x2 sin x
y  cx  x cos x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(b) The two-parameter family y  c1ex  c2xex is an explicit solution of the linear
second-order equation 
y  2y  y  0
in part (b) of Example 3. (Verify.) In Figure 1.1.4 we have shown seven of the "dou-
ble inﬁnity" of solutions in the family. The solution curves in red, green, and blue
are the graphs of the particular solutions y  5xex (cl  0, c2  5), y  3ex (cl  3,
c2  0), and y  5ex  2xex (c1  5, c2  2), respectively.
Sometimes a differential equation possesses a solution that is not a member of a
family of solutions of the equation—that is, a solution that cannot be obtained by spe-
cializing any of the parameters in the family of solutions. Such an extra solution is called
a singular solution. For example, we have seen that 
and y  0 are solutions of
the differential equation dydx  xy1/2 on (, ). In Section 2.2 we shall demonstrate,
by actually solving it, that the differential equation dydx  xy1/2 possesses the one-
parameter family of solutions 
. When c  0, the resulting particular
solution is 
. But notice that the trivial solution y  0 is a singular solution, since
it is not a member of the family 
; there is no way of assigning a value to
the constant c to obtain y  0.
In all the preceding examples we used x and y to denote the independent and
dependent variables, respectively. But you should become accustomed to seeing
and working with other symbols to denote these variables. For example, we could
denote the independent variable by t and the dependent variable by x.
y  (1
4 x2  c)
2
y  1
16 x4
y  (1
4 x2  c)
2
y  1
16 x4
8
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
FIGURE 1.1.5
Some solutions of DE
in Example 8
(a) two explicit solutions
(b) piecewise-defined solution
c = 1
c = −1
x
y
c = 1,
x
0
≤
c = −1,
x < 0
x
y
FIGURE 1.1.4
Some solutions
of DE in part (b) of Example 6
y
x
EXAMPLE 7
Using Different Symbols
The functions x  c1 cos 4t and x  c2 sin 4t, where c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants
or parameters, are both solutions of the linear differential equation
For x  c1 cos 4t the ﬁrst two derivatives with respect to t are x  4c1 sin 4t
and x  16c1 cos 4t. Substituting x and x then gives
In like manner, for x  c2 sin 4t we have x  16c2 sin 4t, and so
Finally, it is straightforward to verify that the linear combination of solutions, or the
two-parameter family x  c1 cos 4t  c2 sin 4t, is also a solution of the differential
equation.
The next example shows that a solution of a differential equation can be a
piecewise-deﬁned function.
x  16x  16c2 sin 4t  16(c2 sin 4t)  0.
x  16x 16c1 cos 4t  16(c1 cos 4t)  0.
x  16x  0.
EXAMPLE 8
Piecewise-Deﬁned Solution
The one-parameter family of quartic monomial functions y  cx4 is an explicit solu-
tion of the linear ﬁrst-order equation
xy  4y  0
on the interval (, ). (Verify.) The blue and red solution curves shown in
Figure 1.1.5(a) are the graphs of y  x4 and y  x4 and correspond to the choices
c  1 and c  1, respectively.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The piecewise-deﬁned differentiable function 
is also a solution of the differential equation but cannot be obtained from the family
y  cx4 by a single choice of c. As seen in Figure 1.1.5(b) the solution is constructed
from the family by choosing c  1 for x  0 and c  1 for x  0.
Systems of Differential Equations
Up to this point we have been
discussing single differential equations containing one unknown function. But
often in theory, as well as in many applications, we must deal with systems of
differential equations. A system of ordinary differential equations is two or more
equations involving the derivatives of two or more unknown functions of a single
independent variable. For example, if x and y denote dependent variables and t
denotes the independent variable, then a system of two ﬁrst-order differential
equations is given by
(9)
A solution of a system such as (9) is a pair of differentiable functions x  1(t),
y  2(t), deﬁned on a common interval I, that satisfy each equation of the system
on this interval.
dy
dt  g(t, x, y).
dx
dt  f(t, x, y)
y 
x4,    x  0
x4,    x  0
1.1
DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY
●
9
REMARKS
(i) A few last words about implicit solutions of differential equations are in
order. In Example 5 we were able to solve the relation x2  y2  25 for
y in terms of x to get two explicit solutions, 
and
, of the differential equation (8). But don't read too much
into this one example. Unless it is easy or important or you are instructed to,
there is usually no need to try to solve an implicit solution G(x, y)  0 for y
explicitly in terms of x. Also do not misinterpret the second sentence following
Deﬁnition 1.1.3. An implicit solution G(x, y)  0 can deﬁne a perfectly good
differentiable function  that is a solution of a DE, yet we might not be able to
solve G(x, y)  0 using analytical methods such as algebra. The solution curve
of  may be a segment or piece of the graph of G(x, y)  0. See Problems 45
and 46 in Exercises 1.1. Also, read the discussion following Example 4 in
Section 2.2.
(ii) Although the concept of a solution has been emphasized in this section,
you should also be aware that a DE does not necessarily have to possess
a solution. See Problem 39 in Exercises 1.1. The question of whether a
solution exists will be touched on in the next section.
(iii) It might not be apparent whether a ﬁrst-order ODE written in differential
form M(x, y)dx  N(x, y)dy  0 is linear or nonlinear because there is nothing
in this form that tells us which symbol denotes the dependent variable. See
Problems 9 and 10 in Exercises 1.1.
(iv) It might not seem like a big deal to assume that F(x, y, y, . . . , y(n))  0 can
be solved for y(n), but one should be a little bit careful here. There are exceptions,
and there certainly are some problems connected with this assumption. See
Problems 52 and 53 in Exercises 1.1.
(v) You may run across the term closed form solutions in DE texts or in
lectures in courses in differential equations. Translated, this phrase usually
2(x)  125  x2
1(x)  125  x2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
refers to explicit solutions that are expressible in terms of elementary (or
familiar) functions: ﬁnite combinations of integer powers of x, roots, exponen-
tial and logarithmic functions, and trigonometric and inverse trigonometric
functions.
(vi) If every solution of an nth-order ODE F(x, y, y, . . . , y(n))  0 on an inter-
val I can be obtained from an n-parameter family G(x, y, c1, c2, . . . , cn)  0 by
appropriate choices of the parameters ci, i  1, 2, . . . , n, we then say that the
family is the general solution of the DE. In solving linear ODEs, we shall im-
pose relatively simple restrictions on the coefﬁcients of the equation; with these
restrictions one can be assured that not only does a solution exist on an interval
but also that a family of solutions yields all possible solutions. Nonlinear ODEs,
with the exception of some ﬁrst-order equations, are usually difﬁcult or impos-
sible to solve in terms of elementary functions. Furthermore, if we happen to
obtain a family of solutions for a nonlinear equation, it is not obvious whether
this family contains all solutions. On a practical level, then, the designation
"general solution" is applied only to linear ODEs. Don't be concerned about
this concept at this point, but store the words "general solution" in the back of
your mind—we will come back to this notion in Section 2.3 and again in
Chapter 4.
EXERCISES 1.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-1.
In Problems 1-8 state the order of the given ordinary differ-
ential equation. Determine whether the equation is linear or
nonlinear by matching it with (6).
1. (1  x)y  4xy 5y  cos x
2.
3. t5y(4)  t3y  6y  0
4.
5.
6.
7. (sin )y	  (cos )y  2
8.
In Problems 9 and 10 determine whether the given 
ﬁrst-order differential equation is linear in the indicated
dependent variable by matching it with the ﬁrst differential
equation given in (7).
9. (y2  1) dx  x dy  0; in y; in x
10. u dv  (v  uv  ueu) du  0; in v; in u
¨x 1  x. 2
3x.  x  0
d 2R
dt 2   k
R2
d 2y
dx 2  B1 
dy
dx
2
d 2u
dr 2  du
dr  u  cos(r  u)
x d3y
dx3 
dy
dx
4
 y  0
In Problems 11-14 verify that the indicated function is an
explicit solution of the given differential equation. Assume
an appropriate interval I of deﬁnition for each solution.
11. 2y  y  0;
y  ex/2
12.
13. y  6y  13y  0;
y  e3x cos 2x
14. y  y  tan x;
y  (cos x)ln(sec x  tan x)
In Problems 15-18 verify that the indicated function 
y  (x) is an explicit solution of the given ﬁrst-order
differential equation. Proceed as in Example 2, by consider-
ing  simply as a function, give its domain. Then by consid-
ering  as a solution of the differential equation, give at least
one interval I of deﬁnition.
15.
16. y  25  y2;
y  5 tan 5x
17. y  2xy2;
y  1(4  x2)
18. 2y  y3 cos x;
y  (1  sin x)1/2
In Problems 19 and 20 verify that the indicated expression is
an implicit solution of the given ﬁrst-order differential equa-
tion. Find at least one explicit solution y  (x) in each case.
(y  x)y  y  x  8;  y  x  42x  2
dy
dt  20y  24;  y  6
5  6
5 e20t
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Use a graphing utility to obtain the graph of an explicit solu-
tion. Give an interval I of deﬁnition of each solution .
19.
20. 2xy dx  (x2  y) dy  0;
2x2y  y2  1
In Problems 21-24 verify that the indicated family of func-
tions is a solution of the given differential equation. Assume
an appropriate interval I of deﬁnition for each solution.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25. Verify that the piecewise-deﬁned function
is a solution of the differential equation xy  2y  0
on (, ).
26. In Example 5 we saw that y  1(x) 
and
are solutions of dydx 
xy on the interval (5, 5). Explain why the piecewise-
deﬁned function
is not a solution of the differential equation on the
interval (5, 5).
In Problems 27-30 ﬁnd values of m so that the function
y  emx is a solution of the given differential equation. 
27. y  2y  0
28. 5y  2y
29. y  5y  6y  0
30. 2y  7y  4y  0
In Problems 31 and 32 ﬁnd values of m so that the function
y  xm is a solution of the given differential equation. 
31. xy  2y  0
32. x2y  7xy  15y  0
y 
125  x2,   
125  x2,
5  x  0
 0 	 x  5
y  
2(x)  125  x2
125  x2
y 
x2, x  0
  x2, x  0
y  c1x1  c2x  c3x ln x  4x2
x3  d 3y
dx3  2x2  d 2y
dx2  x dy
dx  y  12x2;
d 2y
dx2  4 dy
dx  4y  0; y  c1e2x  c2xe2x
dy
dx  2xy  1; y  ex2
x
0
 et2 dt  c1ex2
dP
dt  P(1  P); P 
c1et
1  c1et
dX
dt  (X  1)(1  2X);  ln
2X  1
X  1  t
1.1
DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY
●
11
In Problems 33-36 use the concept that y  c,   x  ,
is a constant function if and only if y  0 to determine
whether the given differential equation possesses constant
solutions.
33. 3xy  5y  10
34. y  y2  2y  3
35. (y  1)y  1
36. y  4y  6y  10
In Problems 37 and 38 verify that the indicated pair of
functions is a solution of the given system of differential
equations on the interval (, ).
37.
38.
,
Discussion Problems
39. Make up a differential equation that does not possess
any real solutions.
40. Make up a differential equation that you feel conﬁdent
possesses only the trivial solution y  0. Explain your
reasoning.
41. What function do you know from calculus is such that
its ﬁrst derivative is itself? Its ﬁrst derivative is a
constant multiple k of itself? Write each answer in
the form of a ﬁrst-order differential equation with a
solution.
42. What function (or functions) do you know from calcu-
lus is such that its second derivative is itself? Its second
derivative is the negative of itself? Write each answer in
the form of a second-order differential equation with a
solution.
43. Given that y  sin x is an explicit solution of the first-
order differential equation 
. Find an in-
terval I of deﬁnition. [Hint: I is not the interval (, ).]
44. Discuss why it makes intuitive sense to presume that
the linear differential equation y  2y  4y  5 sin t
has a solution of the form y  A sin t  B cos t, where
A and B are constants. Then ﬁnd speciﬁc constants A
and B so that y  A sin t  B cos t is a particular solu-
tion of the DE.
dy
dx  11  y2
y  cos 2t  sin 2t  1
5 et
y  e2t  5e6t
x  cos 2t  sin 2t  1
5 et
x  e2t  3e6t,
d 2y
dt 2  4x  et;
 dy
dt  5x  3y;
d 2x
dt 2  4y  et
 dx
dt  x  3y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Problems 45 and 46 the given ﬁgure represents the graph
of an implicit solution G(x, y)  0 of a differential equation
dydx  f (x, y). In each case the relation G(x, y)  0
implicitly deﬁnes several solutions of the DE. Carefully
reproduce each ﬁgure on a piece of paper. Use different
colored pencils to mark off segments, or pieces, on each
graph that correspond to graphs of solutions. Keep in mind
that a solution  must be a function and differentiable. Use
the solution curve to estimate an interval I of deﬁnition of
each solution .
45.
12
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
51. Discuss, and illustrate with examples, how to solve
differential equations of the forms dydx  f (x) and
d2ydx2  f (x).
52. The differential equation x(y)2  4y  12x3  0 has
the form given in (4). Determine whether the equation
can be put into the normal form dydx  f (x, y).
53. The normal form (5) of an nth-order differential equa-
tion is equivalent to (4) whenever both forms have
exactly the same solutions. Make up a ﬁrst-order differ-
ential equation for which F(x, y, y)  0 is not equiva-
lent to the normal form dydx  f (x, y).
54. Find a linear second-order differential equation 
F(x, y, y, y)  0 for which y  c1x  c2x2 is a two-
parameter family of solutions. Make sure that your equa-
tion is free of the arbitrary parameters c1 and c2.
Qualitative information about a solution y  (x) of a
differential equation can often be obtained from the
equation itself. Before working Problems 55-58, recall
the geometric signiﬁcance of the derivatives dydx
and d2ydx2.
55. Consider the differential equation 
.
(a) Explain why a solution of the DE must be an
increasing function on any interval of the x-axis.
(b) What are 
What does
this suggest about a solution curve as 
(c) Determine an interval over which a solution curve is
concave down and an interval over which the curve
is concave up.
(d) Sketch the graph of a solution y  (x) of the dif-
ferential equation whose shape is suggested by
parts (a)-(c).
56. Consider the differential equation dydx  5  y.
(a) Either by inspection or by the method suggested in
Problems 33-36, ﬁnd a constant solution of the DE.
(b) Using only the differential equation, ﬁnd intervals on
the y-axis on which a nonconstant solution y  (x)
is increasing. Find intervals on the y-axis on which 
y  (x) is decreasing.
57. Consider the differential equation dydx  y(a  by),
where a and b are positive constants.
(a) Either by inspection or by the method suggested
in Problems 33-36, ﬁnd two constant solutions of
the DE.
(b) Using only the differential equation, ﬁnd intervals on
the y-axis on which a nonconstant solution y  (x)
is increasing. Find intervals on which y  (x) is
decreasing.
(c) Using only the differential equation, explain why 
y  a2b is the y-coordinate of a point of inﬂection
of the graph of a nonconstant solution y  (x).
x : ?
lim
x :  dy>dx  and lim
x :  dy>dx?
dy>dx  ex2
FIGURE 1.1.6
Graph for Problem 45
FIGURE 1.1.7
Graph for Problem 46
y
x
1
1
1
x
1
y
46.
47. The graphs of members of the one-parameter family
x3  y3  3cxy are called folia of Descartes. Verify
that this family is an implicit solution of the ﬁrst-order
differential equation
48. The graph in Figure 1.1.7 is the member of the family of
folia in Problem 47 corresponding to c  1. Discuss:
How can the DE in Problem 47 help in ﬁnding points
on the graph of x3  y3  3xy where the tangent line
is vertical? How does knowing where a tangent line is
vertical help in determining an interval I of deﬁnition
of a solution  of the DE? Carry out your ideas,
and compare with your estimates of the intervals in
Problem 46.
49. In Example 5 the largest interval I over which the
explicit solutions y  1(x) and y  2(x) are deﬁned
is the open interval (5, 5). Why can't the interval I of
deﬁnition be the closed interval [5, 5]?
50. In Problem 21 a one-parameter family of solutions of
the DE P  P(1  P) is given. Does any solution
curve pass through the point (0, 3)? Through the
point (0, 1)?
dy
dx  y(y3  2x3)
x(2y3  x3).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.2
INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
13
(d) On the same coordinate axes, sketch the graphs of
the two constant solutions found in part (a). These
constant solutions partition the xy-plane into three
regions. In each region, sketch the graph of a non-
constant solution y  (x) whose shape is sug-
gested by the results in parts (b) and (c).
58. Consider the differential equation y  y2  4.
(a) Explain why there exist no constant solutions of
the DE.
(b) Describe the graph of a solution y  (x). For
example, can a solution curve have any relative
extrema?
(c) Explain why y  0 is the y-coordinate of a point of
inﬂection of a solution curve.
(d) Sketch the graph of a solution y  (x) of the
differential equation whose shape is suggested by
parts (a)-(c).
Computer Lab Assignments
In Problems 59 and 60 use a CAS to compute all derivatives
and to carry out the simpliﬁcations needed to verify that the
indicated function is a particular solution of the given differ-
ential equation.
59. y(4)  20y	  158y  580y  841y  0; 
y  xe5x cos 2x
60.
y  20 cos(5 ln x)
x
 3 sin(5 ln x)
x
x3y	  2x2y  20xy  78y  0;
Geometric Interpretation of IVPs
The cases n  1 and n  2 in (1),
(2)
 Subject to:   y(x0)  y0
 Solve:  
 dy
dx  f (x, y)
INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Normal form of a DE
●Solution of a DE
●Family of solutions
INTRODUCTION
We are often interested in problems in which we seek a solution y(x) of a
differential equation so that y(x) also satisﬁes certain prescribed side conditions—that is, conditions
that are imposed on the unknown function y(x) and its derivatives at a point x0. On some interval I
containing x0 the problem of solving an nth-order differential equation subject to n side conditions
speciﬁed at x0:
(1)
where y0, y1, . . . , yn1 are arbitrary real constants, is called an nth-order initial-value
problem (IVP). The values of y(x) and its ﬁrst n  1 derivatives at x0, y(x0)  y0, y(x0)  y1, . . . ,
y(n1)(x0)  yn1 are called initial conditions (IC).
Solving an nth-order initial-value problem such as (1) frequently entails ﬁrst ﬁnding an 
n-parameter family of solutions of the given differential equation and then using the initial-
conditions at x0 to determine the n constants in this family. The resulting particular solution is
deﬁned on some interval I containing the initial point x0.
 Subject to:  y(x0)  y0,  y(x0)  y1,  . . . ,  y(n1)(x0)  yn1,
 Solve:   
 d ny
dxn  f x, y, y, . . . , y(n1)
1.2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and
(3)
are examples of ﬁrst- and second-order initial-value problems, respectively. These
two problems are easy to interpret in geometric terms. For (2) we are seeking a solution
y(x) of the differential equation y  f(x, y) on an interval I containing x0 so that its
graph passes through the speciﬁed point (x0, y0). A solution curve is shown in blue
in Figure 1.2.1. For (3) we want to ﬁnd a solution y(x) of the differential equation 
y  f(x, y, y) on an interval I containing x0 so that its graph not only passes through
(x0, y0) but the slope of the curve at this point is the number y1. A solution curve is
shown in blue in Figure 1.2.2. The words initial conditions derive from physical sys-
tems where the independent variable is time t and where y(t0)  y0 and y(t0)  y1 rep-
resent the position and velocity, respectively, of an object at some beginning, or initial,
time t0.
 Subject to:   y(x0)  y0,  y(x0)  y1
 Solve:  
 d2y
dx2   f (x, y, y)
14
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
FIGURE 1.2.3
Solution curves of two
IVPs in Example 1
y
x
(0, 3)
(1, −2)
FIGURE 1.2.1
Solution curve of
ﬁrst-order IVP
FIGURE 1.2.2
Solution curve of
second-order IVP
x
I
solutions of the DE
( x 0 ,  y 0 ) 
y
m = y 1 
x
I
solutions of the DE
( x 0 ,  y 0 ) 
y
EXAMPLE 1
Two First-Order IVPs
(a) In Problem 41 in Exercises 1.1 you were asked to deduce that y  cex is a one-
parameter family of solutions of the simple ﬁrst-order equation y  y. All the
solutions in this family are deﬁned on the interval (, ). If we impose an initial
condition, say, y(0)  3, then substituting x  0, y  3 in the family determines the
constant 3  ce0  c. Thus y  3ex is a solution of the IVP
(b) Now if we demand that a solution curve pass through the point (1, 2) rather
than (0, 3), then y(1)  2 will yield 2  ce or c  2e1. In this case y 
2ex1 is a solution of the IVP
The two solution curves are shown in dark blue and dark red in Figure 1.2.3.
The next example illustrates another ﬁrst-order initial-value problem. In this
example notice how the interval I of deﬁnition of the solution y(x) depends on the
initial condition y(x0)  y0.
y  y,  y(1)  2.
y  y,  y(0)  3.
EXAMPLE 2
Interval I of Deﬁnition of a Solution
In Problem 6 of Exercises 2.2 you will be asked to show that a one-parameter family
of solutions of the ﬁrst-order differential equation y  2xy2  0 is y  1(x2  c).
If we impose the initial condition y(0)  1, then substituting x  0 and y  1
into the family of solutions gives 1  1c or c  1. Thus y  1(x2  1). We
now emphasize the following three distinctions:
•
Considered as a function, the domain of y  1(x2  1) is the set of real
numbers x for which y(x) is deﬁned; this is the set of all real numbers
except x  1 and x  1. See Figure 1.2.4(a).
•
Considered as a solution of the differential equation y  2xy2  0, the
interval I of deﬁnition of y  1(x2  1) could be taken to be any
interval over which y(x) is deﬁned and differentiable. As can be seen in
Figure 1.2.4(a), the largest intervals on which y  1(x2  1) is a solution
are (,1), (1, 1), and (1, ).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

•
Considered as a solution of the initial-value problem y  2xy2  0,
y(0)  1, the interval I of deﬁnition of y  1(x2  1) could be taken to
be any interval over which y(x) is deﬁned, differentiable, and contains the
initial point x  0; the largest interval for which this is true is (1, 1). See
the red curve in Figure 1.2.4(b).
See Problems 3-6 in Exercises 1.2 for a continuation of Example 2.
1.2
INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
15
FIGURE 1.2.4
Graphs of function
and solution of IVP in Example 2
(0, −1)
x
y
1
−1
x
y
1
−1
(a) function defined for all x except x = ±1
(b) solution defined on interval containing x = 0
y
y = 0
y = x4/16
(0, 0)
1
x
FIGURE 1.2.5
Two solutions curves
of the same IVP in Example 4
EXAMPLE 3
Second-Order IVP
In Example 7 of Section 1.1 we saw that x  c1 cos 4t  c2 sin 4t is a two-parameter
family of solutions of x  16x  0. Find a solution of the initial-value problem
(4)
SOLUTION
We ﬁrst apply x(2)  2 to the given family of solutions: c1 cos 2 
c2 sin 2  2. Since cos 2  1 and sin 2  0, we ﬁnd that c1  2. We next apply
x(2)  1 to the one-parameter family x(t)  2 cos 4t  c2 sin 4t. Differentiating
and then setting t  2 and x  1 gives 8 sin 2  4c2 cos 2  1, from which we
see that 
. Hence  
is a solution of (4).
Existence and Uniqueness
Two fundamental questions arise in considering
an initial-value problem:
Does a solution of the problem exist?
If a solution exists, is it unique?
For the ﬁrst-order initial-value problem (2) we ask:
Existence
{
Does the differential equation dydx  f(x, y) possess solutions?
Do any of the solution curves pass through the point (x0, y0)?
Uniqueness {
When can we be certain that there is precisely one solution curve
passing through the point (x0, y0)?
Note that in Examples 1 and 3 the phrase "a solution" is used rather than "the solu-
tion" of the problem. The indeﬁnite article "a" is used deliberately to suggest the
possibility that other solutions may exist. At this point it has not been demonstrated
that there is a single solution of each problem. The next example illustrates an initial-
value problem with two solutions.
x  2 cos 4t  1
4 sin 4t
c2  1
4
x  16x  0,  x

2  2,  x

2  1.
EXAMPLE 4
An IVP Can Have Several Solutions
Each of the functions y  0 and 
satisﬁes the differential equation
dydx  xy1/2 and the initial condition y(0)  0, so the initial-value problem
has at least two solutions. As illustrated in Figure 1.2.5, the graphs of both functions,
shown in red and blue pass through the same point (0, 0).
Within the safe conﬁnes of a formal course in differential equations one can be
fairly conﬁdent that most differential equations will have solutions and that solutions of
initial-value problems will probably be unique. Real life, however, is not so idyllic.
Therefore it is desirable to know in advance of trying to solve an initial-value problem
dy
dx  xy1/2,  y(0)  0
y  1
16 x4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

whether a solution exists and, when it does, whether it is the only solution of the prob-
lem. Since we are going to consider ﬁrst-order differential equations in the next two
chapters, we state here without proof a straightforward theorem that gives conditions
that are sufﬁcient to guarantee the existence and uniqueness of a solution of a ﬁrst-order
initial-value problem of the form given in (2). We shall wait until Chapter 4 to address
the question of existence and uniqueness of a second-order initial-value problem.
16
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
x
I0
R
a
b
c
d
(x0, y0)
y
FIGURE 1.2.6
Rectangular region R
THEOREM 1.2.1
Existence of a Unique Solution
Let R be a rectangular region in the xy-plane deﬁned by a  x  b, c  y  d
that contains the point (x0, y0) in its interior. If f(x, y) and fy are continuous
on R, then there exists some interval I0: (x0  h, x0  h), h  0, contained in
[a, b], and a unique function y(x), deﬁned on I0, that is a solution of the initial-
value problem (2).
The foregoing result is one of the most popular existence and uniqueness theo-
rems for ﬁrst-order differential equations because the criteria of continuity of f(x, y)
and fy are relatively easy to check. The geometry of Theorem 1.2.1 is illustrated
in Figure 1.2.6.
EXAMPLE 5
Example 4 Revisited
We saw in Example 4 that the differential equation dydx  xy1/2 possesses at least
two solutions whose graphs pass through (0, 0). Inspection of the functions
shows that they are continuous in the upper half-plane deﬁned by y  0. Hence
Theorem 1.2.1 enables us to conclude that through any point (x0, y0), y0  0 in the
upper half-plane there is some interval centered at x0 on which the given differential
equation has a unique solution. Thus, for example, even without solving it, we know
that there exists some interval centered at 2 on which the initial-value problem
dydx  xy1/2, y(2)  1 has a unique solution.
In Example 1, Theorem 1.2.1 guarantees that there are no other solutions of the
initial-value problems y  y, y(0)  3 and y  y, y(1)  2 other than y  3ex
and y  2ex1, respectively. This follows from the fact that f(x, y)  y and
fy  1 are continuous throughout the entire xy-plane. It can be further shown that
the interval I on which each solution is deﬁned is (, ).
Interval of Existence/Uniqueness
Suppose y(x) represents a solution of
the initial-value problem (2). The following three sets on the real x-axis may not be
the same: the domain of the function y(x), the interval I over which the solution y(x)
is deﬁned or exists, and the interval I0 of existence and uniqueness. Example 2 of
Section 1.1 illustrated the difference between the domain of a function and the
interval I of deﬁnition. Now suppose (x0, y0) is a point in the interior of the rectan-
gular region R in Theorem 1.2.1. It turns out that the continuity of the function
f (x, y) on R by itself is sufﬁcient to guarantee the existence of at least one solution
of dydx  f (x, y), y(x0)  y0, deﬁned on some interval I. The interval I of deﬁni-
tion for this initial-value problem is usually taken to be the largest interval contain-
ing x0 over which the solution y(x) is deﬁned and differentiable. The interval I
depends on both f (x, y) and the initial condition y(x0)  y0. See Problems 31-34 in
Exercises 1.2. The extra condition of continuity of the ﬁrst partial derivative fy
f (x, y)  xy1/2    and    f
y 
x
2y1/2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.2
INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
17
on R enables us to say that not only does a solution exist on some interval I0 con-
taining x0, but it is the only solution satisfying y(x0)  y0. However, Theorem 1.2.1
does not give any indication of the sizes of intervals I and I0; the interval I of
deﬁnition need not be as wide as the region R, and the interval I0 of existence and
uniqueness may not be as large as I. The number h  0 that deﬁnes the interval
I0: (x0  h, x0  h) could be very small, so it is best to think that the solution y(x)
is unique in a local sense—that is, a solution deﬁned near the point (x0, y0). See
Problem 50 in Exercises 1.2.
REMARKS
(i) The conditions in Theorem 1.2.1 are sufﬁcient but not necessary. This means
that when f(x, y) and fy are continuous on a rectangular region R, it must
always follow that a solution of (2) exists and is unique whenever (x0, y0) is a
point interior to R. However, if the conditions stated in the hypothesis of
Theorem 1.2.1 do not hold, then anything could happen: Problem (2) may still
have a solution and this solution may be unique, or (2) may have several solu-
tions, or it may have no solution at all. Arereading of Example 5 reveals that the
hypotheses of Theorem 1.2.1 do not hold on the line y  0 for the differential
equation dydx  xy1/2, so it is not surprising, as we saw in Example 4 of this
section, that there are two solutions deﬁned on a common interval h  x  h
satisfying y(0)  0. On the other hand, the hypotheses of Theorem 1.2.1 do
not hold on the line y  1 for the differential equation dydx  y  1.
Nevertheless it can be proved that the solution of the initial-value problem
dydx  y  1, y(0)  1, is unique. Can you guess this solution?
(ii) You are encouraged to read, think about, work, and then keep in mind
Problem 49 in Exercises 1.2.
(iii) Initial conditions are prescribed at a single point x0. But we are also inter-
ested in solving differential equations that are subject to conditions speciﬁed
on y(x) or its derivative at two different points x0 and x1. Conditions such as 
and called boundary conditions. A differential equation together with bound-
ary conditions is called a boundary-value problem (BVP). For example,
is a boundary-value problem. See Problems 39-44 in Exercises 1.2.
When we start to solve differential equations in Chapter 2 we will solve
only ﬁrst-order equations and ﬁrst-order initial-value problems. The mathe-
matical description of many problems in science and engineering involve
second-order IVPs or two-point BVPs. We will examine some of these prob-
lems in Chapters 4 and 5.  
y  ly  0,  y(0)  0,  y(p)  0
y(1)  0,  y(5)  0    or    y(p>2)  0,  y(p)  1
EXERCISES 1.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-1.
In Problems 1 and 2, y  1(1  c1ex) is a one-parameter
family of solutions of the ﬁrst-order DE y  y  y2. Find a
solution of the ﬁrst-order IVP consisting of this differential
equation and the given initial condition.
1.
2. y(1)  2
In Problems 3-6, y  1(x2  c) is a one-parameter family
of solutions of the ﬁrst-order DE y  2xy2  0. Find a
y(0)  1
3
solution of the ﬁrst-order IVP consisting of this differential
equation and the given initial condition. Give the largest
interval I over which the solution is deﬁned.
3.
4.
5. y(0)  1
6.
In Problems 7-10, x  c1 cos t  c2 sin t is a two-parameter
family of solutions of the second-order DE x  x  0. Find
y(1
2)  4
y(2)  1
2
y(2)  1
3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a solution of the second-order IVP consisting of this differ-
ential equation and the given initial conditions.
7. x(0)  1,
x(0)  8
8. x(2)  0,
x(2)  1
9.
10.
In Problems 11-14, y  c1ex  c2ex is a two-parameter
family of solutions of the second-order DE y  y  0. Find
a solution of the second-order IVP consisting of this differ-
ential equation and the given initial conditions.
11.
12. y(1)  0,
y(1)  e
13. y(1)  5,
y(1)  5
14. y(0)  0,
y(0)  0
In Problems 15 and 16 determine by inspection at least two
solutions of the given ﬁrst-order IVP.
15. y  3y2/3,
y(0)  0
16. xy  2y,
y(0)  0
In Problems 17-24 determine a region of the xy-plane for
which the given differential equation would have a unique
solution whose graph passes through a point (x0, y0) in the
region.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21. (4  y2)y  x2
22. (1  y3)y  x2
23. (x2  y2)y  y2
24. (y  x)y  y  x
In Problems 25-28 determine whether Theorem 1.2.1 guar-
antees that the differential equation 
pos-
sesses a unique solution through the given point.
25. (1, 4)
26. (5, 3)
27. (2, 3)
28. (1, 1)
29. (a) By inspection ﬁnd a one-parameter family of solu-
tions of the differential equation xy  y. Verify that
each member of the family is a solution of the
initial-value problem xy  y, y(0)  0.
(b) Explain part (a) by determining a region R in the
xy-plane for which the differential equation xy  y
would have a unique solution through a point (x0, y0)
in R.
y  1y2  9
dy
dx  y  x
x dy
dx  y
dy
dx  1xy
dy
dx  y2/3
y(0)  2
y(0)  1,
x(>4)  12,  x(>4)  212
x(>6)  1
2, x(>6)  0
18
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
(c) Verify that the piecewise-deﬁned function
satisﬁes the condition y(0)  0. Determine whether
this function is also a solution of the initial-value
problem in part (a).
30. (a) Verify that y  tan (x  c) is a one-parameter family
of solutions of the differential equation y  1  y2.
(b) Since f (x, y)  1  y2 and fy  2y are continu-
ous everywhere, the region R in Theorem 1.2.1 can
be taken to be the entire xy-plane. Use the family of
solutions in part (a) to ﬁnd an explicit solution of
the ﬁrst-order initial-value problem y  1  y2,
y(0)  0. Even though x0  0 is in the interval
(2, 2), explain why the solution is not deﬁned on
this interval.
(c) Determine the largest interval I of deﬁnition for the
solution of the initial-value problem in part (b).
31. (a) Verify that y  1(x  c) is a one-parameter
family of solutions of the differential equation 
y  y2.
(b) Since f(x, y)  y2 and fy  2y are continuous
everywhere, the region R in Theorem 1.2.1 can be
taken to be the entire xy-plane. Find a solution from
the family in part (a) that satisﬁes y(0)  1. Then
ﬁnd a solution from the family in part (a) that
satisﬁes y(0)  1. Determine the largest interval I
of deﬁnition for the solution of each initial-value
problem.
(c) Determine the largest interval I of deﬁnition for the
solution of the ﬁrst-order initial-value problem
y  y2, y(0)  0. [Hint: The solution is not a mem-
ber of the family of solutions in part (a).]
32. (a) Show that a solution from the family in part (a)
of Problem 31 that satisﬁes y  y2, y(1)  1, is
y  1(2  x).
(b) Then show that a solution from the family in part (a)
of Problem 31 that satisﬁes y  y2, y(3)  1, is
y  1(2  x).
(c) Are the solutions in parts (a) and (b) the same?
33. (a) Verify that 3x2  y2  c is a one-parameter fam-
ily
of solutions of the differential equation 
y dydx  3x.
(b) By hand, sketch the graph of the implicit solution
3x2  y2  3. Find all explicit solutions y  (x) of
the DE in part (a) deﬁned by this relation. Give the
interval I of deﬁnition of each explicit solution.
(c) The point (2, 3) is on the graph of 3x2  y2  3,
but which of the explicit solutions in part (b) satis-
ﬁes y(2)  3?
34. (a) Use the family of solutions in part (a) of Problem 33
to ﬁnd an implicit solution of the initial-value
y 
0,  x  0
x,  x  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.2
INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
19
FIGURE 1.2.7
Graph for Problem 35
y
x
5
−5
5
In Problems 39-44, 
is a two-
parameter family of solutions of the second-order DE
If possible, ﬁnd a solution of the differential
equation that satisﬁes the given side conditions. The condi-
tions speciﬁed at two different points are called boundary
conditions.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
Discussion Problems
In Problems 45 and 46 use Problem 51 in Exercises 1.1 and
(2) and (3) of this section.
45. Find a function y  f (x) whose graph at each point (x, y)
has the slope given by 8e2x  6x and has the 
y-intercept (0, 9).
46. Find a function y  f (x) whose second derivative is
y  12x  2 at each point (x, y) on its graph and
y  x  5 is tangent to the graph at the point corre-
sponding to x  1.
47. Consider the initial-value problem y  x  2y,
. Determine which of the two curves shown
in Figure 1.2.11 is the only plausible solution curve.
Explain your reasoning.
y(0)  1
2
y(p>2)  1, y(p)  0
y(0)  0, y(p)  2
y(0)  1, y(p)  5
y(0)  0, y(p>6)  0
y(0)  0, y(p)  0
y(0)  0, y(p>4)  3
y  4y  0.
y  c1 cos 2x  c2 sin 2x
FIGURE 1.2.10
Graph for Problem 38
y
x
5
−5
5
36.
37.
38.
FIGURE 1.2.8
Graph for Problem 36
FIGURE 1.2.9
Graph for Problem 37
y
x
5
−5
5
y
x
5
−5
5
FIGURE 1.2.11
Graphs for Problem 47
(0, )
1
2
1
1
x
y
problem y dydx  3x, y(2)  4. Then, by hand,
sketch the graph of the explicit solution of this
problem and give its interval I of deﬁnition.
(b) Are there any explicit solutions of y dydx  3x that
pass through the origin?
In Problems 35-38 the graph of a member of a family
of
solutions
of a second-order differential equation 
d2ydx2  f (x, y, y) is given. Match the solution curve with
at least one pair of the following initial conditions.
(a) y(1)  1,
y(1)  2
(b) y(1)  0,
y(1)  4
(c) y(1)  1,
y(1)  2
(d) y(0)  1,
y(0)  2
(e) y(0)  1,
y(0)  0
(f) y(0)  4,
y(0)  2
35.
48. Determine a plausible value of x0 for which the
graph of the solution of the initial-value problem 
y  2y  3x  6, y(x0)  0 is tangent to the x-axis at
(x0, 0). Explain your reasoning.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
49. Suppose that the ﬁrst-order differential equation 
dydx  f (x, y) possesses a one-parameter family of
solutions and that f (x, y) satisﬁes the hypotheses of
Theorem 1.2.1 in some rectangular region R of the 
xy-plane. Explain why two different solution curves
cannot intersect or be tangent to each other at a point
(x0, y0) in R.
50. The functions 
and
have the same domain but are clearly different. See
Figures 1.2.12(a) and 1.2.12(b), respectively. Show that
both functions are solutions of the initial-value problem
dydx  xy1/2, y(2)  1 on the interval (, ).
Resolve the apparent contradiction between this fact
and the last sentence in Example 5.
y(x) 
0,
1
16 x4, x  0
  x  0
y(x)  1
16 x4,   x  
Mathematical Model
51. Population Growth
Beginning in the next section
we will see that differential equations can be used to
describe or model many different physical systems. In
this problem suppose that a model of the growing popu-
lation of a small community is given by the initial-value
problem
where P is the number of individuals in the community
and time t is measured in years. How fast—that is, at
what rate—is the population increasing at t  0? How
fast is the population increasing when the population
is 500?
dP
dt  0.15P(t)  20,  P(0)  100,
FIGURE 1.2.12
Two solutions of the IVP in Problem 50
(a)
(2, 1)
y
x
(b)
(2, 1)
y
x
Mathematical Models
It is often desirable to describe the behavior of some
real-life system or phenomenon, whether physical, sociological, or even economic,
in mathematical terms. The mathematical description of a system of phenomenon is
called a mathematical model and is constructed with certain goals in mind. For ex-
ample, we may wish to understand the mechanisms of a certain ecosystem by study-
ing the growth of animal populations in that system, or we may wish to date fossils
by analyzing the decay of a radioactive substance, either in the fossil or in the stra-
tum in which it was discovered.
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Units of measurement for weight, mass, and density
●Newton's second law of motion
●Hooke's law
●Kirchhoff's laws
●Archimedes' principle
INTRODUCTION
In this section we introduce the notion of a differential equation as a
mathematical model and discuss some speciﬁc models in biology, chemistry, and physics. Once we
have studied some methods for solving DEs in Chapters 2 and 4, we return to, and solve, some of
these models in Chapters 3 and 5.
1.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Construction of a mathematical model of a system starts with
(i)
identification of the variables that are responsible for changing the
system. We may choose not to incorporate all these variables into the
model at first. In this step we are specifying the level of resolution of
the model.
Next
(ii)
we make a set of reasonable assumptions, or hypotheses, about the
system we are trying to describe. These assumptions will also include
any empirical laws that may be applicable to the system.
For some purposes it may be perfectly within reason to be content with low-
resolution models. For example, you may already be aware that in beginning
physics courses, the retarding force of air friction is sometimes ignored in modeling
the motion of a body falling near the surface of the Earth, but if you are a scientist
whose job it is to accurately predict the ﬂight path of a long-range projectile,
you have to take into account air resistance and other factors such as the curvature
of the Earth.
Since the assumptions made about a system frequently involve a rate of change
of one or more of the variables, the mathematical depiction of all these assumptions
may be one or more equations involving derivatives. In other words, the mathemat-
ical model may be a differential equation or a system of differential equations.
Once we have formulated a mathematical model that is either a differential
equation or a system of differential equations, we are faced with the not insigniﬁcant
problem of trying to solve it. If we can solve it, then we deem the model to be reason-
able if its solution is consistent with either experimental data or known facts about
the behavior of the system. But if the predictions produced by the solution are poor,
we can either increase the level of resolution of the model or make alternative as-
sumptions about the mechanisms for change in the system. The steps of the model-
ing process are then repeated, as shown in the diagram in Figure 1.3.1.
1.3
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
●
21
Express assumptions
in terms of DEs
Display predictions
of  model 
(e.g., graphically)
Solve the DEs
If necessary,
alter assumptions
or increase resolution
of model
Assumptions
and hypotheses
Mathematical
formulation
Obtain
solutions
Check model
predictions with
known facts
FIGURE 1.3.1
Steps in the modeling process with differential equations
Of course, by increasing the resolution, we add to the complexity of the mathemati-
cal model and increase the likelihood that we cannot obtain an explicit solution.
A mathematical model of a physical system will often involve the variable time t.
A solution of the model then gives the state of the system; in other words, the values
of the dependent variable (or variables) for appropriate values of t describe the system
in the past, present, and future.
Population Dynamics
One of the earliest attempts to model human pop-
ulation growth by means of mathematics was by the English clergyman and econo-
mist Thomas Malthus in 1798. Basically, the idea behind the Malthusian model is the
assumption that the rate at which the population of a country grows at a certain time is
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

proportional* to the total population of the country at that time. In other words, the more
people there are at time t, the more there are going to be in the future. In mathematical
terms, if P(t) denotes the total population at time t, then this assumption can be
expressed as
,
(1)
where k is a constant of proportionality. This simple model, which fails to take into
account many factors that can inﬂuence human populations to either grow or decline
(immigration and emigration, for example), nevertheless turned out to be fairly accu-
rate in predicting the population of the United States during the years 1790-1860.
Populations that grow at a rate described by (1) are rare; nevertheless, (1) is still used
to model growth of small populations over short intervals of time (bacteria growing
in a petri dish, for example).
Radioactive Decay
The nucleus of an atom consists of combinations of protons
and neutrons. Many of these combinations of protons and neutrons are unstable—that
is, the atoms decay or transmute into atoms of another substance. Such nuclei are
said to be radioactive. For example, over time the highly radioactive radium, Ra-226,
transmutes into the radioactive gas radon, Rn-222. To model the phenomenon of
radioactive decay, it is assumed that the rate dAdt at which the nuclei of a sub-
stance decay is proportional to the amount (more precisely, the number of nuclei)
A(t) of the substance remaining at time t:
.
(2)
Of course, equations (1) and (2) are exactly the same; the difference is only in the in-
terpretation of the symbols and the constants of proportionality. For growth, as we
expect in (1), k  0, and for decay, as in (2), k  0.
The model (1) for growth can also be seen as the equation dSdt  rS, which
describes the growth of capital S when an annual rate of interest r is compounded
continuously. The model (2) for decay also occurs in biological applications such as
determining the half-life of a drug—the time that it takes for 50% of a drug to be
eliminated from a body by excretion or metabolism. In chemistry the decay model
(2) appears in the mathematical description of a ﬁrst-order chemical reaction. The
point is this:
A single differential equation can serve as a mathematical model for many
different phenomena.
Mathematical models are often accompanied by certain side conditions. For ex-
ample, in (1) and (2) we would expect to know, in turn, the initial population P0 and
the initial amount of radioactive substance A0 on hand. If the initial point in time is
taken to be t  0, then we know that P(0)  P0 and A(0)  A0. In other words, a
mathematical model can consist of either an initial-value problem or, as we shall see
later on in Section 5.2, a boundary-value problem.
Newton's Law of Cooling/Warming
According to Newton's empirical
law of cooling/warming, the rate at which the temperature of a body changes is
proportional to the difference between the temperature of the body and the temper-
ature of the surrounding medium, the so-called ambient temperature. If T(t) repre-
sents the temperature of a body at time t, Tm the temperature of the surrounding
dA
dt   A    or    dA
dt  kA
dP
dt  P    or    dP
dt  kP
22
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
*If two quantities u and v are proportional, we write u  v. This means that one quantity is a constant
multiple of the other: u  kv.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

medium, and dTdt the rate at which the temperature of the body changes, then
Newton's law of cooling/warming translates into the mathematical statement
,
(3)
where k is a constant of proportionality. In either case, cooling or warming, if Tm is a
constant, it stands to reason that k  0.
Spread of a Disease
A contagious disease—for example, a ﬂu virus—is
spread throughout a community by people coming into contact with other people. Let
x(t) denote the number of people who have contracted the disease and y(t) denote the
number of people who have not yet been exposed. It seems reasonable to assume that
the rate dxdt at which the disease spreads is proportional to the number of encoun-
ters, or interactions, between these two groups of people. If we assume that the num-
ber of interactions is jointly proportional to x(t) and y(t)—that is, proportional to the
product xy—then
,
(4)
where k is the usual constant of proportionality. Suppose a small community has a
ﬁxed population of n people. If one infected person is introduced into this commu-
nity, then it could be argued that x(t) and y(t) are related by x  y  n  1. Using
this last equation to eliminate y in (4) gives us the model
.
(5)
An obvious initial condition accompanying equation (5) is x(0)  1.
Chemical Reactions
The disintegration of a radioactive substance, governed
by the differential equation (1), is said to be a ﬁrst-order reaction. In chemistry
a few reactions follow this same empirical law: If the molecules of substance A
decompose into smaller molecules, it is a natural assumption that the rate at which
this decomposition takes place is proportional to the amount of the ﬁrst substance
that has not undergone conversion; that is, if X(t) is the amount of substance A
remaining at any time, then dXdt  kX, where k is a negative constant since X is
decreasing. An example of a ﬁrst-order chemical reaction is the conversion of t-butyl
chloride, (CH3)3CCl, into t-butyl alcohol, (CH3)3COH:
Only the concentration of the t-butyl chloride controls the rate of reaction. But in the
reaction
one molecule of sodium hydroxide, NaOH, is consumed for every molecule of
methyl chloride, CH3Cl, thus forming one molecule of methyl alcohol, CH3OH, and
one molecule of sodium chloride, NaCl. In this case the rate at which the reaction
proceeds is proportional to the product of the remaining concentrations of CH3Cl and
NaOH. To describe this second reaction in general, let us suppose one molecule of a
substance A combines with one molecule of a substance B to form one molecule of a
substance C. If X denotes the amount of chemical C formed at time t and if  and 
are, in turn, the amounts of the two chemicals A and B at t  0 (the initial amounts),
then the instantaneous amounts of A and B not converted to chemical C are   X
and   X, respectively. Hence the rate of formation of C is given by
,
(6)
where k is a constant of proportionality. A reaction whose model is equation (6) is
said to be a second-order reaction.
dX
dt  k(  X)(  X)
CH3Cl  NaOH : CH3OH  NaCl
(CH3)3CCl  NaOH : (CH3)3COH  NaCl.
dx
dt  kx(n  1  x)
dx
dt  kxy
dT
dt  T  Tm    or    dT
dt  k(T  Tm)
1.3
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
●
23
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mixtures
The mixing of two salt solutions of differing concentrations gives
rise to a ﬁrst-order differential equation for the amount of salt contained in the mix-
ture. Let us suppose that a large mixing tank initially holds 300 gallons of brine (that
is, water in which a certain number of pounds of salt has been dissolved). Another
brine solution is pumped into the large tank at a rate of 3 gallons per minute; the
concentration of the salt in this inﬂow is 2 pounds per gallon. When the solution in
the tank is well stirred, it is pumped out at the same rate as the entering solution. See
Figure 1.3.2. If A(t) denotes the amount of salt (measured in pounds) in the tank at
time t, then the rate at which A(t) changes is a net rate:
.
(7)
The input rate Rin at which salt enters the tank is the product of the inﬂow concentra-
tion of salt and the inﬂow rate of ﬂuid. Note that Rin is measured in pounds per
minute:
Now, since the solution is being pumped out of the tank at the same rate that it is
pumped in, the number of gallons of brine in the tank at time t is a constant 300 gal-
lons. Hence the concentration of the salt in the tank as well as in the outﬂow is
c(t)  A(t)300 lb/gal, so the output rate Rout of salt is
The net rate (7) then becomes
(8)
If rin and rout denote general input and output rates of the brine solutions,* then
there are three possibilities: rin  rout, rin  rout, and rin  rout. In the analysis lead-
ing to (8) we have assumed that rin  rout. In the latter two cases the number of gal-
lons of brine in the tank is either increasing (rin  rout) or decreasing (rin  rout) at
the net rate rin  rout. See Problems 10-12 in Exercises 1.3.
Draining a Tank
In hydrodynamics, Torricelli's law states that the speed v of
efﬂux of water though a sharp-edged hole at the bottom of a tank ﬁlled to a depth h
is the same as the speed that a body (in this case a drop of water) would acquire in
falling freely from a height h—that is, 
, where g is the acceleration due to
gravity. This last expression comes from equating the kinetic energy 
with the
potential energy mgh and solving for v. Suppose a tank ﬁlled with water is allowed to
drain through a hole under the inﬂuence of gravity. We would like to ﬁnd the depth h
of water remaining in the tank at time t. Consider the tank shown in Figure 1.3.3. If
the area of the hole is Ah (in ft2) and the speed of the water leaving the tank is
(in ft/s), then the volume of water leaving the tank per second is 
(in ft3/s). Thus if V(t) denotes the volume of water in the tank at time t, then
,
(9)
dV
dt  Ah12gh
Ah12gh
v  12gh
1
2mv2
v  12gh
dA
dt  6  A
100    or    dA
dt 
1
100 A  6.
Rout  (        lb/gal)  (3 gal/min)          lb/min.
A(t)
----
300
A(t)
----
100
concentration
of salt
in outﬂow
output rate
of brine
output rate
of salt
concentration
of salt
in inﬂow
input rate
of brine
input rate
of salt
Rin  (2 lb/gal)  (3 gal/min)  (6 lb/min).
dA
dt 
input rate
of salt  
output rate
of salt   Rin  Rout
24
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
input rate of brine
3 gal/min
output rate of brine
3 gal/min
constant
300 gal
FIGURE 1.3.2
Mixing tank
h
Aw
Ah
FIGURE 1.3.3
Draining tank
*Don't confuse these symbols with Rin and Rout, which are input and output rates of salt.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where the minus sign indicates that V is decreasing. Note here that we are ignoring
the possibility of friction at the hole that might cause a reduction of the rate of ﬂow
there. Now if the tank is such that the volume of water in it at time t can be written
V(t)  Awh, where Aw (in ft2) is the constant area of the upper surface of the water
(see Figure 1.3.3), then dVdt  Aw dhdt. Substituting this last expression into (9)
gives us the desired differential equation for the height of the water at time t:
.
(10)
It is interesting to note that (10) remains valid even when Aw is not constant. In this
case we must express the upper surface area of the water as a function of h—that is,
Aw  A(h). See Problem 14 in Exercises 1.3.
Series Circuits
Consider the single-loop LRC-series circuit shown in Fig-
ure 1.3.4(a), containing an inductor, resistor, and capacitor. The current in a circuit
after a switch is closed is denoted by i(t); the charge on a capacitor at time t is de-
noted by q(t). The letters L, R, and C are known as inductance, resistance, and capac-
itance, respectively, and are generally constants. Now according to Kirchhoff's
second law, the impressed voltage E(t) on a closed loop must equal the sum of the
voltage drops in the loop. Figure 1.3.4(b) shows the symbols and the formulas for the
respective voltage drops across an inductor, a capacitor, and a resistor. Since current
i(t) is related to charge q(t) on the capacitor by i  dqdt, adding the three voltages
inductor
resistor
capacitor
and equating the sum to the impressed voltage yields a second-order differential
equation
(11)
We will examine a differential equation analogous to (11) in great detail in
Section 5.1.
Falling Bodies
To construct a mathematical model of the motion of a body
moving in a force ﬁeld, one often starts with the laws of motion formulated by the
English mathematician Isaac Newton (1643-1727). Recall from elementary physics
that Newton's ﬁrst law of motion states that a body either will remain at rest or will
continue to move with a constant velocity unless acted on by an external force. In
each case this is equivalent to saying that when the sum of the forces 
—
that is, the net or resultant force—acting on the body is zero, then the acceleration
a of the body is zero. Newton's second law of motion indicates that when the net
force acting on a body is not zero, then the net force is proportional to its accelera-
tion a or, more precisely, F  ma, where m is the mass of the body.
Now suppose a rock is tossed upward from the roof of a building as illustrated
in Figure 1.3.5. What is the position s(t) of the rock relative to the ground at time t?
The acceleration of the rock is the second derivative d2sdt2. If we assume that the
upward direction is positive and that no force acts on the rock other than the force of
gravity, then Newton's second law gives
.
(12)
In other words, the net force is simply the weight F  F1  W of the rock near the
surface of the Earth. Recall that the magnitude of the weight is W  mg, where m is
m d 2s
dt2  mg    or    d 2s
dt2  g
F   Fk
L d 2q
dt2  R dq
dt  1
C q  E(t).
L di
dt  L d 2q
dt2,    iR  R dq
dt,    and    1
C q
dh
dt   Ah
Aw
 12gh
1.3
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
●
25
(a)
(b)
E(t)
L
C
R
(a) LRC-series circuit
(b)
L
R
Inductor
inductance L: henries (h)
voltage drop across: L di
dt
i
Capacitor
capacitance C: farads (f)
voltage drop across: 1
C
i
Resistor
resistance R: ohms (Ω)
voltage drop across: iR
i
q
C
FIGURE 1.3.4
Symbols, units, and
voltages. Current i(t) and charge q(t) are
measured in amperes (A) and coulombs
(C), respectively
ground
building
rock
s(t)
s0
v0
FIGURE 1.3.5
Position of rock
measured from ground level
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the mass of the body and g is the acceleration due to gravity. The minus sign in (12) is
used because the weight of the rock is a force directed downward, which is opposite
to the positive direction. If the height of the building is s0 and the initial velocity of the
rock is v0, then s is determined from the second-order initial-value problem
.
(13)
Although we have not been stressing solutions of the equations we have con-
structed, note that (13) can be solved by integrating the constant g twice with
respect to t. The initial conditions determine the two constants of integration.
From elementary physics you might recognize the solution of (13) as the formula
Falling Bodies and Air Resistance
Before the famous experiment by the
Italian mathematician and physicist Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) from the leaning
tower of Pisa, it was generally believed that heavier objects in free fall, such as a can-
nonball, fell with a greater acceleration than lighter objects, such as a feather.
Obviously, a cannonball and a feather when dropped simultaneously from the same
height do fall at different rates, but it is not because a cannonball is heavier. The dif-
ference in rates is due to air resistance. The resistive force of air was ignored in the
model given in (13). Under some circumstances a falling body of mass m, such as a
feather with low density and irregular shape, encounters air resistance proportional
to its instantaneous velocity v. If we take, in this circumstance, the positive direction
to be oriented downward, then the net force acting on the mass is given by F  F1 
F2  mg  kv, where the weight F1  mg of the body is force acting in the positive
direction and air resistance F2  kv is a force, called viscous damping, acting in the
opposite or upward direction. See Figure 1.3.6. Now since v is related to acceleration
a by a  dvdt, Newton's second law becomes F  ma  m dvdt. By equating the
net force to this form of Newton's second law, we obtain a ﬁrst-order differential
equation for the velocity v(t) of the body at time t,
.
(14)
Here k is a positive constant of proportionality. If s(t) is the distance the body falls in
time t from its initial point of release, then v  dsdt and a  dvdt  d2sdt2. In
terms of s, (14) is a second-order differential equation
(15)
Suspended Cables
Suppose a ﬂexible cable, wire, or heavy rope is sus-
pended between two vertical supports. Physical examples of this could be one of the
two cables supporting the roadbed of a suspension bridge as shown in Figure 1.3.7(a)
or a long telephone wire strung between two posts as shown in Figure 1.3.7(b). Our
goal is to construct a mathematical model that describes the shape that such a cable
assumes.
To begin, let's agree to examine only a portion or element of the cable between
its lowest point P1 and any arbitrary point P2. As drawn in blue in Figure 1.3.8, this
element of the cable is the curve in a rectangular coordinate system with y-axis cho-
sen to pass through the lowest point P1 on the curve and the x-axis chosen a units
below P1. Three forces are acting on the cable: the tensions T1 and T2 in the cable
that are tangent to the cable at P1 and P2, respectively, and the portion W of the total
vertical load between the points P1 and P2. Let T1  T1, T2  T2, and 
W  W denote the magnitudes of these vectors. Now the tension T2 resolves
into horizontal and vertical components (scalar quantities) T2 cos  and T2 sin .
m d 2s
dt 2  mg  k ds
dt    or    m d 2s
dt 2  k ds
dt  mg.
m dv
dt  mg  kv
s(t)  1
2gt2  v0t  s0.
d 2s
dt 2  g,  s(0)  s0,  s(0)  v0
26
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
positive
direction
air resistance
gravity
kv
mg
FIGURE 1.3.6
Falling body of mass m
(a) suspension bridge cable
(b) telephone wires
FIGURE 1.3.7
Cables suspended
between vertical supports
FIGURE 1.3.8
Element of cable
cos
wire
T2
θ
θ
sin
T2
T2
P2
T1
W
P1
θ
y
x
(x, 0)
(0, a)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Because of static equilibrium we can write
By dividing the last equation by the ﬁrst, we eliminate T2 and get tan   WT1. But
because dydx  tan , we arrive at
(16)
This simple ﬁrst-order differential equation serves as a model for both the shape of a
ﬂexible wire such as a telephone wire hanging under its own weight and the shape of
the cables that support the roadbed of a suspension bridge. We will come back to
equation (16) in Exercises 2.2 and Section 5.3.
What Lies Ahead
Throughout this text you will see three different types of
approaches to, or analyses of, differential equations. Over the centuries differential
equations would often spring from the efforts of a scientist or engineer to describe
some physical phenomenon or to translate an empirical or experimental law into
mathematical terms. As a consequence, a scientist, engineer, or mathematician
would often spend many years of his or her life trying to ﬁnd the solutions of a DE.
With a solution in hand, the study of its properties then followed. This quest for so-
lutions is called by some the analytical approach to differential equations. Once they
realized that explicit solutions are at best difﬁcult to obtain and at worst impossible
to obtain, mathematicians learned that a differential equation itself could be a font of
valuable information. It is possible, in some instances, to glean directly from the dif-
ferential equation answers to questions such as Does the DE actually have solutions?
If a solution of the DE exists and satisﬁes an initial condition, is it the only such so-
lution? What are some of the properties of the unknown solutions? What can we say
about the geometry of the solution curves? Such an approach is qualitative analysis.
Finally, if a differential equation cannot be solved by analytical methods, yet we
can prove that a solution exists, the next logical query is Can we somehow approxi-
mate the values of an unknown solution? Here we enter the realm of numerical
analysis. An afﬁrmative answer to the last question stems from the fact that a differ-
ential equation can be used as a cornerstone for constructing very accurate approxi-
mation algorithms. In Chapter 2 we start with qualitative considerations of ﬁrst-
order ODEs, then examine analytical stratagems for solving some special ﬁrst-order
equations, and conclude with an introduction to an elementary numerical method.
See Figure 1.3.9.
dy
dx  W
T1
.
T1  T2 cos     and    W  T2 sin .
1.3
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
●
27
(a) analytical
(b) qualitative
(c) numerical
y'=f(y)
FIGURE 1.3.9
Different approaches to the study of differential equations
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
REMARKS
Each example in this section has described a dynamical system—a system that
changes or evolves with the ﬂow of time t. Since the study of dynamical
systems is a branch of mathematics currently in vogue, we shall occasionally
relate the terminology of that ﬁeld to the discussion at hand.
In more precise terms, a dynamical system consists of a set of time-
dependent variables, called state variables, together with a rule that enables
us to determine (without ambiguity) the state of the system (this may be a past,
present, or future state) in terms of a state prescribed at some time t0. Dynamical
systems are classiﬁed as either discrete-time systems or continuous-time systems.
In this course we shall be concerned only with continuous-time systems—
systems in which all variables are deﬁned over a continuous range of time. The
rule, or mathematical model, in a continuous-time dynamical system is a differ-
ential equation or a system of differential equations. The state of the system
at a time t is the value of the state variables at that time; the speciﬁed state of
the system at a time t0 is simply the initial conditions that accompany the math-
ematical model. The solution of the initial-value problem is referred to as the
response of the system. For example, in the case of radioactive decay, the rule
is dAdt  kA. Now if the quantity of a radioactive substance at some time t0 is
known, say A(t0)  A0, then by solving the rule we ﬁnd that the response of the
system for t  t0 is 
(see Section 3.1). The response A(t) is the
single state variable for this system. In the case of the rock tossed from the roof
of a building, the response of the system—the solution of the differential
equation d2sdt2  g, subject to the initial state s(0)  s0, s(0)  v0, is the
function 
, where T represents the time
when the rock hits the ground. The state variables are s(t) and s(t), which
are the vertical position of the rock above ground and its velocity at time t,
respectively. The acceleration s(t) is not a state variable, since we have to know
only any initial position and initial velocity at a time t0 to uniquely determine
the rock's position s(t) and velocity s(t)  v(t) for any time in the interval 
t0  t  T. The acceleration s(t)  a(t) is, of course, given by the differential
equation s(t)  g, 0  t  T.
One last point: Not every system studied in this text is a dynamical system.
We shall also examine some static systems in which the model is a differential
equation.
s(t)  1
2gt2  v0t  s0, 0  t  T
A(t)  A0e(tt0)
EXERCISES 1.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-1.
Population Dynamics
1. Under the same assumptions that underlie the model in
(1), determine a differential equation for the population
P(t) of a country when individuals are allowed to
immigrate into the country at a constant rate r  0.
What is the differential equation for the population P(t)
of the country when individuals are allowed to emigrate
from the country at a constant rate r  0?
2. The population model given in (1) fails to take death
into consideration; the growth rate equals the birth rate.
In another model of a changing population of a commu-
nity it is assumed that the rate at which the population
changes is a net rate—that is, the difference between
the rate of births and the rate of deaths in the commu-
nity. Determine a model for the population P(t) if both
the birth rate and the death rate are proportional to the
population present at time t  0.
3. Using the concept of net rate introduced in Problem 2,
determine a model for a population P(t) if the birth rate
is proportional to the population present at time t but the
death rate is proportional to the square of the population
present at time t.
4. Modify the model in Problem 3 for net rate at which
the population P(t) of a certain kind of ﬁsh changes by
also assuming that the ﬁsh are harvested at a constant
rate h  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.3
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
●
29
Newton's Law of Cooling/Warming
5. A cup of coffee cools according to Newton's law of
cooling (3). Use data from the graph of the temperature
T(t) in Figure 1.3.10 to estimate the constants Tm, T0,
and k in a model of the form of a ﬁrst-order initial-value
problem: dTdt  k(T  Tm), T(0)  T0.
number of people x(t) who have adopted the innovation
at time t if it is assumed that the rate at which the innova-
tions spread through the community is jointly propor-
tional to the number of people who have adopted it and
the number of people who have not adopted it.
Mixtures
9. Suppose that a large mixing tank initially holds 300 gal-
lons of water in which 50 pounds of salt have been dis-
solved. Pure water is pumped into the tank at a rate of
3 gal/min, and when the solution is well stirred, it is
then pumped out at the same rate. Determine a differen-
tial equation for the amount of salt A(t) in the tank at
time t  0. What is A(0)?
10. Suppose that a large mixing tank initially holds 300 gal-
lons of water is which 50 pounds of salt have been
dissolved.Another brine solution is pumped into the tank
at a rate of 3 gal/min, and when the solution is well
stirred, it is then pumped out at a slower rate of 2 gal/min.
If the concentration of the solution entering is 2 lb/gal,
determine a differential equation for the amount of salt
A(t) in the tank at time t  0.
11. What is the differential equation in Problem 10, if the
well-stirred solution is pumped out at a faster rate of
3.5 gal/min?
12. Generalize the model given in equation (8) on page 24
by assuming that the large tank initially contains N0
number of gallons of brine, rin and rout are the input and
output rates of the brine, respectively (measured in gal-
lons per minute), cin is the concentration of the salt in
the inﬂow, c(t) the concentration of the salt in the tank
as well as in the outﬂow at time t (measured in pounds
of salt per gallon), and A(t) is the amount of salt in the
tank at time t  0.
Draining a Tank
13. Suppose water is leaking from a tank through a circular
hole of area Ah at its bottom. When water leaks through a
hole, friction and contraction of the stream near the hole
reduce the volume of water leaving the tank per second to
where c (0  c  1) is an empirical constant.
Determine a differential equation for the height h of water
at time t for the cubical tank shown in Figure 1.3.12. The
radius of the hole is 2 in., and g  32 ft/s2.
cAh12gh,
FIGURE 1.3.10
Cooling curve in Problem 5
FIGURE 1.3.11
Ambient temperature in Problem 6
t
T
25
50
minutes
75
100
100
50
200
0
150
t
Tm(t)
12
noon
24
 midnight
36
noon
48
midnight
0
midnight  
20
40
60
80
100
120
6. The ambient temperature Tm in (3) could be a function
of time t. Suppose that in an artiﬁcially controlled
environment, Tm(t) is periodic with a 24-hour period,
as illustrated in Figure 1.3.11. Devise a mathematical
model for the temperature T(t) of a body within this
environment.
Spread of a Disease/Technology
7. Suppose a student carrying a ﬂu virus returns to an iso-
lated college campus of 1000 students. Determine a dif-
ferential equation for the number of people x(t) who have
contracted the ﬂu if the rate at which the disease spreads
is proportional to the number of interactions between the
number of students who have the ﬂu and the number of
students who have not yet been exposed to it.
8. At a time denoted as t  0 a technological innovation is
introduced into a community that has a ﬁxed population
of n people. Determine a differential equation for the
h
circular
hole
10 ft
Aw
FIGURE 1.3.12
Cubical tank in Problem 13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14. The right-circular conical tank shown in Figure 1.3.13
loses water out of a circular hole at its bottom. Determine
a differential equation for the height of the water h at
time t  0. The radius of the hole is 2 in., g  32 ft/s2,
and the friction/contraction factor introduced in Problem
13 is c  0.6.
30
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Newton's Second Law and Archimedes' Principle
18. A cylindrical barrel s feet in diameter of weight w lb
is ﬂoating in water as shown in Figure 1.3.17(a). After
an initial depression the barrel exhibits an up-and-
down bobbing motion along a vertical line. Using
Figure 1.3.17(b), determine a differential equation for
the vertical displacement y(t) if the origin is taken to be
on the vertical axis at the surface of the water when the
barrel is at rest. Use Archimedes'principle: Buoyancy,
or upward force of the water on the barrel, is equal to
the weight of the water displaced. Assume that the
downward direction is positive, that the weight density
of water is 62.4 lb/ft3, and that there is no resistance
between the barrel and the water.
FIGURE 1.3.13
Conical tank in Problem 14
L
R
E
FIGURE 1.3.14
LR-series circuit in Problem 15
FIGURE 1.3.15
RC-series circuit in Problem 16
FIGURE 1.3.16
Air resistance proportional to square of
velocity in Problem 17
R
C
E
FIGURE 1.3.17
Bobbing motion of ﬂoating barrel in
Problem 18
8 ft
circular hole
h
20 ft
Aw
mg
kv2
SKYDIVING
MADE
EASY
0
y(t)
0
surface
s/2
(b)
(a)
s/2
Series Circuits
15. A series circuit contains a resistor and an inductor as
shown in Figure 1.3.14. Determine a differential equa-
tion for the current i(t) if the resistance is R, the induc-
tance is L, and the impressed voltage is E(t).
16. A series circuit contains a resistor and a capacitor as
shown in Figure 1.3.15. Determine a differential equa-
tion for the charge q(t) on the capacitor if the resis-
tance is R, the capacitance is C, and the impressed
voltage is E(t).
Falling Bodies and Air Resistance
17. For high-speed motion through the air—such as the
skydiver shown in Figure 1.3.16, falling before the
parachute is opened—air resistance is closer to a power
of the instantaneous velocity v(t). Determine a differen-
tial equation for the velocity v(t) of a falling body of
mass m if air resistance is proportional to the square of
the instantaneous velocity.
Newton's Second Law and Hooke's Law
19. After a mass m is attached to a spring, it stretches it
s units and then hangs at rest in the equilibrium position
as shown in Figure 1.3.18(b). After the spring/mass
FIGURE 1.3.18
Spring/mass system in Problem 19
unstretched
spring
equilibrium
position
m
x = 0
x(t) > 0
x(t) < 0
m
s
(a)
(b)
(c)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.3
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
●
31
system has been set in motion, let x(t) denote the di-
rected distance of the mass beyond the equilibrium po-
sition. As indicated in Figure 1.3.17(c), assume that the
downward direction is positive, that the motion takes
place in a vertical straight line through the center of
gravity of the mass, and that the only forces acting on
the system are the weight of the mass and the restoring
force of the stretched spring. Use Hooke's law: The
restoring force of a spring is proportional to its total
elongation. Determine a differential equation for the
displacement x(t) at time t  0.
20. In Problem 19, what is a differential equation for the
displacement x(t) if the motion takes place in a
medium that imparts a damping force on the spring/
mass system that is proportional to the instantaneous
velocity of the mass and acts in a direction opposite to
that of motion?
Newton's Second Law and Rocket Motion 
When the mass m of a body is changing with time, Newton's
second law of motion becomes  
(17)
where F is the net force acting on the body and mv is its
momentum. Use (17) in Problems 21 and 22.
21. A small single-stage rocket is launched vertically as
shown in Figure 1.3.19. Once launched, the rocket con-
sumes its fuel, and so its total mass m(t) varies with time
t  0. If it is assumed that the positive direction is up-
ward, air resistance is proportional to the instantaneous
velocity v of the rocket, and R is the upward thrust or
force generated by the propulsion system, then con-
struct a mathematical model for the velocity v(t) of the
rocket. [Hint: See (14) in Section 1.3.]
F  d
dt (mv),
FIGURE 1.3.20
Satellite
in Problem 23
FIGURE 1.3.21
Hole through
Earth in Problem 24
Earth of mass M
R
satellite of 
mass  m 
r
s
u
rf
a
c
e
satellite of 
mass  m 
surface
m
R
r
24. Suppose a hole is drilled through the center of the Earth
and a bowling ball of mass m is dropped into the hole, as
shown in Figure 1.3.21. Construct a mathematical model
that describes the motion of the ball. At time t let r de-
note the distance from the center of the Earth to the mass
m, M denote the mass of the Earth, Mr denote the mass of
that portion of the Earth within a sphere of radius r, and
 denote the constant density of the Earth.
FIGURE 1.3.19
Single-stage rocket in Problem 21
22. In Problem 21, the mass m(t) is the sum of three differ-
ent masses: 
where mp is the
constant mass of the payload, mv is the constant mass of
the vehicle, and mf(t) is the variable amount of fuel.  
(a) Show that the rate at which the total mass m(t) of the
rocket changes is the same as the rate at which the
mass mf(t) of the fuel changes.
(b) If the rocket consumes its fuel at a constant rate ,
ﬁnd m(t). Then rewrite the differential equation in
Problem 21 in terms of 
and the initial total mass
m(0)  m0.
(c) Under the assumption in part (b), show that the
burnout time tb  0 of the rocket, or the time at
which all the fuel is consumed, is 
where mf(0) is the initial mass of the fuel.
Newton's Second Law and the Law 
of Universal Gravitation
23. By Newton's universal law of gravitation the free-fall
acceleration a of a body, such as the satellite shown in
Figure 1.3.20, falling a great distance to the surface is not
the constant g. Rather, the acceleration a is inversely pro-
portional to the square of the distance from the center of
the Earth, a  kr2, where k is the constant of proportion-
ality. Use the fact that at the surface of the Earth r  R and
a  g to determine k. If the positive direction is upward,
use Newton's second law and his universal law of gravita-
tion to ﬁnd a differential equation for the distance r.
tb  mf(0)>l,
l
l
m(t)  mp  mv  mf(t),
James L. Davidson/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

equation that describes the shape of the curve C. Such a
curve C is important in applications ranging from con-
struction of telescopes to satellite antennas, automobile
headlights, and solar collectors. [Hint: Inspection of the
ﬁgure shows that we can write   2. Why? Now use
an appropriate trigonometric identity.]
Discussion Problems
30. Reread Problem 41 in Exercises 1.1 and then give an
explicit solution P(t) for equation (1). Find a one-
parameter family of solutions of (1).
31. Reread the sentence following equation (3) and assume
that Tm is a positive constant. Discuss why we would ex-
pect k  0 in (3) in both cases of cooling and warming.
You might start by interpreting, say, T(t)  Tm in a
graphical manner.
32. Reread the discussion leading up to equation (8). If we
assume that initially the tank holds, say, 50 lb of salt, it
stands to reason that because salt is being added to the
tank continuously for t  0, A(t) should be an increas-
ing function. Discuss how you might determine from
the DE, without actually solving it, the number of
pounds of salt in the tank after a long period of time.
33. Population 
Model
The 
differential 
equation
where k is a positive constant, is a
model of human population P(t) of a certain commu-
nity. Discuss an interpretation for the solution of this
equation. In other words, what kind of population do
you think the differential equation describes?
34. Rotating Fluid
As shown in Figure 1.3.24(a), a right-
circular cylinder partially ﬁlled with ﬂuid is rotated
with a constant angular velocity  about a vertical y-axis
through its center. The rotating ﬂuid forms a surface of
revolution S. To identify S, we ﬁrst establish a coordinate
system consisting of a vertical plane determined by the
y-axis and an x-axis drawn perpendicular to the y-axis
such that the point of intersection of the axes (the origin)
is located at the lowest point on the surface S. We then
seek a function y  f(x) that represents the curve C of in-
tersection of the surface S and the vertical coordinate
plane. Let the point P(x, y) denote the position of a parti-
cle of the rotating ﬂuid of mass m in the coordinate
plane. See Figure 1.3.23(b).
(a) At P there is a reaction force of magnitude F due to
the other particles of the ﬂuid which is normal to the
surface S. By Newton's second law the magnitude
of the net force acting on the particle is m2x. What
is this force? Use Figure 1.3.24(b) to discuss the na-
ture and origin of the equations
(b) Use part (a) to ﬁnd a ﬁrst-order differential equation
that deﬁnes the function y  f (x).
F cos   mg,    F sin   m2x.
dP
dt  (k cos t)P,
32
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Additional Mathematical Models
25. Learning Theory
In the theory of learning, the rate at
which a subject is memorized is assumed to be pro-
portional to the amount that is left to be memorized.
Suppose M denotes the total amount of a subject to be
memorized and A(t) is the amount memorized in time
t  0. Determine a differential equation for the amount
A(t).
26. Forgetfulness
In Problem 25 assume that the rate at
which material is forgotten is proportional to the amount
memorized in time t  0. Determine a differential equa-
tion for the amount A(t) when forgetfulness is taken into
account.
27. Infusion of a Drug
A drug is infused into a patient's
bloodstream at a constant rate of r grams per second.
Simultaneously, the drug is removed at a rate proportional
to the amount x(t) of the drug present at time t. Determine
a differential equation for the amount x(t).
28. Tractrix
Aperson P, starting at the origin, moves in the
direction of the positive x-axis, pulling a weight along
the curve C, called a tractrix, as shown in Figure 1.3.22.
The weight, initially located on the y-axis at (0, s), is
pulled by a rope of constant length s, which is kept taut
throughout the motion. Determine a differential equation
for the path C of motion. Assume that the rope is always
tangent to C.
FIGURE 1.3.22
Tractrix curve in Problem 28
FIGURE 1.3.23
Reﬂecting surface in Problem 29
y
x
(0, s)
(x, y)
y
s
P
θ
C
C
θ
θ
φ
x
y
O
P(x, y)
L
tangent
29. Reﬂecting Surface
Assume that when the plane
curve C shown in Figure 1.3.23 is revolved about the
x-axis, it generates a surface of revolution with the
property that all light rays L parallel to the x-axis strik-
ing the surface are reﬂected to a single point O (the
origin). Use the fact that the angle of incidence is equal
to the angle of reﬂection to determine a differential
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1
IN REVIEW
●
33
35. Falling Body
In Problem 23, suppose r  R  s,
where s is the distance from the surface of the Earth to
the falling body. What does the differential equation
obtained in Problem 23 become when s is very small in
comparison to R? [Hint: Think binomial series for 
(R  s)2  R2 (1  sR)2.]
ω
P
y
x
θ
θ mg
2x
mω
P(x, y)
F
tangent line to
curve C at P
curve C of
intersection
of xy-plane
and surface
of revolution
(a)
(b)
y
FIGURE 1.3.24
Rotating ﬂuid in Problem 34
36. Raindrops Keep Falling
In meteorology the term
virga refers to falling raindrops or ice particles that
evaporate before they reach the ground. Assume that a
typical raindrop is spherical. Starting at some time,
which we can designate as t  0, the raindrop of radius
r0 falls from rest from a cloud and begins to evaporate.
(a) If it is assumed that a raindrop evaporates in such a
manner that its shape remains spherical, then it also
makes sense to assume that the rate at which the rain-
drop evaporates—that is, the rate at which it loses
mass—is proportional to its surface area. Show that
this latter assumption implies that the rate at which
the radius r of the raindrop decreases is a constant.
Find r(t). [Hint: See Problem 51 in Exercises 1.1.]
(b) If the positive direction is downward, construct a
mathematical model for the velocity v of the falling
raindrop at time t  0. Ignore air resistance. [Hint:
Use the form of Newton's second law given in
(17).]
37. Let It Snow
The "snowplow problem" is a classic
and appears in many differential equations texts, but it
was probably made famous by Ralph Palmer Agnew:
One day it started snowing at a heavy and steady
rate. A snowplow started out at noon, going 2 miles
the ﬁrst hour and 1 mile the second hour. What time
did it start snowing?
Find the textbook Differential Equations, Ralph Palmer
Agnew, McGraw-Hill Book Co., and then discuss the
construction and solution of the mathematical model.
38. Reread this section and classify each mathematical
model as linear or nonlinear.
CHAPTER 1 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-1.
In Problems 1 and 2 ﬁll in the blank and then write this result
as a linear ﬁrst-order differential equation that is free of the
symbol c1 and has the form dydx  f (x, y). The symbol c1
represents a constant.
1.
2.
In Problems 3 and 4 ﬁll in the blank and then write this result
as a linear second-order differential equation that is free of
the symbols c1 and c2 and has the form F(y, y)  0. The
symbols c1, c2, and k represent constants.
3.
4. d 2
dx2 (c1 cosh kx  c2 sinh kx) 
d 2
dx2 (c1 cos kx  c2 sin kx) 
d
dx (5  c1e2x) 
d
dx c1e10x 
In Problems 5 and 6 compute y and y and then combine
these derivatives with y as a linear second-order differential
equation that is free of the symbols c1 and c2 and has the form
F(y, y y)  0. The symbols c1 and c2 represent constants.
5. y  c1ex  c2xex
6. y  c1ex cos x  c2ex sin x
In Problems 7-12 match each of the given differential equa-
tions with one or more of these solutions:
(a) y  0,
(b) y  2,
(c) y  2x,
(d) y  2x2.
7. xy  2y
8. y  2
9. y  2y  4
10. xy  y
11. y  9y  18
12. xy  y  0
In Problems 13 and 14 determine by inspection at least one
solution of the given differential equation.
13. y  y
14. y  y(y  3)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Problems 27-30 verify that the indicated expression is an
implicit solution of the given differential equation.
27.
28.
29.
30.
In Problems 31-34, y  c1e3x  c2ex  2x is a two-
parameter family of the second-order DE y  2y  3y 
6x  4. Find a solution of the second-order IVP consisting
of this differential equation and the given initial conditions.
31. y (0)  0, y(0)  0
32. y (0)  1, y(0)  3
33. y (1)  4, y(1)  2
34. y (1)  0, y(1)  1
35. The graph of a solution of a second-order initial-value
problem d2ydx2  f (x, y, y), y(2)  y0, y(2)  y1, is
given in Figure 1.R.1. Use the graph to estimate the val-
ues of y0 and y1.
(1  xy)y  y2;  y  exy
y  2y(y)3;  y3  3y  1  3x

dy
dx
2
 1  1
y2 ;  (x  5)2  y2  1
x dy
dx  y  1
y2;  x3y3  x3  1
34
●
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
In Problems 15 and 16 interpret each statement as a differen-
tial equation.
15. On the graph of y  (x) the slope of the tangent line at
a point P(x, y) is the square of the distance from P(x, y) to
the origin.
16. On the graph of y  (x) the rate at which the slope
changes with respect to x at a point P(x, y) is the nega-
tive of the slope of the tangent line at P(x, y).
17. (a) Give the domain of the function y  x2/3.
(b) Give the largest interval I of deﬁnition over which
y  x2/3 is solution of the differential equation 
3xy  2y  0.
18. (a) Verify that the one-parameter family y2  2y 
x2  x  c is an implicit solution of the differential
equation (2y  2)y  2x  1.
(b) Find a member of the one-parameter family in
part (a) that satisﬁes the initial condition y(0)  1.
(c) Use your result in part (b) to ﬁnd an explicit
function y  (x) that satisﬁes y(0)  1. Give the
domain of the function . Is y  (x) a solution of
the initial-value problem? If so, give its interval I of
deﬁnition; if not, explain.
19. Given that y  x  2x is a solution of the DE xy 
y  2x. Find x0 and the largest interval I for which y(x) is
a solution of the ﬁrst-order IVP xy  y  2x, y(x0)  1.
20. Suppose that y(x) denotes a solution of the first-order
IVP y  x2  y2, y(1)  1 and that y(x) possesses
at least a second derivative at x  1. In some neigh-
borhood of x  1 use the DE to determine whether
y(x) is increasing or decreasing and whether the graph
y(x) is concave up or concave down.
21. A differential equation may possess more than one fam-
ily of solutions.
(a) Plot 
different 
members 
of 
the 
families 
y  1(x)  x2  c1 and y  2(x)  x2  c2.
(b) Verify that y  1(x) and y  2(x) are two
solutions of the nonlinear ﬁrst-order differential
equation (y)2  4x2.
(c) Construct a piecewise-deﬁned function that is a
solution of the nonlinear DE in part (b) but is not a
member of either family of solutions in part (a).
22. What is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of a
solution of 
that passes through (1, 4)?
In Problems 23-26 verify that the indicated function is an
explicit solution of the given differential equation. Give an
interval of deﬁnition I for each solution.
23. y  y  2 cos x  2 sin x;
y  x sin x  x cos x
24. y  y  sec x;
y  x sin x  (cos x)ln(cos x)
25. x2y  xy  y  0;
y  sin(ln x)
26. x2y  xy  y  sec(ln x);
y  cos(ln x) ln(cos(ln x))  (ln x) sin(ln x)
y  61y  5x3
y
x
5
−5
5
FIGURE 1.R.1
Graph for Problem 35
36. A tank in the form of a right-circular cylinder of radius
2 feet and height 10 feet is standing on end. If the tank
is initially full of water and water leaks from a circular
hole of radius inch at its bottom, determine a differen-
tial equation for the height h of the water at time t  0.
Ignore friction and contraction of water at the hole.
37. The number of ﬁeld mice in a certain pasture is given by
the function 200  10t, where time t is measured in
years. Determine a differential equation governing a
population of owls that feed on the mice if the rate at
which the owl population grows is proportional to the
difference between the number of owls at time t and
number of ﬁeld mice at time t  0.
38. Suppose that dAdt  0.0004332 A(t) represents a
mathematical model for the radioactive decay of radium-
226, where A(t) is the amount of radium (measured in
grams) remaining at time t (measured in years). How
much of the radium sample remains at the time t when
the sample is decaying at a rate of 0.002 gram per year?
1
2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

35
2
2.1 Solution Curves Without a Solution
2.1.1 Direction Fields
2.1.2 Autonomous First-Order DEs
2.2 Separable Equations
2.3 Linear Equations
2.4 Exact Equations
2.5 Solutions by Substitutions
2.6 A Numerical Method
Chapter 2 in Review
The history of mathematics is rife with stories of people who devoted much of
their lives to solving equations—algebraic equations at ﬁrst and then eventually
differential equations. In Sections 2.2-2.5 we will study some of the more
important analytical methods for solving ﬁrst-order DEs. However, before we start
solving anything, you should be aware of two facts: It is possible for a differential
equation to have no solutions, and a differential equation can possess solutions, yet
there might not exist any analytical method for solving it. In Sections 2.1 and 2.6
we do not solve any DEs but show how to glean information about solutions
directly from the equation itself. In Section 2.1 we see how the DE yields
qualitative information about graphs that enables us to sketch renditions of solution
curves. In Section 2.6 we use the differential equation to construct a procedure,
called a numerical method, for approximating solutions.
First-Order Differential Equations
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
solution 
curv e 
(a) lineal element at a point
(b) lineal element is tangent to
solution curve that passes
through the point
slope = 1.2
(2, 3)
x
y
tangent
(2, 3)
x
y
FIGURE 2.1.1
A solution curve is
tangent to lineal element at (2, 3)
SOLUTION CURVES WITHOUT A SOLUTION
REVIEW MATERIAL
●The ﬁrst derivative as slope of a tangent line
●The algebraic sign of the ﬁrst derivative indicates increasing or decreasing
INTRODUCTION
Let us imagine for the moment that we have in front of us a ﬁrst-order differ-
ential equation dydx  f (x, y), and let us further imagine that we can neither ﬁnd nor invent a
method for solving it analytically. This is not as bad a predicament as one might think, since the dif-
ferential equation itself can sometimes "tell" us speciﬁcs about how its solutions "behave."
We begin our study of ﬁrst-order differential equations with two ways of analyzing a DE qual-
itatively. Both these ways enable us to determine, in an approximate sense, what a solution curve
must look like without actually solving the equation.
2.1
2.1.1
DIRECTION FIELDS
Some Fundamental Questions
We saw in Section 1.2 that whenever f (x, y)
and fy satisfy certain continuity conditions, qualitative questions about existence
and uniqueness of solutions can be answered. In this section we shall see that other
qualitative questions about properties of solutions—How does a solution behave
near a certain point? How does a solution behave as 
?—can often be an-
swered when the function f depends solely on the variable y. We begin, however, with
a simple concept from calculus: 
A derivative dydx of a differentiable function y  y(x) gives slopes of tangent
lines at points on its graph.
Slope
Because a solution y  y(x) of a ﬁrst-order differential equation
(1)
is necessarily a differentiable function on its interval I of deﬁnition, it must also be con-
tinuous on I. Thus the corresponding solution curve on I must have no breaks and must
possess a tangent line at each point (x, y(x)). The function f in the normal form (1) is
called the slope function or rate function. The slope of the tangent line at (x, y(x)) on
a solution curve is the value of the ﬁrst derivative dydx at this point, and we know
from (1) that this is the value of the slope function f(x, y(x)). Now suppose that (x, y)
represents any point in a region of the xy-plane over which the function f is deﬁned. The
value f(x, y) that the function f assigns to the point represents the slope of a line or, as
we shall envision it, a line segment called a lineal element. For example, consider the
equation dydx  0.2xy, where f(x, y)  0.2xy. At, say, the point (2, 3) the slope of a
lineal element is f(2, 3)  0.2(2)(3)  1.2. Figure 2.1.1(a) shows a line segment with
slope 1.2 passing though (2, 3). As shown in Figure 2.1.1(b), if a solution curve also
passes through the point (2, 3), it does so tangent to this line segment; in other words,
the lineal element is a miniature tangent line at that point.
Direction Field
If we systematically evaluate f over a rectangular grid of
points in the xy-plane and draw a line element at each point (x, y) of the grid with
slope f (x, y), then the collection of all these line elements is called a direction ﬁeld
or a slope ﬁeld of the differential equation dydx  f (x, y). Visually, the direction
ﬁeld suggests the appearance or shape of a family of solution curves of the
differential equation, and consequently, it may be possible to see at a glance certain
qualitative aspects of the solutions—regions in the plane, for example, in which a
dy
dx  f (x, y)
x : 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.1
SOLUTION CURVES WITHOUT A SOLUTION
●
37
solution exhibits an unusual behavior. A single solution curve that passes through a
direction ﬁeld must follow the ﬂow pattern of the ﬁeld; it is tangent to a lineal element
when it intersects a point in the grid. Figure 2.1.2 shows a computer-generated direc-
tion ﬁeld of the differential equation dydx  sin(x  y) over a region of the xy-plane.
Note how the three solution curves shown in color follow the ﬂow of the ﬁeld.
EXAMPLE 1
Direction Field
The direction ﬁeld for the differential equation dydx  0.2xy shown in Figure 2.1.3(a)
was obtained by using computer software in which a 5  5 grid of points (mh, nh),
m and n integers, was deﬁned by letting 5  m  5, 5  n  5, and h  1.
Notice in Figure 2.1.3(a) that at any point along the x-axis (y  0) and the
y-axis (x  0), the slopes are f (x, 0)  0 and f (0, y)  0, respectively, so the lineal
elements are horizontal. Moreover, observe in the ﬁrst quadrant that for a ﬁxed value
of x the values of f (x, y)  0.2xy increase as y increases; similarly, for a ﬁxed y the
values of f (x, y)  0.2xy increase as x increases. This means that as both x and y
increase, the lineal elements almost become vertical and have positive slope ( f(x, y) 
0.2xy 	 0 for x 	 0, y 	 0). In the second quadrant,  f (x, y) increases as x and y
increase, so the lineal elements again become almost vertical but this time have
negative slope ( f (x, y)  0.2xy 
 0 for x 
 0, y 	 0). Reading from left to right,
imagine a solution curve that starts at a point in the second quadrant, moves steeply
downward, becomes ﬂat as it passes through the y-axis, and then, as it enters the ﬁrst
quadrant, moves steeply upward—in other words, its shape would be concave
upward and similar to a horseshoe. From this it could be surmised that y : 
as x : . Now in the third and fourth quadrants, since f (x, y)  0.2xy 	 0 and
f (x, y)  0.2xy 
 0, respectively, the situation is reversed: Asolution curve increases
and then decreases as we move from left to right. We saw in (1) of Section 1.1 that
is an explicit solution of the differential equation dydx  0.2xy; you
should verify that a one-parameter family of solutions of the same equation is given
by
. For purposes of comparison with Figure 2.1.3(a) some representative
graphs of members of this family are shown in Figure 2.1.3(b).
y  ce0.1x2
y  e0.1x2
EXAMPLE 2
Direction Field
Use a direction ﬁeld to sketch an approximate solution curve for the initial-value
problem dydx  sin y,
.
SOLUTION
Before proceeding, recall that from the continuity of f (x, y)  sin y and
fy  cos y, Theorem 1.2.1 guarantees the existence of a unique solution curve
passingthroughanyspeciﬁedpoint(x0, y0)intheplane.Nowwesetourcomputersoft-
ware again for a 5  5 rectangular region and specify (because of the initial condition)
points in that region with vertical and horizontal separation of 
unit—that is, at
points (mh, nh), 
, m and n integers such that 10  m  10, 10  n  10.
The result is shown in Figure 2.1.4. Because the right-hand side of dydx  sin y is 0
at y  0, and at y  , the lineal elements are horizontal at all points whose second
coordinates are y  0 or y  . It makes sense then that a solution curve passing
through the initial point (0, 
has the shape shown in the ﬁgure.
Increasing/Decreasing
Interpretation of the derivative dydx as a function
that gives slope plays the key role in the construction of a direction ﬁeld. Another
telling property of the ﬁrst derivative will be used next, namely, if dydx 	 0 (or
dydx 
 0) for all x in an interval I, then a differentiable function y  y(x) is
increasing (or decreasing) on I.
3
2)
h  1
2
1
2
y(0)  3
2
c>0 
c<0 
x
y
4
_4
_4
_2
2
4
_4
_2
2
4
_2
2
4
_4
_2
2
x
y
c=0 
(b) some solution curves in the
family y  ce0.1x2
(a) direction ﬁeld for
dy/dx  0.2xy
FIGURE 2.1.3
Direction ﬁeld and
solution curves in Example 1
FIGURE 2.1.2
Solution curves
following ﬂow of a direction ﬁeld
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

x
y
_4
_2
2
4
4
_4
_2
2
FIGURE 2.1.4
Direction ﬁeld in
Example 2 on page 37
38
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
REMARKS
Sketching a direction ﬁeld by hand is straightforward but time consuming; it is
probably one of those tasks about which an argument can be made for doing it
once or twice in a lifetime, but it is overall most efﬁciently carried out by means
of computer software. Before calculators, PCs, and software the method of
isoclines was used to facilitate sketching a direction ﬁeld by hand. For the DE
dydx  f (x, y), any member of the family of curves f (x, y)  c, c a constant,
is called an isocline. Lineal elements drawn through points on a speciﬁc iso-
cline, say, f(x, y)  c1 all have the same slope c1. In Problem 15 in Exercises 2.1
you have your two opportunities to sketch a direction ﬁeld by hand.
2.1.2
AUTONOMOUS FIRST-ORDER DEs
Autonomous First-Order DEs
In Section 1.1 we divided the class of ordi-
nary differential equations into two types: linear and nonlinear. We now consider
brieﬂy another kind of classiﬁcation of ordinary differential equations, a classiﬁca-
tion that is of particular importance in the qualitative investigation of differential
equations. An ordinary differential equation in which the independent variable does
not appear explicitly is said to be autonomous. If the symbol x denotes the indepen-
dent variable, then an autonomous ﬁrst-order differential equation can be written as
f (y, y)  0 or in normal form as
.
(2)
We shall assume throughout that the function f in (2) and its derivative f  are contin-
uous functions of y on some interval I. The ﬁrst-order equations
f (y)
f (x, y)
p
p
are autonomous and nonautonomous, respectively.
Many differential equations encountered in applications or equations that are
models of physical laws that do not change over time are autonomous. As we have
already seen in Section 1.3, in an applied context, symbols other than y and x are rou-
tinely used to represent the dependent and independent variables. For example, if t
represents time then inspection of
,
where k, n, and Tm are constants, shows that each equation is time independent.
Indeed, all of the ﬁrst-order differential equations introduced in Section 1.3 are time
independent and so are autonomous.
Critical Points
The zeros of the function f in (2) are of special importance. We
say that a real number c is a critical point of the autonomous differential equation (2)
if it is a zero of f—that is, f(c)  0. A critical point is also called an equilibrium
point or stationary point. Now observe that if we substitute the constant function
y(x)  c into (2), then both sides of the equation are zero. This means:
If c is a critical point of (2), then y(x)  c is a constant solution of the
autonomous differential equation.
A constant solution y(x)  c of (2) is called an equilibrium solution; equilibria are
the only constant solutions of (2).
dA
dt  kA,    dx
dt  kx(n  1  x),    dT
dt  k(T  Tm),    dA
dt  6 
1
100 A
dy
dx  1  y2    and    dy
dx  0.2xy
dy
dx  f (y)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As was already mentioned, we can tell when a nonconstant solution y  y(x) of
(2) is increasing or decreasing by determining the algebraic sign of the derivative
dydx; in the case of (2) we do this by identifying intervals on the y-axis over which
the function f (y) is positive or negative.
2.1
SOLUTION CURVES WITHOUT A SOLUTION
●
39
EXAMPLE 3
An Autonomous DE
The differential equation
where a and b are positive constants, has the normal form dPdt  f(P), which is (2)
with t and P playing the parts of x and y, respectively, and hence is autonomous.
From f(P)  P(a  bP)  0 we see that 0 and ab are critical points of the equation,
so the equilibrium solutions are P(t)  0 and P(t)  ab. By putting the critical points
on a vertical line, we divide the line into three intervals deﬁned by  
 P 
 0,
0 
 P 
 ab, ab 
 P 
 . The arrows on the line shown in Figure 2.1.5 indicate
the algebraic sign of f(P)  P(a  bP) on these intervals and whether a nonconstant
solution P(t) is increasing or decreasing on an interval. The following table explains
the ﬁgure.
Interval
Sign of f (P)
P(t)
Arrow
(, 0)
minus
decreasing
points down
(0, ab)
plus
increasing
points up
(ab, )
minus
decreasing
points down
Figure 2.1.5 is called a one-dimensional phase portrait, or simply phase
portrait, of the differential equation dPdt  P(a  bP). The vertical line is called a
phase line.
Solution Curves
Without solving an autonomous differential equation, we
can usually say a great deal about its solution curves. Since the function f in (2) is
independent of the variable x, we may consider f deﬁned for  
 x 
  or for 
0  x 
 . Also, since f and its derivative f are continuous functions of y on some
interval I of the y-axis, the fundamental results of Theorem 1.2.1 hold in some hori-
zontal strip or region R in the xy-plane corresponding to I, and so through any point
(x0, y0) in R there passes only one solution curve of (2). See Figure 2.1.6(a). For the
sake of discussion, let us suppose that (2) possesses exactly two critical points c1 and
c2 and that c1 
 c2. The graphs of the equilibrium solutions y(x)  c1 and y(x)  c2
are horizontal lines, and these lines partition the region R into three subregions R1,
R2, and R3, as illustrated in Figure 2.1.6(b). Without proof here are some conclusions
that we can draw about a nonconstant solution y(x) of (2):
•
If (x0, y0) is in a subregion Ri, i  1, 2, 3, and y(x) is a solution whose
graph passes through this point, then y(x) remains in the subregion Ri for all
x. As illustrated in Figure 2.1.6(b), the solution y(x) in R2 is bounded below
by c1 and above by c2, that is, c1 
 y(x) 
 c2 for all x. The solution curve
stays within R2 for all x because the graph of a nonconstant solution of (2)
cannot cross the graph of either equilibrium solution y(x)  c1 or y(x)  c2.
See Problem 33 in Exercises 2.1.
•
By continuity of f we must then have either f (y) 	 0 or f (y) 
 0 for all x in
a subregion Ri, i  1, 2, 3. In other words, f (y) cannot change signs in a
subregion. See Problem 33 in Exercises 2.1.
dP
dt  P(a  bP),
P-axis
a 
0 
b 
FIGURE 2.1.5
Phase portrait of 
DE in Example 3
R
I
R1
R2
(x0, y0)
(x0, y0)
y(x) = c2
y(x) = c1
R3
y
y
x
x
(a) region R
(b) subregions R1, R2, and R3 of R
FIGURE 2.1.6
Lines y(x)  c1 and
y(x)  c2 partition R into three horizontal
subregions
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R1
R2
P0
P0
P0
P
P
a 
b 
0 
t
R3
phase line
decreasing
decreasing
increasing
tP-plane
FIGURE 2.1.7
Phase portrait and
solution curves in Example 4
40
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
•
Since dydx  f (y(x)) is either positive or negative in a subregion Ri, i  1,
2, 3, a solution y(x) is strictly monotonic—that is, y(x) is either increasing
or decreasing in the subregion Ri. Therefore y(x) cannot be oscillatory, nor
can it have a relative extremum (maximum or minimum). See Problem 33
in Exercises 2.1.
•
If y(x) is bounded above by a critical point c1 (as in subregion R1 where 
y(x) 
 c1 for all x), then the graph of y(x) must approach the graph of the
equilibrium solution y(x)  c1 either as x :  or as x : . If y(x) is
bounded—that is, bounded above and below by two consecutive critical
points (as in subregion R2 where c1 
 y(x) 
 c2 for all x)—then the graph
of y(x) must approach the graphs of the equilibrium solutions y(x)  c1 and 
y(x)  c2, one as x :  and the other as x : . If y(x) is bounded below
by a critical point (as in subregion R3 where c2 
 y(x) for all x), then the
graph of y(x) must approach the graph of the equilibrium solution y(x)  c2
either as x :  or as x : . See Problem 34 in Exercises 2.1.
With the foregoing facts in mind, let us reexamine the differential equation in
Example 3.
EXAMPLE 4
Example 3 Revisited
The three intervals determined on the P-axis or phase line by the critical points 0 and
ab now correspond in the tP-plane to three subregions deﬁned by:
R1:  
 P 
 0,
R2: 0 
 P 
 ab,
and
R3: ab 
 P 
 ,
where  
 t 
 . The phase portrait in Figure 2.1.7 tells us that P(t) is decreasing
in R1, increasing in R2, and decreasing in R3. If P(0)  P0 is an initial value, then in
R1, R2, and R3 we have, respectively, the following:
(i)
For P0 
 0, P(t) is bounded above. Since P(t) is decreasing, P(t)
decreases without bound for increasing t, and so P(t) : 0 as t : .
This means that the negative t-axis, the graph of the equilibrium solution
P(t)  0, is a horizontal asymptote for a solution curve.
(ii)
For 0 
 P0 
 ab, P(t) is bounded. Since P(t) is increasing, P(t) : ab
as t :  and P(t) : 0 as t : . The graphs of the two equilibrium
solutions, P(t)  0 and P(t)  ab, are horizontal lines that are horizontal
asymptotes for any solution curve starting in this subregion.
(iii)
For P0 	 ab, P(t) is bounded below. Since P(t) is decreasing, P(t) : ab
as t : . The graph of the equilibrium solution P(t)  ab is a horizontal
asymptote for a solution curve.
In Figure 2.1.7 the phase line is the P-axis in the tP-plane. For clarity the origi-
nal phase line from Figure 2.1.5 is reproduced to the left of the plane in which
the subregions R1, R2, and R3 are shaded. The graphs of the equilibrium solutions
P(t)  ab and P(t)  0 (the t-axis) are shown in the ﬁgure as blue dashed lines;
the solid graphs represent typical graphs of P(t) illustrating the three cases just
discussed.
In a subregion such as R1 in Example 4, where P(t) is decreasing and unbounded
below, we must necessarily have P(t) : . Do not interpret this last statement to
mean P(t) :  as t : ; we could have P(t) :  as t : T, where T 	 0 is a
ﬁnite number that depends on the initial condition P(t0)  P0. Thinking in dynamic
terms, P(t) could "blow up" in ﬁnite time; thinking graphically, P(t) could have a
vertical asymptote at t  T 	 0. A similar remark holds for the subregion R3.
The differential equation dydx  sin y in Example 2 is autonomous and has an
inﬁnite number of critical points, since sin y  0 at y  n, n an integer. Moreover,
we now know that because the solution y(x) that passes through 
is bounded
(0, 3
2)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

above and below by two consecutive critical points ( 
 y(x) 
 0) and is
decreasing (sin y 
 0 for  
 y 
 0), the graph of y(x) must approach the graphs
of the equilibrium solutions as horizontal asymptotes: y(x) :  as x :  and
y(x) : 0 as x : .
2.1
SOLUTION CURVES WITHOUT A SOLUTION
●
41
EXAMPLE 5
Solution Curves of an Autonomous DE
The autonomous equation dydx  (y  1)2 possesses the single critical point 1.
From the phase portrait in Figure 2.1.8(a) we conclude that a solution y(x) is an
increasing function in the subregions deﬁned by  
 y 
 1 and 1 
 y 
 , where
 
 x 
 . For an initial condition y(0)  y0 
 1, a solution y(x) is increasing and
bounded above by 1, and so y(x) : 1 as x : ; for y(0)  y0 	 1 a solution y(x) is
increasing and unbounded.
Now y(x)  1  1(x  c) is a one-parameter family of solutions of the differ-
ential equation. (See Problem 4 in Exercises 2.2.) A given initial condition deter-
mines a value for c. For the initial conditions, say, y(0)  1 
 1 and y(0)  2 	 1,
we ﬁnd, in turn, that y(x)  1  1(x 
, and y(x)  1  1(x  1). As shown in
Figures 2.1.8(b) and 2.1.8(c), the graph of each of these rational functions possesses
1
2)
c 
c 
c 
c 
y0
(d)
y0
(c)
y0
(b)
y0
(a)
FIGURE 2.1.9
Critical point c is an
attractor in (a), a repeller in (b), and semi-
stable in (c) and (d).
1 
increasing
y
increasing
(a) phase line
(0, −1)
y
1
1
2
x
x
y
(b) xy-plane
y(0)  1
(0, 2)
y
1
x
1
x
y
(c) xy-plane
y(0)  1
=
=
=
= −
FIGURE 2.1.8
Behavior of solutions near y  1 in Example 5
a vertical asymptote. But bear in mind that the solutions of the IVPs
are deﬁned on special intervals. They are, respectively,
The solution curves are the portions of the graphs in Figures 2.1.8(b) and
2.1.8(c) shown in blue. As predicted by the phase portrait, for the solution curve
in Figure 2.1.8(b), y(x) : 1 as x : ; for the solution curve in Figure 2.1.8(c),
y(x) :  as x : 1 from the left.
Attractors and Repellers
Suppose that y(x) is a nonconstant solution of the
autonomous differential equation given in (1) and that c is a critical point of the DE.
There are basically three types of behavior that y(x) can exhibit near c. In
Figure 2.1.9 we have placed c on four vertical phase lines. When both arrowheads on
either side of the dot labeled c point toward c, as in Figure 2.1.9(a), all solutions y(x)
of (1) that start from an initial point (x0, y0) sufﬁciently near c exhibit the asymp-
totic behavior 
. For this reason the critical point c is said to be
limx:  y(x)  c
y(x)  1 
1
x  1
2
,  1
2 
 x 
    and   y(x)  1 
1
x  1
,   
 x 
 1.
dy
dx  ( y  1)2,  y(0)  1    and    dy
dx  (y  1)2,  y(0)  2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

slopes of lineal
elements on a
vertical line vary
slopes of lineal
elements on a horizontal
line are all the same
x
y
y 
FIGURE 2.1.10
Direction ﬁeld for an
autonomous DE
x
y
y = 0
y = 3
FIGURE 2.1.11
Translated solution
curves of an autonomous DE
42
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
asymptotically stable. Using a physical analogy, a solution that starts near c is like a
charged particle that, over time, is drawn to a particle of opposite charge, and so c is
also referred to as an attractor. When both arrowheads on either side of the dot
labeled c point away from c, as in Figure 2.1.9(b), all solutions y(x) of (1) that start
from an initial point (x0, y0) move away from c as x increases. In this case the critical
point c is said to be unstable. An unstable critical point is also called a repeller, for
obvious reasons. The critical point c illustrated in Figures 2.1.9(c) and 2.1.9(d) is
neither an attractor nor a repeller. But since c exhibits characteristics of both an
attractor and a repeller—that is, a solution starting from an initial point (x0, y0) sufﬁ-
ciently near c is attracted to c from one side and repelled from the other side—we say
that the critical point c is semi-stable. In Example 3 the critical point ab is
asymptotically stable (an attractor) and the critical point 0 is unstable (a repeller).
The critical point 1 in Example 5 is semi-stable.
Autonomous DEs and Direction Fields
If a ﬁrst-order differential equa-
tion is autonomous, then we see from the right-hand side of its normal form dydx 
f(y) that slopes of lineal elements through points in the rectangular grid used to con-
struct a direction ﬁeld for the DE depend solely on the y-coordinate of the points.
Put another way, lineal elements passing through points on any horizontal line must
all have the same slope and therefore are parallel; slopes of lineal elements along any
vertical line will, of course, vary. These facts are apparent from inspection of the hor-
izontal yellow strip and vertical blue strip in Figure 2.1.10. The ﬁgure exhibits a di-
rection ﬁeld for the autonomous equation dydx  2(y  1). The red lineal elements
in Figure 2.1.10 have zero slope because they lie along the graph of the equilibrium
solution y  1.
Translation Property
You may recall from precalculus mathematics that the
graph of a function 
, where k is a constant, is the graph of 
rigidly translated or shifted horizontally along the x-axis by an amount 
the trans-
lation is to the right if k 	 0 and to the left if k 
 0. It turns out that under the condi-
tions stipulated for (2), solution curves of an autonomous ﬁrst-order DE are related
by the concept of translation. To see this, let's consider the differential equation
dydx  y(3  y), which is a special case of the autonomous equation considered in
Examples 3 and 4. Because y  0 and y  3 are equilibrium solutions of the DE,
their graphs divide the xy-plane into three subregions 
In Figure 2.1.11 we have superimposed on a direction ﬁeld of the DE six solutions
curves. The ﬁgure illustrates that all solution curves of the same color, that is, solu-
tion curves lying within a particular subregion Ri, all look alike. This is no coinci-
dence but is a natural consequence of the fact that lineal elements passing through
points on any horizontal line are parallel. That said, the following translation prop-
erty of an automonous DE should make sense:
If y(x) is a solution of an autonomous differential equation dydx  f(y), then
y1(x)  y(x  k), k a constant, is also a solution.
Thus, if y(x) is a solution of the initial-value problem dydx  f(y), y(0)  y0, then
y1(x)  y(x  x0) is a solution of the IVPdydx  f(y), y(x0)  y0. For example, it is easy
to verify that 
is a solution of the IVP dydx  y, y(0)  1
and so a solution y1(x) of, say, dydx  y, y(5)  1 is y(x)  ex translated 5 units to
the right:
y1(x)  y(x  5)  ex5,  
 x 
 .
y(x)  ex,  
 x 
 ,
R1:  
 y 
 0,  R2: 0 
 y 
 3,  and  R3: 3 
 y 
 .
R1, R2, and R3:
k;
y  f(x)
y  f(x  k)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

x
3
2
1
_1
_2
_3
_3
_2
_1
1
2
3
y
FIGURE 2.1.12
Direction ﬁeld for Problem 1
x
y
8
_8
_8
_4
4
8
_4
4
FIGURE 2.1.13
Direction ﬁeld for Problem 2
2.
(a) y(6)  0
(b) y(0)  1
(c) y(0)  4
(d) y(8)  4
dy
dx  e0.01xy2
In Problems 5-12 use computer software to obtain a direc-
tion ﬁeld for the given differential equation. By hand, sketch
an approximate solution curve passing through each of the
given points.
5. y  x
6. y  x  y
(a) y(0)  0
(a) y(2)  2
(b) y(0)  3
(b) y(1)  3
7.
8.
(a) y(1)  1
(a) y(0)  1
(b) y(0)  4
(b) y(2)  1
9.
10.
(a)
(a) y(0)  2
(b) y(2)  1
(b) y(1)  2.5
y(0)  1
2
dy
dx  xey
dy
dx  0.2x2  y
dy
dx  1
y
y dy
dx  x
2.1
SOLUTION CURVES WITHOUT A SOLUTION
●
43
EXERCISES 2.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-1.
2.1.1
DIRECTION FIELDS
In Problems 1-4 reproduce the given computer-generated
direction ﬁeld. Then sketch, by hand, an approximate solu-
tion curve that passes through each of the indicated points.
Use different colored pencils for each solution curve.
1.
(a) y(2)  1
(b) y(3)  0
(c) y(0)  2
(d) y(0)  0
dy
dx  x2  y2
3.
(a) y(0)  0
(b) y(1)  0
(c) y(2)  2
(d) y(0)  4
dy
dx  1  xy
4.
(a) y(0)  1
(b) y(1)  0
(c) y(3)  3
(d) y(0)  5
2
dy
dx  (sin x) cos y
x
y
4
_4
_4
_2
2
4
_2
2
FIGURE 2.1.14
Direction ﬁeld for Problem 3
x
y
4
_4
_4
_2
2
4
_2
2
FIGURE 2.1.15
Direction ﬁeld for Problem 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
13.
11.
12.
(a) y(2)  2
(a)
(b) y(1)  0
(b)
In Problems 13 and 14 the given ﬁgure represents the graph
of f(y) and f(x), respectively. By hand, sketch a direction
ﬁeld over an appropriate grid for dydx  f(y) (Problem 13)
and then for dydx  f(x) (Problem 14).
y(3
2)  0
y(1
2)  2
dy
dx  1  y
x
y  y  cos 
2 x
f
1
y
1
FIGURE 2.1.16
Graph for Problem 13
f
x
1
1
FIGURE 2.1.17
Graph for Problem 14
14.
15. In parts (a) and (b) sketch isoclines f(x, y)  c (see the
Remarks on page 38) for the given differential equation
using the indicated values of c. Construct a direction ﬁeld
over a grid by carefully drawing lineal elements with the
appropriate slope at chosen points on each isocline. In
each case, use this rough direction ﬁeld to sketch an ap-
proximate solution curve for the IVPconsisting of the DE
and the initial condition y(0)  1.
(a) dydx  x  y; c an integer satisfying 5  c  5
(b) dydx  x2  y2; 
Discussion Problems
16. (a) Consider the direction ﬁeld of the differential equa-
tion dydx  x(y  4)2  2, but do not use tech-
nology to obtain it. Describe the slopes of the lineal
elements on the lines x  0, y  3, y  4, and y  5.
(b) Consider the IVPdydx  x(y  4)2  2, y(0)  y0,
where y0 
 4. Can a solution y(x) :  as x : ?
Based on the information in part (a), discuss.
c  1
4, c  1, c  9
4, c  4
17. For a ﬁrst-order DE dydx  f (x, y) a curve in the plane
deﬁned by f (x, y)  0 is called a nullcline of the equa-
tion,sincealinealelementatapointonthecurvehaszero
slope. Use computer software to obtain a direction ﬁeld
over a rectangular grid of points for dydx  x2  2y,
and then superimpose the graph of the nullcline 
over the direction ﬁeld. Discuss the behavior of solution
curves in regions of the plane deﬁned by 
and by
. Sketch some approximate solution curves. Try
to generalize your observations.
18. (a) Identify the nullclines (see Problem 17) in
Problems 1, 3, and 4. With a colored pencil, circle
any lineal elements in Figures 2.1.12, 2.1.14, and
2.1.15 that you think may be a lineal element at a
point on a nullcline.
(b) What are the nullclines of an autonomous ﬁrst-order
DE?
2.1.2
AUTONOMOUS FIRST-ORDER DEs
19. Consider the autonomous ﬁrst-order differential equa-
tion dydx  y  y3 and the initial condition y(0)  y0.
By hand, sketch the graph of a typical solution y(x)
when y0 has the given values.
(a) y0 	 1
(b) 0 
 y0 
 1 
(c) 1 
 y0 
 0
(d) y0 
 1
20. Consider the autonomous ﬁrst-order differential equation
dydx  y2  y4 and the initial condition y(0)  y0. By
hand, sketch the graph of a typical solution y(x) when y0
has the given values.
(a) y0 	 1
(b) 0 
 y0 
 1 
(c) 1 
 y0 
 0
(d) y0 
 1
In Problems 21-28 ﬁnd the critical points and phase portrait
of the given autonomous ﬁrst-order differential equation.
Classify each critical point as asymptotically stable, unstable,
or semi-stable. By hand, sketch typical solution curves in the
regions in the xy-plane determined by the graphs of the
equilibrium solutions.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
In Problems 29 and 30 consider the autonomous differential
equation dydx  f(y), where the graph of f is given. Use
the graph to locate the critical points of each differential
dy
dx  yey  9y
ey
dy
dx  y ln(y  2)
dy
dx  y(2  y)(4  y)
dy
dx  y2(4  y2)
dy
dx  10  3y  y2
dy
dx  (y  2)4
dy
dx  y2  y3
dy
dx  y2  3y
y 	 1
2 x2
y 
 1
2 x2
y  1
2 x2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29.
f
c
y
FIGURE 2.1.18
Graph for Problem 29
30.
f
y
1
1
FIGURE 2.1.19
Graph for Problem 30
Discussion Problems
31. Consider the autonomous DE dydx  (2)y  sin y.
Determine the critical points of the equation. Discuss
a way of obtaining a phase portrait of the equation.
Classify the critical points as asymptotically stable,
unstable, or semi-stable.
32. A critical point c of an autonomous ﬁrst-order DE is
said to be isolated if there exists some open interval that
contains c but no other critical point. Can there exist an
autonomous DE of the form given in (2) for which
every critical point is nonisolated? Discuss; do not think 
profound thoughts.
33. Suppose that y(x) is a nonconstant solution of the
autonomous equation dydx  f (y) and that c is a
critical point of the DE. Discuss: Why can't the graph
of y(x) cross the graph of the equilibrium solution
y  c? Why can't f (y) change signs in one of the
subregions discussed on page 39? Why can't y(x) be
oscillatory or have a relative extremum (maximum or
minimum)?
34. Suppose that y(x) is a solution of the autonomous equa-
tion dydx  f (y) and is bounded above and below by
two consecutive critical points c1 
 c2, as in subregion 
R2 of Figure 2.1.6(b). If f (y) 	 0 in the region, then 
limx: y(x)  c2. Discuss why there cannot exist a num-
ber L 
 c2 such that limx: y(x)  L. As part of your
discussion, consider what happens to y(x) as x : .
2.1
SOLUTION CURVES WITHOUT A SOLUTION
●
45
equation. Sketch a phase portrait of each differential equa-
tion. By hand, sketch typical solution curves in the subre-
gions in the xy-plane determined by the graphs of the equi-
librium solutions.
35. Using the autonomous equation (2), discuss how it is
possible to obtain information about the location of
points of inﬂection of a solution curve.
36. Consider the autonomous DE dydx  y2  y  6. Use
your ideas from Problem 35 to ﬁnd intervals on the
y-axis for which solution curves are concave up and
intervals for which solution curves are concave down.
Discuss why each solution curve of an initial-value
problem of the form dydx  y2  y  6, y(0)  y0,
where 2 
 y0 
 3, has a point of inﬂection with the
same y-coordinate. What is that y-coordinate? Carefully
sketch the solution curve for which y(0)  1. Repeat
for y(2)  2.
37. Suppose the autonomous DE in (2) has no critical
points. Discuss the behavior of the solutions.
Mathematical Models
38. Population Model The differential equation in Exam-
ple 3 is a well-known population model. Suppose the DE
is changed to
,
where a and b are positive constants. Discuss what
happens to the population P as time t increases.
39. Population Model Another population model is given 
by
,
where h and k are positive constants. For what initial
values P(0)  P0 does this model predict that the popu-
lation will go extinct?
40. Terminal Velocity
In Section 1.3 we saw that the auto-
nomous differential equation
,
where k is a positive constant and g is the acceleration
due to gravity, is a model for the velocity v of a body of
mass m that is falling under the inﬂuence of gravity.
Because the term kv represents air resistance, the
velocity of a body falling from a great height does not in-
crease without bound as time t increases. Use a phase
portrait of the differential equation to ﬁnd the limiting, or
terminal, velocity of the body. Explain your reasoning.
41. Suppose the model in Problem 40 is modiﬁed so 
that air resistance is proportional to v2, that is,
.
See Problem 17 in Exercises 1.3. Use a phase portrait
to ﬁnd the terminal velocity of the body. Explain your
reasoning.
m dv
dt  mg  kv2
m dv
dt  mg  kv
dP
dt  kP  h
dP
dt  P(aP  b)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
42. Chemical Reactions
When certain kinds of chemicals
are combined, the rate at which the new compound is
formed is modeled by the autonomous differential
equation
where k 	 0 is a constant of proportionality and
 	  	 0. Here X(t) denotes the number of grams of
the new compound formed in time t.
(a) Use a phase portrait of the differential equation to
predict the behavior of X(t) as t : .
dX
dt  k(  X)(  X),
(b) Consider the case when   . Use a phase portrait
of the differential equation to predict the behavior
of X(t) as t :  when X(0) 
 . When X(0) 	 .
(c) Verify that an explicit solution of the DE in the case
when k  1 and    is X(t)    1(t  c).
Find a solution that satisﬁes X(0)  2. Then ﬁnd
a solution that satisﬁes X(0)  2. Graph these
two solutions. Does the behavior of the solutions as
t :  agree with your answers to part (b)?
Solution by Integration
Consider the ﬁrst-order differential equation dydx 
f (x, y). When f does not depend on the variable y, that is, f(x, y)  g(x), the differen-
tial equation
(1)
can be solved by integration. If g(x) is a continuous function, then integrating both
sides of (1) gives 
, where G(x) is an antiderivative (indeﬁ-
nite integral) of g(x). For example, if dydx  1  e2x, then its solution is
or
.
A Deﬁnition
Equation (1), as well as its method of solution, is just a special
case when the function f in the normal form dydx  f (x, y) can be factored into a
function of x times a function of y.
y  x  1
2e2x  c
y  (1  e2x) dx
y  g(x) dx  G(x)  c
dy
dx  g(x)
DEFINITION 2.2.1
Separable Equation
A ﬁrst-order differential equation of the form
is said to be separable or to have separable variables.
dy
dx  g(x)h(y)
For example, the equations
dy
dx  y2xe3x4y    and    dy
dx  y  sin x
SEPARABLE EQUATIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Basic integration formulas (See inside front cover)
●Techniques of integration: integration by parts and partial fraction decomposition
●
See also the Student Resource Manual.
INTRODUCTION
We begin our study of how to solve differential equations with the simplest
of all differential equations: ﬁrst-order equations with separable variables. Because the method in
this section and many techniques for solving differential equations involve integration, you are
urged to refresh your memory on important formulas (such as duu) and techniques (such as
integration by parts) by consulting a calculus text.
2.2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

are separable and nonseparable, respectively. In the ﬁrst equation we can factor
f (x, y)  y2xe3x4y as
g(x)
h(y)
p
p
,
but in the second equation there is no way of expressing y  sin x as a product of a
function of x times a function of y.
Observe that by dividing by the function h(y), we can write a separable equation
dydx  g(x)h(y) as
,
(2)
where, for convenience, we have denoted 1h(y) by p(y). From this last form we can
see immediately that (2) reduces to (1) when h(y)  1.
Now if y  (x) represents a solution of (2), we must have p((x))(x)  g(x),
and therefore
.
(3)
But dy  (x) dx, and so (3) is the same as
,
(4)
where H(y) and G(x) are antiderivatives of p(y)  1h(y) and g(x), respectively.
Method of Solution
Equation (4) indicates the procedure for solving separable
equations. A one-parameter family of solutions, usually given implicitly, is obtained
by integrating both sides of p(y) dy  g(x) dx.
Note
There is no need to use two constants in the integration of a separable
equation, because if we write H(y)  c1  G(x)  c2, then the difference c2  c1 can
be replaced by a single constant c, as in (4). In many instances throughout the chap-
ters that follow, we will relabel constants in a manner convenient to a given equation.
For example, multiples of constants or combinations of constants can sometimes be
replaced by a single constant.
 p(y) dy  g(x) dx    or    H(y)  G(x)  c
 p( (x))(x) dx  g(x) dx
p(y) dy
dx  g(x)
f (x, y)  y2xe3x4y   (xe3x)( y2e4y)
2.2
SEPARABLE EQUATIONS
●
47
EXAMPLE 1
Solving a Separable DE
Solve (1  x) dy  y dx  0.
SOLUTION
Dividing by (1  x)y, we can write dyy  dx(1  x), from which it
follows that
; laws of exponents
Relabeling 
as c then gives y  c(1  x).
ec1
  ec1(1  x).
   1  x  ec1
 y  eln1xc1  eln1x  ec1
 ln y   ln 1  x   c1
  dy
y  dx
1  x
;
 1  x   1  x,
 1  x   (1  x),  
x 1
x <1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 2.2.1
Solution curve for the
IVP in Example 2
x
y
(4, −3)
48
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
ALTERNATIVE SOLUTION
Because each integral results in a logarithm, a judicious
choice for the constant of integration is lnc rather than c. Rewriting the second
line of the solution as lny  ln1  x  lnc enables us to combine the terms on
the right-hand side by the properties of logarithms. From lny  lnc(1  x) we
immediately get y  c(1  x). Even if the indeﬁnite integrals are not all logarithms,
it may still be advantageous to use lnc. However, no ﬁrm rule can be given.
In Section 1.1 we saw that a solution curve may be only a segment or an arc of
the graph of an implicit solution G(x, y)  0.
EXAMPLE 2
Solution Curve
Solve the initial-value problem  
.
SOLUTION
Rewriting the equation as y dy  x dx, we get
.
We can write the result of the integration as x2  y2  c2 by replacing the constant
2c1 by c2. This solution of the differential equation represents a family of concentric
circles centered at the origin.
Now when x  4, y  3, so 16  9  25  c2. Thus the initial-value problem
determines the circle x2  y2  25 with radius 5. Because of its simplicity we can
solve this implicit solution for an explicit solution that satisﬁes the initial condition.
We saw this solution as y  2(x) or 
in Example 3 of
Section 1.1. A solution curve is the graph of a differentiable function. In this case the
solution curve is the lower semicircle, shown in dark blue in Figure 2.2.1 containing
the point (4, 3).
Losing a Solution
Some care should be exercised in separating variables, since
the variable divisors could be zero at a point. Speciﬁcally, if r is a zero 
of the function h(y), then substituting y  r into dydx  g(x)h(y) makes both sides
zero; in other words, y  r is a constant solution of the differential equation.
But after variables are separated, the left-hand side of 
 g(x) dx is undeﬁned at r.
As a consequence, y  r might not show up in the family of solutions that are obtained
after integration and simpliﬁcation. Recall that such a solution is called a singular
solution.
dy
h(y)
y  125  x2, 5 
 x 
 5
 y dy   x dx    and    y2
2  x2
2  c1
dy
dx  x
y,  y(4)  3
EXAMPLE 3
Losing a Solution
Solve  
.
SOLUTION
We put the equation in the form
.
(5)
The second equation in (5) is the result of using partial fractions on the left-hand side
of the ﬁrst equation. Integrating and using the laws of logarithms gives
.
 ln
y  2
y  2  4x  c2    or    y  2
y  2  e4xc2
1
4 ln y  2   1
4 ln y  2   x  c1
dy
y2  4  dx    or    
1
4
y  2 
1
4
y  2 dy  dx
dy
dx  y2  4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.2
SEPARABLE EQUATIONS
●
49
EXAMPLE 4
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve 
.
SOLUTION
Dividing the equation by ey cos x gives
.
Before integrating, we use termwise division on the left-hand side and the trigono-
metric identity sin 2x  2 sin x cos x on the right-hand side. Then
integration by parts :
yields
ey  yey  ey  2 cos x  c.
(7)
The initial condition y  0 when x  0 implies c  4. Thus a solution of the initial-
value problem is
ey  yey  ey  4  2 cos x.
(8)
Use of Computers
The Remarks at the end of Section 1.1 mentioned
that it may be difﬁcult to use an implicit solution G(x, y)  0 to ﬁnd an explicit
solution y  (x). Equation (8) shows that the task of solving for y in terms of x may
present more problems than just the drudgery of symbol pushing—sometimes it
simply cannot be done! Implicit solutions such as (8) are somewhat frustrating; nei-
ther the graph of the equation nor an interval over which a solution satisfying y(0) 
0 is deﬁned is apparent. The problem of "seeing" what an implicit solution looks like
can be overcome in some cases by means of technology. One way* of proceeding is
to use the contour plot application of a computer algebra system (CAS). Recall from
multivariate calculus that for a function of two variables z  G(x, y) the two-
dimensional curves deﬁned by G(x, y)  c, where c is constant, are called the level
curves of the function. With the aid of a CAS, some of the level curves of the func-
tion G(x, y)  ey  yey  ey  2 cos x have been reproduced in Figure 2.2.2. The
family of solutions deﬁned by (7) is the level curves G(x, y)  c. Figure 2.2.3 illus-
trates the level curve G(x, y)  4, which is the particular solution (8), in blue color.
The other curve in Figure 2.2.3 is the level curve G(x, y)  2, which is the member
of the family G(x, y)  c that satisﬁes y(2)  0.
If an initial condition leads to a particular solution by yielding a speciﬁc value of
the parameter c in a family of solutions for a ﬁrst-order differential equation, there is
 (ey  yey) dy  2  sin x dx
e2y  y
ey
 dy  sin 2x
cos x  dx
(e2y  y) cos x dy
dx  ey sin 2x, y(0)  0
Here we have replaced 4c1 by c2. Finally, after replacing 
by c and solving the
last equation for y, we get the one-parameter family of solutions
.
(6)
Now if we factor the right-hand side of the differential equation as 
dydx  (y  2)(y  2), we know from the discussion of critical points in Section 2.1
that y  2 and y  2 are two constant (equilibrium) solutions. The solution y  2 is a
member of the family of solutions deﬁned by (6) corresponding to the value c  0.
However, y  2 is a singular solution; it cannot be obtained from (6) for any choice of
the parameter c. This latter solution was lost early on in the solution process. Inspection
of (5) clearly indicates that we must preclude y  2 in these steps.
y  2 1  ce4x
1  ce4x
ec2
*In Section 2.6 we will discuss several other ways of proceeding that are based on the concept of a
numerical solver.
x
y
2
_2
_2
_1
1
2
_1
1
FIGURE 2.2.2
Level curves of
G(x, y)  ey  yey  ey  2 cos x
FIGURE 2.2.3
Level curves 
c  2 and c  4
(0, 0) 
/2,0) 
( π 
x
y
2
_2
_2
_1
1
2
_1
1
c=4 
c=2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a =  
 > 
0 
a 0 
(0, 0)
x
y
FIGURE 2.2.4
Piecewise-deﬁned
solutions of (9)
50
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
a natural inclination for most students (and instructors) to relax and be content.
However, a solution of an initial-value problem might not be unique. We saw in
Example 4 of Section 1.2 that the initial-value problem
(9)
has at least two solutions, y  0 and 
. We are now in a position to solve the
equation. Separating variables and integrating y1/2 dy  x dx gives
When x  0, then y  0, so necessarily, c  0. Therefore 
. The trivial solution
y  0 was lost by dividing by y1/2. In addition, the initial-value problem (9) possesses
inﬁnitely many more solutions, since for any choice of the parameter a  0 the
piecewise-deﬁned function
satisﬁes both the differential equation and the initial condition. See Figure 2.2.4.
Solutions Deﬁned by Integrals
If g is a function continuous on an open in-
terval I containing a, then for every x in I,
You might recall that the foregoing result is one of the two forms of the fundamental
theorem of calculus. In other words, 
is an antiderivative of the function g.
There are times when this form is convenient in solving DEs. For example, if g is
continuous on an interval I containing x0 and x, then a solution of the simple initial-
value problem 
, that is deﬁned on I is given by
You should verify that y(x) deﬁned in this manner satisﬁes the initial condition. Since
an antiderivative of a continuous function g cannot always be expressed in terms of
elementary functions, this might be the best we can do in obtaining an explicit
solution of an IVP. The next example illustrates this idea.
y(x)  y0 
x
x0
g(t) dt
dy>dx  g(x), y(x0)  y0
x
a g(t) dt
d
dx 
x
a
g(t) dt  g(x).
y 
0,
1
16 (x2  a2)2,
x 
 a
x  a
y  1
16 x4
2y1/2  x2
2  c1    or    y 	
x2
4  c
2
,  c  0.
y  1
16 x4
dy
dx  xy1/2,  y(0)  0
EXAMPLE 5
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve  
SOLUTION
The function 
is continuous on 
, but its antideriva-
tive is not an elementary function. Using t as dummy variable of integration, we can
write
 y(x)  y(3) 
x
3
et2 dt.
 y(x)  y(3) 
x
3
et2 dt
 y(t)]
x
3  
x
3
et2 dt
 
x
3
 dy
dt dt 
x
3
et2 dt
(, )
g(x)  ex2
dy
dx  ex2,  y(3)  5.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Using the initial condition y(3)  5, we obtain the solution
The procedure demonstrated in Example 5 works equally well on separable
equations 
where, say, f (y) possesses an elementary antiderivative
but g(x) does not possess an elementary antiderivative. See Problems 29 and 30 in
Exercises 2.2.
dy>dx  g(x) f (y)
y(x)  5 
x
3
et2 dt.
2.2
SEPARABLE EQUATIONS
●
51
REMARKS
(i) As we have just seen in Example 5, some simple functions do not possess
an antiderivative that is an elementary function. Integrals of these kinds of
functions are called nonelementary. For example, 
and 
are
nonelementary integrals. We will run into this concept again in Section 2.3.
(ii) In some of the preceding examples we saw that the constant in the one-
parameter family of solutions for a ﬁrst-order differential equation can be rela-
beled when convenient. Also, it can easily happen that two individuals solving the
same equation correctly arrive at dissimilar expressions for their answers. For
example, by separation of variables we can show that one-parameter families of
solutions for the DE (1  y2) dx  (1  x2) dy  0 are
.
As you work your way through the next several sections, bear in mind that fami-
lies of solutions may be equivalent in the sense that one family may be obtained
from another by either relabeling the constant or applying algebra and trigonom-
etry. See Problems 27 and 28 in Exercises 2.2.
arctan x  arctan y  c    or    x  y
1  xy  c
sin x2 dx
x
3 et2 dt
EXERCISES 2.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-2.
In Problems 1-22 solve the given differential equation by
separation of variables.
1.
2.
3. dx  e3xdy  0
4. dy  (y  1)2dx  0
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11. csc y dx  sec2x dy  0
12. sin 3x dx  2y cos33x dy  0
13. (ey  1)2ey dx  (ex  1)3ex dy  0
14. x(1  y2)1/2 dx  y(1  x2)1/2 dy
dy
dx 	
2y  3
4x  5
2
y ln x dx
dy 	
y  1
x 
2
exy dy
dx  ey  e2xy
dy
dx  e3x2y
dy
dx  2xy2  0
x dy
dx  4y
dy
dx  (x  1)2
dy
dx  sin 5x
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
In Problems 23-28 ﬁnd an explicit solution of the given
initial-value problem.
23.
24.
25. x2 dy
dx  y  xy, y(1)  1
dy
dx  y2  1
x2  1
, y(2)  2
dx
dt  4(x2  1), x(>4)  1
(ex  ex) dy
dx  y2
dy
dx  x11  y2
dy
dx  xy  2y  x  2
xy  3y  x  3
dy
dx  xy  3x  y  3
xy  2x  4y  8
dN
dt  N  Ntet2
dP
dt  P  P2
dQ
dt  k(Q  70)
dS
dr  kS
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
26.
27.
28. (1  x4) dy  x(1  4y2) dx  0,
y(1)  0
In Problems 29 and 30 proceed as in Example 5 and ﬁnd an
explicit solution of the given initial-value problem.
29.
30.
In Problems 31-34 ﬁnd an explicit solution of the given
initial-value problem. Determine the exact interval I of deﬁ-
nition by analytical methods. Use a graphing utility to plot
the graph of the solution. 
31.
32.
33.
34.
35. (a) Find a solution of the initial-value problem consist-
ing of the differential equation in Example 3 and
each of the initial-conditions: y(0)  2, y(0)  2,
and
.
(b) Find the solution of the differential equation in
Example 4 when ln c1 is used as the constant of
integration on the left-hand side in the solution and
4 ln c1 is replaced by ln c. Then solve the same
initial-value problems in part (a).
36. Find a solution of 
that passes through
the indicated points.
(a) (0, 1)
(b) (0, 0)
(c)
(d)
37. Find a singular solution of Problem 21. Of Problem 22.
38. Show that an implicit solution of
is given by ln(x2  10)  csc y  c. Find the constant
solutions, if any, that were lost in the solution of the dif-
ferential equation.
Often a radical change in the form of the solution of a differen-
tial equation corresponds to a very small change in either the
initial condition or the equation itself. In Problems 39-42 ﬁnd
an explicit solution of the given initial-value problem. Use a
graphing utility to plot the graph of each solution. Compare
each solution curve in a neighborhood of (0, 1).
39. dy
dx  (y  1)2, y(0)  1
2x sin2 y dx  (x2  10) cos y dy  0
(2, 1
4)
(1
2, 1
2)
x dy
dx  y2  y
y(1
4)  1
sin x dx  ydy  0,  y(0)  1
ey dx  ex dy  0,  y(0)  0
(2y  2) dy
dx  3x2  4x  2,  y(1)  2
dy
dx  2x  1
2y
,  y(2)  1
dy
dx  y 2 sin x2,  y(2)  1
3
dy
dx  yex2,  y(4)  1
11  y2 dx  11  x2 dy  0, y(0)  13
2
dy
dt  2y  1, y(0)  5
2
40.
41.
42.
43. Every autonomous ﬁrst-order equation dydx  f(y)
is separable. Find explicit solutions y1(x), y2(x), y3(x),
and y4(x) of the differential equation dydx  y  y3
that satisfy, in turn, the initial conditions y1(0)  2,
,
, and y4(0)  2. Use a graphing
utility to plot the graphs of each solution. Compare these
graphs with those predicted in Problem 19 of Exercises 2.1.
Give the exact interval of deﬁnition for each solution.
44. (a) The autonomous ﬁrst-order differential equation 
dydx  1(y  3) 
has 
no 
critical 
points.
Nevertheless, place 3 on the phase line and obtain
a phase portrait of the equation. Compute d2ydx2
to determine where solution curves are concave up
and where they are concave down (see Problems
35 and 36 in Exercises 2.1). Use the phase portrait
and concavity to sketch, by hand, some typical
solution curves.
(b) Find explicit solutions y1(x), y2(x), y3(x), and y4(x)
of the differential equation in part (a) that satisfy,
in turn, the initial conditions y1(0)  4, y2(0)  2,
y3(1)  2, and y4(1)  4. Graph each solution
and compare with your sketches in part (a). Give
the exact interval of deﬁnition for each solution.
In Problems 45-50 use a technique of integration or a substi-
tution to ﬁnd an explicit solution of the given differential
equation or initial-value problem. 
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
Discussion Problems
51. (a) Explain why the interval of deﬁnition of the explicit
solution y  2(x) of the initial-value problem in
Example 2 is the open interval (5, 5).
(b) Can any solution of the differential equation cross
the x-axis? Do you think that x2  y2  1 is an
implicit solution of the initial-value problem 
dydx  xy, y(1)  0?
52. (a) If a 	 0, discuss the differences, if any, between
the solutions of the initial-value problems consist-
ing of the differential equation dydx  xy and
dy
dx  x tan1 x
y
,  y(0)  3
dy
dx  e1x
y ,  y(1)  4
dy
dx  y2/3  y
(1x  x)dy
dx  1y  y
dy
dx  sin1x
1y
dy
dx 
1
1  sin x
y3(0)  1
2
y2(0)  1
2
dy
dx  (y  1)2  0.01, y(0)  1
dy
dx  (y  1)2  0.01, y(0)  1
dy
dx  (y  1)2, y(0)  1.01
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

each of the initial conditions y(a)  a, y(a)  a,
y(a)  a, and y(a)  a.
(b) Does the initial-value problem dydx  xy,
y(0)  0 have a solution?
(c) Solve dydx  xy, y(1)  2 and give the exact
interval I of deﬁnition of its solution.
53. In Problems 43 and 44 we saw that every autonomous
ﬁrst-order differential equation dydx  f (y) is
separable. Does this fact help in the solution of the
initial-value problem 
?
Discuss. Sketch, by hand, a plausible solution curve of
the problem.
54. (a) Solve the two initial-value problems:
and
(b) Show that there are more than 1.65 million digits in
the y-coordinate of the point of intersection of the
two solution curves in part (a).
55. Find a function whose square plus the square of its
derivative is 1.
56. (a) The differential equation in Problem 27 is equiva-
lent to the normal form
in the square region in the xy-plane deﬁned by
x  1, y  1. But the quantity under the radical is
nonnegative also in the regions deﬁned by x  1,
y  1. Sketch all regions in the xy-plane for
which this differential equation possesses real
solutions.
(b) Solve the DE in part (a) in the regions deﬁned by
x  1, y  1. Then ﬁnd an implicit and an
explicit solution of the differential equation subject
to y(2)  2.
Mathematical Model
57. Suspension Bridge
In (16) of Section 1.3 we saw that
a mathematical model for the shape of a ﬂexible cable
strung between two vertical supports is
,
(10)
where W denotes the portion of the total vertical load
between the points P1 and P2 shown in Figure 1.3.7. The
dy
dx  W
T1
dy
dx  B
1  y2
1  x2
dy
dx  y 
y
x ln x,  y(e)  1.
dy
dx  y,  y(0)  1
dy
dx  11  y2 sin2 y, y(0)  1
2
DE (10) is separable under the following conditions that
describe a suspension bridge.
Let us assume that the x- and y-axes are as shown in
Figure 2.2.5—that is, the x-axis runs along the horizon-
tal roadbed, and the y-axis passes through (0, a), which
is the lowest point on one cable over the span of the
bridge, coinciding with the interval [L2, L2]. In the
case of a suspension bridge, the usual assumption is that
the vertical load in (10) is only a uniform roadbed dis-
tributed along the horizontal axis. In other words, it is
assumed that the weight of all cables is negligible in
comparison to the weight of the roadbed and that the
weight per unit length of the roadbed (say, pounds per
horizontal foot) is a constant . Use this information to
set up and solve an appropriate initial-value problem
from which the shape (a curve with equation y  (x))
of each of the two cables in a suspension bridge is
determined. Express your solution of the IVP in terms
of the sag h and span L. See Figure 2.2.5.
2.2
SEPARABLE EQUATIONS
●
53
FIGURE 2.2.5
Shape of a cable in Problem 57
L/2
L (span)
h (sag)
cable 
roadbed (load)
x
(0, a)
L/2
y
Computer Lab Assignments
58. (a) Use a CAS and the concept of level curves to
plot representative graphs of members of the
family of solutions of the differential equation
. Experiment with different numbers
of level curves as well as various rectangular
regions deﬁned by a  x  b, c  y  d.
(b) On separate coordinate axes plot the graphs of the
particular solutions corresponding to the initial
conditions: y(0)  1; y(0)  2; y(1)  4;
y(1)  3.
59. (a) Find an implicit solution of the IVP
(b) Use part (a) to ﬁnd an explicit solution y  (x) of
the IVP.
(c) Consider your answer to part (b) as a function only.
Use a graphing utility or a CAS to graph this func-
tion, and then use the graph to estimate its domain.
(d) With the aid of a root-ﬁnding application of a CAS,
determine the approximate largest interval I of
(2y  2) dy  (4x3  6x) dx   0, y(0)  3.
dy
dx  8x  5
3y2  1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
deﬁnition of the solution y  (x) in part (b). Use a
graphing utility or a CAS to graph the solution
curve for the IVP on this interval.
60. (a) Use a CAS and the concept of level curves to
plot representative graphs of members of the
family of solutions of the differential equation
. 
Experiment 
with 
different 
numbers of level curves as well as various rectan-
gular regions in the xy-plane until your result
resembles Figure 2.2.6.
(b) On separate coordinate axes, plot the graph of the
implicit solution corresponding to the initial condi-
tion 
. Use a colored pencil to mark off that
segment of the graph that corresponds to the solu-
tion curve of a solution  that satisﬁes the initial
y(0)  3
2
dy
dx  x(1  x)
y(2  y)
condition. With the aid of a root-ﬁnding application
of a CAS, determine the approximate largest inter-
val I of deﬁnition of the solution . [Hint: First ﬁnd
the points on the curve in part (a) where the tangent
is vertical.]
(c) Repeat part (b) for the initial condition y(0)  2.
x
y
FIGURE 2.2.6
Level curves in Problem 60
LINEAR EQUATIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Review the deﬁnitions of linear DEs in (6) and (7) of Section 1.1.
INTRODUCTION
We continue our quest for solutions of ﬁrst-order differential equations by
next examining linear equations. Linear differential equations are an especially "friendly" family
of differential equations, in that, given a linear equation, whether ﬁrst order or a higher-order kin,
there is always a good possibility that we can ﬁnd some sort of solution of the equation that we can
examine.
2.3
A Deﬁnition
The form of a linear ﬁrst-order DE was given in (7) of Sec-
tion 1.1. This form, the case when 
in (6) of that section, is reproduced here for
convenience.
n  1
DEFINITION 2.3.1
Linear Equation
A ﬁrst-order differential equation of the form
,
(1)
is said to be a linear equation in the variable y.
a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  g(x)
Standard Form
By dividing both sides of (1) by the lead coefﬁcient 
we
obtain a more useful form, the standard form, of a linear equation:
(2)
We seek a solution of (2) on an interval I for which both coefﬁcient functions P and
f are continuous.
dy
dx  P(x)y  f(x).
a1(x),
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.3
LINEAR EQUATIONS
●
55
Before we examine a general procedure for solving equations of form (2) we
note that in some instances (2) can be solved by separation of variables. For exam-
ple, you should verify that the equations 
and
are both linear and separable, but that the linear equation
is not separable.
Method of Solution
The method for solving (2) hinges on a remarkable fact
that the left-hand side of the equation can be recast into the form of the exact deriva-
tive of a product by multiplying the both sides of (2) by a special function 
It is
relatively easy to ﬁnd the function 
because we want
left hand side of 
product
product rule
(2) multipled by m(x) 
2    4  
4
c
c
these must be equal
The equality is true provided that
The last equation can be solved by separation of variables. Integrating
gives 
. Even though there are an inﬁnite choices of 
(all constant
multiples of 
), all produce the same desired result. Hence we can simplify life
and choose 
The function 
(3)
is called an integrating factor for equation (2).  
Here is what we have so far: We multiplied both sides of (2) by (3) and, by
construction, the left-hand side is the derivative of a product of the integrating factor
and y:
Finally, we discover why (3) is called an integrating factor. We can integrate both
sides of the last equation,
and solve for y. The result is a one-parameter family of solutions of (2):
(4)
We emphasize that you should not memorize formula (4). The following proce-
dure should be worked through each time. 
y  eP(x)dx eP(x)dx f(x)dx  ceP(x)dx.
eP(x)dx y eP(x)dx f(x)  c
 d
dx [eP(x)dx y]  eP(x)dx f(x).
 eP(x)dx dy
dx  P(x)eP(x)dx y  eP(x)dx f(x)
(x)  eP(x)dx
c2  1.
eP(x)dx
(x)
(x)  c2eP(x)dx
d
  Pdx    and solving    ln(x) P(x)dx  c1
d
dx  P.
d
dx [(x)y]  dy
dx  d
dxy  dy
dx  Py.
(x)
(x).
dy
dx  y  x
dy
dx  y  5
dy
dx  2xy  0
We match each equation with (2). In the
ﬁrst equation P(x)  2x, f(x)  0 and in
the second P(x)  1, f(x)  5.

See Problem 50 
in Exercises 2.3

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
SOLVING A LINEAR FIRST-ORDER EQUATION 
(i)
Remember to put a linear equation into the standard form (2). 
(ii)
From the standard form of the equation identify P(x) and then ﬁnd the
integrating factor eP(x)dx. No constant need be used in evaluating the
indeﬁnite integral P(x)dx.
(iii)
Multiply the both sides of the standard form equation by the integrating
factor. The left-hand side of the resulting equation is automatically the
derivative of the product of the integrating factor eP(x)dx and y:
(iv)
Integrate both sides of the last equation and solve for y.
d
dx [eP(x)dxy]  eP(x)dxf(x).
EXAMPLE 1
Solving a Linear Equation
Solve  
SOLUTION
This linear equation can be solved by separation of variables.
Alternatively, since the differential equation is already in standard form (2), we iden-
tify 
and so the integrating factor is 
. We then multiply the
given equation by this factor and recognize that 
Integration of the last equation, 
then yields 
or y  ce3x,  
 x 
 .
e3xy  c

d
dx [e3x y] dx 0 dx
e3x dy
dx  3e3x y  e3x  0    is the same as    d
dx [e3x y]  0.
e(3)dx  e3x
P(x)  3,
dy
dx  3y  0.
EXAMPLE 2
Solving a Linear Equation
Solve  
SOLUTION
This linear equation, like the one in Example 1, is already in standard
form with 
Thus the integrating factor is again 
. This time multiply-
ing the given equation by this factor gives
Integrating the last equation,  
or 
When a1, a0, and g in (1) are constants, the differential equation is autonomous.
In Example 2 you can verify from the normal form dydx  3(y  2) that 2 is a
critical point and that it is unstable (a repeller). Thus a solution curve with an
y  2  ce3x,  
 x 
 .

d
dx [e3x y] dx  6e3x dx    gives    e3x y  6	
e3x
3 
  c,
e3x dy
dx  3e3x y  6e3x    and so    d
dx [e3x y]  6e3x.
e3x
P(x)  3.
dy
dx  3y  6.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

initial point either above or below the graph of the equilibrium solution 
y  2 pushes away from this horizontal line as x increases. Figure 2.3.1, obtained
with the aid of a graphing utility, shows the graph of y  2 along with some addi-
tional solution curves.
General Solution
Suppose again that the functions P and f in (2) are con-
tinuous on a common interval I. In the steps leading to (4) we showed that if (2) has
a solution on I, then it must be of the form given in (4). Conversely, it is a straight-
forward exercise in differentiation to verify that any function of the form given in
(4) is a solution of the differential equation (2) on I. In other words, (4) is a one-
parameter family of solutions of equation (2) and every solution of (2) deﬁned on I
is a member of this family. Therefore we call (4) the general solution of the
differential equation on the interval I. (See the Remarks at the end of Section 1.1.)
Now by writing (2) in the normal form y  F (x, y), we can identify 
F (x, y)  P(x)y  f (x) and Fy  P(x). From the continuity of P and f on the
interval I we see that F and Fy are also continuous on I. With Theorem 1.2.1 as
our justiﬁcation, we conclude that there exists one and only one solution of the
initial-value problem
(5)
deﬁned on some interval I0 containing x0. But when x0 is in I, ﬁnding a solution of (5)
is just a matter of ﬁnding an appropriate value of c in (4)—that is, to each x0 in I there
corresponds a distinct c. In other words, the interval I0 of existence and uniqueness
in Theorem 1.2.1 for the initial-value problem (5) is the entire interval I.
dy
dx  P(x)y  f(x),  y(x0)  y0
2.3
LINEAR EQUATIONS
●
57
FIGURE 2.3.1
Solution curves of DE
in Example 2
1
_1
2
3
4
_2
_1
1
_3
x
y
y =_2 
EXAMPLE 3
General Solution
Solve  
.
SOLUTION
Dividing by x, the standard form of the given DE is
.
(6)
From this form we identify P(x)  4x and f (x)  x5ex and further observe that P
and f are continuous on (0, ). Hence the integrating factor is
Here we have used the basic identity 
. Now we multiply (6) by x4
and rewrite
It follows from integration by parts that the general solution deﬁned on the interval
(0, ) is x4y  xex  ex  c or y  x5ex  x4ex  cx4.
Except in the case in which the lead coefficient is 1, the recasting of equation
(1) into the standard form (2) requires division by a1(x). Values of x for which
a1(x)  0 are called singular points of the equation. Singular points are poten-
tially troublesome. Specifically, in (2), if P(x) (formed by dividing a0(x) by a1(x))
is discontinuous at a point, the discontinuity may carry over to solutions of the
differential equation.
x4  dy
dx  4x5y  xex    as    d
dx [x4y]  xex.
blogbN  N, N 	 0
e4dx/x  e4ln x  eln x4  x4.
we can use ln x instead of ln x since x 	 0
dy
dx  4
x y  x5ex
x dy
dx  4y  x6ex
In case you are wondering why the
interval (0, ) is important in Example 3,
read this paragraph and the paragraph
following Example 4.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 4
General Solution
Find the general solution of 
.
SOLUTION
We write the differential equation in standard form
(7)
and identify P(x)  x(x2  9). Although P is continuous on (, 3), (3, 3), and
(3, ), we shall solve the equation on the ﬁrst and third intervals. On these intervals
the integrating factor is
.
After multiplying the standard form (7) by this factor, we get
. 
Integrating both sides of the last equation gives 
Thus for either
x 	 3 or x 
 3 the general solution of the equation is 
.
Notice in Example 4 that x  3 and x  3 are singular points of the equation
and that every function in the general solution 
is discontinuous at
these points. On the other hand, x  0 is a singular point of the differential equation
in Example 3, but the general solution y  x5ex  x4ex  cx4 is noteworthy in that
every function in this one-parameter family is continuous at x  0 and is deﬁned
on the interval (, ) and not just on (0, ), as stated in the solution. However,
the family y  x5ex  x4ex  cx4 deﬁned on (, ) cannot be considered the gen-
eral solution of the DE, since the singular point x  0 still causes a problem. See
Problems 45 and 46 in Exercises 2.3.
y  c1x2  9
y 
c
1x2  9
1x2  9 y  c.
d
dx 1x2  9 y  0
ex dx/(x29)  e
1
2 2x dx/(x29)  e
1
2 lnx29  1x2  9
dy
dx 
x
x2  9 y  0
(x2  9) dy
dx  xy  0
EXAMPLE 5
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve  
.
SOLUTION
The equation is in standard form, and P(x)  1 and f (x)  x are contin-
uous on (, ). The integrating factor is edx  ex, so integrating
gives exy  xex  ex  c. Solving this last equation for y yields the general solution
y  x  1  cex. But from the initial condition we know that y  4 when x  0.
Substituting these values into the general solution implies that c  5. Hence the
solution of the problem is
y  x  1  5ex,
 
 x 
 .
(8)
Figure 2.3.2, obtained with the aid of a graphing utility, shows the graph of
the solution (8) in dark blue along with the graphs of other members of the one-
parameter family of solutions y  x  1  cex. It is interesting to observe that as x
increases, the graphs of all members of this family are close to the graph of the solu-
tion 
The last solution corresponds to 
in the family and is shown in
c  0
y  x  1.
d
dx [exy]  xex
dy
dx  y  x, y(0)  4
x
y
4
_4
_4
_2
2
4
_2
2
c=0 
c>0 
c=5
c<0 
FIGURE 2.3.2
Solution curves of DE
in Example 5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

dark green in Figure 2.3.2. This asymptotic behavior of solutions is due to the fact
that the contribution of cex, 
, becomes negligible for increasing values of x.
We say that cex is a transient term, since ex : 0 as x : . While this behavior
is not characteristic of all general solutions of linear equations (see Example 2), the
notion of a transient is often important in applied problems.
Discontinuous Coefﬁcients
In applications, the coefﬁcients P(x) and f (x) in
(2) may be piecewise continuous. In the next example f (x) is piecewise continuous
on [0, ) with a single discontinuity, namely, a (ﬁnite) jump discontinuity at x  1.
We solve the problem in two parts corresponding to the two intervals over which f is
deﬁned. It is then possible to piece together the two solutions at x  1 so that y(x) is
continuous on [0, ).
c  0
2.3
LINEAR EQUATIONS
●
59
EXAMPLE 6
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve  
SOLUTION
The graph of the discontinuous function f is shown in Figure 2.3.3. We
solve the DE for y(x) ﬁrst on the interval [0, 1] and then on the interval (1, ). For
0  x  1 we have
.
Integrating this last equation and solving for y gives y  1  c1ex. Since y(0)  0,
we must have c1  1, and therefore y  1  ex, 0  x  1. Then for x 	 1 the
equation
leads to y  c2ex. Hence we can write
By appealing to the deﬁnition of continuity at a point, it is possible to determine 
c2 so that the foregoing function is continuous at x  1. The requirement that
implies that c2e1  1  e1 or c2  e  1. As seen in
Figure 2.3.4, the function
(9)
is continuous on (0, ).
It is worthwhile to think about (9) and Figure 2.3.4 a little bit; you are urged to
read and answer Problem 48 in Exercises 2.3.
Functions Defined by Integrals
At the end of Section 2.2 we discussed
the fact that some simple continuous functions do not possess antiderivatives that
are elementary functions and that integrals of these kinds of functions are called
nonelementary. For example, you may have seen in calculus that 
and
sin x2 dx are nonelementary integrals. In applied mathematics some important func-
tions are deﬁned in terms of nonelementary integrals. Two such special functions are
the error function and complementary error function:
.
(10)
erf(x) 
2
1
 
x
0
 et2 dt    and    erfc(x) 
2
1
 

x
 et2 dt
ex2 dx
y 
1  ex,
(e  1)ex,
0  x  1,
  x 	 1
limx:1 y(x)  y(1)
y 
1  ex,
c2ex,
0  x  1,
  x 	 1.
dy
dx  y  0
dy
dx  y  1  or, equivalently,   d
dx [exy]  ex
dy
dx  y  f (x), y(0)  0 where f (x) 
1,
0,
0  x  1,
  x 	 1.
FIGURE 2.3.3
Discontinuous f(x) in
Example 6
x
y
1
x
y
FIGURE 2.3.4
Graph of (9) in
Example 6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

*This result is usually proved in the third semester of calculus.
†Certain commands have the same spelling, but in Mathematica commands begin with a capital letter
(DSolve), whereas in Maple the same command begins with a lower case letter (dsolve). When
discussing such common syntax, we compromise and write, for example, dsolve. See the Student
Resource Manual for the complete input commands used to solve a linear ﬁrst-order DE.
FIGURE 2.3.5
Solution curves of DE
in Example 7
x
y
60
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
From the known result 
* we can write 
Then from 
it is seen from (10) that the complementary error func-
tion erfc(x) is related to erf(x) by erf(x)  erfc(x)  1. Because of its importance
in probability, statistics, and applied partial differential equations, the error func-
tion has been extensively tabulated. Note that erf(0)  0 is one obvious function
value. Values of erf(x) can also be found by using a CAS. 

0   x
0  
x  
(21) 
0  et2 dt  1.

0  et2 dt  12
EXAMPLE 7
The Error Function
Solve the initial-value problem  
.
SOLUTION
Since the equation is already in standard form, we see that the integrat-
ing factor is 
, so from
.
(11)
Applying y(0)  1 to the last expression then gives c  1. Hence the solution of the
problem is
The graph of this solution on the interval (, ), shown in dark blue in Figure 2.3.5
among other members of the family deﬁned in (11), was obtained with the aid of a
computer algebra system.
Use of Computers
The computer algebra systems Mathematica and Maple
are capable of producing implicit or explicit solutions for some kinds of differential
equations using their dsolve commands.†
y  2ex2 
x
0
 et2  dt  ex2    or    y  ex2 [1  1 erf(x)].
d
dx [ex2y]  2ex2    we get    y  2ex2 
x
0
 et2 dt  cex2
ex2
dy
dx  2xy  2,  y(0)  1
REMARKS
(i) A linear ﬁrst-order differential equation
is said to be homogeneous, whereas the equation 
with 
not identically zero is said to be nonhomogeneous. For example, the
linear equations 
and 
are, in turn, homogeneous and
nonhomogeneous. As can be seen in this example the trivial solution 
is
always a solution of a homogeneous linear DE. Store this terminology in the
back of your mind because it becomes important when we study linear higher-
order ordinary differential equations in Chapter 4.
y  0
xy  y  ex
xy  y  0
g(x)
a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  g(x)
a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.3
LINEAR EQUATIONS
●
61
(ii) Occasionally, a ﬁrst-order differential equation is not linear in one variable
but in linear in the other variable. For example, the differential equation
is not linear in the variable y. But its reciprocal
is recognized as linear in the variable x. You should verify that the integrating
factor 
and integration by parts yield the explicit solution
for the second equation. This expression is then an
implicit solution of the ﬁrst equation.
(iii) Mathematicians have adopted as their own certain words from engineer-
ing, which they found appropriately descriptive. The word transient, used ear-
lier, is one of these terms. In future discussions the words input and output will
occasionally pop up. The function f in (2) is called the input or driving func-
tion; a solution 
of the differential equation for a given input is called the
output or response.
(iv) The term special functions mentioned in conjunction with the error func-
tion also applies to the sine integral function and the Fresnel sine integral
introduced in Problems 55 and 56 in Exercises 2.3. "Special Functions" is
actually a well-deﬁned branch of mathematics. More special functions are
studied in Section 6.4.
y(x)
x  y2  2y  2  cey
e(1)dy  ey
dx
dy  x  y2    or    dx
dy  x  y2
dy
dx 
1
x  y2
EXERCISES 2.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-2.
In Problems 1-24 ﬁnd the general solution of the given dif-
ferential equation. Give the largest interval I over which the
general solution is deﬁned. Determine whether there are any
transient terms in the general solution.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5. y  3x2y  x2
6. y  2xy  x3
7. x2y  xy  1
8. y  2y  x2  5
9.
10.
11.
12.
13. x2y  x(x  2)y  ex
14. xy  (1  x)y  ex sin 2x
15. y dx  4(x  y6) dy  0
16. y dx  (yey  2x) dy
17. cos x dy
dx  (sin x)y  1
(1  x) dy
dx  xy  x  x2
x dy
dx  4y  x3  x
x dy
dx  2y  3
x dy
dx  y  x2 sin x
3 dy
dx  12y  4
dy
dx  y  e3x
dy
dx  2y  0
dy
dx  5y
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
In Problems 25-36 solve the given initial-value problem.
Give the largest interval I over which the solution is deﬁned.
25.
26.
27. xy  y  ex,  y(1)  2
dy
dx  2x  3y,  y(0)  1
3
dy
dx  x  5y,  y(0)  3
(x2  1) dy
dx  2y  (x  1)2
x dy
dx  (3x  1)y  e3x
dP
dt  2tP  P  4t  2
dr
d  r sec   cos 
(x  2)2 dy
dx  5  8y  4xy
(x  1) dy
dx  (x  2)y  2xex
cos2x sin x dy
dx  (cos3x)y  1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
In Problems 37-40 proceed as in Example 6 to solve the
given initial-value problem. Use a graphing utility to graph
the continuous function y(x).
37.
where
38.
where
39.
where
40.
where
41. Proceed in a manner analogous to Example 6 to solve the
initial-value problem y  P(x)y  4x, y(0)  3, where
Use a graphing utility to graph the continuous function
y(x).
42. Consider the initial-value problem y  exy  f (x),
y(0)  1. Express the solution of the IVP for x 	 0 as a
nonelementary integral when f(x)  1. What is the so-
lution when f (x)  0? When f (x)  ex?
43. Express the solution of the initial-value problem 
y  2xy  1, y(1)  1, in terms of erf(x).
P(x) 
 2,
2>x, 0  x  1,
x 	 1.
f (x) 
x,
x, 
0  x 
 1
x  1
(1  x2) dy
dx  2xy  f (x), y(0)  0,
f (x) 
x,
0, 
0  x 
 1
x  1
dy
dx  2xy  f (x), y(0)  2,
f (x) 
1,
1, 
0  x  1
x 	 1
dy
dx  y  f (x), y(0)  1,
f (x) 
1,
0,
0  x  3
x 	 3
dy
dx  2y  f (x), y(0)  0, 
y  (tan x)y  cos2 x,  y(0)  1
y  (sin x)y  2 sin x,  y(>2)  1
x(x  1)dy
dx  xy  1,  y(e)  1
(x  1) dy
dx  y  ln x,  y(1)  10
y  4xy  x3ex2,  y(0)  1
x dy
dx  y  4x  1,  y(1)  8
dT
dt  k(T  Tm),  T(0)  T0,  k, Tm, T0 constants
L di
dt  Ri  E,  i(0)  i0,  L, R, E, i0 constants
y dx
dy  x  2y2,  y(1)  5
Discussion Problems
44. Reread the discussion following Example 2. Construct a
linear ﬁrst-order differential equation for which all
nonconstant solutions approach the horizontal asymp-
tote y  4 as x : .
45. Reread Example 3 and then discuss, with reference
to Theorem 1.2.1, the existence and uniqueness of a
solution of the initial-value problem consisting of 
xy  4y  x6ex and the given initial condition.
(a) y(0)  0
(b) y(0)  y0, y0 	 0
(c) y(x0)  y0, x0 	 0, y0 	 0
46. Reread Example 4 and then ﬁnd the general solution of
the differential equation on the interval (3, 3).
47. Reread the discussion following Example 5. Construct a
linear ﬁrst-order differential equation for which all solu-
tions are asymptotic to the line y  3x  5 as x : .
48. Reread Example 6 and then discuss why it is technically
incorrect to say that the function in (9) is a "solution" of
the IVP on the interval [0, ).
49. (a) Construct a linear ﬁrst-order differential equation of
the form xy  a0(x)y  g(x) for which yc  cx3
and 
yp  x3. 
Give 
an 
interval 
on 
which 
y  x3  cx3 is the general solution of the DE.
(b) Give an initial condition y(x0)  y0 for the DE
found in part (a) so that the solution of the IVP
is y  x3  1x3. Repeat if the solution is 
y  x3  2x3. Give an interval I of deﬁnition of
each of these solutions. Graph the solution curves. Is
there an initial-value problem whose solution is
deﬁned on (, )?
(c) Is each IVP found in part (b) unique? That is, can
there be more than one IVP for which, say, 
y  x3  1x3, x in some interval I, is the solution?
50. In determining the integrating factor (3), we did not use
a constant of integration in the evaluation of P(x) dx.
Explain why using P(x) dx  c1 has no effect on the
solution of (2).
51. Suppose P(x) is continuous on some interval I and a is a
number in I. What can be said about the solution of the
initial-value problem y  P(x)y  0, y(a)  0?
Mathematical Models
52. Radioactive Decay Series
The following system
of differential equations is encountered in the study of the
decay of a special type of radioactive series of elements:
where 1 and 2 are constants. Discuss how to solve this
system subject to x(0)  x0, y(0)  y0. Carry out your
ideas.
 dy
dt  1x  2y,
 dx
dt  1x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

53. Heart Pacemaker
A heart pacemaker consists of a
switch, a battery of constant voltage E0, a capacitor with
constant capacitance C, and the heart as a resistor with
constant resistance R. When the switch is closed, the
capacitor charges; when the switch is open, the capacitor
discharges, sending an electrical stimulus to the heart.
During the time the heart is being stimulated, the voltage
E across the heart satisﬁes the linear differential equation
Solve the DE, subject to E(4)  E0.
Computer Lab Assignments
54. (a) Express the solution of the initial-value problem 
y  2xy  1, 
, in terms of erfc(x).
(b) Use tables or a CAS to ﬁnd the value of y(2). Use a
CAS to graph the solution curve for the IVP on
(, ).
55. (a) The sine integral function
is deﬁned by
, where the integrand is 
Si(x)  x
0 (sin t>t) dt
y(0)  1 2
dE
dt   1
RC E.
deﬁned to be 1 at t  0. Express the solution y(x) of
the initial-value problem x3y  2x2y  10 sin x,
y(1)  0 in terms of Si(x).
(b) Use a CAS to graph the solution curve for the IVP
for x 	 0.
(c) Use a CAS to ﬁnd the value of the absolute maxi-
mum of the solution y(x) for x 	 0.
56. (a) The Fresnel sine integral
is deﬁned by
. Express the solution y(x) 
of the initial-value problem y (sin x2)y  0, 
y(0)  5, in terms of S(x).
(b) Use a CAS to graph the solution curve for the IVP
on (, ).
(c) It is known that S(x) :
as x :  and S(x) : 
as x :  . What does the solution y(x) approach
as x : ? As x : ?
(d) Use a CAS to ﬁnd the values of the absolute
maximum and the absolute minimum of the
solution y(x).
1
2
1
2
S(x)  x
0 sin(pt2>2) dt
2.4
EXACT EQUATIONS
●
63
EXACT EQUATIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Multivariate calculus
●Partial differentiation and partial integration
●Differential of a function of two variables
INTRODUCTION
Although the simple ﬁrst-order equation 
y dx  x dy  0 
is separable, we can solve the equation in an alternative manner by recognizing that the expression
on the left-hand side of the equality is the differential of the function f (x, y)  xy; that is, 
d(xy)  y dx  x dy.
In this section we examine ﬁrst-order equations in differential form M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0. By
applying a simple test to M and N, we can determine whether M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy is a differen-
tial of a function f(x, y). If the answer is yes, we can construct f by partial integration.
2.4
Differential of a Function of Two Variables
If z  f (x, y) is a function of
two variables with continuous ﬁrst partial derivatives in a region R of the xy-plane,
then its differential is
.
(1)
In the special case when f (x, y)  c, where c is a constant, then (1) implies
.
(2)
f
x dx  f
y dy  0
dz  f
x dx  f
y dy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
In other words, given a one-parameter family of functions f (x, y)  c, we can generate
a ﬁrst-order differential equation by computing the differential of both sides of the
equality. For example, if x2  5xy  y3  c, then (2) gives the ﬁrst-order DE
.
(3)
A Deﬁnition
Of course, not every ﬁrst-order DE written in differential form
(2x  5y) dx  (5x  3y2) dy  0
M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0 corresponds to a differential of f (x, y)  c. So for our
purposes it is more important to turn the foregoing example around; namely, if
we are given a ﬁrst-order DE such as (3), is there some way we can recognize
that the differential expression (2x  5y) dx  (5x  3y2) dy is the differential
d(x2  5xy  y3)? If there is, then an implicit solution of (3) is x2  5xy  y3  c.
We answer this question after the next deﬁnition.
DEFINITION 2.4.1
Exact Equation
A differential expression M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy is an exact differential in a
region R of the xy-plane if it corresponds to the differential of some function
f (x, y) deﬁned in R. A ﬁrst-order differential equation of the form
is said to be an exact equation if the expression on the left-hand side is an
exact differential.
M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0
For example, x2y3 dx  x3y2 dy  0 is an exact equation, because its left-hand
side is an exact differential:
.
Notice that if we make the identiﬁcations M(x, y)  x2y3 and N(x, y)  x3y2, then
My  3x2y2  Nx. Theorem 2.4.1, given next, shows that the equality of the
partial derivatives My and Nx is no coincidence.
d 	1
3 x3 y3
  x2y3 dx  x3y2 dy
THEOREM 2.4.1
Criterion for an Exact Differential
Let M(x, y) and N(x, y) be continuous and have continuous ﬁrst partial
derivatives in a rectangular region R deﬁned by a 
 x 
 b, c 
 y 
 d. Then a
necessary and sufﬁcient condition that M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy be an exact
differential is
.
(4)
M
y  N
x
PROOF OF THE NECESSITY
For simplicity let us assume that M(x, y) and
N(x, y) have continuous ﬁrst partial derivatives for all (x, y). Now if the expression
M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy is exact, there exists some function f such that for all x in R,
.
Therefore
,
M(x, y)  f
x
,    N(x, y)  f
y
M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  f
x dx  f
y dy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and
.
The equality of the mixed partials is a consequence of the continuity of the ﬁrst par-
tial derivatives of M(x, y) and N(x, y).
The sufﬁciency part of Theorem 2.4.1 consists of showing that there exists a
function f for which f x  M(x, y) and fy  N(x, y) whenever (4) holds. The
construction of the function f actually reﬂects a basic procedure for solving exact
equations.
Method of Solution
Given an equation in the differential form 
M
y  
y 	
f
x
  2 f
y x  
x 	
f
y
  N
x
2.4
EXACT EQUATIONS
●
65
EXAMPLE 1
Solving an Exact DE
Solve 2xy dx  (x2  1) dy  0.
SOLUTION
With M(x, y)  2xy and N(x, y)  x2  1 we have
.
M
y  2x  N
x
M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0, determine whether the equality in (4) holds. If it does,
then there exists a function f for which
.
We can ﬁnd f by integrating M(x, y) with respect to x while holding y constant:
,
(5)
where the arbitrary function g(y) is the "constant" of integration. Now differentiate
(5) with respect to y and assume that fy  N(x, y):
This gives
.
(6)
Finally, integrate (6) with respect to y and substitute the result in (5). The implicit
solution of the equation is f (x, y)  c.
Some observations are in order. First, it is important to realize that the expres-
sion N(x, y)  (y)  M(x, y) dx in (6) is independent of x, because
.
Second, we could just as well start the foregoing procedure with the assumption that
f y  N(x, y). After integrating N with respect to y and then differentiating that
result, we would ﬁnd the analogues of (5) and (6) to be, respectively,
.
In either case none of these formulas should be memorized.
f (x, y)  N(x, y) dy  h(x)    and    h(x)  M(x, y)  
x  N(x, y) dy

x N(x, y)  
y  M(x, y) dx  N
x  
y 	

x  M(x, y) dx
  N
x  M
y  0
g(y)  N(x, y)  
y
  M(x, y) dx
f
y  
y
  M(x, y) dx  g(y)  N(x, y).
f (x, y)  M(x, y) dx  g(y)
f
x  M(x, y)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Thus the equation is exact, and so by Theorem 2.4.1 there exists a function f (x, y)
such that
.
From the ﬁrst of these equations we obtain, after integrating,
.
Taking the partial derivative of the last expression with respect to y and setting the
result equal to N(x, y) gives
.
; N(x, y)
It follows that g(y)  1 and g(y)  y. Hence f (x, y)  x2y  y, so the solution
of the equation in implicit form is x2y  y  c. The explicit form of the solution is
easily seen to be y  c(1  x2) and is deﬁned on any interval not containing either
x  1 or x  1.
Note
The solution of the DE in Example 1 is not f (x, y)  x2y  y. Rather, it
f
y  x2  g(y)  x2  1
f (x, y)  x2y  g(y)
f
x  2xy    and    f
y  x2  1
EXAMPLE 2
Solving an Exact DE
Solve (e2y  y cos xy) dx  (2xe2y  x cos xy  2y) dy  0.
SOLUTION
The equation is exact because
.
Hence a function f(x, y) exists for which
.
Now, for variety, we shall start with the assumption that f y  N(x, y); that is,
.
Remember, the reason x can come out in front of the symbol  is that in the integra-
tion with respect to y, x is treated as an ordinary constant. It follows that
,
;M(x, y)
and so h(x)  0 or h(x)  c. Hence a family of solutions is
xe2y  sin xy  y2  c  0.
 f
x  e2y  y cos xy  h(x)  e2y  y cos xy
 f(x, y)  xe2y  sin xy  y2  h(x)
 f (x, y)  2x  e2y dy  x  cos xy dy  2  y dy
 f
y  2xe2y  x cos xy  2y
M(x, y)  f
x    and   N(x, y)  f
y
M
y  2e2y  xy sin xy  cos xy  N
x
is f (x, y)  c; if a constant is used in the integration of g(y), we can then write the
solution as f (x, y)  0. Note, too, that the equation could be solved by separation of
variables.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.4
EXACT EQUATIONS
●
67
ear equation y  P(x)y  f (x) can be transformed into a derivative when we multi-
ply the equation by an integrating factor. The same basic idea sometimes works for a
nonexact differential equation M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0. That is, it is sometimes
possible to ﬁnd an integrating factor (x, y) so that after multiplying, the left-hand
side of
(x, y)M(x, y) dx  (x, y)N(x, y) dy  0
(8)
is an exact differential. In an attempt to ﬁnd , we turn to the criterion (4) for exact-
ness. Equation (8) is exact if and only if (M)y  (N)x, where the subscripts
denote partial derivatives. By the Product Rule of differentiation the last equation is
the same as My  yM  Nx  xN or
xN  yM  (My  Nx).
(9)
Although M, N, My, and Nx are known functions of x and y, the difﬁculty here in
determining the unknown (x, y) from (9) is that we must solve a partial differential
EXAMPLE 3
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve  
.
SOLUTION
By writing the differential equation in the form
(cos x sin x  xy2) dx  y(1  x2) dy  0,
we recognize that the equation is exact because
.
Now
The last equation implies that h(x)  cos x sin x. Integrating gives
.
Thus
,
(7)
where 2c1 has been replaced by c. The initial condition y  2 when x  0 demands
that 4(1)  cos2 (0)  c, and so c  3. An implicit solution of the problem is then
y2(1  x2)  cos2 x  3.
The solution curve of the IVP is the curve drawn in blue in Figure 2.4.1;
it is part of an interesting family of curves. The graphs of the members of the one-
parameter family of solutions given in (7) can be obtained in several ways, two of
which are using software to graph level curves (as discussed in Section 2.2) and
using a graphing utility to carefully graph the explicit functions obtained for var-
ious values of c by solving y2  (c  cos2 x)(1  x2) for y.
Integrating Factors
Recall from Section 2.3 that the left-hand side of the lin-
y2
2 (1  x2)  1
2 cos2 x  c1    or    y2(1  x2)  cos2 x  c
h(x)   (cos x)(sin x dx)   1
2 cos2 x
 f
x  xy2  h(x)  cos x sin x  xy2.
 f(x, y)  y2
2  (1  x2)  h(x)
 f
y  y(1  x2)
M
y  2xy  N
x
dy
dx  xy2  cos x sin x
y(1  x2)
, y(0)  2
x
y
FIGURE 2.4.1
Solution curves of DE
in Example 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
equation. Since we are not prepared to do that, we make a simplifying assumption.
Suppose  is a function of one variable; for example, say that  depends only on x. In
this case, x  ddx and y  0, so (9) can be written as
.
(10)
We are still at an impasse if the quotient (My  Nx)N depends on both x and y.
However, if after all obvious algebraic simpliﬁcations are made, the quotient
(My  Nx)N turns out to depend solely on the variable x, then (10) is a ﬁrst-order
ordinary differential equation. We can ﬁnally determine  because (10) is separa-
ble as well as linear. It follows from either Section 2.2 or Section 2.3 that 
(x)  e((

)/N)dx. In like manner, it follows from (9) that if  depends only on
the variable y, then
.
(11)
In this case, if (Nx  My)M is a function of y only, then we can solve (11) for .
We summarize the results for the differential equation
M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0.
(12)
•
If (My  Nx)N is a function of x alone, then an integrating factor for (12) is
.
(13)
•
If (Nx  My)M is a function of y alone, then an integrating factor for (12) is
.
(14)
(y)  eNxMy
M
 dy
(x)  eMyNx
N
 dx
d
dy  Nx  My
M
 
Nx
My
d
dx  My  Nx
N
 
EXAMPLE 4
A Nonexact DE Made Exact
The nonlinear ﬁrst-order differential equation
xy dx  (2x2  3y2  20) dy  0
is not exact. With the identiﬁcations M  xy, N  2x2  3y2  20, we ﬁnd the partial
derivatives My  x and Nx  4x. The ﬁrst quotient from (13) gets us nowhere, since
depends on x and y. However, (14) yields a quotient that depends only on y:
.
The integrating factor is then e3dy/y  e3lny  eln
 y3. After we multiply the given
DE by (y)  y3, the resulting equation is
xy4 dx  (2x2y3  3y5  20y3) dy  0.
You should verify that the last equation is now exact as well as show, using the
method of this section, that a family of solutions is 
.
1
2 x2y4  1
2 y6  5y4  c
y3
Nx  My
M

4x  x
xy

3x
xy 
3
y
My  Nx
N

x  4x
2x2  3y2  20 
3x
2x2  3y2  20
REMARKS
(i) When testing an equation for exactness, make sure it is of the precise
form M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0. Sometimes a differential equation 
is written G(x, y) dx  H(x, y) dy. In this case, ﬁrst rewrite it as 
G(x, y) dx  H(x, y) dy  0 and then identify M(x, y)  G(x, y) and 
N(x, y)  H(x, y) before using (4).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.4
EXACT EQUATIONS
●
69
(ii) In some texts on differential equations the study of exact equations
precedes that of linear DEs. Then the method for ﬁnding integrating factors
just discussed can be used to derive an integrating factor for 
y  P(x)y  f (x). By rewriting the last equation in the differential form
(P(x)y  f (x)) dx  dy  0, we see that
.
From (13) we arrive at the already familiar integrating factor eP(x)dx used in
Section 2.3.
My  Nx
N
 P(x)
EXERCISES 2.4
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-2.
In Problems 1-20 determine whether the given differential
equation is exact. If it is exact, solve it.
1. (2x  1) dx  (3y  7) dy  0
2. (2x  y) dx  (x  6y) dy  0
3. (5x  4y) dx  (4x  8y3) dy  0
4. (sin y  y sin x) dx  (cos x  x cos y  y) dy  0
5. (2xy2  3) dx  (2x2y  4) dy  0
6.
7. (x2  y2) dx  (x2  2xy) dy  0
8.
9. (x  y3  y2 sin x) dx  (3xy2  2y cos x) dy
10. (x3  y3) dx  3xy2 dy  0
11.
12. (3x2y  ey) dx  (x3  xey  2y) dy  0
13.
14.
15.
16. (5y  2x)y  2y  0
17. (tan x  sin x sin y) dx  cos x cos y dy  0
18.
 (x  sin2 x  4xyexy2) dy
(2y sin x cos x  y  2y2exy2) dx
	x2y3 
1
1  9x2
 dx
dy  x3y2  0
	1  3
y  x
 dy
dx  y  3
x  1
x dy
dx  2xex  y  6x2
(y ln y  exy) dx 	
1
y  x ln y
 dy  0
	1  ln x  y
x
 dx  (1  ln x) dy
	2y  1
x  cos 3x
 dy
dx  y
x2  4x3  3y sin 3x  0
19. (4t3y  15t2  y) dt  (t4  3y2  t) dy  0
20.
In Problems 21-26 solve the given initial-value problem.
21. (x  y)2 dx  (2xy  x2  1) dy  0,
y(1)  1
22. (ex  y) dx  (2  x  yey) dy  0,
y(0)  1
23. (4y  2t  5) dt  (6y  4t  1) dy  0,
y(1)  2
24.
25. (y2 cos x  3x2y  2x) dx
 (2y sin x  x3  ln y) dy  0,
y(0)  e
26.
, 
In Problems 27 and 28 ﬁnd the value of k so that the given
differential equation is exact.
27. (y3  kxy4  2x) dx  (3xy2  20x2y3) dy  0
28. (6xy3  cos y) dx  (2kx2y2  x sin y) dy  0
In Problems 29 and 30 verify that the given differential
equation is not exact. Multiply the given differential equa-
tion by the indicated integrating factor (x, y) and verify that
the new equation is exact. Solve.
29. (xy sin x  2y cos x) dx  2x cos x dy  0;
(x, y)  xy
30. (x2  2xy  y2) dx  (y2  2xy  x2) dy  0;
(x, y)  (x  y)2
In Problems 31-36 solve the given differential equation by
ﬁnding, as in Example 4, an appropriate integrating factor.
31. (2y2  3x) dx  2xy dy  0
32. y(x  y  1) dx  (x  2y) dy  0
y(0)  1
	
1
1  y2  cos x  2xy
 dy
dx  y(y  sin x)
	
3y2  t2
y5 
 dy
dt  t
2y4  0, y(1)  1
	
1
t  1
t2 
y
t2  y2
 dt 	yey 
t
t2  y2
 dy  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

33. 6xy dx  (4y  9x2) dy  0
34.
35. (10  6y  e3x) dx  2 dy  0
36. (y2  xy3) dx  (5y2  xy  y3 sin y) dy  0
In Problems 37 and 38 solve the given initial-value problem
by ﬁnding, as in Example 4, an appropriate integrating factor.
37. x dx  (x2y  4y) dy  0,
y(4)  0
38. (x2  y2  5) dx  (y  xy) dy,
y(0)  1
39. (a) Show that a one-parameter family of solutions of
the equation
(4xy  3x2) dx  (2y  2x2) dy  0
is x3  2x2y  y2  c.
(b) Show that the initial conditions y(0)  2 and 
y(1)  1 determine the same implicit solution.
(c) Find explicit solutions y1(x) and y2(x) of the dif-
ferential equation in part (a) such that y1(0)  2
and y2(1)  1. Use a graphing utility to graph y1(x)
and y2(x).
Discussion Problems
40. Consider the concept of an integrating factor used in
Problems 29-38. Are the two equations M dx  N dy  0
and M dx  N dy  0 necessarily equivalent in the
sense that a solution of one is also a solution of the other?
Discuss.
41. Reread Example 3 and then discuss why we can con-
clude that the interval of deﬁnition of the explicit
solution of the IVP (the blue curve in Figure 2.4.1) is
(1, 1).
42. Discuss how the functions M(x, y) and N(x, y) can be
found so that each differential equation is exact. Carry
out your ideas.
(a)
(b)
43. Differential equations are sometimes solved by
having a clever idea. Here is a little exercise in
cleverness: 
Although 
the 
differential 
equation 
(x 
) dx  y dy  0 is not exact, show how
the rearrangement (x dx  y dy)
 dx and
the observation d(x2  y2)  x dx  y dy can lead to
a solution.
44. True or False: Every separable ﬁrst-order equation
dydx  g(x)h(y) is exact.
1
2
1x2  y2
1x2  y2
	x1/2y1/2 
x
x2  y
 dx  N(x, y) dy  0
M(x, y) dx 	xexy  2xy  1
x
 dy  0
cos x dx 	1  2
y
 sin x dy  0
Mathematical Model
45. Falling Chain
A portion of a uniform chain of length
8 ft is loosely coiled around a peg at the edge of a high
horizontal platform, and the remaining portion of the
chain hangs at rest over the edge of the platform. See
Figure 2.4.2. Suppose that the length of the overhang-
ing chain is 3 ft, that the chain weighs 2 lb/ft, and that
the positive direction is downward. Starting at t  0
seconds, the weight of the overhanging portion causes
the chain on the table to uncoil smoothly and to fall to
the ﬂoor. If x(t) denotes the length of the chain over-
hanging the table at time t 	 0, then v  dxdt is its
velocity. When all resistive forces are ignored, it can
be shown that a mathematical model relating v to x is
given by
.
(a) Rewrite this model in differential form. Proceed as
in Problems 31-36 and solve the DE for v in terms
of x by ﬁnding an appropriate integrating factor.
Find an explicit solution v(x).
(b) Determine the velocity with which the chain leaves
the platform.
xv dv
dx  v2  32x
70
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
x(t)
platform edge
peg
FIGURE 2.4.2
Uncoiling chain in Problem 45
Computer Lab Assignments
46. Streamlines
(a) The solution of the differential equation
is a family of curves that can be interpreted as
streamlines of a ﬂuid ﬂow around a circular object
whose boundary is described by the equation
x2  y2  1. Solve this DE and note the solution
f(x, y)  c for c  0.
(b) Use
a
CAS
to
plot
the
streamlines
for
c  0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8 in three
different ways. First, use the contourplot of a CAS.
Second, solve for x in terms of the variable y. Plot
the resulting two functions of y for the given values
of c, and then combine the graphs. Third, use the
CAS to solve a cubic equation for y in terms of x.
2xy
(x2  y2)2 dx 1 
y2  x2
(x2  y2)2 dy  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.5
SOLUTIONS BY SUBSTITUTIONS
●
71
SOLUTIONS BY SUBSTITUTIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Techniques of integration
●Separation of variables
●Solution of linear DEs
INTRODUCTION
We usually solve a differential equation by recognizing it as a certain kind of
equation (say, separable, linear, or exact) and then carrying out a procedure, consisting of equation-
speciﬁc mathematical steps, that yields a solution of the equation. But it is not uncommon to be
stumped by a differential equation because it does not fall into one of the classes of equations that
we know how to solve. The procedures that are discussed in this section may be helpful in this
situation.
2.5
Substitutions
Often the ﬁrst step in solving a differential equation consists
of transforming it into another differential equation by means of a substitution.
For example, suppose we wish to transform the ﬁrst-order differential equation
dydx  f (x, y) by the substitution y  g(x, u), where u is regarded as a function of
the variable x. If g possesses ﬁrst-partial derivatives, then the Chain Rule
.
If we replace dydx by the foregoing derivative and replace y in f(x, y) by g(x, u), then
the DE dydx  f(x, y) becomes gx(x, u)  gu(x, u)
 f(x, g(x, u)), which, solved
for dudx, has the form 
 F(x, u). If we can determine a solution u  (x) of this 
last equation, then a solution of the original differential equation is y  g(x, (x)).
In the discussion that follows we examine three different kinds of ﬁrst-order
differential equations that are solvable by means of a substitution.
Homogeneous Equations
If a function f possesses the property f(tx, ty) 
du
dx
du
dx
dy
dx  g
x dx
dx  g
u du
dx    gives    dy
dx  gx(x, u)  gu(x, u) du
dx
tf(x, y) for some real number , then f is said to be a homogeneous function of
degree . For example, f (x, y)  x3  y3 is a homogeneous function of degree 3,
since
f (tx, ty)  (tx)3  (ty)3  t3(x3  y3)  t3f(x, y),
whereas f (x, y)  x3  y3  1 is not homogeneous. A ﬁrst-order DE in differential
form
M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0
(1)
is said to be homogeneous* if both coefﬁcient functions M and N are homogeneous
functions of the same degree. In other words, (1) is homogeneous if
.
In addition, if M and N are homogeneous functions of degree , we can also write
,
(2)
M(x, y)  xM(1, u)    and    N(x, y)  xN(1, u),  where u  y>x
M(tx, ty)  tM(x, y)    and    N(tx, ty)  tN(x, y)
*Here the word homogeneous does not mean the same as it did in the Remarks at the end of Section 2.3.
Recall that a linear ﬁrst-order equation a1(x)y  a0(x)y  g(x) is homogeneous when g(x)  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
and
.
(3)
See Problem 31 in Exercises 2.5. Properties (2) and (3) suggest the substitutions that can
be used to solve a homogeneous differential equation. Speciﬁcally, either of the substi-
tutions y  ux or x  vy, where u and v are new dependent variables, will reduce a
homogeneous equation to a separable ﬁrst-order differential equation.To show this, ob-
serve that as a consequence of (2) a homogeneous equation M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0
can be rewritten as
,
where u  yx or y  ux. By substituting the differential dy  u dx  x du into the
last equation and gathering terms, we obtain a separable DE in the variables u and x:
or
.
At this point we offer the same advice as in the preceding sections: Do not memorize
anything here (especially the last formula); rather, work through the procedure each
time. The proof that the substitutions x  vy and dx  v dy  y dv also lead to a
separable equation follows in an analogous manner from (3).
 dx
x 
N(1, u) du
M(1, u)  uN(1, u)  0
 [M(1, u)  uN(1, u)] dx  xN(1, u) du  0
 M(1, u) dx  N(1, u)[u dx  x du]  0
xM(1, u) dx  xN(1, u) dy  0    or    M(1, u) dx  N(1, u) dy  0
M(x, y)  yM(v, 1)    and    N(x, y)  yN(v, 1),  where v  x>y
EXAMPLE 1
Solving a Homogeneous DE
Solve (x2  y2) dx  (x2  xy) dy  0.
SOLUTION
Inspection of M(x, y)  x2  y2 and N(x, y)  x2  xy shows that
these coefﬁcients are homogeneous functions of degree 2. If we let y  ux, then
dy  u dx  x du, so after substituting, the given equation becomes
.
After integration the last line gives
.
Using the properties of logarithms, we can write the preceding solution as
.
Although either of the indicated substitutions can be used for every homoge-
neous differential equation, in practice we try x  vy whenever the function M(x, y)
is simpler than N(x, y). Also it could happen that after using one substitution, we may
encounter integrals that are difﬁcult or impossible to evaluate in closed form; switch-
ing substitutions may result in an easier problem.
ln
(x  y)2
cx
  y
x    or    (x  y)2  cxey/x
  y
x  2 ln1  y
x  ln x   lnc
 u  2 ln 1  u   ln x   ln c 
 1 
2
1  u du  dx
x  0
 1  u
1  u du  dx
x  0
 x2(1  u) dx  x3(1  u) du  0
 (x2  u2x2) dx  (x2  ux2)[u dx  x du]  0
; long division
; resubstituting u  yx
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bernoulli's Equation
The differential equation
,
(4)
where n is any real number, is called Bernoulli's equation. Note that for n  0 and
n  1, equation (4) is linear. For n  0 and n  1 the substitution u  y1n reduces
any equation of form (4) to a linear equation.
dy
dx  P(x)y  f (x)yn
2.5
SOLUTIONS BY SUBSTITUTIONS
●
73
EXAMPLE 2
Solving a Bernoulli DE
Solve  
SOLUTION
We ﬁrst rewrite the equation as
by dividing by x. With n  2 we have u  y1 or y  u1. We then substitute
into the given equation and simplify. The result is
.
The integrating factor for this linear equation on, say, (0, ) is
.
Integrating
gives x1u  x  c or u  x2  cx. Since u  y1, we have y  1u, so a solu-
tion of the given equation is y  1(x2  cx).
Note that we have not obtained the general solution of the original nonlinear dif-
ferential equation in Example 2, since y  0 is a singular solution of the equation.
Reduction to Separation of Variables
A differential equation of the form
(5)
can always be reduced to an equation with separable variables by means of the sub-
stitution u  Ax  By  C, B  0. Example 3 illustrates the technique.
dy
dx  f(Ax  By  C)
d
dx [x1u]  1
edx/x  eln x  eln x1  x1
du
dx  1
x u  x
dy
dx  dy
du du
dx  u2 du
dx
dy
dx  1
x y  xy2
x dy
dx  y  x2y2.
; Chain Rule
EXAMPLE 3
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve  
SOLUTION
If we let u  2x  y, then dudx  2  dydx, so the differential
equation is transformed into
.
du
dx  2  u2  7    or    du
dx  u2  9
dy
dx  (2x  y)2  7,  y(0)  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

; replace 
by c
e6c1
x
y
FIGURE 2.5.1
Solutions of DE in
Example 3
74
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
The last equation is separable. Using partial fractions
and then integrating yields
.
Solving the last equation for u and then resubstituting gives the solution
.
(6)
Finally, applying the initial condition y(0)  0 to the last equation in (6) gives 
c  1. Figure 2.5.1, obtained with the aid of a graphing utility, shows the graph of
the particular solution 
in dark blue, along with the graphs of
some other members of the family of solutions (6).
y  2x  3(1  e6x)
1  e6x
u  3(1  ce6x)
1  ce6x     or    y  2x  3(1  ce6x)
1  ce6x
1
6 ln
u  3
u  3  x  c1    or    u  3
u  3  e6x6c1  ce6x
du
(u  3)(u  3)  dx    or    1
6 
1
u  3 
1
u  3 du  dx
EXERCISES 2.5
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-2.
Each DE in Problems 1-14 is homogeneous.
In Problems 1-10 solve the given differential equation by
using an appropriate substitution.
1. (x  y) dx  x dy  0
2. (x  y) dx  x dy  0
3. x dx  (y  2x) dy  0
4. y dx  2(x  y) dy 
5. (y2  yx) dx  x2 dy  0
6. (y2  yx) dx  x2 dy  0
7.
8.
9.
10.
In Problems 11-14 solve the given initial-value problem.
11.
12.
13. (x  yey/x) dx  xey/x dy  0,
y(1)  0
14. y dx  x(ln x  ln y  1) dy  0,
y(1)  e
(x2  2y2) dx
dy  xy, y(1)  1
xy2 dy
dx  y3  x3, y(1)  2
x dy
dx  y  1x2  y2, x 	 0
y dx  (x  1xy) dy  0
dy
dx  x  3y
3x  y
dy
dx  y  x
y  x
Each DE in Problems 15-22 is a Bernoulli equation.
In Problems 15-20 solve the given differential equation by
using an appropriate substitution.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
In Problems 21 and 22 solve the given initial-value problem.
21.
22.
Each DE in Problems 23-30 is of the form given in (5).
In Problems 23-28 solve the given differential equation by
using an appropriate substitution.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28. dy
dx  1  eyx5
dy
dx  2  1y  2x  3
dy
dx  sin(x  y)
dy
dx  tan2(x  y)
dy
dx  1  x  y
x  y
dy
dx  (x  y  1)2
y1/2 dy
dx  y3/2  1, y(0)  4
x2 dy
dx  2xy  3y4, y(1)  1
2
3(1  t2) dy
dt  2ty(y3  1)
t2 dy
dt  y2  ty
x dy
dx  (1  x)y  xy2
dy
dx  y(xy3  1)
dy
dx  y  exy2
x dy
dx  y  1
y2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.6
A NUMERICAL METHOD
●
75
In Problems 29 and 30 solve the given initial-value problem.
29.
30.
Discussion Problems
31. Explain why it is always possible to express any homoge-
neous differential equation M(x, y) dx  N(x, y) dy  0 in
the form
.
You might start by proving that
.
32. Put the homogeneous differential equation
(5x2  2y2) dx  xy dy  0
into the form given in Problem 31.
33. (a) Determine two singular solutions of the DE in
Problem 10.
(b) If the initial condition y(5)  0 is as prescribed in
Problem 10, then what is the largest interval I over
which the solution is deﬁned? Use a graphing util-
ity to graph the solution curve for the IVP.
34. In Example 3 the solution y(x) becomes unbounded as
x : . Nevertheless, y(x) is asymptotic to a curve as
x :  and to a different curve as x : . What are the
equations of these curves?
35. The differential equation dydx  P(x)  Q(x)y  R(x)y2
is known as Riccati's equation.
(a) A Riccati equation can be solved by a succession
of two substitutions provided that we know a
M(x, y)  xaM(1, y>x)    and    N(x, y)  xaN(1, y>x)
dy
dx  F 	
y
x
dy
dx 
3x  2y
3x  2y  2, y(1)  1
dy
dx  cos(x  y), y(0)  >4
particular solution y1 of the equation. Show that the
substitution y  y1  u reduces Riccati's equation
to a Bernoulli equation (4) with n  2. The
Bernoulli equation can then be reduced to a linear
equation by the substitution w  u1.
(b) Find a one-parameter family of solutions for the
differential equation
where y1  2x is a known solution of the equation.
36. Determine an appropriate substitution to solve
xy  y ln(xy).
Mathematical Models
37. Falling Chain
In Problem 45 in Exercises 2.4 we saw
that a mathematical model for the velocity v of a chain
slipping off the edge of a high horizontal platform is
.
In that problem you were asked to solve the DE by con-
verting it into an exact equation using an integrating
factor. This time solve the DE using the fact that it is a
Bernoulli equation.
38. Population Growth
In the study of population dy-
namics one of the most famous models for a growing
but bounded population is the logistic equation
,
where a and b are positive constants. Although we
will come back to this equation and solve it by an
alternative method in Section 3.2, solve the DE this
ﬁrst time using the fact that it is a Bernoulli equation.
dP
dt  P(a  bP)
xv dv
dx  v2  32x
dy
dx   4
x2  1
x y  y2
A NUMERICAL METHOD
INTRODUCTION
A ﬁrst-order differential equation dydx  f (x, y) is a source of information.
We started this chapter by observing that we could garner qualitative information from a ﬁrst-order
DE about its solutions even before we attempted to solve the equation. Then in Sections 2.2-2.5 we
examined ﬁrst-order DEs analytically—that is, we developed some procedures for obtaining explicit
and implicit solutions. But a differential equation can a possess a solution, yet we may not be able
to obtain it analytically. So to round out the picture of the different types of analyses of differential
equations, we conclude this chapter with a method by which we can "solve" the differential equa-
tion numerically—this means that the DE is used as the cornerstone of an algorithm for approximat-
ing the unknown solution.
In this section we are going to develop only the simplest of numerical methods—a method that
utilizes the idea that a tangent line can be used to approximate the values of a function in a small
neighborhood of the point of tangency. A more extensive treatment of numerical methods for ordi-
nary differential equations is given in Chapter 9.
2.6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Using the Tangent Line
Let us assume that the ﬁrst-order initial-value
problem
(1)
possesses a solution. One way of approximating this solution is to use tangent lines.
For example, let y(x) denote the unknown solution of the ﬁrst-order initial-value
problem 
The nonlinear differential equation in
this IVP cannot be solved directly by any of the methods considered in Sections 2.2,
2.4, and 2.5; nevertheless, we can still ﬁnd approximate numerical values of the
unknown y(x). Speciﬁcally, suppose we wish to know the value of y(2.5). The IVP
has a solution, and as the ﬂow of the direction ﬁeld of the DE in Figure 2.6.1(a) sug-
gests, a solution curve must have a shape similar to the curve shown in blue.
The direction ﬁeld in Figure 2.6.1(a) was generated with lineal elements passing
through points in a grid with integer coordinates. As the solution curve passes
through the initial point (2, 4), the lineal element at this point is a tangent line with
slope given by 
As is apparent in Figure 2.6.1(a)
and the "zoom in" in Figure 2.6.1(b), when x is close to 2, the points on the solution
curve are close to the points on the tangent line (the lineal element). Using the point
(2, 4), the slope f (2, 4)  1.8, and the point-slope form of a line, we ﬁnd that an equa-
tion of the tangent line is y  L(x), where L(x)  1.8x  0.4. This last equation,
called a linearization of y(x) at x  2, can be used to approximate values of y(x)
within a small neighborhood of x  2. If y1  L(x1) denotes the y-coordinate on the
tangent line and y(x1) is the y-coordinate on the solution curve corresponding to an
x-coordinate x1 that is close to x  2, then y(x1)  y1. If we choose, say, x1  2.1,
then y1  L(2.1)  1.8(2.1)  0.4  4.18, so y(2.1)  4.18.
f (2, 4)  0.114  0.4(2)2  1.8.
y  0.11y  0.4x2, y(2)  4.
y   f(x, y), y(x0)  y0
2
(2, 4) 
slope 
m  = 1.8 
x
y
2
4
_2
(a) direction ﬁeld for y  0
(b) lineal element
at (2, 4)
e 
solution 
curv 
FIGURE 2.6.1
Magniﬁcation of a neighborhood about the point (2, 4)
solution curv e 
x
y
x1 =
+
x0
h
x0
L(x)
(x0, y0)
(x1, y1)
h
(x1, y(x1))
slope = f(x0, y0)
error
FIGURE 2.6.2
Approximating y(x1)
using a tangent line
Euler's Method
To generalize the procedure just illustrated, we use the lin-
*This is not an actual tangent line, since (x1, y1) lies on the ﬁrst tangent and not on the solution curve.
earization of the unknown solution y(x) of (1) at x  x0:
.
(2)
The graph of this linearization is a straight line tangent to the graph of y  y(x) at
the point (x0, y0). We now let h be a positive increment of the x-axis, as shown in
Figure 2.6.2. Then by replacing x by x1  x0  h in (2), we get
,
where y1  L(x1). The point (x1, y1) on the tangent line is an approximation to the
point (x1, y(x1)) on the solution curve. Of course, the accuracy of the approxima-
tion L(x1)  y(x1) or y1  y(x1) depends heavily on the size of the increment h.
Usually, we must choose this step size to be "reasonably small." We now repeat the
process using a second "tangent line" at (x1, y1).* By identifying the new starting
L(x1)  y0  f (x0, y0)(x0  h  x0)    or    y1  y0  hf(x1, y1)
L(x)  y0  f (x0, y0)(x  x0)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TABLE 2.6.1
h  0.1
xn
yn
2.00
4.0000
2.10
4.1800
2.20
4.3768
2.30
4.5914
2.40
4.8244
2.50
5.0768
TABLE 2.6.2
h  0.05
xn
yn
2.00
4.0000
2.05
4.0900
2.10
4.1842
2.15
4.2826
2.20
4.3854
2.25
4.4927
2.30
4.6045
2.35
4.7210
2.40
4.8423
2.45
4.9686
2.50
5.0997
2.6
A NUMERICAL METHOD
●
77
point as (x1, y1) with (x0, y0) in the above discussion, we obtain an approximation 
y2  y(x2) corresponding to two steps of length h from x0, that is, x2  x1  h 
x0  2h, and
.
Continuing in this manner, we see that y1, y2, y3, . . . , can be deﬁned recursively by
the general formula
,
(3)
where xn  x0  nh, n  0, 1, 2, . . . . This procedure of using successive "tangent
lines" is called Euler's method.
yn1  yn  hf (xn, yn)
y(x2)  y(x0  2h)  y(x1  h)  y2  y1  hf (x1, y1)
EXAMPLE 1
Euler's Method
Consider the initial-value problem 
Use Euler's
method to obtain an approximation of y(2.5) using ﬁrst h  0.1 and then h  0.05.
SOLUTION
With the identiﬁcation 
(3) becomes
.
Then for h  0.1, x0  2, y0  4, and n  0 we ﬁnd
,
which, as we have already seen, is an estimate to the value of y(2.1). However, if we
use the smaller step size h  0.05, it takes two steps to reach x  2.1. From
we have y1  y(2.05) and y2  y(2.1). The remainder of the calculations were
carried out by using software. The results are summarized in Tables 2.6.1 and 2.6.2,
where each entry has been rounded to four decimal places. We see in Tables 2.6.1 and
2.6.2 that it takes ﬁve steps with h  0.1 and 10 steps with h  0.05, respectively, to
get to x  2.5. Intuitively, we would expect that y10  5.0997 corresponding to
h  0.05 is the better approximation of y(2.5) than the value y5  5.0768 corre-
sponding to h  0.1.
In Example 2 we apply Euler's method to a differential equation for which we
have already found a solution. We do this to compare the values of the approxima-
tions yn at each step with the true or actual values of the solution y(xn) of the initial-
value problem.
y2  4.09  0.05(0.114.09  0.4(2.05)2)  4.18416187
y1  4  0.05(0.114  0.4(2)2)  4.09
y1  y0  h(0.11y0  0.4x0
2)  4  0.1(0.114  0.4(2)2)  4.18
yn1  yn  h(0.11yn  0.4xn
2)
f (x, y)  0.11y  0.4x2,
y  0.11y  0.4x2, y(2)  4.
EXAMPLE 2
Comparison of Approximate and Actual Values
Consider the initial-value problem y  0.2xy, y(1)  1. Use Euler's method to
obtain an approximation of y(1.5) using ﬁrst h  0.1 and then h  0.05.
SOLUTION
With the identiﬁcation f (x, y)  0.2xy, (3) becomes
where x0  1 and y0  1. Again with the aid of computer software we obtain the
values in Tables 2.6.3 and 2.6.4 on page 78.
yn1  yn  h(0.2xn yn)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

78
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
In Example 1 the true or actual values were calculated from the known solution
(Verify.) The absolute error is deﬁned to be
.
The relative error and percentage relative error are, in turn,
.
It is apparent from Tables 2.6.3 and 2.6.4 that the accuracy of the approximations
improves as the step size h decreases. Also, we see that even though the percentage
relative error is growing with each step, it does not appear to be that bad. But you
should not be deceived by one example. If we simply change the coefﬁcient of the
right side of the DE in Example 2 from 0.2 to 2, then at xn  1.5 the percentage
relative errors increase dramatically. See Problem 4 in Exercises 2.6.
A Caveat
Euler's method is just one of many different ways in which a solu-
tion of a differential equation can be approximated. Although attractive for its sim-
plicity, Euler's method is seldom used in serious calculations. It was introduced
here simply to give you a ﬁrst taste of numerical methods. We will go into greater
detail in discussing numerical methods that give signiﬁcantly greater accuracy, no-
tably the fourth order Runge-Kutta method, referred to as the RK4 method, in
Chapter 9.
Numerical Solvers
Regardless of whether we can actually ﬁnd an explicit
or implicit solution, if a solution of a differential equation exists, it represents a
smooth curve in the Cartesian plane. The basic idea behind any numerical method
for ﬁrst-order ordinary differential equations is to somehow approximate the
y-values of a solution for preselected values of x. We start at a speciﬁed initial point
(x0, y0) on a solution curve and proceed to calculate in a step-by-step fashion a
sequence of points (x1, y1), (x2, y2), . . . , (xn, yn) whose y-coordinates yi approxi-
mate the y-coordinates y(xi) of points (x1, y(x1)), (x2, y(x2)), . . . , (xn, y(xn)) that lie
on the graph of the usually unknown solution y(x). By taking the x-coordinates
close together (that is, for small values of h) and by joining the points (x1, y1),
(x2, y2), . . . , (xn, yn) with short line segments, we obtain a polygonal curve whose
qualitative characteristics we hope are close to those of an actual solution curve.
Drawing curves is something that is well suited to a computer. A computer program
written to either implement a numerical method or render a visual representation of
an approximate solution curve ﬁtting the numerical data produced by this method
is referred to as a numerical solver. Many different numerical solvers are commer-
cially available, either embedded in a larger software package, such as a computer
absolute error
 actual value   and  absolute error
 actual value   100
 actual value  approximation 
y  e0.1(x21).
TABLE 2.6.3
h  0.1
xn
yn
Actual value
Abs. error
% Rel. error
1.00
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.00
1.10
1.0200
1.0212
0.0012
0.12
1.20
1.0424
1.0450
0.0025
0.24
1.30
1.0675
1.0714
0.0040
0.37
1.40
1.0952
1.1008
0.0055
0.50
1.50
1.1259
1.1331
0.0073
0.64
TABLE 2.6.4
h  0.05
xn
yn
Actual value
Abs. error
% Rel. error
1.00
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.00
1.05
1.0100
1.0103
0.0003
0.03
1.10
1.0206
1.0212
0.0006
0.06
1.15
1.0318
1.0328
0.0009
0.09
1.20
1.0437
1.0450
0.0013
0.12
1.25
1.0562
1.0579
0.0016
0.16
1.30
1.0694
1.0714
0.0020
0.19
1.35
1.0833
1.0857
0.0024
0.22
1.40
1.0980
1.1008
0.0028
0.25
1.45
1.1133
1.1166
0.0032
0.29
1.50
1.1295
1.1331
0.0037
0.32
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

algebra system, or provided as a stand-alone package. Some software packages
simply plot the generated numerical approximations, whereas others generate hard
numerical data as well as the corresponding approximate or numerical solution
curves. By way of illustration of the connect-the-dots nature of the graphs pro-
duced by a numerical solver, the two colored polygonal graphs in Figure 2.6.3 are
the numerical solution curves for the initial-value problem y  0.2xy, y(0)  1 on
the interval [0, 4] obtained from Euler's method and the RK4 method using the
step size h  1. The blue smooth curve is the graph of the exact solution
of the IVP. Notice in Figure 2.6.3 that, even with the ridiculously large step size of
h  1, the RK4 method produces the more believable "solution curve." The numer-
ical solution curve obtained from the RK4 method is indistinguishable from the
actual solution curve on the interval [0, 4] when a more typical step size of h  0.1
is used.
Using a Numerical Solver
Knowledge of the various numerical methods is
not necessary in order to use a numerical solver. Asolver usually requires that the dif-
ferential equation be expressed in normal form dydx  f (x, y). Numerical solvers
that generate only curves usually require that you supply f (x, y) and the initial data x0
and y0 and specify the desired numerical method. If the idea is to approximate the nu-
merical value of y(a), then a solver may additionally require that you state a value for
h or, equivalently, give the number of steps that you want to take to get from x  x0
to x  a. For example, if we wanted to approximate y(4) for the IVP illustrated in
Figure 2.6.3, then, starting at x  0 it would take four steps to reach x  4 with a step
size of h  1; 40 steps is equivalent to a step size of h  0.1. Although we will not
delve here into the many problems that one can encounter when attempting to ap-
proximate mathematical quantities, you should at least be aware of the fact that a nu-
merical solver may break down near certain points or give an incomplete or mislead-
ing picture when applied to some ﬁrst-order differential equations in the normal
form. Figure 2.6.4 illustrates the graph obtained by applying Euler's method to a cer-
tain ﬁrst-order initial-value problem dydx  f (x, y), y(0)  1. Equivalent results
were obtained using three different commercial numerical solvers, yet the graph is
hardly a plausible solution curve. (Why?) There are several avenues of recourse
when a numerical solver has difﬁculties; three of the more obvious are decrease the
step size, use another numerical method, and try a different numerical solver.
y  e0.1x2
FIGURE 2.6.4
A not-very helpful
numerical solution curve
x
y
1
2
3
4
5
_1
1
2
3
4
5
6
_2 _1
2.6
A NUMERICAL METHOD
●
79
exact 
solution 
(0,1)
Euler's
method
RK4
method
_1
1
2
3
4
5
y
x
4
5
3
2
1
_1
FIGURE 2.6.3
Comparison of the
Runge-Kutta (RK4) and Euler methods
EXERCISES 2.6
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-3.
In Problems 1 and 2 use Euler's method to obtain a four-
decimal approximation of the indicated value. Carry out the
recursion of (3) by hand, ﬁrst using h  0.1 and then using
h  0.05.
1. y  2x  3y  1, y(1)  5;
y(1.2)
2. y  x  y2, y(0)  0;
y(0.2)
In Problems 3 and 4 use Euler's method to obtain a four-
decimal approximation of the indicated value. First use 
h  0.1 and then use h  0.05. Find an explicit solution for
each initial-value problem and then construct tables similar to
Tables 2.6.3 and 2.6.4.
3. y  y, y(0)  1;
y(1.0)
4. y  2xy, y(1)  1;
y(1.5)
In Problems 5-10 use a numerical solver and Euler's
method to obtain a four-decimal approximation of the indi-
cated value. First use h  0.1 and then use h  0.05.
5. y  ey, y(0)  0;
y(0.5)
6. y  x2  y2, y(0)  1;
y(0.5)
7. y  (x  y)2, y(0)  0.5;
y(0.5)
8.
9.
10. y  y  y2, y(0)  0.5;
y(0.5)
In Problems 11 and 12 use a numerical solver to obtain a nu-
merical solution curve for the given initial-value problem.
First use Euler's method and then the RK4 method. Use
y  xy2  y
x, y(1)  1; y(1.5)
y  xy  1y, y(0)  1; y(0.5)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
h  0.25 in each case. Superimpose both solution curves on
the same coordinate axes. If possible, use a different color
for each curve. Repeat, using h  0.1 and h  0.05.
11. y  2(cos x)y,
y(0)  1
12. y  y(10  2y),
y(0)  1
Discussion Problems
13. Use a numerical solver and Euler's method to
approximate y(1.0), where y(x) is the solution to
y  2xy2, y(0)  1. First use h  0.1 and then use 
h  0.05. Repeat, using the RK4 method. Discuss
what might cause the approximations to y(1.0) to
differ so greatly.
Computer Lab Assignments
14. (a) Use a numerical solver and the RK4 method to
graph the solution of the initial-value problem
y  2xy  1, y(0)  0.
(b) Solve the initial-value problem by one of the
analytic procedures developed earlier in this
chapter.
(c) Use the analytic solution y(x) found in part (b)
and a CAS to ﬁnd the coordinates of all relative
extrema.
CHAPTER 2 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-3.
Answer Problems 1-12 without referring back to the text.
Fill in the blanks or answer true or false.
1. The linear DE, y  ky  A, where k and A are constants,
is autonomous. The critical point 
of the equa-
tion is a(n) 
(attractor or repeller) for k 	 0
and a(n) 
(attractor or repeller) for k 
 0.
2. The initial-value problem x
 4y  0, y(0)  k, has
an inﬁnite number of solutions for k 
and
no solution for k 
.
3. The linear DE, y  k1y  k2, where k1 and k2 are
nonzero constants, always possesses a constant 
solution.
4. The linear DE, a1(x)y  a0(x)y  0 is also separable.
5. An example of a nonlinear third-order differential equa-
tion in normal form is 
.
6. The ﬁrst-order DE 
is not separa-
ble. 
7. Every autonomous DE 
is separable.
8. By inspection, two solutions of the differential equation
are 
.
9. If 
then 
.
10. If a differentiable function 
satisﬁes 
then 
.
y(x) 
y(1)  2,
y  x,
y(x)
y 
y  exy,
y  y  2
dy>dx  f(y)
dr
du  ru  r  u  1
dy
dx
11.
is a solution of the linear ﬁrst-order
differential equation 
.
12. An example of an autonomous linear ﬁrst-order DE with
a single critical point 
is 
, whereas an
autonomous nonlinear ﬁrst-order DE with a single criti-
cal point 
is 
.
In Problems 13 and 14 construct an autonomous ﬁrst-order
differential equation dydx  f (y) whose phase portrait is
consistent with the given ﬁgure.
13.
3
3
y  ecos x
x
0
tecos t dt
1
3
y
FIGURE 2.R.1
Graph for Problem 13
14.
0
2
4
y
FIGURE 2.R.2
Graph for Problem 14
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 IN REVIEW
●
81
15. The number 0 is a critical point of the autonomous dif-
ferential equation dxdt  xn, where n is a positive in-
teger. For what values of n is 0 asymptotically stable?
Semi-stable? Unstable? Repeat for the differential equa-
tion dxdt  xn.
16. Consider the differential equation 
The function f (P) has one real zero, as shown in
Figure 2.R.3. Without attempting to solve the differen-
tial equation, estimate the value of limt: P(t).
f (P)  0.5P 3  1.7P  3.4.
dP>dt  f (P), where
(g) y dx  (y  xy2) dy
(h)
(i)
xy y  y2  2x
(j) 2xy y  y2  2x2
(k) y dx  x dy  0
(l)
(m)
(n)
In Problems 19-26 solve the given differential equation.
19. (y2  1) dx  y sec2 x dy
20. y(ln x  ln y) dx  (x ln x  x ln y  y) dy
21.
22.
23.
24. (2x  y  1)y  1
25. (x2  4) dy  (2x  8xy) dx
26. (2r2 cos 	 sin 	  r cos 	) d	
 (4r  sin 	  2r cos2 	) dr  0
In Problems 27 and 28 solve the given initial-value problem
and give the largest interval I on which the solution is deﬁned.
27.
28.
29. (a) Without solving, explain why the initial-value
problem
has no solution for y0 
 0.
(b) Solve the initial-value problem in part (a) for 
y0 	 0 and ﬁnd the largest interval I on which the
solution is deﬁned.
30. (a) Find an implicit solution of the initial-value problem
.
(b) Find an explicit solution of the problem in part (a) and
give the largest interval I over which the solution is
deﬁned. A graphing utility may be helpful here.
dy
dx  y2  x2
xy
,  y(1)  12
dy
dx  1y,  y(x0)  y0
dy
dt  2(t  1)y2  0,  y(0)  1
8
sin x dy
dx  (cos x)y  0,  y (7p>6)  2
t dQ
dt  Q  t 4 ln t
dx
dy   4y2  6xy
3y2  2x
(6x  1)y2 dy
dx  3x2  2y3  0
y
x2 dy
dx  e2x3y2  0
dy
dx  x
y  y
x  1
	x2  2y
x  
 dx  (3  ln x2) dy
x dy
dx  ye x/y  x
FIGURE 2.R.4
Portion of a direction ﬁeld for Problem 17
P
1
1
f
FIGURE 2.R.3
Graph for Problem 16
17. Figure 2.R.4 is a portion of a direction ﬁeld of a differ-
ential equation dydx  f (x, y). By hand, sketch two
different solution curves—one that is tangent to the lin-
eal element shown in black and one that is tangent to the
lineal element shown in red.
18. Classify each differential equation as separable, exact,
linear, homogeneous, or Bernoulli. Some equations may
be more than one kind. Do not solve.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f) dy
dx  5y  y2
dy
dx  y2  y
x2  x
dy
dx 
1
x(x  y)
(x  1) dy
dx  y  10
dy
dx 
1
y  x
dy
dx  x  y
x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

integers, 7  m  7, 7  n  7. In each direction ﬁeld,
sketch by hand an approximate solution curve that passes
through each of the solid points shown in red. Discuss: Does
it appear that the DE possesses critical points in the interval
3.5  y  3.5? If so, classify the critical points as asymp-
totically stable, unstable, or semi-stable.
x
3
2
1
_1
_2
_3
_3
_2
_1
1
2
3
y
FIGURE 2.R.6
Portion of a direction ﬁeld for Problem 33
x
y
FIGURE 2.R.5
Graph for Problem 31
34.
FIGURE 2.R.7
Portion of a direction ﬁeld for Problem 34
x
3
2
1
_1
_2
_3
_3
_2
_1
1
2
3
y
82
●
CHAPTER 2
FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
31. Graphs of some members of a family of solutions for a
ﬁrst-order differential equation dydx  f(x, y) are
shown in Figure 2.R.5. The graphs of two implicit
solutions, one that passes through the point (1, 1) and
one that passes through (1, 3), are shown in blue.
Reproduce the ﬁgure on a piece of paper. With colored
pencils trace out the solution curves for the solutions
y  y1(x) and y  y2(x) deﬁned by the implicit solu-
tions such that y1(1)  1 and y2(1)  3, respectively.
Estimate the intervals on which the solutions y  y1(x)
and y  y2(x) are deﬁned.
32. Use Euler's method with step size h  0.1 to approxi-
mate y(1.2), where y(x) is a solution of the initial-value
problem 
, y(1)  9.
In Problems 33 and 34 each ﬁgure represents a portion of a
direction ﬁeld of an autonomous ﬁrst-order differential equa-
tion dydx  f(y). Reproduce the ﬁgure on a separate piece
of paper and then complete the direction ﬁeld over the grid.
The points of the grid are (mh, nh), where 
m and n
h  1
2,
y  1  x1y
33.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

83
3
Modeling with First-Order 
Differential Equations
3.1 Linear Models
3.2 Nonlinear Models
3.3 Modeling with Systems of First-Order DEs
Chapter 3 in Review
In Section 1.3 we saw how a ﬁrst-order differential equation could be used as a
mathematical model in the study of population growth, radioactive decay,
continuous compound interest, cooling of bodies, mixtures, chemical reactions,
ﬂuid draining from a tank, velocity of a falling body, and current in a series circuit.
Using the methods of Chapter 2, we are now able to solve some of the linear DEs in
Section 3.1 and nonlinear DEs in Section 3.2 that commonly appear in applications.
The chapter concludes with the natural next step. In Section 3.3 we examine how
systems of ﬁrst-order differential equations can arise as mathematical models in
coupled physical systems (for example, electrical networks, and a population of
predators such as foxes interacting with a population of prey such as rabbits).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Growth and Decay
The initial-value problem
,
(1)
where k is a constant of proportionality, serves as a model for diverse phenomena
involving either growth or decay. We saw in Section 1.3 that in biological applica-
tions the rate of growth of certain populations (bacteria, small animals) over short
periods of time is proportional to the population present at time t. Knowing the pop-
ulation at some arbitrary initial time t0, we can then use the solution of (1) to predict
the population in the future—that is, at times t  t0. The constant of proportional-
ity k in (1) can be determined from the solution of the initial-value problem, using a
subsequent measurement of x at a time t1  t0. In physics and chemistry (1) is seen
in the form of a ﬁrst-order reaction—that is, a reaction whose rate, or velocity,
dxdt is directly proportional to the amount x of a substance that is unconverted
or remaining at time t. The decomposition, or decay, of U-238 (uranium) by
radioactivity into Th-234 (thorium) is a ﬁrst-order reaction.
EXAMPLE 1
Bacterial Growth
Aculture initially has P0 number of bacteria. At t  1 h the number of bacteria is mea-
sured to be 
. If the rate of growth is proportional to the number of bacteria P(t) pre-
sent at time t, determine the time necessary for the number of bacteria to triple.
SOLUTION
We ﬁrst solve the differential equation in (1), with the symbol x replaced
by P. With t0  0 the initial condition is P(0)  P0. We then use the empirical obser-
vation that 
to determine the constant of proportionality k.
Notice that the differential equation dPdt  kP is both separable and linear.
When it is put in the standard form of a linear ﬁrst-order DE,
,
we can see by inspection that the integrating factor is ekt. Multiplying both sides of
the equation by this term and integrating gives, in turn,
.
Therefore P(t)  cekt. At t  0 it follows that P0  ce0  c, so P(t)  P0ekt. At 
t  1 we have 
or 
. From the last equation we get
, so P(t)  P0e0.4055t. To ﬁnd the time at which the number of bac-
teria has tripled, we solve 3P0  P0e0.4055t for t. It follows that 0.4055t  ln 3, or
.
See Figure 3.1.1.
t 
ln 3
0.4055  2.71 h
k  ln 3
2  0.4055
ek  3
2
3
2P0  P0ek
d
dt [ektP]  0    and    ektP  c
dP
dt  kP  0
P(1)  3
2P0
3
2P0
dx
dt  kx,  x(t0)  x0
t
P
3P0
P0
t =  2.71
P(t) = P0e0.4055t
FIGURE 3.1.1
Time in which 
population triples in Example 1
LINEAR MODELS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●A differential equation as a mathematical model in Section 1.3
●Reread "Solving a Linear First-Order Equation" on page 56 in Section 2.3
INTRODUCTION
In this section we solve some of the linear ﬁrst-order models that were
introduced in Section 1.3.
3.1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.1
LINEAR MODELS
●
85
Notice in Example 1 that the actual number P0 of bacteria present at time t  0
played no part in determining the time required for the number in the culture to triple.
The time necessary for an initial population of, say, 100 or 1,000,000 bacteria to
triple is still approximately 2.71 hours.
As shown in Figure 3.1.2, the exponential function ekt increases as t increases
for k  0 and decreases as t increases for k  0. Thus problems describing growth
(whether of populations, bacteria, or even capital) are characterized by a positive
value of k, whereas problems involving decay (as in radioactive disintegration) yield
a negative k value. Accordingly, we say that k is either a growth constant (k  0) or
a decay constant (k  0).
Half-Life
In physics the half-life is a measure of the stability of a radioactive
substance. The half-life is simply the time it takes for one-half of the atoms in an
initial amount A0 to disintegrate, or transmute, into the atoms of another element.
The longer the half-life of a substance, the more stable it is. For example, the half-
life of highly radioactive radium, Ra-226, is about 1700 years. In 1700 years one-
half of a given quantity of Ra-226 is transmuted into radon, Rn-222. The most
commonly occurring uranium isotope, U-238, has a half-life of approximately
4,500,000,000 years. In about 4.5 billion years, one-half of a quantity of U-238 is
transmuted into lead, Pb-206.
EXAMPLE 2
Half-Life of Plutonium
A breeder reactor converts relatively stable uranium-238 into the isotope plutonium-
239. After 15 years it is determined that 0.043% of the initial amount A0 of plutonium
has disintegrated. Find the half-life of this isotope if the rate of disintegration is pro-
portional to the amount remaining.
SOLUTION
Let A(t) denote the amount of plutonium remaining at time t. As in
Example 1 the solution of the initial-value problem
is A(t)  A0ekt. If 0.043% of the atoms of A0 have disintegrated, then 99.957% of the
substance remains. To ﬁnd the decay constant k, we use 0.99957A0  A(15)—that is,
0.99957A0  A0e15k. Solving for k then gives 
ln 0.99957  0.00002867.
Hence A(t)  A0e0.00002867t. Now the half-life is the corresponding value of time at
which 
. Solving for t gives 
, or 
. The
last equation yields
.
Carbon Dating
About 1950, a team of scientists at the University of Chicago
led by the chemist Willard Libby devised a method using a radioactive isotope of car-
bon as a means of determining the approximate ages of carbonaceous fossilized mat-
ter. The theory of carbon dating is based on the fact that the radioisotope carbon-14
is produced in the atmosphere by the action of cosmic radiation on nitrogen-14. The
ratio of the amount of C-14 to the stable C-12 in the atmosphere appears to be a con-
stant, and as a consequence the proportionate amount of the isotope present in all liv-
ing organisms is the same as that in the atmosphere. When a living organism dies, the
absorption of C-14, by breathing, eating, or photosynthesis, ceases. By comparing
the proportionate amount of C-14, say, in a fossil with the constant amount ratio
found in the atmosphere, it is possible to obtain a reasonable estimation of its age.
The method is based on the knowledge of the half-life of C-14. Libby's calculated
t 
ln 2
0.00002867  24,180 yr
1
2  e0.00002867t
1
2 A0  A0e0.00002867t
A(t)  1
2 A0
k  1
15
dA
dt  kA,  A(0)  A0
t
ekt, k > 0
growth
ekt, k < 0
decay
y
FIGURE 3.1.2
Growth (k  0) and
decay (k  0)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

value of the half-life of C-14 was approximately 5600 years, but today the commonly
accepted value of the half-life is approximately 5730 years. For his work, Libby was
awarded the Nobel Prize for chemistry in 1960. Libby's method has been used to date
wooden furniture found in Egyptian tombs, the woven ﬂax wrappings of the Dead
Sea Scrolls, a recently discovered copy of the Gnostic Gospel of Judas written on
papyrus, and the cloth of the enigmatic Shroud of Turin. See Figure 3.1.3 and
Problem 12 in Exercises 3.1.
86
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
*The number of disintegrations per minute per gram of carbon is recorded by using a Geiger counter.
The lower level of detectability is about 0.1 disintegrations per minute per gram.
EXAMPLE 3
Age of a Fossil
A fossilized bone is found to contain 0.1% of its original amount of C-14. Determine
the age of the fossil.
SOLUTION
The starting point is again A(t)  A0ekt. To determine the value of
the decay constant k we use the fact that A0  A(5730) or A0  A0e5730k. The
last equation implies 5730k  ln 
 ln2 and so we get k  (ln2)5730 
0.00012097. Therefore A(t)  A0e0.00012097t. With A(t)  0.001A0 we have
0.001A0  A0e0.00012097t and 0.00012097t  ln(0.001)  ln 1000. Thus
.
The date found in Example 3 is really at the border of accuracy for this method.
The usual carbon-14 technique is limited to about 10 half-lives of the isotope, or
roughly 
years. One reason for this limitation is that the chemical analysis
needed to obtain an accurate measurement of the remaining C-14 becomes somewhat
formidable around the point 
Also, this analysis demands the destruction of
a rather large sample of the specimen. If this measurement is accomplished indi-
rectly, based on the actual radioactivity of the specimen, then it is very difﬁcult to
distinguish between the radiation from the specimen and the normal background
radiation.* But recently the use of a particle accelerator has enabled scientists to
separate the C-14 from the stable C-12 directly. When the precise value of the ratio
of C-14 to C-12 is computed, the accuracy can be extended to 70,000 to 100,000
years. Other isotopic techniques, such as using potassium-40 and argon-40, can give
dates of several million years. Nonisotopic methods based on the use of amino acids
are also sometimes possible. 
Newton's Law of Cooling/Warming
In equation (3) of Section 1.3 we saw
that the mathematical formulation of Newton's empirical law of cooling/warming of
an object is given by the linear ﬁrst-order differential equation
,
(2)
where k is a constant of proportionality, T(t) is the temperature of the object for t  0,
and Tm is the ambient temperature—that is, the temperature of the medium around the
object. In Example 4 we assume that Tm is constant.
dT
dt  k(T  Tm)
0.001A0.
60,000
t 
ln 1000
0.00012097  57,100 years
1
2
1
2
1
2
EXAMPLE 4
Cooling of a Cake
When a cake is removed from an oven, its temperature is measured at 300° F. Three
minutes later its temperature is 200° F. How long will it take for the cake to cool off
to a room temperature of 70° F?
FIGURE 3.1.3
A page of the Gnostic
Gospel of Judas
NGS Image Collection
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.1
LINEAR MODELS
●
87
SOLUTION
In (2) we make the identiﬁcation Tm  70. We must then solve the
initial-value problem
(3)
and determine the value of k so that T(3)  200.
Equation (3) is both linear and separable. If we separate variables,
,
yields ln T  70  kt  c1, and so T  70  c2ekt. When t  0, T  300, so
300  70  c2 gives c2  230; therefore T  70  230ekt. Finally, the measurement
T(3)  200 leads to 
, or 
ln 
. Thus
.
(4)
We note that (4) furnishes no ﬁnite solution to T(t)  70, since 
.
Yet we intuitively expect the cake to reach room temperature after a reasonably long
period of time. How long is "long"? Of course, we should not be disturbed by the fact
that the model (3) does not quite live up to our physical intuition. Parts (a) and (b) of
Figure 3.1.4 clearly show that the cake will be approximately at room temperature in
about one-half hour.
The ambient temperature in (2) need not be a constant but could be a function
Tm(t) of time t. See Problem 18 in Exercises 3.1.
Mixtures
The mixing of two ﬂuids sometimes gives rise to a linear ﬁrst-order
differential equation. When we discussed the mixing of two brine solutions in
Section 1.3, we assumed that the rate A(t) at which the amount of salt in the mixing
tank changes was a net rate:
.
(5)
In Example 5 we solve equation (8) of Section 1.3.
dA
dt  (input rate of salt)  (output rate of salt)  Rin  Rout
lim t :  T(t)  70
T(t)  70  230e0.19018t
13
23  0.19018
k  1
3
e3k  13
23
dT
T  70  k dt
dT
dt  k(T  70),  T(0)  300
t
T
15
30
300
150
T = 70
(a)
T(t)
t (min)
75
20.1
74
21.3
73
22.8
72
24.9
71
28.6
70.5
32.3
(b)
FIGURE 3.1.4
Temperature of cooling
cake in Example 4
EXAMPLE 5
Mixture of Two Salt Solutions
Recall that the large tank considered in Section 1.3 held 300 gallons of a brine
solution. Salt was entering and leaving the tank; a brine solution was being pumped
into the tank at the rate of 3 gal/min; it mixed with the solution there, and then the
mixture was pumped out at the rate of 3 gal/min. The concentration of the salt
in the inﬂow, or solution entering, was 2 lb/gal, so salt was entering the tank at the
rate Rin  (2 lb/gal)(3 gal/min)  6 lb/min and leaving the tank at the rate Rout 
(A300 lb/gal)(3 gal/min)  A100 lb/min. From this data and (5) we get equa-
tion (8) of Section 1.3. Let us pose the question: If 50 pounds of salt were dissolved
initially in the 300 gallons, how much salt is in the tank after a long time?
SOLUTION
To ﬁnd the amount of salt A(t) in the tank at time t, we solve the initial-
value problem
.
Note here that the side condition is the initial amount of salt A(0)  50 in the tank
and not the initial amount of liquid in the tank. Now since the integrating factor of the
linear differential equation is et/100, we can write the equation as
.
d
dt [et/100A]  6et/100
dA
dt 
1
100 A  6,  A(0)  50
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Integrating the last equation and solving for A gives the general solution 
A(t)  600  cet/100. When t  0, A  50, so we ﬁnd that c  550. Thus the
amount of salt in the tank at time t is given by
.
(6)
The solution (6) was used to construct the table in Figure 3.1.5(b). Also, it can be
seen from (6) and Figure 3.1.5(a) that A(t) : 600 as t : . Of course, this is what
we would intuitively expect; over a long time the number of pounds of salt in the
solution must be (300 gal)(2 lb/gal)  600 lb.
In Example 5 we assumed that the rate at which the solution was pumped in was
the same as the rate at which the solution was pumped out. However, this need not be
the case; the mixed brine solution could be pumped out at a rate rout that is faster
or slower than the rate rin at which the other brine solution is pumped in. The next
example illustrates the case when the mixture is pumped out at rate that is slower
than the rate at which the brine solution is being pumped into the tank.
A(t)  600  550et/100
88
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
t
A
A = 600
500
(a)
t (min)
A (lb)
50
266.41
100
397.67
150
477.27
200
525.57
300
572.62
400
589.93
(b)
FIGURE 3.1.5
Pounds of salt in the
tank in Example 5
FIGURE 3.1.7
LR-series circuit
E
L
R
FIGURE 3.1.6
Graph of A(t) in
Example 6
t
A
50
250
500
100
EXAMPLE 6
Example 5 Revisited
If the well-stirred solution in Example 5 is pumped out at a slower rate of, say, 
rout  2 gal/min, then liquid will accumulate in the tank at the rate of rin  rout  
(3  2) gal/min  1 gal/min. After t minutes,
(1 gal/min) . (t min)  t gal
will accumulate, so the tank will contain 300  t gallons of brine. The concentration
of the outﬂow is then c(t)  A(300  t) lb/gal, and the output rate of salt is Rout 
c(t) . rout, or
.
Hence equation (5) becomes
.
The integrating factor for the last equation is 
and so after multiplying by the factor the equation is cast into the form 
Integrating the last equation gives 
By applying the
initial condition 
and solving for A yields the solution A(t)  600  2t 
(4.95 	 107)(300  t)2. As Figure 3.1.6 shows, not unexpectedly, salt builds up in
the tank over time, that is, 
Series Circuits
For a series circuit containing only a resistor and an inductor,
Kirchhoff's second law states that the sum of the voltage drop across the inductor
(L(didt)) and the voltage drop across the resistor (iR) is the same as the impressed
voltage (E(t)) on the circuit. See Figure 3.1.7.
Thus we obtain the linear differential equation for the current i(t),
,
(7)
where L and R are constants known as the inductance and the resistance, respectively.
The current i(t) is also called the response of the system.
L di
dt  Ri  E(t)
A :   as  t : .
A(0)  50
(300  t)2A  2(300  t)3  c.
d
dt[(300  t)2 A]  6(300  t)2.
e2dt>(300t)  e2 ln(300t)  eln(300t)2  (300  t)2
dA
dt  6 
2A
300  t    or    dA
dt 
2
300  t A  6
Rout 
A
300  t lb/gal  (2 gal/min) 
2A
300  t lb/min
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.1
LINEAR MODELS
●
89
R
C
E
FIGURE 3.1.8
RC-series circuit
The voltage drop across a capacitor with capacitance C is given by q(t)C,
where q is the charge on the capacitor. Hence, for the series circuit shown in
Figure 3.1.8, Kirchhoff's second law gives
.
(8)
But current i and charge q are related by i  dqdt, so (8) becomes the linear differ-
ential equation
.
(9)
R dq
dt  1
C q  E(t)
Ri  1
C q  E(t)
FIGURE 3.1.9
Population growth is a
discrete process
t
1
t1
t2
P
P0
t
1
P
P0
(a)
(b)
(c)
t
1
P
P0
EXAMPLE 7
Series Circuit
A 12-volt battery is connected to a series circuit in which the inductance is henry
and the resistance is 10 ohms. Determine the current i if the initial current is zero.
SOLUTION
From (7) we see that we must solve
,
subject to i(0)  0. First, we multiply the differential equation by 2 and read off the
integrating factor e20t. We then obtain
.
Integrating each side of the last equation and solving for i gives i(t) 
 ce20t.
Now i(0)  0 implies that 0 
 c or c   . Therefore the response is 
i(t) 

e20t.
From (4) of Section 2.3 we can write a general solution of (7):
.
(10)
In particular, when E(t)  E0 is a constant, (10) becomes
.
(11)
Note that as t : , the second term in equation (11) approaches zero. Such a term is usu-
ally called a transient term; any remaining terms are called the steady-state part of the
solution. In this case E0R is also called the steady-state current; for large values of time
it appears that the current in the circuit is simply governed by Ohm's law (E  iR).
i(t)  E0
R  ce(R/L)t
i(t)  e(R/L)t
L
  e(R/L)tE(t) dt  ce(R/L)t
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
d
dt [e20ti]  24e20t
1
2 di
dt  10i  12
1
2
REMARKS
The solution P(t)  P0e0.4055t of the initial-value problem in Example 1
described the population of a colony of bacteria at any time t  0. Of course,
P(t) is a continuous function that takes on all real numbers in the interval
P0 
 P  . But since we are talking about a population, common sense
dictates that P can take on only positive integer values. Moreover, we would
not expect the population to grow continuously—that is, every second, every
microsecond, and so on—as predicted by our solution; there may be intervals
of time [t1, t2] over which there is no growth at all. Perhaps, then, the graph
shown in Figure 3.1.9(a) is a more realistic description of P than is the graph
of an exponential function. Using a continuous function to describe a discrete
phenomenon is often more a matter of convenience than of accuracy. However,
for some purposes we may be satisﬁed if our model describes the system
fairly closely when viewed macroscopically in time, as in Figures 3.1.9(b)
and 3.1.9(c), rather than microscopically, as in Figure 3.1.9(a).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXERCISES 3.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-3.
Growth and Decay
1. The population of a community is known to increase at
a rate proportional to the number of people present
at time t. If an initial population P0 has doubled in
5 years, how long will it take to triple? To quadruple?
2. Suppose it is known that the population of the commu-
nity in Problem 1 is 10,000 after 3 years. What was the
initial population P0? What will be the population in
10 years? How fast is the population growing at t  10?
3. The population of a town grows at a rate proportional to
the population present at time t. The initial population of
500 increases by 15% in 10 years. What will be the pop-
ulation in 30 years? How fast is the population growing
at t  30?
4. The population of bacteria in a culture grows at a rate
proportional to the number of bacteria present at time t.
After 3 hours it is observed that 400 bacteria are present.
After 10 hours 2000 bacteria are present. What was the
initial number of bacteria?
5. The radioactive isotope of lead, Pb-209, decays at a rate
proportional to the amount present at time t and has a half-
life of 3.3 hours. If 1 gram of this isotope is present ini-
tially, how long will it take for 90% of the lead to decay?
6. Initially 100 milligrams of a radioactive substance was
present. After 6 hours the mass had decreased by 3%. If
the rate of decay is proportional to the amount of the
substance present at time t, ﬁnd the amount remaining
after 24 hours.
7. Determine the half-life of the radioactive substance
described in Problem 6.
8. (a) Consider the initial-value problem dAdt  kA,
A(0)  A0 as the model for the decay of a radioac-
tive substance. Show that, in general, the half-life T
of the substance is T  (ln 2)k.
(b) Show that the solution of the initial-value problem
in part (a) can be written A(t)  A02t/T.
(c) If a radioactive substance has the half-life T given
in part (a), how long will it take an initial amount A0
of the substance to decay to 
?
9. When a vertical beam of light passes through a trans-
parent medium, the rate at which its intensity I
decreases is proportional to I(t), where t represents the
thickness of the medium (in feet). In clear seawater,
the intensity 3 feet below the surface is 25% of the initial
intensity I0 of the incident beam. What is the intensity of
the beam 15 feet below the surface?
10. When interest is compounded continuously, the amount
of money increases at a rate proportional to the amount
1
8 A0
S present at time t, that is, dSdt  rS, where r is the
annual rate of interest.
(a) Find the amount of money accrued at the end of
5 years when $5000 is deposited in a savings
account drawing 5 % annual interest compounded
continuously.
(b) In how many years will the initial sum deposited
have doubled?
(c) Use a calculator to compare the amount obtained in
part (a) with the amount S  5000(1  (0.0575))5(4)
that is accrued when interest is compounded
quarterly.
Carbon Dating
11. Archaeologists used pieces of burned wood, or char-
coal, found at the site to date prehistoric paintings and
drawings on walls and ceilings of a cave in Lascaux,
France. See Figure 3.1.10. Use the information on page 86
to determine the approximate age of a piece of burned
wood, if it was found that 85.5% of the C-14 found in
living trees of the same type had decayed.
1
4
3
4
FIGURE 3.1.10
Cave wall painting in Problem 11
Prehistoric/Getty Images
12. The Shroud of Turin, which shows the negative image of
the body of a man who appears to have been cruciﬁed, is
believed by many to be the burial shroud of Jesus of
Nazareth. See Figure 3.1.11. In 1988 the Vatican granted
permission to have the shroud carbon-dated. Three inde-
pendent scientiﬁc laboratories analyzed the cloth and
concluded that the shroud was approximately 660 years
old,* an age consistent with its historical appearance.
FIGURE 3.1.11
Shroud image in Problem 12
© Bettmann/CORBIS
*Some scholars have disagreed with this ﬁnding. For more information on
this fascinating mystery see the Shroud of Turin home page at
http://www.shroud.com/.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.1
LINEAR MODELS
●
91
Using this age, determine what percentage of the origi-
nal amount of C-14 remained in the cloth as of 1988.
Newton's Law of Cooling/Warming
13. A thermometer is removed from a room where the
temperature is 70° F and is taken outside, where the air
temperature is 10° F. After one-half minute the ther-
mometer reads 50° F. What is the reading of the ther-
mometer at t  1 min? How long will it take for the
thermometer to reach 15° F?
14. A thermometer is taken from an inside room to the out-
side, where the air temperature is 5° F. After 1 minute
the thermometer reads 55° F, and after 5 minutes it
reads 30° F. What is the initial temperature of the inside
room?
15. A small metal bar, whose initial temperature was 20° C,
is dropped into a large container of boiling water. How
long will it take the bar to reach 90° C if it is known that
its temperature increases 2° in 1 second? How long will it
take the bar to reach 98° C?
16. Two large containers A and B of the same size are ﬁlled
with different ﬂuids. The ﬂuids in containers A and B
are maintained at 0° C and 100° C, respectively. A small
metal bar, whose initial temperature is 100° C, is low-
ered into container A. After 1 minute the temperature
of the bar is 90° C. After 2 minutes the bar is removed
and instantly transferred to the other container. After
1 minute in container B the temperature of the bar rises
10°. How long, measured from the start of the entire
process, will it take the bar to reach 99.9° C?
17. A thermometer reading 70° F is placed in an oven
preheated to a constant temperature. Through a glass
window in the oven door, an observer records that the
thermometer reads 110° F after 
minute and 145° F
after 1 minute. How hot is the oven?
18. At t  0 a sealed test tube containing a chemical is
immersed in a liquid bath. The initial temperature of
the chemical in the test tube is 80° F. The liquid bath
has a controlled temperature (measured in degrees
Fahrenheit) given by Tm(t)  100  40e0.1t, t  0,
where t is measured in minutes.
(a) Assume that k  0.1 in (2). Before solving the
IVP, describe in words what you expect the temper-
ature T(t) of the chemical to be like in the short
term. In the long term.
(b) Solve the initial-value problem. Use a graphing util-
ity to plot the graph of T(t) on time intervals of var-
ious lengths. Do the graphs agree with your
predictions in part (a)?
19. A dead body was found within a closed room of a house
where the temperature was a constant 70° F. At the time
of discovery the core temperature of the body was
determined to be 85° F. One hour later a second mea-
1
2
surement showed that the core temperature of the body
was 80° F. Assume that the time of death corresponds to
t  0 and that the core temperature at that time was
98.6° F. Determine how many hours elapsed before the
body was found. [Hint: Let t1  0 denote the time that
the body was discovered.]
20. The rate at which a body cools also depends on its
exposed surface area S. If S is a constant, then a modiﬁ-
cation of (2) is
where k  0 and Tm is a constant. Suppose that two cups
A and B are ﬁlled with coffee at the same time. Initially,
the temperature of the coffee is 150° F. The exposed
surface area of the coffee in cup B is twice the surface
area of the coffee in cup A. After 30 min the temperature
of the coffee in cup A is 100° F. If Tm  70° F, then what
is the temperature of the coffee in cup B after 30 min?
Mixtures
21. A tank contains 200 liters of ﬂuid in which 30 grams of
salt is dissolved. Brine containing 1 gram of salt per liter
is then pumped into the tank at a rate of 4 L/min; the
well-mixed solution is pumped out at the same rate. Find
the number A(t) of grams of salt in the tank at time t.
22. Solve Problem 21 assuming that pure water is pumped
into the tank.
23. A large tank is ﬁlled to capacity with 500 gallons of pure
water. Brine containing 2 pounds of salt per gallon is
pumped into the tank at a rate of 5 gal/min. The well-
mixed solution is pumped out at the same rate. Find the
number A(t) of pounds of salt in the tank at time t.
24. In Problem 23, what is the concentration c(t) of the salt
in the tank at time t? At t  5 min? What is the concen-
tration of the salt in the tank after a long time, that is, as
t : ? At what time is the concentration of the salt in
the tank equal to one-half this limiting value?
25. Solve Problem 23 under the assumption that the solu-
tion is pumped out at a faster rate of 10 gal/min. When
is the tank empty?
26. Determine the amount of salt in the tank at time t in
Example 5 if the concentration of salt in the inﬂow is
variable and given by cin(t)  2  sin(t4) lb/gal.
Without actually graphing, conjecture what the solution
curve of the IVP should look like. Then use a graphing
utility to plot the graph of the solution on the interval
[0, 300]. Repeat for the interval [0, 600] and compare
your graph with that in Figure 3.1.5(a).
27. A large tank is partially ﬁlled with 100 gallons of ﬂuid
in which 10 pounds of salt is dissolved. Brine containing
dT
dt  kS(T  Tm),
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

pound of salt per gallon is pumped into the tank at a
rate of 6 gal/min. The well-mixed solution is then
pumped out at a slower rate of 4 gal/min. Find the num-
ber of pounds of salt in the tank after 30 minutes.
28. In Example 5 the size of the tank containing the salt
mixture was not given. Suppose, as in the discussion
following Example 5, that the rate at which brine is
pumped into the tank is 3 gal/min but that the well-
stirred solution is pumped out at a rate of 2 gal/min. It
stands to reason that since brine is accumulating in the
tank at the rate of 1 gal/min, any ﬁnite tank must even-
tually overﬂow. Now suppose that the tank has an open
top and has a total capacity of 400 gallons.
(a) When will the tank overﬂow?
(b) What will be the number of pounds of salt in the
tank at the instant it overﬂows?
(c) Assume that although the tank is overﬂowing, brine
solution continues to be pumped in at a rate of
3 gal/min and the well-stirred solution continues to
be pumped out at a rate of 2 gal/min. Devise a
method for determining the number of pounds of
salt in the tank at t  150 minutes.
(d) Determine the number of pounds of salt in the tank as
t : . Does your answer agree with your intuition?
(e) Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of A(t) on
the interval [0, 500).
Series Circuits
29. A 30-volt electromotive force is applied to an LR-series
circuit in which the inductance is 0.1 henry and the
resistance is 50 ohms. Find the current i(t) if i(0)  0.
Determine the current as t : .
30. Solve equation (7) under the assumption that 
E(t)  E0 sin vt and i(0)  i0.
31. A 100-volt electromotive force is applied to an RC-
series circuit in which the resistance is 200 ohms and
the capacitance is 104 farad. Find the charge q(t) on
the capacitor if q(0)  0. Find the current i(t).
32. A 200-volt electromotive force is applied to an RC-series
circuit in which the resistance is 1000 ohms and the
capacitance is 5 	 106 farad. Find the charge q(t) on the
capacitor if i(0)  0.4. Determine the charge and current
at t  0.005 s. Determine the charge as t : .
33. An electromotive force
is applied to an LR-series circuit in which the inductance
is 20 henries and the resistance is 2 ohms. Find the
current i(t) if i(0)  0.
E(t) 
120,
0, 
0 
 t 
 20
    t  20
1
2
92
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
34. Suppose an RC-series circuit has a variable resistor. If the
resistance at time t is given by R  k1  k2t, where k1 and
k2 are known positive constants, then (9) becomes
.
If E(t)  E0 and q(0)  q0, where E0 and q0 are
constants, show that
.
Additional Linear Models
35. Air Resistance
In (14) of Section 1.3 we saw that
a differential equation describing the velocity v of a
falling mass subject to air resistance proportional to the
instantaneous velocity is
,
where k  0 is a constant of proportionality. The positive
direction is downward.
(a) Solve the equation subject to the initial condition
v(0)  v0.
(b) Use the solution in part (a) to determine the limit-
ing, or terminal, velocity of the mass. We saw how
to determine the terminal velocity without solving
the DE in Problem 40 in Exercises 2.1.
(c) If the distance s, measured from the point where the
mass was released above ground, is related to ve-
locity v by dsdt  v(t), ﬁnd an explicit expression
for s(t) if s(0)  0.
36. How High?—No Air Resistance
Suppose a small
cannonball weighing 16 pounds is shot vertically
upward, as shown in Figure 3.1.12, with an initial veloc-
ity v0  300 ft/s. The answer to the question "How high
does the cannonball go?" depends on whether we take
air resistance into account.
(a) Suppose air resistance is ignored. If the positive
direction is upward, then a model for the state of
the cannonball is given by d2sdt2  g (equation
(12) of Section 1.3). Since dsdt  v(t) the last
m dv
dt  mg  kv
q(t)  E0C  (q0  E0C)
k1
k1  k2t
1/Ck2
(k1  k2t) dq
dt  1
C q  E(t)
FIGURE 3.1.12
Find the
maximum height of the cannonball
in Problem 36
ground
level
−mg
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.1
LINEAR MODELS
●
93
differential equation is the same as dvdt  g,
where we take g  32 ft/s2. Find the velocity v(t)
of the cannonball at time t.
(b) Use the result obtained in part (a) to determine the
height s(t) of the cannonball measured from ground
level. Find the maximum height attained by the
cannonball.
37. How High?—Linear Air Resistance
Repeat Prob-
lem 36, but this time assume that air resistance is
proportional to instantaneous velocity. It stands to
reason that the maximum height attained by the cannon-
ball must be less than that in part (b) of Problem 36.
Show this by supposing that the constant of proportion-
ality is k  0.0025. [Hint: Slightly modify the DE in
Problem 35.]
38. Skydiving
A skydiver weighs 125 pounds, and her
parachute and equipment combined weigh another 35
pounds. After exiting from a plane at an altitude of
15,000 feet, she waits 15 seconds and opens her para-
chute. Assume that the constant of proportionality in
the model in Problem 35 has the value k  0.5 during
free fall and k  10 after the parachute is opened.
Assume that her initial velocity on leaving the plane is
zero. What is her velocity and how far has she traveled
20 seconds after leaving the plane? See Figure 3.1.13.
How does her velocity at 20 seconds compare with her
terminal velocity? How long does it take her to reach the
ground? [Hint: Think in terms of two distinct IVPs.]
and the downward direction is taken to be the positive
direction.
(a) Solve for v(t) if the raindrop falls from rest.
(b) Reread Problem 36 of Exercises 1.3 and then
show that the radius of the raindrop at time t is
r(t)  (kr)t  r0.
(c) If r0  0.01 ft and r  0.007 ft 10 seconds after the
raindrop falls from a cloud, determine the time at
which the raindrop has evaporated completely.
40. Fluctuating Population
The differential equation
dPdt  (k cos t)P, where k is a positive constant, is a
mathematical model for a population P(t) that under-
goes yearly seasonal ﬂuctuations. Solve the equation
subject to P(0)  P0. Use a graphing utility to graph the
solution for different choices of P0.
41. Population Model
In one model of the changing
population P(t) of a community, it is assumed that
,
where dBdt and dDdt are the birth and death rates,
respectively.
(a) Solve for P(t) if dBdt  k1P and dDdt  k2P.
(b) Analyze the cases k1  k2, k1  k2, and k1  k2.
42. Constant-Harvest Model
A model that describes the
population of a ﬁshery in which harvesting takes place at
a constant rate is given by
where k and h are positive constants.
(a) Solve the DE subject to P(0)  P0.
(b) Describe the behavior of the population P(t) for in-
creasing time in the three cases P0 hk, P0 hk,
and 0  P0  hk.
(c) Use the results from part (b) to determine whether
the ﬁsh population will ever go extinct in ﬁnite
time, that is, whether there exists a time T  0
such that P(T)  0. If the population goes extinct,
then ﬁnd T.
43. Drug Dissemination
A mathematical model for the
rate at which a drug disseminates into the bloodstream
is given by 
where r and k are positive constants. The function x(t)
describes the concentration of the drug in the blood-
stream at time t.
(a) Since the DE is autonomous, use the phase portrait
concept of Section 2.1 to ﬁnd the limiting value of
x(t) as t : .
dx
dt  r  kx,
dP
dt  kP  h,
dP
dt  dB
dt  dD
dt
FIGURE 3.1.13
Find the time to
reach the ground in
Problem 38
free fall
parachute opens
air resistance is 0.5v
air resistance is 10v
t = 20 s
39. Evaporating Raindrop As a raindrop falls, it evapo-
rates while retaining its spherical shape. If we make the
further assumptions that the rate at which the raindrop
evaporates is proportional to its surface area and that air
resistance is negligible, then a model for the velocity
v(t) of the raindrop is
.
Here r is the density of water, r0 is the radius of the rain-
drop at t  0, k  0 is the constant of proportionality,
dv
dt 
3(k/)
(k/)t  r0
 v  g
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(b) Solve the DE subject to x(0)  0. Sketch the graph
of x(t) and verify your prediction in part (a). At
what time is the concentration one-half this limiting
value?
44. Memorization
When forgetfulness is taken into
account, the rate of memorization of a subject is given by
,
where k1  0, k2  0, A(t) is the amount memorized
in time t, M is the total amount to be memorized, and
M  A is the amount remaining to be memorized.
(a) Since the DE is autonomous, use the phase portrait
concept of Section 2.1 to ﬁnd the limiting value of
A(t) as t : . Interpret the result.
(b) Solve the DE subject to A(0)  0. Sketch the graph
of A(t) and verify your prediction in part (a).
45. Heart Pacemaker
A heart pacemaker, shown in
Figure 3.1.14, consists of a switch, a battery, a capacitor,
and the heart as a resistor. When the switch S is at P, the
capacitor charges; when S is at Q, the capacitor dis-
charges, sending an electrical stimulus to the heart. In
Problem 53 in Exercises 2.3 we saw that during this
time the electrical stimulus is being applied to the heart,
the voltage E across the heart satisﬁes the linear DE
.
(a) Let us assume that over the time interval of length
t1, 0  t  t1, the switch S is at position P shown
in Figure 3.1.14 and the capacitor is being
charged. When the switch is moved to position
Q at time t1 the capacitor discharges, sending an
impulse to the heart over the time interval of
length t2: t1 
 t  t1  t2. Thus over the initial
charging/discharging interval 0  t  t1  t2 the
voltage to the heart is actually modeled by the
piecewise-defined differential equation
.
dE
dt 
0,
 1
RC E,
0 
 t  t1
t1 
 t  t1  t2
dE
dt   1
RC E
dA
dt  k1(M  A)  k2A
94
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
By moving S between P and Q, the charging and
discharging over time intervals of lengths t1 and t2
is repeated indeﬁnitely. Suppose t1  4 s, t2  2 s,
E0  12 V, and E(0)  0, E(4)  12, E(6)  0,
E(10)  12, E(12)  0, and so on. Solve for E(t)
for 0 
 t 
 24.
(b) Suppose for the sake of illustration that R  C  1.
Use a graphing utility to graph the solution for the
IVP in part (a) for 0 
 t 
 24.
46. Sliding Box (a) A box of mass m slides down an
inclined plane that makes an angle u with the hori-
zontal as shown in Figure 3.1.15. Find a differential
equation for the velocity v(t) of the box at time t in
each of the following three cases:
(i)
No sliding friction and no air resistance
(ii)
With sliding friction and no air resistance
(iii) With sliding friction and air resistance
In cases (ii) and (iii), use the fact that the force of
friction opposing the motion of the box is mN,
where m is the coefﬁcient of sliding friction and N
is the normal component of the weight of the box.
In case (iii) assume that air resistance is propor-
tional to the instantaneous velocity.
(b) In part (a), suppose that the box weighs 96 pounds,
that the angle of inclination of the plane is u  30°,
that the coefﬁcient of sliding friction is
,
and that the additional retarding force due to air
resistance is numerically equal to v. Solve the dif-
ferential equation in each of the three cases, assum-
ing that the box starts from rest from the highest
point 50 ft above ground.
1
4
  134
heart
C
Q
P
S
switch
E0
R
FIGURE 3.1.14
Model of a pacemaker in 
Problem 45
FIGURE 3.1.15
Box sliding down inclined plane in
Problem 46
θ
50 ft
motion
friction
W = mg
47. Sliding Box—Continued (a) In Problem 46 let s(t) be
the distance measured down the inclined plane
from the highest point. Use dsdt  v(t) and the
solution for each of the three cases in part (b) of
Problem 46 to ﬁnd the time that it takes the box to
slide completely down the inclined plane. A root-
ﬁnding application of a CAS may be useful here.
(b) In the case in which there is friction (m  0) but no
air resistance, explain why the box will not slide
down the plane starting from rest from the highest
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

point above ground when the inclination angle u
satisﬁes tan u 
 m.
(c) The box will slide downward on the plane when
tan u 
 m if it is given an initial velocity 
v(0)  v0  0. Suppose that 
and 
u  23°. Verify that tan u 
 m. How far will the
box slide down the plane if v0  1 ft/s?
(d) Using the values 
and u  23°, approxi-
mate the smallest initial velocity v0 that can be given
to the box so that, starting at the highest point 50 ft
above ground, it will slide completely down the in-
clined plane. Then ﬁnd the corresponding time it
takes to slide down the plane.
  134
  134
3.2
NONLINEAR  MODELS
●
95
48. What Goes Up . . . (a) It is well known that the
model in which air resistance is ignored, part (a) of
Problem 36, predicts that the time ta it takes the
cannonball to attain its maximum height is the
same as the time td it takes the cannonball to fall
from the maximum height to the ground. Moreover,
the magnitude of the impact velocity vi will be the
same as the initial velocity v0 of the cannonball.
Verify both of these results.
(b) Then, using the model in Problem 37 that takes air
resistance into account, compare the value of ta
with td and the value of the magnitude of vi with v0.
Aroot-ﬁnding application of a CAS (or graphic cal-
culator) may be useful here.
NONLINEAR MODELS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Equations (5), (6), and (10) of Section 1.3 and Problems 7, 8, 13, 14, and 17 of Exercises 1.3
●Separation of variables in Section 2.2
INTRODUCTION
We ﬁnish our study of single ﬁrst-order differential equations with an exam-
ination of some nonlinear models.
3.2
Population Dynamics
If P(t) denotes the size of a population at time t, the
P
f(P)
r
K
FIGURE 3.2.1
Simplest assumption
for f (P) is a straight line (blue color)
model for exponential growth begins with the assumption that dPdt  kP for some
k  0. In this model, the relative, or speciﬁc, growth rate deﬁned by
(1)
is a constant k. True cases of exponential growth over long periods of time are hard
to ﬁnd because the limited resources of the environment will at some time exert
restrictions on the growth of a population. Thus for other models, (1) can be expected
to decrease as the population P increases in size.
The assumption that the rate at which a population grows (or decreases) is
dependent only on the number P present and not on any time-dependent mechanisms
such as seasonal phenomena (see Problem 33 in Exercises 1.3) can be stated as
.
(2)
The differential equation in (2), which is widely assumed in models of animal
populations, is called the density-dependent hypothesis.
Logistic Equation
Suppose an environment is capable of sustaining no more
than a ﬁxed number K of individuals in its population. The quantity K is called the
carrying capacity of the environment. Hence for the function f in (2) we have
f (K)  0, and we simply let f (0)  r. Figure 3.2.1 shows three functions f that sat-
isfy these two conditions. The simplest assumption that we can make is that f (P)
is linear—that is, f (P)  c1P  c2. If we use the conditions f (0)  r and f (K)  0,
dP>dt
P
 f (P)    or    dP
dt  Pf (P)
dP>dt
P
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

96
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
we ﬁnd, in turn, c2  r and c1  rK, and so f takes on the form f(P)  r  (rK)P.
Equation (2) becomes
.
(3)
With constants relabeled, the nonlinear equation (3) is the same as
.
(4)
Around 1840 the Belgian mathematician-biologist P. F. Verhulst (1804-1849)
was concerned with mathematical models for predicting the human populations of
various countries. One of the equations he studied was (4), where a  0 and b  0.
Equation (4) came to be known as the logistic equation, and its solution is called the
logistic function. The graph of a logistic function is called a logistic curve.
The linear differential equation dPdt  kP does not provide a very accurate
model for population when the population itself is very large. Overcrowded condi-
tions, with the resulting detrimental effects on the environment such as pollution and
excessive and competitive demands for food and fuel, can have an inhibiting effect
on population growth. As we shall now see, the solution of (4) is bounded as t : .
If we rewrite (4) as dPdt  aP  bP2, the nonlinear term bP2, b  0, can be in-
terpreted as an "inhibition" or "competition" term. Also, in most applications the
positive constant a is much larger than the constant b.
Logistic curves have proved to be quite accurate in predicting the growth
patterns, in a limited space, of certain types of bacteria, protozoa, water ﬂeas
(Daphnia), and fruit ﬂies (Drosophila).
Solution of the Logistic Equation
One method of solving (4) is separation
dP
dt  P(a  bP)
dP
dt  Pr  r
KP
of variables. Decomposing the left side of dPP(a  bP)  dt into partial fractions
and integrating gives
It follows from the last equation that
.
If P(0)  P0, P0  ab, we ﬁnd c1  P0(a  bP0), and so after substituting and
simplifying, the solution becomes
.
(5)
Graphs of P(t)
The basic shape of the graph of the logistic function P(t) can be
obtained without too much effort. Although the variable t usually represents time and
we are seldom concerned with applications in which t  0, it is nonetheless of some in-
terest to include this interval in displaying the various graphs of P. From (5) we see that
.
P(t) : aP0
bP0
 a
b as t :     and    P(t) : 0 as t : 
P(t) 
aP0
bP0  (a  bP0)eat
P(t) 
ac1eat
1  bc1eat 
ac1
bc1  eat
 
P
a  bP  c1eat.
 ln
P
a  bP  at  ac
 1
a ln P   1
a ln a  bP   t  c
 
1>a
P 
b>a
a  bPdP  dt
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The dashed line P  a2b shown in Figure 3.2.2 corresponds to the ordinate of a
point of inﬂection of the logistic curve. To show this, we differentiate (4) by the
Product Rule:
.
From calculus recall that the points where d2Pdt2  0 are possible points of inﬂec-
tion, but P  0 and P  ab can obviously be ruled out. Hence P  a2b is the only
possible ordinate value at which the concavity of the graph can change. For 
0  P  a2b it follows that P  0, and a2b  P  ab implies that P  0.
Thus, as we read from left to right, the graph changes from concave up to concave
down at the point corresponding to P  a2b. When the initial value satisﬁes 
0  P0  a2b, the graph of P(t) assumes the shape of an S, as we see in
Figure 3.2.2(a). For a2b  P0  ab the graph is still S-shaped, but the point of
inﬂection occurs at a negative value of t, as shown in Figure 3.2.2(b).
We have already seen equation (4) in (5) of Section 1.3 in the form 
dxdt  kx(n  1  x), k  0. This differential equation provides a reasonable
model for describing the spread of an epidemic brought about initially by introduc-
ing an infected individual into a static population. The solution x(t) represents the
number of individuals infected with the disease at time t.
  2b2P P  a
bP  a
2b
  P(a  bP)(a  2bP)
 d 2P
dt2  P b dP
dt  (a  bP) dP
dt  dP
dt (a  2bP)
3.2
NONLINEAR MODELS
●
97
P
P0
a/2b
a/b
t
P
P0
a/2b
a/b
t
(a)
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.2.2
Logistic curves for
different initial conditions
(a) 
t
x
x = 1000
10
500
5
(a)
t (days)
x (number infected)
4
50 (observed)
5
124
6
276
7
507
8
735
9
882
10
953
(b)
FIGURE 3.2.3
Number of infected
students in Example 1
EXAMPLE 1
Logistic Growth
Suppose a student carrying a ﬂu virus returns to an isolated college campus of 1000
students. If it is assumed that the rate at which the virus spreads is proportional not
only to the number x of infected students but also to the number of students not
infected, determine the number of infected students after 6 days if it is further
observed that after 4 days x(4)  50.
SOLUTION
Assuming that no one leaves the campus throughout the duration of the
disease, we must solve the initial-value problem
.
By making the identiﬁcation a  1000k and b  k, we have immediately from
(5) that
.
Now, using the information x(4)  50, we determine k from
We ﬁnd 
. Thus
.
Finally,
.
Additional calculated values of x(t) are given in the table in Figure 3.2.3(b). Note that
the number of infected students x(t) approaches 1000 as t increases.
x(6) 
1000
1  999e5.9436  276 students
x(t) 
1000
1  999e0.9906t
1000k  1
4 ln 19
999  0.9906
50 
1000
1  999e4000k.
x(t) 
1000k
k  999ke1000kt 
1000
1  999e1000kt
dx
dt  kx(1000  x), x(0)  1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Modiﬁcations of the Logistic Equation
There are many variations of the
logistic equation. For example, the differential equations
and
(6)
could serve, in turn, as models for the population in a ﬁshery where ﬁsh are harvested
or are restocked at rate h. When h  0 is a constant, the DEs in (6) can be readily an-
alyzed qualitatively or solved analytically by separation of variables. The equations
in (6) could also serve as models of the human population decreased by emigration
or increased by immigration, respectively. The rate h in (6) could be a function of
time t or could be population dependent; for example, harvesting might be done peri-
odically over time or might be done at a rate proportional to the population P at time
t. In the latter instance, the model would look like P  P(a  bP)  cP, c  0. The
human population of a community might change because of immigration in such a
manner that the contribution due to immigration was large when the population P of
the community was itself small but small when P was large; a reasonable model for
thepopulationof thecommunitywouldthenbe P  P(a  bP)  cekP, c  0, k  0.
See Problem 24 in Exercises 3.2. Another equation of the form given in (2),
,
(7)
is a modiﬁcation of the logistic equation known as the Gompertz differential equa-
tion named after the English mathematician Benjamin Gompertz (1779-1865).
This DE is sometimes used as a model in the study of the growth or decline of pop-
ulations, the growth of solid tumors, and certain kinds of actuarial predictions. See
Problem 8 in Exercises 3.2.
Chemical Reactions
Suppose that a grams of chemical A are combined with
b grams of chemical B. If there are M parts of A and N parts of B formed in the com-
pound and X(t) is the number of grams of chemical C formed, then the number of
grams of chemical A and the number of grams of chemical B remaining at time t are,
respectively,
.
The law of mass action states that when no temperature change is involved, the rate
at which the two substances react is proportional to the product of the amounts of A
and B that are untransformed (remaining) at time t:
.
(8)
If we factor out M(M  N) from the ﬁrst factor and N(M  N) from the second
and introduce a constant of proportionality k  0, (8) has the form
,
(9)
where a  a(M  N)M and b  b(M  N)N. Recall from (6) of Section 1.3 that
a chemical reaction governed by the nonlinear differential equation (9) is said to be a
second-order reaction.
dX
dt  k(  X)(  X)
dX
dt a 
M
M  N Xb 
N
M  N X
a 
M
M  N X    and    b 
N
M  N X
dP
dt  P(a  b ln P)
dP
dt  P(a  bP)  h
dP
dt  P(a  bP)  h
98
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 2
Second-Order Chemical Reaction
A compound C is formed when two chemicals A and B are combined. The resulting
reaction between the two chemicals is such that for each gram of A, 4 grams of B is
used. It is observed that 30 grams of the compound C is formed in 10 minutes.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Determine the amount of C at time t if the rate of the reaction is proportional to the
amounts of A and B remaining and if initially there are 50 grams of A and 32 grams
of B. How much of the compound C is present at 15 minutes? Interpret the solution
as t : .
SOLUTION
Let X(t) denote the number of grams of the compound C present at
time t. Clearly, X(0)  0 g and X(10)  30 g.
If, for example, 2 grams of compound C is present, we must have used,
say, a grams of A and b grams of B, so a  b  2 and b  4a. Thus we must use
a 
 2
g of chemical A and b 
 2
g of B. In general, for X grams of
C we must use
.
The amounts of A and B remaining at time t are then
,
respectively.
Now we know that the rate at which compound C is formed satisﬁes
.
To simplify the subsequent algebra, we factor from the ﬁrst term and from the
second and then introduce the constant of proportionality:
.
By separation of variables and partial fractions we can write
.
Integrating gives
(10)
When t  0, X  0, so it follows at this point that c2 
. Using X  30 g at t  10,
we ﬁnd 210k 
ln 
 0.1258. With this information we solve the last equation
in (10) for X:
.
(11)
From (11) we ﬁnd X(15)  34.78 grams. The behavior of X as a function of time 
is displayed in Figure 3.2.4. It is clear from the accompanying table and (11) that 
X : 40 as t : . This means that 40 grams of compound C is formed, leaving
.
50  1
5 (40)  42 g of A    and    32  4
5 (40)  0 g of B
X(t)  1000 1  e0.1258t
25  4e0.1258t
88
25
1
10
25
4
ln 250  X
40  X  210kt  c1    or    250  X
40  X  c2e210kt.

1
210
250  X dX 
1
210
40  X dX  k dt
dX
dt  k(250  X)(40  X)
4
5
1
5
dX
dt 50  1
5 X32  4
5 X
50  1
5 X and 32  4
5 X
1
5 X grams of A    and    4
5 X grams of B
(4
5)
8
5
(1
5)
2
5
3.2
NONLINEAR MODELS
●
99
10
20
30
40
t
X
X = 40
(a)
t (min)
X (g)
10
30 (measured)
15
34.78
20
37.25
25
38.54
30
39.22
35
39.59
(b)
FIGURE 3.2.4
Number of grams of
compound C in Example 2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
REMARKS
The indeﬁnite integral 	 du(a2  u2) can be evaluated in terms of logarithms,
the inverse hyperbolic tangent, or the inverse hyperbolic cotangent. For example,
of the two results
(12)
(13)
(12) may be convenient in Problems 15 and 26 in Exercises 3.2, whereas (13)
may be preferable in Problem 27.
  
du
a 2  u 2  1
2a ln 
a  u
a  u  c,  u   a, 
  
du
a 2  u 2  1
a tanh1 u
a  c,  u   a 
EXERCISES 3.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-3.
Logistic Equation
1. The number N(t) of supermarkets throughout the country
that are using a computerized checkout system is
described by the initial-value problem
.
(a) Use the phase portrait concept of Section 2.1 to pre-
dict how many supermarkets are expected to adopt
the new procedure over a long period of time. By
hand, sketch a solution curve of the given initial-
value problem.
(b) Solve the initial-value problem and then use a graph-
ing utility to verify the solution curve in part (a).
How many companies are expected to adopt the new
technology when t  10?
2. The number N(t) of people in a community who are
exposed to a particular advertisement is governed by
the logistic equation. Initially, N(0)  500, and it is
observed that N(1)  1000. Solve for N(t) if it is pre-
dicted that the limiting number of people in the commu-
nity who will see the advertisement is 50,000.
3. A model for the population P(t) in a suburb of a large
city is given by the initial-value problem
,
where t is measured in months. What is the limiting
value of the population? At what time will the popula-
tion be equal to one-half of this limiting value?
4. (a) Census data for the United States between 1790 and
1950 are given in Table 3.2.1. Construct a logistic
population model using the data from 1790, 1850,
and 1910.
dP
dt  P(101  107 P), P(0)  5000
dN
dt  N(1  0.0005N),  N(0)  1
(b) Construct a table comparing actual census popula-
tion with the population predicted by the model in
part (a). Compute the error and the percentage error
for each entry pair.
Modiﬁcations of the Logistic Model
5. (a) If a constant number h of ﬁsh are harvested from a
ﬁshery per unit time, then a model for the popula-
tion P(t) of the ﬁshery at time t is given by
,
where a, b, h, and P0 are positive constants.
Suppose a  5, b  1, and h  4. Since the DE is
autonomous, use the phase portrait concept of
Section 2.1 to sketch representative solution curves
dP
dt  P(a  bP)  h, P(0)  P0
TABLE 3.2.1
Year
Population (in millions)
1790
3.929
1800
5.308
1810
7.240
1820
9.638
1830
12.866
1840
17.069
1850
23.192
1860
31.433
1870
38.558
1880
50.156
1890
62.948
1900
75.996
1910
91.972
1920
105.711
1930
122.775
1940
131.669
1950
150.697
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.2
NONLINEAR MODELS
●
101
corresponding to the cases P0  4, 1  P0  4, and
0  P0  1. Determine the long-term behavior of
the population in each case.
(b) Solve the IVP in part (a). Verify the results of your
phase portrait in part (a) by using a graphing utility
to plot the graph of P(t) with an initial condition
taken from each of the three intervals given.
(c) Use the information in parts (a) and (b) to determine
whether the ﬁshery population becomes extinct in
ﬁnite time. If so, ﬁnd that time.
6. Investigate the harvesting model in Problem 5 both
qualitatively and analytically in the case a  5, b  1,
h 
. Determine whether the population becomes
extinct in ﬁnite time. If so, ﬁnd that time.
7. Repeat Problem 6 in the case a  5, b  1, h  7.
8. (a) Suppose a  b  1 in the Gompertz differential
equation (7). Since the DE is autonomous, use the
phase portrait concept of Section 2.1 to sketch rep-
resentative solution curves corresponding to the
cases P0  e and 0  P0  e.
(b) Suppose a  1, b  1 in (7). Use a new phase por-
trait to sketch representative solution curves corre-
sponding to the cases P0  e1 and 0  P0  e1.
(c) Find an explicit solution of (7) subject to P(0)  P0.
Chemical Reactions
9. Two chemicals A and B are combined to form a chemical
C. The rate, or velocity, of the reaction is proportional to
the product of the instantaneous amounts of A and B not
converted to chemical C. Initially, there are 40 grams of
A and 50 grams of B, and for each gram of B, 2 grams of
A is used. It is observed that 10 grams of C is formed in
5 minutes. How much is formed in 20 minutes? What is
the limiting amount of C after a long time? How much of
chemicals A and B remains after a long time?
10. Solve Problem 9 if 100 grams of chemical A is present
initially. At what time is chemical C half-formed?
Additional Nonlinear Models
11. Leaking Cylindrical Tank
A tank in the form of a
right-circular cylinder standing on end is leaking water
through a circular hole in its bottom. As we saw in (10)
of Section 1.3, when friction and contraction of water at
the hole are ignored, the height h of water in the tank is
described by
,
where Aw and Ah are the cross-sectional areas of the
water and the hole, respectively.
(a) Solve the DE if the initial height of the water is H.
By hand, sketch the graph of h(t) and give its interval
dh
dt  Ah
Aw
 12gh
25
4
I of deﬁnition in terms of the symbols Aw, Ah, and H.
Use g  32 ft/s2.
(b) Suppose the tank is 10 feet high and has radius
2 feet and the circular hole has radius inch. If the
tank is initially full, how long will it take to empty?
12. Leaking Cylindrical Tank—Continued
When fric-
tion and contraction of the water at the hole are taken
into account, the model in Problem 11 becomes
,
where 0  c  1. How long will it take the tank in
Problem 11(b) to empty if c  0.6? See Problem 13 in
Exercises 1.3.
13. Leaking Conical Tank
A tank in the form of a right-
circular cone standing on end, vertex down, is leaking
water through a circular hole in its bottom.
(a) Suppose the tank is 20 feet high and has radius
8 feet and the circular hole has radius 2 inches. In
Problem 14 in Exercises 1.3 you were asked to
show that the differential equation governing the
height h of water leaking from a tank is
.
In this model, friction and contraction of the water
at the hole were taken into account with c  0.6,
and g was taken to be 32 ft/s2. See Figure 1.3.12. If
the tank is initially full, how long will it take the
tank to empty?
(b) Suppose the tank has a vertex angle of 60° and the
circular hole has radius 2 inches. Determine the dif-
ferential equation governing the height h of water.
Use c  0.6 and g  32 ft/s2. If the height of the
water is initially 9 feet, how long will it take the
tank to empty?
14. Inverted Conical Tank
Suppose that the conical tank
in Problem 13(a) is inverted, as shown in Figure 3.2.5,
and that water leaks out a circular hole of radius 2 inches
in the center of its circular base. Is the time it takes to
empty a full tank the same as for the tank with vertex
down in Problem 13? Take the friction/contraction coef-
ﬁcient to be c  0.6 and g  32 ft/s2.
dh
dt   5
6h3/2
dh
dt  c Ah
Aw
 12gh
1
2
8 ft
Aw
h
20 ft
FIGURE 3.2.5
Inverted conical tank in Problem 14
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15. Air Resistance
A differential equation for the veloc-
ity v of a falling mass m subjected to air resistance pro-
portional to the square of the instantaneous velocity is
,
where k  0 is a constant of proportionality. The posi-
tive direction is downward.
(a) Solve the equation subject to the initial condition
v(0)  v0.
(b) Use the solution in part (a) to determine the limit-
ing, or terminal, velocity of the mass. We saw how
to determine the terminal velocity without solving
the DE in Problem 41 in Exercises 2.1.
(c) If the distance s, measured from the point where
the mass was released above ground, is related to
velocity v by dsdt  v(t), ﬁnd an explicit expres-
sion for s(t) if s(0)  0.
16. How High?—Nonlinear Air Resistance
Consider the
16-pound cannonball shot vertically upward in Prob-
lems 36 and 37 in Exercises 3.1 with an initial velocity 
v0  300 ft/s. Determine the maximum height attained by
the cannonball if air resistance is assumed to be propor-
tional to the square of the instantaneous velocity. Assume
that the positive direction is upward and take k  0.0003.
[Hint: Slightly modify the DE in Problem 15.]
17. That Sinking Feeling
(a) Determine a differential 
equation for the velocity v(t) of a mass m sinking
in water that imparts a resistance proportional to
the square of the instantaneous velocity and also
exerts an upward buoyant force whose magnitude is
given by Archimedes' principle. See Problem 18 in
Exercises 1.3. Assume that the positive direction is
downward.
(b) Solve the differential equation in part (a).
(c) Determine the limiting, or terminal, velocity of the
sinking mass.
18. Solar Collector
The differential equation
describes the shape of a plane curve C that will reﬂect all
incoming light beams to the same point and could be a
model for the mirror of a reﬂecting telescope, a satellite
antenna, or a solar collector. See Problem 29 in
Exercises 1.3. There are several ways of solving this DE.
(a) Verify that the differential equation is homogeneous
(see Section 2.5). Show that the substitution y  ux
yields
.
u du
11  u2 (1  11  u2)
 dx
x
dy
dx  x  1x2  y2
y
m dv
dt  mg  kv2
102
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Use a CAS (or another judicious substitution) to
integrate the left-hand side of the equation. Show that
the curve C must be a parabola with focus at the ori-
gin and is symmetric with respect to the x-axis.
(b) Show that the ﬁrst differential equation can also be
solved by means of the substitution u  x2  y2.
19. Tsunami
(a) A simple model for the shape of a
tsunami is given by
,
where W(x)  0 is the height of the wave expressed
as a function of its position relative to a point off-
shore. By inspection, ﬁnd all constant solutions of
the DE.
(b) Solve the differential equation in part (a). A CAS
may be useful for integration.
(c) Use a graphing utility to obtain the graphs of all
solutions that satisfy the initial condition W(0)  2.
20. Evaporation
An outdoor decorative pond in the shape
of a hemispherical tank is to be ﬁlled with water pumped
into the tank through an inlet in its bottom. Suppose that
the radius of the tank is R  10 ft, that water is pumped
in at a rate of p ft3/min, and that the tank is initially
empty. See Figure 3.2.6. As the tank ﬁlls, it loses water
through evaporation. Assume that the rate of evaporation
is proportional to the area A of the surface of the water
and that the constant of proportionality is k  0.01.
(a) The rate of change dVdt of the volume of the water
at time t is a net rate. Use this net rate to determine a
differential equation for the height h of the water at
time t. The volume of the water shown in the ﬁgure is
V  pRh2  ph3, where R  10. Express the area
of the surface of the water A  pr 2 in terms of h.
(b) Solve the differential equation in part (a). Graph the
solution.
(c) If there were no evaporation, how long would it take
the tank to ﬁll?
(d) With evaporation, what is the depth of the water at
the time found in part (c)? Will the tank ever be
ﬁlled? Prove your assertion.
1
3
dW
dx  W 14  2W
FIGURE 3.2.6
Decorative pond in Problem 20
Output: water evaporates
                 at rate proportional
                  to area A of surface
Input: water pumped in
         at rate    ft3
A
V
Output: water evaporates
                 at rate proportional
                  to area A of surface
Input: water pumped in
         at rate  
3/min
π
(a) hemispherical tank
(b) cross-section of tank
R
r
h
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21. Doomsday Equation
Consider the differential equation
where 
and 
In Section 3.1 we saw that in
the case 
the linear differential equation
is a mathematical model of a population
P(t) that exhibits unbounded growth over the inﬁnite
time interval 
, that is, 
See
Example 1 on page 84. 
(a) Suppose for 
that the nonlinear differential
equation 
is a mathematical model for a population of small
animals, where time t is measured in months. Solve
the differential equation subject to the initial condi-
tion 
and the fact that the animal popula-
tion has doubled in 5 months. 
(b) The differential equation in part (a) is called a
doomsday equation because the population 
exhibits unbounded growth over a finite time 
interval 
that is, there is some time T such
Find T.
(c) From part (a), what is 
22. Doomsday or Extinction
Suppose the population
model (4) is modiﬁed to be
(a) If 
show by means of a phase portrait
(see page 39) that, depending on the initial condi-
tion 
the mathematical model could in-
clude a doomsday scenario 
or an extinc-
tion scenario 
(b) Solve the initial-value problem
Show that this model predicts a doomsday for the
population in a ﬁnite time T. 
(c) Solve the differential equation in part (b) subject to
the initial condition 
Show that this
model predicts extinction for the population as
Project Problems
23. Regression Line
Read the documentation for your
CAS on scatter plots (or scatter diagrams) and least-
squares linear ﬁt. The straight line that best ﬁts a set of
t : .
P(0)  100.
dP
dt  P(0.0005P  0.1), P(0)  300.
(P(t) : 0).
(P(t) : )
P(0)  P0,
a  0, b  0
dP
dt  P(bP  a).
P(50)? P(100)?
P(t) :  as t : T.
(0, T),
P(t)
P(0)  10
dP
dt  kP1.01, k  0,
c  0.01
P(t) :  as t : .
[0, )
dP>dt  kP
c  0
c  0.
k  0
dP
dt  kP1c,
3.2
NONLINEAR MODELS
●
103
data points is called a regression line or a least
squares line. Your task is to construct a logistic model
for the population of the United States, deﬁning f (P)
in (2) as an equation of a regression line based on the
population data in the table in Problem 4. One way of 
doing this is to approximate the left-hand side 
of 
the ﬁrst equation in (2), using the forward difference
quotient in place of dPdt:
.
(a) Make a table of the values t, P(t), and Q(t) using
t  0, 10, 20, . . . , 160 and h  10. For example, the
ﬁrst line of the table should contain t  0, P(0), and
Q(0). With P(0)  3.929 and P(10)  5.308,
.
Note that Q(160) depends on the 1960 census popu-
lation P(170). Look up this value.
(b) Use a CAS to obtain a scatter plot of the data 
(P(t), Q(t)) computed in part (a). Also use a CAS to
ﬁnd an equation of the regression line and to
superimpose its graph on the scatter plot.
(c) Construct a logistic model dPdt  Pf(P), where f(P)
is the equation of the regression line found in part (b).
(d) Solve the model in part (c) using the initial condi-
tion P(0)  3.929.
(e) Use a CAS to obtain another scatter plot, this time
of the ordered pairs (t, P(t)) from your table in
part (a). Use your CAS to superimpose the graph of
the solution in part (d) on the scatter plot.
(f) Look up the U.S. census data for 1970, 1980, and
1990. What population does the logistic model in part
(c) predict for these years? What does the model pre-
dict for the U.S. population P(t) as t : ?
24. Immigration Model
(a) In Examples 3 and 4 of
Section 2.1 we saw that any solution P(t) of (4)
possesses the asymptotic behavior P(t) : ab as 
t :  for P0  ab and for 0  P0  ab; as a
consequence the equilibrium solution P  ab is
called an attractor. Use a root-ﬁnding application of
a CAS (or a graphic calculator) to approximate the
equilibrium solution of the immigration model
.
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph the function 
F(P)  P(1  P)  0.3eP. Explain how this graph
can be used to determine whether the number found
in part (a) is an attractor.
dP
dt  P(1  P)  0.3eP
Q(0) 
1
P(0) P(10)  P(0)
10
 0.035
Q(t) 
1
P(t) P(t  h)  P(t)
h
1
P dP
dt
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(c) Use a numerical solver to compare the solution
curves for the IVPs
for P0  0.2 and P0  1.2 with the solution curves
for the IVPs
for P0  0.2 and P0  1.2. Superimpose all curves on
the same coordinate axes but, if possible, use a differ-
ent color for the curves of the second initial-value
problem. Over a long period of time, what percentage
increase does the immigration model predict in the
population compared to the logistic model?
25. What Goes Up . . .
In Problem 16 let ta be the time it
takes the cannonball to attain its maximum height and
let td be the time it takes the cannonball to fall from the
maximum height to the ground. Compare the value of
ta with the value of td and compare the magnitude of
the impact velocity vi with the initial velocity v0. See
Problem 48 in Exercises 3.1. A root-ﬁnding application
of a CAS might be useful here. [Hint: Use the model in
Problem 15 when the cannonball is falling.]
26. Skydiving
A skydiver is equipped with a stopwatch
and an altimeter. As shown in Figure 3.2.7, he opens his
parachute 25 seconds after exiting a plane ﬂying at an
altitude of 20,000 feet and observes that his altitude is
14,800 feet. Assume that air resistance is proportional to
the square of the instantaneous velocity, his initial ve-
locity on leaving the plane is zero, and g  32 ft/s2.
(a) Find the distance s(t), measured from the plane, the
skydiver has traveled during freefall in time t.
[Hint: The constant of proportionality k in the
model given in Problem 15 is not speciﬁed. Use the
expression for terminal velocity vt obtained in part
(b) of Problem 15 to eliminate k from the IVP. Then
eventually solve for vt.]
(b) How far does the skydiver fall and what is his
velocity at t  15 s?
dP
dt  P(1  P)  0.3eP, P(0)  P0
dP
dt  P(1  P), P(0)  P0
104
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
27. Hitting Bottom
A helicopter hovers 500 feet above a
large open tank full of liquid (not water). A dense com-
pact object weighing 160 pounds is dropped (released
from rest) from the helicopter into the liquid. Assume
that air resistance is proportional to instantaneous ve-
locity v while the object is in the air and that viscous
damping is proportional to v2 after the object has en-
tered the liquid. For air take k  , and for the liquid
take k  0.1. Assume that the positive direction is
downward. If the tank is 75 feet high, determine the
time and the impact velocity when the object hits the
bottom of the tank. [Hint: Think in terms of two distinct
IVPs. If you use (13), be careful in removing the ab-
solute value sign. You might compare the velocity when
the object hits the liquid—the initial velocity for the
second problem—with the terminal velocity vt of the
object falling through the liquid.]
28. Old Man River . . .
In Figure 3.2.8(a) suppose that the
y-axis and the dashed vertical line x  1 represent, re-
spectively, the straight west and east beaches of a river
that is 1 mile wide. The river ﬂows northward with a
velocity vr, where 
mi/h is a constant. A man
enters the current at the point (1, 0) on the east shore and
swims in a direction and rate relative to the river given by
the vector vs, where the speed 
mi/h is a constant.
The man wants to reach the west beach exactly at (0, 0)
and so swims in such a manner that keeps his velocity
vector vs always directed toward the point (0, 0). Use
Figure 3.2.8(b) as an aid in showing that a mathematical
model for the path of the swimmer in the river is
[Hint: The velocity v of the swimmer along the path or
curve shown in Figure 3.2.8 is the resultant v  vs  vr.
Resolve vs and vr into components in the x- and 
dy
dx  vsy  vr1x2  y2
vsx
.
|vs|  vs
|vr|  vr
1
4
s(t)
25 s
14,800 ft
FIGURE 3.2.7
Skydiver in Problem 26
y
(0, 0)
(1, 0)
y(t)
x(t)
θ
(x(t), y(t))
vr
west
beach
east
beach
swimmer
current
x
y
(0, 0)
(1, 0)
vs
vr
x
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.2.8
Path of swimmer in Problem 28
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

y-directions. If 
are parametric equa-
tions of the swimmer's path, then 
.]
29. (a) Solve the DE in Problem 28 subject to y(1)  0. For
convenience let 
(b) Determine the values of vs for which the swimmer
will reach the point (0, 0) by examining 
in
the cases k  1, k  1, and 0  k  1.
30. Old Man River Keeps Moving . . . Suppose the man in
Problem 28 again enters the current at (1, 0) but this
time decides to swim so that his velocity vector vs is
always directed toward the west beach. Assume that the
speed 
mi/h is a constant. Show that a mathe-
matical model for the path of the swimmer in the river
is now
31. The current speed vr of a straight river such as that in
Problem 28 is usually not a constant. Rather, an approxi-
mation to the current speed (measured in miles per hour)
could be a function such as 
whose values are small at the shores (in this
case, vr(0)  0 and vr(1)  0) and largest in the middle of
the river. Solve the DE in Problem 30 subject to y(1)  0,
where vs  2 mi/h and vr(x) is as given. When the swim-
mer makes it across the river, how far will he have to
walk along the beach to reach the point (0, 0)?
32. Raindrops Keep Falling . . .
When a bottle of liquid
refreshment was opened recently, the following factoid
was found inside the bottle cap:
The average velocity of a falling raindrop is 7 miles/hour.
A quick search of the Internet found that meteorologist
Jeff Haby offers the additional information that an
"average" spherical raindrop has a radius of 0.04 in. and
an approximate volume of 0.000000155 ft3. Use this data
and, if need be, dig up other data and make other reason-
able assumptions to determine whether "average velocity
of . . . 7 mi/h" is consistent with the models in Problems
35 and 36 in Exercises 3.1 and Problem 15 in this exer-
cise set. Also see Problem 36 in Exercises 1.3.
33. Time Drips By
The clepsydra, or water clock, was a
device that the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, and
Chinese used to measure the passage of time by observ-
ing the change in the height of water that was permitted
to ﬂow out of a small hole in the bottom of a container
or tank.
(a) Suppose a tank is made of glass and has the shape of
a right-circular cylinder of radius 1 ft. Assume that
h(0)  2 ft corresponds to water ﬁlled to the top of
the tank, a hole in the bottom is circular with radius
in., g  32 ft/s2, and c  0.6. Use the differential
equation in Problem 12 to ﬁnd the height h(t) of the
water.
1
32
0 
 x 
 1,
vr(x)  30x(1  x),
dy
dx  vr
vs
.
|vs|  vs
lim
x : 0y(x)
k  vr>vs.
v  (dx>dt, dy>dt)
x  x(t), y  y(t)
3.2
NONLINEAR MODELS
●
105
(b) For the tank in part (a), how far up from its bottom
should a mark be made on its side, as shown in
Figure 3.2.9, that corresponds to the passage of one
hour? Next determine where to place the marks
corresponding to the passage of 2 hr, 3 hr, . . . , 12 hr.
Explain why these marks are not evenly spaced.
2
1 hour
2 hours
1
FIGURE 3.2.9
Clepsydra in Problem 33
2
1
FIGURE 3.2.10
Clepsydra in Problem 34
35. Suppose that r  f(h) deﬁnes the shape of a water clock
for which the time marks are equally spaced. Use the
differential equation in Problem 12 to ﬁnd f(h) and
sketch a typical graph of h as a function of r. Assume
that the cross-sectional area Ah of the hole is constant.
[Hint: In this situation dhdt  a, where a  0 is a
constant.]
34. (a) Suppose that a glass tank has the shape of a cone with
circular cross section as shown in Figure 3.2.10. As
in part (a) of Problem 33, assume that h(0)  2 ft
corresponds to water ﬁlled to the top of the tank,
a hole in the bottom is circular with radius 
in.,
g  32 ft/s2, and c  0.6. Use the differential equa-
tion in Problem 12 to ﬁnd the height h(t) of the
water.
(b) Can this water clock measure 12 time intervals
of length equal to 1 hour? Explain using sound
mathematics.
1
32
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

106
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
MODELING WITH SYSTEMS OF FIRST-ORDER DEs
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 1.3
INTRODUCTION
This section is similar to Section 1.3 in that we are just going to discuss cer-
tain mathematical models, but instead of a single differential equation the models will be systems of
ﬁrst-order differential equations. Although some of the models will be based on topics that we
explored in the preceding two sections, we are not going to develop any general methods for solv-
ing these systems. There are reasons for this: First, we do not possess the necessary mathematical
tools for solving systems at this point. Second, some of the systems that we discuss—notably the
systems of nonlinear ﬁrst-order DEs—simply cannot be solved analytically. We shall examine
solution methods for systems of linear DEs in Chapters 4, 7, and 8.
3.3
Linear/Nonlinear Systems
We have seen that a single differential equation
can serve as a mathematical model for a single population in an environment. But if
there are, say, two interacting and perhaps competing species living in the same
environment (for example, rabbits and foxes), then a model for their populations x(t)
and y(t) might be a system of two ﬁrst-order differential equations such as
.
(1)
When g1 and g2 are linear in the variables x and y—that is, g1 and g2 have the forms
,
where the coefﬁcients ci could depend on t—then (1) is said to be a linear system.
A system of differential equations that is not linear is said to be nonlinear.
Radioactive Series
In the discussion of radioactive decay in Sections 1.3
and 3.1 we assumed that the rate of decay was proportional to the number A(t) of
nuclei of the substance present at time t. When a substance decays by radioactivity,
it usually doesn't just transmute in one step into a stable substance; rather, the ﬁrst
substance decays into another radioactive substance, which in turn decays into a
third substance, and so on. This process, called a radioactive decay series, con-
tinues until a stable element is reached. For example, the uranium decay series is
U-238 : Th-234 :    : Pb-206, where Pb-206 is a stable isotope of lead.
The half-lives of the various elements in a radioactive series can range from
billions of years (4.5 	 109 years for U-238) to a fraction of a second. Suppose a
radioactive series is described schematically by 
, where k1  l1  0
and k2  l2  0 are the decay constants for substances X and Y, respectively,
and Z is a stable element. Suppose, too, that x(t), y(t), and z(t) denote amounts of
substances X, Y, and Z, respectively, remaining at time t. The decay of element X is
described by
,
whereas the rate at which the second element Y decays is the net rate
,
dy
dt  1x  2y
dx
dt  1x
X
1: Y
2: Z
g1(t, x, y)  c1 x  c2 y  f1(t)    and    g2(t, x, y)  c3 x  c4 y  f2(t)
 dy
dt  g2(t, x, y)
 dx
dt  g1(t, x, y)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.3
MODELING WITH SYSTEMS OF FIRST-ORDER DEs
●
107
since Y is gaining atoms from the decay of X and at the same time losing atoms
because of its own decay. Since Z is a stable element, it is simply gaining atoms from
the decay of element Y:
.
In other words, a model of the radioactive decay series for three elements is the linear
system of three ﬁrst-order differential equations
(2)
Mixtures
Consider the two tanks shown in Figure 3.3.1. Let us suppose for the
sake of discussion that tank A contains 50 gallons of water in which 25 pounds of salt
is dissolved. Suppose tank B contains 50 gallons of pure water. Liquid is pumped
into and out of the tanks as indicated in the ﬁgure; the mixture exchanged between
the two tanks and the liquid pumped out of tank B are assumed to be well stirred.
We wish to construct a mathematical model that describes the number of pounds x1(t)
and x2(t) of salt in tanks A and B, respectively, at time t.
 dz
dt  2y.
 dy
dt  1x  2y
 dx
dt  1x
dz
dt  2y
mixture
3 gal/min
mixture
4 gal/min
B
A
pure water
3 gal/min
mixture
1 gal/min
FIGURE 3.3.1
Connected mixing tanks
By an analysis similar to that on page 24 in Section 1.3 and Example 5 of
Section 3.1 we see that the net rate of change of x1(t) for tank A is
dx1
---
dt  (3 gal/min)  (0 lb/gal)  (1 gal/min)  (      lb/gal)  (4 gal/min)  (      lb/gal)
      x1       x2.
input rate
of salt
output rate
of salt
x2
---
50
1
---
50
x1
---
50
2
---
25
Similarly, for tank B the net rate of change of x2(t) is
  2
25x1  2
25x2.
 dx2
dt  4  x1
50  3  x2
50  1  x2
50
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Thus we obtain the linear system
(3)
Observe that the foregoing system is accompanied by the initial conditions x1(0)  25,
x2(0)  0.
A Predator-Prey Model
Suppose that two different species of animals interact
within the same environment or ecosystem, and suppose further that the ﬁrst species
eats only vegetation and the second eats only the ﬁrst species. In other words, one
species is a predator, and the other is a prey. For example, wolves hunt grass-eating
caribou, sharks devour little ﬁsh, and the snowy owl pursues an arctic rodent called
the lemming. For the sake of discussion, let us imagine that the predators are foxes
and the prey are rabbits.
Let x(t) and y(t) denote the fox and rabbit populations, respectively, at time t.
If there were no rabbits, then one might expect that the foxes, lacking an adequate
food supply, would decline in number according to
.
(4)
When rabbits are present in the environment, however, it seems reasonable that the
number of encounters or interactions between these two species per unit time is jointly
proportional to their populations x and y—that is, proportional to the product xy. Thus
when rabbits are present, there is a supply of food, so foxes are added to the system at
a rate bxy, b  0. Adding this last rate to (4) gives a model for the fox population:
(5)
On the other hand, if there were no foxes, then the rabbits would, with an added
assumption of unlimited food supply, grow at a rate that is proportional to the num-
ber of rabbits present at time t:
.
(6)
But when foxes are present, a model for the rabbit population is (6) decreased by
cxy, c  0—that is, decreased by the rate at which the rabbits are eaten during their
encounters with the foxes:
(7)
Equations (5) and (7) constitute a system of nonlinear differential equations
(8)
where a, b, c, and d are positive constants. This famous system of equations is known
as the Lotka-Volterra predator-prey model.
Except for two constant solutions, x(t)  0, y(t)  0 and x(t)  dc, y(t)  ab,
the nonlinear system (8) cannot be solved in terms of elementary functions. However,
we can analyze such systems quantitatively and qualitatively. See Chapter 9,
"Numerical Solutions of Ordinary Differential Equations," and Chapter 10, "Plane
Autonomous Systems."*
dy
dt  dy  cxy  y(d  cx),
dx
dt  ax  bxy  x(a  by)
 dy
dt  dy  cxy.
 dy
dt  dy,    d  0
dx
dt  ax  bxy.
dx
dt  ax,    a  0
 dx2
dt 
 2
25 x1  2
25 x2.
 dx1
dt    2
25 x1  1
50 x2
108
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
*Chapters 10-15 are in the expanded version of this text, Differential Equations with Boundary-Value
Problems.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.3
MODELING WITH SYSTEMS OF FIRST-ORDER DEs
●
109
FIGURE 3.3.2
Populations of
predators (red) and prey (blue) in 
Example 1
t
population
x, y
time
predators 
prey 
EXAMPLE 1
Predator-Prey Model
Suppose
represents a predator-prey model. Because we are dealing with populations, we
have x(t)  0, y(t)  0. Figure 3.3.2, obtained with the aid of a numerical solver,
shows typical population curves of the predators and prey for this model superim-
posed on the same coordinate axes. The initial conditions used were x(0)  4, y(0)  4.
The curve in red represents the population x(t) of the predators (foxes), and the blue
curve is the population y(t) of the prey (rabbits). Observe that the model seems to
predict that both populations x(t) and y(t) are periodic in time. This makes intuitive
sense because as the number of prey decreases, the predator population eventually
decreases because of a diminished food supply; but attendant to a decrease in the
number of predators is an increase in the number of prey; this in turn gives rise to an
increased number of predators, which ultimately brings about another decrease in
the number of prey.
Competition Models
Now suppose two different species of animals occupy
the same ecosystem, not as predator and prey but rather as competitors for the same
resources (such as food and living space) in the system. In the absence of the other,
let us assume that the rate at which each population grows is given by
,
(9)
respectively.
Since the two species compete, another assumption might be that each of these
rates is diminished simply by the inﬂuence, or existence, of the other population.
Thus a model for the two populations is given by the linear system
(10)
,
where a, b, c, and d are positive constants.
On the other hand, we might assume, as we did in (5), that each growth rate in
(9) should be reduced by a rate proportional to the number of interactions between
the two species:
(11)
.
Inspection shows that this nonlinear system is similar to the Lotka-Volterra predator-
prey model. Finally, it might be more realistic to replace the rates in (9), which
indicate that the population of each species in isolation grows exponentially, with
rates indicating that each population grows logistically (that is, over a long time the
population is bounded):
.
(12)
dx
dt  a1x  b1x2    and    dy
dt  a2 y  b2 y2
 dy
dt  cy  dxy
 dx
dt  ax  bxy
 dy
dt  cy  dx
 dx
dt  ax  by
dx
dt  ax    and    dy
dt  cy
dy
dt  4.5y  0.9xy
dx
dt  0.16x  0.08xy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When these new rates are decreased by rates proportional to the number of interac-
tions, we obtain another nonlinear model:
(13)
,
where all coefﬁcients are positive. The linear system (10) and the nonlinear systems
(11) and (13) are, of course, called competition models.
Networks
An electrical network having more than one loop also gives rise to
simultaneous differential equations. As shown in Figure 3.3.3, the current i1(t) splits
in the directions shown at point B1, called a branch point of the network. By
Kirchhoff's ﬁrst law we can write
.
(14)
We can also apply Kirchhoff's second law to each loop. For loop A1B1B2A2A1,
summing the voltage drops across each part of the loop gives
.
(15)
Similarly, for loop A1B1C1C2B2A2A1 we ﬁnd
.
(16)
Using (14) to eliminate i1 in (15) and (16) yields two linear ﬁrst-order equations for
the currents i2(t) and i3(t):
(17)
We leave it as an exercise (see Problem 14 in Exercises 3.3) to show that the sys-
tem of differential equations describing the currents i1(t) and i2(t) in the network con-
taining a resistor, an inductor, and a capacitor shown in Figure 3.3.4 is
(18)
 RC di2
dt 
 i2  i1  0.
 L di1
dt   Ri2
  E(t) 
L2 di3
dt 
 R1i2  R1i3  E(t).
L1 di2
dt   (R1  R2)i2  R1i3  E(t)
E(t)  i1R1  L2  di3
dt
E(t)  i1R1  L1 di2
dt  i2R2
i1(t)  i2(t)  i3(t)
 dy
dt  a2y  b2y 2  c2xy  y(a2  b2y  c2x)
 dx
dt  a1x  b1x2  c1xy  x(a1  b1x  c1y)
110
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
A1
L1
R1
R2
A2
B1
B2
C1
C2
i1
i2
i3
L2
E
FIGURE 3.3.3
Network whose model
is given in (17)
FIGURE 3.3.4
Network whose
model is given in (18)
i1
L
R
C
i2
i3
E
EXERCISES 3.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-4.
Radioactive Series
1. We have not discussed methods by which systems
of ﬁrst-order differential equations can be solved.
Nevertheless, systems such as (2) can be solved with no
knowledge other than how to solve a single linear ﬁrst-
order equation. Find a solution of (2) subject to the
initial conditions x(0)  x0, y(0)  0, z(0)  0.
2. In Problem 1 suppose that time is measured in days,
that the decay constants are k1  0.138629 and 
k2  0.004951, and that x0  20. Use a graphing utility
to obtain the graphs of the solutions x(t), y(t), and z(t)
on the same set of coordinate axes. Use the graphs to
approximate the half-lives of substances X and Y.
3. Use the graphs in Problem 2 to approximate the times
when the amounts x(t) and y(t) are the same, the
times when the amounts x(t) and z(t) are the same, and
the times when the amounts y(t) and z(t) are the same.
Why does the time that is determined when the amounts
y(t) and z(t) are the same make intuitive sense?
4. Construct a mathematical model for a radioactive series
of four elements W, X, Y, and Z, where Z is a stable
element.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.3
MODELING WITH SYSTEMS OF FIRST-ORDER DEs
●
111
Mixtures
5. Consider two tanks A and B, with liquid being pumped in
and out at the same rates, as described by the system of
equations (3). What is the system of differential equations
if, instead of pure water, a brine solution containing
2 pounds of salt per gallon is pumped into tank A?
6. Use the information given in Figure 3.3.5 to construct a
mathematical model for the number of pounds of salt
x1(t), x2(t), and x3(t) at time t in tanks A, B, and C,
respectively.
x2(t), and x3(t) at time t in tanks A, B, and C, respectively.
Without solving the system, predict limiting values of
x1(t), x2(t), and x3(t) as t : .
mixture
5 gal/min
mixture
6 gal/min
mixture
4 gal/min
pure water
4 gal/min
B
100 gal
C
100 gal
A
100 gal
mixture
2 gal/min
mixture
1 gal/min
FIGURE 3.3.5
Mixing tanks in Problem 6
7. Two very large tanks A and B are each partially filled
with 100 gallons of brine. Initially, 100 pounds of salt
is dissolved in the solution in tank A and 50 pounds of
salt is dissolved in the solution in tank B. The system
is closed in that the well-stirred liquid is pumped only
between the tanks, as shown in Figure 3.3.6.
mixture
2 gal/min
mixture
3 gal/min
B
100 gal
A
100 gal
FIGURE 3.3.6
Mixing tanks in Problem 7
(a) Use the information given in the ﬁgure to construct
a mathematical model for the number of pounds
of salt x1(t) and x2(t) at time t in tanks A and B,
respectively.
(b) Find a relationship between the variables x1(t)
and x2(t) that holds at time t. Explain why this
relationship makes intuitive sense. Use this rela-
tionship to help ﬁnd the amount of salt in tank B at
t  30 min.
8. Three large tanks contain brine, as shown in Figure 3.3.7.
Use the information in the ﬁgure to construct a mathe-
matical model for the number of pounds of salt x1(t),
FIGURE 3.3.7
Mixing tanks in Problem 8
mixture
4 gal/min
mixture
4 gal/min
mixture
4 gal/min
pure water
4 gal/min
B
150 gal
C
100 gal
A
200 gal
Predator-Prey Models
9. Consider the Lotka-Volterra predator-prey model
deﬁned by
,
where the populations x(t) (predators) and y(t) (prey)
are measured in thousands. Suppose x(0)  6 and 
y(0)  6. Use a numerical solver to graph x(t) and y(t).
Use the graphs to approximate the time t  0 when
the two populations are ﬁrst equal. Use the graphs to
approximate the period of each population.
Competition Models
10. Consider the competition model deﬁned by
,
where the populations x(t) and y(t) are measured in
thousands and t in years. Use a numerical solver to
analyze the populations over a long period of time for
each of the following cases:
(a) x(0)  1.5,
y(0)  3.5
(b) x(0)  1,
y(0)  1
(c) x(0)  2,
y(0)  7
(d) x(0)  4.5,
y(0)  0.5
11. Consider the competition model deﬁned by
,
where the populations x(t) and y(t) are measured in
thousands and t in years. Use a numerical solver to
 dy
dt  y(1.7  0.1y  0.15x)
 dx
dt  x(1  0.1x  0.05y)
 dy
dt  y(1  0.1y  0.3x)
 dx
dt  x(2  0.4x  0.3y)
 dy
dt  0.2y  0.025xy
 dx
dt  0.1x  0.02xy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

analyze the populations over a long period of time for
each of the following cases:
(a) x(0)  1,
y(0)  1
(b) x(0)  4,
y(0)  10
(c) x(0)  9,
y(0)  4
(d) x(0)  5.5,
y(0)  3.5
Networks
12. Show that a system of differential equations that
describes the currents i2(t) and i3(t) in the electrical
network shown in Figure 3.3.8 is
 R1 di2
dt  R2 di3
dt  1
C i3  0.
 L di2
dt  L di3
dt  R1i2  E(t)
112
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
let s(t), i(t), and r(t) denote, in turn, the number of peo-
ple in the community (measured in hundreds) who are
susceptible to the disease but not yet infected with it,
the number of people who are infected with the dis-
ease, and the number of people who have recovered
from the disease. Explain why the system of differen-
tial equations
where k1 (called the infection rate) and k2 (called the
removal rate) are positive constants, is a reasonable
mathematical model, commonly called a SIR model,
for the spread of the epidemic throughout the commu-
nity. Give plausible initial conditions associated with
this system of equations.
16. (a) In Problem 15, explain why it is sufﬁcient to
analyze only
.
(b) Suppose k1  0.2, k2  0.7, and n  10. Choose
various values of i(0)  i0, 0  i0  10. Use a
numerical solver to determine what the model pre-
dicts about the epidemic in the two cases s0  k2k1
and s0 
 k2k1. In the case of an epidemic, estimate
the number of people who are eventually infected.
Project Problems
17. Concentration of a Nutrient
Suppose compartments
A and B shown in Figure 3.3.10 are ﬁlled with ﬂuids and
are separated by a permeable membrane. The ﬁgure is
a compartmental representation of the exterior and
interior of a cell. Suppose, too, that a nutrient necessary
for cell growth passes through the membrane. A model
 di
dt  k2i  k1si
 ds
dt  k1si
 dr
dt  k2i,
 di
dt  k2i  k1si
 ds
dt  k1si
R1
E
i1
L
i2
i3
C
R2
FIGURE 3.3.8
Network in Problem 12
i1
i2
i3
R1
R2
R3
E
L1
L2
FIGURE 3.3.9
Network in Problem 13
13. Determine a system of ﬁrst-order differential equations
that describes the currents i2(t) and i3(t) in the electrical
network shown in Figure 3.3.9.
14. Show that the linear system given in (18) describes
the currents i1(t) and i2(t) in the network shown in
Figure 3.3.4. [Hint: dqdt  i3.]
Additional Nonlinear Models
15. SIR Model
Acommunicable disease is spread through-
out a small community, with a ﬁxed population of n peo-
ple, by contact between infected individuals and people
who are susceptible to the disease. Suppose that everyone
is initially susceptible to the disease and that no one leaves
the community while the epidemic is spreading.At time t,
FIGURE 3.3.10
Nutrient ﬂow through a membrane in
Problem 17
B
A
membrane
fluid at
concentration
x(t)
fluid at
concentration
y(t)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 IN REVIEW
●
113
solver to obtain numerical solution curves of (3) subject
to the initial conditions x1(0)  25, x2(0)  0.
20. Newton's Law of Cooling/Warming
As shown in
Figure 3.3.11, a small metal bar is placed inside con-
tainer A, and container A then is placed within a much
larger container B. As the metal bar cools, the ambient
temperature TA(t) of the medium within container A
changes according to Newton's law of cooling. As
container A cools, the temperature of the medium in-
side container B does not change signiﬁcantly and can
be considered to be a constant TB. Construct a mathe-
matical model for the temperatures T(t) and TA(t),
where T(t) is the temperature of the metal bar inside
container A. As in Problems 1 and 18, this model can
be solved by using prior knowledge. Find a solution of
the system subject to the initial conditions T(0)  T0,
TA(0)  T1.
FIGURE 3.3.11
Container within a container in 
Problem 20
TA (t)
container A
container B
TB  = constant
metal
bar
for the concentrations x(t) and y(t) of the nutrient in
compartments A and B, respectively, at time t is given
by the linear system of differential equations
,
where VA and VB are the volumes of the compartments,
and k  0 is a permeability factor. Let x(0)  x0 and
y(0)  y0 denote the initial concentrations of the nutri-
ent. Solely on the basis of the equations in the system
and the assumption x0  y0  0, sketch, on the same set
of coordinate axes, possible solution curves of the sys-
tem. Explain your reasoning. Discuss the behavior of
the solutions over a long period of time.
18. The system in Problem 17, like the system in (2), can be
solved with no advanced knowledge. Solve for x(t) and
y(t) and compare their graphs with your sketches in
Problem 17. Determine the limiting values of x(t) and
y(t) as t : . Explain why the answer to the last ques-
tion makes intuitive sense.
19. Mixtures
Solely on the basis of the physical descrip-
tion of the mixture problem on page 107 and in
Figure 3.3.1, discuss the nature of the functions x1(t)
and x2(t). What is the behavior of each function over a
long period of time? Sketch possible graphs of x1(t) and
x2(t). Check your conjectures by using a numerical
 dy
dt  
VB
(x  y)
 dx
dt  
VA
(y  x)
CHAPTER 3 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-4.
Answer Problems 1 and 2 without referring back to the text.
Fill in the blank or answer true or false.
1. If P(t)  P0e0.15t gives the population in an environment
at time t, then a differential equation satisﬁed by P(t)
is
.
2. If the rate of decay of a radioactive substance is
proportional to the amount A(t) remaining at time t, then
the half-life of the substance is necessarily T  (ln 2)k.
The rate of decay of the substance at time t  T is one-
half the rate of decay at t  0. 
3. In March 1976 the world population reached 4 billion.
At that time, a popular news magazine predicted that
with an average yearly growth rate of 1.8%, the world
population would be 8 billion in 45 years. How does this
value compare with the value predicted by the model
that assumes that the rate of increase in population is
proportional to the population present at time t?
4. Air containing 0.06% carbon dioxide is pumped into a
room whose volume is 8000 ft3. The air is pumped in at
a rate of 2000 ft3/min, and the circulated air is then
pumped out at the same rate. If there is an initial con-
centration of 0.2% carbon dioxide in the room, deter-
mine the subsequent amount in the room at time t. What
is the concentration of carbon dioxide at 10 minutes?
What is the steady-state, or equilibrium, concentration
of carbon dioxide?
5. Solve the differential equation
of the tractrix. See Problem 28 in Exercises 1.3. Assume
that the initial point on the y-axis in (0, 10) and that the
length of the rope is x  10 ft.
dy
dx   
y
1s2  y2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6. Suppose a cell is suspended in a solution containing a
solute of constant concentration Cs. Suppose further
that the cell has constant volume V and that the area of
itspermeable membrane is the constant A.By Fick's lawthe
rate of change of its mass m is directly proportional to the
area A and the difference Cs  C(t), where C(t) is the con-
centration of the solute inside the cell at time t. Find C(t) if
m  VC(t) and C(0)  C0. See Figure 3.R.1.
114
●
CHAPTER 3
MODELING WITH FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Find the current i(t) if the resistance is 0.2 ohm, the
impressed voltage is E(t)  4, and i(0)  0. Graph i(t).
10. A classical problem in the calculus of variations is to
ﬁnd the shape of a curve  such that a bead, under the
inﬂuence of gravity, will slide from point A(0, 0) to
point B(x1, y1) in the least time. See Figure 3.R.2. It can
be shown that a nonlinear differential for the shape y(x)
of the path is y[1  (y)2]  k, where k is a constant.
First solve for dx in terms of y and dy, and then use the
substitution y  k sin2u to obtain a parametric form of
the solution. The curve  turns out to be a cycloid.
concentration
C(t)
concentration
Cs
molecules of solute
diffusing through
cell membrane
FIGURE 3.R.1
Cell in Problem 6
7. Suppose that as a body cools, the temperature of the
surrounding medium increases because it completely
absorbs the heat being lost by the body. Let T(t) and
Tm(t) be the temperatures of the body and the medium
at time t, respectively. If the initial temperature of the
body is T1 and the initial temperature of the medium
is T2, then it can be shown in this case that Newton's
law of cooling is dTdt  k(T  Tm), k  0, where
Tm  T2  B(T1  T), B  0 is a constant.
(a) The foregoing DE is autonomous. Use the phase
portrait concept of Section 2.1 to determine the
limiting value of the temperature T(t) as t : .
What is the limiting value of Tm(t) as t : ?
(b) Verify your answers in part (a) by actually solving
the differential equation.
(c) Discuss a physical interpretation of your answers in
part (a).
8. According to Stefan's law of radiation the absolute
temperature T of a body cooling in a medium at constant
absolute temperature Tm is given by
,
where k is a constant. Stefan's law can be used over a
greater temperature range than Newton's law of cooling.
(a) Solve the differential equation.
(b) Show that when T  Tm is small in comparison to
Tm then Newton's law of cooling approximates
Stefan's law. [Hint: Think binomial series of the
right-hand side of the DE.]
9. An LR-series circuit has a variable inductor with the
inductance deﬁned by
.
L(t) 
1  1
10 t,
0,
0 
 t  10
        t  10
dT
dt  k(T 4  T 4
m)
FIGURE 3.R.2
Sliding bead in Problem 10
x
y
B(x1, y1)
A(0, 0)
bead
mg
11. A model for the populations of two interacting species
of animals is
Solve for x and y in terms of t.
12. Initially, two large tanks A and B each hold 100 gallons
of brine. The well-stirred liquid is pumped between the
tanks as shown in Figure 3.R.3. Use the information
given in the ﬁgure to construct a mathematical model
for the number of pounds of salt x1(t) and x2(t) at time t
in tanks A and B, respectively.
 dy
dt  k2xy.
 dx
dt  k1x(  x)
FIGURE 3.R.3
Mixing tanks in Problem 12
2 lb/gal
7 gal/min
mixture
5 gal/min
A
100 gal
B
100 gal
mixture
3 gal/min
mixture
1 gal/min
mixture
4 gal/min
When all the curves in a family G(x, y, c1)  0 intersect
orthogonally all the curves in another family H(x, y, c2)  0,
the families are said to be orthogonal trajectories of each
other. See Figure 3.R.4. If dydx  f (x, y) is the differential
equation of one family, then the differential equation for the
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

orthogonal trajectories of this family is dydx  1f (x, y).
In Problems 13 and 14 ﬁnd the differential equation of the
given family. Find the orthogonal trajectories of this family.
Use a graphing utility to graph both families on the same set
of coordinate axes.
CHAPTER 3 IN REVIEW
●
115
FIGURE 3.R.4
Orthogonal trajectories
tangents
H(x, y, c2) = 0
G(x, y, c1) = 0
13. y  x  1  c1ex
14.
15. Potassium-40 Decay One of the most abundant metals
found throughout the Earth's crust and oceans is potas-
sium. Although potassium occurs naturally in the form
of three isotopes, only the isotope potassium-40 (K-40)
is radioactive. This isotope is a bit unusual in that it
decays by two different nuclear reactions. Over time,
by emitting a beta particle, a great percentage of an ini-
tial amount of K-40 decays into the stable isotope cal-
cium-40 (Ca-40), whereas by electron capture a smaller
percentage of K-40 decays into the stable isotope
y 
1
x  c1
* The knowledge of how K-40 decays is the basis for the potassium-
argon dating method. This method can be used to ﬁnd the age of very old
igneous rocks. Fossils can sometimes be dated indirectly by dating the
igneous rocks in the substrata in which the fossils are found.
argon-40 (Ar-40).* Because the rates at which the amounts
C(t) of Ca-40 and A(t) of Ar-40 increase are proportional
to the amount K(t) of potassium present, and the rate at
which potassium decreases is also proportional to K(t) we
obtain the system of linear ﬁrst-order equations
where 
and 
are positive constants of proportionality.  
(a) From the foregoing system of differential equations
ﬁnd 
if 
Then ﬁnd 
and 
if
and 
(b) It is known that 
and
Find the half-life of K-40.
(c) Use your solutions for C(t) and 
to determine the
percentage of an initial amount 
of K-40 that de-
cays into Ca-40 and the percentage that decays into
Ar-40 over a very long period of time.
K0
A(t)
l2  0.5874 	 1010.
l1  4.7526 	 1010
A(0)  0.
C(0)  0
A(t)
C(t)
K(0)  K0.
K(t)
l2
l1
 dK
dt  (l1  l2)K,
 dA
dt  l2K
 dC
dt  l1K
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Higher-Order Differential Equations
4.1
Preliminary Theory—Linear Equations
4.1.1 Initial-Value and Boundary-Value Problems
4.1.2 Homogeneous Equations
4.1.3 Nonhomogeneous Equations
4.2
Reduction of Order
4.3
Homogeneous Linear Equations with Constant Coefﬁcients 
4.4
Undetermined Coefﬁcients—Superposition Approach
4.5
Undetermined Coefﬁcients—Annihilator Approach
4.6
Variation of Parameters
4.7
Cauchy-Euler Equation
4.8
Green's Functions
4.8.1 Initial-Value Problems
4.8.2 Boundary-Value Problems
4.9
Solving Systems of Linear DEs by Elimination
4.10 Nonlinear Differential Equations
Chapter 4 in Review
We turn now to the solution of ordinary differential equation of order two or higher.
In the ﬁrst seven sections of this chapter we examine the underlying theory and
solution methods for certain kinds of linear equations. In the new, but optional,
Section 4.8 we build on the material of Section 4.6 to construct Green's functions
for solving linear initial-value and boundary-value problems. The elimination
method of solving systems of linear equations is introduced in Section 4.9 because
this method simply uncouples a system into individual linear equations in each
dependent variable. The chapter concludes with a brief examination of nonlinear
higher-order equations in Section 4.10.
4
116
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR EQUATIONS
●
117
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR EQUATIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Reread the Remarks at the end of Section 1.1
●Section 2.3 (especially page 57)
INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 2 we saw that we could solve a few ﬁrst-order differential equa-
tions by recognizing them as separable, linear, exact, homogeneous, or perhaps Bernoulli equations.
Even though the solutions of these equations were in the form of a one-parameter family, this
family, with one exception, did not represent the general solution of the differential equation. Only
in the case of linear ﬁrst-order differential equations were we able to obtain general solutions, by
paying attention to certain continuity conditions imposed on the coefﬁcients. Recall that a general
solution is a family of solutions deﬁned on some interval I that contains all solutions of the DE that
are deﬁned on I. Because our primary goal in this chapter is to ﬁnd general solutions of linear higher-
order DEs, we ﬁrst need to examine some of the theory of linear equations.
4.1
4.1.1
INITIAL-VALUE AND BOUNDARY-VALUE
PROBLEMS
Initial-Value Problem
In Section 1.2 we deﬁned an initial-value problem for
a general nth-order differential equation. For a linear differential equation an
nth-order initial-value problem is
Solve:
Subject to:
.
(1)
Recall that for a problem such as this one we seek a function deﬁned on some interval
I, containing x0, that satisﬁes the differential equation and the n initial conditions
speciﬁed at x0: y(x0)  y0, y(x0)  y1, . . . , y(n1)(x0)  yn1. We have already seen
that in the case of a second-order initial-value problem a solution curve must pass
through the point (x0, y0) and have slope y1 at this point.
Existence and Uniqueness
In Section 1.2 we stated a theorem that gave
conditions under which the existence and uniqueness of a solution of a ﬁrst-order
initial-value problem were guaranteed. The theorem that follows gives sufﬁcient
conditions for the existence of a unique solution of the problem in (1).
y(x0)  y0, y(x0)  y1 , . . . ,  y(n1)(x0)  yn1
an(x) d ny
dxn  an1(x) d n1y
dxn1      a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  g(x)
THEOREM 4.1.1
Existence of a Unique Solution
Let an(x), an1(x), . . . , a1(x), a0(x) and g(x) be continuous on an interval I and
let an(x)  0 for every x in this interval. If x  x0 is any point in this interval,
then a solution y(x) of the initial-value problem (1) exists on the interval and is
unique.
EXAMPLE 1
Unique Solution of an IVP
The initial-value problem
3y  5y	  y  7y  0, y(1)  0, y(1)  0, y	(1)  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
possesses the trivial solution y  0. Because the third-order equation is linear with
constant coefﬁcients, it follows that all the conditions of Theorem 4.1.1 are fulﬁlled.
Hence y  0 is the only solution on any interval containing x  1.
FIGURE 4.1.1
Solution curves of a
BVP that pass through two points
I
solutions of the DE
(b, y1)
(a, y0)
x
y
EXAMPLE 2
Unique Solution of an IVP
You should verify that the function y  3e2x  e2x  3x is a solution of the initial-
value problem
Now the differential equation is linear, the coefﬁcients as well as g(x)  12x are
continuous, and a2(x)  1  0 on any interval I containing x  0. We conclude from
Theorem 4.1.1 that the given function is the unique solution on I.
The requirements in Theorem 4.1.1 that ai(x), i  0, 1, 2, . . . , n be continuous
and an(x)  0 for every x in I are both important. Speciﬁcally, if an(x)  0 for some x
in the interval, then the solution of a linear initial-value problem may not be unique
or even exist. For example, you should verify that the function y  cx2  x  3 is a
solution of the initial-value problem
on the interval (
, 
) for any choice of the parameter c. In other words, there is no
unique solution of the problem. Although most of the conditions of Theorem 4.1.1
are satisﬁed, the obvious difﬁculties are that a2(x)  x2 is zero at x  0 and that the
initial conditions are also imposed at x  0.
Boundary-Value Problem
Another type of problem consists of solving a lin-
ear differential equation of order two or greater in which the dependent variable y or
its derivatives are speciﬁed at different points. A problem such as
Solve:
Subject to:
is called a boundary-value problem (BVP). The prescribed values y(a)  y0 and
y(b)  y1 are called boundary conditions. A solution of the foregoing problem is a
function satisfying the differential equation on some interval I, containing a and b,
whose graph passes through the two points (a, y0) and (b, y1). See Figure 4.1.1.
For a second-order differential equation other pairs of boundary conditions
could be
where y0 and y1 denote arbitrary constants. These three pairs of conditions are just
special cases of the general boundary conditions
The next example shows that even when the conditions of Theorem 4.1.1 are
fulﬁlled, a boundary-value problem may have several solutions (as suggested in
Figure 4.1.1), a unique solution, or no solution at all.
 2y(b)  2y(b)  2.
 1y(a)  1y(a)  1
 y(a)  y0,     y(b)  y1,
 y(a)  y0,     y(b)  y1
 y(a)  y0,     y(b)  y1
y(a)  y0,  y(b)  y1
a2(x) d 2y
dx2  a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  g(x)
x2y	  2xy  2y  6,  y(0)  3,  y(0)  1
y	  4y  12x,  y(0)  4,  y(0)  1.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR EQUATIONS
●
119
FIGURE 4.1.2
Solution curves for
BVP in part (a) of Example 3
x
c2 = 0
c2 = 1
c2 =
c2 =
c2 = −
(0, 0)
( /2, 0)
1
1
t
π
1
2 1
4
1
2
EXAMPLE 3
A BVP Can Have Many, One, or No Solutions
In Example 7 of Section 1.1 we saw that the two-parameter family of solutions of the
differential equation x	  16x  0 is
(2)
(a) Suppose we now wish to determine the solution of the equation that further
satisﬁes the boundary conditions x(0)  0, x(p2)  0. Observe that the ﬁrst
condition 0  c1 cos 0  c2 sin 0 implies that c1  0, so x  c2 sin 4t. But when t 
p2, 0  c2 sin 2p is satisﬁed for any choice of c2, since sin 2p  0. Hence the
boundary-value problem
(3)
has inﬁnitely many solutions. Figure 4.1.2 shows the graphs of some of the
members of the one-parameter family x  c2 sin 4t that pass through the two points
(0, 0) and (p2, 0).
(b) If the boundary-value problem in (3) is changed to
,
(4)
then x(0)  0 still requires c1  0 in the solution (2). But applying x(p8)  0 to 
x  c2 sin 4t demands that 0  c2 sin(p2)  c21. Hence x  0 is a solution of this
new boundary-value problem. Indeed, it can be proved that x  0 is the only solution
of (4).
(c) Finally, if we change the problem to
,
(5)
we ﬁnd again from x(0)  0 that c1  0, but applying x(p2)  1 to x  c2 sin 4t leads
to the contradiction 1  c2 sin 2p  c2  0  0. Hence the boundary-value problem (5)
has no solution.
4.1.2
HOMOGENEOUS EQUATIONS
A linear nth-order differential equation of the form
(6)
is said to be homogeneous, whereas an equation
(7)
with g(x) not identically zero, is said to be nonhomogeneous. For example, 
2y	  3y  5y  0 is a homogeneous linear second-order differential equation,
whereas x3y  6y  10y  ex is a nonhomogeneous linear third-order differen-
tial equation. The word homogeneous in this context does not refer to coefﬁcients
that are homogeneous functions, as in Section 2.5.
We shall see that to solve a nonhomogeneous linear equation (7), we must ﬁrst
be able to solve the associated homogeneous equation (6).
To avoid needless repetition throughout the remainder of this text, we
shall, as a matter of course, make the following important assumptions when
an(x) dny
dxn  an1(x) dn1y
dxn1      a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  g(x),
an(x) dny
dxn  an1(x) dn1y
dxn1      a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  0
x	  16x  0,  x(0)  0,  x 

2  1
x	  16x  0,  x(0)  0,  x 

8  0
x	  16x  0,  x(0)  0,  x 

2  0
x  c1 cos 4t  c2 sin 4t.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
stating definitions and theorems about linear equations (1). On some common
interval I,
•
the coefﬁcient functions ai(x), i  0, 1, 2, . . . , n and g(x) are continuous;
•
an(x)  0 for every x in the interval.
Differential Operators
In calculus differentiation is often denoted by the cap-
ital letter D—that is, dydx  Dy. The symbol D is called a differential operator
because it transforms a differentiable function into another function. For example,
D(cos 4x)  4 sin 4x and D(5x3  6x2)  15x2  12x. Higher-order derivatives
can be expressed in terms of D in a natural manner:
where y represents a sufﬁciently differentiable function. Polynomial expressions
involving D, such as D  3, D2  3D  4, and 5x3D3  6x2D2  4xD  9, are
also differential operators. In general, we deﬁne an nth-order differential opera-
tor or polynomial operator to be
L  an(x)Dn  an1(x)Dn1      a1(x)D  a0(x).
(8)
As a consequence of two basic properties of differentiation, D(cf(x))  cDf(x), c is a
constant, and D{f(x)  g(x)}  Df(x)  Dg(x), the differential operator L possesses
a linearity property; that is, L operating on a linear combination of two differentiable
functions is the same as the linear combination of L operating on the individual func-
tions. In symbols this means that
L{a f (x)  bg(x)}  aL( f (x))  bL(g(x)),
(9)
where a and b are constants. Because of (9) we say that the nth-order differential
operator L is a linear operator.
Differential Equations
Any linear differential equation can be expressed in
terms of the D notation. For example, the differential equation y	  5y  6y  5x  3
can be written as D2y  5Dy  6y  5x  3 or (D2  5D  6)y  5x  3. Using (8),
we can write the linear nth-order differential equations (6) and (7) compactly as
respectively.
Superposition Principle
In the next theorem we see that the sum, or super-
position, of two or more solutions of a homogeneous linear differential equation is
also a solution.
L(y)  0    and    L(y)  g(x),
d
dx 
dy
dx  d 2y
dx2  D(Dy)  D2y    and, in general,    dny
dxn  Dny,
Please remember
these two
assumptions.

THEOREM 4.1.2
Superposition Principle—Homogeneous Equations
Let y1, y2, . . . , yk be solutions of the homogeneous nth-order differential equation
(6) on an interval I. Then the linear combination
where the ci, i  1, 2, . . . , k are arbitrary constants, is also a solution on the
interval.
y  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)      ckyk(x),
PROOF
We prove the case k  2. Let L be the differential operator deﬁned in
(8), and let y1(x) and y2(x) be solutions of the homogeneous equation L( y)  0. If
we deﬁne y  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x), then by linearity of L we have
L( y)  L{c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)}  c1 L(y1)  c2 L(y2)  c1  0  c2  0  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR EQUATIONS
●
121
FIGURE 4.1.3
Set consisting of f1 and
f2 is linearly independent on (
, 
)
f1  = x
x
y
f 2  = |x|
x
y
(a)
(b)
COROLLARIES TO THEOREM 4.1.2
(A) A constant multiple y  c1y1(x) of a solution y1(x) of a homogeneous
linear differential equation is also a solution.
(B) A homogeneous linear differential equation always possesses the trivial
solution y  0.
EXAMPLE 4
Superposition—Homogeneous DE
The functions y1  x2 and y2  x2 ln x are both solutions of the homogeneous linear
equation x3y  2xy  4y  0 on the interval (0, 
). By the superposition principle
the linear combination
is also a solution of the equation on the interval.
The function y  e7x is a solution of y	  9y  14y  0. Because the differen-
tial equation is linear and homogeneous, the constant multiple y  ce7x is also a
solution. For various values of c we see that y  9e7x, y  0, 
, . . . are all
solutions of the equation.
Linear Dependence and Linear Independence
The next two concepts
are basic to the study of linear differential equations.
y  15e7x
y  c1x2  c2x2 ln x
DEFINITION 4.1.1
Linear Dependence/Independence
A set of functions f1(x), f2(x), . . . , fn(x) is said to be linearly dependent on an
interval I if there exist constants c1, c2, . . . , cn, not all zero, such that
for every x in the interval. If the set of functions is not linearly dependent on
the interval, it is said to be linearly independent.
c1 f1(x)  c2 f2(x)      cn fn(x)  0
In other words, a set of functions is linearly independent on an interval I if the only
constants for which
for every x in the interval are 
.
It is easy to understand these deﬁnitions for a set consisting of two functions 
f1(x) and f2(x). If the set of functions is linearly dependent on an interval, then
there exist constants c1 and c2 that are not both zero such that for every x in the
interval, c1 f1(x)  c2 f2(x)  0. Therefore if we assume that c1  0, it follows that
f1(x)  (c2c1) f2(x); that is, if a set of two functions is linearly dependent, then one
function is simply a constant multiple of the other. Conversely, if f1(x)  c2 f2(x)
for some constant c2, then (1)  f1(x)  c2 f2(x)  0 for every x in the interval.
Hence the set of functions is linearly dependent because at least one of the constants
(namely, c1  1) is not zero. We conclude that a set of two functions f1(x) and f2(x)
is linearly independent when neither function is a constant multiple of the other on
the interval. For example, the set of functions f1(x)  sin 2x, f2(x)  sin x cos x is
linearly dependent on (
, 
) because f1(x) is a constant multiple of f2(x). Recall
from the double-angle formula for the sine that sin 2x  2 sin x cos x. On the other
hand, the set of functions f1(x)  x, f2(x)  x is linearly independent on (
, 
).
Inspection of Figure 4.1.3 should convince you that neither function is a constant
multiple of the other on the interval.
c1  c2      cn  0
c1 f1(x)  c2 f2(x)      cn fn(x)  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
It follows from the preceding discussion that the quotient f2(x)f1(x) is not a con-
stant on an interval on which the set f1(x), f2(x) is linearly independent. This little fact
will be used in the next section.
EXAMPLE 5
Linearly Dependent Set of Functions
The set of functions f1(x)  cos2x, f2(x)  sin2x, f3(x)  sec2x, f4(x)  tan2x is
linearly dependent on the interval (p2, p2) because
when c1  c2  1, c3  1, c4  1. We used here cos2x  sin2x  1 and
1  tan2x  sec2x.
A set of functions f1(x), f2(x), . . . , fn(x) is linearly dependent on an interval if
at least one function can be expressed as a linear combination of the remaining
functions.
c1 cos2x  c2 sin2x  c3 sec2x  c4 tan2x  0
EXAMPLE 6
Linearly Dependent Set of Functions
The set of functions 
, f3(x)  x  1, f4(x)  x2 is
linearly dependent on the interval (0, 
) because f2 can be written as a linear combi-
nation of f1, f3, and f4. Observe that
for every x in the interval (0, 
).
Solutions of Differential Equations
We are primarily interested in linearly
independent functions or, more to the point, linearly independent solutions of a lin-
ear differential equation. Although we could always appeal directly to Deﬁnition 4.1.1,
it turns out that the question of whether the set of n solutions y1, y2, . . . , yn of a
homogeneous linear nth-order differential equation (6) is linearly independent can be
settled somewhat mechanically by using a determinant.
f2(x)  1  f1(x)  5  f3(x)  0  f4(x)
f1(x)  1x  5, f2(x)  1x  5x
DEFINITION 4.1.2
Wronskian
Suppose each of the functions f1(x), f2(x), . . . , fn(x) possesses at least n  1 
derivatives. The determinant
where the primes denote derivatives, is called the Wronskian of the
functions.
W( f1, f2, . . . , fn) 
f1
f 1


f1
(n1)
f2
f 2


f2
(n1)
  
  
  
fn
f n


fn
(n1)
,
THEOREM 4.1.3
Criterion for Linearly Independent Solutions
Let y1, y2, . . . , yn be n solutions of the homogeneous linear nth-order
differential equation (6) on an interval I. Then the set of solutions is linearly
independent on I if and only if W(y1, y2, . . . , yn)  0 for every x in the
interval.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

It follows from Theorem 4.1.3 that when y1, y2, . . . , yn are n solutions of (6) on
an interval I, the Wronskian W( y1, y2, . . . , yn) is either identically zero or never zero
on the interval.
A set of n linearly independent solutions of a homogeneous linear nth-order
differential equation is given a special name.
4.1
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR EQUATIONS
●
123
DEFINITION 4.1.3
Fundamental Set of Solutions
Any set y1, y2, . . . , yn of n linearly independent solutions of the homogeneous
linear nth-order differential equation (6) on an interval I is said to be a funda-
mental set of solutions on the interval.
The basic question of whether a fundamental set of solutions exists for a linear
equation is answered in the next theorem.
THEOREM 4.1.4
Existence of a Fundamental Set
There exists a fundamental set of solutions for the homogeneous linear nth-order
differential equation (6) on an interval I.
Analogous to the fact that any vector in three dimensions can be expressed as a
linear combination of the linearly independent vectors i, j, k, any solution of an nth-
order homogeneous linear differential equation on an interval I can be expressed as a
linear combination of n linearly independent solutions on I. In other words, n linearly
independent solutions y1, y2, . . . , yn are the basic building blocks for the general
solution of the equation.
THEOREM 4.1.5
General Solution—Homogeneous Equations
Let y1, y2, . . . , yn be a fundamental set of solutions of the homogeneous linear nth-
order differential equation (6) on an interval I. Then the general solution of the
equation on the interval is
where ci, i  1, 2, . . . , n are arbitrary constants.
y  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)      cnyn(x),
Theorem 4.1.5 states that if Y(x) is any solution of (6) on the interval, then con-
stants C1, C2, . . . , Cn can always be found so that
We will prove the case when n  2.
PROOF
Let Y be a solution and let y1 and y2 be linearly independent solutions of
a2y	  a1y  a0y  0 on an interval I. Suppose that x  t is a point in I for which
W(y1(t), y2(t))  0. Suppose also that Y(t)  k1 and Y(t)  k2. If we now examine
the equations
it follows that we can determine C1 and C2 uniquely, provided that the determinant of
the coefﬁcients satisﬁes

y1(t)
y1(t)
y2(t)
y2(t)  0.
 C1y1(t)  C2y2(t)  k2,
 C1y1(t)  C2y2(t)  k1
Y(x)  C1y1(x)  C2y2(x)      Cnyn(x).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

124
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
But this determinant is simply the Wronskian evaluated at x  t, and by assumption,
W  0. If we deﬁne G(x)  C1y1(x)  C2y2(x), we observe that G(x) satisﬁes the
differential equation since it is a superposition of two known solutions; G(x) satisﬁes
the initial conditions
and Y(x) satisﬁes the same linear equation and the same initial conditions.
Because the solution of this linear initial-value problem is unique (Theorem 4.1.1),
we have Y(x)  G(x) or Y(x)  C1y1(x)  C2y2(x).
G(t)  C1y1(t)  C2y2(t)  k1    and    G(t)  C1y1(t)  C2y2(t)  k2;
EXAMPLE 7
General Solution of a Homogeneous DE
The functions y1  e3x and y2  e3x are both solutions of the homogeneous linear
equation y	  9y  0 on the interval (
, 
). By inspection the solutions are lin-
early independent on the x-axis. This fact can be corroborated by observing that the
Wronskian
for every x. We conclude that y1 and y2 form a fundamental set of solutions, and
consequently, y  c1e3x  c2e3x is the general solution of the equation on the
interval.
W(e3x, e3x)  
e3x
3e3x
e3x
3e3x  6  0
EXAMPLE 8
A Solution Obtained from a General Solution
The function y  4sinh 3x  5e3x is a solution of the differential equation in
Example 7. (Verify this.) In view of Theorem 4.1.5 we must be able to obtain this
solution from the general solution y  c1e3x  c2e3x. Observe that if we choose 
c1  2 and c2  7, then y  2e3x  7e3x can be rewritten as
The last expression is recognized as y  4 sinh 3x  5e3x.
y  2e3x  2e3x  5e3x  4
e3x  e3x
2   5e3x.
EXAMPLE 9
General Solution of a Homogeneous DE
The functions y1  ex, y2  e2x, and y3  e3x satisfy the third-order equation
y  6y	  11y  6y  0. Since
for every real value of x, the functions y1, y2, and y3 form a fundamental set of solu-
tions on (
, 
). We conclude that y  c1ex  c2e2x  c3e3x is the general solution
of the differential equation on the interval.
4.1.3
NONHOMOGENEOUS EQUATIONS
Any function yp, free of arbitrary parameters, that satisﬁes (7) is said to be a particular
solution or particular integral of the equation. For example, it is a straightforward
task to show that the constant function yp  3 is a particular solution of the
nonhomogeneous equation y	  9y  27.
W(ex, e2x, e3x)  p
ex
ex
ex
e2x
2e2x
4e2x
e3x
3e3x
9e3x p  2e6x  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now if y1, y2, . . . , yk are solutions of (6) on an interval I and yp is any particular
solution of (7) on I, then the linear combination
(10)
is also a solution of the nonhomogeneous equation (7). If you think about it, this makes
sense, because the linear combination c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)    ckyk(x) is trans-
formed into 0 by the operator L  anDn  an1Dn1      a1D  a0, whereas yp
is transformed into g(x). If we use k  n linearly independent solutions of the nth-order
equation (6), then the expression in (10) becomes the general solution of (7).
y  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)      ckyk(x)  yp
4.1
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR EQUATIONS
●
125
THEOREM 4.1.6
General Solution—Nonhomogeneous Equations
Let yp be any particular solution of the nonhomogeneous linear nth-order differen-
tial equation (7) on an interval I, and let y1, y2, . . . , yn be a fundamental set of so-
lutions of the associated homogeneous differential equation (6) on I. Then the
general solution of the equation on the interval is
where the ci, i  1, 2, . . . , n are arbitrary constants.
y  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)      cn yn(x)  yp,
PROOF
Let L be the differential operator deﬁned in (8) and let Y(x) and yp(x)
be particular solutions of the nonhomogeneous equation L(y)  g(x). If we deﬁne
u(x)  Y(x)  yp(x), then by linearity of L we have
L(u)  L{Y(x)  yp(x)}  L(Y(x))  L(yp(x))  g(x)  g(x)  0.
This shows that u(x) is a solution of the homogeneous equation L(y)  0. Hence by
Theorem 4.1.5, 
, and so
or
Complementary Function
We see in Theorem 4.1.6 that the general solu-
tion of a nonhomogeneous linear equation consists of the sum of two functions:
The linear combination 
, which is the
general solution of (6), is called the complementary function for equation (7). In
other words, to solve a nonhomogeneous linear differential equation, we ﬁrst solve
the associated homogeneous equation and then ﬁnd any particular solution of the
nonhomogeneous equation. The general solution of the nonhomogeneous equation
is then
y  complementary function  any particular solution
 yc  yp.
yc(x)  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)      cnyn(x)
y  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)      cnyn(x)  yp(x)  yc(x)  yp(x).
 Y(x)  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)      cnyn(x)  yp(x).
 Y(x)  yp(x)  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)      cnyn(x)
u(x)  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x)      cnyn(x)
EXAMPLE 10
General Solution of a Nonhomogeneous DE
By substitution the function 
is readily shown to be a particular solu-
tion of the nonhomogeneous equation
(11)
y  6y	  11y  6y  3x.
yp  11
12  1
2 x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

126
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
To write the general solution of (11), we must also be able to solve the associated
homogeneous equation
But in Example 9 we saw that the general solution of this latter equation on the in-
terval (
, 
) was yc  c1ex  c2e2x  c3e3x. Hence the general solution of (11)
on the interval is
Another Superposition Principle
The last theorem of this discussion will
be useful in Section 4.4 when we consider a method for ﬁnding particular solutions
of nonhomogeneous equations.
y  yc  yp  c1ex  c2e2x  c3e3x  11
12  1
2 x.
y  6y	  11y  6y  0.
THEOREM 4.1.7
Superposition Principle—Nonhomogeneous Equations
Let 
, 
, . . . , 
be k particular solutions of the nonhomogeneous linear nth-
order differential equation (7) on an interval I corresponding, in turn, to k dis-
tinct functions g1, g2, . . . , gk. That is, suppose 
denotes a particular solution
of the corresponding differential equation
(12)
where i  1, 2, . . . , k. Then
(13)
is a particular solution of
(14)
 g1(x)  g2(x)      gk(x).
 an(x)y(n)  an1(x)y(n1)      a1(x)y  a0(x)y
yp  yp1(x)  yp2(x)      ypk(x)
an(x)y(n)  an1(x)y(n1)      a1(x)y  a0(x)y  gi(x),
ypi
ypk
yp2
yp1
PROOF
We prove the case k  2. Let L be the differential operator deﬁned in (8)
and let 
and 
be particular solutions of the nonhomogeneous equations
L(y)  g1(x) and L( y)  g2(x), respectively. If we deﬁne 
, we
want to show that yp is a particular solution of L( y)  g1(x)  g2(x). The result
follows again by the linearity of the operator L:
L(yp)  L{yp1(x)  yp2(x)}  L( yp1(x))  L( yp2(x))  g1(x)  g2(x).
yp  yp1(x)  yp2(x)
yp2(x)
yp1(x)
EXAMPLE 11
Superposition—Nonhomogeneous DE
You should verify that
It follows from (13) of Theorem 4.1.7 that the superposition of 
, and 
,
is a solution of
y	  3y  4y  16x2  24x  8  2e2x  2xex  ex.
g1(x)
g3(x)
g2(x)
y  yp1  yp2  yp3  4x2  e2x  xex,
yp3
yp1, yp2
 yp3  xex 
 is a particular solution of  y	  3y  4y  2xex  ex.
 yp2  e2x 
 is a particular solution of  y	  3y  4y  2e2x,
 yp1  4x2  is a particular solution of  y	  3y  4y  16x2  24x  8,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note
If the 
are particular solutions of (12) for i  1, 2, . . . , k, then the linear
combination
where the ci are constants, is also a particular solution of (14) when the right-hand
member of the equation is the linear combination
Before we actually start solving homogeneous and nonhomogeneous linear
differential equations, we need one additional bit of theory, which is presented in the
next section.
c1g1(x)  c2g2(x)      ckgk(x).
yp  c1yp1  c2yp2      ckypk,
ypi
4.1
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR EQUATIONS
●
127
REMARKS
This remark is a continuation of the brief discussion of dynamical systems
given at the end of Section 1.3.
A dynamical system whose rule or mathematical model is a linear nth-order
differential equation
is said to be an nth-order linear system. The n time-dependent functions y(t),
y(t), . . . , y(n1)(t) are the state variables of the system. Recall that their val-
ues at some time t give the state of the system. The function g is variously
called the input function, forcing function, or excitation function. A solu-
tion y(t) of the differential equation is said to be the output or response of the
system. Under the conditions stated in Theorem 4.1.1, the output or response
y(t) is uniquely determined by the input and the state of the system prescribed
at a time t0—that is, by the initial conditions y(t0), y(t0), . . . , y(n1)(t0).
For a dynamical system to be a linear system, it is necessary that the super-
position principle (Theorem 4.1.7) holds in the system; that is, the response of
the system to a superposition of inputs is a superposition of outputs. We have
already examined some simple linear systems in Section 3.1 (linear ﬁrst-order
equations); in Section 5.1 we examine linear systems in which the mathe-
matical models are second-order differential equations.
an(t)y(n)  an1(t)y(n1)      a1(t)y  a0(t)y  g(t)
EXERCISES 4.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-4.
4.1.1
INITIAL-VALUE AND BOUNDARY-VALUE
PROBLEMS
In Problems 1-4 the given family of functions is the general
solution of the differential equation on the indicated interval.
Find a member of the family that is a solution of the initial-
value problem.
1. y  c1ex  c2ex, (
, 
);
y	  y  0,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  1
2. y  c1e4x  c2ex, (
, 
);
y	  3y  4y  0,
y(0)  1,
y(0)  2
3. y  c1x  c2x ln x, (0, 
); 
x2y	  xy  y  0,
y(1)  3,
y(1)  1
4. y  c1  c2 cos x  c3 sin x, (
, 
); 
y  y  0,
y(p)  0,
y(p)  2,
y	(p)  1
5. Given that y  c1  c2x2 is a two-parameter family of
solutions of xy	  y  0 on the interval (
, 
),
show that constants c1 and c2 cannot be found so that a
member of the family satisﬁes the initial conditions
y(0)  0, y(0)  1. Explain why this does not violate
Theorem 4.1.1.
6. Find two members of the family of solutions in
Problem 5 that satisfy the initial conditions y(0)  0,
y(0)  0.
7. Given that x(t)  c1 cos vt  c2 sin vt is the general
solution of x	  v2x  0 on the interval (
, 
),
show that a solution satisfying the initial conditions
x(0)  x0, x(0)  x1 is given by
x(t)  x0 cos t  x1
 sin t.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
8. Use the general solution of x	  v2x  0 given in
Problem 7 to show that a solution satisfying the initial
conditions x(t0)  x0, x(t0)  x1 is the solution given in
Problem 7 shifted by an amount t0:
In Problems 9 and 10 ﬁnd an interval centered about x  0 for
which the given initial-value problem has a unique solution.
9. (x  2)y	  3y  x,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  1
10. y	  (tan x)y  ex,
y(0)  1,
y(0)  0
11. (a) Use the family in Problem 1 to ﬁnd a solution of
y	  y  0 that satisﬁes the boundary conditions
y(0)  0, y(1)  1.
(b) The DE in part (a) has the alternative general solu-
tion y  c3 cosh x  c4 sinh x on (
, 
). Use this
family to ﬁnd a solution that satisﬁes the boundary
conditions in part (a).
(c) Show that the solutions in parts (a) and (b) are
equivalent
12. Use the family in Problem 5 to ﬁnd a solution of
xy	  y  0 that satisﬁes the boundary conditions
y(0)  1, y(1)  6.
In Problems 13 and 14 the given two-parameter family is a
solution of the indicated differential equation on the interval
(
, 
). Determine whether a member of the family can be
found that satisﬁes the boundary conditions.
13. y  c1ex cos x  c2ex sin x;
y	  2y  2y  0
(a) y(0)  1,
y(p)  0
(b) y(0)  1,
y(p)  1
(c) y(0)  1,
y(p2)
(d) y(0)  0,
y(p)  0.
14. y  c1x2  c2x4  3;
x2y	  5xy  8y  24
(a) y(1)  0,
y(1)  4
(b) y(0)  1,
y(1)  2
(c) y(0)  3,
y(1)  0
(d) y(1)  3,
y(2)  15
4.1.2
HOMOGENEOUS EQUATIONS
In Problems 15-22 determine whether the given set of func-
tions is linearly independent on the interval (
, 
).
15. f1(x)  x,
f2(x)  x2,
f3(x)  4x  3x2
16. f1(x)  0,
f2(x)  x,
f3(x)  ex
17. f1(x)  5,
f2(x)  cos2x,
f3(x)  sin2x
18. f1(x)  cos 2x,
f2(x)  1,
f3(x)  cos2x
19. f1(x)  x,
f2(x)  x  1,
f3(x)  x  3
20. f1(x)  2  x,
f2(x)  2  x
 1
x(t)  x0 cos (t  t0)  x1
 sin (t  t0).
21. f1(x)  1  x,
f2(x)  x,
f3(x)  x2
22. f1(x)  ex,
f2(x)  ex,
f3(x)  sinh x
In Problems 23-30 verify that the given functions form a
fundamental set of solutions of the differential equation on
the indicated interval. Form the general solution.
23. y	  y  12y  0;
e3x, e4x, (
, 
)
24. y	  4y  0;
cosh 2x, sinh 2x, (
, 
)
25. y	  2y  5y  0;
ex cos 2x, ex sin 2x, (
, 
)
26. 4y	  4y  y  0;
ex/2, xex/2, (
, 
)
27. x2y	  6xy  12y  0;
x3, x4, (0, 
)
28. x2y	  xy  y  0;
cos(ln x), sin(ln x), (0, 
)
29. x3y  6x2y	  4xy  4y  0;
x, x2, x2 ln x, (0, 
)
30. y(4)  y	  0;
1, x, cos x, sin x, (
, 
)
4.1.3
NONHOMOGENEOUS EQUATIONS
In Problems 31-34 verify that the given two-parameter fam-
ily of functions is the general solution of the nonhomoge-
neous differential equation on the indicated interval.
31. y	  7y  10y  24ex;
y  c1e2x  c2e5x  6ex, (
, 
)
32. y	  y  sec x;
y  c1 cos x  c2 sin x  x sin x  (cos x) ln(cos x),
(p2, p2)
33. y	  4y  4y  2e2x  4x  12;
y  c1e2x  c2xe2x  x2e2x  x  2, (
, 
)
34. 2x2y	  5xy  y  x2  x;
35. (a) Verify that 
and 
are, respec-
tively, particular solutions of
and
(b) Use part (a) to ﬁnd particular solutions of
and
36. (a) By inspection find a particular solution of 
y	  2y  10.
(b) By inspection find a particular solution of 
y	  2y  4x.
(c) Find a particular solution of y	  2y  4x  10.
(d) Find a particular solution of y	  2y  8x  5.
 y	  6y  5y  10x2  6x  32  e2x.
 y	  6y  5y  5x2  3x  16  9e2x
 y	  6y  5y  5x2  3x  16.
 y	  6y  5y  9e2x
yp2  x2  3x
yp1  3e2x
y  c1x1/2  c2x1  1
15x2  1
6x, (0, 
)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Discussion Problems
37. Let n  1, 2, 3, . . . . Discuss how the observations
Dnxn1  0 and Dnxn  n! can be used to ﬁnd the gen-
eral solutions of the given differential equations.
(a) y	  0
(b) y  0
(c) y(4)  0
(d) y	  2
(e) y  6
(f) y(4)  24
38. Suppose that y1  ex and y2  ex are two solutions of
a homogeneous linear differential equation. Explain
why y3  cosh x and y4  sinh x are also solutions of
the equation.
39. (a) Verify that y1  x3 and y2  x3 are linearly
independent solutions of the differential equation
x2y	  4xy  6y  0 on the interval (
, 
).
(b) Show that W( y1, y2)  0 for every real number x.
Does this result violate Theorem 4.1.3? Explain.
(c) Verify that Y1  x3 and Y2  x2 are also linearly
independent solutions of the differential equation
in part (a) on the interval (
, 
).
(d) Find a solution of the differential equation satisfy-
ing y(0)  0, y(0)  0.
4.2
REDUCTION OF ORDER
●
129
(e) By the superposition principle, Theorem 4.1.2,
both
linear combinations y  c1y1  c2y2
and
Y  c1Y1  c2Y2 are solutions of the differential
equation. Discuss whether one, both, or neither of
the linear combinations is a general solution of the
differential equation on the interval (
, 
).
40. Is the set of functions f1(x)  ex2, f2(x)  ex3 lin-
early dependent or linearly independent on (
, 
)?
Discuss.
41. Suppose y1, y2, . . . , yk are k linearly independent solu-
tions on (
, 
) of a homogeneous linear nth-order
differential equation with constant coefﬁcients. By
Theorem 4.1.2 it follows that yk1  0 is also a solution
of the differential equation. Is the set of solutions
y1, y2, . . . , yk, yk1 linearly dependent or linearly inde-
pendent on (
, 
)? Discuss.
42. Suppose that y1, y2, . . . , yk are k nontrivial solutions of
a homogeneous linear nth-order differential equation
with constant coefﬁcients and that k  n  1. Is the set
of solutions y1, y2, . . . , yk linearly dependent or linearly
independent on (
, 
)? Discuss.
REDUCTION OF ORDER
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 2.5 (using a substitution)
●Section 4.1
INTRODUCTION
In the preceding section we saw that the general solution of a homogeneous
linear second-order differential equation
(1)
is a linear combination y  c1y1  c2y2, where y1 and y2 are solutions that constitute a linearly inde-
pendent set on some interval I. Beginning in the next section, we examine a method for determining
these solutions when the coefﬁcients of the differential equation in (1) are constants. This method,
which is a straightforward exercise in algebra, breaks down in a few cases and yields only a single
solution y1 of the DE. It turns out that we can construct a second solution y2 of a homogeneous equa-
tion (1) (even when the coefﬁcients in (1) are variable) provided that we know a nontrivial solution
y1 of the DE. The basic idea described in this section is that equation (1) can be reduced to a linear
ﬁrst-order DE by means of a substitution involving the known solution y1. A second solution y2 of
(1) is apparent after this ﬁrst-order differential equation is solved.
a2(x)y	  a1(x)y  a0(x)y  0
4.2
Reduction of Order
Suppose that y1 denotes a nontrivial solution of (1) and
that y1 is deﬁned on an interval I. We seek a second solution y2 so that the set consist-
ing of y1 and y2 is linearly independent on I. Recall from Section 4.1 that if y1 and
y2 are linearly independent, then their quotient y2y1 is nonconstant on I—that is,
y2(x)y1(x)  u(x) or y2(x)  u(x)y1(x). The function u(x) can be found by substituting
y2(x)  u(x)y1(x) into the given differential equation. This method is called reduction
of order because we must solve a linear ﬁrst-order differential equation to ﬁnd u.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 1
A Second Solution by Reduction of Order
Given that y1  ex is a solution of y	  y  0 on the interval (
, 
), use reduction
of order to ﬁnd a second solution y2.
SOLUTION
If y  u(x)y1(x)  u(x)ex, then the Product Rule gives
and so
Since ex  0, the last equation requires u	  2u  0. If we make the substitution
w  u, this linear second-order equation in u becomes w  2w  0, which is a
linear first-order equation in w. Using the integrating factor e2x, we can write
. After integrating, we get w  c1e2x or u  c1e2x. Integrating
again then yields 
Thus
.
(2)
By picking c2  0 and c1  2, we obtain the desired second solution, y2  ex.
Because W(ex, ex)  0 for every x, the solutions are linearly independent on
(
, 
).
Since we have shown that y1  ex and y2  ex are linearly independent solu-
tions of a linear second-order equation, the expression in (2) is actually the general
solution of y	  y  0 on (
, 
).
General Case
Suppose we divide by a2(x) to put equation (1) in the standard
form
(3)
where P(x) and Q(x) are continuous on some interval I. Let us suppose further that
y1(x) is a known solution of (3) on I and that y1(x)  0 for every x in the interval. If
we deﬁne y  u(x)y1(x), it follows that
This implies that we must have
(4)
where we have let w  u. Observe that the last equation in (4) is both linear and
separable. Separating variables and integrating, we obtain
.
We solve the last equation for w, use w  u, and integrate again:
.
u  c1  eP dx
y1
2
 dx  c2
ln wy1
2   P dx  c    or    wy1
2  c1eP dx
dw
w  2 y1
y1
 dx  P dx  0
y1u	  (2y1  Py1)u  0    or    y1w  (2y1  Py1)w  0,
y	  Py  Qy  u[y1  Py1  Qy1]  y1u	  (2y1  Py1)u  0.
	


zero
  y  uy1  y1u, y	  uy	1  2y1u  y1u	
y	  P(x)y  Q(x)y  0,
y  u(x)ex   c1
2 ex  c2ex
u  1
2 c1e2x  c2.
d
dx [e2xw]  0
y	  y  ex(u	  2u)  0.
y  uex  exu, y	  uex  2exu  exu	,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.2
REDUCTION OF ORDER
●
131
By choosing c1  1 and c2  0, we ﬁnd from y  u(x)y1(x) that a second solution of
equation (3) is
(5)
It makes a good review of differentiation to verify that the function y2(x) deﬁned in
(5) satisﬁes equation (3) and that y1 and y2 are linearly independent on any interval
on which y1(x) is not zero.
y2  y1(x)  eP(x) dx
y1
2(x)  dx.
EXAMPLE 2
A Second Solution by Formula (5)
The function y1  x2 is a solution of x2y	  3xy  4y  0. Find the general solu-
tion of the differential equation on the interval (0, 
).
SOLUTION
From the standard form of the equation,
we ﬁnd from (5)
.
The general solution on the interval (0, 
) is given by y  c1y1  c2y2; that is,
y  c1x2  c2x2 ln x.
 x2  dx
x  x2 ln x
; e3d x /x  eln x3  x3
y2  x2  e3dx /x
x4  dx
y	  3
x y  4
x2 y  0,
REMARKS
(i) The derivation and use of formula (5) have been illustrated here because this
formula appears again in the next section and in Sections 4.7 and 6.3. We use (5)
simply to save time in obtaining a desired result. Your instructor will tell you
whether you should memorize (5) or whether you should know the ﬁrst princi-
ples of reduction of order.
(ii) Reduction of order can be used to ﬁnd the general solution of a nonhomo-
geneous equation a2(x)y	  a1(x)y  a0(x)y  g(x) whenever a solution y1 of
the associated homogeneous equation is known. See Problems 17-20 in
Exercises 4.2.
EXERCISES 4.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-5.
In Problems 1-16 the indicated function y1(x) is a solution
of the given differential equation. Use reduction of order or
formula (5), as instructed, to ﬁnd a second solution y2(x).
1. y	  4y  4y  0;
y1  e2x
2. y	  2y  y  0;
y1  xex
3. y	  16y  0;
y1  cos 4x
4. y	  9y  0;
y1  sin 3x
5. y	  y  0;
y1  cosh x
6. y	  25y  0;
y1  e5x
7. 9y	  12y  4y  0;
y1  e2x/3
8. 6y	  y  y  0;
y1  ex/3
9. x2y	  7xy  16y  0;
y1  x4
10. x2y	  2xy  6y  0;
y1  x2
11. xy	  y  0;
y1  ln x
12. 4x2y	  y  0;
y1  x1/2 ln x
13. x2y	  xy  2y  0;
y1  x sin(ln x)
14. x2y	  3xy  5y  0;
y1  x2 cos(ln x)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
15. (1  2x  x2)y	  2(1  x)y  2y  0;
y1  x  1
16. (1  x2)y	  2xy  0;
y1  1
In Problems 17-20 the indicated function y1(x) is a solution
of the associated homogeneous equation. Use the method
of reduction of order to ﬁnd a second solution y2(x) of the
homogeneous equation and a particular solution of the given
nonhomogeneous equation.
17. y	  4y  2;
y1  e2x
18. y	  y  1;
y1  1
19. y	  3y  2y  5e3x;
y1  ex
20. y	  4y  3y  x;
y1  ex
Discussion Problems
21. (a) Give a convincing demonstration that the second-
order equation ay	  by  cy  0, a, b, and c con-
stants, always possesses at least one solution of the
form 
, m1 a constant.
(b) Explain why the differential equation in part (a)
must then have a second solution either of the form
y1  em1x
or of the form 
, m1 and m2
constants.
(c) Reexamine Problems 1-8. Can you explain why the
statements in parts (a) and (b) above are not
contradicted by the answers to Problems 3-5?
22. Verify that y1(x)  x is a solution of xy	  xy  y  0.
Use reduction of order to ﬁnd a second solution y2(x) in
the form of an inﬁnite series. Conjecture an interval of
deﬁnition for y2(x).
Computer Lab Assignments
23. (a) Verify that y1(x)  ex is a solution of 
xy	  (x  10)y  10y  0.
(b) Use (5) to ﬁnd a second solution y2(x). Use a CAS to
carry out the required integration.
(c) Explain, using Corollary (A) of Theorem 4.1.2, why
the second solution can be written compactly as
.
y2(x)  
10
n0
  1
n! xn
y2  xem1x
y2  em2 x
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR EQUATIONS 
WITH CONSTANT COEFFICIENTS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Review Problems 27-30 in Exercises 1.1 and Theorem 4.1.5
●Review the algebra of solving polynomial equations (see the Student Resource Manual)
INTRODUCTION
As a means of motivating the discussion in this section, let us return to ﬁrst-
order differential equations—more speciﬁcally, to homogeneous linear equations ay  by  0,
where the coefﬁcients a  0 and b are constants. This type of equation can be solved either by
separation of variables or with the aid of an integrating factor, but there is another solution method,
one that uses only algebra. Before illustrating this alternative method, we make one observation:
Solving ay  by  0 for y yields y  ky, where k is a constant. This observation reveals the
nature of the unknown solution y; the only nontrivial elementary function whose derivative is a
constant multiple of itself is an exponential function emx. Now the new solution method: If we substi-
tute y  emx and y  memx into ay  by  0, we get
Since emx is never zero for real values of x, the last equation is satisﬁed only when m is a solution or
root of the ﬁrst-degree polynomial equation am  b  0. For this single value of m, y  emx is a
solution of the DE. To illustrate, consider the constant-coefﬁcient equation 2y  5y  0. It is not
necessary to go through the differentiation and substitution of y  emx into the DE; we merely have
to form the equation 2m  5  0 and solve it for m. From 
we conclude that 
is a
solution of 2y  5y  0, and its general solution on the interval (
, 
) is 
In this section we will see that the foregoing procedure can produce exponential solutions for
homogeneous linear higher-order DEs,
(1)
where the coefﬁcients ai, i  0, 1, . . . , n are real constants and an  0.
any(n)  an1y(n1)    a2y	  a1y  a0y  0,
y  c1e5x/2.
y  e5x/2
m  5
2
amemx  bemx  0    or    emx (am  b)  0.
4.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Auxiliary Equation
We begin by considering the special case of the second-
order equation
(2)
where a, b, and c are constants. If we try to ﬁnd a solution of the form y  emx, then
after substitution of y  memx and y	  m2emx, equation (2) becomes
As in the introduction we argue that because emx  0 for all x, it is apparent that the
only way y  emx can satisfy the differential equation (2) is when m is chosen as a
root of the quadratic equation
(3)
This last equation is called the auxiliary equation of the differential equa-
tion (2). Since the two roots of (3) are 
and
there will be three forms of the general solution of
(2) corresponding to the three cases:
•
m1 and m2 real and distinct (b2  4ac  0),
•
m1 and m2 real and equal (b2  4ac  0), and
•
m1 and m2 conjugate complex numbers (b2  4ac  0).
We discuss each of these cases in turn.
Case I: Distinct Real Roots
Under the assumption that the auxiliary equation
(3) has two unequal real roots m1 and m2, we ﬁnd two solutions, 
and 
We see that these functions are linearly independent on (
, 
) and hence form a fun-
damental set. It follows that the general solution of (2) on this interval is
(4)
Case II: Repeated Real Roots
When m1  m2, we necessarily obtain only
one exponential solution, 
. From the quadratic formula we ﬁnd that
m1  b2a since the only way to have m1  m2 is to have b2  4ac  0. It follows
from (5) in Section 4.2 that a second solution of the equation is
(5)
In (5) we have used the fact that ba  2m1. The general solution is then
(6)
Case III: Conjugate Complex Roots
If m1 and m2 are complex, then we can
write m1  a  ib and m2  a  ib, where a and b  0 are real and i2  1.
Formally, there is no difference between this case and Case I, and hence
However, in practice we prefer to work with real functions instead of complex
exponentials. To this end we use Euler's formula:
where u is any real number.* It follows from this formula that
(7)
eix  cos x  i sin x    and    eix  cos x  i sin x,
ei  cos   i sin ,
y  C1e(ai)x  C2e(ai)x.
y  c1em1x  c2xem1x.
y2  em1x  e2m1x
e2m1x dx  em1x  dx  xem1x.
y1  em1x
y  c1em1x  c2em2x.
y2  em2x.
y1  em1x
m2  (b  1b2  4ac)2a,
m1  (b  1b2  4ac)2a
am2  bm  c  0.
am2emx  bmemx  cemx  0    or    emx(am2  bm  c)  0.
ay	  by  cy  0,
4.3
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR EQUATIONS WITH CONSTANT COEFFICIENTS
●
133
*A formal derivation of Euler's formula can be obtained from the Maclaurin series 
by
substituting x  iu, using i2  1, i3  i, . . . , and then separating the series into real and imaginary
parts. The plausibility thus established, we can adopt cos u  i sin u as the deﬁnition of eiu.
ex  

n0
 xn
n!
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
where we have used cos(bx)  cos bx and sin(bx)  sin bx. Note that by ﬁrst
adding and then subtracting the two equations in (7), we obtain, respectively,
Since y  C1e(aib)x  C2e(aib)x is a solution of (2) for any choice of the constants C1
and C2, the choices C1  C2  1 and C1  1, C2  1 give, in turn, two solutions:
But
and
Hence from Corollary (A) of Theorem 4.1.2 the last two results show that eax cos bx
and eax sin bx are real solutions of (2). Moreover, these solutions form a fundamen-
tal set on (
, 
). Consequently, the general solution is
(8)
y  c1eax cos x  c2eax sin x  eax(c1 cos x  c2 sin x).
y2  eax(eix  eix)  2ieax sin x.
y1  eax(eix  eix)  2eax cos x
y1  e(ai)x  e(ai)x    and    y2  e(ai)x  e(ai)x.
eix  eix  2 cos x    and    eix  eix  2i sin x.
FIGURE 4.3.1
Solution curve of IVP
in Example 2
x
y
4
5
_4
_2
2
_3
_1
1
3
4
_2
_3
2
1 
_1
3
EXAMPLE 1
Second-Order DEs
Solve the following differential equations.
(a) 2y	  5y  3y  0
(b) y	  10y  25y  0
(c) y	  4y  7y  0
SOLUTION
We give the auxiliary equations, the roots, and the corresponding gen-
eral solutions.
(a) 2m2  5m  3  (2m  1)(m  3)  0,
, m2  3
From (4), y  c1ex/2  c2e3x.
(b) m2  10m  25  (m  5)2  0,
m1  m2  5
From (6), y  c1e5x  c2xe5x.
(c)
From (8) with   2,   23, y  e2x(c1 cos 23x  c2 sin 23x).
m2  4m  7  0, m1  2  23i,  m2  2  23i
m1  1
2
EXAMPLE 2
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve 4y	  4y  17y  0, y(0)  1, y(0)  2.
SOLUTION
By the quadratic formula we ﬁnd that the roots of the auxiliary
equation 4m2  4m  17  0 are 
. Thus from
(8) we have y  ex/2(c1 cos 2x  c2 sin 2x). Applying the condition y(0)  1,
we
see 
from 
e0(c1 cos 0  c2 sin 0)  1 
that 
c1  1. 
Differentiating
y  ex/2(cos 2x  c2 sin 2x) and then using y(0)  2 gives 2c2   2 or c2  .
Hence the solution of the IVP is y  ex/2(cos 2x  sin 2x). In Figure 4.3.1 we see
that the solution is oscillatory, but y : 0 as x : 
.
Two Equations Worth Knowing
The two differential equations
,
y	  k2y  0    and    y	  k2y  0
3
4
3
4
1
2
m1  1
2  2i and m2  1
2  2i
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where k is real, are important in applied mathematics. For y	  k2y  0 the auxiliary
equation m2  k2  0 has imaginary roots m1  ki and m2  ki. With a  0 and
b  k in (8) the general solution of the DE is seen to be
(9)
On the other hand, the auxiliary equation m2  k2  0 for y	  k2y  0 has distinct
real roots m1  k and m2  k, and so by (4) the general solution of the DE is
(10)
Notice that if we choose 
in (10), we get the particu-
lar solutions 
. Since
cosh kx and sinh kx are linearly independent on any interval of the x-axis, an alterna-
tive form for the general solution of y	  k2y  0 is
(11)
See Problems 41 and 42 in Exercises 4.3.
Higher-Order Equations
In general, to solve an nth-order differential equa-
tion (1), where the ai, i  0, 1, . . . , n are real constants, we must solve an nth-degree
polynomial equation
(12)
If all the roots of (12) are real and distinct, then the general solution of (1) is
It is somewhat harder to summarize the analogues of Cases II and III because the
roots of an auxiliary equation of degree greater than two can occur in many combi-
nations. For example, a ﬁfth-degree equation could have ﬁve distinct real roots, or
three distinct real and two complex roots, or one real and four complex roots, or ﬁve
real but equal roots, or ﬁve real roots but two of them equal, and so on. When m1 is a
root of multiplicity k of an nth-degree auxiliary equation (that is, k roots are equal
to m1), it can be shown that the linearly independent solutions are
and the general solution must contain the linear combination
Finally, it should be remembered that when the coefﬁcients are real, complex
roots of an auxiliary equation always appear in conjugate pairs. Thus, for example,
a cubic polynomial equation can have at most two complex roots.
c1em1x  c2xem1x  c3x2em1x      ckxk1em1x.
em1x,  xem1x,  x2em1x, . . . ,  xk1em1x
y  c1em1x  c2em2x      cnemnx.
anmn  an1mn1      a2m2  a1m  a0  0.
y  c1 cosh kx  c2 sinh kx.
y  1
2 (ekx  ekx)  cosh kx and y  1
2 (ekx  ekx)  sinh kx
c1  c2  1
2 and c1  1
2, c2  1
2
y  c1ekx  c2ekx.
y  c1 cos kx  c2 sin kx.
4.3
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR EQUATIONS WITH CONSTANT COEFFICIENTS
●
135
EXAMPLE 3
Third-Order DE
Solve y  3y	  4y  0.
SOLUTION
It should be apparent from inspection of m3  3m2  4  0 that one
root is m1  1, so m  1 is a factor of m3  3m2  4. By division we ﬁnd
so the other roots are m2  m3  2. Thus the general solution of the DE is
y  c1ex  c2e2x  c3xe2x.
m3  3m2  4  (m  1)(m2  4m  4)  (m  1)(m  2)2,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 4
Fourth-Order DE
Solve 
SOLUTION
The auxiliary equation m4  2m2  1  (m2  1)2  0 has roots
m1  m3  i and m2  m4  i. Thus from Case II the solution is
By Euler's formula the grouping C1eix  C2eix can be rewritten as
after a relabeling of constants. Similarly, x(C3eix  C4eix) can be expressed as
x(c3 cos x  c4 sin x). Hence the general solution is
Example 4 illustrates a special case when the auxiliary equation has repeated
complex roots. In general, if m1  a  ib, b  0 is a complex root of multiplicity k
of an auxiliary equation with real coefﬁcients, then its conjugate m2  a  ib is also
a root of multiplicity k. From the 2k complex-valued solutions
we conclude, with the aid of Euler's formula, that the general solution of the corre-
sponding differential equation must then contain a linear combination of the 2k real
linearly independent solutions
In Example 4 we identify k  2, a  0, and b  1.
Of course the most difﬁcult aspect of solving constant-coefﬁcient differential equa-
tions is ﬁnding roots of auxiliary equations of degree greater than two. For example,
to solve 3y  5y	  10y  4y  0, we must solve 3m3  5m2  10m  4  0.
Something we can try is to test the auxiliary equation for rational roots. Recall that
if m1  pq is a rational root (expressed in lowest terms) of an auxiliary equation
with integer coefﬁcients, then p is a factor of a0 and q is
a factor of an. For our speciﬁc cubic auxiliary equation, all the factors of a0  4 and
an  3 are p: 1, 2, 4 and q: 1, 3, so the possible rational roots are
. Each of these numbers can then be tested—say, by
synthetic division. In this way we discover both the root 
and the factorization
The quadratic formula then yields the remaining roots m2  1  
i and
m3  1  
i. Therefore the general solution of 3y  5y	  10y  4y  0 is
y  c1ex/3  ex(c2 cos 
x  c3 sin 
x).
Use of Computers
Finding roots or approximation of roots of auxiliary equa-
tions is a routine problem with an appropriate calculator or computer software.
Polynomial equations (in one variable) of degree less than ﬁve can be solved by
means of algebraic formulas using the solve commands in Mathematica and Maple.
For auxiliary equations of degree ﬁve or greater it might be necessary to resort to nu-
merical commands such as NSolve and FindRoot in Mathematica. Because of their
capability of solving polynomial equations, it is not surprising that these computer
23
23
23
23
3m3  5m2  10m  4  (m  1
3)(3m2  6m  12).
m1  1
3
p>q: 1, 2, 4, 1
3, 2
3, 4
3
anmn      a1m  a0  0
 eax sin x,  xeax sin x,  x2eax sin x,   . . . ,  xk1eax sin x.
 eax cos x,  xeax cos x,  x2eax cos x,  . . . ,  xk1eax cos x,
 e(ai)x, xe(ai)x, x2e(ai)x,  . . . , xk1e(ai)x,
 e(ai)x, xe(ai)x, x2e(ai)x,  . . . , xk1e(ai)x,
y  c1 cos x  c2 sin x  c3x cos x  c4x sin x.
c1 cos x  c2 sin x
y  C1eix  C2eix  C3xeix  C4xeix.
d 4y
dx4  2 d 2y
dx2  y  0.
There is more on
this in the SRM.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

algebra systems are also able, by means of their dsolve commands, to provide explicit
solutions of homogeneous linear constant-coefﬁcient differential equations.
In the classic text Differential Equations by Ralph Palmer Agnew* (used by the
author as a student) the following statement is made:
It is not reasonable to expect students in this course to have computing skill and
equipment necessary for efﬁcient solving of equations such as
(13)
Although it is debatable whether computing skills have improved in the intervening
years, it is a certainty that technology has. If one has access to a computer algebra sys-
tem, equation (13) could now be considered reasonable. After simpliﬁcation and some
relabeling of output, Mathematica yields the (approximate) general solution
Finally, if we are faced with an initial-value problem consisting of, say, a
fourth-order equation, then to ﬁt the general solution of the DE to the four initial
conditions, we must solve four linear equations in four unknowns (the c1, c2, c3, c4
in the general solution). Using a CAS to solve the system can save lots of time. See
Problems 69 and 70 in Exercises 4.3 and Problem 41 in Chapter 4 in Review.
  c3e0.476478x cos(0.759081x)  c4e0.476478x sin(0.759081x).
 y  c1e0.728852x cos(0.618605x)  c2e0.728852x sin(0.618605x)
4.317 d 4y
dx4  2.179 d 3y
dx3  1.416 d 2y
dx2  1.295 dy
dx  3.169y  0.
4.3
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR EQUATIONS WITH CONSTANT COEFFICIENTS
●
137
*McGraw-Hill, New York, 1960.
EXERCISES 4.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-5.
In Problems 1-14 ﬁnd the general solution of the given
second-order differential equation.
1. 4y	  y  0
2. y	  36y  0
3. y	  y  6y  0
4. y	  3y  2y  0
5. y	  8y  16y  0
6. y	  10y  25y  0
7. 12y	  5y  2y  0
8. y	  4y  y  0
9. y	  9y  0
10. 3y	  y  0
11. y	  4y  5y  0
12. 2y	  2y  y  0
13. 3y	  2y  y  0
14. 2y	  3y  4y  0
In Problems 15-28 ﬁnd the general solution of the given
higher-order differential equation.
15. y  4y	  5y  0
16. y  y  0
17. y  5y	  3y  9y  0
18. y  3y	  4y  12y  0
19. d3u
dt3  d 2u
dt2  2u  0
20.
21. y  3y	  3y  y  0
22. y  6y	  12y  8y  0
23. y(4)  y  y	  0
24. y(4)  2y	  y  0
25.
26.
27.
28.
In Problems 29-36 solve the given initial-value problem.
29. y	  16y  0,
y(0)  2, y(0)  2
30. d 2y
d2  y  0, y(p>3)  0, y(p>3)  2
2 d 5x
ds5  7 d 4x
ds4  12 d 3x
ds3  8 d 2x
ds2  0
d 5u
dr5  5 d 4u
dr4  2 d 3u
dr3  10 d 2u
dr2  du
dr  5u  0
d 4y
dx4  7 d 2y
dx2  18y  0
16 d 4y
dx4  24 d 2y
dx2  9y  0
d 3x
dt3  d 2x
dt2  4x  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

138
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
31.
32. 4y	  4y  3y  0,
y(0)  1, y(0)  5
33. y	  y  2y  0,
y(0)  y(0)  0
34. y	  2y  y  0,
y(0)  5, y(0)  10
35. y  12y	  36y  0,
y(0)  0, y(0)  1, y	(0)  7
36. y  2y	  5y  6y  0,
y(0)  y(0)  0, y	(0)  1
In Problems 37-40 solve the given boundary-value problem.
37. y	  10y  25y  0,
y(0)  1, y(1)  0
38. y	  4y  0,
y(0)  0, y(p)  0
39.
40. y	  2y  2y  0,
y(0)  1, y(p)  1
In Problems 41 and 42 solve the given problem ﬁrst using
the form of the general solution given in (10). Solve again,
this time using the form given in (11).
41. y	  3y  0,
y(0)  1, y(0)  5
42. y	  y  0,
y(0)  1, y(1)  0
In Problems 43-48 each ﬁgure represents the graph of a
particular solution of one of the following differential
equations:
(a) y	  3y  4y  0
(b) y	  4y  0
(c) y	  2y  y  0
(d) y	  y  0
(e) y	  2y  2y  0
(f) y	  3y  2y  0
Match a solution curve with one of the differential equations.
Explain your reasoning.
y	  y  0, y(0)  0, y(p>2)  0
d 2y
dt2  4 dy
dt  5y  0, y(1)  0, y(1)  2
In Problems 49-58 ﬁnd a homogeneous linear differential equa-
tion with constant coefﬁcients whose general solution is given.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58. y  c1cos x  c2sin x  c3cos2 x  c4sin2x
y  c1  c2x  c3e8x
y  c1  c2e2xcos5x   c3e2xsin5x
y  c1excosx  c2exsinx
y  c1 cosh7x  c2 sinh7x
y  c1 cos3x  c2 sin3x
y  c1e10x  c2xe10x
y  c1  c2e2x
y  c1e4x  c2e3x
y  c1ex  c2e5x
x
y
x
y
FIGURE 4.3.2
Graph for Problem 43
FIGURE 4.3.3
Graph for Problem 44
43.
44.
x
y
FIGURE 4.3.4
Graph for Problem 45
45.
x
y
FIGURE 4.3.5
Graph for Problem 46
46.
π
x
y
π
x
y
FIGURE 4.3.6
Graph for Problem 47
FIGURE 4.3.7
Graph for Problem 48
47.
48.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Discussion Problems
59. Two roots of a cubic auxiliary equation with real coefﬁ-
cients are 
and 
What is the corre-
sponding homogeneous linear differential equation?
Discuss: Is your answer unique?
60. Find the general solution of 
if 
is one root of its auxiliary equation.
61. Find the general solution of y  6y	  y  34y  0
if it is known that y1  e4x cos x is one solution.
62. To solve y(4)  y  0, we must ﬁnd the roots of
m4  1  0. This is a trivial problem using a CAS
but can also be done by hand working with complex
numbers. Observe that m4  1  (m2  1)2  2m2.
How does this help? Solve the differential equation.
63. Verify that 
is a particular
solution of y(4)  y  0. Reconcile this particular solu-
tion with the general solution of the DE.
64. Consider the boundary-value problem y	  ly  0,
y(0)  0, y(p2)  0. Discuss: Is it possible to
determine values of l so that the problem possesses
(a) trivial solutions? (b) nontrivial solutions?
y  sinh x  2 cos (x  p>6)
m1  1
2
2y  7y	  4y  4y  0
m2  3  i.
m1  1
2
4.4
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—SUPERPOSITION APPROACH
●
139
Computer Lab Assignments
In Problems 65-68 use a computer either as an aid in solving
the auxiliary equation or as a means of directly obtaining the
general solution of the given differential equation. If you use
a CAS to obtain the general solution, simplify the output and,
if necessary, write the solution in terms of real functions.
65. y  6y	  2y  y  0
66. 6.11y  8.59y	  7.93y  0.778y  0
67. 3.15y(4)  5.34y	  6.33y  2.03y  0
68. y(4)  2y	  y  2y  0
In Problems 69 and 70 use a CAS as an aid in solving the aux-
iliary equation. Form the general solution of the differential
equation. Then use a CAS as an aid in solving the system of
equations for the coefﬁcients ci, i  1, 2, 3, 4 that results when
the initial conditions are applied to the general solution.
69. 2y(4)  3y  16y	  15y  4y  0,
y(0)  2, y(0)  6, y	(0)  3, y(0) 
70. y(4)  3y  3y	  y  0,
y(0)  y(0)  0, y	(0)  y(0)  1
1
2
*Note to the Instructor: In this section the method of undetermined coefﬁcients is developed from the
viewpoint of the superposition principle for nonhomogeneous equations (Theorem 4.7.1). In Section 4.5
an entirely different approach will be presented, one utilizing the concept of differential annihilator
operators. Take your pick.
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—SUPERPOSITION
APPROACH*
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Review Theorems 4.1.6 and 4.1.7 (Section 4.1)
INTRODUCTION
To solve a nonhomogeneous linear differential equation
(1)
we must do two things: 
• ﬁnd the complementary function yc and 
• ﬁnd any particular solution yp of the nonhomogeneous equation (1). 
Then, as was discussed in Section 4.1, the general solution of (1) is y  yc  yp. The complemen-
tary function yc is the general solution of the associated homogeneous DE of (1), that is,
. 
In Section 4.3 we saw how to solve these kinds of equations when the coefﬁcients were constants.
Our goal in the present section is to develop a method for obtaining particular solutions.
an y(n)  an1y(n1)      a1 y  a0 y  0
an y(n)  an1 y(n1)      a1 y  a0y  g(x),
4.4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

140
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Method of Undetermined Coefﬁcients
The ﬁrst of two ways we shall
consider for obtaining a particular solution yp for a nonhomogeneous linear DE is
called the method of undetermined coefﬁcients. The underlying idea behind
this method is a conjecture about the form of yp, an educated guess really, that is
motivated by the kinds of functions that make up the input function g(x). The general
method is limited to linear DEs such as (1) where
•
the coefﬁcients ai, i  0, 1, . . . , n are constants and
•
g(x) is a constant k, a polynomial function, an exponential function eax,
a sine or cosine function sin bx or cos bx, or ﬁnite sums and products
of these functions.
Note
Strictly speaking, g(x)  k (constant) is a polynomial function. Since a
constant function is probably not the ﬁrst thing that comes to mind when you think
of polynomial functions, for emphasis we shall continue to use the redundancy
"constant functions, polynomials, . . . . "
The following functions are some examples of the types of inputs g(x) that are
appropriate for this discussion:
That is, g(x) is a linear combination of functions of the type
 g(x)  sin 3x  5x cos 2x, 
 g(x)  xex sin x  (3x2  1)e4x.
 g(x)  10, g(x)  x2  5x,     g(x)  15x  6  8ex,
P(x)  an xn  an1 xn1      a1x  a0,    P(x) eax,  P(x) eax sin x,  and  P(x) eax cos x,
where n is a nonnegative integer and a and b are real numbers. The method of
undetermined coefﬁcients is not applicable to equations of form (1) when
and so on. Differential equations in which the input g(x) is a function of this last kind
will be considered in Section 4.6.
The set of functions that consists of constants, polynomials, exponentials
eax, sines, and cosines has the remarkable property that derivatives of their sums
and products are again sums and products of constants, polynomials, exponen-
tials eax, sines, and cosines. Because the linear combination of derivatives 
must be identical to g(x), it seems
reasonable to assume that yp has the same form as g(x).
The next two examples illustrate the basic method.
an y(n)
p  an1 yp
(n1)      a1 yp  a0 yp
g(x)  ln x, g(x)  1
x
, g(x)  tan x, g(x)  sin1x,
EXAMPLE 1
General Solution Using Undetermined Coefﬁcients
Solve 
(2)
SOLUTION
Step 1.
We ﬁrst solve the associated homogeneous equation
y	  4y  2y  0. From the quadratic formula we ﬁnd that the roots of the auxil-
iary equation m2  4m  2  0 are 
and 
. Hence
the complementary function is
Step 2.
Now, because the function g(x) is a quadratic polynomial, let us assume a
particular solution that is also in the form of a quadratic polynomial:
yp  Ax2  Bx  C.
yc  c1e(216)x  c2e(216)x.
m2  2  16
m1  2  16
y	  4y  2y  2x2  3x  6.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We seek to determine speciﬁc coefﬁcients A, B, and C for which yp is a solution
of (2). Substituting yp and the derivatives
into the given differential equation (2), we get
Because the last equation is supposed to be an identity, the coefﬁcients of like powers
of x must be equal:
That is,
Solving this system of equations leads to the values A  1, 
, and C  9.
Thus a particular solution is
Step 3.
The general solution of the given equation is
y  yc  yp  c1e(216)x  c2e(216)x  x2  5
2 x  9.
yp  x2  5
2 x  9.
B  5
2
2A  2,    8A  2B  3,    2A  4B  2C  6.
equal
2A
x2  8A  2B x 
2A  4B  2C
 2x2  3x  6
y	p  4yp  2yp  2A  8Ax  4B  2Ax2  2Bx  2C  2x2  3x  6.
yp  2Ax  B    and    y	p  2A
4.4
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—SUPERPOSITION APPROACH
●
141
EXAMPLE 2
Particular Solution Using Undetermined Coefﬁcients
Find a particular solution of y	  y  y  2 sin 3x.
SOLUTION
A natural ﬁrst guess for a particular solution would be A sin 3x. But
because successive differentiations of sin 3x produce sin 3x and cos 3x, we are
prompted instead to assume a particular solution that includes both of these terms:
Differentiating yp and substituting the results into the differential equation gives,
after regrouping,
or
From the resulting system of equations,
we get 
and 
. A particular solution of the equation is
As we mentioned, the form that we assume for the particular solution yp is an
educated guess; it is not a blind guess. This educated guess must take into consider-
ation not only the types of functions that make up g(x) but also, as we shall see in
Example 4, the functions that make up the complementary function yc.
yp  6
73 cos 3x  16
73 sin 3x.
B  16
73
A  6
73
8A  3B  0,    3A  8B  2,
equal
8A  3B
cos 3x 
3A  8B
sin 3x  0 cos 3x  2 sin 3x.
y 	p  yp  yp  (8A  3B) cos 3x  (3A  8B) sin 3x  2 sin 3x
yp  A cos 3x  B sin 3x.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
(4)
y	p  2yp  3yp  3Ax  2A  3B  3Cxe2x  (2C  3E )e2x  4x  5  6xe2x.
From this identity we obtain the four equations
The last equation in this system results from the interpretation that the coefﬁcient of
e2x in the right member of (4) is zero. Solving, we ﬁnd 
,
, C  2, and
. Consequently,
Step 3.
The general solution of the equation is
In light of the superposition principle (Theorem 4.1.7) we can also approach
Example 3 from the viewpoint of solving two simpler problems. You should verify
that substituting
and
yields, in turn, 
. A particular solution of (3)
is then 
.
The next example illustrates that sometimes the "obvious" assumption for the
form of yp is not a correct assumption.
yp  yp1  yp2
yp1  4
3 x  23
9  and yp2  2x  4
3e2x
 yp2  Cxe2x  Ee2x     into     y	  2y  3y  6xe2x
 yp1  Ax  B
 into 
 y	  2y  3y  4x  5
y  c1ex  c2e3x  4
3 x  23
9 2x  4
3 e2x.
yp   4
3 x  23
9  2xe2x  4
3 e2x.
E  4
3
B  23
9
A  4
3
3A  4,    2A  3B  5,    3C  6,    2C  3E  0.
EXAMPLE 3
Forming yp by Superposition
Solve 
(3)
SOLUTION
Step 1.
First, the solution of the associated homogeneous equation 
y	  2y  3y  0 is found to be yc  c1ex  c2e3x.
Step 2.
Next, the presence of 4x  5 in g(x) suggests that the particular solution
includes a linear polynomial. Furthermore, because the derivative of the product xe2x
produces 2xe2x and e2x, we also assume that the particular solution includes both
xe2x and e2x. In other words, g is the sum of two basic kinds of functions:
Correspondingly, the superposition principle for nonhomogeneous equations
(Theorem 4.1.7) suggests that we seek a particular solution
where 
. Substituting
into the given equation (3) and grouping like terms gives
yp  Ax  B  Cxe2x  Ee2x
yp1  Ax  B and yp2  Cxe2x  Ee2x
yp  yp1  yp2,
g(x)  g1(x)  g2(x)  polynomial  exponentials.
y	  2y  3y  4x  5  6xe2x.
EXAMPLE 4
A Glitch in the Method
Find a particular solution of y	  5y  4y  8ex.
SOLUTION
Differentiation of ex produces no new functions. Therefore proceeding
as we did in the earlier examples, we can reasonably assume a particular solution of
the form yp  Aex. But substitution of this expression into the differential equation
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

yields the contradictory statement 0  8ex, so we have clearly made the wrong guess
for yp.
The difﬁculty here is apparent on examining the complementary function
yc  c1ex  c2e4x. Observe that our assumption Aex is already present in yc. This
means that ex is a solution of the associated homogeneous differential equation, and
a constant multiple Aex when substituted into the differential equation necessarily
produces zero.
What then should be the form of yp? Inspired by Case II of Section 4.3, let's see
whether we can ﬁnd a particular solution of the form
Substituting
and
into the differential equation
and simplifying gives
From the last equality we see that the value of A is now determined as A   .
Therefore a particular solution of the given equation is 
The difference in the procedures used in Examples 1-3 and in Example 4
suggests that we consider two cases. The first case reflects the situation in
Examples 1-3.
Case I
No function in the assumed particular solution is a solution of the asso-
ciated homogeneous differential equation.
In Table 4.4.1 we illustrate some speciﬁc examples of g(x) in (1) along with the
corresponding form of the particular solution. We are, of course, taking for granted
that no function in the assumed particular solution yp is duplicated by a function in
the complementary function yc.
yp  8
3xex.
8
3
y	p  5yp  4yp  3Aex  8ex.
y	p  Axex  2Aex
yp  Axex  Aex
yp  Axex.
4.4
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—SUPERPOSITION APPROACH
●
143
TABLE 4.4.1
Trial Particular Solutions
g(x)
Form of yp
1. 1 (any constant)
A
2. 5x  7
Ax  B
3. 3x2  2
Ax2  Bx  C
4. x3  x  1
Ax3  Bx2  Cx  E
5. sin 4x
A cos 4x  B sin 4x
6. cos 4x
A cos 4x  B sin 4x
7. e5x
Ae5x
8. (9x  2)e5x
(Ax  B)e5x
9. x2e5x
(Ax2  Bx  C)e5x
10. e3x sin 4x
Ae3x cos 4x  Be3x sin 4x
11. 5x2 sin 4x
(Ax2  Bx  C) cos 4x  (Ex2  Fx  G) sin 4x
12. xe3x cos 4x
(Ax  B)e3x cos 4x  (Cx  E)e3x sin 4x
EXAMPLE 5
Forms of Particular Solutions—Case I
Determine the form of a particular solution of
(a) y	  8y  25y  5x3ex  7ex
(b) y	  4y  x cos x
SOLUTION
(a) We can write g(x)  (5x3  7)ex. Using entry 9 in Table 4.4.1 as
a model, we assume a particular solution of the form
Note that there is no duplication between the terms in yp and the terms in the comple-
mentary function yc  e4x(c1 cos 3x  c2 sin 3x).
yp  (Ax3  Bx2  Cx  E)ex.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
(b) The function g(x)  x cos x is similar to entry 11 in Table 4.4.1 except, of course,
that we use a linear rather than a quadratic polynomial and cos x and sin x instead of
cos 4x and sin 4x in the form of yp:
Again observe that there is no duplication of terms between yp
and 
yc  c1 cos 2x  c2 sin 2x.
If g(x) consists of a sum of, say, m terms of the kind listed in the table, then (as in
Example 3) the assumption for a particular solution yp consists of the sum of the trial
forms 
corresponding to these terms:
The foregoing sentence can be put another way.
Form Rule for Case I
The form of yp is a linear combination of all linearly
independent functions that are generated by repeated differentiations of g(x).
yp  yp1  yp2      ypm.
yp1, yp2, . . . , ypm
yp  (Ax  B) cos x  (Cx  E) sin x.
EXAMPLE 6
Forming yp by Superposition—Case I
Determine the form of a particular solution of
SOLUTION
Corresponding to 3x2 we assume
Corresponding to  5 sin 2x we assume
Corresponding to 7xe6x we assume
The assumption for the particular solution is then
No term in this assumption duplicates a term in yc  c1e2x  c2e7x.
Case II
A function in the assumed particular solution is also a solution of the
associated homogeneous differential equation.
The next example is similar to Example 4.
yp  yp1  yp2  yp3  Ax2  Bx  C  E cos 2x  F sin 2x  (Gx  H)e6x.
yp3  (Gx  H)e6x.
yp2  E cos 2x  F sin 2x.
yp1  Ax2  Bx  C.
y	  9y  14y  3x2  5 sin 2x  7xe6x.
EXAMPLE 7
Particular Solution—Case II
Find a particular solution of y	  2y  y  ex.
SOLUTION
The complementary function is yc  c1ex  c2xex. As in Example 4,
the assumption yp  Aex will fail, since it is apparent from yc that ex is a solution of
the associated homogeneous equation y	  2y  y  0. Moreover, we will not be
able to ﬁnd a particular solution of the form yp  Axex, since the term xex is also
duplicated in yc. We next try
Substituting into the given differential equation yields 2Aex  ex, so 
Thus a
particular solution is yp  1
2x2ex.
A  1
2.
yp  Ax2ex.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Suppose again that g(x) consists of m terms of the kind given in Table 4.4.1, and
suppose further that the usual assumption for a particular solution is
where the 
are the trial particular solution forms corresponding to
these terms. Under the circumstances described in Case II, we can make up the
following general rule.
Multiplication Rule for Case II
If any 
contains terms that duplicate terms in
yc, then that 
must be multiplied by xn, where n is the smallest positive integer
that eliminates that duplication.
ypi
ypi
ypi , i  1, 2, . . . , m
yp  yp1  yp2      ypm,
4.4
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—SUPERPOSITION APPROACH
●
145
EXAMPLE 8
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve y	  y  4x  10 sin x, y(p)  0, y(p)  2.
SOLUTION
The solution of the associated homogeneous equation y	  y  0
is yc  c1 cos x  c2 sin x. Because g(x)  4x  10 sin x is the sum of a linear
polynomial and a sine function, our normal assumption for yp, from entries 2 and 5
of Table 4.4.1, would be the sum of 
and 
:
(5)
But there is an obvious duplication of the terms cos x and sin x in this assumed form
and two terms in the complementary function. This duplication can be eliminated by
simply multiplying 
by x. Instead of (5) we now use
(6)
Differentiating this expression and substituting the results into the differential
equation gives
and so A  4, B  0, 2C  10, and 2E  0. The solutions of the system are
immediate: A  4, B  0, C  5, and E  0. Therefore from (6) we obtain
yp  4x  5x cos x. The general solution of the given equation is
We now apply the prescribed initial conditions to the general solution of the
equation. First, y(p)  c1 cos p  c2 sin p  4p  5p cos p  0 yields c1  9p,
since cos p  1 and sin p  0. Next, from the derivative
and
we ﬁnd c2  7. The solution of the initial-value is then
y  9 cos x  7 sin x  4x  5x cos x.
 y()  9 sin   c2 cos   4  5 sin   5 cos   2
 y  9 sin x  c2 cos x  4  5x sin x  5 cos x
y  yc  yp  c1 cos x  c2 sin x  4x  5x cos x.
y	p  yp  Ax  B  2C sin x  2E cos x  4x  10 sin x,
yp  Ax  B  Cx cos x  Ex sin x.
yp2
yp  Ax  B  C cos x  E sin x.
yp2  C cos x  E sin x
yp1  Ax  B
EXAMPLE 9
Using the Multiplication Rule
Solve y	  6y  9y  6x2  2  12e3x.
SOLUTION
The complementary function is yc  c1e3x  c2xe3x. And so, based on
entries 3 and 7 of Table 4.4.1, the usual assumption for a particular solution would be
yp  Ax2  Bx  C  Ee3x.
yp1
yp2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

146
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Inspection of these functions shows that the one term in 
is duplicated in yc. If
we multiply 
by x, we note that the term xe3x is still part of yc. But multiplying
by x2 eliminates all duplications. Thus the operative form of a particular
solution is
Differentiating this last form, substituting into the differential equation, and collecting
like terms gives
yp  Ax2  Bx  C  Ex2e3x.
yp2
yp2
yp2
y	p  6yp  9yp  9Ax2  (12A  9B)x  2A  6B  9C  2Ee3x  6x2  2  12e3x.
It follows from this identity that A  , B  , C  , and E  6. Hence the general
solution y  yc  yp is y  c1e3x  c2xe3x  x2  x   6x2e3x.
2
3
8
9
2
3
2
3
8
9
2
3
EXAMPLE 10
Third-Order DE—Case I
Solve y  y	  ex cos x.
SOLUTION
From the characteristic equation m3  m2  0 we ﬁnd m1  m2  0
and m3  1. Hence the complementary function of the equation is 
yc  c1  c2x  c3ex. With g(x)  ex cos x, we see from entry 10 of Table 4.4.1
that we should assume that
Because there are no functions in yp that duplicate functions in the complementary
solution, we proceed in the usual manner. From
we get 2A  4B  1 and 4A  2B  0. This system gives 
and 
,
so a particular solution is 
. The general solution of the
equation is
y  yc  yp  c1  c2x  c3ex  1
10 ex cos x  1
5 ex sin x.
yp   1
10 ex cos x  1
5 ex sin x
B  1
5
A   1
10
y	p  y	p  (2A  4B)ex cos x  (4A  2B)ex sin x  ex cos x
yp  Aex cos x  Bex sin x.
EXAMPLE 11
Fourth-Order DE—Case II
Determine the form of a particular solution of y(4)  y  1  x2ex.
SOLUTION
Comparing yc  c1  c2x  c3x2  c4ex with our normal assumption
for a particular solution
we see that the duplications between yc and yp are eliminated when 
is multiplied
by x3 and 
is multiplied by x. Thus the correct assumption for a particular solution
is yp  Ax3  Bx3ex  Cx2ex  Exex.
yp2
yp1
yp  A  Bx2ex  Cxex  Eex,
yp1
yp2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.4
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—SUPERPOSITION APPROACH
●
147
REMARKS
(i) In Problems 27-36 in Exercises 4.4 you are asked to solve initial-value
problems, and in Problems 37-40 you are asked to solve boundary-value
problems. As illustrated in Example 8, be sure to apply the initial conditions or
the boundary conditions to the general solution y  yc  yp. Students often
make the mistake of applying these conditions only to the complementary
function yc because it is that part of the solution that contains the constants
c1, c2, . . . , cn.
(ii) From the "Form Rule for Case I" on page 144 of this section you see why
the method of undetermined coefﬁcients is not well suited to nonhomogeneous
linear DEs when the input function g(x) is something other than one of the four
basic types highlighted in color on page 140. For example, if P(x) is a polyno-
mial, then continued differentiation of P(x)eax sin bx will generate an indepen-
dent set containing only a ﬁnite number of functions—all of the same type,
namely, a polynomial times eax sin bx or a polynomial times eax cos bx. On
the other hand, repeated differentiation of input functions such as g(x)  ln x
or g(x)  tan1x generates an independent set containing an inﬁnite number of
functions:
 derivatives of  tan1x:  
1
1  x2, 
2x
(1  x2)2, 2  6x2
(1  x2)3 , . . . .
 derivatives of  ln x:  1
x
, 1
x2 , 2
x3, . . . ,
EXERCISES 4.4
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-5.
In Problems 1-26 solve the given differential equation by
undetermined coefﬁcients.
1. y	  3y  2y  6
2. 4y	  9y  15
3. y	  10y  25y  30x  3
4. y	  y  6y  2x
5.
y	  y  y  x2  2x
6. y	  8y  20y  100x2  26xex
7. y	  3y  48x2e3x
8. 4y	  4y  3y  cos 2x
9. y	  y  3
10. y	  2y  2x  5  e2x
11.
12. y	  16y  2e4x
13. y	  4y  3 sin 2x
14. y	  4y  (x2  3) sin 2x
15. y	  y  2x sin x
y	  y  1
4 y  3  ex/2
1
4
16. y	  5y  2x3  4x2  x  6
17. y	  2y  5y  ex cos 2x
18. y	  2y  2y  e2x(cos x  3 sin x)
19. y	  2y  y  sin x  3 cos 2x
20. y	  2y  24y  16  (x  2)e4x
21. y  6y	  3  cos x
22. y  2y	  4y  8y  6xe2x
23. y  3y	  3y  y  x  4ex
24. y  y	  4y  4y  5  ex  e2x
25. y(4)  2y	  y  (x  1)2
26. y(4)  y	  4x  2xex
In Problems 27-36 solve the given initial-value problem.
27. y	  4y  2,
28. 2y	  3y  2y  14x2  4x  11,
y(0)  0, y(0)  0
29. 5y	  y  6x,
y(0)  0, y(0)  10
30. y	  4y  4y  (3  x)e2x,
y(0)  2, y(0)  5
31. y	  4y  5y  35e4x,
y(0)  3, y(0)  1
y(p>8)  1
2, y(p>8)  2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

148
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
32. y	  y  cosh x,
y(0)  2, y(0)  12
33.
,
x(0)  0, x(0)  0
34.
,
x(0)  0, x(0)  0
35. y  2y	  y  2  24ex  40e5x,
36. y  8y  2x  5  8e2x,
y(0)  5, y(0)  3,
y	(0)  4
In Problems 37-40 solve the given boundary-value problem.
37. y	  y  x2  1,
y(0)  5, y(1)  0
38. y	  2y  2y  2x  2,
y(0)  0, y(p)  p
39. y	  3y  6x,
y(0)  0, y(1)  y(1)  0
40. y	  3y  6x,
y(0)  y(0)  0, y(1)  0
In Problems 41 and 42 solve the given initial-value problem
in which the input function g(x) is discontinuous. [Hint:
Solve each problem on two intervals, and then ﬁnd a solu-
tion so that y and y are continuous at x  p2 (Problem 41)
and at x  p (Problem 42).]
41. y	  4y  g(x),
y(0)  1, y(0)  2,
where
42. y	  2y  10y  g(x),
y(0)  0, y(0)  0,
where
Discussion Problems
43. Consider the differential equation ay	  by  cy  ekx,
where a, b, c, and k are constants. The auxiliary
equation of the associated homogeneous equation is
am2  bm  c  0.
(a) If k is not a root of the auxiliary equation, show
that we can ﬁnd a particular solution of the form
yp  Aekx, where A  1(ak2  bk  c).
(b) If k is a root of the auxiliary equation of multiplicity
one, show that we can ﬁnd a particular solution of
the form yp  Axekx, where A  1(2ak  b).
Explain how we know that k  b(2a).
(c) If k is a root of the auxiliary equation of multiplicity
two, show that we can ﬁnd a particular solution of the
form y  Ax2ekx, where A  1(2a).
44. Discuss how the method of this section can be used
to ﬁnd a particular solution of y	  y  sin x cos 2x.
Carry out your idea.
g(x) 	
20, 0  x  
0,   x  
g(x) 	
sin x, 0  x  >2
0,   x  >2
y	(0)  9
2
y(0)  5
2,
y(0)  1
2,
d 2x
dt 2  2x  F0 cos t
d 2x
dt2  2x  F0 sin t
45. Without solving, match a solution curve of y	  y  f(x)
shown in the ﬁgure with one of the following functions:
(i) f(x)  1,
(ii) f(x)  ex,
(iii) f(x)  ex,
(iv) f(x)  sin 2x,
(v) f(x)  ex sin x,
(vi) f(x)  sin x.
Brieﬂy discuss your reasoning.
x
y
FIGURE 4.4.1
Solution curve
FIGURE 4.4.3
Solution curve
FIGURE 4.4.4
Solution curve
FIGURE 4.4.2
Solution curve
x
y
x
y
x
y
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Computer Lab Assignments
In Problems 46 and 47 ﬁnd a particular solution of the given
differential equation. Use a CAS as an aid in carrying out
differentiations, simpliﬁcations, and algebra.
46. y	  4y  8y  (2x2  3x)e2x cos 2x
 (10x2  x  1)e2x sin 2x
47. y(4)  2y	  y  2 cos x  3x sin x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.5
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—ANNIHILATOR APPROACH
●
149
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—ANNIHILATOR APPROACH
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Review Theorems 4.1.6 and 4.1.7 (Section 4.1)
INTRODUCTION
We saw in Section 4.1 that an nth-order differential equation can be written
(1)
where Dky  dkydxk, k  0, 1, . . . , n. When it suits our purpose, (1) is also written as L(y)  g(x),
where L denotes the linear nth-order differential, or polynomial, operator
(2)
Not only is the operator notation a helpful shorthand, but also on a very practical level the
application of differential operators enables us to justify the somewhat mind-numbing rules for
determining the form of particular solution yp that were presented in the preceding section. In this
section there are no special rules; the form of yp follows almost automatically once we have found
an appropriate linear differential operator that annihilates g(x) in (1). Before investigating how this
is done, we need to examine two concepts.
anDn  an1Dn1      a1D  a0.
anDny  an1Dn1y      a1Dy  a0y  g(x),
4.5
Factoring Operators
When the coefﬁcients ai, i  0, 1, . . . , n are real con-
stants, a linear differential operator (1) can be factored whenever the characteristic
polynomial anmn  an1mn1      a1m  a0 factors. In other words, if r1 is a
root of the auxiliary equation
then L  (D  r1) P(D), where the polynomial expression P(D) is a linear differential
operator of order n  1. For example, if we treat D as an algebraic quantity, then the
operator D2  5D  6 can be factored as (D  2)(D  3) or as (D  3)(D  2). Thus
if a function y  f(x) possesses a second derivative, then
This illustrates a general property:
Factors of a linear differential operator with constant coefﬁcients commute.
A differential equation such as y	  4y  4y  0 can be written as
(D2  4D  4)y  0
or
(D  2)(D  2)y  0
or
(D  2)2y  0.
Annihilator Operator
If L is a linear differential operator with constant co-
efﬁcients and f is a sufﬁciently differentiable function such that
then L is said to be an annihilator of the function. For example, a constant function
y  k is annihilated by D, since Dk  0. The function y  x is annihilated by the
differential operator D2 since the ﬁrst and second derivatives of x are 1 and 0,
respectively. Similarly, D3x2  0, and so on.
L( f (x))  0,
(D2  5D  6)y  (D  2)(D  3)y  (D  3)(D  2)y.
anmn  an1mn1      a1m  a0  0,
The differential operator Dn annihilates each of the functions
1,
x,
x2,
. . . ,
xn1.
(3)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

150
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
As an immediate consequence of (3) and the fact that differentiation can be done
term by term, a polynomial
(4)
can be annihilated by ﬁnding an operator that annihilates the highest power of x.
The functions that are annihilated by a linear nth-order differential operator L
are simply those functions that can be obtained from the general solution of the
homogeneous differential equation L(y)  0.
c0  c1x  c2x2      cn1x n1
The differential operator (D  a)n annihilates each of the functions
eax,
xeax,
x2eax,
. . . ,
xn1eax.
(5)
To see this, note that the auxiliary equation of the homogeneous equation
(D  a)ny  0 is (m  a)n  0. Since a is a root of multiplicity n, the general
solution is
(6)
y  c1eax  c2xeax      cnxn1eax.
EXAMPLE 1
Annihilator Operators
Find a differential operator that annihilates the given function.
(a) 1  5x2  8x3
(b) e3x
(c) 4e2x  10xe2x
SOLUTION
(a) From (3) we know that D4x3  0, so it follows from (4) that
(b) From (5), with a  3 and n  1, we see that
(c) From (5) and (6), with a  2 and n  2, we have
When a and b, b  0 are real numbers, the quadratic formula reveals that
[m2  2am  (a2  b2)]n  0 has complex roots a  ib, a  ib, both of multi-
plicity n. From the discussion at the end of Section 4.3 we have the next result.
(D  2)2(4e2x  10xe2x)  0.
(D  3)e3x  0.
D4(1  5x2  8x3)  0.
The differential operator [D2  2aD  (a2  b2)]n annihilates each of the
functions
(7)
ex cos x, xex cos x, x2ex cos x, . . . , xn1ex cos x,
ex sin x, xex sin x,  x2ex sin x, . . . , xn1ex sin x.
EXAMPLE 2
Annihilator Operator
Find a differential operator that annihilates 5ex cos 2x  9ex sin 2x.
SOLUTION
Inspection of the functions ex cos 2x and ex sin 2x shows that
a  1 and b  2. Hence from (7) we conclude that D2  2D  5 will annihilate
each function. Since D2  2D  5 is a linear operator, it will annihilate any linear
combination of these functions such as 5ex cos 2x  9ex sin 2x.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When a  0 and n  1, a special case of (7) is
(8)
For example, D2  16 will annihilate any linear combination of sin 4x and cos 4x.
We are often interested in annihilating the sum of two or more functions. As we
have just seen in Examples 1 and 2, if L is a linear differential operator such
that L(y1)  0 and L(y2)  0, then L will annihilate the linear combination
c1y1(x)  c2y2(x). This is a direct consequence of Theorem 4.1.2. Let us now suppose
that L1 and L2 are linear differential operators with constant coefﬁcients such that L1
annihilates y1(x) and L2 annihilates y2(x), but L1(y2)  0 and L2(y1)  0. Then the
product of differential operators L1L2 annihilates the sum c1y1(x)  c2y2(x). We can
easily demonstrate this, using linearity and the fact that L1L2  L2L1:
For example, we know from (3) that D2 annihilates 7  x and from (8) that 
D2  16 annihilates sin 4x. Therefore the product of operators D2(D2  16) will
annihilate the linear combination 7  x  6 sin 4x.
Note
The differential operator that annihilates a function is not unique.
We saw in part (b) of Example 1 that D  3 will annihilate e3x, but so will
differential operators of higher order as long as D  3 is one of the factors of the op-
erator. For example, (D  3)(D  1), (D  3)2, and D3(D  3) all annihilate e3x.
(Verify this.) As a matter of course, when we seek a differential annihilator for a
function y  f(x), we want the operator of lowest possible order that does the job.
Undetermined Coefﬁcients
This brings us to the point of the preceding dis-
cussion. Suppose that L(y)  g(x) is a linear differential equation with constant
coefﬁcients and that the input g(x) consists of ﬁnite sums and products of the func-
tions listed in (3), (5), and (7)—that is, g(x) is a linear combination of functions of
the form
where m is a nonnegative integer and a and b are real numbers. We now know
that such a function g(x) can be annihilated by a differential operator L1 of
lowest order, consisting of a product of the operators Dn, (D  a)n, and 
(D2  2aD  a2  b2)n. Applying L1 to both sides of the equation L(y)  g(x)
yields L1L(y)  L1(g(x))  0. By solving the homogeneous higher-order equation
L1L(y)  0, we can discover the form of a particular solution yp for the original
nonhomogeneous equation L(y)  g(x). We then substitute this assumed form into
L(y)  g(x) to ﬁnd an explicit particular solution. This procedure for determining
yp, called the method of undetermined coefﬁcients, is illustrated in the next
several examples.
Before proceeding, recall that the general solution of a nonhomogeneous
linear differential equation L(y)  g(x) is y  yc  yp, where yc is the comple-
mentary function—that is, the general solution of the associated homogeneous
equation L(y)  0. The general solution of each equation L(y)  g(x) is defined
on the interval (
, 
).
k (constant), xm, xmex, xmex cos x, and xmex sin x,
L1L2(y1  y2)  L1L2(y1)  L1L2(y2)
 L2L1(y1)  L1L2(y2)
 L2[L1(y1)]  L1[L2(y2)]  0.  
zero
zero
(D2  2) 	
cos x
sin x  0.
4.5
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—ANNIHILATOR APPROACH
●
151
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 3
General Solution Using Undetermined Coefﬁcients
Solve 
(9)
SOLUTION
Step 1.
First, we solve the homogeneous equation y	  3y  2y  0.
Then, from the auxiliary equation m2  3m  2  (m  1)(m  2)  0 we ﬁnd
m1  1 and m2  2, and so the complementary function is
yc  c1ex  c2e2x.
Step 2.
Now, since 4x2 is annihilated by the differential operator D3, we see that
D3(D2  3D  2)y  4D3x2 is the same as
D3(D2  3D  2)y  0.
(10)
The auxiliary equation of the ﬁfth-order equation in (10),
m3(m2  3m  2)  0
or
m3(m  1)(m  2)  0,
has roots m1  m2  m3  0, m4  1, and m5  2. Thus its general solution
must be
y  c1  c2x  c3x2 
.
(11)
The terms in the shaded box in (11) constitute the complementary function of the
original equation (9). We can then argue that a particular solution yp of (9) should
also satisfy equation (10). This means that the terms remaining in (11) must be the
basic form of yp:
(12)
where, for convenience, we have replaced c1, c2, and c3 by A, B, and C, respectively.
For (12) to be a particular solution of (9), it is necessary to ﬁnd speciﬁc coefﬁcients
A, B, and C. Differentiating (12), we have
and substitution into (9) then gives
Because the last equation is supposed to be an identity, the coefﬁcients of like powers
of x must be equal:
That is
(13)
Solving the equations in (13) gives A  7, B  6, and C  2. Thus
yp  7  6x  2x2.
Step 3.
The general solution of the equation in (9) is y  yc  yp or
y  c1ex  c2e2x  7  6x  2x2.
2C  4,    2B  6C  0,    2A  3B  2C  0.
equal
2C
x2 
2B  6C
x 
2A  3B  2C
 4x2  0x  0.
y	p  3yp  2yp  2C  3B  6Cx  2A  2Bx  2Cx2  4x2.
yp  B  2Cx,    y	p  2C,
yp  A  Bx  Cx2,
c4ex  c5e2x
y	  3y  2y  4x2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.5
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—ANNIHILATOR APPROACH
●
153
EXAMPLE 4
General Solution Using Undetermined Coefﬁcients
Solve 
(14)
SOLUTION
Step 1.
The auxiliary equation for the associated homogeneous equa-
tion y	  3y  0 is m2  3m  m(m  3)  0, so yc  c1  c2e3x.
Step 2.
Now, since (D  3)e3x  0 and (D2  1) sin x  0, we apply the differen-
tial operator (D  3)(D2  1) to both sides of (14):
(15)
The auxiliary equation of (15) is
Thus
y 
After excluding the linear combination of terms in the box that corresponds to yc, we
arrive at the form of yp:
Substituting yp in (14) and simplifying yield
Equating coefﬁcients gives 3A  8, B  3C  0, and 3B  C  4. We ﬁnd 
,
, and 
, and consequently,
Step 3.
The general solution of (14) is then
y  c1  c2e3x  8
3 xe3x  6
5 cos x  2
5 sin x.
yp  8
3 xe3x  6
5 cos x  2
5 sin x.
C  2
5
B  6
5
A  8
3
y	p  3yp  3Ae3x  (B  3C) cos x  (3B  C) sin x  8e3x  4 sin x.
yp  Axe3x  B cos x  C sin x.
 c3xe3x  c4 cos x  c5 sin x.
c1  c2e3x
(m  3)(m2  1)(m2  3m)  0    or    m(m  3)2(m2  1)  0.
(D  3)(D2  1)(D2  3D)y  0.
y	  3y  8e3x  4 sin x.
EXAMPLE 5
General Solution Using Undetermined Coefﬁcients
Solve
(16)
SOLUTION
The complementary function is yc  c1 cos x  c2 sin x. Now by com-
paring cos x and x cos x with the functions in the ﬁrst row of (7), we see that a  0
and n  1, and so (D2  1)2 is an annihilator for the right-hand member of the equa-
tion in (16). Applying this operator to the differential equation gives
Since i and i are both complex roots of multiplicity 3 of the auxiliary equation of
the last differential equation, we conclude that
y 
We substitute
into (16) and simplify:
  x cos x  cos x.
 y	p  yp  4 Ex cos x  4 Cx sin x  (2B  2C) cos x  (2A  2E) sin x
yp  Ax cos x  Bx sin x  Cx2 cos x  Ex2 sin x
 c3x cos x  c4x sin x  c5x2 cos x  c6x2 sin x.
c1 cos x  c2 sin x
(D2  1)2 (D2  1)y  0    or    (D2  1)3y  0.
y	  y  x cos x  cos x.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
y  c1  c2x  c3x2  c4x3  c5e2x  c6xe2x  c7x2e2x  c8x3e2x  c9x4e2x  c10e5x.
(20)
Because the linear combination 
corresponds to the complemen-
tary function of (19), the remaining terms in (20) give the form of a particular solu-
tion of the differential equation:
Summary of the Method
For your convenience the method of undeter-
mined coefﬁcients is summarized as follows.
yp  Ax  Bx2  Cx3  Ex2e2x  Fx3e2x  Gx4e2x  He5x.
c1  c5e2x  c6xe2x
EXAMPLE 6
Form of a Particular Solution
Determine the form of a particular solution for
(17)
SOLUTION
The 
complementary 
function 
for 
the 
given 
equation 
is
yc  c1ex  c2xex.
Now from (7), with a  2, b  1, and n  1, we know that
Applying the operator D2  4D  5 to (17) gives
(18)
Since the roots of the auxiliary equation of (18) are 2  i, 2  i, 1, and 1, we
see from
y 
that a particular solution of (17) can be found with the form
yp  Ae2x cos x  Be2x sin x.
 c3e2x cos x  c4e2x sin x
c1ex  c2xex
(D2  4D  5)(D2  2D  1)y  0.
(D2  4D  5)e2x cos x  0.
y	  2y  y  10e2x cos x.
Equating coefﬁcients gives the equations 4E  1, 4C  0, 2B  2C  1, and
2A  2E  0, from which we ﬁnd 
, C  0, and 
. Hence the
general solution of (16) is
.
y  c1 cos x  c2 sin x  1
4 x cos x  1
2 x sin x  1
4 x2 sin x
E  1
4
A  1
4, B  1
2
EXAMPLE 7
Form of a Particular Solution
Determine the form of a particular solution for
(19)
SOLUTION
Observe that
Therefore D3(D  2)3(D  5) applied to (19) gives
or
The roots of the auxiliary equation for the last differential equation are easily seen to
be 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, and 5. Hence
 D4(D  2)5(D  5)y  0.
 D3(D  2)3(D  5)(D3  4D2  4D)y  0
D3(5x2  6x)  0,    (D  2)3x2e2x  0,    and    (D  5)e5x  0.
y	  4y	  4y  5x2  6x  4x2e2x  3e5x.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.5
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—ANNIHILATOR APPROACH
●
155
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS—ANNIHILATOR APPROACH
The differential equation L(y)  g(x) has constant coefﬁcients, and the func-
tion g(x) consists of ﬁnite sums and products of constants, polynomials, expo-
nential functions eax, sines, and cosines.
(i)
Find the complementary solution yc for the homogeneous equation
L(y)  0.
(ii)
Operate on both sides of the nonhomogeneous equation L(y)  g(x)
with a differential operator L1 that annihilates the function g(x).
(iii)
Find the general solution of the higher-order homogeneous differential
equation L1L(y)  0.
(iv)
Delete from the solution in step (iii) all those terms that are duplicated
in the complementary solution yc found in step (i). Form a linear
combination yp of the terms that remain. This is the form of a particular
solution of L(y)  g(x).
(v)
Substitute yp found in step (iv) into L(y)  g(x). Match coefﬁcients
of the various functions on each side of the equality, and solve the
resulting system of equations for the unknown coefﬁcients in yp.
(vi)
With the particular solution found in step (v), form the general solution
y  yc  yp of the given differential equation.
REMARKS
The method of undetermined coefﬁcients is not applicable to linear differential
equations with variable coefﬁcients nor is it applicable to linear equations with
constant coefﬁcients when g(x) is a function such as
and so on. Differential equations in which the input g(x) is a function of this
last kind will be considered in the next section.
g(x)  ln x,    g(x)  1
x,    g(x)  tan x,    g(x)  sin1 x,
EXERCISES 4.5
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-5.
In Problems 1-10 write the given differential equation in
the form L(y)  g(x), where L is a linear differential opera-
tor with constant coefﬁcients. If possible, factor L.
1. 9y	  4y  sin x
2. y	  5y  x2  2x
3. y	  4y  12y  x  6
4. 2y	  3y  2y  1
5. y  10y	  25y  ex
6. y  4y  ex cos 2x
7. y  2y	  13y  10y  xex
8. y  4y	  3y  x2 cos x  3x
9. y(4)  8y  4
10. y(4)  8y	  16y  (x3  2x)e4x
In Problems 11-14 verify that the given differential operator
annihilates the indicated functions.
11. D4;
y  10x3  2x
12. 2D  1;
y  4ex/2
13. (D  2)(D  5);
y  e2x  3e5x
14. D2  64;
y  2 cos 8x  5 sin 8x
In Problems 15-26 ﬁnd a linear differential operator that
annihilates the given function.
15. 1  6x  2x3
16. x3(1  5x)
17. 1  7e2x
18. x  3xe6x
19. cos 2x
20. 1  sin x
21. 13x  9x2  sin 4x
22. 8x  sin x  10 cos 5x
23. ex  2xex  x2ex
24. (2  ex)2
25. 3  ex cos 2x
26. ex sin x  e2x cos x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
In Problems 27-34 ﬁnd linearly independent functions that
are annihilated by the given differential operator.
27. D5
28. D2  4D
29. (D  6)(2D  3)
30. D2  9D  36
31. D2  5
32. D2  6D  10
33. D3  10D2  25D
34. D2(D  5)(D  7)
In Problems 35-64 solve the given differential equation by
undetermined coefﬁcients.
35. y	  9y  54
36. 2y	  7y  5y  29
37. y	  y  3
38. y  2y	  y  10
39. y	  4y  4y  2x  6
40. y	  3y  4x  5
41. y  y	  8x2
42. y	  2y  y  x3  4x
43. y	  y  12y  e4x
44. y	  2y  2y  5e6x
45. y	  2y  3y  4ex  9
46. y	  6y  8y  3e2x  2x
47. y	  25y  6 sin x
48. y	  4y  4 cos x  3 sin x  8
49. y	  6y  9y  xe4x
50. y	  3y  10y  x(ex  1)
51. y	  y  x2ex  5
52. y	  2y  y  x2ex
53. y	  2y  5y  ex sin x
54. y	  y  1
4 y  ex(sin 3x  cos 3x)
55. y	  25y  20 sin 5x
56. y	  y  4 cos x  sin x
57. y	  y  y  x sin x
58. y	  4y  cos2x
59. y  8y	  6x2  9x  2
60. y  y	  y  y  xex  ex  7
61. y  3y	  3y  y  ex  x  16
62. 2y  3y	  3y  2y  (ex  ex)2
63. y(4)  2y  y	  ex  1
64. y(4)  4y	  5x2  e2x
In Problems 65-72 solve the given initial-value problem.
65. y	  64y  16,
y(0)  1, y(0)  0
66. y	  y  x,
y(0)  1, y(0)  0
67. y	  5y  x  2,
y(0)  0, y(0)  2
68. y	  5y  6y  10e2x,
y(0)  1, y(0)  1
69. y	  y  8 cos 2x  4 sin x,
70. y  2y	  y  xex  5,
y(0)  2, y(0)  2,
y	(0)  1
71. y	  4y  8y  x3,
y(0)  2, y(0)  4
72. y(4)  y  x  ex,
y(0)  0, y(0)  0, y	(0)  0,
y(0)  0
Discussion Problems
73. Suppose L is a linear differential operator that factors
but has variable coefﬁcients. Do the factors of L com-
mute? Defend your answer.
y(p>2) 1, y(p>2)  0
VARIATION OF PARAMETERS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Basic integration formulas and techniques from calculus
●Review Section 2.3 
INTRODUCTION
We pointed out in the discussions in Sections 4.4 and 4.5 that the method of
undetermined coefﬁcients has two inherent weaknesses that limit its wider application to linear
equations: The DE must have constant coefﬁcients and the input function 
must be of the type
listed in Table 4.4.1. In this section we examine a method for determining a particular solution 
of
a nonhomogeneous linear DE that has, in theory, no such restrictions on it. This method, due to the
eminent astronomer and mathematician Joseph Louis Lagrange (1736-1813), is known as varia-
tion of parameters. 
Before examining this powerful method for higher-order equations we revisit the solution of lin-
ear ﬁrst-order differential equations that have been put into standard form. The discussion under the
ﬁrst heading in this section is optional and is intended to motivate the main discussion of this section
that starts under the second heading. If pressed for time this motivational material could be assigned
for reading.
yp
g(x)
4.6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Linear First-Order DEs Revisited
In Section 2.3 we saw that the general so-
lution of a linear ﬁrst-order differential equation 
can be
found by ﬁrst rewriting it in the standard form
(1)
and assuming that 
are continuous on an common interval I. Using the in-
tegrating factor method, the general solution of (1) on the interval I, was found to be
The foregoing solution has the same form as that given in Theorem 4.1.6, namely,
In this case 
is a solution of the associated homogeneous
equation
(2)
and
(3)
is a particular solution of the nonhomogeneous equation (1). As a means of moti-
vating a method for solving nonhomogeneous linear equations of higher-order we
propose to rederive the particular solution (3) by a method known as variation of
parameters. 
Suppose that 
is a known solution of the homogeneous equation (2), that is, 
(4)
It is easily shown that 
is a solution of (4) and because the equation is
linear, 
is its general solution. Variation of parameters consists of ﬁnding a par-
ticular solution of (1) of the form 
In other words, we have replaced
the parameter
by a function
Substituting 
into (1) and using the Product Rule gives
0 because of (4)
4
so
By separating variables and integrating, we ﬁnd 
Hence the sought-after particular solution is
From the fact that 
we see the last result is identical to (3).
y1  eP(x)dx
yp  u1y1  y1
f(x)
y1(x)dx.
du1  f(x)
y1(x)dx     yields     u1 
f (x)
y1(x) dx.
u1:
y1
du1
dx  f (x).
 u1
dy1
dx  P(x)y1  y1
du1
dx  f (x)
 u1
dy1
dx  y1
du1
dx  P(x)u1y1  f(x) 
 d
dx [u1y1]  P(x)u1y1  f(x)
yp  u1y1
u1.
c1
yp  u1(x)y1(x).
c1y1(x)
y1  eP(x)dx
dy1
dx  P(x)y1  0.
y1
yp  eP(x)dxeP(x)dxf (x) dx
dy
dx  P(x)y  0
yc  c1eP(x)dx
y  yc  yp.
y  c1eP(x)dx  eP(x)dxeP(x)dxf(x)dx.
P(x) and f(x)
dy
dx  P(x)y  f(x)
a1(x)y  a0(x)y  g(x)
4.6
VARIATION OF PARAMETERS
●
157
The basic procedure is 
that used in Section 4.2. 
See (4) of Section 2.3. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

158
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Linear Second-Order DEs
Next we consider the case of a linear second-
order equation
(5)
although, as we shall see, variation of parameters extends to higher-order equations.
The method again begins by putting (5) into the standard form 
(6)
by dividing by the leading coefﬁcient 
In (6) we suppose that coefﬁcient func-
tions 
are continuous on some common interval I. As we have
already seen in Section 4.3, there is no difﬁculty in obtaining the complementary
solution 
the general solution of the associated homogeneous
equation of (6), when the coefﬁcients are constants. Analogous to the preceding dis-
cussion, we now ask: Can the parameters 
and 
in 
can be replaced with func-
tions 
and 
or "variable parameters," so that
(7)
is a particular solution of (6)? To answer this question we substitute (7) into (6).
Using the Product Rule to differentiate 
twice, we get
Substituting (7) and the foregoing derivatives into (6) and grouping terms yields
zero
zero
4
4
 y	p  u1y	1  y1u1  y1u	1  u1y1  u2y	2  y2u2  y2u	2  u2y2.
 yp  u1y1  y1u1  u2y2  y2u2
yp
y  u1(x)y1(x)  u2(x)y2(x)
u2,
u1
yc
c2
c1
yc  c1y1(x)  c2y2(x),
P(x), Q(x), and f(x)
a2(x).
y	  P(x)y  Q(x)y  f(x)
a2(x)y	  a1(x)y  a0(x)y  g(x),
(8)
  d
dx [y1u1  y2u2]  P[y1u1  y2u2]  y1u1  y2u2  f (x).
  d
dx [y1u1]  d
dx [y2u2]  P[y1u1  y2u2]  y1u1  y2u2
  y2u	2  u2y2  P[y1u1  y2u2]  y1u1  y2u2
 y	p  P(x)yp  Q(x)yp  u1[y	1  Py1  Qy1]  u2[y	2  Py2  Qy2]  y1u	1  u1y1
Because we seek to determine two unknown functions u1 and u2, reason dictates that
we need two equations. We can obtain these equations by making the further assump-
tion that the functions u1 and u2 satisfy 
This assumption does not
come out of the blue but is prompted by the ﬁrst two terms in (8), since if we demand
that 
, then (8) reduces to 
. We now have our
desired two equations, albeit two equations for determining the derivatives 
and
By Cramer's Rule, the solution of the system
can be expressed in terms of determinants:
,
(9)
where
.
(10)
The functions u1 and u2 are found by integrating the results in (9). The determinant
W is recognized as the Wronskian of y1 and y2. By linear independence of y1 and y2
on I, we know that W(y1(x), y2(x))  0 for every x in the interval.
W  
y1
y1
y2
y2,    W1  
0
f (x)
y2
y2,    W2  
y1
y1
0
f (x)
u1  W1
W   y2 f (x)
W
    and    u2  W2
W  y1 f (x)
W
 y1u1  y2u2  f (x)
 y1u1  y2u2  0
u2.
u1
y1u1  y2u2  f (x)
y1u1  y2u2  0
y1u1  y2u2  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.6
VARIATION OF PARAMETERS
●
159
Summary of the Method
Usually, it is not a good idea to memorize for-
mulas in lieu of understanding a procedure. However, the foregoing procedure is
too long and complicated to use each time we wish to solve a differential equation.
In this case it is more efﬁcient to simply use the formulas in (9). Thus to solve
a2y	  a1y  a0y  g(x), ﬁrst ﬁnd the complementary function yc  c1y1  c2y2
and then compute the Wronskian W( y1(x), y2(x)). By dividing by a2, we put the
equation into the standard form y	  Py  Qy  f(x) to determine f(x). We ﬁnd
u1 and u2 by integrating 
and 
, where W1 and W2 are deﬁned
as in (10). A particular solution is yp  u1y1  u2y2. The general solution of the
equation is then y  yc  yp.
u2  W2>W
u1  W1>W
W1  
         0
(x  1)e2x
  xe2x
2xe2x  e2x  (x  1)xe4x,    W2  
  e2x
2e2x
  0
(x  1)e2x  (x  1)e4x,
EXAMPLE 1
General Solution Using Variation of Parameters
Solve y	  4y  4y  (x  1)e2x.
SOLUTION
From the auxiliary equation m2  4m  4  (m  2)2  0 we have
yc  c1e2x  c2xe2x. With the identiﬁcations y1  e2x and y2  xe2x, we next com-
pute the Wronskian:
Since the given differential equation is already in form (6) (that is, the coefﬁcient of
y	 is 1), we identify f(x)  (x  1)e2x. From (10) we obtain
W(e2x, xe2x)  
  e2x
2e2x
  xe2x
2xe2x  e2x  e4x.
and so from (9)
It follows that 
and 
. Hence
and
y  yc  yp  c1e2x  c2xe2x  1
6x3e2x  1
2x2e2x.
yp  1
3x3  1
2x2e2x 
1
2x2  xxe2x  1
6x3e2x  1
2x2e2x
u2  1
2x2  x
u1  1
3x3  1
2x2
u1   (x  1)xe4x
e4x
 x2  x,    u2  (x  1)e4x
e4x
 x  1.
EXAMPLE 2
General Solution Using Variation of Parameters
Solve 4y	  36y  csc 3x.
SOLUTION
We ﬁrst put the equation in the standard form (6) by dividing by 4:
Because the roots of the auxiliary equation m2  9  0 are m1  3i and m2  3i, the
complementary function is yc  c1 cos 3x  c2 sin 3x. Using y1  cos 3x, y2  sin 3x,
and 
, we obtain
W1  
0
1
4 csc 3x
   sin 3x
3 cos 3x   1
4,    W2  
      cos 3x
3 sin 3x
0
1
4 csc 3x  1
4 cos 3x
sin 3x.
W(cos 3x, sin 3x)  
cos 3x
3 sin 3x
sin 3x
3 cos 3x  3,
f (x)  1
4 csc 3x
y	  9y  1
4 csc 3x.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Integrating
gives 
lnsin 3x. Thus a particular solution is
The general solution of the equation is
yp   1
12 x cos 3x  1
36 (sin 3x) ln sin 3x .
u1   1
12x and u2  1
36
u1  W1
W   1
12    and    u2  W2
W  1
12 cos 3x
sin 3x
EXAMPLE 3
General Solution Using Variation of Parameters
Solve 
SOLUTION
The auxiliary equation m2  1  0 yields m1  1 and m2  1.
Therefore yc  c1ex  c2ex. Now W(ex, ex)  2, and
Since the foregoing integrals are nonelementary, we are forced to write
and so
(12)
In Example 3 we can integrate on any interval [x0, x] that does not contain the origin.
We will solve the equation in Example 3 by an alternative method in Section 4.8.
Higher-Order Equations
The method that we have just examined for non
homogeneous second-order differential equations can be generalized to linear nth-order
equations that have been put into the standard form
(13)
If yc  c1y1  c2y2  cnyn is the complementary function for (13), then a
particular solution is
yp  u1(x)y1(x)  u2(x)y2(x)      un(x)yn(x),
y(n)  Pn1(x)y(n1)      P1(x)y  P0(x)y  f (x).
y  yc  yp  c1ex  c2ex  1
2 ex 
x
x0
 et
t  dt  1
2 ex 
x
x0
 et
t  dt.
yp  1
2 ex 
x
x0
 et
t  dt  1
2 ex 
x
x0
 et
t  dt,
 u2  ex(1>x)
2 ,
 u2   1
2 
x
x0
 et
t  dt.
 u1   ex(1>x)
2
,     u1  1
2 
x
x0
 et
t  dt,
y	  y  1
x.
(11)
y  ycyp  c1 cos 3x  c2 sin 3x  1
12 x cos 3x  1
36 (sin 3x) ln sin 3x .
Equation (11) represents the general solution of the differential equation on, say,
the interval (0, p6).
Constants of Integration
When computing the indeﬁnite integrals of 
and
, we need not introduce any constants. This is because
  C1y1  C2y2  u1y1  u2y2.
  (c1  a1)y1  (c2  b1)y2  u1y1  u2y2
 y  yc  yp  c1y1  c2y2  (u1  a1)y1  (u2  b1)y2
u2
u1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where the 
, k  1, 2, . . . , n are determined by the n equations
(14)
The ﬁrst n  1 equations in this system, like 
in (8), are assumptions
that are made to simplify the resulting equation after yp  u1(x)y1(x)     
un(x)yn(x) is substituted in (13). In this case Cramer's Rule gives
where W is the Wronskian of y1, y2, . . . , yn and Wk is the determinant obtained by
replacing the kth column of the Wronskian by the column consisting of the right-
hand side of (14)—that is, the column consisting of (0, 0, . . . , f(x)). When n  2,
we get (9). When n  3, the particular solution is yp  u1y1  u2y2  u3y3, where
y1, y2, and y3 constitute a linearly independent set of solutions of the associated
homogeneous DE and u1, u2, u3 are determined from
(15)
u1  W1
W ,    u2  W2
W ,    u3  W3
W ,
uk  Wk
W, k  1, 2, . . . , n,
y1u1  y2u2  0
 y1
(n1)u1  y2
(n1)u2      yn
(n1)un  f (x).




 y1u1 
 y2u2     
 ynun  0
 y1u1 
 y2u2     
 ynun  0
uk
4.6
VARIATION OF PARAMETERS
●
161
W1  p
0
0
f (x)
y2
y2
y	2
y3
y3
y	3
p ,  W2  p
y1
y1
y	1
0
0
f (x)
y3
y3
y	3
p ,  W3  p
y1
y1
y	1
y2
y2
y	2
0
0
f (x)
p ,  and  W  p
y1
y1
y	1
y2
y2
y	2
y3
y3
y	3
p .
See Problems 25-28 in Exercises 4.6.
REMARKS
(i) Variation of parameters has a distinct advantage over the method of
undetermined coefﬁcients in that it will always yield a particular solution yp
provided that the associated homogeneous equation can be solved. The pre-
sent method is not limited to a function f(x) that is a combination of the four
types listed on page 140. As we shall see in the next section, variation of
parameters, unlike undetermined coefﬁcients, is applicable to linear DEs
with variable coefﬁcients.
(ii) In the problems that follow, do not hesitate to simplify the form of yp.
Depending on how the antiderivatives of 
and 
are found, you might not
obtain the same yp as given in the answer section. For example, in Problem 3
in Exercises 4.6 both yp  sin x  x cos x and yp 
sin x  x cos x
are valid answers. In either case the general solution y  yc  yp simpliﬁes to
y  c1 cos x  c2 sin x  x cos x. Why?
1
2
1
2
1
4
1
2
1
2
u2
u1
EXERCISES 4.6
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-6.
In Problems 1-18 solve each differential equation by varia-
tion of parameters.
1. y	  y  sec x
2. y	  y  tan x
3. y	  y  sin x
4. y	  y  sec u tan u
5. y	  y  cos2x
6. y	  y  sec2x
7. y	  y  cosh x
8. y	  y  sinh 2x
9.
10. y	  9y  9x
e3x
y	  4y  e2x
x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
11.
12.
13. y	  3y  2y  sin ex
14. y	  2y  y  et arctan t
15. y	  2y  y  et ln t
16.
17. 3y	  6y  6y  ex sec x
18.
In Problems 19-22 solve each differential equation by
variation of parameters, subject to the initial conditions
y(0)  1, y(0)  0.
19. 4y	  y  xex/2
20. 2y	  y  y  x  1
21. y	  2y  8y  2e2x  ex
22. y	  4y  4y  (12x2  6x)e2x
In Problems 23 and 24 the indicated functions are known lin-
early independent solutions of the associated homogeneous
differential equation on (0, 
). Find the general solution of
the given nonhomogeneous equation.
23.
;
y1  x1/2 cos x, y2  x1/2 sin x
x2y	  xy  (x2  1
4)y  x3/2
4y	  4y  y  ex/211  x2
2y	  2y  y  41x
y	  2y  y 
ex
1  x2
y	  3y  2y 
1
1  ex
24. x2y	  xy  y  sec(ln x);
y1  cos(ln x), y2  sin(ln x)
In Problems 25-28 solve the given third-order differential
equation by variation of parameters.
25. y  y  tan x
26. y  4y  sec 2x
27.
28.
Discussion Problems
In Problems 29 and 30 discuss how the methods of unde-
termined coefﬁcients and variation of parameters can be
combined to solve the given differential equation. Carry out
your ideas.
29. 3y	  6y  30y  15 sin x  ex tan 3x
30. y	  2y  y  4x2  3  x1ex
31. What are the intervals of deﬁnition of the general solu-
tions in Problems 1, 7, 9, and 18? Discuss why the inter-
val of deﬁnition of the general solution in Problem 24 is
not (0, 
).
32. Find the general solution of x4y	  x3y  4x2y  1
given that y1  x2 is a solution of the associated homo-
geneous equation.
y  3y	  2y 
e2x
1  ex
y  2y	  y  2y  e4x
CAUCHY-EULER EQUATION
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Review the concept of the auxiliary equation in Section 4.3.
INTRODUCTION
The same relative ease with which we were able to ﬁnd explicit solutions of
higher-order linear differential equations with constant coefﬁcients in the preceding sections does
not, in general, carry over to linear equations with variable coefﬁcients. We shall see in Chapter 6
that when a linear DE has variable coefﬁcients, the best that we can usually expect is to ﬁnd a
solution in the form of an inﬁnite series. However, the type of differential equation that we consider
in this section is an exception to this rule; it is a linear equation with variable coefﬁcients whose
general solution can always be expressed in terms of powers of x, sines, cosines, and logarithmic
functions. Moreover, its method of solution is quite similar to that for constant-coefﬁcient equations
in that an auxiliary equation must be solved.
4.7
Cauchy-Euler Equation
A linear differential equation of the form
anxn dny
dxn  an1xn1 dn1y
dxn1      a1x dy
dx  a0y  g(x),
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where the coefﬁcients an, an1, . . . , a0 are constants, is known as a Cauchy-Euler
equation. The differential equation is named in honor of two of the most proliﬁc
mathematicians of all time. Augustin-Louis Cauchy (French, 1789-1857) and
Leonhard Euler (Swiss, 1707-1783). The observable characteristic of this type of
equation is that the degree k  n, n  1, . . . , 1, 0 of the monomial coefﬁcients xk
matches the order k of differentiation dkydxk:
As in Section 4.3, we start the discussion with a detailed examination of the
forms of the general solutions of the homogeneous second-order equation
.
(1)
The solution of higher-order equations follows analogously. Also, we can solve the
nonhomogeneous equation ax2y	  bxy  cy  g(x) by variation of parameters,
once we have determined the complementary function yc.
Note
The coefﬁcient ax2 of y	 is zero at x  0. Hence to guarantee that the
fundamental results of Theorem 4.1.1 are applicable to the Cauchy-Euler equation, we
focus our attention on ﬁnding the general solutions deﬁned on the interval (0, 
). 
Method of Solution
We try a solution of the form y  xm, where m is to be
determined. Analogous to what happened when we substituted emx into a linear equa-
tion with constant coefﬁcients, when we substitute xm, each term of a Cauchy-Euler
equation becomes a polynomial in m times xm, since
ax2 d 2y
dx2  bx dy
dx  cy  0
anx n
 an1x n1
 . . . .
dny
----
dx n
d n1y
------
dx n1
same
same
4.7
CAUCHY-EULER EQUATION
●
163
akxk dky
dxk  akxkm(m  1)(m  2)    (m  k  1)xmk  akm(m  1)(m  2)    (m  k  1)xm.
For example, when we substitute y  xm, the second-order equation becomes
ax2 d 2y
dx2  bx dy
dx  cy  am(m  1)xm  bmxm  cxm  (am(m  1)  bm  c)xm.
Thus y  xm is a solution of the differential equation whenever m is a solution of the
auxiliary equation
(2)
There are three different cases to be considered, depending on whether the roots of
this quadratic equation are real and distinct, real and equal, or complex. In the last
case the roots appear as a conjugate pair.
Case I: Distinct Real Roots
Let m1 and m2 denote the real roots of (1) such
that m1  m2. Then 
and 
form a fundamental set of solutions. Hence
the general solution is
(3)
y  c1xm1  c2xm2.
y2  xm2
y1  xm1
am(m  1)  bm  c  0    or    am2  (b  a)m  c  0.
EXAMPLE 1
Distinct Roots
Solve x2 d 2y
dx2  2x dy
dx  4y  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
SOLUTION
Rather than just memorizing equation (2), it is preferable to assume
y  xm as the solution a few times to understand the origin and the difference
between this new form of the auxiliary equation and that obtained in Section 4.3.
Differentiate twice,
and substitute back into the differential equation:
if m2  3m  4  0. Now (m  1)(m  4)  0 implies m1  1, m2  4, so
y  c1x1  c2x4.
Case II: Repeated Real Roots
If the roots of (2) are repeated (that is,
m1  m2), then we obtain only one solution—namely, 
When the roots of the
quadratic equation am2  (b  a)m  c  0 are equal, the discriminant of the coef-
ﬁcients is necessarily zero. It follows from the quadratic formula that the root must
be m1  (b  a)2a.
Now we can construct a second solution y2, using (5) of Section 4.2. We ﬁrst
write the Cauchy-Euler equation in the standard form
and make the identiﬁcations P(x)  bax and 
Thus
The general solution is then
(4)
y  c1xm1  c2xm1 ln x.
  xm1  dx
x  xm1 ln x.
; 2m1  (b  a)/a
  xm1  xb/a  x(ba)/adx
; e(b / a)ln x  eln xb/a  xb / a
  xm1  xb/a  x2m1dx
 y2  xm1  e(b/a)ln x
x2m1
 dx
(b>ax) dx  (b>a) ln x.
d 2y
dx2  b
ax dy
dx  c
ax2 y  0
y  xm1.
  xm(m(m  1)  2m  4)  xm(m2  3m  4)  0
 x2 d 2y
dx2  2x dy
dx  4y  x2  m(m  1)xm2  2x  mxm1  4xm
dy
dx  mxm1,    d 2y
dx2  m(m  1)xm2,
EXAMPLE 2
Repeated Roots
Solve 
SOLUTION
The substitution y  xm yields
when 4m2  4m  1  0 or (2m  1)2  0. Since 
, it follows from (4) that
the general solution is y  c1x1/2  c2x1/2 ln x.
For higher-order equations, if m1 is a root of multiplicity k, then it can be shown that
xm1,  xm1 ln x,  xm1(ln x)2, . . . ,  xm1(ln x)k1
m1  1
2
4x2 d 2y
dx2  8x dy
dx  y  xm(4m(m  1)  8m  1)  xm(4m2  4m  1)  0
4x2 d 2y
dx2  8x dy
dx  y  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

are k linearly independent solutions. Correspondingly, the general solution of the dif-
ferential equation must then contain a linear combination of these k solutions.
Case III: Conjugate Complex Roots
If the roots of (2) are the conjugate
pair m1  a  ib, m2  a  ib, where a and b  0 are real, then a solution is
But when the roots of the auxiliary equation are complex, as in the case of equations
with constant coefﬁcients, we wish to write the solution in terms of real functions
only. We note the identity
which, by Euler's formula, is the same as
xib  cos(b ln x)  i sin(b ln x).
Similarly,
xib  cos(b ln x)  i sin(b ln x).
Adding and subtracting the last two results yields
xib  xib  2 cos(b ln x)
and
xib  xib  2i sin(b ln x),
respectively. From the fact that y  C1xaib  C2xaib is a solution for any values
of the constants, we see, in turn, for C1  C2  1 and C1  1, C2  1 that
or
are also solutions. Since W(xa cos(b ln x), xa sin(b ln x))  bx2a1  0, b  0 on
the interval (0, 
), we conclude that
constitute a fundamental set of real solutions of the differential equation. Hence the
general solution is
(5)
y  x[c1 cos( ln x)  c2 sin( ln x)].
y1  x cos( ln x)    and    y2  x sin( ln x)
 y1  2x cos( ln x)    and    y2  2ix sin( ln x)
 y1  x(xi  xi)    and    y2  x(xi  xi)
xi  (eln x)i  ei ln x,
y  C1xi  C2xi.
4.7
CAUCHY-EULER EQUATION
●
165
x
y
_1
0
1
1
x 
y
25
50
75
10
5
100
(a)  solution for 0 

x 1 
(b) solution for 0 

x 100 
FIGURE 4.7.1
Solution curve of IVP
in Example 3
EXAMPLE 3
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve 
SOLUTION
The y term is missing in the given Cauchy-Euler equation; neverthe-
less, the substitution y  xm yields
when 4m2  4m  17  0. From the quadratic formula we ﬁnd that the roots are
and 
. With the identiﬁcations 
and b  2 we see from
(5) that the general solution of the differential equation is
By applying the initial conditions 
to the foregoing solution
and using ln 1  0, we then ﬁnd, in turn, that c1  1 and c2  0. Hence the solution
of the initial-value problem is y  x1/2 cos(2 ln x). The graph of this function,
obtained with the aid of computer software, is given in Figure 4.7.1. The particular
solution is seen to be oscillatory and unbounded as 
.
x : 
y(1)  1, y(1)  1
2
y  x1/2[c1 cos(2 ln x)  c2 sin(2 ln x)].
  1
2
m2  1
2  2i
m1  1
2  2i
4x2y	  17y  xm(4m(m  1)  17)  xm(4m2  4m  17)  0
4x2y	  17y  0, y(1)  1, y(1)  1
2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
The next example illustrates the solution of a third-order Cauchy-Euler 
equation.
EXAMPLE 4
Third-Order Equation
Solve 
SOLUTION
The ﬁrst three derivatives of y  xm are
so the given differential equation becomes
dy
dx  mxm1,    d 2y
dx2  m(m  1)xm2,    d 3y
dx3  m(m  1)(m  2)xm3,
x3 d 3y
dx3  5x2 d 2y
dx2  7x dy
dx  8y  0.
  xm(m3  2m2  4m  8)  xm(m  2)(m2  4)  0.
  xm(m(m  1)(m  2)  5m(m  1)  7m  8)
 x3 d 3y
dx3  5x2 d 2y
dx2  7x dy
dx  8y  x3m(m  1)(m  2)xm3  5x2m(m  1)xm2  7xmxm1  8xm
In this case we see that y  xm will be a solution of the differential equation
for
m1 
2, m2  2i, and m3  2i.
Hence the general solution is 
y  c1x2  c2 cos(2 ln x)  c3 sin(2 ln x).
Nonhomogeneous Equations
The method of undetermined coefﬁcients
described in Sections 4.5 and 4.6 does not carry over, in general, to nonhomoge-
neous linear differential equations with variable coefﬁcients. Consequently, in our
next example the method of variation of parameters is employed.
EXAMPLE 5
Variation of Parameters
Solve x2y	  3xy  3y  2x4ex.
SOLUTION
Since the equation is nonhomogeneous, we ﬁrst solve the associated
homogeneous equation. From the auxiliary equation (m  1)(m  3)  0 we ﬁnd yc
 c1x  c2x3. Now before using variation of parameters to ﬁnd a particular solution
yp  u1y1  u2y2, recall that the formulas 
and 
, where W1,
W2, and W are the determinants deﬁned on page 158, were derived under the assump-
tion that the differential equation has been put into the standard form y	  P(x)y 
Q(x)y  f(x). Therefore we divide the given equation by x2, and from
we make the identiﬁcation f(x)  2x2ex. Now with y1  x, y2  x3, and
y	  3
x y  3
x2 y  2x2ex
u2  W2>W
u1  W1>W
W  
x
1
x3
3x2  2x3,  W1  
0
2x2ex
  x3
3x2  2x5ex,  W2  
x
1
0
2x2ex  2x3ex,
we ﬁnd
The integral of the last function is immediate, but in the case of 
we integrate
by parts twice. The results are u1  x2ex  2xex  2ex and u2  ex. Hence
yp  u1y1  u2y2 is
Finally, y  yc  yp  c1x  c2x3  2x2ex  2xex.
yp  (x2ex  2xex  2ex)x  exx3  2x2ex  2xex.
u1
u1  2x5ex
2x3  x2ex    and    u2  2x3ex
2x3  ex.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Reduction to Constant Coefﬁcients
The similarities between the forms of
solutions of Cauchy-Euler equations and solutions of linear equations with constant
coefﬁcients are not just a coincidence. For example, when the roots of the auxiliary
equations for ay	  by  cy  0 and ax2y	  bxy  cy  0 are distinct and real,
the respective general solutions are
(5)
In view of the identity eln x  x, x  0, the second solution given in (5) can be
expressed in the same form as the ﬁrst solution:
where t  ln x. This last result illustrates the fact that any Cauchy-Euler equation can
always be rewritten as a linear differential equation with constant coefﬁcients by
means of the substitution x  et. The idea is to solve the new differential equation
in terms of the variable t, using the methods of the previous sections, and, once the
general solution is obtained, resubstitute t  ln x. This method, illustrated in the last
example, requires the use of the Chain Rule of differentiation.
y  c1em1 ln x  c2em2 ln x  c1em1t  c2em2t,
y  c1em1x  c2em2x    and    y  c1xm1  c2xm2, x  0.
4.7
CAUCHY-EULER EQUATION
●
167
EXAMPLE 6
Changing to Constant Coefﬁcients
Solve x2y	  xy  y  ln x.
SOLUTION
With the substitution x  et or t  ln x, it follows that
Substituting in the given differential equation and simplifying yields
Since this last equation has constant coefﬁcients, its auxiliary equation is
m2  2m  1  0, or (m  1)2  0. Thus we obtain yc  c1et  c2tet.
By undetermined coefﬁcients we try a particular solution of the form yp  A  Bt.
This assumption leads to 2B  A  Bt  t, so A  2 and B  1. Using y  yc  yp,
we get
By resubstituting et  x and t  ln x we see that the general solution of the original
differential equation on the interval (0, 
) is y  c1x  c2x ln x  2  ln x.
Solutions For x < 0
In the preceding discussion we have solved Cauchy-Euler
equations for 
One way of solving a Cauchy-Euler equation for 
is to
change the independent variable by means of the substitution 
(which implies
and using the Chain Rule:
dy
dx  dy
dt dt
dx  dy
dt   and   d2y
dx2  d
dt dy
dt
dt
dx  d 2y
dt2.
t  0)
t  x
x  0
x  0.
y  c1et  c2tet  2  t.
d 2y
dt2  2 dy
dt  y  t.
 1
x 
d 2y
dt2 1
x  dy
dt  1
x2  1
x2 
d 2y
dt2  dy
dt.
; Product Rule and Chain Rule
d 2y
dx2  1
x d
dx 
dy
dt  dy
dt  1
x2
; Chain Rule
dy
dx  dy
dt dt
dx  1
x dy
dt
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
See Problems 37 and 38 in Exercises 4.7.
A Different Form
A second-order equation of the form
(6)
is also a Cauchy-Euler equation. Observe that (6) reduces to (1) when 
We can solve (6) as we did (1), namely, seeking solutions of 
and
using
Alternatively, we can reduce (6) to the familiar form (1) by means of the change of
independent variable 
solving the reduced equation, and resubstituting.
See Problems 39-42 in Exercises 4.7.
t  x  x0,
dy
dx  m(x  x0)m1   and  d2y
dx2  m(m  1)(x  x0)m2.
y  (x  x0)m
x0  0.
a(x  x0)2 d2y
dx2  b(x  x0)dy
dx  cy  0
EXERCISES 4.7
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-6.
In Problems 1-18 solve the given differential equation.
1. x2y	  2y  0
2. 4x2y	  y  0
3. xy	  y  0
4. xy	  3y  0
5. x2y	  xy  4y  0
6. x2y	  5xy  3y  0
7. x2y	  3xy  2y  0
8. x2y	  3xy  4y  0
9. 25x2y	  25xy  y  0
10. 4x2y	  4xy  y  0
11. x2y	  5xy  4y  0
12. x2y	  8xy  6y  0
13. 3x2y	  6xy  y  0
14. x2y	  7xy  41y  0
15. x3y  6y  0
16. x3y  xy  y  0
17. xy(4)  6y  0
18. x4y(4)  6x3y  9x2y	  3xy  y  0
In Problems 19-24 solve the given differential equation by
variation of parameters.
19. xy	  4y  x4
20. 2x2y	  5xy  y  x2  x
21. x2y	  xy  y  2x
22. x2y	  2xy  2y  x4ex
23. x2y	  xy  y  ln x
24.
In Problems 25-30 solve the given initial-value problem.
Use a graphing utility to graph the solution curve.
25. x2y	  3xy  0,
y(1)  0, y(1)  4
26. x2y	  5xy  8y  0,
y(2)  32, y(2)  0
x2y	  xy  y 
1
x  1
27. x2y	  xy  y  0,
y(1)  1, y(1)  2
28. x2y	  3xy  4y  0,
y(1)  5, y(1)  3
29.
30.
In Problems 31-36 use the substitution x  et to transform
the given Cauchy-Euler equation to a differential equation
with constant coefﬁcients. Solve the original equation 
by solving the new equation using the procedures in
Sections 4.3-4.5.
31. x2y	  9xy  20y  0
32. x2y	  9xy  25y  0
33. x2y	  10xy  8y  x2
34. x2y	  4xy  6y  ln x2
35. x2y	  3xy  13y  4  3x
36. x3y  3x2y	  6xy  6y  3  ln x3
In Problems 37 and 38 use the substitution 
to solve
the given initial-value problem on the interval 
37. 4x2y	  y  0,
y(1)  2, y(1)  4
38. x2y	  4xy  6y  0,
y(2)  8, y(2)  0
In Problems 39 and 40 use 
to solve the given
differential equation.
39.
40. (x  1)2y	  (x  1)y  5y  0
(x  3)2 y	  8(x  1)y  14y  0
y  (x  x0)m
(
, 0).
t  x
x2y	  5xy  8y  8x6, y1
2  0, y1
2  0
xy	  y  x, y(1)  1, y(1)  1
2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.8
GREEN'S FUNCTIONS
●
169
In Problems 41 and 42 use the substitution 
to
solve the given differential equation.
41.
42.
Discussion Problems
43. Give the largest interval over which the general solution
of Problem 42 is deﬁned.
44. Can a Cauchy-Euler differential equation of lowest
order with real coefﬁcients be found if it is known that 
2 and 1  i are roots of its auxiliary equation? Carry out
your ideas.
45. The initial-conditions y(0)  y0, y(0)  y1 apply to
each of the following differential equations:
x2y	  0,
x2y	  2xy  2y  0,
x2y	  4xy  6y  0.
(x  4)2y	  5(x  4)y  9y  0
(x  2)2y	  (x  2)y  y  0
t  x  x0
For what values of y0 and y1 does each initial-value
problem have a solution?
46. What are the x-intercepts of the solution curve shown
in Figure 4.7.1? How many x-intercepts are there for
?
Computer Lab Assignments
In Problems 47-50 solve the given differential equation by
using a CAS to ﬁnd the (approximate) roots of the auxiliary
equation.
47. 2x3y  10.98x2y	  8.5xy  1.3y  0
48. x3y  4x2y	  5xy  9y  0
49. x4y(4)  6x3y  3x2y	  3xy  4y  0
50. x4y(4)  6x3y  33x2y	  105xy  169y  0
51. Solve x3y  x2y	  2xy  6y  x2 by variation of
parameters. Use a CAS as an aid in computing roots of
the auxiliary equation and the determinants given in
(15) of Section 4.6.
0  x  1
2
GREEN'S FUNCTIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●See the Remarks at the end of Section 4.1 for the deﬁnitions of response, input, and output.  
●Differential operators in Section 4.1 and Section 4.5
●The method of variation of parameters in Section 4.6 
INTRODUCTION
We will see in Chapter 5 that the linear second-order differential equation
(1)
plays an important role in many applications. In the mathematical analysis of physical systems it is
often desirable to express the response or output
of (1) subject to either initial conditions or
boundary conditions directly in terms of the forcing function or input
In this manner the 
response of the system can quickly be analyzed for different forcing functions.
To see how this is done, we start by examining solutions of initial-value problems in which the
DE (1) has been put into the standard form
(2) 
by dividing the equation by the lead coefﬁcient 
We also assume throughout this section that
the coefﬁcient functions 
and 
are continuous on some common interval I. 
f(x)
P(x), Q(x),
a2(x).
y	  P(x)y  Q(x)y  f(x)
g(x).
y(x)
a2(x)d2y
dx2  a1(x) dy
dx  a0(x)y  g(x) 
4.8
4.8.1
INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS 
Three Initial-Value Problems
We will see as the discussion unfolds that the
solution 
of the second order initial-value problem
(3)
y	  P(x)y  Q(x)y  f(x),   y(x0)  y0,  y(x0)  y1
y(x)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
can be expressed as the superposition of two solutions: 
(4)
where 
is the solution of the associated homogeneous DE with nonhomogeneous
initial conditions 
(5)
and 
is the solution of the nonhomogeneous DE with homogeneous (that is,
zero) initial conditions 
(6)
In the case where the coefﬁcients P and Q are constants the solution of the IVP (5)
presents no difﬁculties: We use the method of Section 4.3 to ﬁnd the general solution
of the homogeneous DE and then use the given initial conditions to determine the
two constants in that solution. So we will focus on the solution of the IVP (6).
Because of the zero initial conditions, the solution of (6) could describe a physical
system that is initially at rest and so is sometimes called a rest solution. 
Green's Function
If 
form a fundamental set of solutions on the
interval I of the associated homogeneous form of (2), then a particular solution of the
nonhomogeneous equation (2) on the interval I can be found by variation of parame-
ters. Recall from (3) of Section 4.6, the form of this solution is
(7)
The variable coefﬁcients 
in (7) are deﬁned by (9) of Section 4.6:
(8)
The linear independence of 
on the interval I guarantees that the
Wronskian 
for all x in I. If x and 
are numbers in I, then
integrating the derivatives 
and 
in (8) on the interval 
and substitut-
ing the results into (7) give 
(9)
where
From the properties of the deﬁnite integral, the two integrals in the second line of (9)
can be rewritten as a single integral
(10) 
The function 
in (10),
(11)
is called the Green's function for the differential equation (2). 
Observe that a Green's function (11) depends only on the fundamental solutions
of the associated homogeneous differential equation for (2) and not
on the forcing function 
Therefore all linear second-order differential equations
(2) with the same left-hand side but with different forcing functions have the same
the Green's function. So an alternative title for (11) is the Green's function for the
second-order differential operator L  D2  P(x)D  Q(x).
f(x).
y1(x) and  y2(x)
G(x, t)  y1(t)y2(x)  y1(x)y2(t)
W(t)
G(x, t)
yp(x) 
x
x0
G(x, t) f(t) dt.
W(t)  W(y1(t), y2(t))  
y1(t)
y1(t)
y2(t)
y2(t)
 
x
x0
 y1(x)y2(t)
W(t)
 f(t) dt     
x
x0
 y1(t)y2(x)
W(t)
 f(t) dt,
 yp(x)  y1(x)
x
x0
 y2(t)f(t)
W(t)
 dt   y2(x)
x
x0
 y1(t)f(t)
W(t)  dt
[x0, x]
u2(x)
u1(x)
x0
W  W(y1(x), y2(x))  0
y1(x) and y2(x)
u1(x)  y2(x)f(x)
W
,    u2(x)  y1(x)f(x)
W
.
u1(x) and  u2(x)
yp(x)  u1(x)y1(x)  u2(x)y2(x).
y1(x) and y2(x)
y	  P(x)y  Q(x)y  f(x),   y(x0)  0,  y(x0)  0.
yp(x)
y	  P(x)y  Q(x)y  0,   y(x0)  y0,  y(x0)  y1
yh(x)
y(x)  yh(x)  yp(x),
Because y1(x) and y2(x) are constant
with respect to the integration on t,
we can move these functions inside
the deﬁnite intergrals.

Important. Read this
paragraph a second time. 
Here at least one of the numbers y0 or y1 is
assumed to be nonzero. If both y0 and y1 are
0, then the solution of the IVP is y  0.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.8
GREEN'S FUNCTIONS
●
171
EXAMPLE 1
Particular Solution
Use (10) and (11) to ﬁnd a particular solution of 
SOLUTION
The solutions of the associated homogeneous equation 
are
and 
It follows from (11) that the Green's
function is
(12)
Thus from (10), a particular solution of the DE is
(13)    
yp(x) 
x
x0
sinh(x  t) f(t) dt.
G(x, t)  etex  exet
2
 ext  e(xt)
2
 sinh(x  t).
W(y1(t), y2(t))  2.
y2  ex,
y1  ex,
y	  y  0
y	  y  f(x).
EXAMPLE 2
General Solutions
Find the general solution of following nonhomogeneous differential equations.
(a)
(b)
SOLUTION
From Example 1, both DEs possess the same complementary function
. Moreover, as pointed out in the paragraph preceding Example 1,
the Green's function for both differential equations is (12).
(a) With the identiﬁcations 
and 
we see from (13) that a partic-
ular solution of 
is 
Thus the general solu-
tion 
of the given DE on any interval 
not containing the origin is 
(14)
You should compare this solution with that found in Example 3 of Section 4.6.
(b) With 
in (13), a particular solution of 
is 
The general solution 
is then
(15)
Now consider the special initial-value problem (6) with homogeneous initial
conditions. One way of solving the problem when 
has already been illus-
trated in Sections 4.4 and 4.6, that is, apply the initial conditions
to the general solution of the nonhomogeneous DE. But
there is no actual need to do this because we already have a solution of the IVP
at hand; it is the function deﬁned in (10). 
y(x0)  0,  y(x0)  0
f(x)  0
y  c1ex  c2ex 
x
x0
sinh(x  t) e2t dt.
y  yc  yp
x
x0sinh(x  t) e2t dt.
yp(x) 
y	  y  e2x
f(x)  e2x
y  c1e x  c2ex 
x
x0
 sinh(x  t)
t
 dt.
[x0, x]
y  yc  yp
yp(x) 
x
x0
 sinh(x  t)
t
 dt.
y	  y  1>x
f(t)  1>t
f(x)  1>x
yc  c1ex   c2ex
y	  y  e2x
y	  y  1>x
THEOREM 4.8.1
Solution of the IVP (6)
The function 
deﬁned in (10) is the solution of the initial-value problem (6).
yp(x)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
PROOF
By construction we know that 
in (10) satisﬁes the nonhomogeneous
DE. Next, because a deﬁnite integral has the property 
we have
Finally, to show that 
we utilize the Leibniz formula* for the derivative 
of an integral:
0 from (11)
2
Hence,
yp(x0) 
x0
x0
y1(t)y2(x0)  y1(x0)y2(t)
W(t)
 f(t) dt  0.

x
x0
 y1(t)y2(x)  y1(x)y2(t)
W(t)
 f(t) dt.
yp(x)  G(x, x)f(x) 
yp(x0)  0
yp(x0) 
x0
x0
G(x0, t) f(t) dt  0.
a
a  0
yp(x)
EXAMPLE 3
Example 2 Revisited
Solve the initial-value problems
(a)
(b)
SOLUTION
(a) With 
it follows from (14) of Example 2 and
Theorem 4.8.1 that the solution of the initial-value problem is
where 
(b) Identifying 
we see from (15) that the solution of the IVP is
(16) 
In part (b) of Example 3, we can carry out the integration in (16), but bear in
mind that x is held constant throughout the integration with respect to t:
  1
3e2x  1
2ex  1
6ex.
  1
2ex
x
0
et dt  1
2ex
x
0
e3t dt
 yp(x) 
x
0
sinh(x  t) e2t dt 
x
0
 ext  e(xt)
2
 e2t dt
yp(x) 
x
0
sinh(x  t) e2t dt.
x0  0 and f(t)  e2t,
[1, x], x  0.
yp(x) 
x
1
 sinh(x  t)
t
 dt,
x0  1 and f(t)  1>t,
y	  y  e2x,   y(0)  0, y(0)  0
y	  y  1>x,   y(1)  0, y(1)  0
* This formula, usually discussed in advanced calculus, is given by
d
dx 
v(x)
u(x)
F(x, t)dt  F(x, v(x))v(x)  F(x, u(x))u(x) 
v(x)
u(x)

xF(x, t)dt.
EXAMPLE 4
Using (10) and (11)
Solve the initial-value problem
SOLUTION
We begin by constructing the Green's function for the given differen-
tial equation.
y	  4y  x,   y(0)  0, y(0)  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The two linearly independent solutions of 
are 
From (11), with 
we ﬁnd 
With the further identiﬁcations 
and 
in (10) we see that a solution of
the given initial-value problem is
If we wish to evaluate the integral, we ﬁrst write 
and then use integration by parts:
or
Initial-Value Problems—Continued
Finally, we are now in a position to
make use of Theorem 4.8.1 to ﬁnd the solution of the initial-value problem posed in
(3). It is simply the function already given in (4).
yp(x)  1
4x  1
8 sin2x.
 yp(x)  1
2sin2x [1
2t sin2t  1
4 cos2t]
x
0  1
2 cos2x [1
2t cos2t  1
4sin2t]
x
0
yp(x)  1
2sin2x
x
0
t cos2t dt  1
2 cos2x
x
0
t sin2t dt
yp(x)  1
2
x
0
tsin2(x  t)dt.
f(t)  t
x0  0
G(x, t)  cos2t sin2x  cos2x sin2t
2
 1
2 sin2(x  t).
W(cos2t, sin2t)  2,
y2(x)  sin2x.
y1(x)  cos 2x and
y	  4y  0
4.8
GREEN'S FUNCTIONS
●
173
Here we have used the trigonometric
identity 
sin(2x  2t)  sin 2x cos 2t  cos 2x sin 2t

THEOREM 4.8.2
Solution of the IVP (3)
If 
is the solution of the initial-value problem (5) and 
is the solution (10)
of the initial-value problem (6) on the interval I, then 
(17)
is the solution of the initial-value problem (3).
y(x)  yh(x)  yp(x)
yp(x)
yh(x)
PROOF
Because 
is a linear combination of the fundamental solutions, it
follows from (10) of Section 4.1 that 
is a solution of the nonhomoge-
neous DE. Moreover, since 
satisﬁes the initial-conditions in (5) and 
satisﬁes the
initial conditions in (6), we have, 
Keeping in mind the absence of a forcing function in (5) and the presence of such
a term in (6), we see from (17) that the response 
of a physical system described
by the initial-value problem (3) can be separated into two different responses:
(18)
3
3
response of system
response of system
due to initial conditions
due to the forcing
function f
If you wish to peek ahead, the following initial-value problem represents a pure
resonance situation for a driven spring/mass system. See pages 200-202.
y(x0)  y0, y(x0)  y1
y(x)    yh(x)    yp(x)
y(x)
 y(x0)  yh(x0)  yp(x0)  y1  0  y1.
 y(x0)  yh(x0)  yp(x0)  y0  0  y0
yp
yh
y  yh  yp
yh(x)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

174
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 5
Using Theorem 4.8.2
Solve the initial-value problem
SOLUTION
We solve two initial-value problems. 
First, we solve 
By applying the initial con-
ditions to the general solution 
of the homogeneous DE,
we ﬁnd that 
and 
Therefore, 
Next we solve 
Since the left-hand side
of the differential equation is the same as the DE in Example 4, the Green's function
is the same, namely, 
With 
we see from (10) that
the solution of this second problem is 
Finally, in view of (17) in Theorem 4.8.2, the solution of the original IVP is
(19)
If desired, we can integrate the deﬁnite integral in (19) by using the trigonomet-
ric identity
with 
and 
(20)
Hence, the solution (19) can be rewritten as
or
(21)
Note that the physical signiﬁcance indicated in (18) is lost in (21) after combining
like terms in the two parts of the solution 
The beauty of the solution given in (19) is that we can immediately write down
the response of a system if the initial conditions remain the same, but the forcing
function is changed. For example, if the problem in Example 5 is changed to
we simply replace 
in the integral in (19) by t and the solution is then 
Because the forcing function f is isolated in the particular solution
the solution in (17) is useful when f is piecewise deﬁned.
The next example illustrates this idea.
yp(x)  x
x0G(x, t) f(t) dt,
  1
4x  cos2x  9
8sin2x.
; see Example 4
  cos 2x  sin2x  1
2
x
0
tsin2(x  t) dt
y(x)  yh(x)  yp(x)
sin2t
y  4y  x, y(0)  1, y(0)  2,
y(x)  yh(x)  yp(x).
 y(x)  cos2x  7
8 sin2x  1
4 x cos2x.
y(x)  yh(x)  yp(x)  cos2x  sin2x  1
8sin2x  1
4x cos2x,
  1
8sin2x  1
4xcos2x.
  1
4[1
4sin(2x  4t)  tcos2x] x
 0
  1
4
x
0
[cos(2x  4t)  cos2x] dt
yp(x)  1
2
x
0
sin2(x  t)sin2tdt
B  2t:
A  2(x  t)
sinAsinB  1
2[cos(A  B)  cos (A  B)]
y(x)  yh(x)  yp(x)  cos2x  sin2x   1
2
x
0
sin2(x  t)sin2t dt.
yp(x)  1
2x
0 sin2(x  t)sin2t dt.
f(t)  sin2t
G(x, t)  1
2sin2(x  t).
y  4y  sin2x, y(0)  0, y(0)  0.
yh(x)  cos2x  sin2x.
c2  1.
c1  1
y(x)  c1cos2x  c2 sin2x
y  4y  0, y(0)  1, y(0)  2.
y  4y  sin 2x,  y(0)  1, y(0)  2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.8
GREEN'S FUNCTIONS
●
175
EXAMPLE 6
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve the initial-value problem
where the forcing function f is piecewise deﬁned:
SOLUTION
From (19), with 
replaced by 
we can write
Because f is deﬁned in three pieces, we consider three cases in the evaluation of the
deﬁnite integral. For 
for 
and ﬁnally for 
we can use the integration following Example 5:
Hence 
is 
and so 
Putting all the pieces together we get
The three parts of  
are shown in different colors in Figure 4.8.1.
We next examine how a boundary value problem (BVP) can be solved using a
different kind of Green's function.
y(x)
y(x) 	
cos 2x  sin 2x,          
x  0
(1  1
4 x) cos2x  7
8 sin 2x, 0  x  2
(1  1
2)cos2x  sin2x, 
x  2.
y(x)  yh(x)  yp(x)  cos2x  sin 2x  yp(x).
yp(x) 	
0,                         x  0
1
8 sin2x1
4x cos2x,   0  x  2
1
2 cos2x,             x  2.
yp(x)
  1
2pcos 2x.
; sin(2x  8p)  sin 2x
 
   1
16 sin (2x  8p)1
2 pcos 2x  1
16sin 2x
; using the integration in (20)
  1
4[1
4sin (2x  4t)  tcos 2x] 2p
 0
  1
2p
2p
0
sin 2(x  t) sin 2t dt
yp(x)  1
2
2p
0
sin 2(x  t) sin 2t dt  1
2
x
2p
sin 2(x  t) 0 dt
x  2p,
  1
8sin2x  1
4x cos2x,
; using the integration in (20)
yp(x)  1
2
x
0
sin2(x  t) sin2t dt
0  x  2,
yp(x)  1
2
x
0
sin2(x  t) 0 dt  0,
x  0,
y(x)  cos 2x  sin 2x  1
2
x
0
sin2(x  t) f(t) dt.
f(t),
sin2t
f(x) 	
0,        x  0
sin 2x,   0  x  2
0,     x  2.
y	  4y  f(x), y(0)  1, y(0)  2,
_1
3p
2p
p
_p
1
y
x
FIGURE 4.8.1
Graph of y(x) in
Example 6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
4.8.2
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
In contrast to a second-order IVP, in which 
and 
are speciﬁed at the same
point, a BVP for a second-order DE involves conditions on 
and 
that are
speciﬁed at two different points 
and 
Conditions such as
are just special cases of the more general homogeneous boundary conditions:
(22)
(23)
where 
are constants. Speciﬁcally, our goal is to ﬁnd a integral
solution 
that is analogous to (10) for nonhomogeneous boundary-value problems
of the form
(24)
In addition to the usual assumptions that 
and 
are continuous on 
we assume that the homogeneous problem
possesses only the trivial solution 
This latter assumption is sufﬁcient to guarantee
that a unique solution of (24) exists and is given by an integral 
where 
is a Green's function. 
The starting point in the construction of 
is again the variation of parame-
ters formulas (7) and (8).
Another Green's Function
Suppose 
are linearly independent
solutions on 
of the associated homogeneous form of the DE in (24) and that x
is a number in the interval 
Unlike the construction of (9) where we started by
integrating the derivatives in (8) over the same interval, we now integrate the ﬁrst
equation in (8) on 
and the second equation in (8) on 
(25)
The reason for integrating 
over different intervals will become clear
shortly. From (25), a particular solution 
of the DE is
here we used the minus
sign in (25) to reverse
the limits of integration
$11%11&
or
(26)
The right-hand side of (26) can be written compactly as a single integral
(27)
where the function 
is 
(28)
G(x, t) 	
y1(t)y2(x)
W(t)
, a  t  x
y1(x)y2(t)
W(t)
, x  t  b.
G(x, t)
yp(x) 
b
a
G(x, t) f(t)dt,
 yp(x) 
x
a
y2(x)y1(t)
W(t)
f(t) dt 
b
x
y1(x)y2(t)
W(t)
f(t)dt.
 yp(x)  y1(x) 
b
x
y2(t) f(t)
W(t)
dt  y2(x) 
x
a
y1(t) f(t)
W(t)
dt
yp(x)  u1(x)y1(x)  u2(x)y2(x)
u1(x) and u2(x)
u1(x)  
x
b
y2(t) f(t)
W(t) dt and u2(x) 
x
a
y1(t) f(t)
W(t)
dt.
[a,  x]:
[b, x]
[a, b].
[a, b]
y1(x) and y2(x)
G(x, t)
G(x, t)
yp(x)  b
aG(x, t) f(t)dt,
y  0.
 A2y(b)  B2y(b)  0,   
 A1y(a)  B1y(a)  0
 y	  P(x)y  Q(x)y  0,
[a, b],
f(x)
P(x), Q(x),
 A2y(b)  B2y(b)  0.   
 A1y(a)  B1y(a)  0
 y	  P(x)y  Q(x)y  f(x),
yp(x)
A1, A2, B1, and B2
A2y(b)  B2y(b)  0,
A1y(a)  B1y(a)  0
y(a)  0,  y(b)  0;          y(a)  0,    y(b)  0;          y(a)  0,  y(b)  0.
x  b.
x  a
y(x)
y(x)
y(x)
y(x)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The piecewise-deﬁned function (28) is called a Green's function for the boundary-
value problem (24). It can be proved that 
is a continuous function of x on the
interval 
Now if the solutions 
and 
used in the construction of 
in (28) are
chosen in such a manner that at 
satisﬁes 
and at
satisﬁes 
then, wondrously, 
deﬁned in
(27) satisﬁes both homogeneous boundary conditions in (24).
To see this we will need
(29)
and 
(30)
Before proceeding, observe in (25) that 
and 
In view of the
second of these two properties we can show that 
satisﬁes (22) whenever 
satisﬁes the same boundary condition. From (29) and (30) we have
0
0
2
2
(1111)1111*
0 from (22)
Likewise, 
implies that whenever 
satisﬁes (23) so does yp(x):
y2(x)
u1(b)  0
  u1(a)[A1y1(a)  B1y1(a)]  0.
A1yp(a)  B1yp(a)  A1[u1(a)y1(a)  u2(a)y2(a)]  B1[u1(a)y1(a)  u2(a)y2(a)]
y1(x)
yp(x)
u2(a)  0.
u1(b)  0
 u1(x)y1(x)  u2(x)y2(x).
yp(x)  u1(x)y1(x)  y1(x)u1(x)  u2(x)y2(x)  y2(x)u2(x)
yp(x)  u1(x)y1(x)  u2(x)y2(x)
yp(x)
A2y2(b)  B2y2(b)  0,
y2(x)
x  b,
A1y1(a)  B1y1(a)  0,
y1(x)
x  a,
G(x, t)
y2(x)
y1(x)
[a, b].
G(x, t)
4.8
GREEN'S FUNCTIONS
●
177
The second line in (30) results from 
the fact that
.
See the discussion in Section 4.6 
following (4).
y1(x)u1(x)  y2(x)u2(x)  0

0
0
2
2
(1111)1111*
0 from (22)
  u2(b)[A2y2(b)  B2y2(b)]  0.
A2yp(b)  B2yp(b)  A2[u1(b)y1(b)  u2(b)y2(b)]  B2[u1(b)y1(b)  u2(b)y2(b)]
THEOREM 4.8.3
Solution of the BVP (24) 
Let 
and 
be linearly independent solutions of
on 
and suppose 
and 
satisfy (22) and (23), respectively. Then the
function 
deﬁned in (27) is a solution of the boundary-value problem (24).
yp(x)
y2(x)
y1(x)
[a,  b],
y	  P(x)y  Q(x)y  0
y2(x)
y1(x)
EXAMPLE 7
Using Theorem 4.8.3
Solve the boundary-value problem
SOLUTION
The solutions of the associated homogeneous equation 
are 
and 
and 
satisﬁes 
whereas 
sat-
isﬁes 
The Wronskian is 
and so from (28) we see that the
Green's function for the boundary-value problem is
G(x, t) 	
1
2 cos 2t sin 2x, 0  t  x
1
2 cos 2x sin 2t, x  t  p>2.
W(y1, y2)  2,
y(p>2)  0.
y2(x)
y(0)  0
y1(x)
y2(x)  sin 2x
y1(x)  cos 2x
y	  4y  0
y	  4y  3, y(0)  0, y(p>2)  0.
The boundary condition y(0)  0 is a
special case of (22) with a  0, A1  0,
and B1  1. The boundary condition 
y(p/2)  0 is a special case of (23) with 
b  p/2, A2  1, B2  0.

The next theorem summarizes these results.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
It follows from Theorem 4.8.3 that a solution of the BVP is (27) with the identiﬁca-
tions 
or, after evaluating the deﬁnite integrals,   
Don't infer from the preceding example that the demand that 
satisfy (22)
and 
satisfy (23) uniquely determines these functions. As we see in the last
example, there is a certain arbitrariness in the selection of these functions. 
y2(x)
y1(x)
yp(x)  3
4  3
4 cos 2x.
  3  1
2 sin 2x
x
0
cos 2t dt  3  1
2 cos 2x
p>2
x
sin 2t dt,
yp(x)  3
p>2
0
G(x, t)dt
f(t)  3:
a  0, b  p>2, and
EXAMPLE 8
A Boundary-Value Problem
Solve the boundary-value problem
SOLUTION
The differential equation is recognized as a Cauchy-Euler DE. From
the auxiliary equation 
the general so-
lution of the associated homogeneous equation is 
Applying 
to this solution implies 
By choosing 
we get
and 
On the other hand, 
applied to the general solution
shows 
or 
The choice 
now gives 
and so
The Wronskian of these two functions is
Hence the Green's function for the boundary-value problem is
In order to identify the correct forcing function f we must write the DE in standard form:
From this equation we see that 
and so 
in (27) becomes
Straightforward deﬁnite integration and algebraic simpliﬁcation yield the solution
yp(x)  3x5  15x3  12x.
  4(4x  x3)
x
1
(t  t3) dt  4(x  x3)
2
x
(4t  t3)dt.
yp(x)  24
2
1
G(x, t) t3dt
yp(x)
f(t)  24t3
y	  3
xy  3
x2y  24x3.
G(x, t) 	
(t  t3)(4x  x3)
6t3
,   1  t  x
(x  x3)(4t  t3)
6t3
,   x  t  2.
W(y1(x), y2(x))  
x  x3 4x  x3
1  3x2 4  3x2  6x3.
y2(x)  4x  x3.
c1  4
c2  1
c1  4c2.
2c1  8c2  0
 y(2)  0
y1  x  x3.
c1  1
c2  1
c1  c2  0 or c1  c2.
y(1)  0
y  c1x  c2x3.
m(m  1)  3m  3  (m  1)(m  3)  0
x2y	  3xy  3y  24x5, y(1)  0, y(2)  0.
Verify yp(x) that satisﬁes the differential
equation and the two boundary
conditions.

REMARKS 
We have barely scratched the surface of the elegant, albeit complicated, theory
of Green's functions. Green's functions can also be constructed for linear sec-
ond-order partial differential equations, but we leave coverage of the latter
topic to an advanced course. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.8
GREEN'S FUNCTIONS
●
179
EXERCISES 4.8
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-6.
4.8.1
INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
In Problems 1-6 proceed as in Example 1 to ﬁnd a particular
solution 
of the given differential equation in the 
integral form (10). 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
In Problems 7-12 proceed as in Example 2 to ﬁnd the
general solution of the given differential equation. Use the
results obtained in Problems 1-6. Do not evaluate the integral
that deﬁnes 
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
In Problems 13-18 proceed as in Example 3 to ﬁnd a solu-
tion of the given initial-value problem. Evaluate the integral
that deﬁnes 
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
In Problems 19-30 proceed as in Example 5 to ﬁnd a solu-
tion of the given initial-value problem.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30. x2y	  xy  y  x2, y(1)  4, y(1)  3
x2y	  6y  ln x, y(1)  1, y(1)  3
x2y	  2xy  2y  x ln x, y(1)  1, y(1)  0
x2y	  2xy  2y  x, y(1)  2, y(1)  1
y	  3y  2y 
1
1  ex, y(0)  0, y(0)  1
y	  3y  2y  sin ex, y(0)  1, y(0)  0
y	  y  sec2x, y(p)  1
2, y(p)  1
y	  y  csc x cot x, y(p>2)  p>2, y(p>2)  1
y	  6y  9y  x, y(0)  1, y(0)  3
y	  10y  25y  e5x, y(0)  1, y(0)  1
y	  y  1, y(0)  10, y(0)  1
y	  4y  e2x, y(0)  1, y(0)  4
y	  y  sec2x, y(p)  0, y(p)  0
y	  y  csc x cot x, y(p>2)  0, y(p>2)  0
y	  6y  9y  x, y(0)  0, y(0)  0
y	  10y  25y  e5x, y(0)  0, y(0)  0
y	  y  1, y(0)  0, y(0)  0
y	  4y  e2x, y(0)  0, y(0)  0
yp(x).
y	  2y  2y  cos2x
y	  9y  x  sin x
4y	  4y  y  arctan x
y	  2y  y  ex
y	  3y  10y  x2
y	  16y  xe2x
yp(x).
y	  2y  2y  f(x)
y	  9y  f(x)
4y	  4y  y  f(x)
y	  2y  y  f(x)
y	  3y  10y  f(x)
y	  16y  f(x)
yp(x)
In Problems 31-34 proceed as in Example 6 to ﬁnd a solu-
tion of the initial-value problem with the given piecewise-
deﬁned forcing function.
31.
where
32.
where
33.
where
34.
where
4.8.2
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
In Problems 35 and 36, (a) use (27) and (28) to ﬁnd a solu-
tion of the boundary-value problem. (b) Verify that the
function 
satisﬁes the differential equations and both
boundary-conditions.
35.
36.
37. In Problem 35 ﬁnd a solution of the BVP when 
38. In Problem 36 ﬁnd a solution of the BVP when 
In Problems 39-44 proceed as in Examples 7 and 8 to ﬁnd a
solution of the given boundary-value problem.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
Discussion Problems
45. Suppose the solution of the boundary-value problem
y	  Py  Qy  f(x),  y(a)  0, y(b)  0,
x2y	  4xy  6y  x4, y(1)  y(1)  0, y(3)  0
x2y	  xy  1, y(e1)  0, y(1)  0
y	  y  e2x, y(0)  0, y(1)  0
y	  2y  2y  ex, y(0)  0, y(p>2)  0
y	  9y  1, y(0)  0, y(p)  0
y	  y  1, y(0)  0, y(1)  0
f(x)  x.
f(x)  1.
y	  f(x), y(0)  0, y(1)  y(1)  0
y	  f(x), y(0)  0, y(1)  0
yp(x)
f(x) 	
0, x  0
cos x, 0  x  4p
0, x  4p
y	  y  f(x), y(0)  0, y(0)  1,
f(x) 	
0, x  0
10,  0  x  3p
0, x  3p
y	  y  f(x), y(0)  1, y(0)  1,
f(x) 	
0, x  0
x, x  0
y	  y  f(x), y(0)  3, y(0)  2,
f(x) 	
1, x  0
1, x  0
y	  y  f(x), y(0)  8, y(0)  2,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
is given by 
where 
and
are solutions of the associated homogeneous
differential equation chosen in the construction of 
so
that 
and 
Prove that the solution of the
boundary-value problem with nonhomogeneous DE and
boundary conditions,
is given by
y(x)  yp(x) 
B
y1(b)y1(x) 
A
y2(a)y2(x).
y	  Py  Qy  f(x),  y(a)  A, y(b)  B
y2(b)  0.
y1(a)  0
G(x, t)
y2(x)
y1(x)
yp(x)  b
aG(x, t)f(t)dt
a  b,
[Hint: In your proof, you will have to show that
Reread the assumptions fol-
lowing (24).]
46. Use the result in Problem 45 to solve
y	  y  1, y(0)  5, y(1)  10.
y1(b)  0 and y2(a)  0.
SOLVING SYSTEMS OF LINEAR DEs BY ELIMINATION
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Because the method of systematic elimination uncouples a system into distinct linear ODEs in
each dependent variable, this section gives you an opportunity to practice what you learned in
Sections 4.3, 4.4 (or 4.5), and 4.6.
INTRODUCTION
Simultaneous ordinary differential equations involve two or more equations that
contain derivatives of two or more dependent variables—the unknown functions—with respect to a
single independent variable. The method of systematic elimination for solving systems of differential
equations with constant coefﬁcients is based on the algebraic principle of elimination of variables. We
shall see that the analogue of multiplying an algebraic equation by a constant is operating on an ODE
with some combination of derivatives.
4.9
Systematic Elimination
The elimination of an unknown in a system of linear
differential equations is expedited by rewriting each equation in the system in differ-
ential operator notation. Recall from Section 4.1 that a single linear equation
where the ai, i  0, 1, . . . , n are constants, can be written as
If the nth-order differential operator 
factors
into differential operators of lower order, then the factors commute. Now, for exam-
ple, to rewrite the system
in terms of the operator D, we ﬁrst bring all terms involving the dependent variables
to one side and group the same variables:
 x  y  4x  2y  et
 x	  2x  y	  x  3y  sin t
anDn  an1D(n1)      a1D  a0
(anDn  an1D(n1)      a1D  a0)y  g(t).
any(n)  an1y(n1)      a1y  a0y  g(t),
x	  2x  x  y	  3y  sin t
   x  4x  y  2y  et     is the same as    (D2  2D  1)x  (D2  3)y  sin t
    (D  4)x  (D  2)y  et.
Solution of a System
A solution of a system of differential equations is a set
of sufﬁciently differentiable functions x  f1(t), y  f2(t), z  f3(t), and so on that
satisﬁes each equation in the system on some common interval I.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Method of Solution
Consider the simple system of linear ﬁrst-order
equations
(1)
Operating on the ﬁrst equation in (1) by D while multiplying the second by 3 and
then adding eliminates y from the system and gives D2x  6x  0. Since the roots of
the auxiliary equation of the last DE are 
and 
, we obtain
(2)
Multiplying the first equation in (1) by 2 while operating on the second by D and
then subtracting gives the differential equation for y, D2y  6y  0. It follows
immediately that
(3)
Now (2) and (3) do not satisfy the system (1) for every choice of c1, c2, c3, and
c4 because the system itself puts a constraint on the number of parameters in a solu-
tion that can be chosen arbitrarily. To see this, observe that substituting x(t) and y(t)
into the ﬁrst equation of the original system (1) gives, after simpliﬁcation,
Since the latter expression is to be zero for all values of t, we must have
and 
These two equations enable us to write c3
as a multiple of c1 and c4 as a multiple of c2:
.
(4)
Hence we conclude that a solution of the system must be
You are urged to substitute (2) and (3) into the second equation of (1) and verify
that the same relationship (4) holds between the constants.
x(t)  c1e16t  c2e16t,    y(t)  16
3  c1e16t  16
3  c2e16t.
c3   16
3  c1    and    c4  16
3  c2
16c2  3c4  0.
16c1  3c3  0
16c1  3c3e16t  16c2  3c4e16t  0.
y(t)  c3e16t  c4e16t.
x(t)  c1e16t  c2e16t.
m2  16
m1  16
dx
dt  3y
dy
dt  2x
    or, equivalently,    Dx  3y  0
2x  Dy  0.
4.9
SOLVING SYSTEMS OF LINEAR DES BY ELIMINATION
●
181
EXAMPLE 1
Solution by Elimination
Solve
(5)
SOLUTION
Operating on the ﬁrst equation by D  3 and on the second by D and
then subtracting eliminates x from the system. It follows that the differential equation
for y is
Since the characteristic equation of this last differential equation is
m2  m  6  (m  2)(m  3)  0, we obtain the solution
(6)
Eliminating y in a similar manner yields (D2  D  6)x  0, from which we ﬁnd
(7)
x(t)  c3e2t  c4e3t.
y(t)  c1e2t  c2e3t.
[(D  3)(D  2)  2D]y  0    or    (D2  D  6)y  0.
 (D  3)x  
 2y  0.
 Dx   (D  2 )y  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
As we noted in the foregoing discussion, a solution of (5) does not contain four in-
dependent constants. Substituting (6) and (7) into the ﬁrst equation of (5) gives
From 4c1  2c3  0 and c2  3c4  0 we get c3  2c1 and 
.
Accordingly, a solution of the system is
Because we could just as easily solve for c3 and c4 in terms of c1 and c2, the
solution in Example 1 can be written in the alternative form
It sometimes pays to keep one's eyes open when solving systems. Had we solved
for x ﬁrst in Example 1, then y could be found, along with the relationship between the
constants, using the last equation in the system (5). You should verify that substituting
x(t) into 
yields 
Also note in the initial dis-
cussion that the relationship given in (4) and the solution y(t) of (1) could also have
been obtained by using x(t) in (2) and the ﬁrst equation of (1) in the form
y  1
3 Dx  1
3 26c1e16t  1
3 26c2e16t.
y  1
2 c3e2t  3c4e3t.
y  1
2 (Dx  3x)
x(t)  c3e2t  c4e3t,    y(t)  1
2 c3e2t  3c4e3t.
x(t)  2c1e2t  1
3 c2e3t,    y(t)  c1e2t  c2e3t.
c4  1
3 c2
(4c1  2c3)e2t  (c2  3c4)e3t  0.
This might save
you some time.

EXAMPLE 2
Solution by Elimination
Solve
(8)
SOLUTION
First we write the system in differential operator notation:
(9)
Then, by eliminating x, we obtain
or
Since the roots of the auxiliary equation m(m2  4)  0 are m1  0, m2  2i, and
m3  2i, the complementary function is yc  c1  c2 cos 2t  c3 sin 2t. To deter-
mine the particular solution yp, we use undetermined coefﬁcients by assuming that
yp  At3  Bt2  Ct. Therefore 
The last equality implies that 12A  1, 8B  2, and 6A  4C  0; hence
, and 
. Thus
(10)
Eliminating y from the system (9) leads to
It should be obvious that xc  c4 cos 2t  c5 sin 2t and that undetermined coefﬁ-
cients can be applied to obtain a particular solution of the form xp  At2  Bt  C.
In this case the usual differentiations and algebra yield 
and so
(11)
x  xc  xp  c4 cos 2t  c5 sin 2t  1
4 t2  1
8.
xp  1
4 t2  1
8,
[(D  4)  D(D  1)]x  t2    or    (D2  4)x  t2.
y  yc  yp  c1  c2 cos 2t  c3 sin 2t  1
12 t3  1
4 t2  1
8 t.
C  1
8
A  1
12, B  1
4
y
p  4yp  12At2  8Bt  6A  4C  t2  2t.
yp  3At2  2Bt  C, y	p  6At  2B, y	
p  6A,
 (D3  4D)y  t2  2t.
 [(D  1)D2  (D  4)D]y  (D  1)t2  (D  4)0
 (D  1)x    Dy  0.
 (D  4)x   D2y  t2
 x 
 x  y  0.
 x  4x  y	  t2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now c4 and c5 can be expressed in terms of c2 and c3 by substituting (10)
and (11) into either equation of (8). By using the second equation, we ﬁnd, after com-
bining terms,
so c5  2c4  2c2  0 and 2c5  c4  2c3  0. Solving for c4 and c5 in terms of c2
and c3 gives c4   (4c2  2c3) and c5 
(2c2  4c3). Finally, a solution of (8)
is found to be
 y(t)  c1  c2 cos 2t  c3 sin 2t  1
12 t3  1
4 t2  1
8 t.
 x(t)  1
5 (4c2  2c3) cos 2t  1
5 (2c2  4c3) sin 2t  1
4 t2  1
8,
1
5
1
5
(c5  2c4  2c2) sin 2t  (2c5  c4  2c3) cos 2t  0,
4.9
SOLVING SYSTEMS OF LINEAR DES BY ELIMINATION
●
183
EXAMPLE 3
A Mixture Problem Revisited
In (3) of Section 3.3 we saw that the system of linear ﬁrst-order differential equations
is a model for the number of pounds of salt x1(t) and x2(t) in brine mixtures in tanks
A and B, respectively, shown in Figure 3.3.1. At that time we were not able to solve
the system. But now, in terms of differential operators, the foregoing system can be
written as
Operating on the ﬁrst equation by 
multiplying the second equation by 
adding, and then simplifying gives (625D2  100D  3)x1  0. From the auxiliary
equation
we see immediately that x1(t)  c1et/25  c2e3t/25. We can now obtain x2(t) by
using the ﬁrst DE of the system in the form 
In this manner we
ﬁnd the solution of the system to be
In the original discussion on page 108 we assumed that the initial conditions were
x1(0)  25 and x2(0)  0. Applying these conditions to the solution yields 
c1  c2  25 and 2c1  2c2  0. Solving these equations simultaneously gives
Finally, a solution of the initial-value problem is
The graphs of both of these equations are given in Figure 4.9.1. Consistent with the
fact that pure water is being pumped into tank A we see in the ﬁgure that x1(t) : 0
and x2(t) : 0 as t : 
.
x1(t)  25
2  et/25  25
2  e3t/25,    x2(t)  25et/25  25e3t/25.
c1  c2  25
2 .
x1(t)  c1et/25  c2e3t/25,    x2(t)  2c1et/25  2c2e3t/25.
x2  50(D  2
25)x1.
625m2  100m  3  (25m  1)(25m  3)  0
1
50,
D  2
25,
  2
25  x1 D   2
25 x2  0.
 D  2
25 x1   
 1
50  x2  0
 dx2
dt 
 2
25 x1  2
25 x2
 dx1
dt   2
25 x1  1
50 x2
FIGURE 4.9.1
Pounds of salt in tanks
A and B in Example 3
20
5
10
15
25
20
40
x1(t)
x2(t)
60
time
pounds of salt
80
100
0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXERCISES 4.9
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-6.
In Problems 1-20 solve the given system of differential
equations by systematic elimination.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5. (D2  5)x 
2y  0
2x  (D2  2)y  0
6. (D  1)x  (D  1)y  2
3x  (D  2)y  1
7.
8.
9.
Dx 
D2y  e3t
(D  1)x  (D  1)y  4e3t
10.
D2x 
Dy  t
(D  3)x  (D  3)y  2
11. (D2  1)x 
y  0
(D  1)x  Dy  0
12. (2D2  D  1)x  (2D  1)y  1
(D  1)x 
Dy  1
13.
14.
15.
(D  1)x  (D2  1)y  1
(D2  1)x  (D  1)y  2
16.
D2x  2(D2  D)y  sin t
x 
Dy  0
17. Dx  y
18.
Dx 
z  et
Dy  z
(D  1)x  Dy  Dz  0
Dz  x
x  2y  Dz  et
19.
20.
dz
dt  x  y
dz
dt  x  y
dy
dt  y  z
dy
dt  x  z
dx
dt  x  z
dx
dt  6y
d2x
dt2  dx
dt  x  y  0
 dx
dt  dy
dt
  et
 dx
dt 
 x  dy
dt  5et
 2 dx
dt  5x  dy
dt  et
dx
dt  dy
dt  x  4y
d 2y
dt2  4x  et
d 2x
dt2  dy
dt  5x
d 2x
dt2  4y  et
dy
dt  x  2
dy
dt  x  t
dx
dt  4y  1
dx
dt  y  t
dy
dt  x  2y
dy
dt  x
dx
dt  4x  7y
dx
dt  2x  y
In Problems 21 and 22 solve the given initial-value problem.
21.
22.
x(1)  0, y(1)  1
x(0)  0, y(0)  0
Mathematical Models
23. Projectile Motion
A projectile shot from a gun has
weight w  mg and velocity v tangent to its path of
motion. Ignoring air resistance and all other forces acting
on the projectile except its weight, determine a system of
differential equations that describes its path of motion.
See Figure 4.9.2. Solve the system. [Hint: Use Newton's
second law of motion in the x and y directions.]
dy
dt  3x  2y
dy
dt  4x  y
dx
dt  y  1
dx
dt  5x  y
FIGURE 4.9.2
Path of projectile in Problem 23
y
x
mg
v
24. Projectile Motion with Air Resistance
Determine a
system of differential equations that describes the path
of motion in Problem 23 if air resistance is a retarding
force k (of magnitude k) acting tangent to the path of the
projectile but opposite to its motion. See Figure 4.9.3.
Solve the system. [Hint: k is a multiple of velocity,
say, bv.]
FIGURE 4.9.3
Forces in Problem 24
k
v
θ
Discussion Problems
25. Examine and discuss the following system:
Computer Lab Assignments
26. Reexamine Figure 4.9.1 in Example 3. Then use a root-
ﬁnding application to determine when tank B contains
more salt than tank A.
 (D  1)x  2(D  1)y  1.
 Dx
  2Dy  t2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.10
NONLINEAR DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
●
185
27. (a) Reread Problem 8 of Exercises 3.3. In that problem
you were asked to show that the system of differen-
tial equations
is a model for the amounts of salt in the connected
mixing tanks A, B, and C shown in Figure 3.3.7.
Solve the system subject to x1(0)  15, x2(t)  10,
x3(t)  5.
 dx3
dt  2
75 x2  1
25 x3
 dx2
dt  1
50 x1  2
75 x2
 dx1
dt   1
50 x1
(b) Use a CAS to graph x1(t), x2(t), and x3(t) in the
same coordinate plane (as in Figure 4.9.1) on the
interval [0, 200].
(c) Because only pure water is pumped into Tank A, it
stands to reason that the salt will eventually be
ﬂushed out of all three tanks. Use a root-ﬁnding
application of a CAS to determine the time when
the amount of salt in each tank is less than or equal
to 0.5 pound. When will the amounts of salt x1(t),
x2(t), and x3(t) be simultaneously less than or equal
to 0.5 pound?
NONLINEAR DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 2.2 and 2.5
●Section 4.2
●A review of Taylor series from calculus is also recommended.
INTRODUCTION
The difﬁculties that surround higher-order nonlinear differential equations
and the few methods that yield analytic solutions are examined next. Two of the solution methods
considered in this section employ a change of variable to reduce a nonlinear second-order DE to a
ﬁrst-order DE. In that sense these methods are analogous to the material in Section 4.2.
4.10
Some Differences
There are several signiﬁcant differences between linear
and nonlinear differential equations. We saw in Section 4.1 that homogeneous linear
equations of order two or higher have the property that a linear combination of solu-
tions is also a solution (Theorem 4.1.2). Nonlinear equations do not possess this
property of superposability. See Problems 1 and 18 in Exercises 4.10. We can ﬁnd
general solutions of linear ﬁrst-order DEs and higher-order equations with constant
coefﬁcients. Even when we can solve a nonlinear ﬁrst-order differential equation in
the form of a one-parameter family, this family does not, as a rule, represent a gen-
eral solution. Stated another way, nonlinear ﬁrst-order DEs can possess singular
solutions, whereas linear equations cannot. But the major difference between linear
and nonlinear equations of order two or higher lies in the realm of solvability. Given
a linear equation, there is a chance that we can ﬁnd some form of a solution that we
can look at—an explicit solution or perhaps a solution in the form of an inﬁnite
series (see Chapter 6). On the other hand, nonlinear higher-order differential equa-
tions virtually defy solution by analytical methods. Although this might sound dis-
heartening, there are still things that can be done. As was pointed out at the end of
Section 1.3, we can always analyze a nonlinear DE qualitatively and numerically.
Let us make it clear at the outset that nonlinear higher-order differential equations
are important—dare we say even more important than linear equations?—because as
we ﬁne-tune the mathematical model of, say, a physical system, we also increase the
likelihood that this higher-resolution model will be nonlinear.
We begin by illustrating an analytical method that occasionally enables us to
ﬁnd explicit/implicit solutions of special kinds of nonlinear second-order differential
equations.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Reduction of Order  Nonlinear second-order differential equations F(x, y, y	)  0,
EXAMPLE 1
Dependent Variable y Is Missing
Solve y	  2x(y)2.
SOLUTION
If we let u  y, then dudx  y	. After substituting, the second-order
equation reduces to a ﬁrst-order equation with separable variables; the independent
variable is x and the dependent variable is u:
The constant of integration is written as 
for convenience. The reason should be
obvious in the next few steps. Because u1  1y, it follows that
and so
Independent Variable Missing
Next we show how to solve an equation
y   
dx
x2  c1
2    or    y   1
c1
 tan1 x
c1
 c2.
dy
dx  
1
x2  c1
2,
c1
2
 u1  x2  c1
2.
  u2 du  2x dx
 du
dx  2xu2    or    du
u2  2x dx
EXAMPLE 2
Independent Variable x Is Missing
Solve yy	  (y)2.
technique for an equation of the form F(x, y, y	)  0. If u  y, then the differential
equation becomes F(x, u, u)  0. If we can solve this last equation for u, we can ﬁnd
y by integration. Note that since we are solving a second-order equation, its solution
will contain two arbitrary constants.
that has the form F(y, y, y	)  0. Once more we let u  y, but because the indepen-
dent variable x is missing, we use this substitution to transform the differential equa-
tion into one in which the independent variable is y and the dependent variable is u.
To this end we use the Chain Rule to compute the second derivative of y:
In this case the ﬁrst-order equation that we must now solve is
Fy, u, u du
dy  0.
y	  du
dx  du
dy dy
dx  u du
dy.
where the dependent variable y is missing, and F(y, y, y	)  0, where the indepen-
dent variable x is missing, can sometimes be solved by using first-order methods.
Each equation can be reduced to a first-order equation by means of the substitu-
tion u  y.
Dependent Variable Missing
The next example illustrates the substitution
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SOLUTION
With the aid of u  y, the Chain Rule shown above, and separation of
variables, the given differential equation becomes
Integrating the last equation then yields lnu  lny  c1, which, in turn, gives u  c2y,
where the constant 
has been relabeled as c2. We now resubstitute u  dydx, sepa-
rate variables once again, integrate, and relabel constants a second time:
Use of Taylor Series
In some instances a solution of a nonlinear initial-value
problem, in which the initial conditions are speciﬁed at x0, can be approximated by a
Taylor series centered at x0.
 dy
y  c2  dx    or    lny   c2x  c3    or    y  c4ec2x.
ec1
yu du
dy  u2    or    du
u  dy
y .
4.10
NONLINEAR DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
●
187
EXAMPLE 3
Taylor Series Solution of an IVP
Let us assume that a solution of the initial-value problem
(1)
exists. If we further assume that the solution y(x) of the problem is analytic at 0, then
y(x) possesses a Taylor series expansion centered at 0:
(2)
Note that the values of the ﬁrst and second terms in the series (2) are known
since those values are the speciﬁed initial conditions y(0)  1, y(0)  1.
Moreover, the differential equation itself deﬁnes the value of the second derivative
at 0: y	(0)  0  y(0)  y(0)2  0  (1)  (1)2  2. We can then ﬁnd
expressions for the higher derivatives y, y(4), . . . by calculating the successive
derivatives of the differential equation:
(3)
(4)
(5)
and so on. Now using y(0)  1 and y(0)  1, we ﬁnd from (3) that y(0)  4. From
the values y(0)  1, y(0)  1, and y	(0)  2 we ﬁnd y(4)(0)  8 from (4). With
the additional information that y(0)  4, we then see from (5) that y(5)(0)  24.
Hence from (2) the ﬁrst six terms of a series solution of the initial-value problem (1) are
Use of a Numerical Solver
Numerical methods, such as Euler's method or the
Runge-Kutta method, are developed solely for ﬁrst-order differential equations and then
are extended to systems of ﬁrst-order equations. To analyze an nth-order initial-value
problem numerically, we express the nth-order ODE as a system of n ﬁrst-order equa-
tions. In brief, here is how it is done for a second-order initial-value problem: First, solve
y(x)  1  x  x2  2
3 x3  1
3 x4  1
5 x5     .
 y(5)(x)  d
dx (y	  2yy	  2(y)2)  y  2yy  6yy	
 y(4)(x)  d
dx (1  y  2yy)  y	  2yy	  2(y)2
 y(x)  d
dx (x  y  y2)  1  y  2yy
y(x)  y(0)  y(0)
1!  x  y	(0)
2!  x2  y(0)
3!  x3  y(4)(0)
4!  x4  y(5)(0)
5!  x5     .
y	  x  y  y2,  y(0)  1,  y(0)  1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

188
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
for y	—that is, put the DE into normal form y	  f(x, y, y)—and then let y  u. For
example, if we substitute y  u in
(6)
then y	  u and y(x0)  u(x0), so the initial-value problem (6) becomes
However, it should be noted that a commercial numerical solver might not require*
that you supply the system.
Subject to:  y(x0)  y0, u(x0)  u0.
 Solve:    	
y  u
u  f(x, y, u)
d 2y
dx2  f (x, y, y),  y(x0)  y0,  y(x0)  u0,
FIGURE 4.10.2
Numerical solution
curve for the IVP in (1)
y
10
20
x
FIGURE 4.10.1
Comparison of two
approximate solutions in Example 1
y
x
Taylor
polynomial 
solution curve 
generated by a 
numerical solver 
EXAMPLE 4
Graphical Analysis of Example 3
Following the foregoing procedure, we ﬁnd that the second-order initial-value prob-
lem in Example 3 is equivalent to
with initial conditions y(0)  1, u(0)  1. With the aid of a numerical solver we get
the solution curve shown in blue in Figure 4.10.1. For comparison the graph of the
ﬁfth-degree Taylor polynomial 
is shown
in red. Although we do not know the interval of convergence of the Taylor series
obtained in Example 3, the closeness of the two curves in a neighborhood of the ori-
gin suggests that the power series may converge on the interval (1, 1).
Qualitative Questions
The blue numerical solution curve in Figure 4.10.1
raises some questions of a qualitative nature: Is the solution of the original initial-value
problem oscillatory as 
? The graph generated by a numerical solver on the larger
interval shown in Figure 4.10.2 would seem to suggest that the answer is yes. But this
single example—or even an assortment of examples—does not answer the basic ques-
tion as to whether all solutions of the differential equation y	  x  y  y2 are oscilla-
tory in nature. Also, what is happening to the solution curve in Figure 4.10.2 when x is
near 1? What is the behavior of solutions of the differential equation as 
?
Are solutions bounded as 
? Questions such as these are not easily answered, in
general, for nonlinear second-order differential equations. But certain kinds of second-
order equations lend themselves to a systematic qualitative analysis, and these, like
their ﬁrst-order relatives encountered in Section 2.1, are the kind that have no explicit
dependence on the independent variable. Second-order ODEs of the form
equations free of the independent variable x, are called autonomous. The differen-
tial equation in Example 2 is autonomous, and because of the presence of the x term
on its right-hand side, the equation in Example 3 is nonautonomous. For an in-depth
treatment of the topic of stability of autonomous second-order differential equations
and autonomous systems of differential equations, refer to Chapter 10 in Differential
Equations with Boundary-Value Problems.
F(y, y, y	)  0    or    d 2y
dx2  f (y, y),
x : 
x : 
x : 
T5(x)  1  x  x2  2
3x3  1
3x4  1
5x5
 du
dx  x  y  y2
 dy
dx  u
*Some numerical solvers require only that a second-order differential equation be expressed in normal
form y	  f(x, y, y). The translation of the single equation into a system of two equations is then built
into the computer program, since the ﬁrst equation of the system is always y  u and the second equation
is u  f(x, y, u).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.10
NONLINEAR DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
●
189
EXERCISES 4.10
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-7.
In Problems 1 and 2 verify that y1 and y2 are solutions of the
given differential equation but that y  c1y1  c2y2 is, in
general, not a solution.
1. (y	)2  y2;
y1  ex, y2  cos x
2.
In Problems 3-8 solve the given differential equation by
using the substitution u  y.
3. y	  (y)2  1  0
4. y	  1  ( y)2
5. x2y	  (y)2  0
6. (y  1)y	  (y)2
7. y	  2y( y)3  0
8. y2y	  y
In Problems 9 and 10 solve the given initial-value problem.
9.
10.
11. Consider the initial-value problem
y	  yy  0,
y(0)  1, y(0)  1.
(a) Use the DE and a numerical solver to graph the
solution curve.
(b) Find an explicit solution of the IVP. Use a graphing
utility to graph this solution.
(c) Find an interval of deﬁnition for the solution in
part (b).
12. Find two solutions of the initial-value problem
Use a numerical solver to graph the solution curves.
In Problems 13 and 14 show that the substitution u  y leads
to a Bernoulli equation. Solve this equation (see Section 2.5).
13. xy	  y  (y)3
14. xy	  y  x( y)2
In Problems 15-18 proceed as in Example 3 and obtain the
ﬁrst six nonzero terms of a Taylor series solution, centered
at 0, of the given initial-value problem. Use a numerical
solver and a graphing utility to compare the solution curve
with the graph of the Taylor polynomial.
15. y	  x  y2,
y(0)  1, y(0)  1
16. y	  y2  1,
y(0)  2, y(0)  3
17. y	  x2  y2  2y,
y(0)  1, y(0)  1
18. y	  ey,
y(0)  0, y(0)  1
( y	)2  ( y)2  1,  y

2  1
2, y

2  13
2 .
y	  x(y)2  0, y(1)  4, y(1)  2
2yy	  1, y(0)  2, y(0)  1
yy	  1
2 ( y)2; y1  1, y2  x2
19. In calculus the curvature of a curve that is deﬁned by a
function y  f(x) is deﬁned as
Find y  f(x) for which k  1. [Hint: For simplicity,
ignore constants of integration.]
Discussion Problems
20. In Problem 1 we saw that cos x and ex were solutions of
the nonlinear equation (y	)2  y2  0. Verify that sin x
and ex are also solutions. Without attempting to solve the
differential equation, discuss how these explicit solutions
can be found by using knowledge about linear equations.
Without attempting to verify, discuss why the linear
combinations y  c1ex  c2ex  c3 cos x  c4 sin x and
y  c2ex  c4 sin x are not, in general, solutions, but
the two special linear combinations y  c1ex  c2ex
and y  c3 cos x  c4 sin x must satisfy the differential
equation.
21. Discuss how the method of reduction of order con-
sidered in this section can be applied to the third-order
differential equation 
. Carry out your
ideas and solve the equation.
22. Discuss how to ﬁnd an alternative two-parameter fam-
ily of solutions for the nonlinear differential equation
y	  2x(y)2 in Example 1. [Hint: Suppose that 
is
used as the constant of integration instead of
.]
Mathematical Models
23. Motion in a Force Field A mathematical model for
the position x(t) of a body moving rectilinearly on the
x-axis in an inverse-square force ﬁeld is given by
Suppose that at t  0 the body starts from rest from the
position x  x0, x0  0. Show that the velocity of
the body at time t is given by v2  2k2(1x  1x0).
Use the last expression and a CAS to carry out the inte-
gration to express time t in terms of x.
24. A mathematical model for the position x(t) of a moving
object is
.
Use a numerical solver to graphically investigate the so-
lutions of the equation subject to x(0)  0, x(0)  x1,
d 2x
dt2  sin x  0
d 2x
dt2  k2
x2.
c1
2
c1
2
y  11  (y	)2
 
y	
[1  ( y)2]3/2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190
●
CHAPTER 4
HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
x1  0. Discuss the motion of the object for t  0 and
for various choices of x1. Investigate the equation
d 2x
dt2  dx
dt  sin x  0
in the same manner. Give a possible physical interpreta-
tion of the dxdt term.
CHAPTER 4 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-7.
Answer Problems 1-10 without referring back to the text.
Fill in the blank or answer true or false.
1. The only solution of the initial-value problem 
y	  x2y  0, y(0)  0, y(0)  0 is __________.
2. For the method of undetermined coefﬁcients, the
assumed form of the particular solution yp
for
y	  y  1  ex is __________.
3. A constant multiple of a solution of a linear differential
equation is also a solution. __________
4. If the set consisting of two functions f1 and f2 is linearly
independent on an interval I, then the Wronskian 
W( f1, f2)  0 for all x in I. __________
5. If 
is a solution of a homogeneous linear 
second-order differential with constant coefﬁcients,
then the general solution of the DE is _______.
6. If 
is a solution of a homoge-
neous fourth-order linear differential equation with con-
stant coefﬁcients, then the roots of the auxiliary equation
are _______.
7. If 
is the general solution of
a homogeneous second-order Cauchy-Euler equation,
then the DE is _______.
8.
is particular solution of 
for
_______.
9. If 
is a particular solution of 
and
is a particular solution of 
then
a particular solution of 
is _______.
10. If 
and 
are solutions of homogeneous
linear 
differential 
equation, 
then 
necessarily
is also a solution of the DE. _______ 
11. Give an interval over which the set of two functions
f1(x)  x2 and f2(x)  x x is linearly independent.
Then give an interval over which the set consisting of
f1 and f2 is linearly dependent.
12. Without the aid of the Wronskian, determine whether
the given set of functions is linearly independent or
linearly dependent on the indicated interval.
(a) f1(x)  ln x, f2(x)  ln x2, (0, 
)
(b) f1(x)  xn, f2(x)  xn1, n  1, 2, . . . , (
, 
)
y  5ex  10ex
y2  ex
y1  ex
y	  y  x2  x
y	  y  x2,
yp2  x2  2
y	  y  x
yp1  x
A 
y  y	  1
yp  Ax2
y  c1x2  c2x2 ln x, x  0,
y  1  x  6x2  3ex
y  sin 5x
(c) f1(x)  x, f2(x)  x  1, (
, 
)
(d)
(e) f1(x)  0, f2(x)  x, (5, 5)
(f) f1(x)  2, f2(x)  2x, (
, 
)
(g) f1(x)  x2, f2(x)  1  x2, f3(x)  2  x2, (
, 
)
(h) f1(x)  xex1, f2(x)  (4x  5)ex,
f3(x)  xex, (
, 
)
13. Suppose m1  3, m2  5, and m3  1 are roots of
multiplicity one, two, and three, respectively, of an aux-
iliary equation. Write down the general solution of the
corresponding homogeneous linear DE if it is
(a) an equation with constant coefﬁcients,
(b) a Cauchy-Euler equation.
14. Consider the differential equation ay	  by  cy  g(x),
where a, b, and c are constants. Choose the input func-
tions g(x) for which the method of undetermined coefﬁ-
cients is applicable and the input functions for which the
method of variation of parameters is applicable.
(a) g(x)  ex ln x
(b) g(x)  x3 cos x
(c)
(d) g(x)  2x2ex
(e) g(x)  sin2x
(f)
In Problems 15-30 use the procedures developed in this
chapter to ﬁnd the general solution of each differential
equation.
15. y	  2y  2y  0
16. 2y	  2y  3y  0
17. y  10y	  25y  0
18. 2y  9y	  12y  5y  0
19. 3y  10y	  15y  4y  0
20. 2y(4)  3y  2y	  6y  4y  0
21. y	  3y  5y  4x3  2x
22. y	  2y  y  x2ex
g(x) 
ex
sin x
g(x)  sin x
ex
f1(x)  cosx  
2, f2(x)  sin x, (
, 
)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 IN REVIEW
●
191
23. y  5y	  6y  8  2 sin x
24. y  y	  6
25. y	  2y  2y  ex tan x
26.
27. 6x2y	  5xy  y  0
28. 2x3y  19x2y	  39xy  9y  0
29. x2y	  4xy  6y  2x4  x2
30. x2y	  xy  y  x3
31. Write down the form of the general solution y  yc  yp
of the given differential equation in the two cases v  a
and v  a. Do not determine the coefﬁcients in yp.
(a) y	  v2y  sin ax
(b) y	  v2y  eax
32. (a) Given that y  sin x is a solution of
y(4)  2y  11y	  2y  10y  0,
ﬁnd the general solution of the DE without the aid
of a calculator or a computer.
(b) Find a linear second-order differential equation
with constant coefﬁcients for which y1  1 and
y2  ex are solutions of the associated homoge-
neous equation and 
is a particular
solution of the nonhomogeneous equation.
33. (a) Write the general solution of the fourth-order DE
y(4)  2y	  y  0 entirely in terms of hyperbolic
functions.
(b) Write down the form of a particular solution of
y(4)  2y	  y  sinh x.
34. Consider the differential equation 
x2y	  (x2  2x)y  (x  2)y  x3.
Verify that y1  x is one solution of the associated
homogeneous equation. Then show that the method of
reduction of order discussed in Section 4.2 leads to a
second solution y2 of the homogeneous equation as well
as a particular solution yp of the nonhomogeneous equa-
tion. Form the general solution of the DE on the interval
(0, 
).
yp  1
2x2  x
y	  y 
2ex
ex  ex
In Problems 35-40 solve the given differential equation sub-
ject to the indicated conditions.
35.
36. y	  2y  y  0,
y(1)  0, y(0)  0
37. y	  y  x  sin x,
y(0)  2, y(0)  3
38.
39. yy	  4x,
y(1)  5, y(1)  2
40. 2y	  3y2,
y(0)  1, y(0)  1
41. (a) Use a CAS as an aid in ﬁnding the roots of the aux-
iliary equation for
12y(4)  64y  59y	  23y  12y  0.
Give the general solution of the equation.
(b) Solve the DE in part (a) subject to the initial condi-
tions y(0)  1, y(0)  2, y	(0)  5, y(0)  0.
Use a CAS as an aid in solving the resulting
systems of four equations in four unknowns.
42. Find a member of the family of solutions of
whose graph is tangent to the
x-axis at x  1. Use a graphing utility to graph the
solution curve.
In Problems 43-46 use systematic elimination to solve the
given system.
43.
44.
45.
46.
 5x  (D  3)y  cos 2t
(D  2 )x  (D  1)y  sin 2t
 3 x  (D  4 )  y  7et
 (D   2)x
  y  et
dy
dt  3x  4y  4t
dx
dt  2x 
 y 
 t  2
 dx
dt  2 dy
dt 
 y  3
 dx
dt 
 dy
dt  2x  2y  1
xy	  y  1x  0
y	  y  sec3x, y(0)  1, y(0)  1
2
y	  2y  2y  0, y (p>2)  0, y()  1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192
Modeling with Higher-Order 
Differential Equations
We have seen that a single differential equation can serve as a mathematical model
for diverse physical systems. For this reason we examine just one application, the
motion of a mass attached to a spring, in great detail in Section 5.1. Except for
terminology and physical interpretations of the four terms in the linear differential
equation
the mathematics of, say, an electrical series circuit is identical to that of a vibrating
spring/mass system. Forms of this linear second-order equation appear in the
analysis of problems in many different areas of science and engineering. In Section 5.1
we deal exclusively with initial-value problems, whereas in Section 5.2 we examine
applications described by boundary-value problems. In Section 5.2 we also see how
some boundary-value problems lead to the important concepts of eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions. Section 5.3 begins with a discussion on the differences between
linear and nonlinear springs; we then show how the simple pendulum and a
suspended wire lead to nonlinear models.
a d 2y
dt2  b dy
dt  cy  g(t),
5.1 Linear Models: Initial-Value Problems
5.1.1 Spring/Mass Systems: Free Undamped Motion
5.1.2 Spring/Mass Systems: Free Damped Motion
5.1.3 Spring/Mass Systems: Driven Motion
5.1.4 Series Circuit Analogue
5.2 Linear Models: Boundary-Value Problems
5.3 Nonlinear Models
Chapter 5 in Review
5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.1
LINEAR MODELS: INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
193
5.1.1
SPRING/MASS SYSTEMS: 
FREE UNDAMPED MOTION
Hooke's Law
Suppose that a ﬂexible spring is suspended vertically from a rigid
support and then a mass m is attached to its free end. The amount of stretch, or elonga-
tion, of the spring will of course depend on the mass; masses with different weights
stretch the spring by differing amounts. By Hooke's law the spring itself exerts a restor-
ing force F opposite to the direction of elongation and proportional to the amount of
elongation s. Simply stated, F  ks, where k is a constant of proportionality called the
spring constant. The spring is essentially characterized by the number k. For example,
if a mass weighing 10 pounds stretches a spring 
foot, then 
implies
k  20 lb/ft. Necessarily then, a mass weighing, say, 8 pounds stretches the same
spring only foot.
Newton's Second Law
After a mass m is attached to a spring, it stretches
the spring by an amount s and attains a position of equilibrium at which its
weight W is balanced by the restoring force ks. Recall that weight is deﬁned by
W  mg, where mass is measured in slugs, kilograms, or grams and g  32 ft/s2,
9.8 m/s2, or 980 cm/s2, respectively. As indicated in Figure 5.1.1(b), the condition
of equilibrium is mg  ks or mg  ks  0. If the mass is displaced by an amount
x from its equilibrium position, the restoring force of the spring is then k(x  s).
Assuming that there are no retarding forces acting on the system and assuming that
the mass vibrates free of other external forces—free motion—we can equate
Newton's second law with the net, or resultant, force of the restoring force and the
weight:
(1)
The negative sign in (1) indicates that the restoring force of the spring acts opposite
to the direction of motion. Furthermore, we adopt the convention that displacements
measured below the equilibrium position x  0 are positive. See Figure 5.1.2.
d 2x
---
dt 2  k(s  x)  mg   kx  mg  ks  kx.
m
zero
2
5
10  k  1
2
1
2
m
(a)
(b)
(c)
unstretched
motion
l
equilibrium
position
mg −ks = 0
m
l
l + s
s
x
FIGURE 5.1.1
Spring/mass system
m
x = 0
x < 0
x > 0
FIGURE 5.1.2
Direction below the
equilibrium position is positive.
LINEAR MODELS: INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 4.1, 4.3, and 4.4
●Problems 29-36 in Exercises 4.3
●Problems 27-36 in Exercises 4.4
INTRODUCTION
In this section we are going to consider several linear dynamical systems in
which each mathematical model is a second-order differential equation with constant coefﬁcients
along with initial conditions speciﬁed at a time that we shall take to be t  0:
.
Recall that the function g is the input, driving function, or forcing function of the system. A solution
y(t) of the differential equation on an interval I containing t  0 that satisﬁes the initial conditions is
called the output or response of the system.
a d 2y
dt2  b dy
dt  cy  g(t), y(0)  y0, y(0)  y1
5.1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
DE of Free Undamped Motion
By dividing (1) by the mass m, we obtain
the second-order differential equation d2xdt2  (km)x  0, or
,
(2)
where v2  km. Equation (2) is said to describe simple harmonic motion or
free undamped motion. Two obvious initial conditions associated with (2) are
x(0)  x0 and x(0)  x1, the initial displacement and initial velocity of the mass,
respectively. For example, if x0  0, x1  0, the mass starts from a point below the
equilibrium position with an imparted upward velocity. When x(0)  0, the mass is
said to be released from rest. For example, if x0  0, x1  0, the mass is released
from rest from a point x0 units above the equilibrium position.
d 2x
dt2  2x  0
Equation of Motion
To solve equation (2), we note that the solutions of its
auxiliary equation m2  v2  0 are the complex numbers m1  vi, m2  vi. Thus
from (8) of Section 4.3 we ﬁnd the general solution of (2) to be
.
(3)
The period of motion described by (3) is T  2pv. The number T represents the time
(measured in seconds) it takes the mass to execute one cycle of motion. A cycle is one
complete oscillation of the mass, that is, the mass m moving from, say, the lowest point
below the equilibrium position to the point highest above the equilibrium position and
then back to the lowest point. From a graphical viewpoint T  2pv seconds is the
length of the time interval between two successive maxima (or minima) of x(t). Keep
in mind that a maximum of x(t) is a positive displacement corresponding to the mass
attaining its greatest distance below the equilibrium position, whereas a minimum of
x(t) is negative displacement corresponding to the mass attaining its greatest height
above the equilibrium position. We refer to either case as an extreme displacement of
the mass. The frequency of motion is f  1T  v2p and is the number of cycles
completed each second. For example, if x(t)  2 cos 3pt  4 sin 3pt, then the period
is T  2p3p  23 s, and the frequency is f  32 cycles/s. From a graphical view-
point the graph of x(t) repeats every second, that is, 
, and cycles of
the graph are completed each second (or, equivalently, three cycles of the graph are
completed every 2 seconds). The number 
(measured in radians per sec-
ond) is called the circular frequency of the system. Depending on which text you read,
both f  v2p and v are also referred to as the natural frequency of the system.
Finally, when the initial conditions are used to determine the constants c1 and c2 in (3),
we say that the resulting particular solution or response is the equation of motion.
  1k>m
3
2
x(t  2
3)  x(t)
2
3
x(t)  c1 cos t  c2 sin t
EXAMPLE 1
Free Undamped Motion
A mass weighing 2 pounds stretches a spring 6 inches. At t  0 the mass is released
from a point 8 inches below the equilibrium position with an upward velocity of 
.
Determine the equation of motion.
SOLUTION
Because we are using the engineering system of units, the measure-
ments given in terms of inches must be converted into feet: 
; 
.
In addition, we must convert the units of weight given in pounds into units of mass.
From m  Wg we have 
slug. Also, from Hooke's law, 
implies that the spring constant is k  4 lb/ft. Hence (1) gives
.
The initial displacement and initial velocity are 
, 
, where the neg-
ative sign in the last condition is a consequence of the fact that the mass is given an
initial velocity in the negative, or upward, direction.
x (0)  4
3
x(0)  2
3
1
16 d 2x
dt2  4x  or  d 2x
dt2  64x  0
2  k  1
2
m  2
32  1
16
8 in.  2
3 ft
6 in.  1
2 ft
4
3 ft/s
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.1
LINEAR MODELS: INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
195
Now v2  64 or v  8, so the general solution of the differential equation is
.
(4)
Applying the initial conditions to x(t) and x(t) gives 
and 
. Thus the
equation of motion is
.
(5)
Alternative Forms of x(t)
When c1 	 0 and c2 	 0, the actual amplitude A
of free vibrations is not obvious from inspection of equation (3). For example,
although the mass in Example 1 is initially displaced foot beyond the equilibrium
position, the amplitude of vibrations is a number larger than . Hence it is often con-
venient to convert a solution of form (3) to the simpler form
,
(6)
where 
and f is a phase angle deﬁned by
.
(7)
To verify this, we expand (6) by the addition formula for the sine function:
.
(8)
It follows from Figure 5.1.3 that if f is deﬁned by
,
then (8) becomes
.
A c1
A cos t  A c2
A sin t  c1 cos t  c2 sin t  x(t)
sin 
 
c1
1c1
 2  c2
 2  c1
A
,  cos 
 
c2
1c1
 2  c2
 2  c2
A
A sin t cos 
   cos t sin 
  ( sin 
)cos t  ( cos 
)sin t
sin 
  c1
A
cos 
  c2
A
 tan 
  c1
c2
A  2c1
2  c2
2
x(t)  A sin(t  
)
2
3
2
3
x(t)  2
3 cos 8t  1
6 sin 8t
c2  1
6
c1  2
3
x(t)  c1 cos 8t  c2 sin 8t
c1
c2
φ
c1  + c2
2
2
FIGURE 5.1.3
A relationship between
c1  0, c2  0 and phase angle f
EXAMPLE 2
Alternative Form of Solution (5)
In view of the foregoing discussion we can write solution (5) in the alternative
form x(t)  A sin(8t  f). Computation of the amplitude is straightforward,
, but some care should be exercised in
computing the phase angle f defined by (7). With 
and 
we find
tan f  4, and a calculator then gives tan1(4)  1.326 rad. This is not the
phase angle, since tan1(4) is located in the fourth quadrant and therefore con-
tradicts the fact that sin f  0 and cos f  0 because c1  0 and c2  0. Hence
we must take f to be the second-quadrant angle f  p  (1.326)  1.816 rad.
Thus (5) is the same as
.
(9)
The period of this function is T  2p8  p4 s.
You should be aware that some instructors in science and engineering prefer that
(3) be expressed as a shifted cosine function 
x(t)  A cos(vt  f),
(6)
x(t)  117
6  sin(8t  1.816)
c2  1
6
c1  2
3
A  2(2
3)2  (1
6)2  217
36  0.69 ft
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

196
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
where 
In this case the radian measured angle 
is deﬁned in slightly
different manner than in (7):
.
(7)
For example, in Example 2 with 
and 
(7) indicates that tan 
Because sin 
and cos 
the angle 
lies in the fourth quadrant and so
rounded to three decimal places 
rad. From (6) we obtain
a second alternative form of solution (5):
.
Graphical Interpretation
Figure 5.1.4(a) illustrates the mass in Example 2
going through approximately two complete cycles of motion.  Reading left to right, the
ﬁrst ﬁve positions (marked with black dots) correspond to the initial position of the
mass below the equilibrium position 
, the mass passing through the equilibrium
position for the ﬁrst time heading upward (x  0), the mass at its extreme displacement
above the equilibrium position 
, the mass at the equilibrium position
for the second time heading downward (x  0), and the mass at its extreme displace-
ment below the equilibrium position 
. The black dots on the graph of (9),
given in Figure 5.1.4(b), also agree with the ﬁve positions just given. Note, however,
that in Figure 5.1.4(b) the positive direction in the tx-plane is the usual upward
(x  1176)
(x  1176)
(x  2
3)
x(t)  217
6
 cos(8t  (0.245)) or x(t)  217
6
 cos(8t  0.245)
f  tan1(1
4)  0.245
f
f  0
f  0
f  1
4.
c2  1
6,
c1  2
3
sin 
  c2
A
cos 
  c1
A
 tan 
  c2
c1
f
A  2c2
1  c2
2.
x = −
6
17
x =
6
17
x = 0
2
3
x =
x = 0
x = 0
x negative
x positive
(a)
(b)
x
t
(0, )
2
3
period
4
π
amplitude
A =
6
17
x = 0
x negative
x positive
FIGURE 5.1.4
Simple harmonic motion
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.1
LINEAR MODELS: INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
197
direction and so is opposite to the positive direction indicated in Figure 5.1.4(a). Hence
the solid blue graph representing the motion of the mass in Figure 5.1.4(b) is the
reﬂection through the t-axis of the blue dashed curve in Figure 5.1.4(a).
Form (6) is very useful because it is easy to find values of time for which
the graph of x(t) crosses the positive t-axis (the line x  0). We observe that
sin(vt  f)  0 when vt  f  np, where n is a nonnegative integer.
Systems with Variable Spring Constants
In the model discussed above we
assumed an ideal world—a world in which the physical characteristics of the spring
do not change over time. In the nonideal world, however, it seems reasonable to ex-
pect that when a spring/mass system is in motion for a long period, the spring will
weaken; in other words, the "spring constant" will vary—or, more speciﬁcally,
decay—with time. In one model for the aging spring the spring constant k in (1) is
replaced by the decreasing function K(t)  keat, k  0, a  0. The linear
differential equation mx  keatx  0 cannot be solved by the methods that were
considered in Chapter 4. Nevertheless, we can obtain two linearly independent solu-
tions using the methods in Chapter 6. See Problem 15 in Exercises 5.1, Example 4 in
Section 6.4, and Problems 33 and 39 in Exercises 6.4.
When a spring/mass system is subjected to an environment in which the
temperature is rapidly decreasing, it might make sense to replace the constant k
with K(t)  kt, k  0, a function that increases with time. The resulting model,
mx  ktx  0, is a form of Airy's differential equation. Like the equation for
an aging spring, Airy's equation can be solved by the methods of Chapter 6. See
Problem 16 in Exercises 5.1, Example 5 in Section 6.2, and Problems 34, 35, and
40 in Exercise 6.4.
5.1.2
SPRING/MASS SYSTEMS: 
FREE DAMPED MOTION
The concept of free harmonic motion is somewhat unrealistic, since the motion
described by equation (1) assumes that there are no retarding forces acting on the mov-
ing mass. Unless the mass is suspended in a perfect vacuum, there will be at least a re-
sisting force due to the surrounding medium. As Figure 5.1.5 shows, the mass could be
suspended in a viscous medium or connected to a dashpot damping device.
DE of Free Damped Motion
In the study of mechanics, damping forces
acting on a body are considered to be proportional to a power of the instantaneous
velocity. In particular, we shall assume throughout the subsequent discussion that
this force is given by a constant multiple of dxdt. When no other external forces are
impressed on the system, it follows from Newton's second law that
,
(10)
where b is a positive damping constant and the negative sign is a consequence of the
fact that the damping force acts in a direction opposite to the motion.
Dividing (10) by the mass m, we ﬁnd that the differential equation of free
damped motion is 
or
,
(11)
where
.
(12)
2  
m,  2  k
m
d 2x
dt2  2 dx
dt  2x  0
d 2x
dt 2  b
m dx
dt  k
mx  0
m d 2x
dt2  kx   dx
dt
m
(a)
(b)
m
FIGURE 5.1.5
Damping devices
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
The symbol 2l is used only for algebraic convenience because the auxiliary equation
is m2  2lm  v2  0, and the corresponding roots are then
.
We can now distinguish three possible cases depending on the algebraic sign of
l2  v2. Since each solution contains the damping factor elt, l  0, the displace-
ments of the mass become negligible as time t increases.
Case I: L2  V2  0
In this situation the system is said to be overdamped
because the damping coefﬁcient b is large when compared to the spring constant k.
The corresponding solution of (11) is 
or
.
(13)
This equation represents a smooth and nonoscillatory motion. Figure 5.1.6 shows
two possible graphs of x(t).
Case II: L2  V2  0
The system is said to be critically damped because any
slight decrease in the damping force would result in oscillatory motion. The general
solution of (11) is 
or
.
(14)
Some graphs of typical motion are given in Figure 5.1.7. Notice that the motion is
quite similar to that of an overdamped system. It is also apparent from (14) that the
mass can pass through the equilibrium position at most one time.
Case III: L2  V2  0
In this case the system is said to be underdamped,
since the damping coefﬁcient is small in comparison to the spring constant. The roots
m1 and m2 are now complex:
.
Thus the general solution of equation (11) is
.
(15)
As indicated in Figure 5.1.8, the motion described by (15) is oscillatory; but because
of the coefﬁcient elt, the amplitudes of vibration
as 
.
t : 
: 0
x(t)  et (c1 cos 12  2t  c2 sin 12  2t)
m1    12  2i,    m2    12  2i
x(t)  et(c1  c2t)
x(t)  c1em1t  c2tem1t
x(t)  et (c1e122t  c2e122t)
x(t)  c1em1t  c2em2t
m1    22  2,    m2    22  2
t
x
FIGURE 5.1.6
Motion of an
overdamped system
t
x
underdamped
undamped
t
x
FIGURE 5.1.7
Motion of a critically
damped system
FIGURE 5.1.8
Motion of an
underdamped system
EXAMPLE 3
Overdamped Motion
It is readily veriﬁed that the solution of the initial-value problem
is
(16)
The problem can be interpreted as representing the overdamped motion of a mass on
a spring. The mass is initially released from a position 1 unit below the equilibrium
position with a downward velocity of 1 ft/s.
To graph x(t), we find the value of t for which the function has an
extremum—that is, the value of time for which the first derivative (velocity) is
zero. Differentiating (16) gives 
, so x(t)  0 implies that
x(t)  5
3et  8
3e4t
x(t)  5
3 et  2
3 e4t.
d 2x
dt2  5 dx
dt  4x  0, x(0)  1, x(0)  1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.1
LINEAR MODELS: INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
199
or 
. It follows from the first derivative test, as well as our
physical intuition, that x(0.157)  1.069 ft is actually a maximum. In other
words, the mass attains an extreme displacement of 1.069 feet below the equilib-
rium position.
We should also check to see whether the graph crosses the t-axis—that is,
whether the mass passes through the equilibrium position. This cannot happen in this
instance because the equation x(t)  0, or 
, has the physically irrelevant solu-
tion 
.
The graph of x(t), along with some other pertinent data, is given in
Figure 5.1.9.
t  1
3 ln 2
5  0.305
e3t  2
5
t  1
3 ln 8
5  0.157
e3t  8
5
1
3
2
t
x
5
3
x = 
−
e−t
e−4t
2
3
t
x(t)
1
0.601
1.5
0.370
2
0.225
2.5
0.137
3
0.083
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 5.1.9
Overdamped system in
Example 3
EXAMPLE 4
Critically Damped Motion
A mass weighing 8 pounds stretches a spring 2 feet. Assuming that a damping force
numerically equal to 2 times the instantaneous velocity acts on the system, determine
the equation of motion if the mass is initially released from the equilibrium position
with an upward velocity of 3 ft/s.
SOLUTION
From Hooke's law we see that 8  k(2) gives k  4 lb/ft and that
W  mg gives 
slug. The differential equation of motion is then
.
(17)
The auxiliary equation for (17) is m2  8m  16  (m  4)2  0, so m1  m2   4.
Hence the system is critically damped, and
.
(18)
Applying the initial conditions x(0)  0 and x(0)  3, we ﬁnd, in turn, that c1  0
and c2  3. Thus the equation of motion is
.
(19)
To graph x(t), we proceed as in Example 3. From x(t)  3e4t(1  4t) we
see that x(t)  0 when 
. The corresponding extreme displacement is
. As shown in Figure 5.1.10, we interpret this value
to mean that the mass reaches a maximum height of 0.276 foot above the
equilibrium position.
x(1
4)  3(1
4)e1  0.276 ft
t  1
4
x(t)  3te4t
x(t)  c1e4t  c2te4t
1
4 d 2x
dt 2  4x  2 dx
dt  or  d 2x
dt2  8 dx
dt  16x  0
m  8
32  1
4
EXAMPLE 5
Underdamped Motion
A mass weighing 16 pounds is attached to a 5-foot-long spring. At equilibrium the
spring measures 8.2 feet. If the mass is initially released from rest at a point 2 feet above
the equilibrium position, ﬁnd the displacements x(t) if it is further known that the sur-
rounding medium offers a resistance numerically equal to the instantaneous velocity.
SOLUTION
The elongation of the spring after the mass is attached is 8.2  5  3.2 ft,
so it follows from Hooke's law that 16  k(3.2) or k  5 lb/ft. In addition,
slug, so the differential equation is given by
.
(20)
Proceeding, we ﬁnd that the roots of m2  2m  10  0 are m1  1  3i and
m2  1  3i, which then implies that the system is underdamped, and
(21)
x(t)  et(c1 cos 3t  c2 sin 3t).
1
2 d 2x
dt2  5x  dx
dt    or    d 2x
dt2  2 dx
dt  10x  0
m  16
32  1
2
− 0.276
t
x
t = 
maximum
height above
equilibrium position
1
4
FIGURE 5.1.10
Critically damped
system in Example 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Finally, the initial conditions x(0)  2 and x(0)  0 yield c1  2 and 
,
so the equation of motion is
.
(22)
Alternative Form of x(t)
In a manner identical to the procedure used on
page 195, we can write any solution
in the alternative form
,
(23)
where 
and the phase angle f is determined from the equations
.
The coefﬁcient Aelt is sometimes called the damped amplitude of vibrations.
Because (23) is not a periodic function, the number 
is called the
quasi period and 
is the quasi frequency. The quasi period is the
time interval between two successive maxima of x(t). You should verify, for the
equation of motion in Example 5, that 
and f  4.391. Therefore an
equivalent form of (22) is
.
5.1.3
SPRING/MASS SYSTEMS: DRIVEN MOTION
DE of Driven Motion with Damping
Suppose we now take into con-
sideration an external force f(t) acting on a vibrating mass on a spring. For
example, f(t) could represent a driving force causing an oscillatory vertical motion
of the support of the spring. See Figure 5.1.11. The inclusion of f(t) in the formu-
lation of Newton's second law gives the differential equation of driven or forced
motion:
.
(24)
Dividing (24) by m gives
,
(25)
where F(t)  f(t)m and, as in the preceding section, 2l  bm, v2  km. To solve
the latter nonhomogeneous equation, we can use either the method of undetermined
coefﬁcients or variation of parameters.
d 2x
dt2  2 dx
dt  2x  F(t)
m d 2x
dt2  kx   dx
dt  f(t)
x(t)  2110
3
 et sin(3t  4.391)
A  21103
12  2 2
2 12  2
sin 
  c1
A,  cos 
  c2
A,  tan 
  c1
c2
A  1c1
 2  c2
 2
x(t)  Aet  sin(12  2t  
)
x(t)  et (c1 cos 12  2t  c2 sin 12  2t)
x(t)  et 2 cos 3t  2
3 sin 3t
c2  2
3
m
FIGURE 5.1.11
Oscillatory vertical
motion of the support
EXAMPLE 6
Interpretation of an Initial-Value Problem
Interpret and solve the initial-value problem
.
(26)
SOLUTION
We can interpret the problem to represent a vibrational system consist-
ing of a mass (
slug or kilogram) attached to a spring (k  2 lb/ft or N/m).
m  1
5
1
5 d 2x
dt2  1.2 dx
dt  2x  5 cos 4t, x(0)  1
2, x(0)  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.1
LINEAR MODELS: INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
201
The mass is initially released from rest unit (foot or meter) below the equilibrium
position. The motion is damped (b  1.2) and is being driven by an external peri-
odic (T  p2 s) force beginning at t  0. Intuitively, we would expect that even
with damping, the system would remain in motion until such time as the forcing
function was "turned off," in which case the amplitudes would diminish. However,
as the problem is given, f(t)  5 cos 4t will remain "on" forever.
We ﬁrst multiply the differential equation in (26) by 5 and solve
by the usual methods. Because m1  3  i, m2  3  i, it follows that
xc(t)  e3t(c1 cos t  c2 sin t). Using the method of undetermined coefficients,
we assume a particular solution of the form xp(t)  A cos 4t  B sin 4t. Differentiating
xp(t) and substituting into the DE gives
.
The resulting system of equations
yields 
and 
. It follows that
.
(27)
When we set t  0 in the above equation, we obtain 
. By differentiating
the expression and then setting t  0, we also ﬁnd that 
. Therefore the
equation of motion is
.
(28)
x(t)  e3t 
38
51 cos t  86
51 sin t  25
102 cos 4t  50
51 sin 4t
c2  86
51
c1  38
51
x(t)  e3t(c1 cos t  c2 sin t)  25
102 cos 4t  50
51 sin 4t
B  50
51
A   25
102
6A  24B  25,  24A  6B  0
xp  6xp  10xp  (6A  24B) cos 4t  (24A  6B) sin 4t  25 cos 4t
dx2
dt2  6 dx
dt  10x  0
1
2
t
x
steady state
xp(t)
transient
_1
1
π /2
(a)
(b)
t
x
x(t)=transient
+ steady state
_1
1
π /2
FIGURE 5.1.12
Graph of solution in
(28) of Example 6
x
2π
π
x1=7
x1=3
x1=0
x1=_3
t
FIGURE 5.1.13
Graph of solution in
Example 7 for various initial velocities x1
EXAMPLE 7
Transient/Steady-State Solutions
The solution of the initial-value problem
,
where x1 is constant, is given by
Solution curves for selected values of the initial velocity x1 are shown in Figure 5.1.13.
The graphs show that the inﬂuence of the transient term is negligible for about
t  3p2.
x(t)  (x1  2) et sin t  2 sin t.
transient
steady-state
d 2x
dt2  2 dx
dt  2x  4 cos t  2 sin t, x(0)  0, x(0)  x1
Transient and Steady-State Terms
When F is a periodic function, such as
F(t)  F0 sin gt or F(t)  F0 cos gt, the general solution of (25) for l  0 is the sum
of a nonperiodic function xc(t) and a periodic function xp(t). Moreover, xc(t) dies off
as time increases—that is, 
. Thus for large values of time, the dis-
placements of the mass are closely approximated by the particular solution xp(t). The
complementary function xc(t) is said to be a transient term or transient solution,
and the function xp(t), the part of the solution that remains after an interval of time, is
called a steady-state term or steady-state solution. Note therefore that the effect
of the initial conditions on a spring/mass system driven by F is transient. In the
particular solution (28), 
is a transient term, and 
is a steady-state term. The graphs of these two terms and the
solution (28) are given in Figures 5.1.12(a) and 5.1.12(b), respectively.
 25
102 cos 4t  50
51 sin 4t
xp(t) 
e3t (38
51 cos t  86
51 sin t)
limt: xc (t)  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
DE of Driven Motion without Damping
With a periodic impressed force
and no damping force, there is no transient term in the solution of a problem. Also,
we shall see that a periodic impressed force with a frequency near or the same as the
frequency of free undamped vibrations can cause a severe problem in any oscillatory
mechanical system.
x
t
FIGURE 5.1.14
Pure resonance
EXAMPLE 8
Undamped Forced Motion
Solve the initial-value problem
,
(29)
where F0 is a constant and g 	 v.
SOLUTION
The complementary function is xc(t)  c1 cos vt  c2 sin vt. To obtain a
particular solution, we assume xp(t)  A cos gt  B sin gt so that
.
Equating coefﬁcients immediately gives A  0 and B  F0(v2  g2). Therefore
.
Applying the given initial conditions to the general solution
yields c1  0 and c2  gF0v(v2  g2). Thus the solution is
.
(30)
Pure Resonance
Although equation (30) is not deﬁned for g  v, it is interesting
to observe that its limiting value as 
can be obtained by applying L'Hôpital's
Rule. This limiting process is analogous to "tuning in" the frequency of the driving
force (g2p) to the frequency of free vibrations (v2p). Intuitively, we expect that
over a length of time we should be able to substantially increase the amplitudes of vi-
bration. For g  v we deﬁne the solution to be
(31)
As suspected, when 
, the displacements become large; in fact, 
when tn  npv, n  1, 2, . . . . The phenomenon that we have just described is known
as pure resonance. The graph given in Figure 5.1.14 shows typical motion in this case.
In conclusion it should be noted that there is no actual need to use a limiting
process on (30) to obtain the solution for g  v. Alternatively, equation (31) follows
by solving the initial-value problem
directly by conventional methods.
d 2x
dt2  2x  F0 sin t, x(0)  0, x(0)  0
 x(tn)  B 
t : 
  F0
22 sin t  F0
2 t cos t.
  F0
sin t  t cos t
22
  F0 lim
 :
sin t  t cos t
2
 x(t)  lim
 :F0
     sin t   sin t
(2  2)
 F0lim  
 :
d
d ( sin t   sin t)
d
d
 (3  2)
 : 
x(t) 
F0
(2  2)
 ( sin t   sin t),   	 
x(t)  c1 cos t  c2 sin t 
F0
2  2 sin t
xp(t) 
F0
2  2 sin t
xp  2xp  A(2  2) cos t  B(2  2) sin t  F0 sin t
d 2x
dt2  2x  F0 sin t, x(0)  0, x(0)  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.1
LINEAR MODELS: INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
203
If the displacements of a spring/mass system were actually described by a func-
tion such as (31), the system would necessarily fail. Large oscillations of the mass
would eventually force the spring beyond its elastic limit. One might argue too that
the resonating model presented in Figure 5.1.14 is completely unrealistic because it
ignores the retarding effects of ever-present damping forces. Although it is true that
pure resonance cannot occur when the smallest amount of damping is taken into con-
sideration, large and equally destructive amplitudes of vibration (although bounded
as 
) can occur. See Problem 43 in Exercises 5.1.
5.1.4
SERIES CIRCUIT ANALOGUE
LRC-Series Circuits
As was mentioned in the introduction to this chapter,
many different physical systems can be described by a linear second-order differential
equation similar to the differential equation of forced motion with damping:
.
(32)
If i(t) denotes current in the LRC-series electrical circuit shown in Figure 5.1.15,
then the voltage drops across the inductor, resistor, and capacitor are as shown in
Figure 1.3.4. By Kirchhoff's second law the sum of these voltages equals the voltage
E(t) impressed on the circuit; that is,
.
(33)
But the charge q(t) on the capacitor is related to the current i(t) by i  dqdt, so 
(33) becomes the linear second-order differential equation
.
(34)
The nomenclature used in the analysis of circuits is similar to that used to
describe spring/mass systems.
If E(t)  0, the electrical vibrations of the circuit are said to be free. Because
the auxiliary equation for (34) is Lm2  Rm  1C  0, there will be three forms of
the solution with R 	 0, depending on the value of the discriminant R2  4LC. We
say that the circuit is
,
,
and
.
In each of these three cases the general solution of (34) contains the factor eRt/2L, so
as 
. In the underdamped case when q(0)  q0, the charge on the
capacitor oscillates as it decays; in other words, the capacitor is charging and dis-
charging as 
. When E(t)  0 and R  0, the circuit is said to be undamped,
and the electrical vibrations do not approach zero as t increases without bound; the
response of the circuit is simple harmonic.
t : 
t : 
q(t) : 0
 underdamped if 
 R2  4L/C  0
 critically damped if  R2  4L/C  0
 overdamped if 
 R2  4L/C  0
L d 2q
dt2  R dq
dt  1
C q  E(t)
L di
dt  Ri  1
C q  E(t)
m d 2x
dt2    dx
dt  kx  f(t)
t : 
C
L
E
R
FIGURE 5.1.15
LRC-series circuit
EXAMPLE 9
Underdamped Series Circuit
Find the charge q(t) on the capacitor in an LRC-series circuit when L  0.25 henry (h),
R  10 ohms (), C  0.001 farad (f), E(t)  0, q(0)  q0 coulombs (C), and i(0)  0.
SOLUTION
Since 1C  1000, equation (34) becomes
.
1
4 q  10q  1000q  0  or  q  40q  4000q  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Solving this homogeneous equation in the usual manner, we ﬁnd that the circuit is
underdamped and q(t)  e20t(c1 cos 60t  c2 sin 60t). Applying the initial condi-
tions, we ﬁnd c1  q0 and 
. Thus
.
Using (23), we can write the foregoing solution as
.
When there is an impressed voltage E(t) on the circuit, the electrical vibrations
are said to be forced. In the case when R 	 0, the complementary function qc(t) of
(34) is called a transient solution. If E(t) is periodic or a constant, then the particu-
lar solution qp(t) of (34) is a steady-state solution.
q(t)  q0110
3
 e20t sin(60t  1.249)
q(t)  q0e20t cos 60t  1
3 sin 60t
c2  1
3 q0
EXAMPLE 10
Steady-State Current
Find the steady-state solution qp(t) and the steady-state current in an LRC-series
circuit when the impressed voltage is E(t)  E0 sin gt.
SOLUTION
The steady-state solution qp(t) is a particular solution of the differential
equation
.
Using the method of undetermined coefﬁcients, we assume a particular solution of
the form qp(t)  A sin gt  B cos gt. Substituting this expression into the differen-
tial equation, simplifying, and equating coefﬁcients gives
It is convenient to express A and B in terms of some new symbols.
If
If
Therefore A  E0X(gZ2) and B  E0R(gZ2), so the steady-state charge is
.
Now the steady-state current is given by 
:
.
(35)
The quantities X  Lg  1Cg and 
deﬁned in Example 10 are
called the reactance and impedance, respectively, of the circuit. Both the reactance
and the impedance are measured in ohms.
Z  1X2  R2
ip(t)  E0
Z  
R
Z sin t  X
Z cos t
ip(t)  qp(t)
qp(t)   E0X
Z2 sin t  E0R
Z2 cos t
 Z  1X2  R2,     then     Z 2  L22  2L
C 
1
C22  R2.
 X  L  1
C
,     then     X2  L22  2L
C 
1
C22.
A 
E0L  1
C
 L22  2L
C 
1
C2 2  R2
,    B 
E0R
 L22  2L
C 
1
C2 2  R2
.
L  d 2q
dt2  R  dq
dt  1
C q  E0 sin t
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.1
LINEAR MODELS: INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
205
EXERCISES 5.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-7.
5.1.1
SPRING/MASS SYSTEMS: 
FREE UNDAMPED MOTION
1. A mass weighing 4 pounds is attached to a spring whose
spring constant is 16 lb/ft. What is the period of simple
harmonic motion?
2. A 20-kilogram mass is attached to a spring. If the fre-
quency of simple harmonic motion is 2p cycles/s,
what is the spring constant k? What is the frequency
of simple harmonic motion if the original mass is
replaced with an 80-kilogram mass?
3. A mass weighing 24 pounds, attached to the end of
a spring, stretches it 4 inches. Initially, the mass is
released from rest from a point 3 inches above the equi-
librium position. Find the equation of motion.
4. Determine the equation of motion if the mass in
Problem 3 is initially released from the equilibrium
position with a downward velocity of 2 ft/s.
5. A mass weighing 20 pounds stretches a spring 6 inches.
The mass is initially released from rest from a point
6 inches below the equilibrium position.
(a) Find the position of the mass at the times t  p12,
p8, p6, p4, and 9p32 s.
(b) What is the velocity of the mass when t  3p16 s?
In which direction is the mass heading at this instant?
(c) At what times does the mass pass through the equi-
librium position?
6. A force of 400 newtons stretches a spring 2 meters.
A mass of 50 kilograms is attached to the end of the
spring and is initially released from the equilibrium
position with an upward velocity of 10 m/s. Find the
equation of motion.
7. Another spring whose constant is 20 N/m is suspended
from the same rigid support but parallel to the
spring/mass system in Problem 6. A mass of 20 kilo-
grams is attached to the second spring, and both masses
are initially released from the equilibrium position with
an upward velocity of 10 m/s.
(a) Which mass exhibits the greater amplitude of
motion?
(b) Which mass is moving faster at t  p4 s? At
p2 s?
(c) At what times are the two masses in the same
position? Where are the masses at these times? In
which directions are the masses moving?
8. A mass weighing 32 pounds stretches a spring 2 feet.
Determine the amplitude and period of motion if the
mass is initially released from a point 1 foot above the
equilibrium position with an upward velocity of 2 ft/s.
How many complete cycles will the mass have com-
pleted at the end of 4p seconds?
9. A mass weighing 8 pounds is attached to a spring.
When set in motion, the spring/mass system exhibits
simple harmonic motion.
(a) Determine the equation of motion if the spring con-
stant is 1 lb/ft and the mass is initially released from
a point 6 inches below the equilibrium position with
a downward velocity of 
(b) Express the equation of motion in the form given 
in (6).
(c) Express the equation of motion in the form given 
in (6).
10. A mass weighing 10 pounds stretches a spring 
foot.
This mass is removed and replaced with a mass of
1.6 slugs, which is initially released from a point foot
above the equilibrium position with a downward veloc-
ity of 
.
(a) Express the equation of motion in the form given 
in (6).
(b) Express the equation of motion in the form given 
in (6)
(c) Use one of the solutions obtained in parts (a) and (b)
to determine the times the mass attains a displace-
ment below the equilibrium position numerically
equal to the amplitude of motion.
11. A mass weighing 64 pounds stretches a spring 0.32 foot.
The mass is initially released from a point 8 inches
above the equilibrium position with a downward veloc-
ity of 5 ft/s.
(a) Find the equation of motion.
(b) What are the amplitude and period of motion?
(c) How many complete cycles will the mass have
completed at the end of 3p seconds?
(d) At what time does the mass pass through the equilib-
rium position heading downward for the second time?
(e) At what times does the mass attain its extreme
displacements on either side of the equilibrium
position?
(f) What is the position of the mass at t  3 s?
(g) What is the instantaneous velocity at t  3 s?
(h) What is the acceleration at t  3 s?
(i) What is the instantaneous velocity at the times when
the mass passes through the equilibrium position?
(j) At what times is the mass 5 inches below the equi-
librium position?
(k) At what times is the mass 5 inches below the equi-
librium position heading in the upward direction?
1
2
5
4 ft/s
1
3
1
4
3
2 ft/s.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
12. A mass of 1 slug is suspended from a spring whose
spring constant is 9 lb/ft. The mass is initially released
from a point 1 foot above the equilibrium position with
an upward velocity of 
. Find the times at which
the mass is heading downward at a velocity of 3 ft/s.
13. Under some circumstances when two parallel springs,
with constants k1 and k2, support a single mass, the
effective spring constant of the system is given by
k  4k1k2(k1  k2). A mass weighing 20 pounds
stretches one spring 6 inches and another spring
2 inches. The springs are attached to a common rigid
support and then to a metal plate. As shown in
Figure 5.1.16, the mass is attached to the center of the
plate in the double-spring arrangement. Determine the
effective spring constant of this system. Find the equa-
tion of motion if the mass is initially released from the
equilibrium position with a downward velocity of 2 ft/s.
13 ft/s
14. A certain mass stretches one spring 
foot and another
spring foot. The two springs are attached to a common
rigid support in the manner described in Problem 13 and
Figure 5.1.16. The ﬁrst mass is set aside, a mass weigh-
ing 8 pounds is attached to the double-spring arrange-
ment, and the system is set in motion. If the period
of motion is p15 second, determine how much the
ﬁrst mass weighs.
15. Amodel of a spring/mass system is 4x  e0.1tx  0. By
inspection of the differential equation only, discuss the be-
havior of the system over a long period of time.
16. A model of a spring/mass system is 4x  tx  0.
By inspection of the differential equation only, discuss
the behavior of the system over a long period of time.
5.1.2
SPRING/MASS SYSTEMS: 
FREE DAMPED MOTION
In Problems 17-20 the given ﬁgure represents the graph of
an equation of motion for a damped spring/mass system.
Use the graph to determine
(a) whether the initial displacement is above or below the
equilibrium position and
(b) whether the mass is initially released from rest, heading
downward, or heading upward.
1
2
1
3
20 lb
k
1
2
k
FIGURE 5.1.16
Double-spring system in 
Problem 13
t
x
t
x
t
x
t
x
FIGURE 5.1.17
Graph for Problem 17
FIGURE 5.1.19
Graph for Problem 19
FIGURE 5.1.18
Graph for Problem 18
FIGURE 5.1.20
Graph for Problem 20
18.
20.
21. A mass weighing 4 pounds is attached to a spring whose
constant is 2 lb/ft. The medium offers a damping force
that is numerically equal to the instantaneous velocity.
The mass is initially released from a point 1 foot above
the equilibrium position with a downward velocity of
8 ft/s. Determine the time at which the mass passes
through the equilibrium position. Find the time at which
the mass attains its extreme displacement from the equi-
librium position. What is the position of the mass at this
instant?
19.
17.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.1
LINEAR MODELS: INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
207
22. A 4-foot spring measures 8 feet long after a mass weigh-
ing 8 pounds is attached to it. The medium through
which the mass moves offers a damping force numeri-
cally equal to 
times the instantaneous velocity. Find
the equation of motion if the mass is initially released
from the equilibrium position with a downward velocity
of 5 ft/s. Find the time at which the mass attains its
extreme displacement from the equilibrium position.
What is the position of the mass at this instant?
23. A 1-kilogram mass is attached to a spring whose constant
is 16 N/m, and the entire system is then submerged in a
liquid that imparts a damping force numerically equal to
10 times the instantaneous velocity. Determine the equa-
tions of motion if
(a) the mass is initially released from rest from a point
1 meter below the equilibrium position, and then
(b) the mass is initially released from a point 1 meter
below the equilibrium position with an upward
velocity of 12 m/s.
24. In parts (a) and (b) of Problem 23 determine whether the
mass passes through the equilibrium position. In each
case ﬁnd the time at which the mass attains its extreme
displacement from the equilibrium position. What is the
position of the mass at this instant?
25. A force of 2 pounds stretches a spring 1 foot. A mass
weighing 3.2 pounds is attached to the spring, and the
system is then immersed in a medium that offers a
damping force that is numerically equal to 0.4 times the
instantaneous velocity.
(a) Find the equation of motion if the mass is initially
released from rest from a point 1 foot above the
equilibrium position.
(b) Express the equation of motion in the form given
in (23).
(c) Find the ﬁrst time at which the mass passes through
the equilibrium position heading upward.
26. After a mass weighing 10 pounds is attached to a 5-foot
spring, the spring measures 7 feet. This mass is removed
and replaced with another mass that weighs 8 pounds.
The entire system is placed in a medium that offers a
damping force that is numerically equal to the instanta-
neous velocity.
(a) Find the equation of motion if the mass is initially
released from a point foot below the equilibrium
position with a downward velocity of 1 ft/s.
(b) Express the equation of motion in the form given
in (23).
(c) Find the times at which the mass passes through the
equilibrium position heading downward.
(d) Graph the equation of motion.
27. A mass weighing 10 pounds stretches a spring 2 feet. The
mass is attached to a dashpot device that offers a damping
1
2
12
force numerically equal to b (b  0) times the instanta-
neous velocity. Determine the values of the damping con-
stant b so that the subsequent motion is (a) overdamped,
(b) critically damped, and (c) underdamped.
28. A mass weighing 24 pounds stretches a spring 4 feet.
The subsequent motion takes place in medium that offers
a damping force numerically equal to b (b  0) times
the instantaneous velocity. If the mass is initially
released from the equilibrium position with an upward
velocity of 2 ft/s, show that when 
the equa-
tion of motion is
.
5.1.3
SPRING/MASS SYSTEMS: 
DRIVEN MOTION
29. Amass weighing 16 pounds stretches a spring feet. The
mass is initially released from rest from a point 2 feet
below the equilibrium position, and the subsequent
motion takes place in a medium that offers a damping
force that is numerically equal to 
the instantaneous
velocity. Find the equation of motion if the mass is
driven by an external force equal to f(t)  10 cos 3t.
30. A mass of 1 slug is attached to a spring whose constant
is 5 lb/ft. Initially, the mass is released 1 foot below
the equilibrium position with a downward velocity of
5 ft/s, and the subsequent motion takes place in a
medium that offers a damping force that is numerically
equal to 2 times the instantaneous velocity.
(a) Find the equation of motion if the mass is driven by an
external force equal to f(t)  12 cos 2t  3 sin 2t.
(b) Graph the transient and steady-state solutions on the
same coordinate axes.
(c) Graph the equation of motion.
31. A mass of 1 slug, when attached to a spring, stretches it
2 feet and then comes to rest in the equilibrium position.
Starting at t  0, an external force equal to f(t)  8 sin 4t
is applied to the system. Find the equation of motion if
the surrounding medium offers a damping force that is
numerically equal to 8 times the instantaneous velocity.
32. In Problem 31 determine the equation of motion if the
external force is f(t)  et sin 4t. Analyze the displace-
ments for 
.
33. When a mass of 2 kilograms is attached to a spring
whose constant is 32 N/m, it comes to rest in the equi-
librium position. Starting at t  0, a force equal to
f(t)  68e2t cos 4t is applied to the system. Find the
equation of motion in the absence of damping.
34. In Problem 33 write the equation of motion in the form
x(t)  Asin(vt  f)  Be2tsin(4t  u). What is the
amplitude of vibrations after a very long time?
t : 
1
2
8
3
x(t) 
3
1 2  18
 e2t/3 sinh 2
3 12  18t
  312
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
35. A mass m is attached to the end of a spring whose con-
stant is k. After the mass reaches equilibrium, its support
begins to oscillate vertically about a horizontal line L
according to a formula h(t). The value of h represents the
distance in feet measured from L. See Figure 5.1.21.
(a) Determine the differential equation of motion if
the entire system moves through a medium offer-
ing a damping force that is numerically equal to
b(dxdt).
(b) Solve the differential equation in part (a) if the spring
is stretched 4 feet by a mass weighing 16 pounds and
b  2, h(t)  5 cos t, x(0)  x(0)  0.
(b) Evaluate 
.
40. Compare the result obtained in part (b) of Problem 39
with the solution obtained using variation of parameters
when the external force is F0 cos vt.
41. (a) Show that x(t) given in part (a) of Problem 39 can
be written in the form
.
(b) If we deﬁne 
, show that when  is
small an approximate solution is
.
When  is small, the frequency g2p of the
impressed force is close to the frequency v2p of
free vibrations. When this occurs, the motion is as
indicated in Figure 5.1.22. Oscillations of this
kind are called beats and are due to the fact that
the frequency of sin t is quite small in compari-
son to the frequency of sin gt. The dashed curves,
or envelope of the graph of x(t), are obtained from
the graphs of (F0 2g) sin t. Use a graphing
utility with various values of F0, , and g to verify
the graph in Figure 5.1.22.
x(t)  F0
2 sin t sin t
  1
2 (  )
x(t) 
2F0
2  2 sin 1
2 (  )t sin 1
2 (  )t
lim
:
 
F0
2  2
 (cos t  cos t)
36. A mass of 100 grams is attached to a spring whose
constant is 1600 dynes/cm. After the mass reaches equi-
librium, its support oscillates according to the formula
h(t)  sin 8t, where h represents displacement from its
original position. See Problem 35 and Figure 5.1.21.
(a) In the absence of damping, determine the equation
of motion if the mass starts from rest from the equi-
librium position.
(b) At what times does the mass pass through the equi-
librium position?
(c) At what times does the mass attain its extreme
displacements?
(d) What are the maximum and minimum displace-
ments?
(e) Graph the equation of motion.
In Problems 37 and 38 solve the given initial-value problem.
37.
38.
39. (a) Show that the solution of the initial-value problem
is
.
x(t) 
F0
2  2 (cos t  cos t)
d 2x
dt2  2x  F0 cos t, x(0)  0, x(0)  0
d 2x
dt2  9x  5 sin 3t,  x(0)  2, x(0)  0
x(0)  1, x(0)  1
d 2x
dt2  4x  5 sin 2t  3 cos 2t,
L
support
h(t)
FIGURE 5.1.21
Oscillating support in Problem 35
t
x
FIGURE 5.1.22
Beats phenomenon in Problem 41
Computer Lab Assignments
42. Can there be beats when a damping force is added to the
model in part (a) of Problem 39? Defend your position
with graphs obtained either from the explicit solution of
the problem
or from solution curves obtained using a numerical
solver.
43. (a) Show that the general solution of
d 2x
dt2  2 dx
dt  2x  F0 sin t
d2x
dt2  2dx
dt  2x  F0cos t, x(0)  0, x(0)  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.1
LINEAR MODELS: INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
209
is
where 
and the phase angles f
and u are, respectively, defined by sin f  c1A,
cos f  c2A and
,
.
(b) The
solution
in
part
(a)
has
the
form
x(t)  xc(t)  xp(t). Inspection shows that xc(t) is tran-
sient, and hence for large values of time, the solution
is approximated by xp(t)  g(g) sin(gt  u), where
.
Although the amplitude g(g) of xp(t) is bounded as
show that the maximum oscillations will
occur at the value 
. What is the
maximum value of g? The number 
is said to be the resonance frequency of the system.
(c) When F0  2, m  1, and k  4, g becomes
.
Construct a table of the values of g1 and g(g1) corre-
sponding to the damping coefﬁcients b  2, b  1,
, and 
. Use a graphing utility to
obtain the graphs of g corresponding to these damp-
ing coefﬁcients. Use the same coordinate axes. This
family of graphs is called the resonance curve or
frequency response curve of the system. What is
g1 approaching as 
? What is happening to the
resonance curve as 
?
44. Consider a driven undamped spring/mass system
described by the initial-value problem
.
(a) For n  2, discuss why there is a single frequency
g12p at which the system is in pure resonance.
(b) For n  3, discuss why there are two frequencies
g12p and g22p at which the system is in pure
resonance.
(c) Suppose v  1 and F0  1. Use a numerical solver
to obtain the graph of the solution of the initial-value
problem for n  2 and g  g1 in part (a). Obtain the
graph of the solution of the initial-value problem for
n  3 corresponding, in turn, to g  g1 and g  g2
in part (b).
d 2x
dt2  2x  F0 sinn t, x(0)  0, x(0)  0
 : 0
 : 0
  1
4
  3
4,   1
2
g() 
2
1(4  2)2  22
12  22/2
1  12  22
t : ,
 g(y) 
F0
1(2  2)2  42 2
 cos  
2   2
1(2  2)2  42 2
 sin  
2
1(2  2)2  42 2
A  1c1
 2  c2
 2
 
F0
1(2  2)2  422 sin(t  ),
x(t)  Aelt sin2v2  l2t  f
5.1.4
SERIES CIRCUIT ANALOGUE
45. Find the charge on the capacitor in an LRC-series circuit
at t  0.01 s when L  0.05 h, R  2 , C  0.01 f,
E(t)  0 V, q(0)  5 C, and i(0)  0 A. Determine the
ﬁrst time at which the charge on the capacitor is equal to
zero.
46. Find the charge on the capacitor in an LRC-series
circuit when 
, R  20 , 
, E(t)  0 V,
q(0)  4 C, and i(0)  0 A. Is the charge on the capaci-
tor ever equal to zero?
In Problems 47 and 48 ﬁnd the charge on the capacitor and
the current in the given LRC-series circuit. Find the maxi-
mum charge on the capacitor.
47.
, R  10 , 
, E(t)  300 V, q(0)  0 C,
i(0)  0 A
48. L  1 h, 
R  100 , 
C  0.0004 f, 
E(t)  30 V, 
q(0)  0 C, i(0)  2 A
49. Find the steady-state charge and the steady-state current
in an LRC-series circuit when L  1 h, R  2 , 
C  0.25 f, and E(t)  50 cos t V.
50. Show that the amplitude of the steady-state current in
the LRC-series circuit in Example 10 is given by E0Z,
where Z is the impedance of the circuit.
51. Use Problem 50 to show that the steady-state current
in an LRC-series circuit when 
, R  20 ,
C  0.001 f, and E(t)  100 sin 60t V, is given by
ip(t)  4.160 sin(60t  0.588).
52. Find the steady-state current in an LRC-series
circuit when 
, R  20 , C  0.001 f, and 
E(t)  100 sin 60t  200 cos 40t V.
53. Find the charge on the capacitor in an LRC-series circuit
when 
, R  10 , C  0.01 f, E(t)  150 V,
q(0)  1 C, and i(0)  0 A. What is the charge on the
capacitor after a long time?
54. Show that if L, R, C, and E0 are constant, then the
amplitude of the steady-state current in Example 10 is a
maximum when 
. What is the maximum
amplitude?
55. Show that if L, R, E0, and g are constant, then the
amplitude of the steady-state current in Example 10 is a
maximum when the capacitance is C  1Lg2.
56. Find the charge on the capacitor and the current in 
an LC-series circuit when L  0.1 h, C  0.1 f, E(t) 
100 sin gt V, q(0)  0 C, and i(0)  0 A.
57. Find the charge on the capacitor and the current in an
LC-series circuit when E(t)  E0 cos gt V, q(0)  q0 C,
and i(0)  i0 A.
58. In Problem 57 ﬁnd the current when the circuit is in
resonance.
  1> 1LC
L  1
2 h
L  1
2 h
L  1
2 h
C  1
30 f
L  5
3 h
C 
1
300 f
L  1
4 h
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Deﬂection of a Beam
Many structures are constructed by using girders or
beams, and these beams deﬂect or distort under their own weight or under the inﬂuence
of some external force. As we shall now see, this deﬂection y(x) is governed by a rela-
tively simple linear fourth-order differential equation.
To begin, let us assume that a beam of length L is homogeneous and has uniform
cross sections along its length. In the absence of any load on the beam (including its
weight), a curve joining the centroids of all its cross sections is a straight line called
the axis of symmetry. See Figure 5.2.1(a). If a load is applied to the beam in a verti-
cal plane containing the axis of symmetry, the beam, as shown in Figure 5.2.1(b),
undergoes a distortion, and the curve connecting the centroids of all cross sections is
called the deﬂection curve or elastic curve. The deﬂection curve approximates the
shape of the beam. Now suppose that the x-axis coincides with the axis of symmetry
and that the deﬂection y(x), measured from this axis, is positive if downward. In the
theory of elasticity it is shown that the bending moment M(x) at a point x along the
beam is related to the load per unit length w(x) by the equation
.
(1)
In addition, the bending moment M(x) is proportional to the curvature k of the elas-
tic curve
,
(2)
where E and I are constants; E is Young's modulus of elasticity of the material of the
beam, and I is the moment of inertia of a cross section of the beam (about an axis
known as the neutral axis). The product EI is called the ﬂexural rigidity of the beam.
Now, from calculus, curvature is given by k  y[1  (y)2]3/2. When the
deﬂection y(x) is small, the slope y  0, and so [1  (y)2]3/2  1. If we let k  y,
equation (2) becomes M  EI y. The second derivative of this last expression is
.
(3)
Using the given result in (1) to replace d2Mdx2 in (3), we see that the deﬂection y(x)
satisﬁes the fourth-order differential equation
.
(4)
EI
  d 4y
dx4  w(x)
d 2M
dx2  EI d 2
dx2 y  EI d 4y
dx4
M(x)  EI
d2M
dx2  w(x)
axis of symmetry
deflection curve
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 5.2.1
Deﬂection of a
homogeneous beam
LINEAR MODELS: BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 4.1 (page 117)
●Problems 37-40 in Exercises 4.3
●Problems 37-40 in Exercises 4.4
INTRODUCTION
The preceding section was devoted to systems in which a second-order math-
ematical model was accompanied by initial conditions—that is, side conditions that are speciﬁed on
the unknown function and its ﬁrst derivative at a single point. But often the mathematical descrip-
tion of a physical system demands that we solve a linear differential equation subject to boundary
conditions—that is, conditions speciﬁed on the unknown function, or on one of its derivatives, or
even on a linear combination of the unknown function and one of its derivatives at two (or more)
different points.
5.2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.2
LINEAR MODELS: BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
211
Boundary conditions associated with equation (4) depend on how the ends of the
beam are supported. A cantilever beam is embedded or clamped at one end and
free at the other. A diving board, an outstretched arm, an airplane wing, and a bal-
cony are common examples of such beams, but even trees, ﬂagpoles, skyscrapers,
and the George Washington Monument can act as cantilever beams because they
are embedded at one end and are subject to the bending force of the wind. For
a cantilever beam the deﬂection y(x) must satisfy the following two conditions at
the embedded end x  0:
•
y(0)  0 because there is no deﬂection, and
•
y(0)  0 because the deﬂection curve is tangent to the x-axis (in other
words, the slope of the deﬂection curve is zero at this point).
At x  L the free-end conditions are
•
y(L)  0 because the bending moment is zero, and
•
y(L)  0 because the shear force is zero.
The function F(x)  dMdx  EI d3ydx3 is called the shear force. If an end of
a beam is simply supported or hinged (also called pin supported and fulcrum
supported) then we must have y  0 and y  0 at that end. Table 5.2.1 summarizes
the boundary conditions that are associated with (4). See Figure 5.2.2.
x = 0
x = L
(a) embedded at both ends
(b) cantilever beam: embedded at
the left end, free at the right
end
(c) simply supported at both ends
x = 0
x = L
x = 0
x = L
FIGURE 5.2.2
Beams with various
end conditions
TABLE 5.2.1
Ends of the Beam
Boundary Conditions
embedded
y  0,
y  0
free
y  0,
y  0
simply supported
or hinged
y  0,
y  0
EXAMPLE 1
An Embedded Beam
A beam of length L is embedded at both ends. Find the deﬂection of the beam if a con-
stant load w0 is uniformly distributed along its length—that is, w(x)  w0, 0  x  L.
SOLUTION
From (4) we see that the deﬂection y(x) satisﬁes
.
Because the beam is embedded at both its left end (x  0) and its right end (x  L),
there is no vertical deﬂection and the line of deﬂection is horizontal at these points.
Thus the boundary conditions are
.
We can solve the nonhomogeneous differential equation in the usual manner (ﬁnd yc
by observing that m  0 is root of multiplicity four of the auxiliary equation m4  0
and then ﬁnd a particular solution yp by undetermined coefﬁcients), or we can simply
integrate the equation d4ydx4  w0EI four times in succession. Either way, we
ﬁnd the general solution of the equation y  yc  yp to be
.
Now the conditions y(0)  0 and y(0)  0 give, in turn, c1  0 and c2  0, whereas the
remaining conditions y(L)  0 and y(L)  0 applied to 
yield the simultaneous equations 
 2c3 L  3c4 L2  w0
6EI
  L3  0.
 c3 L2  c4 L3 
w0
24EI
  L4  0
y(x)  c3x2  c4x3 
w0
24EI x4
y(x)  c1  c2x  c3x2  c4x3 
w0
24EI x4
y(0)  0,    y(0)  0,  y(L)  0,    y(L)  0
EI d 4y
dx4  w0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Solving this system gives c3  w0L224EI and c4  w0L12EI. Thus the deﬂection is
or 
. By choosing w0  24EI, and L  1, we obtain the 
deﬂection curve in Figure 5.2.3.
Eigenvalues and Eigenfunctions
Many applied problems demand that we
solve a two-point boundary-value problem (BVP) involving a linear differential
equation that contains a parameter l. We seek the values of l for which the
boundary-value problem has nontrivial, that is, nonzero, solutions.
y(x) 
w0
24EI x2 (x  L)2
y(x)  w0L2
24EI x2  w0L
12EI x3 
w0
24EI x4
x
y
1
0.5
FIGURE 5.2.3
Deﬂection curve for
BVP in Example 1
EXAMPLE 2
Nontrivial Solutions of a BVP
Solve the boundary-value problem
.
SOLUTION
We shall consider three cases: l  0, l  0, and l  0.
Case I:
For l  0 the solution of y  0 is y  c1x  c2. The conditions y(0)  0
and y(L)  0 applied to this solution imply, in turn, c2  0 and c1  0. Hence for l  0
the only solution of the boundary-value problem is the trivial solution y  0.
Case II:
For l  0 it is convenient to write l  a2, where a denotes a positive
number. With this notation the roots of the auxiliary equation m2  a2  0 are m1  a
and m2  a. Since the interval on which we are working is ﬁnite, we choose to write
the general solution of y  a2y  0 as y  c1 cosh ax  c2 sinh ax. Now y(0) is
,
and so y(0)  0 implies that c1  0. Thus y  c2 sinh ax. The second condition,
y(L)  0, demands that c2 sinh aL  0. For a 	 0, sinh aL 	 0; consequently, we
are forced to choose c2  0. Again the only solution of the BVP is the trivial solu-
tion y  0.
Case III:
For l  0 we write l  a2, where a is a positive number. Because the
auxiliary equation m2  a2  0 has complex roots m1  ia and m2  ia, the
general solution of y  a2y  0 is y  c1 cos ax  c2 sin ax. As before, y(0)  0
yields c1  0, and so y  c2 sin ax. Now the last condition y(L)  0, or
,
is satisﬁed by choosing c2  0. But this means that y  0. If we require c2 	 0, then
sin aL  0 is satisﬁed whenever aL is an integer multiple of p.
.
Therefore for any real nonzero c2, y  c2 sin(npxL) is a solution of the problem for
each n. Because the differential equation is homogeneous, any constant multiple of a
solution is also a solution, so we may, if desired, simply take c2  1. In other words,
for each number in the sequence
. . . ,
1  2
L2, 
2  42
L2 , 
3  92
L2 ,
L  n or    n
L  or  n  n
2 
n
L
2
,  n  1, 2, 3, . . . 
c2 sin L  0
y(0)  c1 cosh 0  c2 sinh 0  c1  1  c2  0  c1
y  y  0, y(0)  0,  y(L)  0
Note that we use hyperbolic functions
here. Reread "Two Equations Worth
Knowing" on pages 134-135.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.2
LINEAR MODELS: BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
213
the corresponding function in the sequence
. . .
is a nontrivial solution of the problem  
for 
n  1, 2, 3, . . . , respectively.
The numbers ln  n2p2L2, n  1, 2, 3, . . . for which the boundary-value
problem in Example 2 possesses nontrivial solutions are known as eigenvalues. The
nontrivial solutions that depend on these values of ln, yn  c2 sin(npxL) or simply
yn  sin(npxL), are called eigenfunctions. The graphs of the eigenfunctions for
n  1, 2, 3, 4, 5 are shown in Figure 5.2.4. Note that each graph passes through the
two points (0, 0) and (0, L).
y  ny  0, y(0)  0, y(L)  0
y1  sin
L
 x, 
y2  sin2
L
 x, 
y3  sin3
L  x,
L
(a)
(b)
P
x = 0
x
y
x = L
FIGURE 5.2.5
Elastic column
buckling under a compressive force
EXAMPLE 3
Example 2 Revisited
It follows from Example 2 and the preceding disucussion that the boundary-value
problem
possesses only the trivial solution y  0 because 5 is not an eigenvalue.
Buckling of a Thin Vertical Column
In the eighteenth century Leonhard
Euler was one of the ﬁrst mathematicians to study an eigenvalue problem in analyz-
ing how a thin elastic column buckles under a compressive axial force.
Consider a long, slender vertical column of uniform cross section and length L.
Let y(x) denote the deﬂection of the column when a constant vertical compressive
force, or load, P is applied to its top, as shown in Figure 5.2.5. By comparing bend-
ing moments at any point along the column, we obtain
,
(5)
where E is Young's modulus of elasticity and I is the moment of inertia of a cross
section about a vertical line through its centroid.
EI  d 2y
dx2  Py   or   EI  d 2y
dx2  Py  0
y  5y  0, y(0)  0, y(L)  0
-1
1
n = 2 n = 1
n = 4
n = 4
n = 5
n = 3
y
x
L
FIGURE 5.2.4
Graphs of
eigenfunctions 
for n  1, 2, 3, 4, 5
yn  sin(npx>L),
EXAMPLE 4
The Euler Load
Find the deﬂection of a thin vertical homogeneous column of length L subjected to a
constant axial load P if the column is hinged at both ends.
SOLUTION
The boundary-value problem to be solved is
.
First note that y  0 is a perfectly good solution of this problem. This solution has
a simple intuitive interpretation: If the load P is not great enough, there is no
deﬂection. The question then is this: For what values of P will the column bend? In
mathematical terms: For what values of P does the given boundary-value problem
possess nontrivial solutions?
By writing l  PEI, we see that
is identical to the problem in Example 2. From Case III of that discussion we see
that the deflections are yn(x)  c2 sin(npxL) corresponding to the eigenvalues
ln  PnEI  n2p 2L2, n  1, 2, 3, . . . . Physically, this means that the column
will buckle or deflect only when the compressive force is one of the values
Pn  n2p 2EIL2, n  1, 2, 3, . . . . These different forces are called critical
y  y  0,  y(0)  0, y(L)   0
EI  d 2y
dx2  Py  0, y(0)  0, y(L)  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
loads. The deflection corresponding to the smallest critical load P1  p 2EIL2,
called the Euler load, is y1(x)  c2 sin(pxL) and is known as the first buckling
mode.
The deﬂection curves in Example 4 corresponding to n  1, n  2, and n  3
are shown in Figure 5.2.6. Note that if the original column has some sort of physical
restraint put on it at x  L 2, then the smallest critical load will be P2  4p2EIL2,
and the deﬂection curve will be as shown in Figure 5.2.6(b). If restraints are put on
the column at x  L 3 and at x  2L 3, then the column will not buckle until the
critical load P3  9p2EIL2 is applied, and the deﬂection curve will be as shown in
Figure 5.2.6(c). See Problem 23 in Exercises 5.2.
Rotating String
The simple linear second-order differential equation
(6)
occurs again and again as a mathematical model. In Section 5.1 we saw (6) in the
forms d2xdt2  (km)x  0 and d2qdt2  (1LC)q  0 as models for, respec-
tively, the simple harmonic motion of a spring/mass system and the simple harmonic
response of a series circuit. It is apparent when the model for the deﬂection of a thin
column in (5) is written as d2ydx2  (PEI)y  0 that it is the same as (6). We
encounter the basic equation (6) one more time in this section: as a model that deﬁnes
the deﬂection curve or the shape y(x) assumed by a rotating string. The physical situ-
ation is analogous to when two people hold a jump rope and twirl it in a synchronous
manner. See Figures 5.2.7(a) and 5.2.7(b).
Suppose a string of length L with constant linear density r (mass per unit length)
is stretched along the x-axis and ﬁxed at x  0 and x  L. Suppose the string is then
rotated about that axis at a constant angular speed v. Consider a portion of the string
on the interval [x, x  x], where x is small. If the magnitude T of the tension T,
acting tangential to the string, is constant along the string, then the desired differen-
tial equation can be obtained by equating two different formulations of the net force
acting on the string on the interval [x, x  x]. First, we see from Figure 5.2.7(c) that
the net vertical force is
.
(7)
When angles u1 and u2 (measured in radians) are small, we have sin u2  tan u2 and
sin u1  tan u1. Moreover, since tan u2 and tan u1 are, in turn, slopes of the lines con-
taining the vectors T2 and T1, we can also write
.
Thus (7) becomes
.
(8)
Second, we can obtain a different form of this same net force using Newton's second
law, F  ma. Here the mass of the string on the interval is m  r x; the centripetal
acceleration of a body rotating with angular speed v in a circle of radius r is a  rv2.
With x small we take r  y. Thus the net vertical force is also approximated by
,
(9)
where the minus sign comes from the fact that the acceleration points in the direction
opposite to the positive y-direction. Now by equating (8) and (9), we have
F  ( x)y2
F  T [ y(x  x)  y(x)]
tan 2  y(x  x)   and   tan 1  y(x)
F  T sin 2  T sin 1
y  y  0
L
L
x
(b)
y
x
(c)
y
x
L
(a)
y
FIGURE 5.2.6
Deﬂection curves
corresponding to compressive forces 
P1, P2, P3
(a)
(b)
(c)
ω
x = 0
x = L
y(x)
x
x
x + Δx
1
θ
2
θ
T2
T1
FIGURE 5.2.7
Rotating string and
forces acting on it
(10)
y(x  x)  y(x)
-----------------
x
T[y(x  x)  y(x)]  (rx)yv2
T
 rv2y  0.
or
difference quotient
For x close to zero the difference quotient in (10) is approximately the second
derivative d2ydx2. Finally, we arrive at the model
.
(11)
T d 2y
dx2  2y  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.2
LINEAR MODELS: BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
215
EXERCISES 5.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-8.
Deﬂection of a Beam
In Problems 1-5 solve equation (4) subject to the appropriate
boundary conditions. The beam is of length L, and w0 is a
constant.
1. (a) The beam is embedded at its left end and free at its
right end, and w(x)  w0, 0  x  L.
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph the deﬂection curve
when w0  24EI and L  1.
2. (a) The beam is simply supported at both ends, and
w(x)  w0, 0  x  L.
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph the deﬂection curve
when w0  24EI and L  1.
3. (a) The beam is embedded at its left end and simply sup-
ported at its right end, and w(x)  w0, 0  x  L.
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph the deﬂection curve
when w0  48EI and L  1.
4. (a) The beam is embedded at its left end and simply sup-
ported at its right end, and w(x)  w0 sin(pxL),
0  x  L.
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph the deﬂection curve
when w0  2p3EI and L  1.
(c) Use a root-ﬁnding application of a CAS (or a
graphic calculator) to approximate the point in the
graph in part (b) at which the maximum deﬂection
occurs. What is the maximum deﬂection?
5. (a) The beam is simply supported at both ends, and
w(x)  w0x, 0  x  L.
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph the deﬂection curve
when w0  36EI and L  1.
(c) Use a root-ﬁnding application of a CAS (or a
graphic calculator) to approximate the point in the
graph in part (b) at which the maximum deﬂection
occurs. What is the maximum deﬂection?
6. (a) Find the maximum deﬂection of the cantilever beam
in Problem 1.
(b) How does the maximum deﬂection of a beam that is
half as long compare with the value in part (a)?
(c) Find the maximum deﬂection of the simply sup-
ported beam in Problem 2.
(d) How does the maximum deﬂection of the simply
supported beam in part (c) compare with the value
of maximum deﬂection of the embedded beam in
Example 1?
7. A cantilever beam of length L is embedded at its right
end, and a horizontal tensile force of P pounds is applied
to its free left end. When the origin is taken at its free end,
as shown in Figure 5.2.8, the deﬂection y(x) of the beam
can be shown to satisfy the differential equation
.
Find the deﬂection of the cantilever beam if 
w(x)  w0x, 0  x  L, and y(0)  0, y(L)  0.
EIy  Py  w(x)x
2
x
O
P
y
L
x
w0x
FIGURE 5.2.8
Deﬂection of cantilever beam in Problem 7 
Since the string is anchored at its ends x  0 and x  L, we expect that the solution y(x)
of equation (11) should also satisfy the boundary conditions y(0)  0 and y(L)  0.
REMARKS
(i) Eigenvalues are not always easily found, as they were in Example 2;
you might have to approximate roots of equations such as tan x  x or
cos x cosh x  1. See Problems 34-38 in Exercises 5.2.
(ii) Boundary conditions applied to a general solution of a linear differential
equation can lead to a homogeneous algebraic system of linear equations in
which the unknowns are the coefﬁcients ci in the general solution. A homoge-
neous algebraic system of linear equations is always consistent because it
possesses at least a trivial solution. But a homogeneous system of n linear
equations in n unknowns has a nontrivial solution if and only if the determi-
nant of the coefﬁcients equals zero. You might need to use this last fact in
Problems 19 and 20 in Exercises 5.2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
8. When a compressive instead of a tensile force is applied
at the free end of the beam in Problem 7, the differential
equation of the deﬂection is
.
Solve this equation if w(x)  w0x, 0  x  L, and
y(0)  0, y(L)  0.
Eigenvalues and Eigenfunctions
In Problems 9-18 ﬁnd the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions
for the given boundary-value problem.
9. y  ly  0,
y(0)  0,
y(p)  0
10. y  ly  0,
y(0)  0,
y(p4)  0
11. y  ly  0,
y(0)  0,
y(L)  0
12. y  ly  0,
y(0)  0,
y(p2)  0
13. y  ly  0,
y(0)  0,
y(p)  0
14. y  ly  0,
y(p)  0,
y(p)  0
15. y  2y  (l  1)y  0,
y(0)  0,
y(5)  0
16. y  (l  1)y  0,
y(0)  0,
y(1)  0
17. x2y  xy  ly  0,
y(1)  0,
y(ep)  0
18. x2y  xy  ly  0,
y(e1)  0,
y(1)  0
In Problems 19 and 20 ﬁnd the eigenvalues and eigenfunc-
tions for the given boundary-value problem. Consider only
the case l  a4, a  0.
19. y(4)  ly  0,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  0,
y(1)  0,
y(1)  0
20. y(4)  ly  0,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  0,
y(p)  0,
y(p)  0
Buckling of a Thin Column
21. Consider Figure 5.2.6. Where should physical restraints
be placed on the column if we want the critical load to be
P4? Sketch the deﬂection curve corresponding to this load.
22. The critical loads of thin columns depend on the end
conditions of the column. The value of the Euler load P1
in Example 4 was derived under the assumption that the
column was hinged at both ends. Suppose that a thin
vertical homogeneous column is embedded at its base
(x  0) and free at its top (x  L) and that a constant
axial load P is applied to its free end. This load either
causes a small deﬂection d as shown in Figure 5.2.9 or
does not cause such a deﬂection. In either case the dif-
ferential equation for the deﬂection y(x) is
.
EI d2y
dx2  Py  P
EIy  Py  w(x)x
2
(a) What is the predicted deﬂection when d  0?
(b) When d 	 0, show that the Euler load for this col-
umn is one-fourth of the Euler load for the hinged
column in Example 4.
23. As was mentioned in Problem 22, the differential equa-
tion (5) that governs the deﬂection y(x) of a thin elastic
column subject to a constant compressive axial force P
is valid only when the ends of the column are hinged. In
general, the differential equation governing the deﬂection
of the column is given by
.
Assume that the column is uniform (EI is a constant)
and that the ends of the column are hinged. Show that
the solution of this fourth-order differential equation
subject to the boundary conditions y(0)  0, y(0)  0,
y(L)  0, y(L)  0 is equivalent to the analysis in
Example 4.
24. Suppose that a uniform thin elastic column is hinged at
the end x  0 and embedded at the end x  L.
(a) Use the fourth-order differential equation given in
Problem 23 to ﬁnd the eigenvalues ln, the critical
loads Pn, the Euler load P1, and the deﬂections yn(x).
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph the ﬁrst buckling
mode.
Rotating String
25. Consider the boundary-value problem introduced in the
construction of the mathematical model for the shape of
a rotating string:
.
For constant T and r, deﬁne the critical speeds of angu-
lar rotation vn as the values of v for which the boundary-
value problem has nontrivial solutions. Find the critical
speeds vn and the corresponding deﬂections yn(x).
T d2y
dx2  2y  0,  y(0)  0, y(L)  0
d2
dx2
 EI d2y
dx2  P  d2y
dx2  0
y
x =  0
x =  L
P
δ
x
FIGURE 5.2.9
Deﬂection of vertical column in 
Problem 22
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.2
LINEAR MODELS: BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
217
26. When the magnitude of tension T is not constant, then a
model for the deﬂection curve or shape y(x) assumed by
a rotating string is given by
.
Suppose that 1  x  e and that T(x)  x2.
(a) If y(1)  0, y(e)  0, and rv2  0.25, show that
the critical speeds of angular rotation are
and the corresponding
deﬂections are
yn(x)  c2x1/2 sin(np ln x),
n  1, 2, 3, . . . .
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph the deﬂection curves
on the interval [1, e] for n  1, 2, 3. Choose c2  1.
Miscellaneous Boundary-Value Problems
27. Temperature in a Sphere
Consider two concentric
spheres of radius r  a
and r  b,
a  b. See
Figure 5.2.10. The temperature u(r) in the region
between the spheres is determined from the boundary-
value problem
,
where u0 and u1 are constants. Solve for u(r).
r  d2u
dr2  2  du
dr  0,  u(a)  u0, u(b)  u1
n  1
2
 2(4n22  1)>
d
dx
 	T(x) dy
dx
  2y  0
where u0 and u1 are constants. Show that
.
Discussion Problems
29. Simple Harmonic Motion
The model mx  kx  0
for simple harmonic motion, discussed in Section 5.1,
can be related to Example 2 of this section.
Consider a free undamped spring/mass system for
which the spring constant is, say, k  10 lb/ft. Deter-
mine those masses mn that can be attached to the spring
so that when each mass is released at the equilibrium
position at t  0 with a nonzero velocity v0, it will then
pass through the equilibrium position at t  1 second.
How many times will each mass mn pass through the
equilibrium position in the time interval 0  t  1?
30. Damped Motion
Assume that the model for the
spring/mass system in Problem 29 is replaced by 
mx  2x  kx  0.
In other words, the system is free but is subjected to
damping numerically equal to 2 times the instantaneous
velocity. With the same initial conditions and spring
constant as in Problem 29, investigate whether a mass m
can be found that will pass through the equilibrium
position at t  1 second.
In Problems 31 and 32 determine whether it is possible to
ﬁnd values y0 and y1 (Problem 31) and values of L  0
(Problem 32) so that the given boundary-value problem has
(a) precisely one nontrivial solution, (b) more than one
solution, (c) no solution, (d) the trivial solution.
31. y  16y  0,
y(0)  y0, y(p2)  y1
32. y  16y  0,
y(0)  1, y(L)  1
33. Consider the boundary-value problem
(a) The type of boundary conditions speciﬁed are called
periodic boundary conditions. Give a geometric
interpretation of these conditions.
(b) Find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the
problem.
(c) Use a graphing utility to graph some of the eigen-
functions. Verify your geometric interpretation of
the boundary conditions given in part (a).
34. Show that the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the
boundary-value problem
are 
and yn  sin anx, respectively, where an,
n  1, 2, 3, . . . are the consecutive positive roots of
the equation tan a  a.
n   2
n
y  y  0,  y(0)  0,  y(1)  y(1)  0
y  y  0,  y()  y(),  y()  y().
u(r)  u0 ln(r>b)  u1 ln(r>a)
ln(a>b)
u = u1
u = u0
FIGURE 5.2.10
Concentric spheres in Problem 27
28. Temperature in a Ring
The temperature u(r) in the
circular ring shown in Figure 5.2.11 is determined from
the boundary-value problem
,
r d2u
dr2  du
dr  0,  u(a)  u0, u(b)  u1
FIGURE 5.2.11
Circular ring in Problem 28
a
u = u1
u = u0
b
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Computer Lab Assignments
35. Use a CAS to plot graphs to convince yourself that the
equation tan a  a in Problem 34 has an inﬁnite
number of roots. Explain why the negative roots of the
equation can be ignored. Explain why l  0 is not an
eigenvalue even though a  0 is an obvious solution of
the equation tan a  a.
36. Use a root-ﬁnding application of a CAS to approximate
the ﬁrst four eigenvalues l1, l2, l3, and l4 for the BVP
in Problem 34.
In Problems 37 and 38 ﬁnd the eigenvalues and eigenfunc-
tions of the given boundary-value problem. Use a CAS to
approximate the ﬁrst four eigenvalues l1, l2, l3, and l4.
37.
38. y(4)  ly  0, y(0)  0, y(0)  0, y(1)  0, y(1)  0
[Hint: Consider only l  a4, a  0.]
y  y  0, y(0)  0, y(1)  1
2
 y(1)  0
Nonlinear Springs
The mathematical model in (1) of Section 5.1 has the form
,
(1)
where F(x)  kx. Because x denotes the displacement of the mass from its equilibrium
position, F(x)  kx is Hooke's law—that is, the force exerted by the spring that tends
to restore the mass to the equilibrium position. A spring acting under a linear restoring
force F(x)  kx is naturally referred to as a linear spring. But springs are seldom per-
fectly linear. Depending on how it is constructed and the material that is used, a spring
can range from "mushy," or soft, to "stiff," or hard, so its restorative force may vary
from something below to something above that given by the linear law. In the case of
free motion, if we assume that a nonaging spring has some nonlinear characteristics,
then it might be reasonable to assume that the restorative force of a spring—that is,
F(x) in (1)—is proportional to, say, the cube of the displacement x of the mass beyond
its equilibrium position or that F(x) is a linear combination of powers of the displace-
ment such as that given by the nonlinear function F(x)  kx  k1x3. A spring whose
mathematical model incorporates a nonlinear restorative force, such as
,
(2)
is called a nonlinear spring. In addition, we examined mathematical models in which
damping imparted to the motion was proportional to the instantaneous velocity dxdt
and the restoring force of a spring was given by the linear function F(x)  kx. But these
were simply assumptions; in more realistic situations damping could be proportional to
some power of the instantaneous velocity dxdt. The nonlinear differential equation
(3)
m d 2x
dt2 
dx
dt dx
dt  kx  0
m d 2x
dt2  kx3  0    or    m d 2x
dt2  kx  k1x3  0
m d 2x
dt2  F(x)  0
NONLINEAR MODELS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 4.10
INTRODUCTION
In this section we examine some nonlinear higher-order mathematical
models. We are able to solve some of these models using the substitution method (leading to
reduction of the order of the DE) introduced on page 186. In some cases in which the model
cannot be solved, we show how a nonlinear DE can be replaced by a linear DE through a process
called linearization.
5.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.3
NONLINEAR MODELS
●
219
is one model of a free spring/mass system in which the damping force is proportional
to the square of the velocity. One can then envision other kinds of models: linear
damping and nonlinear restoring force, nonlinear damping and nonlinear restoring
force, and so on. The point is that nonlinear characteristics of a physical system lead
to a mathematical model that is nonlinear.
Notice in (2) that both F(x)  kx3 and F(x)  kx  k1x3 are odd functions of x.
To see why a polynomial function containing only odd powers of x provides a
reasonable model for the restoring force, let us express F as a power series centered
at the equilibrium position x  0:
When the displacements x are small, the values of xn are negligible for n suffi-
ciently large. If we truncate the power series with, say, the fourth term, then
F(x)  c0  c1x  c2x2  c3x3. For the force at x  0,
,
and for the force at x  0,
to have the same magnitude but act in the opposite direction, we must have
F(x)  F(x). Because this means that F is an odd function, we must have c0  0
and c2  0, and so F(x)  c1x  c3x3. Had we used only the ﬁrst two terms in the
series, the same argument yields the linear function F(x)  c1x. A restoring force with
mixed powers, such as F(x)  c1x  c2x2, and the corresponding vibrations are said
to be unsymmetrical. In the next discussion we shall write c1  k and c3  k1.
Hard and Soft Springs
Let us take a closer look at the equation in (1) in
F(x)  c0  c1x  c2x2  c3x3
F(x)  c0  c1x  c2x2  c3x3
F(x)  c0  c1x  c2x2  c3x3    .
F
linear spring
hard 
spring 
soft spring 
x
FIGURE 5.3.1
Hard and soft springs
(a) hard spring
(b) soft spring
x
  
  x(0)= 2,
x'(0)= _3
t
  x(0)= 2,
x'(0)= _3
t
x
  x(0)= 2,
x'(0)= 0
  x(0)= 2,
x'(0)= 0
FIGURE 5.3.2
Numerical solution
curves
EXAMPLE 1
Comparison of Hard and Soft Springs
The differential equations
(4)
and
(5)
are special cases of the second equation in (2) and are models of a hard spring and
a soft spring, respectively. Figure 5.3.2(a) shows two solutions of (4) and
Figure 5.3.2(b) shows two solutions of (5) obtained from a numerical solver. The
curves shown in red are solutions that satisfy the initial conditions x(0)  2,
x(0)  3; the two curves in blue are solutions that satisfy x(0)  2, x(0)  0.
These solution curves certainly suggest that the motion of a mass on the hard
spring is oscillatory, whereas motion of a mass on the soft spring appears to be
nonoscillatory. But we must be careful about drawing conclusions based on a
couple of numerical solution curves. A more complete picture of the nature of the
solutions of both of these equations can be obtained from the qualitative analysis
discussed in Chapter 10.
d 2x
dt2  x  x3  0
d 2x
dt2  x  x3  0
the case in which the restoring force is given by F(x)  kx  k1x3, k  0. The
spring is said to be hard if k1  0 and soft if k1  0. Graphs of three types of
restoring forces are illustrated in Figure 5.3.1. The next example illustrates
these two special cases of the differential equation md2xdt2  kx  k1x3  0, 
m  0, k  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

220
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Nonlinear Pendulum
Any object that swings back and forth is called a
physical pendulum. The simple pendulum is a special case of the physical pendu-
lum and consists of a rod of length l to which a mass m is attached at one end. In
describing the motion of a simple pendulum in a vertical plane, we make the simpli-
fying assumptions that the mass of the rod is negligible and that no external damping
or driving forces act on the system. The displacement angle u of the pendulum,
measured from the vertical as shown in Figure 5.3.3, is considered positive when
measured to the right of OP and negative to the left of OP. Now recall the arc s of a
circle of radius l is related to the central angle u by the formula s  lu. Hence angu-
lar acceleration is
.
From Newton's second law we then have
.
From Figure 5.3.3 we see that the magnitude of the tangential component of the force
due to the weight W is mg sin u. In direction this force is mg sin u because it points
to the left for u  0 and to the right for u  0. We equate the two different versions
of the tangential force to obtain ml d2udt2  mg sin u, or
.
(6)
Linearization
Because of the presence of sin u, the model in (6) is non-
linear. In an attempt to understand the behavior of the solutions of nonlinear
higher-order differential equations, one sometimes tries to simplify the problem
by replacing nonlinear terms by certain approximations. For example, the
Maclaurin series for sin u is given by
so if we use the approximation sin u  u  u36, equation (6) becomes
.
Observe that this last equation is the same as the second nonlinear equation in (2) with
m  1, k  gl, and k1  g6l. However, if we assume that the displacements u are
small enough to justify using the replacement sin u  u, then (6) becomes
.
(7)
See Problem 25 in Exercises 5.3. If we set v2  gl, we recognize (7) as the differen-
tial equation (2) of Section 5.1 that is a model for the free undamped vibrations of a lin-
ear spring/mass system. In other words, (7) is again the basic linear equation 
y  ly  0 discussed on page 212 of Section 5.2. As a consequence we say that equa-
tion (7) is a linearization of equation (6). Because the general solution of (7) is u(t) 
c1 cos vt  c2 sin vt, this linearization suggests that for initial conditions amenable
to small oscillations the motion of the pendulum described by (6) will be periodic.
d 2
dt2  g
l   0
d 2u
dt 2  g
l u  g
6l u3  0
sin      3
3!   5
5!  . . .
d 2
dt2  g
l sin   0
F  ma  ml  d 2
dt2
a  d 2s
dt2  l  d 2
dt2
O
θ
θ
P
W = mg
mg cos
θ
mg sin 
θ
l
FIGURE 5.3.3
Simple pendulum
t
2

(0) =   ,
(0)  = 2
(0)  =   ,
(0) = 
(a)
(b)
(0)  ,
(0) 
(c)
(0)  ,











 (0)  2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
FIGURE 5.3.4
In Example 2,
oscillating pendulum in (b); whirling
pendulum in (c)
EXAMPLE 2
Two Initial-Value Problems
The graphs in Figure 5.3.4(a) were obtained with the aid of a numerical solver and
represent approximate or numerical solution curves of (6) when v2  1. The blue
curve depicts the solution of
(6) that satisﬁes the initial conditions
whereas the red curve is the solution of (6) that satisﬁes
(0)  1
2, (0)  1
2,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.3
NONLINEAR MODELS
●
221
u(0)  2. The blue curve represents a periodic solution—the pendulum
oscillating back and forth as shown in Figure 5.3.4(b) with an apparent amplitude 
A  1. The red curve shows that u increases without bound as time increases—the
pendulum, starting from the same initial displacement, is given an initial velocity of
magnitude great enough to send it over the top; in other words, the pendulum is
whirling about its pivot as shown in Figure 5.3.4(c). In the absence of damping, the
motion in each case is continued indeﬁnitely.
Telephone Wires
The ﬁrst-order differential equation dydx  WT1 is
equation (16) of Section 1.3. This differential equation, established with the aid
of Figure 1.3.8 on page 26, serves as a mathematical model for the shape of a ﬂex-
ible cable suspended between two vertical supports when the cable is carrying a
vertical load. In Section 2.2 we solved this simple DE under the assumption that
the vertical load carried by the cables of a suspension bridge was the weight of a
horizontal roadbed distributed evenly along the x-axis. With W  rx, r the weight
per unit length of the roadbed, the shape of each cable between the vertical supports
turned out to be parabolic. We are now in a position to determine the shape of a uni-
form ﬂexible cable hanging only under its own weight, such as a wire strung between
two telephone posts. The vertical load is now the wire itself, and so if r is the linear
density of the wire (measured, say, in pounds per feet) and s is the length of the
segment P1P2 in Figure 1.3.8 then W  rs. Hence
.
(8)
Since the arc length between points P1 and P2 is given by
,
(9)
it follows from the fundamental theorem of calculus that the derivative of (9) is
.
(10)
Differentiating (8) with respect to x and using (10) lead to the second-order equation
.
(11)
In the example that follows we solve (11) and show that the curve assumed by
the suspended cable is a catenary. Before proceeding, observe that the nonlinear
second-order differential equation (11) is one of those equations having the form
F(x, y, y)  0 discussed in Section 4.10. Recall that we have a chance of solving an
equation of this type by reducing the order of the equation by means of the substitu-
tion u  y.
d 2y
dx2  
T1
 ds
dx    or    d 2y
dx2  
T1
 B1 
dy
dx
2
ds
dx  B1 
dy
dx
2
s 
x
0
 B1 
dy
dx
2
dx
dy
dx  s
1
(0)  1
2,
EXAMPLE 3
A Solution of (11)
From the position of the y-axis in Figure 1.3.8 it is apparent that initial conditions
associated with the second differential equation in (11) are y(0)  a and y(0)  0.
If we substitute u  y, then the equation in (11) becomes 
. Sepa-
rating variables, we ﬁnd that
.
 
du
11  u2  
T1
  dx    gives    sinh1u  
T1
 x  c1
du
dx  
1
 11  u2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Now, y(0)  0 is equivalent to u(0)  0. Since sinh1 0  0, c1  0, so 
u  sinh (rxT1). Finally, by integrating both sides of
.
Using y(0)  a, cosh 0  1, the last equation implies that c2  a  T1r. 
Thus 
we
see 
that 
the 
shape 
of 
the 
hanging 
wire 
is 
given 
by
.
In Example 3, had we been clever enough at the start to choose a  T1r,
then the solution of the problem would have been simply the hyperbolic cosine
y  (T1r) cosh (rxT1).
Rocket Motion
In (12) of Section 1.3 we saw that the differential equation of
a free-falling body of mass m near the surface of the Earth is given by
,
where s represents the distance from the surface of the Earth to the object and the
positive direction is considered to be upward. In other words, the underlying
assumption here is that the distance s to the object is small when compared with the
radius R of the Earth; put yet another way, the distance y from the center of the Earth
to the object is approximately the same as R. If, on the other hand, the distance y to
the object, such as a rocket or a space probe, is large when compared to R, then we
combine Newton's second law of motion and his universal law of gravitation to
derive a differential equation in the variable y.
Suppose a rocket is launched vertically upward from the ground as shown in
Figure 5.3.5. If the positive direction is upward and air resistance is ignored, then the
differential equation of motion after fuel burnout is
,
(12)
where k is a constant of proportionality, y is the distance from the center of the
Earth to the rocket, M is the mass of the Earth, and m is the mass of the rocket. To
determine the constant k, we use the fact that when y  R, kMmR2  mg or 
k  gR2M. Thus the last equation in (12) becomes
.
(13)
See Problem 14 in Exercises 5.3.
Variable Mass
Notice in the preceding discussion that we described the motion
of the rocket after it has burned all its fuel, when presumably its mass m is constant.
Of course, during its powered ascent the total mass of the rocket varies as its fuel is
being expended. We saw in (17) of Exercises 1.3 that the second law of motion, as
originally advanced by Newton, states that when a body of mass m moves through a
force ﬁeld with velocity v, the time rate of change of the momentum mv of the body
is equal to applied or net force F acting on the body:
.
(14)
If m is constant, then (14) yields the more familiar form F  m dvdt  ma, where
a is acceleration. We use the form of Newton's second law given in (14) in the next
example, in which the mass m of the body is variable.
F  d
dt (mv)
d 2y
dt2  g R2
y2
m d 2y
dt2  k Mm
y2     or    d 2y
dt2  k M
y2
m d 2s
dt2  mg    or simply    d 2s
dt2  g
y  (T1>) cosh(x> T1)  a  T1>
dy
dx  sinh 
T1
x,    we get    y  T1
 cosh 
T1
 x  c2
v0
y
center of
Earth
R
FIGURE 5.3.5
Distance to rocket is
large compared to R.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.3
NONLINEAR MODELS
●
223
x(t)
5 lb
upward
force
FIGURE 5.3.6
Chain pulled upward
by a constant force in Example 4
EXAMPLE 4
Chain Pulled Upward by a Constant Force
A uniform 10-foot-long chain is coiled loosely on the ground. One end of the chain
is pulled vertically upward by means of constant force of 5 pounds. The chain weighs
1 pound per foot. Determine the height of the end above ground level at time t. See
Figure 5.3.6.
SOLUTION
Let us suppose that x  x(t) denotes the height of the end of the chain in
the air at time t, v  dxdt, and the positive direction is upward. For the portion of the
chain that is in the air at time t we have the following variable quantities:
Thus from (14) we have
(15)
Because v  dxdt, the last equation becomes
.
(16)
The nonlinear second-order differential equation (16) has the form F(x, x, x)  0,
which is the second of the two forms considered in Section 4.10 that can possibly
be solved by reduction of order. To solve (16), we revert back to (15) and use v  x
along with the Chain Rule. From 
the second equation in (15)
can be rewritten as
.
(17)
On inspection (17) might appear intractable, since it cannot be characterized as any
of the ﬁrst-order equations that were solved in Chapter 2. However, by rewriting
(17) in differential form M(x, v)dx  N(x, v)dv  0, we observe that although the
equation
(18)
is not exact, it can be transformed into an exact equation by multiplying it by an
integrating factor. From (Mv  Nx)N  1x we see from (13) of Section 2.4 that
an integrating factor is 
When (18) is multiplied by m(x)  x, the
resulting equation is exact (verify). By identifying f x  xv2  32x2  160x,
f v  x2v and then proceeding as in Section 2.4, we obtain
.
(19)
Since we have assumed that all of the chain is on the ﬂoor initially, we have
x(0)  0. This last condition applied to (19) yields c1  0. By solving the algebraic
equation 
for v  dxdt  0, we get another ﬁrst-order
differential equation,
.
dx
dt  B160  64
3
 x
1
2 x2v2  32
3  x3  80x2  0
1
2
 x2v2  32
3 x3  80x2  c1
edx/x  eln x  x.
(v2  32x  160)dx  xv dv  0
xv dv
dx  v2  160  32x
dv
dt  dv
dx
dx
dt  v dv
dx
x  d 2x
dt2 
dx
dt
2
 32x  160
Product Rule
 v
  160  32x.
x
(     v)  5  x
or
x
---
32
d
---
dt
dv
---
dt
dx
---
dt
 net force:  F  5  W  5  x.
 mass:  
 m  W>g  x>32,
 weight:   W  (x ft)  (1 lb/ft)  x,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
The last equation can be solved by separation of variables. You should verify that
.
(20)
This time the initial condition x(0)  0 implies that 
. Finally, by
squaring both sides of (20) and solving for x, we arrive at the desired result,
(21)
The graph of (21) given in Figure 5.3.7 should not, on physical grounds, be taken at
face value. See Problem 15 in Exercises 5.3.
x(t)  15
2  15
2 1  4110
15
t
2
.
c2  31108
 3
32
 160  64
3
 x
1/2
 t  c2
0.5
1
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
t
x
1.5
2
2.5
0
FIGURE 5.3.7
Graph of (21) in
Example 4
EXERCISES 5.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-9.
To the Instructor
In addition to Problems 24 and 25, all
or portions of Problems 1-6, 8-13, 15, 20, and 21 could
serve as Computer Lab Assignments.
Nonlinear Springs
In Problems 1-4 the given differential equation is model of an
undamped spring/mass system in which the restoring force
F(x) in (1) is nonlinear. For each equation use a numerical
solver to plot the solution curves that satisfy the given initial
conditions. If the solutions appear to be periodic use the solu-
tion curve to estimate the period T of oscillations.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5. In Problem 3, suppose the mass is released from
the initial position x(0)  1 with an initial velocity
x(0)  x1. Use a numerical solver to estimate the
smallest value of x1 at which the motion of the mass
is nonperiodic.
6. In Problem 3, suppose the mass is released from an initial
position x(0)  x0 with the initial velocity x(0)  1. Use
a numerical solver to estimate an interval a  x0  b for
which the motion is oscillatory.
7. Find a linearization of the differential equation in
Problem 4.
x(0)  1, x(0)  1; x(0)  3, x(0)  1
d 2x
dt2  xe0.01x  0,
x(0)  1, x(0)  1; x(0)  3
2, x(0)  1
d 2x
dt2  2x  x2  0,
x(0)  1, x(0)  1; x(0)  2, x(0)  2
d 2x
dt2  4x  16x3  0,
x(0)  1, x(0)  1; x(0)  1
2, x(0)  1
d 2x
dt2  x3  0,
8. Consider the model of an undamped nonlinear
spring/mass system given by x  8x  6x3  x5  0.
Use a numerical solver to discuss the nature of the
oscillations of the system corresponding to the initial
conditions:
In Problems 9 and 10 the given differential equation is a
model of a damped nonlinear spring/mass system. Predict
the behavior of each system as 
. For each equation use
a numerical solver to obtain the solution curves satisfying
the given initial conditions.
9.
10.
11. The model mx  kx  k1x3  F0cos vt of an undamped
periodically driven spring/mass system is called Dufﬁng's
differential equation. Consider the initial-value problem
x  x  k1x3  5 cos t, x(0)  1, x(0)  0. Use a nu-
merical solver to investigate the behavior of the system for
values of k1  0 ranging from k1  0.01 to k1  100.
State your conclusions.
12. (a) Find values of k1  0 for which the system in
Problem 11 is oscillatory.
(b) Consider the initial-value problem
x  x  k1x3 
,
x(0)  0,
x(0)  0.
Find values for k1  0 for which the system is 
oscillatory.
cos 3
2 t
 x(0)  0, x(0)  3
2; x(0)  1, x(0)  1
d 2x
dt2  dx
dt  x  x3  0,
x(0)  3, x(0)  4; x(0)  0, x(0)  8
d 2x
dt2  dx
dt  x  x3  0, 
t : 
 x(0)  2, x(0)  0;  
 x(0)  12, x(0)  1.
 x(0)  12, x(0)  1;   x(0)  2, x(0)  1
2;
 x(0)  1, x(0)  1; 
 x(0)  2, x(0)  1
2;
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.3
NONLINEAR MODELS
●
225
Nonlinear Pendulum
13. Consider the model of the free damped nonlinear
pendulum given by
.
Use a numerical solver to investigate whether the motion
in the two cases l2  v2  0 and l2  v2  0 corre-
sponds, respectively, to the overdamped and underdamped
cases discussed in Section 5.1 for spring/mass systems. For
For
and 
Rocket Motion
14. (a) Use the substitution v  dydt to solve (13) for v in
terms of y. Assuming that the velocity of the rocket
at burnout is v  v0 and y  R at that instant, show
that the approximate value of the constant c of
integration is 
.
(b) Use the solution for v in part (a) to show that the
escape velocity of the rocket is given by
.
[Hint: Take
and assume v  0 for all time t.]
(c) The result in part (b) holds for any body in the Solar
System. Use the values g  32 ft/s2 and R  4000 mi
to show that the escape velocity from the Earth is
(approximately) v0  25,000 mi/h.
(d) Find the escape velocity from the Moon if the
acceleration of gravity is 0.165g and R  1080 mi.
Variable Mass
15. (a) In Example 4, how much of the chain would you
intuitively expect the constant 5-pound force to be
able to lift?
(b) What is the initial velocity of the chain?
(c) Why is the time interval corresponding to x(t) ! 0
given in Figure 5.3.7 not the interval I of deﬁnition of
the solution (21)? Determine the interval I. How
much chain is actually lifted? Explain any difference
between this answer and your prediction in part (a).
(d) Why would you expect x(t) to be a periodic solution?
16. A uniform chain of length L, measured in feet, is held
vertically so that the lower end just touches the ﬂoor.
The chain weighs 2 lb/ft. The upper end that is held is
released from rest at t  0 and the chain falls straight
down. If x(t) denotes the length of the chain on the ﬂoor
at time t, air resistance is ignored, and the positive direc-
tion is taken to be downward, then
.
(a) Solve for v in terms of x. Solve for x in terms of t.
Express v in terms of t.
(L  x)d2x
dt2 
dx
dt
2
 Lg
y : 
v0  12gR
c  gR  1
2
 v0
 2
u(0)  4.
l2  v2  0, use l  1
3, v1, u(0)  2,
and u(0)  2.
l2  v2  0, use l2, v1, u(0)1,
d 2
dt2  2 d
dt  2 sin   0
(b) Determine how long it takes for the chain to fall
completely to the ground.
(c) What velocity does the model in part (a) predict for
the upper end of the chain as it hits the ground?
Miscellaneous Mathematical Models
17. Pursuit Curve
In a naval exercise a ship S1 is pursued
by a submarine S2 as shown in Figure 5.3.8. Ship S1
departs point (0, 0) at t  0 and proceeds along a straight-
line course (the y-axis) at a constant speed v1. The subma-
rine S2 keeps ship S1 in visual contact, indicated by the
straightdashedline L intheﬁgure,whiletravelingatacon-
stant speed v2 along a curve C. Assume that ship S2 starts
at the point (a, 0), a  0, at t  0 and that L is tangent to C.
(a) Determine a mathematical model that describes the
curve C.
(b) Find an explicit solution of the differential equation.
For convenience deﬁne r  v1v2. 
(c) Determine whether the paths of S1 and S2 will ever
intersect by considering the cases r  1, r  1, and r 1.
[Hint:
, where s is arc length measured
along C.]
dt
dx  dt
ds ds
dx
S2
x
y
S1
L
C
FIGURE 5.3.8
Pursuit curve in Problem 17
18. Pursuit Curve
In another naval exercise a destroyer
S1 pursues a submerged submarine S2. Suppose that S1
at (9, 0) on the x-axis detects S2 at (0, 0) and that S2
simultaneously detects S1. The captain of the destroyer
S1 assumes that the submarine will take immediate eva-
sive action and conjectures that its likely new course is
the straight line indicated in Figure 5.3.9. When S1 is at
(3, 0), it changes from its straight-line course toward the
origin to a pursuit curve C. Assume that the speed of
the destroyer is, at all times, a constant 30 mi/h and
that the submarine's speed is a constant 15 mi/h.
(a) Explain why the captain waits until S1 reaches (3, 0)
before ordering a course change to C.
(b) Using polar coordinates, ﬁnd an equation r  f(u)
for the curve C.
(c) Let T denote the time, measured from the initial
detection, at which the destroyer intercepts the sub-
marine. Find an upper bound for T.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
19. The Ballistic Pendulum
Historically, in order to main-
tain quality control over munitions (bullets) produced
by an assembly line, the manufacturer would use a bal-
listic pendulum to determine the muzzle velocity of a
gun, that is, the speed of a bullet as it leaves the barrel.
Invented in 1742 by the English engineer Benjamin
Robins, the ballistic pendulum is simply a plane pendu-
lum consisting of a rod of negligible mass to which a
block of wood of mass mw is attached. The system is set
in motion by the impact of a bullet which is moving
horizontally at the unknown velocity vb; at the time of
the impact, which we take as t  0, the combined mass
is mw  mb, where mb is the mass of the bullet imbedded
in the wood. In (7) of this section, we saw that in the
case of small oscillations, the angular displacement 
of a plane pendulum shown in Figure 5.3.3 is given by
the linear DE  
where
corre-
sponds to motion to the right of vertical. The velocity vb
can be found by measuring the height h of the mass
mw  mb at the maximum displacement angle 
shown in Figure 5.3.10.
Intuitively, the horizontal velocity V of the com-
bined mass (wood plus bullet) after impact is only a
fraction of the velocity vb of the bullet,  that is,
Now recall, a distance s traveled by a particle moving
along a circular path is related to the radius l and central
angle by the formula 
By differentiating the last
formula with respect to time t, it follows  that the
angular velocity 
of the mass and its linear velocity v
are related by 
. Thus the initial angular velocity
at the time t at which the bullet impacts the wood
block is related to V by 
or  
(a) Solve the initial-value problem
d2u
dt2  g
l u  0, u(0)  0, u(0)  v0.
v0 
mb
mw  mb vb
l .
V  lv0
v0
v  lv
v
s  lu.
u
V 
mb
mw  mbvb.
umax
u  0
u  (g>l)u  0,
u(t)
(b) Use the result from part (a) to show that
(c) Use Figure 5.3.10 to express cos 
in terms of l
and h. Then use the ﬁrst two terms of the Maclaurin
series for cos 
to express 
in terms of l and h.
Finally, show that vb is given (approximately) by
(d) Use the result in part (c) to ﬁnd vb
and
and h  6 cm.
mb  5 g, mw  1 kg,
vb 
mw  mb
mb  22gh.
umax
u
umax
vb 
mw  mb
mb  2lg umax.
S2
L
x
y
S1
C
θ
(3, 0)
(9, 0)
FIGURE 5.3.9
Pursuit curve in Problem 18
V
h
l
mb vb
h
max
mw
mbmw

FIGURE 5.3.10
Ballistic pendulum in Problem 19
20. Relief Supplies As shown in Figure 5.3.11, a plane
ﬂying horizontally at a constant speed v0 drops a relief
supply pack to a person on the ground. Assume the ori-
gin is the point where the supply pack is released and
that the positive x-axis points forward and that posi-
tive y-axis points downward. Under the assumption
that the horizontal and vertical components of the air
resistance are proportional to 
and 
, re-
spectively, and if the position of the supply pack is
given by 
then its velocity is
. Equating components in the
vector form of Newton's second law of motion,
gives
(a) Solve both of the foregoing initial-value problems
by means of the substitutions 
and separation of variables. [Hint: See the Remarks
at the end of Section 3.2.]
(b) Suppose the plane ﬁles at an altitude of 1000 ft and
that its constant speed is 300 mi/h. Assume that the
constant of proportionality for air resistance is
and that the supply pack weighs 256 lb.
Use a root-ﬁnding application of a CAS or a graphic
k  0.0053
w  dy>dt,
u  dx>dt,
m d 2y
dt 2  mg  k
dy
dt
2
,  y(0)  0, y(0)  0.
m d 2x
dt 2  mg  k
dx
dt
2
,  x(0)  0, x(0)  v0
m dv
dt  mg  k	
dx
dt
2
 i 
dy
dt
2
j
v(t)  (dx>dt)i  (dy>dt)j
r(t)  x(t)i  y(t)j,
(dy>dt)2
(dx>dt)2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.3
NONLINEAR MODELS
●
227
calculator to determine the horizontal distance the
pack travels, measured from its point of release to
the point where it hits the ground.
24. Pendulum Motion on the Moon-Continued
Repeat
the two parts of Problem 23 this time using the linear
model (7).
Computer Lab Assignments
25. Consider the initial-value problem
for a nonlinear pendulum. Since we cannot solve the
differential equation, we can ﬁnd no explicit solution of
this problem. But suppose we wish to determine the ﬁrst
time t1  0 for which the pendulum in Figure 5.3.3,
starting from its initial position to the right, reaches the
position OP—that is, the ﬁrst positive root of u(t)  0.
In this problem and the next we examine several ways
to proceed.
(a) Approximate t1 by solving the linear problem 
(b) Use the method illustrated in Example 3 of Sec-
tion 4.10 to ﬁnd the ﬁrst four nonzero terms of a
Taylor series solution u(t) centered at 0 for the non-
linear initial-value problem. Give the exact values
of all coefﬁcients.
(c) Use the ﬁrst two terms of the Taylor series in
part (b) to approximate t1.
(d) Use the ﬁrst three terms of the Taylor series in
part (b) to approximate t1.
(e) Use a root-ﬁnding application of a CAS or a graphic
calculator and the ﬁrst four terms of the Taylor series
in part (b) to approximate t1.
(f) In this part of the problem you are led through
the commands in Mathematica that enable you to
approximate the root t1. The procedure is easily
modiﬁed so that any root of u(t)  0 can be
approximated. (If you do not have Mathematica,
adapt the given procedure by ﬁnding the corre-
sponding syntax for the CAS you have on hand.)
Precisely reproduce and then, in turn, execute each
line in the given sequence of commands.
sol  NDSolve[{y[t]  Sin[y[t]]  0, 
y[0]  Pi/12, y[0]  1/3}, 
y, {t, 0, 5}]//Flatten
solution  y[t]/.sol
Clear[y]
y[t_]:  Evaluate[solution]
y[t]
gr1  Plot[y[t], {t, 0, 5}]
root  FindRoot[y[t]  0, {t, 1}]
(g) Appropriately modify the syntax in part (f) and ﬁnd
the next two positive roots of u(t)  0.
d 2
dt2    0,  (0)  
12, (0)  1
3.
d 2
dt2  sin  0,  (0)  
12, (0)   1
3
supply
pack
target
FIGURE 5.3.11
Airplane drop in Problem 20
Discussion Problems
21. Discuss why the damping term in equation (3) is
written as
22. (a) Experiment with a calculator to ﬁnd an interval
0  u  u1, where u is measured in radians, for
which you think sin u  u is a fairly good estimate.
Then use a graphing utility to plot the graphs of
y  x and y  sin x on the same coordinate axes
for 0  x  p2. Do the graphs conﬁrm your
observations with the calculator?
(b) Use a numerical solver to plot the solution curves of
the initial-value problems
and
for several values of u0 in the interval 0  u  u1
found in part (a). Then plot solution curves of the
initial-value problems for several values of u0 for
which u0  u1.
23. Pendulum Motion on the Moon
Does a pendulum of
length l oscillate faster on the Earth or on the Moon?
(a) Take l  3 and g  32 for the acceleration of grav-
ity on Earth. Use a numerical solver to generate a
numerical solution curve for the nonlinear model
(6) subject to the initial conditions 
Repeat using the same values but use
0.165g for the acceleration of gravity on the Moon.
(b) From the graphs in part (a), determine which pendu-
lum oscillates faster. Which pendulum has the
greater amplitude of motion?
u(0)  2.
u(0)  1,
d 2
dt2    0,     (0)  0,  (0)  0
d 2
dt2  sin  0,  (0)  0,  (0)  0

dx
dt dx
dt instead of   
dx
dt
2
.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
26. Consider a pendulum that is released from rest from an
initial displacement of u0 radians. Solving the linear
model (7) subject to the initial conditions u(0)  u0,
u(0)  0 gives 
. The period of
oscillations predicted by this model is given by the
familiar formula 
. The inter-
esting thing about this formula for T is that it does not
depend on the magnitude of the initial displacement
u0. In other words, the linear model predicts that the
time it would take the pendulum to swing from an ini-
tial displacement of, say, u0  p2 ( 90°) to p2
and back again would be exactly the same as the time
it would take to cycle from, say, u0  p360 ( 0.5°)
to p360. This is intuitively unreasonable; the actual
period must depend on u0.
If we assume that g  32 ft/s2 and l  32 ft, then
the period of oscillation of the linear model is T  2p s.
Let us compare this last number with the period
T  2 1g/l  2 1l/g
(t)  0 cos 1g/lt
predicted by the nonlinear model when u0  p4. Using
a numerical solver that is capable of generating hard
data, approximate the solution of
on the interval 0  t  2. As in Problem 25, if t1 denotes
the ﬁrst time the pendulum reaches the position OP in
Figure 5.3.3, then the period of the nonlinear pendulum is
4t1. Here is another way of solving the equation u(t)  0.
Experiment with small step sizes and advance the time,
starting at t  0 and ending at t  2. From your hard data
observe the time t1 when u(t) changes, for the ﬁrst time,
from positive to negative. Use the value t1 to determine
the true value of the period of the nonlinear pendulum.
Compute the percentage relative error in the period esti-
mated by T  2p.
d 2
dt2  sin  0,  (0)  
4 , (0)  0
CHAPTER 5 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-9.
Answer Problems 1-8 without referring back to the text. Fill
in the blank or answer true/false.
1. If a mass weighing 10 pounds stretches a spring 
2.5 feet, a mass weighing 32 pounds will stretch it
feet.
2. The period of simple harmonic motion of mass weigh-
ing 8 pounds attached to a spring whose constant is
6.25 lb/ft is 
seconds.
3. The differential equation of a spring/mass system is
x  16x  0. If the mass is initially released from a
point 1 meter above the equilibrium position with a
downward velocity of 3 m/s, the amplitude of vibra-
tions is 
meters.
4. Pure resonance cannot take place in the presence of a
damping force. 
5. In the presence of a damping force, the displacements
of a mass on a spring will always approach zero as
. 
6. A mass on a spring whose motion is critically damped
can possibly pass through the equilibrium position
twice. 
7. At critical damping any increase in damping will result
in an 
system.
8. If 
simple 
harmonic 
motion 
is 
described 
by
, the phase angle f is 
when the initial conditions are 
and x(0)  1. 
In Problems 9 and 10 the eigenvalues and eigenfunc-
tions of the boundary-value problem y  ly  0, y(0)  0,
y(p)  0 are ln  n2, n  0, 1, 2, . . . , and y  cos nx,
respectively. Fill in the blanks.
x(0)  1
2
x  (12>2)sin(2t  f)
t : 
9. A solution of the BVP when l  8 is y 
because 
.
10. A solution of the BVP when l  36 is y 
because 
.
11. A free undamped spring/mass system oscillates with a
period of 3 seconds. When 8 pounds are removed from
the spring, the system has a period of 2 seconds. What
was the weight of the original mass on the spring?
12. A mass weighing 12 pounds stretches a spring 2 feet. The
mass is initially released from a point 1 foot below the
equilibrium position with an upward velocity of 4 ft/s.
(a) Find the equation of motion.
(b) What are the amplitude, period, and frequency of
the simple harmonic motion?
(c) At what times does the mass return to the point
1 foot below the equilibrium position?
(d) At what times does the mass pass through the
equilibrium position moving upward? Moving
downward?
(e) What is the velocity of the mass at 
?
(f) At what times is the velocity zero?
13. A force of 2 pounds stretches a spring 1 foot. With one
end held ﬁxed, a mass weighing 8 pounds is attached
to the other end. The system lies on a table that imparts
a frictional force numerically equal to 
times the
instantaneous velocity. Initially, the mass is displaced
4 inches above the equilibrium position and released
from rest. Find the equation of motion if the motion
takes place along a horizontal straight line that is taken
as the x-axis.
3
2
t  3p>16 s
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 IN REVIEW
●
229
14. A mass weighing 32 pounds stretches a spring 6 inches.
The mass moves through a medium offering a damping
force that is numerically equal to b times the instanta-
neous velocity. Determine the values of b  0 for which
the spring/mass system will exhibit oscillatory motion.
15. Aspring with constant k  2 is suspended in a liquid that
offers a damping force numerically equal to 4 times the
instantaneous velocity. If a mass m is suspended from the
spring, determine the values of m for which the subse-
quent free motion is nonoscillatory.
16. The vertical motion of a mass attached to a spring 
is 
described 
by 
the 
IVP
. Determine the maximum vertical
displacement of the mass.
17. A mass weighing 4 pounds stretches a spring 18 inches.
A periodic force equal to f(t)  cos gt  sin gt is
impressed on the system starting at t  0. In the absence
of a damping force, for what value of g will the system
be in a state of pure resonance?
18. Find a particular solution for x  2lx  v2x  A,
where A is a constant force.
19. A mass weighing 4 pounds is suspended from a spring
whose constant is 3 lb/ft. The entire system is immersed
in a ﬂuid offering a damping force numerically equal
to the instantaneous velocity. Beginning at t  0, an
external force equal to f(t)  et is impressed on the
system. Determine the equation of motion if the mass is
initially released from rest at a point 2 feet below the
equilibrium position.
20. (a) Two springs are attached in series as shown in
Figure 5.R.1. If the mass of each spring is ignored,
show that the effective spring constant k of the
system is deﬁned by 1k  1k1  1k2.
(b) A mass weighing W pounds stretches a spring
foot and stretches a different spring foot. The two
springs are attached, and the mass is then attached to
the double spring as shown in Figure 5.R.1. Assume
that the motion is free and that there is no damping
force present. Determine the equation of motion if
the mass is initially released at a point 1 foot below
the equilibrium position with a downward velocity of
.
(c) Show that the maximum speed of the mass is
2
3
 23g  1.
2
3 ft/s
1
4
1
2
x(0)  4, x(0)  2
1
4
 x  x  x  0,
21. A series circuit contains an inductance of L  1 h, a
capacitance of C  104 f, and an electromotive force
of E(t)  100 sin 50t V. Initially, the charge q and
current i are zero.
(a) Determine the charge q(t).
(b) Determine the current i(t).
(c) Find the times for which the charge on the capacitor
is zero.
22. (a) Show that the current i(t) in an LRC-series circuit
satisﬁes 
, where E(t) 
denotes the derivative of E(t).
(b) Two initial conditions i(0) and i(0) can be speciﬁed
for the DE in part (a). If i(0)  i0 and q(0)  q0,
what is i(0)?
23. Consider the boundary-value problem
.
Show that except for the case l  0, there are two
independent eigenfunctions corresponding to each
eigenvalue.
24. A bead is constrained to slide along a frictionless rod of
length L. The rod is rotating in a vertical plane with a
constant angular velocity v about a pivot P ﬁxed at the
midpoint of the rod, but the design of the pivot allows
the bead to move along the entire length of the rod. Let
r(t) denote the position of the bead relative to this rotat-
ing coordinate system as shown in Figure 5.R.2. To
apply Newton's second law of motion to this rotating
frame of reference, it is necessary to use the fact that the
net force acting on the bead is the sum of the real forces
(in this case, the force due to gravity) and the inertial
forces (coriolis, transverse, and centrifugal). The math-
ematics is a little complicated, so we just give the result-
ing differential equation for r:
.
(a) Solve the foregoing DE subject to the initial
conditions r(0)  r0, r(0)  v0.
(b) Determine the initial conditions for which the bead
exhibits simple harmonic motion. What is the min-
imum length L of the rod for which it can accom-
modate simple harmonic motion of the bead?
(c) For initial conditions other than those obtained in
part (b), the bead must eventually ﬂy off the rod.
Explain using the solution r(t) in part (a).
(d) Suppose v  1 rad/s. Use a graphing utility to
graph the solution r(t) for the initial conditions
r(0)  0, r(0)  v0, where v0 is 0, 10, 15, 16, 16.1,
and 17.
m d 2r
dt2  m2r  mg sin t
y  y  0,  y(0)  y(2),  y(0)  y(2)
L  d 2i
dt2  R  di
dt  1
C
 i  E(t)
k2
k1
FIGURE 5.R.1
Attached springs in Problem 20
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230
●
CHAPTER 5
MODELING WITH HIGHER-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
(e) Suppose the length of the rod is L  40 ft. For each
pair of initial conditions in part (d), use a root-
ﬁnding application to ﬁnd the total time that the
bead stays on the rod.
bead 
P
r(t)
t
ω
FIGURE 5.R.2
Rotating rod in Problem 24
rigid
support
frictionless surface
x = 0
x(t) < 0
x(t) > 0
m
m
(a) equilibrium
(b) motion
FIGURE 5.R.3
Sliding spring/mass system in Problem 25
Figure 5.R.4. If the spring constants are 
and 
deter-
mine a differential equation for the displacement 
of
the freely sliding mass.
x(t)
k2,
k1
25. Suppose a mass m lying on a ﬂat dry frictionless surface
is attached to the free end of a spring whose constant is
k. In Figure 5.R.3(a) the mass is shown at the equilib-
rium position x  0, that is, the spring is neither
stretched nor compressed. As shown in Figure 5.R.3(b),
the displacement 
of the mass to the right of the equi-
librium position is positive and negative to the left.
Determine a differential equation for the displacement
of the freely sliding mass. Discuss the difference be-
tween the derivation of this DE and the analysis leading
to (1) of Section 5.1.
x(t)
x(t)
rigid
support
rigid
support
k1
k2
m
FIGURE 5.R.4
Double spring system in Problem 26
27. Suppose the mass m in the spring/mass system in
Problem 25 slides over a dry surface whose coefﬁcient
of sliding friction is 
. If the retarding force of
kinetic friction has the constant magnitude 
where mg is the weight of the mass, and acts opposite
to the direction of motion, then it is known as coulomb
friction. By using the signum function
determine a piecewise-deﬁned differential equation for
the displacement 
of the damped sliding mass.
28. For simplicity, let us assume in Problem 27 that 
and 
(a) Find the displacement 
of the mass if it is re-
leased from rest from a point 
units to the right of
the equilibrium position, that is, the initial condi-
tions are 
When released,
intuitively the motion of the mass will be to the left.
Give a time interval 
over which this solution
is deﬁned. Where is the mass at time t1?
(b) For 
assume that the motion is now to the
right. Using initial conditions at 
ﬁnd 
and give
a time interval [t1, t2] over which this solution is
deﬁned. Where is the mass at time t2? 
(c) For 
assume that the motion is now to the left.
Using initial conditions at 
ﬁnd 
and give a
time interval [t2, t3] over which this solution is
deﬁned. Where is the mass at time t3?
(d) Using initial conditions at t3, show that the model
predicts that there is no furthere motion for 
(e) Graph the displacement 
on the interval [0, t3].
x(t)
t  t3.
x(t)
t2,
t  t2
x(t)
t1,
t  t1
[0, t1]
x(0)  5.5, x(0)  0.
5.5
x(t)
fk  1.
k  1,
m  1,
x(t)
sgn(x) 
1,   x  0 (motion to left)
1,   x  0 (motion to right)
fk  "mg,
"  0
26. Suppose the mass m on the ﬂat, dry, frictionless surface
in Problem 25 is attached to two springs as shown
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

231
231
6
Series Solutions of Linear Equations
6.1 Review of Power Series
6.2 Solutions About Ordinary Points
6.3 Solutions About Singular Points
6.4 Special Functions
Chapter 6 in Review
Up to this point in our study of differential equations we have primarily solved
linear equations of order two (or higher) that have constant coefﬁcients. The only
exception was the Cauchy-Euler equation in Section 4.7.  In applications, higher-
order linear equations with variable coefﬁcients are just as important as, if not more
than, differential equations with constant coefﬁcients. As pointed out in Section 4.7,
even a simple linear second-order equation with variable coefﬁcients such as
does not possess solutions that are elementary functions.  But this is
not to say that we can't ﬁnd two linearly independent solutions of 
we
can.  In Sections 6.2 and 6.4 we shall see that the functions that are solutions of this
equation are deﬁned by inﬁnite series.
In this chapter we shall study two inﬁnite-series methods for ﬁnding solutions
of homogeneous linear second-order DEs 
where
the variable coefﬁcients 
are, for the most part, simple
polynomial functions.
a2(x), a1(x), and  a0(x)
a2(x)y  a1(x)y  a0(x)y  0,
y  xy  0;
y  xy  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

232
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
x
a
a + R
a − R
divergence 
divergence 
absolute 
convergence 
series may
converge or diverge
at endpoints
FIGURE 6.1.1
Absolute convergence
within the interval of convergence and
divergence outside of this interval
REVIEW OF POWER SERIES
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Inﬁnite series of constants, p-series, harmonic series, alternating harmonic series, geometric
series, tests for convergence especially the ratio test
●Power series, Taylor series, Maclaurin series (See any calculus text)
INTRODUCTION
In Section 4.3 we saw that solving a homogeneous linear DE with constant
coefﬁcients was essentially a problem in algebra. By ﬁnding the roots of the auxiliary equation, we
could write a general solution of the DE as a linear combination of the elementary functions
But as was pointed out in the introduction to Section 4.7,
most linear higher-order DEs with variable coefﬁcients cannot be solved in terms of elementary
functions.  A usual course of action for equations of this sort is to assume a solution in the form of
an inﬁnite series and proceed in a manner similar to the method of undetermined coefﬁcients
(Section 4.4). In Section 6.2 we consider linear second-order DEs with variable coefﬁcients that
possess solutions in the form of a power series, and so it is appropriate that we begin this chapter
with a review of that topic.
eax, xkeax, xkeaxcosbx, and xkeaxsinbx.
6.1
Power Series
Recall from calculus that power series in 
is an inﬁnite
series of the form
Such a series also said to be a power series centered at a. For example, the power
series 
is centered at a  1. In the next section we will be concerned
principally with power series in x, in other words, power series that are centered at
. For example, 
is a power series in x.
Important Facts
The following bulleted list summarizes some important
facts about power series 
•
Convergence
A power series is convergent at a speciﬁed value of x if 
its sequence of partial sums 
converges, that is, 
exists. If the limit does not exist at x, then the series
is said to be divergent.
•
Interval of Convergence
Every power series has an interval of convergence.
The interval of convergence is the set of all real numbers x for which the series
converges. The center of the interval of convergence is the center a of the series.
•
Radius of Convergence
The radius R of the interval of convergence of a
power series is called its radius of convergence. If 
then a power series
converges for 
and diverges for 
If the series
converges only at its center a, then 
If the series converges for all x, then
we write 
Recall, the absolute-value inequality 
is
equivalent to the simultaneous inequality 
Apower series
may or may not converge at the endpoints 
of this interval.
•
Absolute Convergence
Within its interval of convergence a power series
converges absolutely. In other words, if x is in the interval of convergence
and is not an endpoint of the interval, then the series of absolute values
converges. See Figure 6.1.1.

n0 cn(x  a)n 
a  R and a  R
a  R  x  a  R.
 x  a   R
R  .
R  0.
 x  a  	 R.
 x  a   R
R 	 0,
cn (x  a)n
lim
N :  N
n0
lim
N :  SN(x) 
{SN(x)}

n0cn(x  a)n.


n0
2nxn  1  2x  4x2  . . .
a  0

n0(x  1)n


n0
cn(x  a)n  c0  c1(x  a)  c2(x  a)2  . . ..
x  a
The index of summation need not 
start at n  0.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

•
Ratio Test
Convergence of power series can often be determined by the
ratio test. Suppose 
for all n in 
and that
If 
the series converges absolutely; if 
the series diverges; and
if 
the test is inconclusive. The ratio test is always inconclusive at an
endpoint a 
 R.
L  1
L 	 1
L  1,
lim
n: 
 cn1(x  a)n1 
cn(x  a)n   x  a  lim
n: 
 cn1
 
cn   L.

n0 cn(x  a)n,
cn  0
6.1
REVIEW OF POWER SERIES
●
233
EXAMPLE 1
Interval of Convergence
Find the interval and radius of convergence for 
SOLUTION
The ratio test gives
The series converges absolutely for 
or
or 1  x  5.
This last inequality deﬁnes the open interval of convergence. The series diverges for
, that is, for x 	 5 or x  1. At the left endpoint x  1 of the open
interval of convergence, the series of constants 
is convergent by
the alternating series test. At the right endpoint x  5, the series 
is the
divergent harmonic series. The interval of convergence of the series is [1, 5), and the
radius of convergence is R  2.
•
A Power Series Deﬁnes a Function
A power series deﬁnes a function,
that is, 
whose domain is the interval of
convergence of the series. If the radius of convergence is R 	 0 or 
then f is continuous, differentiable, and integrable on the intervals 
(a  R, a  R) or
, respectively. Moreover, f(x) and f(x)dx can be
found by term-by-term differentiation and integration. Convergence at an
endpoint may be either lost by differentiation or gained through integration. If
is a power series in x, then the ﬁrst two derivatives are 
and
Notice that the ﬁrst term in the ﬁrst derivative and
the ﬁrst two terms in the second derivative are zero. We omit these zero
terms and write
.
(1)
Be sure you understand the two results given in (1); especially note where
the index of summation starts in each series. These results are important and
will be used in all examples in the next section.
•
Identity Property
If 
 0, R 	 0, for all numbers x in
some open interval, then 
for all n.
•
Analytic at a Point
A function f is said to be analytic at a point a if it
can be represented by a power series in x  a with either a positive or an
inﬁnite radius of convergence. In calculus it is seen that inﬁnitely
cn  0

n0 cn(x  a)n
y  

n2
cnn(n  1)xn2  2c2  6c3x  12c4x2  . . .
y  

n1
cnnxn1  c1  2c2x  3c3x2  4c4x3  . . .
y  
n0 n(n  1)xn2.
y  
n0 nxn1
y  

n1
cnxn  c0  c1x  c2x2  c3x3  . . .
(, )
R  ,
f (x)  
n0 cn(x  a)n
 
n1 (1>n)

n1 ((1)n>n)
 x  3  	 2
 x  3   2
1
2  x  3   1
lim
n: 
(x  3)n1
2n1(n  1)
(x  3)n
2nn 
  x  3   lim
n:   
n  1
2n
 1
2
  x  3 .


n1
(x  3)n
2nn
.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
differentiable functions such as 
ex
and so on, can
be represented by Taylor series
or by a Maclaurin series
.
You might remember some of the following Maclaurin series representations.
Interval
Maclaurin Series
of Convergence
(2)
These results can be used to obtain power series representations of other
functions. For example, if we wish to ﬁnd the Maclaurin series representation
of, say, 
we need only replace x in the Maclaurin series for 
Similarly, to obtain a Taylor series representation of 
centered at 
we replace x by 
in the Maclaurin series for ln(1  x):
x  1
a  1
ln x
ex2  1  x2
1!  x4
2!  x6
3!  . . .  

n0
1
n! x2n.
ex:
ex2
(1, 1)
 1
1  x  1  x  x2  x3  . . .  

n0
xn
(1, 1]
 ln(1  x)  x  x2
2  x3
3  x4
4  . . .  

n1
(1)n1
n
xn
(, )
 sinh x  x  x3
3!  x5
5!  x7
7!  . . .  

n0
1
(2n  1)!x2n1
(, )
 cosh x  1  x2
2!  x4
4!  x6
6!  . . .  

n0
1
(2n)!x2n
[1, 1]
 tan1 x  x  x3
3  x5
5  x7
7  . . .  

n0
(1)n
2n  1x2n1
(, )
 sin x  x  x3
3!  x5
5!  x7
7!  . . .  

n0
(1)n
(2n  1)!x2n1
(, )
 cos x  1  x2
2!  x4
4!  x6
6!  . . .  

n0
(1)n
(2n)! x2n
(, )
 ex  1  x
1!  x2
2!  x3
3!  . . .  

n0
1
n!xn


n0
f (n)(0)
n! xn  f(0)  f(0)
1! x  f (0)
1! x2  . . .


n0
f (n)(a)
n!
(x  a)n  f (a)  f(a)
1! (x  a)  f (a)
1! (x  a)2  . . .
ln(1  x),
cos x,
ex, sinx,
ln x  ln(1  (x  1))  (x  1)  (x  1)2
2
 (x  1)3
3
 (x  1)4
4
 . . .  

n1
(1)n1
n
 (x  1)n.
The interval of convergence for the power series representation of 
is the
same as that of 
that is, 
But the interval of convergence of the
Taylor series of 
is now 
this interval is 
shifted 1 unit to
the right.
•
Arithmetic of Power Series
Power series can be combined through the
operations of addition, multiplication, and division. The procedures for
powers series are similar to the way in which two polynomials are added,
multiplied, and divided —that is, we add coefﬁcients of like powers of x,
use the distributive law and collect like terms, and perform long division. 
(1, 1]
(0, 2];
ln x
(, ).
ex,
ex2
You can also verify that the interval of
convergence is (0, 2] by using the ratio
test.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.1
REVIEW OF POWER SERIES
●
235
EXAMPLE 2
Multiplication of Power Series
Find a power series representation of 
SOLUTION
We use the power series for 
and 
Since the power series of 
and 
both converge on 
the product series
converges on the same interval. Problems involving multiplication or division of
power series can be done with minimal fuss using a computer algebra system.
Shifting the Summation Index
For the three remaining sections of this chap-
ter, it is crucial that you become adept at simplifying the sum of two or more power
series, each series expressed in summation notation, to an expression with a single 
As the next example illustrates, combining two or more summations as a single summa-
tion often requires a reindexing, that is, a shift in the index of summation.
.
(, ),
sin x
ex
  x  x2  x3
3  x5
30  . . .  .
  (1)x  (1)x2 1
6  1
2 x3 1
6  1
6x4 
1
120  1
12  1
24x5  . . .
 exsinx 1  x  x2
2  x3
6  x4
24  . . .x  x3
6  x5
120 
x7
5040  . . .
sinx:
ex
ex sin x.
EXAMPLE 3
Addition of Power Series
Write
as one power series.
SOLUTION
In order to add the two series given in summation notation, it is neces-
sary that both indices of summation start with the same number and that the powers
of x in each series be "in phase," in other words, if one series starts with a multiple
of, say, x to the ﬁrst power, then we want the other series to start with the same power.
Note that in the given problem, the first series starts with x0 whereas the second
series starts with x1. By writing the ﬁrst term of the ﬁrst series outside of the summa-
tion notation,
(3)
we see that both series on the right side start with the same power of x, namely, x1.
Now to get the same summation index we are inspired by the exponents of x; we let
in the ﬁrst series and at the same time let 
in the second series.
For 
in 
we get 
and for 
in 
we get 
and
so the right-hand side of (3) becomes
(4)
same
same
2c2   (k  2)(k  1)ck2x k   ck1x k.
k1

k1

k  1,
k  n  1
n  0
k  1,
k  n  2
n  3
k  n  1
k  n  2
series starts
with x
for n  3
series starts
with x
for n  0
 n(n  1)cnx n2   cnx n1  2  1c2x 0   n(n  1)cnx n2   cnxn1
n2

n0

n3

n0



n2
n(n  1)cnxn2  

n0
cnxn1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Remember the summation index is a "dummy" variable; the fact that 
in
one case and 
in the other should cause no confusion if you keep in mind
that it is the value of the summation index that is important. In both cases k takes 
on the same successive values 
when n takes on the values
for 
and 
for 
We are now in a
position to add the series in (4) term-by-term:
(5)
If you are not totally convinced of the result in (5), then write out a few terms on
both sides of the equality. 
A Preview
The point of this section is to remind you of the salient facts about
power series so that you are comfortable using power series in the next section to ﬁnd
solutions of linear second-order DEs. In the last example in this section we tie up
many of the concepts just discussed; it also gives a preview of the method that will
used in Section 6.2. We purposely keep the example simple by solving a linear ﬁrst-
order equation. Also suspend, for the sake of illustration, the fact that you already
know how to solve the given equation by the integrating-factor method in Section 2.3.


n2
n(n  1)cnxn2  

n0
cnxn1  2c2  

k1
[(k  2)(k  1)ck2  ck1]xk.
k  n  1.
n  0, 1, 2, . . .
k  n  1
n  2, 3, 4, . . .
k  1, 2, 3, . . . 
k  n  1
k  n  2
236
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 4
A Power Series Solution
Find a power series solution 
of the differential equation 
SOLUTION
We break down the solution into a sequence of steps.
(i)
First calculate the derivative of the assumed solution:
(ii) Then substitute 
into the given DE: 
(iii) Now shift the indices of summation. When the indices of summation have the
same starting point and the powers of x agree, combine the summations:
 y  y  

n1
cnnxn1  

n0
cnxn
y  y  

n1
cnnxn1  

n0
cnxn.
y and y
; see the first line in (1)
y  

n1
cnnxn1
y  y  0.
y  

n0
cnxn
123
123
k  n1  
k  n
(iv) Because we want 
for all x in some interval, 
is an identity and so we must have 
 ck1  
1
k  1 ck,  k  0, 1, 2, . . . .
ck1(k  1)  ck  0, or


k0
[ck1(k  1)  ck]xk  0
y  y  0
  

k0
[ck1(k  1)  ck]xk.
  

k0
ck1(k  1)xk  

k0
ckxk
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(v) By letting k take on successive integer values starting with 
we ﬁnd
and so on, where 
is arbitrary.
(vi) Using the original assumed solution and the results in part (v) we obtain a formal
power series solution 
It should be fairly obvious that the pattern of the coefﬁcients in part (v) is
so that in summation notation we can write
(8)
From the ﬁrst power series representation in (2) the solution in (8) is recognized
as 
Had you used the method of Section 2.3, you would have found that
is a solution of 
on the interval 
This interval is also the
interval of convergence of the power series in (8).
(, ).
y  y  0
y  cex
y  c0ex.
y  c0

k0
(1)k
k! xk.
ck  c0(1)k>k!, k  0, 1, 2, . . . .
  c01  x  1
2x2 
1
3  2x3 
1
4  3  2x4  . . ..
  c0  c0x  1
2c0x2  c0
1
3  2x3  c0
1
4  3  2x4  . . .
y  c0  c1x  c2x2  c3x3  c4x4  . . .
c0
 c4  1
4c2  1
4 1
3  2c0 
1
4  3  2c0
 c3  1
3c2  1
3
1
2c0   1
3  2c0
 c2  1
2c1  1
2(c0)  1
2c0
  c1  1
1c0  c0
k  0,
6.1
REVIEW OF POWER SERIES
●
237
If desired we could switch back to n as 
the index of summation.

EXERCISES 6.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-9.
In Problems 1-10 ﬁnd the interval and radius of convergence
for the given power series.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
In Problems 11-16 use an appropriate series in (2) to ﬁnd the
Maclaurin series of the given function. Write your answer in
summation notation.
11.
12.
13.
14.
x
1  x2
1
2  x
xe3x
ex>2


n0
(1)n
9n x2n1


k1
25k
52k
x
3
k


k0
3k(4x  5)k


k1
1
k2  k(3x  1)k


k0
k!(x  1)k


k1
(1)k
10k  (x  5)k


n0
5n
n!xn


n1
2n
n xn


n1
1
n2 xn


n1
(1)n
n
xn
15.
16.
In Problems 17 and 18 use an appropriate series in (2) to ﬁnd
the Taylor series of the given function centered at the indi-
cated value of a. Write your answer in summation notation.
17.
[Hint: Use periodicity.]
18.
[Hint: 
]
In Problems 19 and 20 the given function is analytic at
Use appropriate series in (2) and multiplication to
ﬁnd the ﬁrst four nonzero terms of the Maclaurin series of
the given function.
19.
20.
In Problems 21 and 22 the given function is analytic at
Use appropriate series in (2) and long division to ﬁnd
the ﬁrst four nonzero terms of the Maclaurin series of the
given function.
21.
22. tan x
sec x
a  0.
excos x
sin x cos x
a  0.
x  2[1  (x  2)>2]
ln x; a  2
sinx, a  2p
sin x2
ln(1  x)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
In Problems 23 and 24 use a substitution to shift the summa-
tion index so that the general term of given power series
involves 
23.
24.
In Problems 25-30 proceed as in Example 3 to rewrite the
given expression using a single power series whose general
term involves 
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30. 

n2
n(n  1)cnxn  2

n2
n(n  1)cnxn2  3

n1
ncnxn


n2
n(n  1)cnxn2  2

n1
ncnxn  

n0
cnxn


n2
n(n  1)cnxn2  

n0
cnxn2


n1
2ncnxn1  

n0
6cnxn1


n1
ncnxn1  3

n0
cnxn2


n1
ncnxn1  

n0
cnxn
xk.


n3
(2n  1)cnxn3


n1
ncnxn2
xk.
In Problems 31-34 verify by direct substitution that the
given power series is a solution of the indicated differential
equation.  [Hint: For a power 
let 
31.
32.
33.
34.
In Problems 35-38 proceed as in Example 4 and ﬁnd a
power series solution 
of the given linear ﬁrst-
order differential equation.
35.
36.
37.
38.
Discussion Problems
39. In Problem 19, ﬁnd an easier way than multiplying two
power series to obtain the Maclaurin series representa-
tion of 
40. In Problem 21, what do you think is the interval of con-
vergence for the Maclaurin series of sec x?
sin x cos x.
(1  x)y  y  0
y  xy
4y  y  0
y  5y  0
y  

n0
cnxn
y  

n0
(1)n
22n(n!)2x2n, xy  y  xy  0
y  

n1
(1)n1
n
xn, (x  1)y  y  0
y  

n0
(1)nx2n, (1  x2)y  2xy  0
y  

n0
(1)n
n! x2n, y  2xy  0
k  n  1.]
x2n1
SOLUTIONS ABOUT ORDINARY POINTS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Power series, analytic at a point, shifting the index of summation in Section 6.1
INTRODUCTION
At the end of the last section we illustrated how to obtain a power series
solution of a linear ﬁrst-order differential equation. In this section we turn to the more important
problem of ﬁnding power series solutions of linear second-order equations. More to the point, we
are going to ﬁnd solutions of linear second-order equations in the form of power series whose
center is a number 
that is an ordinary point of the DE. We begin with the definition of an
ordinary point.
x0
6.2
A Deﬁnition
If we divide the homogeneous linear second-order differential
equation 
(1)
by the lead coefﬁcient 
we obtain the standard form
(2)
We have the following deﬁnition.
y  P(x)y  Q(x)y  0.
a2(x)
a2(x)y  a1(x)y  a0(x)y  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.2
SOLUTIONS ABOUT ORDINARY POINTS
●
239
DEFINITION 6.2.1
Ordinary and Singular Points
A point 
is said to be an ordinary point of the differential of the
differential equation (1) if both coefﬁcients 
and 
in the standard
form (2) are analytic at 
A point that is not an ordinary point of (1) is said
to be a singular point of the DE.
x0.
Q(x)
P(x)
x  x0
EXAMPLE 1
Ordinary Points
(a) A homogeneous linear second-order differential equation with constant coefﬁcients,
such as
can have no singular points. In other words, every ﬁnite value* of x is an ordinary
point of such equations.
(b) Every ﬁnite value of x is an ordinary point of the differential equation
Speciﬁcally 
is an ordinary point of the DE, because we have already seen in
(2) of Section 6.1 that both  and   
are analytic at this point.
The negation of the second sentence in Deﬁnition 6.2.1 stipulates that if at least
one of the coefﬁcient functions 
in (2) fails to be analytic at 
then 
is a singular point.
x0
x0,
P(x) and Q(x)
sin x
ex
x  0
y  exy  (sin x)y  0.
y  y  0 and y  3y  2y  0,
EXAMPLE 2
Singular Points
(a) The differential equation
is already in standard form. The coefﬁcient functions are
Now 
is analytic at every real number, and 
is analytic at every
positive real number. However, since 
is discontinuous at 
it cannot
be represented by a power series in x, that is, a power series centered at 0. We
conclude  that 
is a singular point of the DE. 
(b) By putting 
in the standard form
,
we see that 
fails to be analytic at 
. Hence 
is a singular point
of the equation.
Polynomial Coefﬁcients
We will primarily be interested in the case when the
coefﬁcients 
in (1) are polynomial functions with no common
factors. A polynomial function is analytic at any value of x, and a rational function is
analytic except at points where its denominator is zero. Thus, in (2) both coefﬁcients 
P(x)  a1(x)
a2(x) and Q(x)  a0(x)
a2(x)
a2(x), a1(x), and a0(x)
x  0
 x  0
P(x)  1/x
y  1
x y  y  0
xy  y  xy  0
x  0
x  0
Q(x)  ln x
Q(x)  ln x
P(x)  x
P(x)  x and Q(x)  ln x.
y  xy  (lnx)y  0
*For our purposes, ordinary points and singular points will always be ﬁnite points. It is possible for an
ODE to have, say, a singular point at inﬁnity.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
are analytic except at those numbers for which 
It follows, then, that
A number 
is an ordinary point of (1) if 
whereas 
is a
singular point of (1) if a2(x0)  0.
x  x0
a2(x0)  0,
x  x0
a2(x)  0.
EXAMPLE 3
Ordinary and Singular Points
(a) The only singular points of the differential equation
are the solutions of 
All other values of x are ordinary points.
(b) Inspection of the Cauchy-Euler
shows that it has a singular point at 
All other values of x are ordinary
points.
(c) Singular points need not be real numbers. The equation
has singular points at the solutions of 
—namely, 
All other values
of x, real or complex, are ordinary points.
We state the following theorem about the existence of power series solutions
without proof.
x  
i.
x2  1  0
(x2  1)y  xy  y  0
x  0.
x2y  y  0
a2(x)  x2  0 at x  0
b
x2  1  0 or x  
 1.
(x2  1)y  2xy  6y  0
THEOREM 6.2.1
Existence of Power Series Solutions
If 
is an ordinary point of the differential equation (1), we can always ﬁnd two
linearly independent solutions in the form of a power series centered at 
that is,
A power series solution converges at least on some interval deﬁned by
, where R is the distance from 
to the closest singular point.
x0
x  x0& R
y  

n0
cn(x  x0)n.
x0,
x  x0
A solution of the form 
is said to be a solution about the
ordinary point x0. The distance R in Theorem 6.2.1 is the minimum value or lower
bound for the radius of convergence.
y  
n0 cn(x  x0)n
EXAMPLE 4
Minimum Radius of Convergence
Find the minimum radius of convergence of a power series solution of the second-
order differential equation
(a) about the ordinary point 
(b) about the ordinary point 
SOLUTION
By the quadratic formula we see from
that the singular
points of the given differential equation are the complex numbers 1 
 2i.
x2  2x  5  0
x  1.
x  0,
(x2  2x  5)y  xy  y  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(a) Because 
is an ordinary point of the DE, Theorem 6.2.1 guarantees that we
can ﬁnd two power series solutions centered at 0. That is, solutions that look like
and, moreover, we know without actually ﬁnding these solutions that
each series must converge at least for 
, where 
is the distance in the
complex plane from either of the numbers 
(the point 
or 
(the
point 
to the ordinary point 0 (the point 
See Figure 6.2.1. 
(b) Because 
is an ordinary point of the DE, Theorem 6.2.1 guarantees that
we can ﬁnd two power series solutions that look like 
Each of
power series converges at least for 
since the distance from each of
the singular points to  
(the point
is
In part (a) of Example 4, one of the two power series solutions centered at 0 of
the differential equation is valid on an interval much larger than 
in
actual fact this solution is valid on the interval 
because it can be shown that
one of the two solutions about 0 reduces to a polynomial.
Note
In the examples that follow as well as in the problems of Exercises 6.2
we will, for the sake of simplicity, ﬁnd only power series solutions about the ordinary
point 
If it is necessary to ﬁnd a power series solutions of an ODE about an
ordinary point 
we can simply make the change of variable 
in the
equation (this translates 
to 
ﬁnd solutions of the new equation of the
form 
, and then resubstitute
Finding a Power Series Solution
Finding a power series solution of a homo-
geneous linear second-order ODE has been accurately described as "the method of
undetermined series coefﬁcients" since the procedure is quite analogous to what we
did in Section 4.4. In case you did not work through Example 4 of Section 6.1 here,
in brief, is the idea. Substitute 
into the differential equation, combine
series as we did in Example 3 of Section 6.1, and then equate the all coefﬁcients to
the right-hand side of the equation to determine the coefﬁcients 
But because the
right-hand side is zero, the last step requires, by the identity property in the bulleted
list in Section 6.1, that all coefﬁcients of x must be equated to zero. No, this does not
mean that all coefﬁcients are zero; this would not make sense, after all Theorem 6.2.1
guarantees that we can ﬁnd two solutions. We will see in Example 5 how the single
assumption that 
leads to two sets of coefﬁ-
cients so that we have two distinct power series 
and 
both expanded about
the ordinary point 
The general solution of the differential equation is
; indeed, it can be shown that 
and 
.
C2  c1
C1  c0
y  C1y1(x)  C2y2(x)
x  0.
y2 (x),
y1(x)
y  
n0cnxn  c0  c1x  c2x2  . . .
cn.
y  
n0cnxn
t  x  x0.
y  
n0cntn
t  0),
x  x0
t  x  x0
x0  0,
x  0.
(, )
(15, 15);
R  18  212.
(1, 0))
1
 x  1   212
y  
n0cn(x  1)n.
x  1
(0, 0)).
(1,  2))
1  2i
(1, 2))
1  2i
 R  25
 x   25
y  
n0 cnxn
x  0
6.2
SOLUTIONS ABOUT ORDINARY POINTS
●
241
FIGURE 6.2.1
Distance from singular
points to the ordinary point 0 in Example 4
y
x
1
1 + 2i
1 − 2i
i
	5
	5
EXAMPLE 5
Power Series Solutions
Solve 
SOLUTION
Since there are no singular points, Theorem 6.2.1 guarantees two
power series solutions centered at 0 that converge for 
Substituting
and the second derivative 
(see (1) in
Section 6.1) into the differential equation give
(3)
We have already added the last two series on the right-hand side of the equality in (3)
by shifting the summation index. From the result given in (5) of Section 6.1
(4)
y  xy  2c2  

k1
[(k  1)(k  2)ck2  ck1]xk  0.
y  xy  

n2
cnn(n  1)xn2  x

n0
cnxn  

n2
cnn(n  1)xn2 

n0
cnxn1.
y  
n2 n(n  1)cnxn2 
y  
n0 cnxn
 x   .
y  xy  0.
Before working through this example, we
recommend that you reread Example 4 of
Section 6.1.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

At this point we invoke the identity property. Since (4) is identically zero, it is neces-
sary that the coefﬁcient of each power of x be set equal to zero—that is, 2c2  0
(it is the coefﬁcient of x0), and
(5)
Now 2c2  0 obviously dictates that c2  0. But the expression in (5), called a
recurrence relation, determines the ck in such a manner that we can choose a certain
subset of the set of coefﬁcients to be nonzero. Since (k  1)(k  2)  0 for all val-
ues of k, we can solve (5) for ck2 in terms of ck1:
(6)
This relation generates consecutive coefﬁcients of the assumed solution one at a time
as we let k take on the successive integers indicated in (6):
and so on. Now substituting the coefﬁcients just obtained into the original
assumption
; c8 is zero
 k  9,     c11   
c8
10  11  0
 k  8,     c10   c7
9  10  
1
3  4  6  7  9  10 c1
 k  7,     c9   c6
8  9  
1
2  3  5  6  8  9 c0
; c5 is zero
 k  6,     c8   c5
7  8  0
 k  5,     c7   c4
6  7 
1
3  4  6  7 c1
 k  4,     c6   c3
5  6 
1
2  3  5  6 c0
; c2 is zero
 k  3,     c5   c2
4  5  0
 k  2,     c4   c1
3  4
 k  1,     c3   c0
2  3
ck2  
ck1
(k  1)(k  2) ,    k  1, 2, 3, . . . .
(k  1)(k  2)ck2  ck1  0,    k  1, 2, 3, . . . .
242
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
y  c0  c1x  c2x2  c3x3  c4x4  c5x5  c6x6  c7x7  c8x8  c9x9  c10x10  c11x11    ,
we get
  
c1
3  4  6  7
 x7  0 
c0
2  3  5  6  8  9
 x9 
c1
3  4  6  7  9  10
 x10  0    .
 y  c0  c1x  0 
c0
2  3
 x3 
c1
3  4
 x4  0 
c0
2  3  5  6
 x6
After grouping the terms containing c0 and the terms containing c1, we obtain
y  c0y1(x)  c1y2(x), where
y2(x)  x 
1
3  4
 x4 
1
3  4  6  7
 x7 
1
3  4  6  7  9  10
    x10      x  

k1
 
(1)k
3  4    (3k)(3k  1)
 x3k1.
 y1(x)  1 
1
2  3
 x3 
1
2  3  5  6
 x6 
1
2  3  5  6  8  9
 x9      1 

k1
 
(1)k
2  3    (3k  1)(3k)
 x3k
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Because the recursive use of (6) leaves c0 and c1 completely undetermined, they
can be chosen arbitrarily. As was mentioned prior to this example, the linear
combination y  c0y1(x)  c1y2(x) actually represents the general solution of the
differential equation. Although we know from Theorem 6.2.1 that each series solu-
tion converges for 
that is, on the interval 
. This fact can also be ver-
iﬁed by the ratio test.
The differential equation in Example 5 is called Airy's equation and is named
after the English mathematician and astronomer George Biddel Airy (1801-1892).
Airy's differential equation is encountered in the study of diffraction of light, diffrac-
tion of radio waves around the surface of the Earth, aerodynamics, and the deﬂection
of a uniform thin vertical column that bends under its own weight. Other common
forms of Airy's equation are y  xy  0 and y  2xy  0. See Problem 41 in
Exercises 6.4 for an application of the last equation.
(, )
 x   ,
6.2
SOLUTIONS ABOUT ORDINARY POINTS
●
243
EXAMPLE 6
Power Series Solution
Solve (x2  1)y  xy  y  0.
SOLUTION
As we have already seen on page 240, the given differential equation has
singular points at x  
i, and so a power series solution centered at 0 will converge at
least for
 1, where 1 is the distance in the complex plane from 0 to either i or i.
The assumption 
and its ﬁrst two derivatives lead to
y  
n0 cnxn
 x 
(x 2  1)  n(n  1)cnx n2  x  ncnx n1   cnx n
n2

n1

n0

  n(n  1)cnx n   n(n  1)cnx n2   ncnx n   cnx n
n2

n2

n1

n0

 2c2  c0  6c3x   [k(k  1)ck  (k  2)(k  1)ck2  kck  ck]xk 
k2

 2c2  c0  6c3x   [(k  1)(k  1)ck  (k  2)(k  1)ck2]x k  0.
k2

  n(n  1)cnx n2   ncnx n   cnx n
n4

n2

n2

 2c2x 0  c0x 0  6c3x  c1x  c1x   n(n 1)cnx n
n2

kn
kn2
kn
kn
From this identity we conclude that 2c2  c0  0, 6c3  0, and
Thus
Substituting k  2, 3, 4, . . . into the last formula gives
c4   1
4 c2   1
2  4 c0   1
222! c0
 ck2  1  k
k  2 ck,    k  2, 3, 4, . . . .
 c3  0
 c2  1
2 c0
(k  1)(k  1)ck  (k  2)(k  1)ck2  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and so on. Therefore
c10   7
10 c8 
3  5  7
2  4  6  8  10 c0  1  3  5  7
255!
 c0,
; c7 is zero
c9   6
9 c7  0,
c8   5
8 c6   
3  5
2  4  6  8 c0   1  3  5
244!
 c0
; c5 is zero
c7   4
7 c5  0
c6   3
6 c4 
3
2  4  6 c0  1  3
233! c0
; c3 is zero
c5   2
5 c3  0
244
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
c5  c3  c2
4  5

c0
4  5 
1
6  1
2  c0
30
 c4  c2  c1
3  4

c0
2  3  4  c0
24
 c3  c1  c0
2  3

c0
2  3  c0
6
 c2  1
2 c0
 c0  0, c1  0
c5  c3  c2
4  5

c1
4  5  6  c1
120
 c4  c2  c1
3  4

c1
3  4  c1
12
 c3  c1  c0
2  3

c1
2  3  c1
6
 c2  1
2 c0  0
 c0   0, c1  0
  c0y1(x)  c1y2(x).
  c01  1
2 x2 
1
222! x4  1  3
233! x6  1  3  5
244!
 x8  1  3  5  7
255!
 x10      c1x
y  c0  c1x  c2x2  c3x3  c4x4  c5x5  c6x6  c7x7  c8x8  c9x9  c10x10    
The solutions are the polynomial y2(x)  x and the power series
y1(x)  1  1
2 x2  

n2
(1)n11  3  5    2n  3
2nn!
 x2n,     x   1.
EXAMPLE 7
Three-Term Recurrence Relation
If we seek a power series solution 
for the differential equation
we obtain 
and the three-term recurrence relation
It follows from these two results that all coefﬁcients cn, for n  3, are expressed in
terms of both c0 and c1. To simplify life, we can ﬁrst choose c0  0, c1  0; this
yields coefﬁcients for one solution expressed entirely in terms of c0. Next, if
we choose c0  0, c1  0, then coefﬁcients for the other solution are expressed
in terms of c1. Using 
in both cases, the recurrence relation for
k  1, 2, 3, . . . gives
c2  1
2 c0
ck2 
ck  ck1
(k  1)(k  2),    k  1, 2, 3, . . . .
c2  1
2 c0
y  (1  x)y  0,
y  
n0 cnxn
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and so on. Finally, we see that the general solution of the equation is
y  c0y1(x)  c1y2(x), where
and
Each series converges for all ﬁnite values of x.
Nonpolynomial Coefﬁcients
The next example illustrates how to ﬁnd a
power series solution about the ordinary point x0  0 of a differential equation when
its coefﬁcients are not polynomials. In this example we see an application of the
multiplication of two power series.
 y2(x)  x  1
6 x3  1
12 x4 
1
120 x5    .
 y1(x)  1  1
2 x2  1
6 x3  1
24 x4  1
30 x5    
6.2
SOLUTIONS ABOUT ORDINARY POINTS
●
245
EXAMPLE 8
DE with Nonpolynomial Coefﬁcients
Solve y  (cos x)y  0.
SOLUTION
We see that x  0 is an ordinary point of the equation because, as we
have already seen, cos x is analytic at that point. Using the Maclaurin series for cos x
given in (2) of Section 6.1, along with the usual assumption 
and the
results in (1) of Section 6.1 we ﬁnd
y  
n0 cnxn
  2c2  c0  (6c3  c1)x 12c4  c2  1
2 c0x2 20c5  c3  1
2 c1x3      0.
  2c2  6c3x  12c4x2  20c5x3     1  x2
2!  x4
4!    (c0  c1x  c2x2  c3x3    )
 y  (cos x)y 

n2
 n(n  1)cnxn2 1  x2
2!  x4
4!  x6
6!    

n0
 cnxn
It follows that
2c2  c0  0,    6c3  c1  0,    12c4  c2  1
2 c0  0,    20c5  c3  1
2 c1  0,
and so on. This gives 
By group-
ing terms, we arrive at the general solution y  c0y1(x)  c1y 2(x), where
Because the differential equation has no ﬁnite singular points, both power series con-
verge for
Solution Curves
The approximate graph of a power series solution 
can be obtained in several ways. We can always resort to graphing the
terms in the sequence of partial sums of the series—in other words, the graphs of the
polynomials 
For large values of N, SN(x) should give us an indi-
cation of the behavior of y(x) near the ordinary point x  0. We can also obtain an ap-
proximate or numerical solution curve by using a solver as we did in Section 4.10.
For example, if you carefully scrutinize the series solutions of Airy's equation in
SN(x)  N
n0 cnxn.

n0 cnxn
y(x) 
 x   .
y1(x)  1  1
2 x2  1
12 x4        and    y2(x)  x  1
6 x3  1
30 x5    .
c5  1
30 c1, . . . .
c4  1
12 c0,
c3  1
6 c1,
c2  1
2 c0,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Example 5, you should see that y1(x) and y2(x) are, in turn, the solutions of the initial-
value problems
(11)
The speciﬁed initial conditions "pick out" the solutions y1(x) and y2(x) from
y  c0y1(x)  c1y2(x), since it should be apparent from our basic series assumption
that y(0)  c0 and y(0)  c1. Now if your numerical solver requires
a system of equations, the substitution y  u in y  xy  0 gives y  u  xy,
and so a system of two ﬁrst-order equations equivalent to Airy's equation is
(12)
Initial conditions for the system in (12) are the two sets of initial conditions in (11)
rewritten as y(0)  1, u(0)  0, and y(0)  0, u(0)  1. The graphs of y1(x)
and y2(x) shown in Figure 6.2.2 were obtained with the aid of a numerical solver.
The fact that the numerical solution curves appear to be oscillatory is consistent
with the fact that Airy's equation appeared in Section 5.1 (page 197) in the form
mx  ktx  0 as a model of a spring whose "spring constant" K(t)  kt increases
with time.
 u  xy.
 y  u
y  
n0 cnxn
 y  xy  0,  y(0)  0, y(0)  1.
 y  xy  0,  y(0)  1, y(0)  0,
246
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
_2
2
4
6
10
8
1
2
3
x
y1
_2
_1
_2
_3
2
4
6
10
8
1
x
y2
(a)  plot of y1(x)  
(b)  plot of y2(x)   
FIGURE 6.2.2
Numerical solution
curves for Airy's DE
REMARKS
(i) In the problems that follow, do not expect to be able to write a solution in
terms of summation notation in each case. Even though we can generate as
many terms as desired in a series solution 
either through the use
of a recurrence relation or, as in Example 8, by multiplication, it might not be
possible to deduce any general term for the coefﬁcients cn. We might have to
settle, as we did in Examples 7 and 8, for just writing out the ﬁrst few terms of
the series.
(ii) A point x0 is an ordinary point of a nonhomogeneous linear second-order
DE y  P(x)y  Q(x)y  f (x) if P(x), Q(x), and f(x) are analytic at x0.
Moreover, Theorem 6.2.1 extends to such DEs; in other words, we can
ﬁnd power series solutions 
of nonhomogeneous
linear DEs in the same manner as in Examples 5-8. See Problem 26 in
Exercises 6.2.
y  
n0 cn(x  x0)n
y  
n0 cnxn
EXERCISES 6.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-9.
In Problems 1 and 2 without actually solving the given
differential equation, ﬁnd the minimum radius of convergence
of power series solutions about the ordinary point 
About the ordinary point 
1.
2.
In Problems 3-6 ﬁnd two power series solutions of the given
differential equation about the ordinary point 
Compare
the series solutions with the solutions of the differential equa-
tions obtained using the method of Section 4.3.  Try to explain
any differences between the two forms of the solutions.
3.
4.
5.
6. y  2y  0
y  y  0
y  y  0
y  y  0
x  0.
(x2  2x  10)y  xy  4y  0
(x2  25)y  2xy  y  0
x  1.
x  0.
In Problems 7-18 ﬁnd two power series solutions of the
given differential equation about the ordinary point x  0.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18. (x2  1)y  xy  y  0
(x2  2)y  3xy  y  0
(x2  1)y  6y  0
y (x  1)y  y  0
(x  2)y  xy  y  0
(x  1)y  y  0
y  2xy  2y  0
y  x2y  xy  0
y  xy  2y  0
y  2xy  y  0
y  x2y  0
y  xy  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.3
SOLUTIONS ABOUT SINGULAR POINTS
●
247
In Problems 19-22 use the power series method to solve the
given initial-value problem. 
19.
20.
21.
22.
In Problems 23 and 24 use the procedure in Example 8 to
ﬁnd two power series solutions of the given differential
equation about the ordinary point x  0.
23.
24.
Discussion Problems
25. Without actually solving the differential equation
ﬁnd the minimum radius of
convergence of power series solutions about the ordi-
nary point 
About the ordinary point 
26. How can the power series method be used to solve the
nonhomogeneous equation  
about the ordi-
nary point 
Of 
? Carry out
your ideas by solving both DEs.
27. Is x  0 an ordinary or a singular point of the differen-
tial equation 
? Defend your answer
with sound mathematics.  [Hint: Use the Maclaurin
series of 
and then examine (sin x)>x.
sin x
xy  (sin x)y  0
y  4xy  4y  ex
x  0?
y  xy  1
x  1.
x  0.
(cos x)y  y  5y  0,
y  exy  y  0
y  (sin x)y  0
(x2  1)y  2xy  0, y(0)  0, y(0)  1
y  2xy  8y  0, y(0)  3, y(0)  0
(x  1)y  (2  x)y  y  0, y(0)  2, y(0)  1
(x  1)y  xy  y  0, y(0)  2,y(0)  6
28. Is 
an ordinary point of the differential equation
Computer Lab Assignments
29. (a) Find two power series solutions for y  xy  y  0
and express the solutions y1(x) and y2(x) in terms of
summation notation.
(b) Use a CAS to graph the partial sums SN(x) for
y1(x). Use N  2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 10. Repeat using the
partial sums SN(x) for y2(x).
(c) Compare the graphs obtained in part (b) with
the curve obtained by using a numerical solver. Use
the initial-conditions y1(0)  1, y1(0)  0, and
y2(0)  0, y2(0)  1.
(d) Reexamine the solution y1(x) in part (a). Express
this series as an elementary function. Then use (5)
of Section 4.2 to ﬁnd a second solution of the equa-
tion. Verify that this second solution is the same as
the power series solution y2(x).
30. (a) Find one more nonzero term for each of the solu-
tions y1(x) and y2(x) in Example 8.
(b) Find a series solution y(x) of the initial-value
problem y  (cos x)y  0, y(0)  1, y(0)  1.
(c) Use a CAS to graph the partial sums SN(x) for the
solution y(x) in part (b). Use N  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
(d) Compare the graphs obtained in part (c) with the
curve obtained using a numerical solver for the
initial-value problem in part (b).
y  5xy  1xy  0?
x  0
SOLUTIONS ABOUT SINGULAR POINTS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 4.2 (especially (5) of that section)
●The deﬁnition of a singular point in Deﬁnition 6.2.1
INTRODUCTION
The two differential equations
y  xy  0
and
xy  y  0 
are similar only in that they are both examples of simple linear second-order DEs with variable
coefﬁcients. That is all they have in common. Since x  0 is an ordinary point of y  xy  0, we
saw in Section 6.2 that there was no problem in ﬁnding two distinct power series solutions centered
at that point. In contrast, because x  0 is a singular point of xy  y  0, ﬁnding two inﬁnite
series—notice that we did not say power series—solutions of the equation about that point becomes
a more difﬁcult task.
The solution method that is discussed in this section does not always yield two inﬁnite series
solutions. When only one solution is found, we can use the formula given in (5) of Section 4.2 to
ﬁnd a second solution.
6.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A Deﬁnition
A singular point x0 of a linear differential equation
(1)
is further classiﬁed as either regular or irregular. The classiﬁcation again depends on
the functions P and Q in the standard form
(2)
 y  P(x)y  Q(x)y  0.
a2(x)y  a1(x)y  a0(x)y  0 
248
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
DEFINITION 6.3.1
Regular and Irregular Singular Points
A singular point x  x0 is said to be a regular singular point of the differential
equation (1) if the functions p(x)  (x  x0) P(x) and q(x)  (x  x0)2Q(x) are
both analytic at x0. A singular point that is not regular is said to be an irregular
singular point of the equation.
The second sentence in Deﬁnition 6.3.1 indicates that if one or both of the func-
tions p(x)  (x  x0) P(x) and q(x)  (x  x0)2Q(x) fail to be analytic at x0, then
x0 is an irregular singular point.
Polynomial Coefﬁcients
As in Section 6.2, we are mainly interested in
linear equations (1) where the coefﬁcients a2(x), a1(x), and a0(x) are polynomials
with no common factors. We have already seen that if a2(x0)  0, then x  x0 is a
singular point of (1), since at least one of the rational functions P(x)  a1(x)
a2(x)
and Q(x)  a0(x) 
a2(x) in the standard form (2) fails to be analytic at that point.
But since a2(x) is a polynomial and x0 is one of its zeros, it follows from the Factor
Theorem of algebra that x  x0 is a factor of a2(x). This means that after a1(x)
a2(x)
and a0(x)
a2(x) are reduced to lowest terms, the factor x  x0 must remain, to some
positive integer power, in one or both denominators. Now suppose that x  x0 is
a singular point of (1) but both the functions defined by the products p(x) 
(x  x0) P(x) and q(x)  (x  x0)2Q(x) are analytic at x0. We are led to the conclu-
sion that multiplying P(x) by x  x0 and Q(x) by (x  x0)2 has the effect (through
cancellation) that x  x0 no longer appears in either denominator. We can now
determine whether x0 is regular by a quick visual check of denominators:
If x  x0 appears at most to the ﬁrst power in the denominator of P(x) and at
most to the second power in the denominator of Q(x), then x  x0 is a regular
singular point.
Moreover, observe that if x  x0 is a regular singular point and we multiply (2) by
(x  x0)2, then the original DE can be put into the form
(3)
where p and q are analytic at x  x0.
 (x  x0)2y  (x  x0)p(x)y  q(x)y  0,
EXAMPLE 1
Classiﬁcation of Singular Points
It should be clear that x  2 and x  2 are singular points of
After dividing the equation by (x2  4)2  (x  2)2(x  2)2 and reducing the
coefﬁcients to lowest terms, we ﬁnd that
We now test P(x) and Q(x) at each singular point.
P(x) 
3
(x  2)(x  2)2    and    Q(x) 
5
(x  2)2(x  2)2.
(x2  4)2y  3(x  2)y  5y  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For x  2 to be a regular singular point, the factor x  2 can appear at most to the
ﬁrst power in the denominator of P(x) and at most to the second power in the denom-
inator of Q(x). A check of the denominators of P(x) and Q(x) shows that both these
conditions are satisﬁed, so x  2 is a regular singular point. Alternatively, we are led
to the same conclusion by noting that both rational functions
are analytic at x  2.
Now since the factor x  (2)  x  2 appears to the second power in the
denominator of P(x), we can conclude immediately that x  2 is an irregular
singular point of the equation. This also follows from the fact that
is not analytic at x  2.
In Example 1, notice that since x  2 is a regular singular point, the original
equation can be written as
As another example, we can see that x  0 is an irregular singular point
of x3y  2xy  8y  0 by inspection of the denominators of P(x)  2
x2
and Q(x)  8
x3. On the other hand, x  0 is a regular singular point of
xy  2xy  8y  0, since x  0 and (x  0)2 do not even appear in the respective
denominators of P(x)  2 and Q(x)  8
x. For a singular point x  x0 any
nonnegative power of x  x0 less than one (namely, zero) and any nonnegative
power less than two (namely, zero and one) in the denominators of P(x) and Q(x), re-
spectively, imply that x0 is a regular singular point. A singular point can be a complex
number. You should verify that x  3i and x  3i are two regular singular points
of (x2  9)y  3xy  (1  x)y  0.
Note
Any second-order Cauchy-Euler equation ax2y  bxy  cy  0, where
a, b, and c are real constants, has a regular singular point at x  0. You should verify that
two solutions of the Cauchy-Euler equation x2y  3xy  4y  0 on the interval (0, )
are y1  x2 and y2  x2 ln x. If we attempted to ﬁnd a power series solution about the
regular singular point x  0 (namely, 
), we would succeed in obtaining
only the polynomial solution y1  x2. The fact that we would not obtain the second so-
lution is not surprising because ln x (and consequently y2  x2 ln x) is not analytic
at x  0—that is, y2 does not possess a Taylor series expansion centered at x  0.
Method of Frobenius
To solve a differential equation (1) about a regular sin-
gular point, we employ the following theorem due to the eminent German mathe-
matician Ferdinand Georg Frobenius (1849-1917).
 y  
n0 cnxn
(x  2)2y  (x  2)
y 
y  0.
p(x) analytic
at x  2
q(x) analytic
at x  2
3
--------
(x  2)2
5
--------
(x  2)2
 p(x)  (x  2)P(x) 
3
(x  2)(x  2)
p(x)  (x  2)P(x) 
3
(x  2)2    and    q(x)  (x  2)2Q(x) 
5
(x  2)2
6.3
SOLUTIONS ABOUT SINGULAR POINTS
●
249
THEOREM 6.3.1
Frobenius' Theorem
If x  x0 is a regular singular point of the differential equation (1), then there
exists at least one solution of the form
(4)
where the number r is a constant to be determined. The series will converge at
least on some interval 0  x  x0  R.
 y  (x  x0)r

n0
cn(x  x0)n 

n0
cn(x  x0)nr,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Notice the words at least in the ﬁrst sentence of Theorem 6.3.1. This means
that in contrast to Theorem 6.2.1, Theorem 6.3.1 gives us no assurance that two series
solutions of the type indicated in (4) can be found. The method of Frobenius, ﬁnding
series solutions about a regular singular point x0, is similar to the power-series method
in the preceding section in that we substitute 
into the given
differential equation and determine the unknown coefﬁcients cn by a recurrence rela-
tion. However, we have an additional task in this procedure: Before determining the co-
efﬁcients, we must ﬁnd the unknown exponent r. If r is found to be a number that is not
a nonnegative integer, then the corresponding solution 
is not
a power series.
As we did in the discussion of solutions about ordinary points, we shall always
assume, for the sake of simplicity in solving differential equations, that the regular
singular point is x  0.
y 
n0 cn(x  x0)nr
 y 
n0 cn(x  x0)nr
250
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 2
Two Series Solutions
Because x  0 is a regular singular point of the differential equation
(5)
we try to ﬁnd a solution of the form 
Now
so
y 

n0
 (n  r)cnxnr1    and    y 

n0
 (n  r)(n  r  1)cnxnr2,     
 y  
n0 cnxnr.
 3xy  y  y  0,
 
  x rr(3r  2)c0x1 

k0
 [(k  r  1)(3k  3r  1)ck1  ck]x k  0,
1444442444443
123
k  n1
k  n
  x rr(3r  2)c0x1  

n1
    
    (n  r)(3n  3r  2)cnxn1 

n0
 cnxn
 
 

n0
 (n  r)(3n  3r  2)cnxnr1 

n0
 cnxnr
 3xy  y  y  3

n0
 (n  r)(n  r  1)cn xnr1 

n0
 (n  r)cnxnr1 

n0
 cnxnr
which implies that
r(3r  2)c0  0
and
Because nothing is gained by taking c0  0, we must then have
(6)
and
(7)
When substituted in (7), the two values of r that satisfy the quadratic equation 
(6), 
and r2  0, give two different recurrence relations:
(8)
(9)
  r2  0,    ck1 
ck
(k  1)(3k  1),    k  0, 1, 2, . . . .
  r1  2
3,    ck1 
ck
(3k  5)(k  1),    k  0, 1, 2, . . .
r1  2
3
 ck1 
ck
(k  r  1)(3k  3r  1),    k  0, 1, 2, . . . .
 r(3r  2)  0
 (k  r  1)(3k  3r  1)ck1  ck  0,    k  0, 1, 2, . . . .
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From (8) we ﬁnd
From (9) we ﬁnd
6.3
SOLUTIONS ABOUT SINGULAR POINTS
●
251
 cn 
c0
n!5  8  11   (3n  2).


  c4 
c3
14  4 
c0
4!5  8  11  14
  c3 
c2
11  3 
c0
3!5  8  11
  c2 
c1
8  2 
c0
2!5  8
  c1 
c0
5  1
  cn 
c0
n!1  4  7    (3n  2).


  c4 
c3
4  10 
c0
4!1  4  7  10
  c3 
c2
3  7 
c0
3!1  4  7
  c2 
c1
2  4 
c0
2!1  4
  c1 
c0
1  1
Here we encounter something that did not happen when we obtained solutions
about an ordinary point; we have what looks to be two different sets of coefﬁ-
cients, but each set contains the same multiple c0. If we omit this term, the series
solutions are
(10)
(11)
By the ratio test it can be demonstrated that both (10) and (11) converge for all val-
ues of x—that is,
Also, it should be apparent from the form of these
solutions that neither series is a constant multiple of the other, and therefore y1(x) and
y2(x) are linearly independent on the entire x-axis. Hence by the superposition prin-
ciple, y  C1y1(x)  C2y2(x) is another solution of (5). On any interval that does not
contain the origin, such as (0, ), this linear combination represents the general solu-
tion of the differential equation.
Indicial Equation
Equation (6) is called the indicial equation of the problem, 
and the values 
and r2  0 are called the indicial roots, or exponents, of
the singularity x  0. In general, after substituting 
into the given dif-
ferential equation and simplifying, the indicial equation is a quadratic equation in r
that results from equating the total coefﬁcient of the lowest power of x to zero. We
solve for the two values of r and substitute these values into a recurrence relation
such as (7). Theorem 6.3.1 guarantees that at least one solution of the assumed series
form can be found.
It is possible to obtain the indicial equation in advance of substituting
into the differential equation. If x  0 is a regular singular point of
(1), then by Deﬁnition 6.3.1 both functions p(x)  xP(x) and q(x)  x2Q(x), where 
P and Q are deﬁned by the standard form (2), are analytic at x  0; that is, the power
series expansions
y  
n0 cnxnr
y  
n0 cnxnr
r1  2
3
 x   .
 y2(x)  x01 

n1
 
1
n!1  4  7    (3n  2) xn.
 y1(x)  x2/31 

n1
 
1
n!5  8  11   (3n  2) xn 
(12)
 p(x)  xP(x)  a0  a1x  a2x2        and    q(x)  x2Q(x)  b0  b1x  b2x2    
are valid on intervals that have a positive radius of convergence. By multiplying 
(2) by x2, we get the form given in (3):
(13)
 x2y  x[xP(x)]y  [x2Q(x)]y  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

After substituting 
and the two series in (12) into (13) and carrying
out the multiplication of series, we ﬁnd the general indicial equation to be
(14)
where a0 and b0 are as deﬁned in (12). See Problems 13 and 14 in Exercises 6.3.
 r(r  1)  a0r  b0  0,
y  
n0 cnxnr
252
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 3
Two Series Solutions
Solve 2xy  (1  x)y  y  0.
SOLUTION
Substituting 
gives
y  
n0 cnxnr
2xy  (1  x)y  y  2  (n  r)(n  r  1)cnx nr1   (n  r)cnx nr1
n0

n0

  (n  r)(2n  2r  1)cnx nr1   (n  r  1)cnx nr
n0

n0

 xr [r(2r  1)c0x1    [(k  r  1)(2k  2r  1)ck1  (k  r  1)ck]xk],
k0

  (n  r)cnx nr   cnx nr
n0

n0

 xr [r(2r  1)c0x1   (n  r)(2n  2r  1)cnx n1   (n  r  1)cnx n]
n1

n0

kn1
kn
which implies that
(15)
and
(16)
k  0, 1, 2, . . . . From (15) we see that the indicial roots are 
and r2  0.
For 
we can divide by 
in (16) to obtain
(17)
whereas for r2  0, (16) becomes
(18)
From (17) we ﬁnd
From (18) we ﬁnd
 ck1 
ck
2k  1,    k  0, 1, 2, . . . .
  ck1 
ck
2(k  1),    k  0, 1, 2, . . . ,
k  3
2
r1  1
2
r1  1
2
 (k  r  1)(2k  2r  1)ck1  (k  r  1)ck  0,
 r(2r  1)  0
 cn  (1)nc0
2nn!  .


 c4  c3
2  4 
c0
24  4!
 c3  c2
2  3  c0
23  3!
 c2  c1
2   2 
c0
22  2!
 c1  c0
2  1 
 cn 
(1)nc0
1  3  5  7    (2n  1) .


 c4  c3
7

c0
1  3  5  7
 c3  c2
5

c0
1  3  5
 c2  c1
3

c0
1  3
 c1  c0
1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Thus for the indicial root 
we obtain the solution
where we have again omitted c0. The series converges for x  0; as given, the series
is not deﬁned for negative values of x because of the presence of x1/2. For r2  0 a
second solution is
On the interval (0, ) the general solution is y  C1y1(x)  C2y2(x).
   y2(x)  1 

n1
 
(1)n
1  3  5  7    (2n  1)xn,     x   .
  y1(x)  x1/21 

n1
 (1)n
2nn! xn 

n0
 (1)n
2nn! xn1/2 ,
 r1  1
2
6.3
SOLUTIONS ABOUT SINGULAR POINTS
●
253
EXAMPLE 4
Only One Series Solution
Solve xy  y  0.
SOLUTION
From xP(x)  0, x2Q(x)  x and the fact that 0 and x are their own
power series centered at 0 we conclude that a0  0 and b0  0, so from (14) the
indicial equation is r(r  1)  0. You should verify that the two recurrence relations
corresponding to the indicial roots r1  1 and r2  0 yield exactly the same set of
coefﬁcients. In other words, in this case the method of Frobenius produces only a
single series solution
Three Cases
For the sake of discussion let us again suppose that x  0 is a
regular singular point of equation (1) and that the indicial roots r1 and r2 of the
singularity are real. When using the method of Frobenius, we distinguish three cases
corresponding to the nature of the indicial roots r1 and r2. In the ﬁrst two cases the
symbol r1 denotes the largest of two distinct roots, that is, r1 	 r2. In the last case
r1  r2.
Case I:
If r1 and r2 are distinct and the difference r1  r2 is not a positive inte-
ger, then there exist two linearly independent solutions of equation (1) of the form
This is the case illustrated in Examples 2 and 3.
Next we assume that the difference of the roots is N, where N is a positive
integer. In this case the second solution may contain a logarithm.
Case II:
If r1 and r2 are distinct and the difference r1  r2 is a positive integer,
then there exist two linearly independent solutions of equation (1) of the form
(19)
(20)
where C is a constant that could be zero.
Finally, in the last case, the case when r1  r2, a second solution will always
contain a logarithm. The situation is analogous to the solution of a Cauchy-Euler
equation when the roots of the auxiliary equation are equal.
 y2(x)  Cy1(x) ln x 

n0
 bnxnr2,    b0  0,
 y1(x) 

n0
 cnxnr1,    c0  0,
y1(x) 

n0
cn xnr1,  c0  0,    y2(x) 

n0
bn xnr2,  b0  0.
y1(x) 

n0
  
(1)n
n!(n  1)! xn1  x  1
2 x2  1
12 x3 
1
144 x4    . 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Case III:
If r1 and r2 are equal, then there always exist two linearly indepen-
dent solutions of equation (1) of the form
(21)
(22)
Finding a Second Solution
When the difference r1  r2 is a positive integer
(Case II), we may or may not be able to ﬁnd two solutions having the
form
This is something that we do not know in advance but is
determined after we have found the indicial roots and have carefully examined the
recurrence relation that deﬁnes the coefﬁcients cn. We just may be lucky enough
to ﬁnd two solutions that involve only powers of x, that is, 
(equation (19)) and 
(equation (20) with C  0). See Problem 31
in Exercises 6.3. On the other hand, in Example 4 we see that the difference of the in-
dicial roots is a positive integer (r1  r2  1) and the method of Frobenius failed to
give a second series solution. In this situation equation (20), with C  0, indicates what
the second solution looks like. Finally, when the difference r1  r2 is a zero (Case III),
the method of Frobenius fails to give a second series solution; the second solution (22)
always contains a logarithm and can be shown to be equivalent to (20) with C  1. One
way to obtain the second solution with the logarithmic term is to use the fact that
(23)
is also a solution of y  P(x)y  Q(x)y  0 whenever y1(x) is a known solution.
We illustrate how to use (23) in the next example.
 y2(x)  y1(x)   e P(x)dx
y2
1(x)
  dx
 y2(x)  
n0 bnxnr2
 y1(x)  
n0 cnxnr1
y  
n0 cnxnr.
  y2(x)  y1(x) ln x 

n1
 bnxnr1.
 y1(x) 

n0
cnxnr1,    c0  0,
254
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 5
Example 4 Revisited Using a CAS
Find the general solution of xy  y  0.
SOLUTION
From the known solution given in Example 4,
we can construct a second solution y2(x) using formula (23). Those with the time,
energy, and patience can carry out the drudgery of squaring a series, long division,
and integration of the quotient by hand. But all these operations can be done with
relative ease with the help of a CAS. We give the results:
 
  y1(x) ln x  y1(x)  1
x  7
12 x  19
144 x2    ,
 
  y1(x)  1
x  ln x  7
12 x  19
144 x2    
 
  y1(x)  
 
1
x2  1
x  7
12  19
72 x    dx
 
  y1(x)  
dx
   x2  x3  5
12 x4  7
72 x5     
  y2(x)  y1(x)  e∫0dx
[y1(x)]2
 dx  y1(x)  
dx
   x  1
2 x2  1
12 x3 
1
144 x4    
2
 y1(x)  x  1
2 x2  1
12 x3 
1
144
 x4     ,
; after long division
; after integrating
; after squaring
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

or
On the interval (0, ) the general solution is y  C1y1(x)  C2y2(x).
Note that the ﬁnal form of y2 in Example 5 matches (20) with C  1; the series
in the brackets corresponds to the summation in (20) with r2  0.
  y2(x)  y1(x) ln x 1  1
2 x  1
2 x2    .
6.3
SOLUTIONS ABOUT SINGULAR POINTS
●
255
REMARKS 
(i) The three different forms of a linear second-order differential equation in (1),
(2), and (3) were used to discuss various theoretical concepts. But on a practical
level, when it comes to actually solving a differential equation using the method
of Frobenius, it is advisable to work with the form of the DE given in (1).
(ii) When the difference of indicial roots r1  r2 is a positive integer
(r1 	 r2), it sometimes pays to iterate the recurrence relation using the
smaller root r2 ﬁrst. See Problems 31 and 32 in Exercises 6.3.
(iii) Because an indicial root r is a solution of a quadratic equation, it could
be complex. We shall not, however, investigate this case.
(iv) If x  0 is an irregular singular point, then we might not be able to ﬁnd
any solution of the DE of form  y 
n0 cnxnr.
EXERCISES 6.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-10.
In Problems 1-10 determine the singular points of the given
differential equation. Classify each singular point as regular
or irregular.
1. x3y  4x2y  3y  0
2. x(x  3)2y  y  0
3. (x2  9)2y  (x  3)y  2y  0
4.
5. (x3  4x)y  2xy  6y  0
6. x2(x  5)2y  4xy  (x2  25)y  0
7. (x2  x  6)y  (x  3)y  (x  2)y  0
8. x(x2  1)2y  y  0
9. x3(x2  25)(x  2)2y  3x(x  2)y  7(x  5)y  0
10. (x3  2x2  3x)2y  x(x  3)2y  (x  1)y  0
In Problems 11 and 12 put the given differential equation
into form (3) for each regular singular point of the equation.
Identify the functions p(x) and q(x).
11. (x2  1)y  5(x  1)y  (x2  x)y  0
12. xy  (x  3)y  7x2y  0
y  1
x y 
1
(x  1)3 y  0
In Problems 13 and 14, x  0 is a regular singular point of the
given differential equation. Use the general form of the indi-
cial equation in (14) to ﬁnd the indicial roots of the singu-
larity. Without solving, discuss the number of series solutions
you would expect to ﬁnd using the method of Frobenius.
13.
14. xy  y  10y  0
In Problems 15-24, x  0 is a regular singular point of
the given differential equation. Show that the indicial roots
of the singularity do not differ by an integer. Use the method
of Frobenius to obtain two linearly independent series
solutions about x  0. Form the general solution on (0, ).
15. 2xy  y  2y  0
16. 2xy  5y  xy  0
17.
18. 2x2y  xy  (x2  1)y  0
19. 3xy  (2  x)y  y  0
20.
21. 2xy  (3  2x)y  y  0
x2y  (x  2
9)y  0
4xy  1
2y  y  0
x2y  (5
3 x  x2)y  1
3 y  0
; after multiplying out
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
22.
23. 9x2y  9x2y  2y  0
24. 2x2y  3xy  (2x  1)y  0
In Problems 25-30, x  0 is a regular singular point of
the given differential equation. Show that the indicial
roots of the singularity differ by an integer. Use the method
of Frobenius to obtain at least one series solution about
x  0. Use (23) where necessary and a CAS, if instructed, to
ﬁnd a second solution. Form the general solution on (0, ).
25. xy  2y  xy  0
26.
27. xy  xy  y  0
28.
29. xy  (1  x)y  y  0
30. xy  y  y  0
In Problems 31 and 32, x  0 is a regular singular point of
the given differential equation. Show that the indicial
roots of the singularity differ by an integer. Use the recur-
rence relation found by the method of Frobenius ﬁrst with
the larger root r1. How many solutions did you ﬁnd? Next
use the recurrence relation with the smaller root r2. How
many solutions did you ﬁnd?
31. xy  (x  6)y  3y  0
32. x(x  1)y  3y  2y  0
33. (a) The differential equation x4y  y  0 has an
irregular singular point at x  0. Show that the sub-
stitution t  1
x yields the DE
which now has a regular singular point at t  0.
(b) Use the method of this section to ﬁnd two series
solutions of the second equation in part (a) about the
regular singular point t  0.
(c) Express each series solution of the original equation
in terms of elementary functions.
Mathematical Model
34. Buckling of a Tapered Column
In Example 4 of
Section 5.2 we saw that when a constant vertical
compressive force or load P was applied to a thin
column of uniform cross section, the deﬂection y(x) was
a solution of the boundary-value problem
(24)
The assumption here is that the column is hinged at both
ends. The column will buckle or deﬂect only when the
compressive force is a critical load Pn.
EI d 2y
dx2  Py  0,  y(0)  0,  y(L)  0.
d 2y
dt2  2
t dy
dt  y  0,
y  3
x y  2y  0
x2y  xy  (x2  1
4)y  0
x2y  xy  (x2  4
9)y  0
(a) In this problem let us assume that the column is of
length L, is hinged at both ends, has circular cross
sections, and is tapered as shown in Figure 6.3.1(a).
If the column, a truncated cone, has a linear taper
y  cx as shown in cross section in Figure 6.3.1(b),
the moment of inertia of a cross section with respect
to an axis perpendicular to the xy-plane is 
where r  y and y  cx. Hence we can write
I(x)  I0(x
b)4, where 
Sub-
stituting I(x) into the differential equation in (24),
we see that the deﬂection in this case is determined
from the BVP
where   Pb4
EI0. Use the results of Problem 33
to ﬁnd the critical loads Pn for the tapered column.
Use an appropriate identity to express the buckling
modes yn(x) as a single function.
(b) Use a CAS to plot the graph of the ﬁrst buckling
mode y1(x) corresponding to the Euler load P1
when b  11 and a  1.
x4 d 2y
dx2  y  0,  y(a)  0,  y(b)  0,
I0  I(b)  1
4(cb)4.
I  1
4r4,
x = a
y
P
x = b
y = cx
b − a = L
L
(a)
(b)
x
FIGURE 6.3.1
Tapered column in Problem 34
Discussion Problems
35. Discuss how you would deﬁne a regular singular point
for the linear third-order differential equation
36. Each of the differential equations
has an irregular singular point at x  0. Determine
whether the method of Frobenius yields a series solu-
tion of each differential equation about x  0. Discuss
and explain your ﬁndings.
37. We have seen that x  0 is a regular singular point of
any Cauchy-Euler equation ax2y  bxy  cy  0.
Are the indicial equation (14) for a Cauchy-Euler equa-
tion and its auxiliary equation related? Discuss.
 x3y  y  0    and    x2y  (3x  1)y  y  0
 a3(x)y  a2(x)y  a1(x)y  a0(x)y  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS
●
257
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 6.2 and 6.3 
INTRODUCTION
In the Remarks at the end of Section 2.3 we mentioned the branch of mathemat-
ics called special functions. Perhaps a better title for this ﬁeld of applied mathematics might be
named functions because many of the functions studied bear proper names: Bessel functions,
Legendre functions, Airy functions,  Chebyshev polynomials, Hermite polynomials, Jacobi polyno-
mials, Laguerre polynomials, Gauss' hypergeometric function, Mathieu functions, and so on.
Historically, special functions were often the by-product of necessity: Someone needed a solution of
a very specialized differential equation that arose from an attempt to solve a physical problem. In
effect, a special function was determined or deﬁned by the differential equation and many properties
of the function could be discerned from the series form of the solution.
In this section we use the methods of Sections 6.2 and 6.3 to ﬁnd solutions of two differential
equations
(1)
(2)
that arise in advanced studies of applied mathematics, physics, and engineering. They are called,
respectively, Bessel's equation of order , named after the German mathematician and astronomer
Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel (1784-1846), and Legendre's equation of order n, named after the
French mathematician Adrien-Marie Legendre (1752-1833). When we solve (1) we shall assume
that 
whereas in (2) we shall consider only the case when n in a nonnegative integer.
  0,

(1  x2)y  2xy  n(n  1)y  0
x 2y  xy  (x2  2)y  0
6.4
Solution of Bessel's Equation
Because 
is a regular singular point of
Bessel's equation, we know that there exists at least one solution of the form
Substituting the last expression into (1) gives
y  
n0 cnxnr.
x  0
(3)
  
  c0(r2   2)xr  xr 

n1
 
 cn[(n  r)2   2]xn  xr 

n0
 
 cnxn2.
  
  c0(r2  r  r   2)xr  xr 

n1
  
 cn[(n  r)(n  r  1)  (n  r)  2]xn  xr 

n0
 cnxn2
  x2y  xy  (x2   2)y  

n0
 cn(n  r)(n  r  1)xnr  

n0
 cn(n  r)xnr  

n0
 cnxnr2   2 

n0
 
cnxnr
From (3) we see that the indicial equation is r2  2  0, so the indicial roots are
r1   and r2  . When r1  , (3) becomes
xn   cnn(n  2n)xn  xn  cnx n2
n1

n0

 xn[(1  2n)c1x    [(k  2)(k  2  2n)ck2  ck]x k2]  0.
k0

 xn[(1  2n)c1x   cnn(n  2n)x n   cnx n2]
n2

n0

k  n  2
k  n
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Therefore by the usual argument we can write (1  2)c1  0 and
or
(4)
The choice c1  0 in (4) implies that 
so for k  0, 2, 4, . . .
we ﬁnd, after letting k  2  2n, n  1, 2, 3, . . . , that
(5)
Thus
(6)
It is standard practice to choose c0 to be a speciﬁc value, namely,
where (1  ) is the gamma function. See Appendix I. Since this latter function
possesses the convenient property (1  )  (), we can reduce the indicated
product in the denominator of (6) to one term. For example,
Hence we can write (6) as
for n  0, 1, 2, . . . .
Bessel Functions of the First Kind
Using the coefﬁcients c2n just obtained
c2n 
(1)n
22n n!(1  )(2  )    (n  )(1  ) 
(1)n
22n n!(1    n)
 (1    2)  (2  )(2  )  (2  )(1  )(1  ).
 (1    1)  (1  )(1  )
 c0 
1
2(1  ),
 c2n 
(1)nc0
22nn!(1  )(2  )    (n  ),    n  1, 2, 3, . . . .


c6    
c4
22  3(3  )   
c0
26  1   2  3(1  )(2  )(3  )
c4    
c2
22  2(2  ) 
c0
24  1  2(1  )(2  )  
c2    
c0
22  1  (1  ) 
c2n   
c2n2
22n(n  ).
 c3  c5  c7      0,
 ck2 
ck
(k  2)(k  2  2),    k  0, 1, 2, . . . .
 (k  2)(k  2  2)ck2  ck  0
258
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
*When we replace x by |x|, the series given in (7) and (8) converge for 0  |x|  . 
and r  , a series solution of (1) is 
This solution is usually
denoted by J(x):
(7)
If   0, the series converges at least on the interval [0, ). Also, for the second
exponent r2   we obtain, in exactly the same manner,
(8)
The functions J(x) and J(x) are called Bessel functions of the ﬁrst kind of order 
and , respectively. Depending on the value of , (8) may contain negative powers
of x and hence converges on (0, ).*
J(x)  

n0
  
(1)n
n!(1    n) 
x
2
2n
.  
 J(x)  

n0
  
(1)n
n!(1    n) 
x
2
2n
.
y  
n0c2n x2n.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now some care must be taken in writing the general solution of (1). When   0,
it is apparent that (7) and (8) are the same. If  	 0 and r1  r2    ()  2
is not a positive integer, it follows from Case I of Section 6.3 that J(x) and J(x) are
linearly independent solutions of (1) on (0, ), and so the general solution on the
interval is y  c1J(x)  c2J(x). But we also know from Case II of Section 6.3 that
when r1  r2  2 is a positive integer, a second series solution of (1) may exist. In this
second case we distinguish two possibilities. When   m  positive integer, Jm(x)
deﬁned by (8) and Jm(x) are not linearly independent solutions. It can be shown that Jm
is a constant multiple of Jm (see Property (i) on page 262). In addition, r1  r2  2
can be a positive integer when  is half an odd positive integer. It can be shown in this
latter event that J(x) and J(x) are linearly independent. In other words, the general
solution of (1) on (0, ) is
(9)
The graphs of y  J0(x) and y  J1(x) are given in Figure 6.4.1.
y  c1J(x)  c2J(x),      integer.
6.4
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS
●
259
EXAMPLE 1
Bessel's Equation of Order
By identifying 
we can see from (9) that the general solution of the
equation 
on (0, ) is  
Bessel Functions of the Second Kind
If   integer, the function deﬁned
by the linear combination
(10)
and the function J(x) are linearly independent solutions of (1). Thus another form of
the general solution of (1) is y  c1J(x)  c2Y(x), provided that   integer. As
m an integer, (10) has the indeterminate form 0
0. However, it can be shown
by L'Hôpital's Rule that 
exists. Moreover, the function
and Jm(x) are linearly independent solutions of x2y  xy  (x2  m2)y  0. Hence
for any value of  the general solution of (1) on (0, ) can be written as
(11)
Y(x) is called the Bessel function of the second kind of order . Figure 6.4.2 shows
the graphs of Y0(x) and Y1(x).
 y  c1J(x)  c2Y(x).
 Ym(x)  lim
 :m Y(x)
 lim :m Y(x)
 : m,
Y(x)  cos J(x)  J(x)
 sin 
y  c1J1/2(x)  c2J1/2(x). 
x2y  xy  (x2  1
4)y  0
 2  1
4 and   1
2,
1
2
2
4
6
8
_0.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
_0.2
x
y
J1
J0
FIGURE 6.4.1
Bessel functions of
the ﬁrst kind for n  0, 1, 2, 3, 4
2
4
6
8
1
_3
_2.5
_2
_1.5
_1
_0.5
0.5
x
y
Y0
Y1
FIGURE 6.4.2
Bessel functions of
the second kind for n  0, 1, 2, 3, 4
EXAMPLE 2
Bessel's Equation of Order 3
By identifying 2  9 and   3, we see from (11) that the general solution of the
equation x2y  xy  (x2  9)y  0 on (0, ) is y  c1J3(x)  c2Y3(x).
DES Solvable in Terms of Bessel Functions
Sometimes it is possible to
transform a differential equation into equation (1) by means of a change of variable.
We can then express the solution of the original equation in terms of Bessel func-
tions. For example, if we let t  x,  	 0, in
(12)
then by the Chain Rule,
dy
dx  dy
dt dt
dx    dy
dt    and     d 2y
dx2  d
dt
 
dy
dx
 dt
dx  2 d 2y
dt2 .
x2y  xy  (a2x2   2)y  0,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Accordingly, (12) becomes
260
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS

t

2
2  d 2y
dt 2 
t
  dy
dt  (t2   2)y  0    or    t2  d 2y
dt2  t dy
dt  (t2   2)y  0.
The last equation is Bessel's equation of order  with solution y  c1J(t)  c2Y(t). By
resubstituting t  x in the last expression, we ﬁnd that the general solution of (12) is
(13)
Equation (12), called the parametric Bessel equation of order , and its general
solution (13) are very important in the study of certain boundary-value problems
involving partial differential equations that are expressed in cylindrical coordinates.
Modiﬁed Bessel Functions
Another equation that bears a resemblance to (1)
is the modiﬁed Bessel equation of order ,
(14)
This DE can be solved in the manner just illustrated for (12). This time if we let
where 
then (14) becomes
Because solutions of the last DE are J(t) and Y(t), complex-valued solutions of
(14) are J(ix) and Y(ix). A real-valued solution, called the modiﬁed Bessel func-
tion of the ﬁrst kind of order , is deﬁned in terms of J(ix):
(15)
See Problem 21 in Exercises 6.4.
Analogous to (10), the modiﬁed Bessel function of the second kind of order
  integer is deﬁned to be
(16)
and for integer   n,
Because I and K are linearly independent on the interval (0, ) for any value of
v, the general solution of (14) on that interval is
(17)
The graphs of 
and 
are given in Figure 6.4.3 and
the graphs of 
and 
are given in Figure 6.4.4.  Unlike
the Bessel functions of the ﬁrst and second kinds, the modiﬁed Bessel functions 
of the ﬁrst and second kind are not oscillatory. Figures 6.4.3 and 6.4.4 also illustrate
the fact that the modiﬁed Bessel functions 
and 
have no
real zeros in the interval 
Also notice that the modiﬁed Bessel functions of
the second kind 
like the Bessel functions of the second kind 
become
unbounded as 
A change of variable in (14) gives us the parametric form of the modiﬁed
Bessel equation of order 
The general solution of the last equation on the interval 
is
y  c1I(ax)  c2K(ax).
(0, )
x2y  xy  (a2x2  n2)y  0.
:
x : 0.
Yn(x)
Kn(x)
(0, ).
Kn(x), n  0, 1, 2, . . .
In(x)
y  K2(x)
y  K0(x), y  K1(x),
y  I2(x)
y  I0(x), y  I1(x),
y  c1I(x)  c2K(x).
 Kn(x)  lim
 :n
 
K(x).
 K(x)  
2 I(x)  I(x)
sin 
,
 I(x)  i J(ix).
 t2 d 2y
dt2  t  dy
dt  (t2   2)y  0.
i2  1,
t  ix,
 x2y  xy  (x2   2)y  0.
y  c1J(x)  c2Y(x). 
1
2
3
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0.5
x
y
I0
I1
I2
FIGURE 6.4.3
Modiﬁed Bessel
functions of the ﬁrst kind for n  0, 1, 2
1
2
3
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0.5
x
y
K2
K1
K0
FIGURE 6.4.4
Modiﬁed Bessel
functions of the second kind for n  0, 1, 2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Yet another equation, important because many DEs ﬁt into its form by appro-
priate choices of the parameters, is
(18)
Although we shall not supply the details, the general solution of (18),
(19)
can be found by means of a change in both the independent and the dependent
variables: 
If p is not an integer, then Yp in (19) can be
replaced by Jp.
z  bxc, y(x) 
z
b
a/c
w(z).
y  xac1Jp(bxc)  c2Yp(bxc),
y  1  2a
x
 y b2c2x2c2  a2  p2c2
x2 y  0,     p  0.
6.4
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS
●
261
EXAMPLE 3
Using (18)
Find the general solution of xy  3y  9y  0 on (0, ).
SOLUTION
By writing the given DE as
we can make the following identiﬁcations with (18):
The ﬁrst and third equations imply that a  1 and 
With these values the
second and fourth equations are satisﬁed by taking b  6 and p  2. From (19)
we ﬁnd that the general solution of the given DE on the interval (0, ) is
y  x1[c1J2(6x1/2)  c2Y2(6x1/2)].
c  1
2.
1  2a  3,     b2c2  9,    2c  2  1,    and     a2  p2c2  0.
 y  3
x
 y  9
x
 y  0,
EXAMPLE 4
The Aging Spring Revisited
Recall that in Section 5.1 we saw that one mathematical model for the free undamped
motion of a mass on an aging spring is given by mx  ketx  0,  	 0. We are
now in a position to ﬁnd the general solution of the equation. It is left as a problem  
to show that the change of variables 
transforms the differential 
equation of the aging spring into
The last equation is recognized as (1) with   0 and where the symbols x
and s play the roles of y and x, respectively. The general solution of the new
equation is x  c1J0(s)  c2Y0(s). If we resubstitute s, then the general solution of
mx  ketx  0 is seen to be
See Problems 33 and 39 in Exercises 6.4.
The other model that was discussed in Section 5.1 of a spring whose character-
istics change with time was mx  ktx  0. By dividing through by m, we see that 
the equation 
is Airy's equation y  2xy  0. See Example 5 in
Section 6.2. The general solution of Airy's differential equation can also be written
in terms of Bessel functions. See Problems 34, 35, and 40 in Exercises 6.4.
 x  k
mtx  0
 x(t)  c1J0
2
 
B
k
m et/2  c2Y0
2
 
B
k
m et/2.
 s2  d 2x
ds2  s  dx
ds  s2x  0.
 s  2
 
B
k
m et/2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Properties
We list below a few of the more useful properties of Bessel
functions of order m, m  0, 1, 2, . . .:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Note that Property (ii) indicates that Jm(x) is an even function if m is an even
integer and an odd function if m is an odd integer. The graphs of Y0(x) and Y1(x) in
Figure 6.4.2 illustrate Property (iv), namely, Ym(x) is unbounded at the origin. This
last fact is not obvious from (10). The solutions of the Bessel equation of order 0
can be obtained by using the solutions y1(x) in (21) and y2(x) in (22) of Section 6.3.
It can be shown that (21) of Section 6.3 is y1(x)  J0(x), whereas (22) of that
section is
The Bessel function of the second kind of order 0, Y0(x), is then deﬁned to be the
linear combination 
for x 	 0. That is,
where   0.57721566 . . . is Euler's constant. Because of the presence of the
logarithmic term, it is apparent that Y0(x) is discontinuous at x  0.
Numerical Values
The ﬁrst ﬁve nonnegative zeros of J0(x), J1(x), Y0(x), and
Y1(x) are given in Table 6.4.1. Some additional function values of these four functions
are given in Table 6.4.2.
Y0(x)  2
J0(x)   ln x
2  2
 

k1
 (1)k
(k!)21  1
2      1
k
x
2
2k
,
 Y0(x)  2
 (  ln 2)y1(x)  2

 y2(x)
y2(x)  J0(x)ln x  

k1
 (1)k
(k!)2
 1  1
2      1
k
x
2
2k
. 
 lim
 x:0
  
Ym(x)  .
 Jm(0) 
0,
1,
m 	 0
m  0,
Jm(x)  (1)mJm(x),
Jm(x)  (1)mJm(x), 
262
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
TABLE 6.4.2
Numerical Values of J0, J1, Y0, and Y1
x
J0(x)
J1(x)
Y0(x)
Y1(x)
0
1.0000
0.0000
—
—
1
0.7652
0.4401
0.0883
0.7812
2
0.2239
0.5767
0.5104
0.1070
3
0.2601
0.3391
0.3769
0.3247
4
0.3971
0.0660
0.0169
0.3979
5
0.1776
0.3276
0.3085
0.1479
6
0.1506
0.2767
0.2882
0.1750
7
0.3001
0.0047
0.0259
0.3027
8
0.1717
0.2346
0.2235
0.1581
9
0.0903
0.2453
0.2499
0.1043
10
0.2459
0.0435
0.0557
0.2490
11
0.1712
0.1768
0.1688
0.1637
12
0.0477
0.2234
0.2252
0.0571
13
0.2069
0.0703
0.0782
0.2101
14
0.1711
0.1334
0.1272
0.1666
15
0.0142
0.2051
0.2055
0.0211
TABLE 6.4.1
Zeros of J0, J1, Y0, and Y1
J0(x)
J1(x)
Y0(x)
Y1(x)
2.4048
0.0000
0.8936
2.1971
5.5201
3.8317
3.9577
5.4297
8.6537
7.0156
7.0861
8.5960
11.7915
10.1735
10.2223
11.7492
14.9309
13.3237
13.3611
14.8974
Differential Recurrence Relation
Recurrence formulas that relate Bessel
functions of different orders are important in theory and in applications. In the next
example we derive a differential recurrence relation.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS
●
263
EXAMPLE 5
Derivation Using the Series Deﬁnition
Derive the formula 
SOLUTION
It follows from (7) that
The result in Example 5 can be written in an alternative form. Dividing
by x gives
This last expression is recognized as a linear ﬁrst-order differential equation in J(x).
Multiplying both sides of the equality by the integrating factor x then yields
(20)
It can be shown in a similar manner that
(21)
See Problem 27 in Exercises 6.4. The differential recurrence relations (20) and
(21) are also valid for the Bessel function of the second kind Y(x). Observe that
when   0, it follows from (20) that
(22)
An application of these results is given in Problem 39 of Exercises 6.4.
Bessel Functions of Half-Integral Order
When the order is half an odd in-
teger, that is, 
Bessel functions of the ﬁrst and second kinds can be
expressed in terms of the elementary functions 
and powers of x. Let's
consider the case when 
From (7)
J1/2(x)  

n0
  
(1)n
n!(1  1
2  n)
 
x
2
2n1/2
. 
   1
2.
cosx,
sinx,
 
1
2, 
3
2, 
5
2, . . . ,
J0(x)  J1(x)    and     Y0(x)  Y1(x).
 d
dx
 [xJ(x)]  xJ1(x).
 d
dx
 [xJ(x)]  xJ1(x).
  Jn(x)  
x
 Jn(x)  Jn1(x).
xJ(x) J(x)  xJ1(x)
xJv(x)   
 (  )
2n

n0

k  n  1
(1)n(2n  )
---------------
n! (1    n)
x-2
L
 J(x)  x  
 (  )
2n1
n1

(1)n
---------------------
(n  1)!
(1    n)
x-2
L
   
 (  )
2n
n0

(1)n
---------------
n! (1    n)
x-2
L
 2  
 (  )
2n
n0

(1)nn
---------------
n! (1    n)
x-2
L
 J(x)  x   
 J(x)  xJ1(x). 
 (  )
2k1
k0

(1)k
---------------
k! (2    k)
x-2
L
xJ(x)  J(x)  xJ1(x).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In view of the property (1  )  () and the fact that 
the values
of 
for n  0, n  1, n  2, and n  3 are, respectively,
In general,
Hence
From (2) of Section 6.1 you should recognize that the inﬁnite series in the last line is
the Maclaurin series for 
and so we have shown that
(23)
We leave it as an exercise to show that
(24)
See Figure 6.4.5 and Problems 31, 32, and 38 in Exercises 6.4.
If n is an integer, then 
is half an odd integer. Because 
and 
we see from (10) that 
For 
we have, in turn, 
and 
In view of (23) and (24) these  results are the same as
(25)
and
(26)
Spherical Bessel Functions
Bessel functions of half-integral order are used
to deﬁne two more important functions: 
and
(27)
The function 
is called the spherical Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind and 
is the spherical Bessel function of the second kind. For example, for 
the
expressions in (27) become 
and
.
 y0(x)  B
p
2xY1>2(x)  B
p
2x B
2
px cosx  cosx
x
 j0(x)  B
p
2xJ1>2(x)  B
p
2x B
2
px sinx  sinx
x
n  0
yn(x)
jn(x)
yn(x)  B
p
2xYn1>2(x).
jn(x) 
B
p
2xJn1>2(x)
Y1>2(x)  B
2
px sin x.
Y1>2(x)  B
2
px cosx
Y1>2(x)  J1>2(x).
Y1>2(x)  J1>2(x)
n  0 and  n  1
J(n1>2)(x).
(1)n1
Yn1>2(x) 
sin(n  1
2)p  cosnp  (1)n,
cos(n  1
2) p  0
n  n  1
2
J1/2(x) 
B
2
x cos x.
J1/2(x) 
B
2
x sin x.
sin x,
J1/2(x) 

n0
  
(1)n
n!(2n  1)!
22n1n!  1
x
2
2n1/2

B
2
x   

n0
  
(1)n
(2n  1)! x2n1.
(1  1
2  n)  (2n  1)!
22n1n!  1.
( 9
2)  (1  7
2)  7
2( 7
2)  7  5
26  2! 1  7  6  5!
26  6  2! 1  7!
273! 1.
( 7
2)  (1  5
2)  5
2( 5
2)  5  3
23  1  5  4  3  2  1
234  2
 1  5!
252! 1
( 5
2)  (1  3
2)  3
2( 3
2)  3
22 1
(3
2)  (1  1
2)  1
2( 1
2)  1
2 1
(1  1
2  n)
(1
2)  1
264
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
−0.5
x
y
J-1/2
J1/2
FIGURE 6.4.5
Bessel functions of
order 
(red)
and order 1
2
1
2 (blue)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

It is apparent from (27) and Figure 6.4.2 for 
the spherical Bessel of the second
kind 
becomes unbounded as 
.
Spherical Bessel functions arise in the solution of a special partial differential
equation expressed in spherical coordinates. See Problem 54 in Exercises 6.4 and
Problem 13 in Exercises 13.3.
x : 0
yn(x)
n  0
6.4
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS
●
265
Solution of Legendre's Equation
Since x  0 is an ordinary point of
Legendre's equation (2), we substitute the series 
shift summation in-
dices, and combine series to get
y  
k0 ckxk,
  

j2
 [( j  2)( j  1)cj2  (n  j)(n  j  1)cj]x j  0
 (1  x2)y  2xy  n(n  1)y  [n(n  1)c0  2c2]  [(n  1)(n  2)c1  6c3]x
which implies that
or
(28)
If we let j take on the values 2, 3, 4, . . . , the recurrence relation (28) yields
and so on. Thus for at least 
we obtain two linearly independent power series
solutions:
(29)
Notice that if n is an even integer, the ﬁrst series terminates, whereas y2(x) is an
inﬁnite series. For example, if n  4, then
Similarly, when n is an odd integer, the series for y2(x) terminates with xn; that is,
when n is a nonnegative integer, we obtain an nth-degree polynomial solution of
Legendre's equation.
y1(x)  c01  4  5
2!  x2  2  4  5  7
4!
 x4  c01  10x2  35
3  x4.
 (n  5)(n  3)(n  1)(n  2)(n  4)(n  6)
7!
 x7    .
y2(x)  c1x  (n  1)(n  2)
3!
 x3  (n  3)(n  1)(n  2)(n  4)
5!
 x5
 (n  4)(n  2)n(n  1)(n  3)(n  5)
6!
 x6    
y1(x)  c01  n(n  1)
2!
 x2  (n  2)n(n  1)(n  3)
4!
 x4
 x   1
c7   (n  5)(n  6)
7  6
 c5   (n  5)(n  3)(n  1)(n  2)(n  4)(n  6)
7!
 c1
c6   (n  4)(n  5)
6  5
 c4   (n  4)(n  2)n(n  1)(n  3)(n  5)
6!
 c0 
c5   (n  3)(n  4)
5  4
 c3  (n  3)(n  1)(n  2)(n  4)
5!
 c1
c4   (n  2)(n  3)
4  3
 c2  (n  2)n(n  1)(n  3)
4!
 c0 
cj2   (n  j)(n  j  1)
( j  2)( j  1)
 cj,    j  2, 3, 4, . . . .
c3   (n  1)(n  2)
3!
 c1
c2   n(n  1)
2!
 c0
 ( j  2)( j  1)cj2  (n  j)(n  j  1)cj  0
 (n  1)(n  2)c1  6c3  0
 n(n  1)c0  2c2  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

266
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
Because we know that a constant multiple of a solution of Legendre's equation
is also a solution, it is traditional to choose speciﬁc values for c0 or c1, depending on
whether n is an even or odd positive integer, respectively. For n  0 we choose
c0  1, and for n  2, 4, 6, . . .
whereas for n  1 we choose c1  1, and for n  3, 5, 7, . . .
For example, when n  4, we have
Legendre Polynomials
These speciﬁc nth-degree polynomial solutions are
called Legendre polynomials and are denoted by Pn(x). From the series for y1(x)
and y2(x) and from the above choices of c0 and c1 we ﬁnd that the ﬁrst several
Legendre polynomials are
(30)
Remember, P0(x), P1(x), P2(x), P3(x), . . . are, in turn, particular solutions of the
differential equations
(31)
The graphs, on the interval [1, 1], of the six Legendre polynomials in (30) are
given in Figure 6.4.6.
Properties
You are encouraged to verify the following properties using the
Legendre polynomials in (30).
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
Property (i) indicates, as is apparent in Figure 6.4.6, that Pn(x) is an even or odd
function according to whether n is even or odd.
Recurrence Relation
Recurrence relations that relate Legendre polynomials
of different degrees are also important in some aspects of their applications. We state,
without proof, the three-term recurrence relation
(32)
which is valid for k  1, 2, 3, . . . . In (30) we listed the ﬁrst six Legendre polynomials.
If, say, we wish to ﬁnd P6(x), we can use (32) with k  5. This relation expresses P6(x)
in terms of the known P4(x) and P5(x). See Problem 45 in Exercises 6.4.
(k  1)Pk1(x)  (2k  1)xPk(x)  kPk1(x)  0,
Pn(0)  0,  n even
 Pn(0)  0,  n odd
Pn(1)  (1)n
 Pn(1)  1
Pn(x)  (1)nPn(x)




n  0:
n  1:
n  2:
n  3:
  (1  x2)y   2xy  0,
 (1  x2)y   2xy  2y  0,
 (1  x2)y   2xy  6y  0,
 (1  x2)y   2xy  12y  0,
P0(x)  1,           P1(x)  x,
P2(x)  1
2 (3x2  1),         P3(x)  1
2 (5x3  3x),
P4(x)  1
8 (35x4  30x2  3),    P5(x)  1
8 (63x5  70x3  15x).
y1(x)  (1)4/2 1  3
2  4
 1  10x2  35
3  x4  1
8 (35x4  30x2  3).
c1  (1)(n1)/2 
1  3    n
2  4    (n  1).
c0  (1)n /2 1  3    (n  1)
2  4    n
,
x
y
1
-1
-1
-0.5
0.5
1
-0.5
0.5
P 1 
P 0 
P 2 
FIGURE 6.4.6
Legendre polynomials
for n  0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Another formula, although not a recurrence relation, can generate the Legendre
polynomials by differentiation. Rodrigues' formula for these polynomials is
(33)
See Problem 48 in Exercises 6.4.
Pn(x) 
1
2nn!  d n
dxn  (x2  1)n,    n  0, 1, 2, . . . .
6.4
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS
●
267
REMARKS
Although we have assumed that the parameter n in Legendre's differential equa-
tion (1  x2)y  2xy  n(n  1)y  0, represented a nonnegative integer, in
a more general setting n can represent any real number. Any solution of
Legendre's equation is called a Legendre function. If n is not a nonnegative
integer, then both Legendre functions y1(x) and y2(x) given in (29) are inﬁnite
series convergent on the open interval (1, 1) and divergent (unbounded) at
x  
1. If n is a nonnegative integer, then as we have just seen one of the
Legendre functions in (29) is a polynomial and the other is an inﬁnite series
convergent for 1  x  1. You should be aware of the fact that Legendre's
equation possesses solutions that are bounded on the closed interval [1, 1]
only in the case when n  0, 1, 2, . . . . More to the point, the only Legendre
functions that are bounded on the closed interval [1, 1] are the Legendre poly-
nomials Pn(x) or constant multiples of these polynomials. See Problem 47 in
Exercises 6.4 and Problem 24 in Chapter 6 in Review.
EXERCISES 6.4
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-11.
Bessel's Equation
In Problems 1-6 use (1) to ﬁnd the general solution of the
given differential equation on (0, ).
1.
2. x2y  xy  (x2  1)y  0
3. 4x2y  4xy  (4x2  25)y  0
4. 16x2y  16xy  (16x2  1)y  0
5. xy  y  xy  0
6.
In Problems 7-10 use (12) to ﬁnd the general solution of the
given differential equation on (0, ).
7. x2y  xy  (9x2  4)y  0
8. x2y  xy  36x2  1
4y  0
d
dx [xy] x  4
xy  0
x2y  xy  x2  1
9y  0
9.
10. x2y  xy  (2x2  64)y  0
In Problems 11 and 12 use the indicated change of variable
to ﬁnd the general solution of the given differential equation
on (0, ).
11. x2y  2xy  2x2y  0;
y  x1/2v(x)
12.
In Problems 13-20 use (18) to ﬁnd the general solution of
the given differential equation on (0, ).
13. xy  2y  4y  0
14. xy  3y  xy  0
15. xy  y  xy  0
16. xy  5y  xy  0
17. x2y  (x2  2)y  0
18. 4x2y  (16x2  1)y  0
x2y  (2x2   2  1
4)y  0;  y  1x v(x)
x2y  xy  25x2  4
9y  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

268
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
19. xy  3y  x3y  0
20. 9x2y  9xy  (x6  36)y  0
21. Use the series in (7) to verify that I(x)  i J(ix) is a
real function.
22. Assume that b in equation (18) can be pure imaginary,
that is, b  i,  	 0, i2  1. Use this assumption to
express the general solution of the given differential
equation in terms the modiﬁed Bessel functions In
and Kn.
(a) y  x2y  0
(b) xy  y  7x3y  0
In Problems 23-26 ﬁrst use (18) to express the general solu-
tion of the given differential equation in terms of Bessel func-
tions. Then use (23) and (24) to express the general solution in
terms of elementary functions.
23. y  y  0
24. x2y  4xy  (x2  2)y  0
25. 16x2y  32xy  (x4  12)y  0
26. 4x2y  4xy  (16x2  3)y  0
27. (a) Proceed as in Example 5 to show that
xJ(x)  J(x)  xJ1(x).
[Hint: Write 2n    2(n  )  .]
(b) Use the result in part (a) to derive (21).
28. Use the formula obtained in Example 5 along with
part (a) of Problem 27 to derive the recurrence relation
2J(x)  xJ1(x)  xJ1(x).
In Problems 29 and 30 use (20) or (21) to obtain the given
result.
29.
30. J0(x)  J1(x)  J1(x)
31. Proceed as on page 264 to derive the elementary form of
J1/2(x) given in (24).
32. Use the recurrence relation in Problem 28 along with
(23) and (24) to express J3/2(x), J3/2(x), J5/2(x) and
J5/2(x) in terms of sin x, cos x, and powers of x.
33. Use the change of variables 
to show
that the differential equation of the aging spring 
mx  ketx  0,  	 0, becomes
s2  d 2x
ds2  s dx
ds  s2x  0.
s  2
 
B
k
m et /2

x
0
 rJ0(r)  dr  xJ1(x)
34. Show that 
is a solution of Airy's
differential equation y  2xy  0, x 	 0, whenever
w is a solution of Bessel's equation of order 
that
is,
t 	 0. [Hint: After
differentiating, substituting, and simplifying, then let
]
35. (a) Use the result of Problem 34 to express the general
solution of Airy's differential equation for x 	 0 in
terms of Bessel functions.
(b) Verify the results in part (a) using (18).
36. Use the Table 6.4.1 to ﬁnd the ﬁrst three positive eigen-
values and corresponding eigenfunctions of the 
boundary-value problem
[Hint: By identifying   2, the DE is the parametric
Bessel equation of order zero.]
37. (a) Use (18) to show that the general solution of the
differential equation xy  y  0 on the interval
(0, ) is
(b) Verify by direct substitution that 
is a particular solution of the DE in the case   1.
Computer Lab Assignments
38. Use a CAS to graph J3/2(x), J3/2(x), J5/2(x), and
J5/2(x).
39. (a) Use the general solution given in Example 4 to
solve the IVP
Also use 
and 
along
with Table 6.4.1 or a CAS to evaluate coefﬁcients.
(b) Use a CAS to graph the solution obtained in part (a)
for 0  t  .
40. (a) Use the general solution obtained in Problem 35 to
solve the IVP
Use a CAS to evaluate coefﬁcients.
(b) Use a CAS to graph the solution obtained in part (a)
for 0  t  200.
41. Column Bending Under Its Own Weight
A uniform
thin column of length L, positioned vertically with one
4x  tx  0,  x(0.1)  1,  x(0.1)  1
2.
Y0(x)  Y1(x)
J0(x)  J1(x)
4x  e0.1tx  0,  x(0)  1,  x(0)  1
2.
y  1xJ1(21x)
y  c11xJ1(21x)  c21xY1(21x).
y(x), y(x) bounded as x : 0, y(2)  0.
xy  y  xy  0,
t  2
3x3/2.
t2w  tw  (t2  1
9)w  0,
1
3,
y  x1/2w(2
3x3/2)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS
●
269
end embedded in the ground, will deﬂect, or bend away,
from the vertical under the inﬂuence of its own weight
when its length or height exceeds a certain critical value.
It can be shown that the angular deﬂection (x) of the
column from the vertical at a point P(x) is a solution of
the boundary-value problem:
where E is Young's modulus, I is the cross-sectional
moment of inertia,  is the constant linear density, and x
is the distance along the column measured from its base.
See Figure 6.4.7. The column will bend only for those
values of L for which the boundary-value problem has a
nontrivial solution.
(a) Restate the boundary-value problem by making the
change of variables t  L  x. Then use the results
of a problem earlier in this exercise set to express
the general solution of the differential equation in
terms of Bessel functions.
(b) Use the general solution found in part (a) to ﬁnd a
solution of the BVP and an equation which deﬁnes
the critical length L, that is, the smallest value of
L for which the column will start to bend.
(c) With the aid of a CAS, ﬁnd the critical length L
of
a solid steel rod of radius r  0.05 in., 
g  0.28 A lb/in., E  2.6  107 lb/in.2, A  	r2,
and I  1
4r4.
EI  d 2
dx2  g(L  x)  0,  (0)  0, (L)  0,
Use the information in Problem 37 to ﬁnd a solu-
tion of
if it is known that
is not zero at x  0.
(b) Use Table 6.4.1 to ﬁnd the Euler load P1 for the
column.
(c) Use a CAS to graph the ﬁrst buckling mode y1(x)
corresponding to the Euler load P1. For simplicity
assume that c1  1 and L  1.
43. Pendulum of Varying Length
For the simple pendu-
lum described on page 220 of Section 5.3, suppose that
the rod holding the mass m at one end is replaced by a
ﬂexible wire or string and that the wire is strung over a
pulley at the point of support O in Figure 5.3.3. In this
manner, while it is in motion in a vertical plane, the
mass m can be raised or lowered. In other words, the
length l(t) of the pendulum varies with time. Under
the same assumptions leading to equation (6) in Sec-
tion 5.3, it can be shown* that the differential equation
for the displacement angle  is now
(a) If l increases at constant rate v and if l(0)  l0,
show that a linearization of the foregoing DE is
(34)
(b) Make the change of variables x  (l0  vt)
v and
show that (34) becomes
(c) Use part (b) and (18) to express the general solution
of equation (34) in terms of Bessel functions.
(d) Use the general solution obtained in part (c) to solve
the initial-value problem consisting of equation (34)
and the initial conditions (0)  0, (0)  0.
[Hints: To simplify calculations, use a further
change of variable 
Also, recall that (20) holds for both J1(u) and Y1(u).
Finally, the identity
will be helpful.]
 2
u
J1(u)Y2(u)  J2(u)Y1(u) 
u  2
v 1g(l0  vt)  2
B
g
v x1/ 2.
d 2
dx 2  2
x d
dx  g
vx  0.
(l0  vt)  2v  g  0.
l  2l  g sin   0.
1xY1(21x)
M x
L d 2y
dx2  Py  0,  y(0)  0,  y(L)  0
x = 0
x
θ
P(x)
ground
FIGURE 6.4.7
Beam in Problem 41
42. Buckling of a Thin Vertical Column
In Example 4
of Section 5.2 we saw that when a constant vertical
compressive force, or load, P was applied to a thin
column of uniform cross section and hinged at both
ends, the deﬂection y(x) is a solution of the BVP:
(a) If the bending stiffness factor EI is proportional
to x, then EI(x)  kx, where k is a constant of
proportionality. If EI(L)  kL  M is the maximum
stiffness factor, then k  M
L and so EI(x)  Mx
L.
EI  d 2y
dx2  Py  0,  y(0)  0,  y(L)  0.
*See Mathematical Methods in Physical Sciences, Mary Boas, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 1966. Also see the article by Borelli, Coleman, and Hobson
in Mathematics Magazine, vol. 58, no. 2, March 1985.
(problem continues on page 270)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
(e) Use a CAS to graph the solution (t) of the
IVP in part (d) when l0  1 ft, 0 
radian,
and
Experiment with the graph using dif-
ferent time intervals such as [0, 10], [0, 30],
and so on.
(f)
What do the graphs indicate about the displacement
angle (t) as the length l of the wire increases with
time?
Legendre's Equation
44. (a) Use the explicit solutions y1(x) and y2(x) of
Legendre's equation given in (29) and the appropri-
ate choice of c0 and c1 to ﬁnd the Legendre polyno-
mials P6(x) and P7(x).
(b) Write the differential equations for which P6(x) and
P7(x) are particular solutions.
45. Use the recurrence relation (32) and P0(x)  1, P1(x)  x,
to generate the next six Legendre polynomials.
46. Show that the differential equation
can be transformed into Legendre's equation by means
of the substitution x  cos .
47. Find the ﬁrst three positive values of  for which the
problem
has nontrivial solutions.
Computer Lab Assignments
48. For purposes of this problem ignore the list of Legendre
polynomials given on page 266 and the graphs given
in Figure 6.4.3. Use Rodrigues' formula (33) to generate
the Legendre polynomials P1(x), P2(x), . . . , P7(x). Use a
CAS to carry out the differentiations and simpliﬁcations.
49. Use a CAS to graph P1(x), P2(x), . . . , P7(x) on the
interval [1, 1].
50. Use a root-ﬁnding application to ﬁnd the zeros of
P1(x), P2(x), . . . , P7(x). If the Legendre polynomials
are built-in functions of your CAS, ﬁnd zeros of
Legendre polynomials of higher degree. Form a con-
jecture about the location of the zeros of any Legendre
polynomial Pn(x), and then investigate to see whether
it is true.
Miscellaneous Differential Equations
51. The differential equation
y  2xy  2ay  0
y(0)  0,  y(x), y(x) bounded on [1,1]
(1  x2)y  2xy  y  0,
sin   d 2y
d 2  cos   dy
d  n(n  1)(sin )y  0
v  1
60 ft/s.
1
10
is known as Hermite's equation of order  after the
French mathematician Charles Hermite (1822-1901).
Show that the general solution of the equation is
where  
are power series solutions centered at the ordinary 
point 0.
52. (a) When 
is a nonnegative integer, Hermite's
differential equation always possesses a polynomial
solution of degree n. Use 
given in Problem 51,
to ﬁnd polynomial solutions for 
and
Then use 
to ﬁnd polynomial solutions
for 
and 
(b) A Hermite polynomial
is deﬁned to be the
nth degree polynomial solution of Hermite's equa-
tion multiplied by an appropriate constant so that
the coefﬁcient of 
in 
is 
Use the polyno-
mial solutions in part (a) to show that the ﬁrst six
Hermite polynomials are
53. The differential equation
,
where 
is a parameter, is known as Chebyshev's
equation after the Russian mathematician Pafnuty
Chebyshev (1821-1894). When 
is a nonnega-
tive integer, Chebyshev's differential equation always
possesses a polynomial solution of degree n. Find a
ﬁfth degree polynomial solution of this differential
equation.
54. If n is an integer, use the substitution 
to show that the general solution of the differential
equation
on the interval 
is 
where 
are the spherical Bessel func-
tions of the ﬁrst and second kind deﬁned in (27).
jn(ax) and  yn(ax)
R(x)  c1 jn(ax)  c2 yn(ax),
(0, )
x2R  2xR  [a2x2  n(n  1)]R  0
R(x)  (ax)1>2Z(x)
a  n
a
(1  x2)y  xy  a2y  0
H5(x)  32x5  160x3  120x.
H4(x)  16x4  48x2  12
H3(x)  8x3  12x
H2(x)  4x2  2
H1(x)  2x
H0(x)  1
2n.
Hn(x)
xn
Hn(x)
n  5.
n  1, n  3,
y2(x)
n  4.
n  0, n  2,
y1(x),
a  n
 y2(x)  x  

k1
(1)k 2k(a1)(a3) . . . (a  2k1)
(2k  1)!
x2k1
 y1(x)  1  

k1
(1)k 2ka(a  2) . . . (a  2k  2)
(2k)!
x 2k
y(x)  c0y1(x)  c1y2(x),
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 IN REVIEW
●
271
CHAPTER 6 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-11.
In Problems 1 and 2 answer true or false without referring
back to the text.
1. The general solution of x2y  xy  (x2  1)y  0 is
y  c1J1(x)  c2J1(x). 
2. Because x  0 is an irregular singular point of
x3y  xy  y  0, the DE possesses no solution that
is analytic at x  0. 
3. Both power series solutions of y  ln(x  1)y  y  0
centered at the ordinary point x  0 are guaranteed
to converge for all x in which one of the following
intervals?
(a) (, )
(b) (1, )
(c)
(d) [1, 1]
4. x  0 is an ordinary point of a certain linear differential
equation. After the assumed solution 
is
substituted into the DE, the following algebraic system
is obtained by equating the coefﬁcients of x0, x1, x2,
and x3 to zero:
Bearing in mind that c0 and c1 are arbitrary, write down
the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of two power series solutions of the
differential equation.
5. Suppose the power series 
is known
to converge at 2 and diverge at 13. Discuss whether
the series converges at 7, 0, 7, 10, and 11. Possible
answers are does, does not, might.
6. Use the Maclaurin series for sin x and cos x along with
long division to ﬁnd the ﬁrst three nonzero terms of a
power series in x for the function
In Problems 7 and 8 construct a linear second-order differen-
tial equation that has the given properties.
7. A regular singular point at x  1 and an irregular
singular point at x  0
8. Regular singular points at x  1 and at x  3
In Problems 9-14 use an appropriate inﬁnite series method
about x  0 to ﬁnd two solutions of the given differential
equation.
f (x)  sin x
cos x.

k0 ck(x  4)k
 20c5  8c4  c3  2
3c2  0.
 12c4  6c3  c2  1
3c1  0
 6c3  4c2  c1  0
 2c2  2c1  c0  0
y  
n0 cnxn
[1
2, 1
2]
9. 2xy  y  y  0
10. y  xy  y  0
11. (x  1)y  3y  0
12. y  x2y  xy  0
13. xy  (x  2)y  2y  0
14. (cos x)y  y  0
In Problems 15 and 16 solve the given initial-value problem.
15. y  xy  2y  0,
y(0)  3, y(0)  2
16. (x  2)y  3y  0,
y(0)  0, y(0)  1
17. Without actually solving the differential equation
(1  2 sin x)y  xy  0, ﬁnd a lower bound for the
radius of convergence of power series solutions about
the ordinary point x  0.
18. Even though x  0 is an ordinary point of the differen-
tial equation, explain why it is not a good idea to try to
ﬁnd a solution of the IVP
of the form 
Using power series, ﬁnd a
better way to solve the problem.
In Problems 19 and 20 investigate whether x  0 is an ordi-
nary point, singular point, or irregular singular point of
the given differential equation. [Hint: Recall the Maclaurin
series for cos x and ex.]
19. xy  (1  cos x)y  x2y  0
20. (ex  1  x)y  xy  0
21. Note that x  0 is an ordinary point of the differential
equation y  x2y  2xy  5  2x  10x3. Use the
assumption 
to ﬁnd the general solution
y  yc  yp that consists of three power series centered
at x  0.
22. The ﬁrst-order differential equation dy
dx  x2  y2
cannot be solved in terms of elementary functions.
However, a solution can be expressed in terms of Bessel
functions.
(a) Show that the substitution 
leads to the
equation u  x2u  0.
(b) Use (18) in Section 6.4 to ﬁnd the general solution
of u  x2u  0.
(c) Use (20) and (21) in Section 6.4 in the forms
and
J(x)   
xJ(x)  J1(x)
J(x)  
xJ(x)  J1(x)
y   1
u du
dx
y  
n0 cnxn
y  
n0 cnxn.
y  xy  y  0,  y(1)  6,  y(1)  3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272
●
CHAPTER 6
SERIES SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS
as an aid to show that a one-parameter family of
solutions of dy
dx  x2  y2 is given by
23. (a) Use (10) of Section 6.4 and Problem 32 of Exer-
cises 6.4 to show that
(b) Use (15) of Section 6.4 to show that
(c) Use (16) of Section 6.4 and part (b) to show that
24. (a) From (30) and (31) of Section 6.4 we know
that when n  0, Legendre's differential equation
(1  x2)y  2xy  0 has the polynomial solu-
tion y  P0(x)  1. Use (5) of Section 4.2 to show
K1/2(x) 
B

2x ex.
I1/2(x) 
B
2
x sinh x    and    I1/2(x) 
B
2
x cosh x.
Y3/2(x)  
B
2
x 
cos x
x
 sin x
y  x J3/4( 1
2x2)  cJ3/4( 1
2x2)
cJ1/4( 1
2x2)  J1/4( 1
2x2)
.
that a second Legendre function satisfying the DE
for 1  x  1 is
(b) We also know from (30) and (31) of Section 6.4
that when n  1, Legendre's differential equation
(1  x2)y  2xy  2y  0 possesses the polyno-
mial solution y  P1(x)  x. Use (5) of Section 4.2
to show that a second Legendre function satisfying
the DE for 1  x  1 is
(c) Use a graphing utility to graph the logarithmic
Legendre functions given in parts (a) and (b).
25. (a) Use binomial series to formally show that
(b) Use the result obtained in part (a) to show that
Pn(1)  1 and Pn(1)  (1)n. See Properties (ii)
and (iii) on page 266.
(1  2xt  t2)1/2  

n0
Pn(x)tn.
y  x
2 ln
1  x
1  x  1.
y  1
2 ln
1  x
1  x.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

273
7.1 Deﬁnition of the Laplace Transform
7.2 Inverse Transforms and Transforms of Derivatives
7.2.1 Inverse Transforms
7.2.2 Transforms of Derivatives
7.3 Operational Properties I
7.3.1 Translation on the s-Axis
7.3.2 Translation on the t-Axis
7.4 Operational Properties II
7.4.1 Derivatives of a Transform
7.4.2 Transforms of Integrals
7.4.3 Transform of a Periodic Function
7.5 The Dirac Delta Function
7.6 Systems of Linear Differential Equations
Chapter 7 in Review
In the linear mathematical models for a physical system such as a spring/mass
system or a series electrical circuit, the right-hand member, or input, of the
differential equations
is a driving function and represents either an external force f(t) or an impressed
voltage E(t). In Section 5.1 we considered problems in which the functions f and E
were continuous. However, discontinuous driving functions are not uncommon.
For example, the impressed voltage on a circuit could be piecewise continuous and
periodic, such as the "sawtooth" function shown on the left. Solving the differential
equation of the circuit in this case is difﬁcult using the techniques of Chapter 4.
The Laplace transform studied in this chapter is an invaluable tool that simpliﬁes
the solution of problems such as these.
m d 2x
dt2  b dx
dt  kx  f(t)    or    Ld 2q
dt2  Rdq
dt  1
C q  E(t)
The Laplace Transform
7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

274
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
Integral Transform
If f(x, y) is a function of two variables, then a deﬁnite in-
tegral of f with respect to one of the variables leads to a function of the other variable.
For example, by holding y constant, we see that 
. Similarly, a deﬁ-
nite integral such as 
transforms a function f of the variable t into a
function F of the variable s. We are particularly interested in an integral transform,
where the interval of integration is the unbounded interval [0, ). If f(t) is deﬁned for
t  0, then the improper integral 
is deﬁned as a limit:
.
(1)
If the limit in (1) exists, then we say that the integral exists or is convergent; if the
limit does not exist, the integral does not exist and is divergent. The limit in (1) will,
in general, exist for only certain values of the variable s.
A Deﬁnition
The function K(s, t) in (1) is called the kernel of the transform.


0
K(s, t) f(t) dt  lim
b :  
b
0
 K(s, t) f(t) dt

0 K(s, t) f(t) dt
b
a K(s, t) f(t) dt
2
1 2xy2 dx  3y2
DEFINITION OF THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Improper integrals with inﬁnite limits of integration
●Integration by parts and partial fraction decomposition
INTRODUCTION
In elementary calculus you learned that differentiation and integration are
transforms; this means, roughly speaking, that these operations transform a function into another
function. For example, the function f(x)  x2 is transformed, in turn, into a linear function and
a family of cubic polynomial functions by the operations of differentiation and integration:
and
Moreover, these two transforms possess the linearity property that the transform of a linear
combination of functions is a linear combination of the transforms. For a and b constants
and
provided that each derivative and integral exists. In this section we will examine a special type of
integral transform called the Laplace transform. In addition to possessing the linearity property the
Laplace transform has many other interesting properties that make it very useful in solving linear
initial-value problems.
[
 f (x)   g(x)] dx  f (x) dx  g(x) dx
 d
dx [ f (x)   g(x)]   f (x)   g(x)
x2 dx  1
3 x3  c.
d
dx
 x2  2x
7.1
We will assume throughout
that s is a real variable.

The choice K(s, t)  e	st as the kernel gives us an especially important integral
transform.
DEFINITION 7.1.1
Laplace Transform
Let f be a function deﬁned for t  0. Then the integral
(2)
is said to be the Laplace transform of f, provided that the integral converges.
The Laplace transform is named in honor of the French mathematician and
astronomer Pierre-Simon Marquis de Laplace (1749-1827).
{ f (t)} 

0
e	st f (t) dt
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.1
DEFINITION OF THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
●
275
When the deﬁning integral (2) converges, the result is a function of s. In general
discussion we shall use a lowercase letter to denote the function being transformed
and the corresponding capital letter to denote its Laplace transform—for example,
.
As the next four examples show, the domain of the function F(s) depends on the
function f(t).
{f (t)}  F(s),    {g(t)}  G(s),    {y(t)}  Y(s)
EXAMPLE 1
Applying Deﬁnition 7.1.1
Evaluate 
.
SOLUTION
From (2),
provided that s 
 0. In other words, when s 
 0, the exponent 	sb is negative, and
as 
. The integral diverges for s  0.
The use of the limit sign becomes somewhat tedious, so we shall adopt the
notation 
0 as a shorthand for writing limb: ( ) b
0. For example,
.
At the upper limit, it is understood that we mean 
as 
for s 
 0.
t : 
e	st : 0
{1} 

0
 e	st (1) dt  	e	st
s 

0  1
s,    s 
 0
b : 
e	sb : 0
  lim
b : 
	e	st
s 0
b
   lim
b : 
	e	sb  1
s
  1
s
 {1} 

0
 e	st(1) dt  lim
b :  
b
0
 e	st dt
{1}
EXAMPLE 2
Applying Deﬁnition 7.1.1
Evaluate 
.
SOLUTION
From Deﬁnition 7.1.1 we have 
. Integrating by parts
and using 
s 
 0, along with the result from Example 1, we obtain
.
{t}  	te	st
s 

0  1
s 

0
  e	st  dt  1
s
 {1}  1
s
 
1
s  1
s2
lim
t :  te	st  0,
{t}  
0 e	st t dt
{t}
EXAMPLE 3
Applying Deﬁnition 7.1.1
Evaluate
(a)
(b)
SOLUTION
In each case we use Deﬁnition 7.1.1.
(a)
The last result is valid for s 
 	3 because in order to have limt :  e	(s3)t  0 we
must require that s  3 
 0 or s 
 	3.
 
1
s  3.
  	e	(s3)t
s  3 0

 {e	3t} 

0
 e	3t e	st dt 

0
 e	(s3)t dt
{e5t}
{e	3t}
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

276
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
(b)
In contrast to part (a), this result is valid for s 
 5 because limt :  e	(s	5)t  0 
demands s 	 5 
 0 or s 
 5.
 
1
s 	 5.
  	e	(s	5)t
s 	 5 0

 {e5t} 

0
 e5t e	st dt 

0
 e	(s	5)t dt
EXAMPLE 4
Applying Deﬁnition 7.1.1
Evaluate 
.
SOLUTION
From Deﬁnition 7.1.1 and two applications of integration by parts we
obtain
At this point we have an equation with 
on both sides of the equality.
Solving for that quantity yields the result
.

 Is a Linear Transform
For a linear combination of functions we can write
whenever both integrals converge for s 
 c. Hence it follows that
.
(3)
Because of the property given in (3),  is said to be a linear transform.
{ f (t)  g(t)}  { f (t)}  {g(t)}  F(s)  G(s)


0
 e	st [ f (t)  g(t)] dt   

0
 e	st f (t) dt   

0
 e	st g(t) dt
{sin 2t} 
2
s2  4,    s 
 0
{sin 2t}
lim e	st cos 2t  0, s 
 0
t:
Laplace transform of sin 2t 
	e	st sin 2t
------------
s
2-s
2-s
{sin 2t}     e	st sin 2t dt 
{sin 2t}.
       e	st cos 2t dt

0

0

0
	e	st cos 2t
------------
s
2-s
   	
2-s

2--s2

4--s2
	
[
   e	st sin 2t dt]

0

0
    e	st cos 2t dt,        s 
 0

0
{sin 2t}
EXAMPLE 5
Linearity of the Laplace Transform
In this example we use the results of the preceding examples to illustrate the linear-
ity of the Laplace transform.
(a) From Examples 1 and 2 we have for s 
 0,
.
(b) From Examples 3 and 4 we have for s 
 5,
  {4e5t 	 10 sin 2t}  4 {e5t} 	 10 {sin2t} 
4
s 	 5 	
20
s2  4.
  {1  5t}   {1}  5 {t}  1
s  5
s2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.1
DEFINITION OF THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
●
277
t
f(t)
b
t1
t3
t2
a
FIGURE 7.1.1
Piecewise continuous
function
(c) From Examples 1, 2, and 3 we have for s 
 0,
We state the generalization of some of the preceding examples by means of the
next theorem. From this point on we shall also refrain from stating any restrictions on
s; it is understood that s is sufﬁciently restricted to guarantee the convergence of the
appropriate Laplace transform.

20
s  3  7
s2 	 9
s.
  {20e	3t  7t 	 9}  20 {e	3t}  7 {t} 	 9 {1}
THEOREM 7.1.1
Transforms of Some Basic Functions
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g) {cosh kt} 
s
s2 	 k2
{sinh kt} 
k
s2 	 k2
{cos kt} 
s
s2  k2
{sin kt} 
k
s2  k2
{eat} 
1
s 	 a
{tn}  n!
sn1,  n  1, 2, 3, . . .
{1}  1
s
This result in (b) of Theorem 7.1.1 can be formally justiﬁed for n a positive
integer using intergration by parts to ﬁrst show that
.
Then for n  1, 2, and 3, we have, respectively,
If we carry on in this manner, you should be convinced that
Sufﬁcient Conditions for Existence of 
 {f(t)}
The integral that deﬁnes
the Laplace transform does not have to converge. For example, neither 
nor
exists. Sufﬁcient conditions guaranteeing the existence of 
are that f
be piecewise continuous on [0, ) and that f be of exponential order for t 
 T. Recall
that a function f is piecewise continuous on [0, ) if, in any interval 0  a  t  b,
there are at most a ﬁnite number of points tk, k  1, 2, . . . , n (tk	1  tk) at which f
has ﬁnite discontinuities and is continuous on each open interval (tk	1, tk). See
Figure 7.1.1. The concept of exponential order is deﬁned in the following manner.
DEFINITION 7.1.2
Exponential Order
A function f is said to be of exponential order if there exist constants 
c, M 
 0, and T 
 0 such that  f (t)  Mect for all t 
 T.
{f (t)}
{et2}
{1>t}
{t n}  n . . . 3  2  1
sn1
 n!
sn1.
 {t3}  3
s   {t2}  3
s  2  1
s3
 3  2  1
s4
 {t2}  2
s   {t}  2
s  1
s2  2  1
s3
 {t}  1
s   {1}  1
s  1
s  1
s2
{t n}  n
s  {t n	1}
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

278
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
FIGURE 7.1.2
f is of exponential 
order
f ( t ) 
t
T
Me ct  ( c > 0)
f(t)
e t 2 
t
f(t)
c
e ct 
FIGURE 7.1.4
is not of exponential
order
et2
t 
e −t 
2 cos  t 
e t 
(a)
(b)
(c)
t
e t 
t
2 e t 
f(t)
f(t)
f(t)
t
FIGURE 7.1.3
Three functions of exponential order
A positive integral power of t is always of exponential order, since, for c 
 0,
is equivalent to showing that 
is ﬁnite for n  1, 2, 3, . . . . The result
follows from n applications of L'Hôpital's rule. A function such as 
is not of
exponential order since, as shown in Figure 7.1.4, 
grows faster than any positive
linear power of e for 
. This can also be seen from
as 
.
t : 

et2
ect  et2	ct  et(t	c) : 
t > c > 0
et2
f(t)  et2
limt :  tn>ect
 tn  Mect  or  
tn
ect  M for t 
 T
If f is an increasing function, then the condition  f(t)  Mect, t 
 T, simply
states that the graph of f on the interval (T, ) does not grow faster than the graph
of the exponential function Mect, where c is a positive constant. See Figure 7.1.2.
The functions f (t)  t, f (t)  e	t, and f (t)  2 cos t are all of exponential order
because for c  1, M  1, T  0 we have, respectively, for t 
 0
.
A comparison of the graphs on the interval [0, ) is given in Figure 7.1.3.
 t   et,     e	t  et,    and     2 cos t   2et
THEOREM 7.1.2
Sufﬁcient Conditions for Existence
If f is piecewise continuous on [0, ) and of exponential order, then 
exists for s 
 c.
{f(t)}
PROOF
By the additive interval property of deﬁnite integrals we can write
.
The integral I1 exists because it can be written as a sum of integrals over intervals
on which e	st f(t) is continuous. Now since f is of exponential order, there exist
constants c, M 
 0, T 
 0 so that  f(t)  Mect for t 
 T. We can then write
for s 
 c. Since 
converges, the integral 
converges 
by the comparison test for improper integrals. This, in turn, implies that I2 exists

T  e	st f (t) dt

T Me	(s	c)t dt
 I2  

T
 e	st f (t) dt  M 

T
e	stect dt  M 

T
e	(s	c)t dt  M e	(s	c)T
s 	 c
{ f(t)} 
T
0
 e	st  f(t) dt 

T
 e	st f(t) dt  I1  I2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.1
DEFINITION OF THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
●
279
for s
c. The existence of I1 and I2 implies that 
exists 
for s
c.

{f (t)}  
0 e	st f (t) dt

t
y
3
2
FIGURE 7.1.5
Piecewise continuous
function in Example 6
EXAMPLE 6
Transform of a Piecewise Continuous Function
Evaluate {f(t)} where 
SOLUTION
The function f, shown in Figure 7.1.5, is piecewise continuous and of
exponential order for t 
 0. Since f is deﬁned in two pieces, {f(t)} is expressed as
the sum of two integrals:
We conclude this section with an additional bit of theory related to the types of
functions of s that we will, generally, be working with. The next theorem indicates that
not every arbitrary function of s is a Laplace transform of a piecewise continuous func-
tion of exponential order.
  2e	3s
s
,    s 
 0.
  0  2e	st
	s 

3
 {f (t)} 

0
 e	st f (t) dt 
3
0
 e	st(0) dt 

3
 e	st(2) dt
f (t) 
0,  0  t  3
2,    t  3.
THEOREM 7.1.3
Behavior of F(s) as 
If f is piecewise continuous on [0, ) and of exponential order and
F(s)  {f(t)}, then lim
s:F(s)  0.
s : 
PROOF
Since f is of exponential order, there exist constants g, M1 
 0, and T 
 0
so that  f(t)  M1egt for t 
 T. Also, since f is piecewise continuous for 0  t  T, it
is necessarily bounded on the interval; that is,  f(t)  M2  M2e0t. If M denotes the
maximum of the set {M1, M2} and c denotes the maximum of {0, g}, then
for s 
 c. As 
, we have 
, and so F(s)  { f (t)} : 0.
 F(s) : 0
s : 
 F(s) 

0
 e	st f (t) dt  M 

0
 e	stect dt  M 

0
 e	(s	c)t dt 
M
s 	 c
REMARKS
(i) Throughout this chapter we shall be concerned primarily with functions
that are both piecewise continuous and of exponential order. We note, however,
that these two conditions are sufﬁcient but not necessary for the existence of a
Laplace transform. The function f (t)  t	1/2 is not piecewise continuous on
the interval [0, ), but its Laplace transform exists. The function 
is not of exponential order, but it can be shown that its Laplace transform 
exists. See Problems 43 and 54 in Exercises 7.1.
(ii) As a consequence of Theorem 7.1.3 we can say that functions of s such as
F1(s)  1 and F2(s)  s(s  1) are not the Laplace transforms of piecewise 
continuous functions of exponential order, since F1(s)
0 and F2(s)
0 as
. But you should not conclude from this that F1(s) and F2(s) are not Laplace
transforms. There are other kinds of functions.
s : 
:/
:/
f(t)  2tet2 cos et2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
EXERCISES 7.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-11.
In Problems 1-18 use Deﬁnition 7.1.1 to ﬁnd {f(t)}.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
f (t) 
0,
cos t,
0  t  >2
        t  >2
f (t) 
sin t,
0,     
0  t  
t  
f (t) 
2t  1,
0,         
0  t  1
t  1
f (t) 
t,
1,
0  t  1
t  1
f (t) 
4,
0,
0  t  2
t  2
f (t) 
	1,
1,
0  t  1
t  1
9.
FIGURE 7.1.7
Graph for Problem 8
FIGURE 7.1.8
Graph for Problem 9
FIGURE 7.1.9
Graph for Problem 10
t
f(t)
(2, 2)
1
1
FIGURE 7.1.6
Graph for Problem 7
t
f(t)
(2, 2)
1
1
t
f(t)
1
1
f(t)
a
c
b
t
8.
10.
23. f(t)  t2  6t 	 3
24. f(t)  	4t2  16t  9
25. f(t)  (t  1)3
26. f(t)  (2t 	 1)3
27. f(t)  1  e4t
28. f(t)  t2 	 e	9t  5
29. f(t)  (1  e2t)2
30. f(t)  (et 	 e	t)2
31. f(t)  4t2 	 5 sin 3t
32. f(t)  cos 5t  sin 2t
33. f(t)  sinh kt
34. f(t)  cosh kt
35. f(t)  et sinh t
36. f(t)  e	t cosh t
In Problems 37-40 ﬁnd {f(t)} by ﬁrst using a trigono-
metric identity.
37. f(t)  sin 2t cos 2t
38. f(t)  cos2t
39. f(t)  sin(4t  5)
40.
41. We have encountered the gamma function
in our
study of Bessel functions in Section 6.4 (page 258).
One deﬁnition of this function is given by the improper
integral
Use this deﬁnition to show that 
42. Use Problem 41 and a change of variables to obtain the
generalization
of the result in Theorem 7.1.1(b).
In Problems 43-46 use Problems 41 and 42 and the fact
that 
to find the Laplace transform of the given
function.
43. f(t)  t	1/2
44. f(t)  t1/2
45. f(t)  t3/2
46. f(t)  2t1/2  8t5/2
Discussion Problems
47. Make up a function F(t) that is of exponential order but
where f(t)  F(t) is not of exponential order. Make up
a function f that is not of exponential order but whose
Laplace transform exists.
48. Suppose that 
for s
c1 and that
for s
c2. When does 
49. Figure 7.1.4 suggests, but does not prove, that the func-
tion 
is not of exponential order. How does
the observation that 
for 
and t
sufﬁciently large, show that 
for any c?
50. Use part (c) of Theorem 7.1.1 to show that
{e(aib)t} 
, where a and b are real
s 	 a  ib
(s 	 a)2  b2
et 2 
 Mect
M 
 0
t2 
 ln M  ct,
f (t)   et 2
{f1(t)  f2(t)}  F1(s)  F2(s)?

{f2(t)}  F2(s)

{f1(t)}   F1(s)
(1
2)  1p
{t}  (  1)
s1
,  
 	1,
(a  1)  a(a).
() 

0
t a	1e	t dt,  a 
 0.
(a)
f (t)  10 cost 	 
6
11. f(t)  et7
12. f(t)  e	2t	5
13. f(t)  te4t
14. f(t)  t2e	2t
15. f(t)  e	t sin t
16. f(t)  et cos t
17. f(t)  t cos t
18. f(t)  t sin t
In Problems 19-36 use Theorem 7.1.1 to ﬁnd { f (t)}.
19. f(t)  2t4
20. f(t)  t5
21. f(t)  4t 	 10
22. f(t)  7t  3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.2
INVERSE TRANSFORMS AND TRANSFORMS OF DERIVATIVES
●
281
and i2  	1. Show how Euler's formula (page 133) can
then be used to deduce the results
.
51. Under 
what 
conditions 
is 
a 
linear 
function
f(x)  mx  b, m  0, a linear transform?
52. Explain why the function
is not piecewise continuous on [0, ).
53. Show that the function 
does not possess a
Laplace transform. [Hint: Write 
as two im-
proper integrals:
Show that I1 diverges.]
  {1>t 2} 
1
0
e	st
t 2  dt 

1
e	st
t 2  dt  I1  I2.
  {1>t2}
f(t)  1>t2

f(t) 
t,        0 t  2
4,       2  t  5
1>(t 	 5),  t 
 5
  {eat sin bt} 
b
(s 	 a)2  b2
  {eat cos bt} 
s 	 a
(s 	 a)2  b2
54. Show that the Laplace transform 
exists.
[Hint: Start with integration by parts.]
55. If 
and 
is a constant, show that
. 
This result is known as the change of scale theorem.
56. Use the given Laplace transform and the result in
Problem 55 to find the indicated Laplace transform.
Assume that a and k are positive constants.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)   {sin t sinh t} 
2s
s4  4;   {sin kt sinh kt}
  {1 	 cos t} 
1
s(s2  1);   {1 	 cos kt}
  {sin t} 
1
s2  1;   {sin kt}
  {et} 
1
s 	 1;   {eat}
  {f(at)}  1
a F 
s
a
a 
 0
  {f(t)}  F(s)
  {2tet2 coset2}
Transform
Inverse Transform
e	3t   	1
1
s  3
{e	3t} 
1
s  3
t   	1
1
s2
{t}  1
s2
1   	1
1
s
{1}  1
s
7.2.1
INVERSE TRANSFORMS
The Inverse Problem
If F(s) represents the Laplace transform of a function
f(t), that is, 
, we then say f(t) is the inverse Laplace transform of
F(s) and write 
. For example, from Examples 1, 2, and 3 of
Section 7.1 we have, respectively,
f(t)   	1{F(s)}
{f(t)}  F(s)
INVERSE TRANSFORMS AND TRANSFORMS OF DERIVATIVES
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Partial fraction decomposition
●See the Student Resource Manual
INTRODUCTION
In this section we take a few small steps into an investigation of how
the Laplace transform can be used to solve certain types of equations for an unknown function. We
begin the discussion with the concept of the inverse Laplace transform or, more precisely, the inverse
of a Laplace transform F(s). After some important preliminary background material on the Laplace
transform of derivatives f(t), f(t), . . . , we then illustrate how both the Laplace transform and the in-
verse Laplace transform come into play in solving some simple ordinary differential equations.
7.2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

282
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
We shall see shortly that in the application of the Laplace transform to equa-
tions we are not able to determine an unknown function f(t) directly; rather, we are
able to solve for the Laplace transform F(s) of f(t); but from that knowledge
we ascertain f by computing 
. The idea is simply this: Suppose
is a Laplace transform; ﬁnd a function f(t) such that 
We shall show how to solve this problem in Example 2.
For future reference the analogue of Theorem 7.1.1 for the inverse transform is
presented as our next theorem.
{f(t)}  F(s).
F(s)  	2s  6
s2  4
f (t)   	1{F(s)}
In evaluating inverse transforms, it often happens that a function of s under con-
sideration does not match exactly the form of a Laplace transform F(s) given in a
table. It may be necessary to "ﬁx up" the function of s by multiplying and dividing
by an appropriate constant.
EXAMPLE 1
Applying Theorem 7.2.1
Evaluate
(a)
(b)
.
SOLUTION
(a) To match the form given in part (b) of Theorem 7.2.1, we identify
n  1  5 or n  4 and then multiply and divide by 4!:
.
(b) To match the form given in part (d) of Theorem 7.2.1, we identify k2  7, so
. We ﬁx up the expression by multiplying and dividing by
:
.
1 is a Linear Transform
The inverse Laplace transform is also a linear
transform; that is, for constants a and b
,
(1)
where F and G are the transforms of some functions f and g. Like (3) of Section 7.1,
(1) extends to any ﬁnite linear combination of Laplace transforms.
 	1{F(s)  G(s)}   	1{F(s)}   	1{G(s)}
 	1
1
s2  7 
1
17
  	1
17
s2  7  1
17 sin17t
17
k  17
 	1
1
s5  1
4!
  	1
4!
s5  1
24 t4
 	1
1
s2  7
 	1
1
s5
THEOREM 7.2.1
Some Inverse Transforms
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g) cosh kt   	1
s
s2 	 k2
sinh kt   	1
k
s2 	 k2
cos kt   	1
s
s2  k2
sin kt   	1
k
s2  k2
eat   	1
1
s 	 a
tn   	1
n!
sn1,  n  1, 2, 3, . . .
1   	1
1
s
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.2
INVERSE TRANSFORMS AND TRANSFORMS OF DERIVATIVES
●
283
(2)
termwise
division
parts (e) and (d)
of Theorem 7.2.1 with k  2
linearity and fixing
up constants
	2s  6
---------
s2  4
6-2
	1{
}  	1{
 	2 cos 2t  3 sin 2t.
}  	2 	1{
	1{
} 
	2s
-------
s2  4
6
-------
s2  4
}
2
-------
s2  4
s
-------
s2  4

Partial Fractions
Partial fractions play an important role in ﬁnding inverse
Laplace transforms. The decomposition of a rational expression into component frac-
tions can be done quickly by means of a single command on most computer algebra
systems. Indeed, some CASs have packages that implement Laplace transform and
inverse Laplace transform commands. But for those of you without access to such
software, we will review in this and subsequent sections some of the basic algebra in
the important cases in which the denominator of a Laplace transform F(s) contains
distinct linear factors, repeated linear factors, and quadratic polynomials with no real
factors. Although we shall examine each of these cases as this chapter develops, it
still might be a good idea for you to consult either a calculus text or a current precal-
culus text for a more comprehensive review of this theory.
The following example illustrates partial fraction decomposition in the case
when the denominator of F(s) is factorable into distinct linear factors.
EXAMPLE 2
Termwise Division and Linearity
Evaluate 
.
SOLUTION
We ﬁrst rewrite the given function of s as two expressions by means of
termwise division and then use (1):
 	1
	2s  6
s2  4 
EXAMPLE 3
Partial Fractions: Distinct Linear Factors
Evaluate 
.
SOLUTION
There exist unique real constants A, B, and C so that
Since the denominators are identical, the numerators are identical:
.
(3)
By comparing coefﬁcients of powers of s on both sides of the equality, we know that
(3) is equivalent to a system of three equations in the three unknowns A, B, and C.
However, there is a shortcut for determining these unknowns. If we set s  1, s  2,
and s  	4 in (3), we obtain, respectively,
,
and so 
, 
, and 
. Hence the partial fraction decomposition is
,
(4)
s2  6s  9
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)(s  4)  	 16>5
s 	 1  25>6
s 	 2  1>30
s  4
C  1
30
B  25
6
A  	16
5
16  A(	1)(5),  25  B(1)(6),  and  1  C(	5)(	6)
s2  6s  9  A(s 	 2)(s  4)  B(s 	 1)(s  4)  C(s 	 1)(s 	 2)
  A(s 	 2)(s  4)  B(s 	 1)(s  4)  C(s 	 1)(s 	 2)
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)(s  4)
.
 
s2  6s  9
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)(s  4) 
A
s 	 1 
B
s 	 2 
C
s  4
 	1
s2  6s  9
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)(s  4)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

284
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
and thus, from the linearity of 	1 and part (c) of Theorem 7.2.1,
  	1
s2  6s  9
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)(s  4)  	 16
5
  	1
1
s 	 1  25
6
  	1
1
s 	 2  1
30
  	1
1
s  4
.
(5)
7.2.2
TRANSFORMS OF DERIVATIVES
Transform a Derivative
As was pointed out in the introduction to this chap-
ter, our immediate goal is to use the Laplace transform to solve differential equations.
To that end we need to evaluate quantities such as 
and 
. For
example, if f  is continuous for t  0, then integration by parts gives
or
(6)
Here we have assumed that 
as 
. Similarly, with the aid of (6),
or
(7)
In like manner it can be shown that
(8)
The recursive nature of the Laplace transform of the derivatives of a function f
should be apparent from the results in (6), (7), and (8). The next theorem gives the
Laplace transform of the nth derivative of f. The proof is omitted.
{ f (t)}  s3F(s) 	 s2f (0) 	 sf(0) 	 f (0).
 { f (t)}  s2F(s) 	 sf (0) 	 f(0).
; from (6)
   s[sF(s) 	 f (0)] 	 f (0)
  	f(0)  s{ f(t)}
 { f (t)} 

0
 e	st  f (t) dt  e	st f (t)

0  s 

0
 e	st f (t) dt
t : 
e	st f(t) : 0
 { f(t)}  sF(s) 	 f (0).
  	f (0)  s{ f (t)}
 { f(t)} 

0
 e	st f (t) dt  e	st  f (t)0

 s 

0
 e	st f (t) dt
{d2y>dt2}
{dy>dt}
  	 16
5
 et  25
6
 e2t  1
30
 e	4t
Solving Linear ODEs
It is apparent from the general result given in
THEOREM 7.2.2
Transform of a Derivative
If f, f, . . . , f (n	1) are continuous on [0, ) and are of exponential order and if
f (n)(t) is piecewise continuous on [0, ), then
where 
.
F(s)  { f(t)}
{ f (n)(t)}  snF(s) 	 sn	1f(0) 	 sn	2f(0) 	    	 f (n	1)(0),
Theorem 7.2.2 that 
depends on 
and the n 	 1 derivatives
of y(t) evaluated at 
This property makes the Laplace transform ideally suited
for solving linear initial-value problems in which the differential equation has con-
stant coefﬁcients. Such a differential equation is simply a linear combination of terms
y, y, y, . . . , y(n):
y(0)  y0, y(0)  y1, . . . , y(n	1)(0)  yn	1,
an 
 d ny
dtn  an	1
 
 d n	1y
dtn	1      a0y  g(t),
t  0.
Y(s)  {y(t)}
{dny>dtn}
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.2
INVERSE TRANSFORMS AND TRANSFORMS OF DERIVATIVES
●
285
where the ai, i  0, 1, . . . , n and y0, y1, . . . , yn	1 are constants. By the linearity prop-
erty the Laplace transform of this linear combination is a linear combination of
Laplace transforms:
(9)
From Theorem 7.2.2, (9) becomes
,
(10)
where 
 G(s). In other words, 
The Laplace transform of a linear differential equation with constant coefﬁcients
becomes an algebraic equation in Y(s). 
If we solve the general transformed equation (10) for the symbol Y(s), we ﬁrst obtain
P(s)Y(s)  Q(s)  G(s) and then write
,
(11)
where 
is a polynomial in s of degree
less than or equal to 
consisting of the various products of the coefﬁcients
ai,
. . . , n and the prescribed initial conditions y0, y1, . . . , yn	1, and G(s) is
the Laplace transform of g(t).* Typically, we put the two terms in (11) over the least
common denominator and then decompose the expression into two or more
partial fractions. Finally, the solution y(t) of the original initial-value problem is
, where the inverse transform is done term by term.
The procedure is summarized in the diagram in Figure 7.2.1.
y(t)   	1{Y(s)}
i  1,
n 	 1
P(s)  ansn  an	1sn	1      a0, Q(s)
Y(s)  Q(s)
P(s)  G(s)
P(s)
{y(t)}  Y(s) and {g(t)}
  an	1[sn	1Y(s) 	 sn	2y(0) 	    	 y(n	2)(0)]      a0Y(s)  G(s)
an [snY(s) 	 sn	1y(0) 	    	 y(n	1)(0)]
an
d ny
dtn  an	1
d n	1y
dt n	1      a0 {y}  {g(t)}.
*The polynomial P(s) is the same as the nth-degree auxiliary polynomial in (12) in Section 4.3 with the
usual symbol m replaced by s.
The next example illustrates the foregoing method of solving DEs, as well as
partial fraction decomposition in the case when the denominator of Y(s) contains a
quadratic polynomial with no real factors.
Apply Laplace
transform  
Apply inverse Laplace
transform      
Find unknown y(t)
that satisfies DE
and initial conditions
Transformed DE
becomes an algebraic
equation in Y(s)
Solve transformed
equation for Y(s) 
Solution y(t)
of original IVP
−1
FIGURE 7.2.1
Steps in solving an IVP by the Laplace transform
EXAMPLE 4
Solving a First-Order IVP
Use the Laplace transform to solve the initial-value problem
.
SOLUTION
We ﬁrst take the transform of each member of the differential 
equation:
.
(12)

dy
dt  3{y}  13{sin 2t}
dy
dt  3y  13 sin 2t,  y(0)  6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

286
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
From (6), 
, and from part (d) of Theorem 7.1.1,
, so (12) is the same as
.
Solving the last equation for Y(s), we get
.
(13)
Since the quadratic polynomial s2  4 does not factor using real numbers, its
assumed numerator in the partial fraction decomposition is a linear polynomial in s:
.
Putting the right-hand side of the equality over a common denominator and equating
numerators gives 6s2  50  A(s2  4)  (Bs  C)(s  3). Setting s  	3 then
immediately yields A  8. Since the denominator has no more real zeros, we equate
the coefﬁcients of s2 and s: 6  A  B and 0  3B  C. Using the value of A in the
ﬁrst equation gives B  	2, and then using this last value in the second equation
gives C  6. Thus
.
We are not quite ﬁnished because the last rational expression still has to be written as
two fractions. This was done by termwise division in Example 2. From (2) of that
example,
.
It follows from parts (c), (d), and (e) of Theorem 7.2.1 that the solution of the initial-
value problem is y(t)  8e	3t 	 2 cos 2t  3 sin 2t.
y(t)  8 	1
1
s  3 	 2 	1
s
s2  4  3 	1
2
s2  4
Y(s) 
6s2  50
(s  3)(s2  4) 
8
s  3  	2s  6
s2  4
6s2  50
(s  3)(s2  4) 
A
s  3  Bs  C
s2  4
Y(s) 
6
s  3 
26
(s  3)(s2  4) 
6s2  50
(s  3)(s2  4)
sY(s) 	 6  3Y(s) 
26
s2  4  or  (s  3)Y(s)  6 
26
s2  4
{sin 2t}  2>(s2  4)
{dy>dt}  sY(s) 	 y(0)  sY(s) 	 6
EXAMPLE 5
Solving a Second-Order IVP
Solve y 	 3y  2y  e	4t,
y(0)  1,
y(0)  5.
SOLUTION
Proceeding as in Example 4, we transform the DE. We take the sum
of the transforms of each term, use (6) and (7), use the given initial conditions, use (c) of
Theorem 7.1.1, and then solve for Y(s):
. (14)
The details of the partial fraction decomposition of Y(s) have already been carried
out in Example 3. In view of the results in (4) and (5) we have the solution of the
initial-value problem
.
y(t)   	1{Y(s)}  	16
5
 et  25
6
 e2t  1
30
 e	4t
 Y(s) 
s  2
s2 	 3s  2 
1
(s2 	 3s  2)(s  4) 
s2  6s  9
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)(s  4)
 (s2 	 3s  2)Y(s)  s  2 
1
s  4
 s2Y(s) 	 sy(0) 	 y(0) 	 3[sY(s) 	 y(0)]  2Y(s) 
1
s  4
 
d2y
dt2 	 3
dy
dt  2{y}  {e	4t}
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

REMARKS
(i) The inverse Laplace transform of a function F(s) may not be unique; in other
words, it is possible that 
and yet f1  f2. For our purposes
this is not anything to be concerned about. If f1 and f2 are piecewise continuous
on [0, ) and of exponential order, then f1 and f2 are essentially the same. See
Problem 44 in Exercises 7.2. However, if f1 and f2 are continuous on [0, ) and
, then f1  f2 on the interval.
(ii) This remark is for those of you who will be required to do partial fraction
decompositions by hand. There is another way of determining the coefﬁcients
in a partial fraction decomposition in the special case when 
is
a rational function of s and the denominator of F is a product of distinct linear
factors. Let us illustrate by reexamining Example 3. Suppose we multiply both
sides of the assumed decomposition
(15)
by, say, s 	 1, simplify, and then set s  1. Since the coefﬁcients of B and C on
the right-hand side of the equality are zero, we get
.
Written another way,
,
where we have shaded, or covered up, the factor that canceled when the left-
hand side was multiplied by s 	 1. Now to obtain B and C, we simply evaluate
the left-hand side of (15) while covering up, in turn, s 	 2 and s  4:
s2  6s  9
----------------------
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)(s  4)
1---
30
s	4 
 C.
and
s2  6s  9
----------------------
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)(s  4)
25
---
6
s2 
 B
s2  6s  9
(s 	 1) (s 	 2)(s  4) s1  	16
5  A
s2  6s  9
(s 	 2)(s  4) s1
 A    or    A  	16
5
s2  6s  9
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)(s  4) 
A
s 	 1 
B
s 	 2 
C
s  4
{ f(t)}  F(s)
{ f1(t)}  { f2(t)}
{ f1(t)}  { f2(t)}
7.2
INVERSE TRANSFORMS AND TRANSFORMS OF DERIVATIVES
●
287
Examples 4 and 5 illustrate the basic procedure for using the Laplace transform
to solve a linear initial-value problem, but these examples may appear to demonstrate
a method that is not much better than the approach to such problems outlined in
Sections 2.3 and 4.3-4.6. Don't draw any negative conclusions from only two
examples. Yes, there is a lot of algebra inherent in the use of the Laplace transform,
but observe that we do not have to use variation of parameters or worry about the
cases and algebra in the method of undetermined coefﬁcients. Moreover, since
the method incorporates the prescribed initial conditions directly into the solution,
there is no need for the separate operation of applying the initial conditions to the
general solution 
of the DE to ﬁnd speciﬁc
constants in a particular solution of the IVP.
The Laplace transform has many operational properties. In the sections that fol-
low we will examine some of these properties and see how they enable us to solve
problems of greater complexity.
y  c1y1  c2y2      cn yn  yp
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

288
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
The desired decomposition (15) is given in (4). This special technique for
determining coefﬁcients is naturally known as the cover-up method.
(iii) In this remark we continue our introduction to the terminology of
dynamical systems. Because of (9) and (10) the Laplace trans-
form is well adapted to linear dynamical systems. The polynomial
in (11) is the total coefﬁcient of Y(s) in
(10) and is simply the left-hand side of the DE with the derivatives dkydtk
replaced by powers sk, k  0, 1, . . . , n. It is usual practice to call the recipro-
cal of P(s)—namely, W(s)  1P(s)—the transfer function of the system
and write (11) as
.
(16)
In this manner we have separated, in an additive sense, the effects on the
response that are due to the initial conditions (that is, W(s)Q(s)) from those
due to the input function g (that is, W(s)G(s)). See (13) and (14). Hence the
response y(t) of the system is a superposition of two responses:
.
If the input is g(t)  0, then the solution of the problem is 
.
This solution is called the zero-input response of the system. On the other hand, the
function 
is the output due to the input g(t). Now if the
initial state of the system is the zero state (all the initial conditions are zero), then
Q(s)  0, and so the only solution of the initial-value problem is y1(t). The latter
solution is called the zero-state response of the system. Both y0(t) and y1(t) are
particular solutions: y0(t) is a solution of the IVP consisting of the associated ho-
mogeneous equation with the given initial conditions, and y1(t) is a solution of the
IVP consisting of the nonhomogeneous equation with zero initial conditions. In
Example 5 we see from (14) that the transfer function is W(s)  1(s2 	 3s  2),
the zero-input response is
,
and the zero-state response is
.
Verify that the sum of y0(t) and y1(t) is the solution y(t) in Example 5 and that
y0(0)  1, 
, whereas y1(0)  0, 
.
y1(0)  0
y0(0)  5
y1(t)   	1
1
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)(s  4)  	1
5
 et  1
6
 e2t  1
30
 e	4t
y0(t)   	1
s  2
(s 	 1)(s 	 2)  	3et  4e2t
y1(t)   	1{W(s)G(s)}
y0(t)   	1{W(s)Q(s)}
y(t)   	1{W(s)Q(s)}   	1{W(s)G(s)}  y0(t)  y1(t)
Y(s)  W(s)Q(s)  W(s)G(s)
P(s)  ansn  an	1sn	1      a0
EXERCISES 7.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-11.
7.2.1
INVERSE TRANSFORMS
In Problems 1-30 use appropriate algebra and Theorem 7.2.1
to ﬁnd the given inverse Laplace transform.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.  	1
(s  2)2
s3 
 	1
(s  1)3
s4 
 	1
2
s 	 1
s3
2
 	1
1
s2 	 48
s5
 	1
1
s4
 	1
1
s3
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.  	1
s  1
s2  2
 	1
2s 	 6
s2  9
 	1
1
4s2  1
 	1
4s
4s2  1
 	1
10s
s2  16
 	1
5
s2  49
 	1
1
5s 	 2
 	1
1
4s  1
 	1
4
s  6
s5 	
1
s  8
 	1
1
s2 	 1
s 
1
s 	 2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.3
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES I
●
289
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
7.2.2
TRANSFORMS OF DERIVATIVES
In Problems 31-40 use the Laplace transform to solve the
given initial-value problem.
31.
32.
33. y  6y  e4t,
y(0)  2
34. y 	 y  2 cos 5t,
y(0)  0
35. y  5y  4y  0,
y(0)  1,
y(0)  0
36. y 	 4y  6e3t 	 3e	t,
y(0)  1,
y(0)  	1
37.
38. y  9y  et,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  0
y  y  22 sin 22t,  y(0)  10,  y(0)  0
2 dy
dt  y  0,  y(0)  	3
dy
dt 	 y  1,  y(0)  0
 	1
6s  3
s4  5s2  4
 	1
1
(s2  1)(s2  4)
 	1
1
s4 	 9
 	1
2s 	 4
(s2  s)(s2  1)
 	1
s
(s  2)(s2  4)
 	1
1
s3  5s
 	1
s2  1
s(s 	 1)(s  1)(s 	 2)
 	1
s
(s 	 2)(s 	 3)(s 	 6)
 	1
s 	 3
s 	 13s  13
 	1
0.9s
(s 	 0.1)(s  0.2)
 	1
1
s2  s 	 20
 	1
s
s2  2s 	 3
 	1
s  1
s2 	 4s
 	1
1
s2  3s
39. 2y  3y 	 3y 	 2y  e	t,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  1
40. y  2y 	 y 	 2y  sin 3t,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  1
The inverse forms of the results in Problem 50 in
Exercises 7.1 are
In Problems 41 and 42 use the Laplace transform and these
inverses to solve the given initial-value problem.
41. y  y  e	3t cos 2t,
y(0)  0
42. y 	 2y  5y  0,
y(0)  1,
y(0)  3
Discussion Problems
43. (a) With a slight change in notation the transform in (6)
is the same as
With f(t)  teat, discuss how this result in conjunc-
tion with (c) of Theorem 7.1.1 can be used to evalu-
ate 
.
(b) Proceed as in part (a), but this time discuss how to
use (7) with f (t)  t sin kt in conjunction with (d)
and (e) of Theorem 7.1.1 to evaluate 
.
44. Make up two functions f1 and f2 that have the same
Laplace transform. Do not think profound thoughts.
45. Reread (iii) in the Remarks on page 288. Find the
zero-input and the zero-state response for the IVP in
Problem 36.
46. Suppose f(t) is a function for which f(t) is piecewise
continuous and of exponential order c. Use results in
this section and Section 7.1 to justify
,
where F(s)  { f (t)}. Verify this result with f(t) 
cos kt.
f (0)  lim
s:  sF(s)
{t sin kt}
{teat}
{ f(t)}  s{ f (t)} 	 f (0).
 	1
b
(s 	 a)2  b2  eat  sin bt.
 	1
s 	 a
(s 	 a)2  b2  eat cos bt
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES I
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Keep practicing partial fraction decomposition
●Completion of the square
INTRODUCTION
It is not convenient to use Deﬁnition 7.1.1 each time we wish to ﬁnd the Laplace
transform of a function f(t). For example, the integration by parts involved in evaluating, say,
is formidable, to say the least. In this section and the next we present several labor-
saving operational properties of the Laplace transform that enable us to build up a more extensive list of
transforms (see the table in Appendix III) without having to resort to the basic deﬁnition and integration.
{et t2 sin 3t}
7.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
7.3.1
TRANSLATION ON THE s-AXIS
A Translation
Evaluating transforms such as 
and 
is
straightforward provided that we know (and we do) 
and 
. In
general, if we know the Laplace transform of a function f, 
, it is pos-
sible to compute the Laplace transform of an exponential multiple of f, that is,
with no additional effort other than translating, or shifting, the transform
F(s) to 
This result is known as the ﬁrst translation theorem or ﬁrst
shifting theorem.
F(s 	 a).
{eat f (t)},
{ f (t)}  F(s)
{cos 4t}
{t3}
{e	2t cos 4t}
{e5tt3}
PROOF
The proof is immediate, since by Deﬁnition 7.1.1
.
If we consider s a real variable, then the graph of F(s 	 a) is the graph of F(s)
shifted on the s-axis by the amount a. If a 
 0, the graph of F(s) is shifted a units to
the right, whereas if a  0, the graph is shifted a units to the left. See Figure 7.3.1.
For emphasis it is sometimes useful to use the symbolism
,
where 
means that in the Laplace transform F(s) of f(t) we replace the
symbol s wherever it appears by s 	 a.
s : s 	 a
{eat f (t)}  { f (t)} s:s	a 
{eat f (t)} 

0
e	steat f (t) dt 

0
e	(s	a)t f (t) dt  F(s 	 a)
s
F ( s ) 
s = a , a > 0
F
F( s −a)
FIGURE 7.3.1
Shift on s-axis
THEOREM 7.3.1
First Translation Theorem
If 
and a is any real number, then
.
{eat f(t)}  F(s 	 a)
{f(t)}  F(s)
EXAMPLE 1
Using the First Translation Theorem
Evaluate
(a)
(b)
.
SOLUTION
The results follow from Theorems 7.1.1 and 7.3.1.
(a)
(b)
Inverse Form of Theorem 7.3.1
To compute the inverse of F(s 	 a), we
must recognize F(s), ﬁnd f(t) by taking the inverse Laplace transform of F(s), and
then multiply f(t) by the exponential function eat. This procedure can be summarized
symbolically in the following manner:
,
(1)
where 
.
The ﬁrst part of the next example illustrates partial fraction decomposition in the
case when the denominator of Y(s) contains repeated linear factors.
f(t)   	1{F(s)}
 	1{F(s 	 a)}   	1{F(s)s:s	a}  eat f (t)
{e	2t cos 4t}  {cos 4t} s:s	(	2) 
s
s2  16 s:s2 
s  2
(s  2)2  16
{e5tt3}  {t3} s: s	5  3!
s4 s:s	5

6
(s 	 5)4
{e	2t cos 4t}
{e5tt3}
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.3
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES I
●
291
EXAMPLE 2
Partial Fractions: Repeated Linear Factors
Evaluate
(a)
(b)
.
SOLUTION
(a) A repeated linear factor is a term (s 	 a)n, where a is a real number
and n is a positive integer  2. Recall that if (s 	 a)n appears in the denominator of a
rational expression, then the assumed decomposition contains n partial fractions
with constant numerators and denominators s 	 a, (s 	 a)2, . . . , (s 	 a)n. Hence with
a  3 and n  2 we write
.
By putting the two terms on the right-hand side over a common denominator, we
obtain the numerator 2s  5  A(s 	 3)  B, and this identity yields A  2 and
B  11. Therefore
(2)
and
(3)
Now 1(s 	 3)2 is F(s)  1s2 shifted three units to the right. Since 
,
it follows from (1) that
.
Finally, (3) is
.
(4)
(b) To start, observe that the quadratic polynomial s2  4s  6 has no real zeros and
so has no real linear factors. In this situation we complete the square:
.
(5)
Our goal here is to recognize the expression on the right-hand side as some Laplace
transform F(s) in which s has been replaced throughout by s  2. What we are 
trying to do is analogous to working part (b) of Example 1 backwards. The denom-
inator in (5) is already in the correct form—that is, s2  2 with s replaced by s  2.
However, we must ﬁx up the numerator by manipulating the constants:
.
Now by termwise division, the linearity of 	1, parts (e) and (d) of Theorem 7.2.1,
and ﬁnally (1),
(6)
(7) 
  1
2 e	2t cos 12t  12
3
 e	2t sin 12t.
  1
2  	1
s
s2  2s:s2 
2
312  	1
12
s2  2s:s2
  	1
s>2  5> 3
s2  4s  6  1
2  	1
s  2
(s  2)2  2  2
3  	1
1
(s  2)2  2
 s> 2  5> 3
(s  2)2  2 
1
2(s  2)  2
3
(s  2)2  2  1
2 
s  2
(s  2)2  2  2
3 
1
(s  2)2  2
1
2s  5
3  1
2
 (s  2)  5
3 	 2
2  1
2
 (s  2)  2
3
s>2  5>3
s2  4s  6  s>2  5>3
(s  2)2  2
 	1
2s  5
(s 	 3)2  2e3t  11e3tt
 	1
1
(s 	 3)2   	1
1
s2 s:s	3  e3tt
 	1{1>s2}  t
  	1
2s  5
(s 	 3)2  2 	1
1
s 	 3  11 	1
1
(s 	 3)2.
 2s  5
(s 	 3)2 
2
s 	 3 
11
(s 	 3)2
2s  5
(s 	 3)2 
A
s 	 3 
B
(s 	 3)2
 	1
s>2  5>3
s2  4s  6
 	1
2s  5
(s 	 3)2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

292
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
EXAMPLE 3
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve y 	 6y  9y  t2e3t,
y(0)  2,
y(0)  17.
SOLUTION
Before transforming the DE, note that its right-hand side is similar to
the function in part (a) of Example 1. After using linearity, Theorem 7.3.1, and the
initial conditions, we simplify and then solve for 
:
.
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side was already decomposed into individual partial
fractions in (2) in part (a) of Example 2:
.
Thus
.
(8)
From the inverse form (1) of Theorem 7.3.1, the last two terms in (8) are
.
Thus (8) is y(t)  2e3t  11te3t  1
12t4e3t.
 	1
1
s2s:s	3  te3t    and     	1
4!
s5s:s	3  t 4e3t
y(t)  2 	1
1
s 	 3  11 	1
1
(s 	 3)2  2
4!
  	1
4!
(s 	 3)5
Y(s) 
2
s 	 3 
11
(s 	 3)2 
2
(s 	 3)5
 Y(s)  2s  5
(s 	 3)2 
2
(s 	 3)5
 (s 	 3)2Y(s)  2s  5 
2
(s 	 3)3
 (s2 	 6s  9)Y(s)  2s  5 
2
(s 	 3)3
 s2Y(s) 	 sy(0) 	 y(0) 	 6[sY(s) 	 y(0)]  9Y(s) 
2
(s 	 3)3
 {y} 	 6{y}  9{y}  {t2e3t}
Y(s)  { f (t)}
EXAMPLE 4
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve y  4y  6y  1  e	t,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  0.
SOLUTION
Since the quadratic term in the denominator does not factor into real linear factors, the
partial fraction decomposition for Y(s) is found to be
.
Moreover, in preparation for taking the inverse transform we already manipulated
the last term into the necessary form in part (b) of Example 2. So in view of the
results in (6) and (7) we have the solution
Y(s)  1>6
s
 1>3
s  1 	 s> 2  5> 3
s2  4s  6
 Y(s) 
2s  1
s(s  1)(s2  4s  6)
 (s2  4s  6)Y(s)  2s  1
s(s  1)
 s2Y(s) 	 sy(0) 	 y(0)  4[sY(s) 	 y(0)]  6Y(s)  1
s 
1
s  1
 {y}  4{y}  6{y}  {1}  {e	t}
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.3
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES I
●
293
.
  1
6  1
3
 e	t 	 1
2
 e	2t cos 12t 	 12
3
 e	2t sin 12t
 y(t)  1
6
  	1
1
s  1
3
  	1
1
s  1 	 1
2  	1
s  2
(s  2)2  2 	
2
312
  	1
12
(s  2)2  2
7.3.2
TRANSLATION ON THE t-AXIS
Unit Step Function
In engineering, one frequently encounters functions 
that are either "off" or "on." For example, an external force acting on a mechanical
system or a voltage impressed on a circuit can be turned off after a period of time.
It is convenient, then, to deﬁne a special function that is the number 0 (off) up to a
certain time t  a and then the number 1 (on) after that time. This function is called
the unit step function or the Heaviside function, named after the English polymath
Oliver Heaviside (1850-1925).
Notice that we deﬁne 
only on the nonnegative t-axis, since this is all
that we are concerned with in the study of the Laplace transform. In a broader sense
for t  a. The graph of 
is given in Figure 7.3.2. In the case
when a  0, we take 
When a function f deﬁned for t  0 is multiplied by 
, the unit step
function "turns off" a portion of the graph of that function. For example, consider
the function f(t)  2t 	 3. To "turn off" the portion of the graph of f for 0  t  1,
we simply form the product (2t 	 3)
. See Figure 7.3.3. In general, the
graph of f(t) 
is 0 (off) for 0  t  a and is the portion of the graph of f (on)
for t  a.
The unit step function can also be used to write piecewise-deﬁned functions in
a compact form. For example, if we consider 0  t  2, 2  t  3, and t  3
and the corresponding values of 
and 
, it should be apparent
that the piecewise-deﬁned function shown in Figure 7.3.4 is the same as
. Also, a general piecewise-deﬁned function of
the type
(9)
is the same as
.
(10)
Similarly, a function of the type
(11)
can be written
(12)
f (t)  g(t)[(t 	 a) 	 (t 	 b)].
f(t) 
0,
g(t),
0,
 0  t  a
 a  t  b
    t  b
f(t)  g(t) 	 g(t) (t 	 a)  h(t) (t 	 a)
f(t) 
g(t),
h(t), 0  t  a
    t  a
f(t)  2 	 3(t 	 2)  (t 	 3)
(t 	 3)
(t 	 2)
(t 	 a)
(t 	 1)
(t 	 a)
(t)  1 for t  0.
(t 	 a)
(t 	 a)  0
(t 	 a)
FIGURE 7.3.2
Graph of unit step
function
t
1
a
FIGURE 7.3.3
Function is
f(t)  (2t 	 3) (t 	 1)
1
y
t
FIGURE 7.3.4
Function is
f(t)  2 	 3(t 	 2)  (t 	 3)
−1
2
t
f(t)
DEFINITION 7.3.1
Unit Step Function
The unit step function
is deﬁned to be
(t 	 a) 
0,
1, 0  t  a
   t  a.
(t 	 a)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

294
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
FIGURE 7.3.5
Function f in Example 5
100
5
f(t)
t
FIGURE 7.3.6
Shift on t-axis
(a) f(t), t  0
(b) f(t  a)
(t  a)
t
f(t)
t
f(t)
a
zero for
0  t  a
one for
t  a
{f(t  a) 
(t  a)}     estf(t  a) 
(t  a) dt     estf(t  a) 
(t  a) dt     estf(t  a) dt.



a
0

a

a
Now if we let v  t 	 a, dv  dt in the last integral, then
PROOF
By the additive interval property of integrals,
can be written as two integrals:
(t 	 a) dt


0
 e	st f (t 	 a)
.
{ f (t 	 a) (t 	 a)} 

0
e	s(va) f (v) dv  e	as

0
e	sv f (v) dv  e	as{ f (t)}
We often wish to ﬁnd the Laplace transform of just a unit step function. This can be
from either Deﬁnition 7.1.1 or Theorem 7.3.2. If we identify f(t)  1 in Theorem 7.3.2,
then f(t 	 a)  1, 
, and so
.
(14)
{(t 	 a)}  e	as
s
F(s)  {1}  1>s
EXAMPLE 5
A Piecewise-Deﬁned Function
Express 
in terms of unit step functions. Graph.
SOLUTION
The graph of f is given in Figure 7.3.5. Now from (9) and (10) with 
a  5, g(t)  20t, and h(t)  0 we get 
.
Consider a general function y  f(t) deﬁned for t  0. The piecewise-deﬁned
function
(13)
plays a signiﬁcant role in the discussion that follows. As shown in Figure 7.3.6, for
a 
 0 the graph of the function 
coincides with the graph of
y
for 
(which is the entire graph of 
shifted a units to
the right on the t-axis), but is identically zero for 
We saw in Theorem 7.3.1 that an exponential multiple of f(t) results in a transla-
tion of the transform F(s) on the s-axis. As a consequence of the next theorem we see
that whenever F(s) is multiplied by an exponential function e	as, a 
 0, the inverse
transform of the product e	as F(s) is the function f shifted along the t-axis in the man-
ner illustrated in Figure 7.3.6(b). This result, presented next in its direct transform
version, is called the second translation theorem or second shifting theorem.
0  t  a.
y  f(t), t  0
t  a
 f(t 	 a)
y   f(t 	 a) (t 	 a)
f(t 	 a) (t 	 a) 
0,
f(t 	 a), 0  t  a
   t  a
f (t)  20t 	 20t (t 	 5)
f (t) 
20t,
0,  0  t  5
   t  5
THEOREM 7.3.2
Second Translation Theorem
If 
and a 
 0, then
.
{ f(t 	 a) (t 	 a)}  e	asF(s)
F(s)  { f(t)}
EXAMPLE 6
Figure 7.3.4 Revisited
Find the Laplace transform the function f in Figure 7.3.4.
SOLUTION
We use f expressed in terms of the unit step function
f(t)  2 	 3 (t 	 2)   (t 	 3)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.3
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES I
●
295
and the result given in (14):
Inverse Form of Theorem 7.3.2
If 
, the inverse form of
f(t)   	1{F(s)}
  2
s 	 3 e	2s
s
 e	3s
s .
 { f(t)}  2{1} 	 3{(t 	 2)}  {(t 	 3)}
EXAMPLE 7
Using Formula (15)
Evaluate
.
SOLUTION
(a) With the three identiﬁcations a  2, F(s)  1(s 	 4), and
	1{F(s)}  e4t, we have from (15)
.
(b) With a  p2, F(s)  s(s2  9), and 
, (15) yields
.
The last expression can be simpliﬁed somewhat by using the addition formula for the 
cosine. Verify that the result is the same as 
Alternative Form of Theorem 7.3.2
We are frequently confronted with
the problem of ﬁnding the Laplace transform of a product of a function g and a unit
step function 
where the function g lacks the precise shifted form 
in Theorem 7.3.2. To ﬁnd the Laplace transform of 
, it is possible to ﬁx
up g(t) into the required form 
by algebraic manipulations. For example, if
we wanted to use Theorem 7.3.2 to ﬁnd the Laplace transform of
, we
would have to force 
into the form 
You should work through the
details and verify that 
is an identity. Therefore
where each term on the right-hand side can now be evaluated by Theorem 7.3.2. But
since these manipulations are time consuming and often not obvious, it is simpler to
devise an alternative version of Theorem 7.3.2. Using Deﬁnition 7.1.1, the deﬁnition
of 
, and the substitution u  t 	 a, we obtain
.
That is,
.
(16)
{g(t)(t 	 a)}   e	as {g(t  a)}
{g(t) (t 	 a)} 

a
e	st g(t) dt 

0
e	s(ua)  g(u  a) du
(t 	 a)
{t2(t 	 2)}  {(t 	 2)2 (t 	 2)  4(t 	 2) (t 	 2)  4(t 	 2)},
t2  (t 	 2)2  4(t 	 2)  4
f(t 	 2).
g(t)  t2
t2(t 	 2)
f(t 	 a)
g(t)(t 	 a)
f(t 	 a)
(t 	 a)
	sin 3t t 	 
2.
 	1
s
s2  9
 e	s/2  cos 3t 	 
2 t 	 
2
 	1{F(s)}  cos 3t
 	1
1
s 	 4
 e	2s  e4(t	2) (t 	 2)
(b)  	1
s
s2  9
 e	s/2
(a)  	1
1
s 	 4
 e	2s
EXAMPLE 8
Second Translation Theorem—Alternative Form
Evaluate 
.
SOLUTION
With g(t)  cos t and a  p, then g(t  p)  cos(t  p)  	cos t
by the addition formula for the cosine function. Hence by (16),
{cos t (t 	 )}  	e	s  {cos t}  	
s
s2  1
 e	s.
{cos t (t 	 )}
Theorem 7.3.2, a 
 0, is
.
(15)
 	1{e	asF(s)}  f(t 	 a) (t 	 a)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
FIGURE 7.3.7
Graph of function (18)
in Example 9
_2
1
2
3
4
5
_1
t
y
2
π
π
3π
(18)
 
5e	t,
5e	t  3
2
  e	(t	)  3
2
  sin t  3
2
  cos t,
 0  t  
        t  .
; trigonometric identities
  5e	t  3
2
 [e	(t	)  sin t  cos t] (t 	 )
 y(t)  5e	t  3
2
 e	(t 	) (t 	 ) 	 3
2
 sin(t 	 ) (t 	 ) 	 3
2
  cos(t 	 ) (t 	 )
We obtained the graph of (18) shown in Figure 7.3.7 by using a graphing utility.
Beams
In Section 5.2 we saw that the static deﬂection y(x) of a uniform beam
of length L carrying load w(x) per unit length is found from the linear fourth-order
differential equation
(19)
where E is Young's modulus of elasticity and I is a moment of inertia of a cross section
of the beam. The Laplace transform is particularly useful in solving (19) when w(x)
is piecewise-deﬁned. However, to use the Laplace transform, we must tacitly assume
that y(x) and w(x) are deﬁned on (0, ) rather than on (0, L). Note, too, that the next
example is a boundary-value problem rather than an initial-value problem.
EI  d4y
dx4  w(x),
FIGURE 7.3.8
Embedded beam with
variable load in Example 10
wall
x
y
L
w(x)
	1
1
s  1
 e	s  e	(t	) (t 	 ),    	1
1
s2  1
 e	s  sin(t 	 ) (t 	 ),
and
.
Thus the inverse of (17) is
 	1
s
s2  1
 e	s  cos(t 	 ) (t 	 )
EXAMPLE 9
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve 
SOLUTION
The function f can be written as 
, so by linear-
ity, the results of Example 7, and the usual partial fractions, we have
.
(17)
Now proceeding as we did in Example 7, it follows from (15) with a  p that the
inverses of the terms inside the brackets are
Y(s) 
5
s  1 	 3
2 		
1
s  1
 e	s 
1
s2  1
 e	s 
s
s2  1
 e	s
 (s  1)Y(s)  5 	
3s
s2  1
 e	s
 sY(s) 	 y(0)  Y(s)  	3 
s
s2  1
 e	s
 {y}  {y}  3{cos t (t 	 )}
f(t)  3 cos t (t 	 )
y  y  f(t),  y(0)  5, where f(t) 
0,
3 cos t, 0  t  
   t  .
EXAMPLE 10
A Boundary-Value Problem
A beam of length L is embedded at both ends, as shown in Figure 7.3.8. Find the
deﬂection of the beam when the load is given by
w(x) 
w01 	 2
L
 x,
0,
     0  x  L>2
 L>2  x  L.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.3
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES I
●
297
SOLUTION
Recall that because the beam is embedded at both ends, the boundary
conditions are y(0)  0, y(0)  0, y(L)  0, y(L)  0. Now by (10) we can express
w(x) in terms of the unit step function:
Transforming (19) with respect to the variable x gives
or
If we let c1  y(0) and c2  y(0), then
,
and consequently
Y(s)  c1
s3  c2
s4  2w0
EIL
 	
L>2
s5 	 1
s6  1
s6
 e	Ls/2
 s4Y(s) 	 sy(0) 	 y(0)  2w0
EIL
 	
L>2
s
	 1
s2  1
s2
 e	Ls/2
.
 EIs4Y(s) 	 s3y(0) 	 s2y(0) 	 sy(0) 	 y(0)  2w0
L
 	
L>2
s
	 1
s2  1
s2
 e	Ls/2
  2w0
L
 	
L
2 	 x x 	 L
2 x 	 L
2
.
 w(x)  w01 	 2
L
 x 	 w01 	 2
L
 x x 	 L
2
  c1
2 x2  c2
6 x3 
w0
60 EIL
 	
5L
2  x4 	 x5 x 	 L
2
5
x 	 L
2
.
 y(x)  c1
2!  	1
2!
s3  c2
3!  	1
3!
s4  2w0
EIL
 	
L>2
4!   	1
4!
s5 	 1
5!  	1
5!
s6  1
5!  	1
5!
s6
 e	Ls/ 2
Applying the conditions y(L)  0 and y(L)  0 to the last result yields a system of
equations for c1 and c2:
Solving, we ﬁnd c1  23w0L2(960EI) and c2  	9w0L(40EI). Thus the deﬂec-
tion is given by
y(x)  23w0L2
1920EI
  x2 	 3w0L
80EI
  x3 
w0
60EIL
 	
5L
2
 x4 	 x5 x 	 L
2
5
x 	 L
2
.
 c1 L  c2 L2
2  85w0L3
960EI  0.
 c1 L2
2  c2 L3
6  49w0L4
1920EI  0
EXERCISES 7.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-12.
7.3.1
TRANSLATION ON THE s-AXIS
In Problems 1-20 ﬁnd either F(s) or f(t), as indicated.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10. e3t 9 	 4t  10 sin t
2
{(1 	 et  3e	4t) cos 5t}
{e	2t cos 4t}
{et sin 3t}
{e2t(t 	 1)2}
{t(et  e2t)2}
{t10e	7t}
{t3e	2t}
{te	6t}
{te10t}
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.  	1
(s  1)2
(s  2)4
 	1
2s 	 1
s2(s  1)3
 	1
5s
(s 	 2)2
 	1
s
(s  1)2
 	1
2s  5
s2  6s  34
 	1
s
s2  4s  5
 	1
1
s2  2s  5
 	1
1
s2 	 6s  10
 	1
1
(s 	 1)4
 	1
1
(s  2)3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
In Problems 21-30 use the Laplace transform to solve the
given initial-value problem.
21. y  4y  e	4t,
y(0)  2
22. y 	 y  1  tet,
y(0)  0
23. y  2y  y  0,
y(0)  1, y(0)  1
24. y 	 4y  4y  t3e2t,
y(0)  0, y(0)  0
25. y 	 6y  9y  t,
y(0)  0, y(0)  1
26. y 	 4y  4y  t3,
y(0)  1, y(0)  0
27. y 	 6y  13y  0,
y(0)  0, y(0)  	3
28. 2y  20y  51y  0,
y(0)  2, y(0)  0
29. y 	 y  et cos t,
y(0)  0, y(0)  0
30. y 	 2y  5y  1  t,
y(0)  0, y(0)  4
In Problems 31 and 32 use the Laplace transform and
the procedure outlined in Example 10 to solve the given
boundary-value problem.
31. y  2y  y  0,
y(0)  2, y(1)  2
32. y  8y  20y  0,
y(0)  0, y(p)  0
33. A 4-pound weight stretches a spring 2 feet. The weight
is released from rest 18 inches above the equilibrium
position, and the resulting motion takes place in a
medium offering a damping force numerically equal to
times the instantaneous velocity. Use the Laplace
transform to ﬁnd the equation of motion x(t).
34. Recall that the differential equation for the instanta-
neous charge q(t) on the capacitor in an LRC-series
circuit is given by
.
(20)
See Section 5.1. Use the Laplace transform to ﬁnd q(t)
when L  1 h, R  20 , C  0.005 f, E(t)  150 V,
t 
 0, q(0)  0, and i(0)  0. What is the current i(t)?
35. Consider a battery of constant voltage E0 that charges
the capacitor shown in Figure 7.3.9. Divide equa-
tion (20) by L and deﬁne 2l  RL and v2  1LC.
Use the Laplace transform to show that the solution
q(t) of q  2lq  v2q  E0L subject to q(0)  0,
i(0)  0 is
q(t) 
E0C	1 	 e	t (cosh 12 	 2t
  


12 	 2 sinh 12 	 2t)
,  
 ,
E0C[1 	 e	t (1  t)],          ,
E0C	1 	 e	t (cos 12 	 2t
  


12 	 2
 sin 12 	 2t) 
,     .
L d 2q
dt2  R
  dq
dt  1
C q  E(t)
7
8
36. Use the Laplace transform to find the charge q(t)
in
an
RC
series circuit when q(0)  0 and
E(t)  E0e	kt, k 
 0. Consider two cases: k  1RC
and k  1RC.
7.3.2
TRANSLATION ON THE t-AXIS
In Problems 37-48 ﬁnd either F(s) or f(t), as indicated.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
In Problems 49-54 match the given graph with one of 
the functions in (a)-(f). The graph of f(t) is given in
Figure 7.3.10.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f) f (t 	 a) (t 	 a) 	 f (t 	 a) (t 	 b)
f (t) (t 	 a) 	 f(t) (t 	 b)
f (t) 	 f (t) (t 	 b)
f (t) (t 	 a)
f (t 	 b) (t 	 b)
f (t) 	 f (t) (t 	 a)
 	1
e	2s
s2(s 	 1)
 	1
e	s
s(s  1)
 	1
se	s/2
s2  4
 	1
e	s
s2  1
 	1
(1  e	2s)2
s  2 
 	1
e	2s
s3 
sin t t 	 
2
{cos 2t (t 	 )}
{(3t  1)(t 	 1)}
{t (t 	 2)}
{e2	t (t 	 2)}
{(t 	 1)(t 	 1)}
FIGURE 7.3.9
Series circuit in Problem 35
E0
R
C
L
FIGURE 7.3.10
Graph for Problems 49-54
t
f(t)
a
b
49.
FIGURE 7.3.11
Graph for Problem 49
t
f(t)
a
b
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.3
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES I
●
299
FIGURE 7.3.12
Graph for Problem 50
t
f(t)
a
b
FIGURE 7.3.13
Graph for Problem 51
t
f(t)
a
b
FIGURE 7.3.14
Graph for Problem 52
t
f(t)
a
b
FIGURE 7.3.15
Graph for Problem 53
t
f(t)
a
b
FIGURE 7.3.16
Graph for Problem 54
t
f(t)
a
b
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
In Problems 55-62 write each function in terms of unit step
functions. Find the Laplace transform of the given function.
55.
56.
57. f (t) 
0,
t2, 0  t  1
         t  1
f (t) 
1,
0,
1,
 0  t  4
 4  t  5
         t  5
f (t) 
2,
	2, 0  t  3
         t  3
58.
59.
60. f (t) 
sin t,
0,     
0  t  2
        t  2
f (t) 
t,
0,
0  t  2
        t  2
f (t) 
0,
sin t, 0  t  3>2
         t  3>2
61.
62.
FIGURE 7.3.18
Graph for Problem 62
3
2
1
staircase function
t
f(t)
1
2
3
4
FIGURE 7.3.17
Graph for Problem 61
1
rectangular pulse
t
b
a
f(t)
In Problems 63-70 use the Laplace transform to solve the
given initial-value problem.
63. y  y  f(t),
y(0)  0, where f(t) 
64. y  y  f(t),
y(0)  0, where
65. y  2y  f(t),
y(0)  0, where
66.
where
67.
,
y(0)  1, y(0)  0
68.
,
y(0)  0, y(0)  1
69.
where
70. y  4y  3y  1 	 (t 	 2) 	 (t 	 4)  (t 	 6),
y(0)  0, y(0)  0
 f (t) 
0,
1,
0,
0  t  
  t  2
       t  2
y  y  f(t), y(0)  0, y(0)  1,
y 	 5y  6y  (t 	 1)
y   4y  sin t (t 	 2)
 f(t) 
1,
0,
0  t  1
        t  1
y  4y  f (t), y(0)  0, y(0)  	1,
 f(t) 
t,
0,
0  t  1
        t  1
f (t) 
1,
	1,
0  t  1
        t  1

0,
5,
0  t  1
        t  1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
71. Suppose a 32-pound weight stretches a spring 2 feet. If the
weight is released from rest at the equilibrium position,
ﬁnd the equation of motion x(t) if an impressed force
f(t)  20t acts on the system for 0  t  5 and is then
removed (see Example 5). Ignore any damping forces.
Use a graphing utility to graph x(t) on the interval [0, 10].
72. Solve Problem 71 if the impressed force f(t)  sin t acts
on the system for 0  t  2p and is then removed.
In Problems 73 and 74 use the Laplace transform to ﬁnd the
charge q(t) on the capacitor in an RC-series circuit subject to
the given conditions.
73. q(0)  0, R  2.5 , C  0.08 f, E(t) given in
Figure 7.3.19
t
E(t)
3
5
FIGURE 7.3.19
E(t) in Problem 73
t
E(t)
1.5
30
30et
FIGURE 7.3.20
E(t) in Problem 74
74. q(0)  q0, R  10 , C  0.1 f, E(t) given in
Figure 7.3.20
75. (a) Use the Laplace transform to find the current
i(t) in a single-loop LR-series circuit when
i(0)  0, L  1 h, R  10 , and E(t) is as given
in Figure 7.3.21.
(b) Use a computer graphing program to graph i(t) for
0  t  6. Use the graph to estimate imax and
imin, the maximum and minimum values of the
current.
FIGURE 7.3.21
E(t) in Problem 75
FIGURE 7.3.22
E(t) in Problem 76
/2
1
−1
t
E(t)
3 /2
π
sin t, 0 ≤t < 3 /2
π
π
π
t
3
1
E(t)
E0
76. (a) Use the Laplace transform to ﬁnd the charge q(t) 
on the capacitor in an RC-series circuit when 
q(0)  0, R  50 , C  0.01 f, and E(t) is as
given in Figure 7.3.22.
(b) Assume that E0  100 V. Use a computer graphing
program to graph q(t) for 0  t  6. Use the
graph to estimate qmax, the maximum value of
the charge.
77. A cantilever beam is embedded at its left end and free
at its right end. Use the Laplace transform to ﬁnd the
deﬂection y(x) when the load is given by
78. Solve Problem 77 when the load is given by
79. Find the deﬂection y(x) of a cantilever beam embedded
at its left end and free at its right end when the load is as
given in Example 10.
80. A beam is embedded at its left end and simply supported
at its right end. Find the deﬂection y(x) when the load is
as given in Problem 77.
Mathematical Model
81. Cake Inside an Oven Reread Example 4 in Sec-
tion 3.1 on the cooling of a cake that is taken out of an
oven.
(a) Devise a mathematical model for the temperature of
a cake while it is inside the oven based on the fol-
lowing assumptions: At t  0 the cake mixture is at
the room temperature of 70°; the oven is not pre-
heated, so at t  0, when the cake mixture is placed
into the oven, the temperature inside the oven is also
70°; the temperature of the oven increases linearly
until t  4 minutes, when the desired temperature
of 300° is attained; the oven temperature is a con-
stant 300° for t  4.
(b) Use the Laplace transform to solve the initial-value
problem in part (a).
 w(x) 
0,  
w0,
0, 
   0  x  L>3
 L> 3  x  2L> 3
  2L> 3  x  L.
 w(x) 
w0,
0,  
0  x  L> 2
 L> 2  x  L.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.4
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES II
●
301
Discussion Problems
82. Discuss how you would ﬁx up each of the following
functions so that Theorem 7.3.2 could be used directly
to ﬁnd the given Laplace transform. Check your
answers using (16) of this section.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
83. (a) Assume that Theorem 7.3.1 holds when the sym-
bol a is replaced by ki, where k is a real number
{(t2 	 3t)(t 	 2)}
{cos t (t 	 )}
{et (t 	 5)}
{(2t  1)(t 	 1)}
and i2  	1. Show that 
can be used to
deduce
(b) Now use the Laplace transform to solve the initial-
value 
problem 
x  v2x  cos vt,
x(0)  0,
x(0)  0.
{t sin kt} 
2ks
(s2  k2)2.
{t cos kt}  s2 	 k2
(s2  k2)2
{tekti}
7.4.1
DERIVATIVES OF A TRANSFORM
Multiplying a Function by tn
The Laplace transform of the product of a
function f(t) with t can be found by differentiating the Laplace transform of f(t). To
motivate this result, let us assume that 
exists and that it is possible
to interchange the order of differentiation and integration. Then
;
that is,
.
We can use the last result to ﬁnd the Laplace transform of t2f(t):
{tf(t)}  	 d
ds { f (t)}
d
ds
 F(s)  d
ds
 

0
 e	st f (t) dt 

0
 

s
 [e	st f (t)] dt  	

0
 e	st tf (t) dt  	{tf (t)}
F(s)  { f (t)}
.
{t2 f (t)}  {t  tf(t)}  	 d
ds
 {tf (t)}  	 d
ds
 	 d
ds
  {f (t)}  d 2
ds2
  { f (t)}
The preceding two cases suggest the general result for 
.
{tn f(t)}
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES II
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Deﬁnition 7.1.1
●Theorems 7.3.1 and 7.3.2
INTRODUCTION
In this section we develop several more operational properties of the
Laplace transform. Speciﬁcally, we shall see how to ﬁnd the transform of a function f(t) that is
multiplied by a monomial t n, the transform of a special type of integral, and the transform of a pe-
riodic function. The last two transform properties allow us to solve some equations that we have
not encountered up to this point: Volterra integral equations, integrodifferential equations, and or-
dinary differential equations in which the input function is a periodic piecewise-deﬁned function.
7.4
THEOREM 7.4.1
Derivatives of Transforms
If 
and n  1, 2, 3, . . . , then
.
{tn f(t)}  (	1)n   dn
dsn
  F(s)
F(s)  { f (t)}
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
EXAMPLE 1
Using Theorem 7.4.1
Evaluate 
.
SOLUTION
With f(t)  sin kt, F(s)  k(s2  k2), and n  1, Theorem 7.4.1 gives
.
If we want to evaluate 
and 
, all we need do, in turn, is
take the negative of the derivative with respect to s of the result in Example 1 and
then take the negative of the derivative with respect to s of 
.
Note
To ﬁnd transforms of functions tneat we can use either Theorem 7.3.1
or Theorem 7.4.1. For example,
Theorem 7.3.1:
.
Theorem 7.4.1:
.
 {te3t}  	 d
ds
 {e3t}  	 d
ds 
1
s 	 3  (s 	 3)	2 
1
(s 	 3)2
{te3t}  {t}s :s	3  1
s2s:s	3 
1
(s 	 3)2
{t2 sin kt}
{t3 sin kt}
{t2 sin kt}
{t sin kt}  	 d
ds
 {sin kt}  	 d
ds
 
k
s2  k2 
2ks
(s2  k2)2
{t sin kt}
EXAMPLE 2
An Initial-Value Problem
Solve x  16x  cos 4t,
x(0)  0,
x(0)  1.
SOLUTION
The initial-value problem could describe the forced, undamped, and
resonant motion of a mass on a spring. The mass starts with an initial velocity of
1 ft/s in the downward direction from the equilibrium position.
Transforming the differential equation gives
.
Now we just saw in Example 1 that
,
(1)
and so with the identiﬁcation k  4 in (1) and in part (d) of Theorem 7.2.1, we obtain
7.4.2
TRANSFORMS OF INTEGRALS
Convolution
If functions f and g are piecewise continuous on the interval
  1
4 sin 4t  1
8 t sin 4t.
 x(t)  1
4  	1
4
s2  16  1
8  	1
8s
(s2  16)2
 	1
2ks
(s2  k2)2  t sin kt
(s2  16) X(s)  1 
s
s2  16    or    X(s) 
1
s2  16 
s
(s2  16)2
[0, ), then a special product, denoted by f  g, is deﬁned by the integral
(2)
and is called the convolution of f and g. The convolution f  g is a function of t.
For example,
.
(3)
et  sin t 
t
0
 e
 
sin(t 	 ) d  1
2
 (	sin t 	 cos t  et)
f  g 
t
0
 f () g(t 	 ) d
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.4
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES II
●
303
It is left as an exercise to show that
that is, f  g  g  f. This means that the convolution of two functions is commutative.
It is not true that the integral of a product of functions is the product of the
integrals. However, it is true that the Laplace transform of the special product (2) is
the product of the Laplace transform of f and g. This means that it is possible to ﬁnd
the Laplace transform of the convolution of two functions without actually evaluat-
ing the integral as we did in (3). The result that follows is known as the convolution
theorem.

t
0
 f() g(t 	 ) d 
t
0
 f(t 	 ) g() d;
PROOF
Let
and
.
Proceeding formally, we have
Holding t ﬁxed, we let t  t  b, dt  db, so that
In the tt-plane we are integrating over the shaded region in Figure 7.4.1. Since f and
g are piecewise continuous on [0, ) and of exponential order, it is possible to inter-
change the order of integration:
F(s)G(s) 

0
f () d


e	stg(t 	 ) dt.
 

0
f () d

0
 e	s()g() d.
 

0

0
 e	s() f ()g() d d
 F(s)G(s) 

0
 e	s
 
f () d
 

0
 e	s
 
g() d
 G(s)  {g(t)} 

0
e	sg() d
 F(s)  { f(t)} 

0
e	s f() d
F(s) G(s) 

0
 e	st dt 
t
0
 f ()g(t 	 ) d 

0
 e	st 
t
0
 f () g(t 	 ) ddt  {f  g}.
.

t
0
 e
 
sin(t 	 ) d  {et}  {sin t} 
1
s 	 1 
1
s2  1 
1
(s 	 1)(s2  1)
FIGURE 7.4.1
Changing order of
integration from t ﬁrst to t ﬁrst
t
τ
τ
τ = t
: 0 to t
t:  to ∞
τ
THEOREM 7.4.2
Convolution Theorem
If f(t) and g(t) are piecewise continuous on [0, ) and of exponential 
order, then
.
{ f  g}  { f (t)} {g(t)}  F(s)G(s)
EXAMPLE 3
Transform of a Convolution
Evaluate
SOLUTION
With f(t)  et and g(t)  sin t, the convolution theorem states that
the Laplace transform of the convolution of f and g is the product of their Laplace
transforms:

t
0
 e
 
sin(t 	 ) d.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
Inverse Form of Theorem 7.4.2
The convolution theorem is sometimes
useful in ﬁnding the inverse Laplace transform of the product of two Laplace
transforms. From Theorem 7.4.2 we have
(4)
Many of the results in the table of Laplace transforms in Appendix III can be derived
using (4). For example, in the next example we obtain entry 25 of the table:
.
(5)
{sin kt 	 kt cos kt} 
2k3
(s2  k2)2
 	1{F(s)G(s)}  f  g.
EXAMPLE 4
Inverse Transform as a Convolution
Evaluate 
.
SOLUTION
Let 
so that
.
In this case (4) gives
.
(6)
With the aid of the product-to-sum trigonometric identity
and the substitutions A  kt and B  k(t 	 t) we can carry out the integration in (6):
Multiplying both sides by 2k3 gives the inverse form of (5).
Transform of an Integral
When g(t)  1 and 
, the
convolution theorem implies that the Laplace transform of the integral of f is
.
(7)
The inverse form of (7),
,
(8)
can be used in lieu of partial fractions when sn is a factor of the denominator and
is easy to integrate. For example, we know for f(t)  sin t that
and so by (8)
and so on.
  	1
1
s3(s2  1)   	1
1>s2(s2  1)
s
 
t
0
 ( 	 sin ) d  1
2 t2 	 1  cos t
  	1
1
s2(s2  1)   	1
1>s(s2  1)
s
 
t
0
 (1 	 cos ) d  t 	 sin t
  	1
1
s(s2  1)   	1
1>(s2  1)
s
 
t
0
 sin  d  1 	 cos t
F(s)  1>(s2  1),
f(t)   	1{F(s)}

t
0
  f() d   	1
F(s)
s 

t
0
  f() d  F(s)
s
{g(t)}  G(s)  1>s
  sin kt 	 kt cos kt
2k3
.
  1
2k2
 	
1
2k sin k(2 	 t) 	  cos kt
t
0
  	1
1
(s2  k2)2  1
2k2 
t
0
 [cos k(2 	 t) 	 cos kt] d
sin A sin B  1
2
 [cos(A 	 B) 	 cos(A  B)]
 	1
1
(s2  k2)2  1
k2 
t
0
 sin k sin k(t 	 ) d
f(t)  g(t)  1
k
  	1
k
s2  k2  1
k sin kt
F(s)  G(s) 
1
s2  k2
 	1
1
(s2  k2)2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.4
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES II
●
305
Volterra Integral Equation
The convolution theorem and the result in (7)
are useful in solving other types of equations in which an unknown function appears
under an integral sign. In the next example we solve a Volterra integral equation
for f(t),
.
(9)
The functions g(t) and h(t) are known. Notice that the integral in (9) has the convo-
lution form (2) with the symbol h playing the part of g.
f(t)  g(t) 
t
0
 f() h(t 	 ) d
FIGURE 7.4.2
LRC-series circuit
C
L
E
R
EXAMPLE 5
An Integral Equation
Solve 
.
SOLUTION
In the integral we identify h(t 	 t)  et	t so that h(t)  et. We take
the Laplace transform of each term; in particular, by Theorem 7.4.2 the transform of
the integral is the product of 
and 
:
.
After solving the last equation for F(s) and carrying out the partial fraction
decomposition, we find
.
The inverse transform then gives
Series Circuits
In a single-loop or series circuit, Kirchhoff's second law states
that the sum of the voltage drops across an inductor, resistor, and capacitor is equal
to the impressed voltage E(t). Now it is known that the voltage drops across an in-
ductor, resistor, and capacitor are, respectively,
,
where i(t) is the current and L, R, and C are constants. It follows that the current in a
circuit, such as that shown in Figure 7.4.2, is governed by the integrodifferential
equation
.
(10)
L  di
dt  Ri(t)  1
C 
t
0
 i() d  E(t)
L  di
dt,  Ri(t),  and  1
C 
t
0
 i() d
  3t2 	 t3  1 	 2e	t.
 f(t)  3 	1
2!
s3 	  	1
3!
s4   	1
1
s 	 2 	1
1
s  1
F(s)  6
s3 	 6
s4  1
s 	
2
s  1
F(s)  3  2
s3 	
1
s  1 	 F(s) 
1
s 	 1
{et}  1>(s 	 1)
{ f(t)}  F(s)
f(t)  3t2 	 e	t 	
t
0
 f() et	 d  for f(t)
EXAMPLE 6
An Integrodifferential Equation
Determine the current i(t) in a single-loop LRC-series circuit when L  0.1 h, 
R  2 , C  0.1 f, i(0)  0, and the impressed voltage is
.
E(t)  120t 	 120t (t 	 1)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
FIGURE 7.4.3
Graph of current i(t)
in Example 6
1
0.5
2
1.5
2.5
20
10
_30
_20
_10
t
i 
SOLUTION
With the given data equation (10) becomes
Now by (7), 
 I(s)s, where 
. Thus the Laplace
transform of the integrodifferential equation is
.
; by (16) of Section 7.3
Multiplying this equation by 10s, using s2  20s  100  (s  10)2, and then solving
for I(s) gives
.
By partial fractions,
From the inverse form of the second translation theorem, (15) of Section 7.3, we
ﬁnally obtain
Written as a piecewise-deﬁned function, the current is
Using this last expression and a CAS, we graph i(t) on each of the two intervals and
then combine the graphs. Note in Figure 7.4.3 that even though the input E(t) is
discontinuous, the output or response i(t) is a continuous function.
Post Script—Green's Functions Redux
By applying the Laplace transform
to the initial-value problem
where a and b are constants, we ﬁnd that the transform of y(t) is
where 
. By rewriting the foregoing transform as the product
we can use the inverse form of the convolution theorem (4) to write the solution of
the IVP as
(11)
y(t) 
t
0
g(t 	 ) f()d,
Y(s) 
1
s2  as  bF(s)
F(s)  {f(t)}
Y(s) 
F(s)
s2  as  b,
y  ay  by  f(t), y(0)  0, y(0)  0,
i(t) 
12 	 12e	10t 	 120te	10t,
	12e	10t  12e	10(t	1) 	 120te	10t 	 1080(t 	 1)e	10(t	1), 0  t  1
         t  1.
	 120te	10t 	 1080(t 	 1)e	10(t	1) (t 	 1).
 i(t)  12[1 	 (t 	 1)] 	 12[e	10t 	 e	10(t	1)(t 	 1)]
 1>100
s  10
 e	s 
1>10
(s  10)2
 e	s 	
1
(s  10)2
 e	s
.
I(s)  1200 	
1>100
s
	 1>100
s  10 	
1>10
(s  10)2 	 1>100
s
 e	s
I(s)  1200 	
1
s(s  10)2 	
1
s(s  10)2
 e	s 	
1
(s  10)2
 e	s
0.1sI(s)  2I(s)  10 I(s)
s
 120 	
1
s2 	 1
s2
 e	s 	 1
s
 e	s
I(s)  {i(t)}
{t
0 i() d}
0.1 di
dt  2i  10
t
0
i() d  120t 	 120t (t 	 1).
Optional material if
Section 4.8 was covered.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.4
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES II
●
307
where 
and 
On the other hand, we
know from (10) of Section 4.8 that the solution of the IVP is also given by
(12)
where 
is the Green's function for the differential equation.
By comparing (11) and (12) we see that the Green's function for the differential
equation is related to 
by
(13)
For example, for the initial-value problem 
we ﬁnd
Thus from (13) we see that the Green's function for the DE 
is
See Example 4 in Section 4.8.
7.4.3
TRANSFORM OF A PERIODIC FUNCTION
Periodic Function
If a periodic function has period T, T 
 0, then
G(t, )  g(t 	 )  1
2 sin 2(t 	 ).
y  4y  f(t)
	1
1
s2  4  1
2 sin 2t  g(t).
y  4y  f(t), y(0)  0, y(0)  0
G(t, )  g(t 	 ).
	1
1
s2  as  b  g(t)
G(t, t)
y(t) 
t
0
G(t, ) f() d,
	1{F(s)}  f(t).
	1
1
s2  as  b  g(t)
In Example 4 of Section 4.8, the roles of the
symbols x and t are played by t and  in this
discussion.

THEOREM 7.4.3
Transform of a Periodic Function
If f(t) is piecewise continuous on [0, ), of exponential order, and periodic with
period T, then
{ f (t)} 
1
1 	 e	sT 
T
0
e	st f (t) dt.
PROOF
Write the Laplace transform of f as two integrals:
.
When we let t  u  T, the last integral becomes
.
Therefore
.
Solving the equation in the last line for 
proves the theorem.
{ f(t)}
{ f(t)} 
T
0
 e	st f(t) dt  e	sT { f(t)}


T
 e	st f (t) dt 

0
 e	s(uT ) f (u  T ) du  e	sT 

0
 e	su f (u) du  e	sT { f (t)}
{ f(t)} 
T
0
 e	st f(t) dt 

T
 e	st f(t) dt
EXAMPLE 7
Transform of a Periodic Function
Find the Laplace transform of the periodic function shown in Figure 7.4.4.
SOLUTION
The function E(t) is called a square wave and has period T  2. For 
0  t  2, E(t) can be deﬁned by
E(t) 
1,
0, 0  t  1
 1  t  2
t
E(t)
1
4
3
2
1
FIGURE 7.4.4
Square wave in
Example 7
f (t  T )  f (t). The next theorem shows that the Laplace transform of a periodic
function can be obtained by integration over one period.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
From
we can then rewrite (16) as
1
s(s  R>L)  L>R
s
	
L>R
s  R>L
.
  1
R
 
1
s 	 e	s
s  e	2s
s
	 e	3s
s
    	 1
R
 
1
s  R>L 	
1
s  R>L
  e	s 
e	2s
s  R>L 	
e	3s
s  R>L    
 I(s)  1
R 
1
s 	
1
s  R>L(1 	 e	s  e	2s 	 e	3s    )
By applying the form of the second translation theorem to each term of both series,
we obtain
	 1
R
 (e	Rt/L 	 e	R(t	1)/L  (t 	 1)  e	R(t	2)/L  (t 	 2) 	 e	R(t	3)/L  (t 	 3)    ) 
i(t)  1
R
 (1 	 (t 	 1)  (t 	 2) 	 (t 	 3)    )
or, equivalently,
To interpret the solution, let us assume for the sake of illustration that R  1, L  1,
and 0  t  4. In this case
i(t)  1
R
 (1 	 e	Rt/L)  1
R
 

n1
(	1)n (1	e	R(t	n)/L) (t 	 n).
;
i(t)  1 	 e	t 	 (1 	 et	1) (t 	 1)  (1 	 e	(t	2)) (t 	 2) 	 (1 	 e	(t	3)) (t 	 3)
and outside the interval by E(t  2)  E(t). Now from Theorem 7.4.3
.
(14)

1
s(1  e	s)
; 1 	 e	2s  (1  e	s)(1 	 e	s)

1
1 	 e	2s 1 	 e	s
s
 {E(t)} 
1
1 	 e	2s
  
2
0
 e	st E(t) dt 
1
1 	 e	2s
 	
1
0
 e	st  1dt 
2
1
 e	st  0 dt
1
1  x  1 	 x  x2 	 x3      becomes  
1
1  e	s  1 	 e	s  e	2s 	 e	3s     .
EXAMPLE 8
A Periodic Impressed Voltage
The differential equation for the current i(t) in a single-loop LR-series circuit is
.
(15)
Determine the current i(t) when i(0)  0 and E(t) is the square wave function shown
in Figure 7.4.4.
SOLUTION
If we use the result in (14) of the preceding example, the Laplace trans-
form of the DE is
.
(16)
To ﬁnd the inverse Laplace transform of the last function, we ﬁrst make use of geo-
metric series. With the identiﬁcation x  e	s, s 
 0, the geometric series
LsI(s)  RI(s) 
1
s(1  e	s)    or    I(s) 
1>L
s(s  R>L) 
1
1  e	s
L  di
dt  Ri  E(t)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.4
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES II
●
309
in other words,
The graph of i(t) for 0  t  4, given in Figure 7.4.5, was obtained with the help
of a CAS.
i(t) 
1 	 e	t,
	e	t  e	(t	1),
1 	 e	t  e	(t	1) 	 e	(t	2),
	e	t  e	(t	1) 	 e	(t	2)  e	(t	3),
 0  t  1
 1  t  2
 2  t  3
 3  t  4.
2
1
3
4
2
1.5
1
0.5
t
i
FIGURE 7.4.5
Graph of current i(t) in
Example 8
EXERCISES 7.4
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-12.
7.4.1
DERIVATIVES OF A TRANSFORM
In Problems 1-8 use Theorem 7.4.1 to evaluate the given
Laplace transform.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
In Problems 9-14 use the Laplace transform to solve
the given initial-value problem. Use the table of Laplace
transforms in Appendix III as needed.
9. y  y  t sin t,
y(0)  0
10. y 	 y  tet sin t,
y(0)  0
11. y  9y  cos 3t,
y(0)  2,
y(0)  5
12. y  y  sin t,
y(0)  1,
y(0)  	1
13. y  16y  f(t),
y(0)  0,
y(0)  1, where
14. y  y  f(t),
y(0)  1,
y(0)  0, where
In Problems 15 and 16 use a graphing utility to graph the
indicated solution.
15. y(t) of Problem 13 for 0  t  2p
16. y(t) of Problem 14 for 0  t  3p
In some instances the Laplace transform can be used to solve
linear differential equations with variable monomial coefﬁ-
cients. In Problems 17 and 18 use Theorem 7.4.1 to reduce
the given differential equation to a linear ﬁrst-order DE
in the transformed function 
. Solve the ﬁrst-
order DE for Y(s) and then ﬁnd 
.
17. ty 	 y  2t2,
y(0)  0
18. 2y  ty 	 2y  10,
y(0)  y(0)  0
y(t)   	1{Y(s)}
Y(s)  {y(t)}
 f(t) 
1,
sin t, 0  t  >2
 
t  >2
 f(t) 
cos 4t,
0,
  0  t  
 
t  
{te	3t cos 3t}
{te2t sin 6t}
{t2 cos t}
{t2 sinh t}
{t sinh 3t}
{t cos 2t}
{t3et}
{te	10t}
7.4.2
TRANSFORMS OF INTEGRALS
In Problems 19-30 use Theorem 7.4.2 to evaluate the given
Laplace transform. Do not evaluate the integral before
transforming.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
In Problems 31-34 use (8) to evaluate the given inverse
transform.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35. The table in Appendix III does not contain an entry for
.
(a) Use (4) along with the results in (5) to evaluate this
inverse transform. Use a CAS as an aid in evaluating
the convolution integral.
(b) Reexamine your answer to part (a). Could you have
obtained the result in a different manner?
36. Use the Laplace transform and the results of Problem 35
to solve the initial-value problem
.
Use a graphing utility to graph the solution.
y  y  sin t  t sin t,  y(0)  0, y(0)  0
 	1
8k3s
(s2  k2)3
 	1
1
s(s 	 a)2
 	1
1
s3(s 	 1)
 	1
1
s2(s 	 1)
 	1
1
s(s 	 1)
t 
t
0
  e	 d
t 
t
0
 sin d

t
0
 sin  cos (t 	 ) d

t
0
  et	 d

t
0
  sin  d

t
0
 e	 cos  d

t
0
 cos  d

t
0
 e d
{e2t  sin t}
{e	t  et cos t}
{t2  tet}
{1  t3}
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

310
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
FIGURE 7.4.7
Graph for Problem 50
FIGURE 7.4.8
Graph for Problem 51
FIGURE 7.4.9
Graph for Problem 52
FIGURE 7.4.10
Graph for Problem 53
1
square wave
t
2a
a
f(t)
3a
4a
sawtooth function
t
2b
b
a
f(t)
3b
4b
1
triangular wave
t
2
f(t)
3
4
1
1
full-wave rectification of sin t
t
f(t)
4
3
2
π
π
π
π
50.
51.
52.
53.
FIGURE 7.4.11
Graph for Problem 54
4
3
2
π
π
π
π
1
half-wave rectification of sin t
t
f(t)
54.
In Problems 55 and 56 solve equation (15) subject to
i(0)  0 with E(t) as given. Use a graphing utility to graph
the solution for 0  t  4 in the case when L  1 and R  1.
55. E(t) is the meander function in Problem 49 with
amplitude 1 and a  1.
56. E(t) is the sawtooth function in Problem 51 with
amplitude 1 and b  1.
In Problems 37-46 use the Laplace transform to solve the
given integral equation or integrodifferential equation.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
In Problems 47 and 48 solve equation (10) subject to i(0)  0
with L, R, C, and E(t) as given. Use a graphing utility to graph
the solution for 0  t  3.
47. L  0.1 h, R  3 , C  0.05 f,
48. L  0.005 h, R  1 , C  0.02 f,
7.4.3
TRANSFORM OF A PERIODIC
FUNCTION
In Problems 49-54 use Theorem 7.4.3 to ﬁnd the Laplace
transform of the given periodic function.
E(t)  100[t 	 (t 	 1)(t 	 1)]
E(t)  100[(t 	 1) 	 (t 	 2)]
dy
dt  6y(t)  9 
t
0
 y() d  1, y(0)  0
y(t)  1 	 sin t 	
t
0
 y() d, y(0)  0
t 	 2 f (t) 
t
0
 (e 	 e	) f (t 	 ) d
f (t)  1  t 	 8
3
 
t
0
 ( 	 t)3 f () d
f (t)  cos t 
t
0
 e	
  
f (t 	 ) d
f (t) 
t
0
 f () d  1
f (t)  2 
t
0
 f () cos (t 	 ) d  4e	t  sin t
f (t)  tet 
t
0
  f (t 	 ) d
f (t)  2t 	 4 
t
0
 sin  f (t 	 ) d
f (t) 
t
0
 (t 	 ) f () d  t
49.
FIGURE 7.4.6
Graph for Problem 49
1
meander function
t
2a
a
f(t)
3a
4a
1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.4
OPERATIONAL PROPERTIES II
●
311
In Problems 57 and 58 solve the model for a driven spring/
mass system with damping
where the driving function f is as speciﬁed. Use a graphing
utility to graph x(t) for the indicated values of t.
57.
, b  1, k  5, f is the meander function in
Problem 49 with amplitude 10, and a  p, 0  t  2p.
58. m  1, b  2, k  1, f is the square wave in Problem 50
with amplitude 5, and a  p, 0  t  4p.
Discussion Problems
59. Discuss how Theorem 7.4.1 can be used to ﬁnd
.
60. In Section 6.4 we saw that ty  y  ty  0 is Bessel's
equation of order n  0. In view of (22) of that section
and Table 6.4.1 a solution of the initial-value problem
ty  y  ty  0, y(0)  1, y(0)  0, is y  J0(t). Use
this result and the procedure outlined in the instructions
to Problems 17 and 18 to show that
.
[Hint: You might need to use Problem 46 in
Exercises 7.2.]
61. (a) Laguerre's differential equation
ty  (1 	 t)y  ny  0 
is known to possess polynomial solutions when n is
a nonnegative integer. These solutions are naturally
called Laguerre polynomials and are denoted by
Ln(t). Find y  Ln(t), for n  0, 1, 2, 3, 4 if it is
known that Ln(0)  1.
(b) Show that
,
where 
and y  Ln(t) is a polynomial
solution of the DE in part (a). Conclude that
.
This last relation for generating the Laguerre poly-
nomials is the analogue of Rodrigues' formula for
the Legendre polynomials. See (33) in Section 6.4.
62. The Laplace transform 
exists, but without ﬁnd-
ing it solve the initial-value problem 
63. Solve the integral equation
f (t)  et  et
t
0
 e	t f () d.
y(0)  0, y(0)  0.
y  y  e	t2,
{e	t2}
Ln(t)  et
n! dn
dtn
 tne	t,    n  0, 1, 2, . . .
Y(s)  {y}

et
n! dn
dtn
 tne	t  Y(s)
{J0(t)} 
1
1s2  1
 	1ln s 	 3
s  1
m  1
2
m d 2x
dt2   dx
dt  kx  f (t),  x(0)  0, x(0)  0,
64. (a) Show that the square wave function E(t) given in
Figure 7.4.4 can be written
(b) Obtain (14) of this section by taking the Laplace
transform of each term in the series in part (a).
65. Use the Laplace transform as an aide in evaluating the
improper integral 
66. If we assume that 
exists and 
,
then
Use this result to ﬁnd the Laplace transform of the given
function. The symbols a and k are positive constants.
(a)
(b)
67. Transform of the Logarithm
Because 
has
an inﬁnite discontinuity at 
it might be assumed
that 
does not exist; however, this is incorrect.
The point of this problem to guide you through the
formal steps leading to the Laplace transform of
(a) Use integration by parts to show that
(b) If 
, use Theorem 7.4.1 with 
to
show that part (a) becomes 
Find an explicit solution 
of the foregoing dif-
ferential equation.
(c) Finally, the integral deﬁnition of Euler's constant
(sometimes called the Euler-Mascheroni constant)
is 
, where 
. . . . 
Use 
in the solution in part (b) to show that
Computer Lab Assignments
68. In this problem you are led through the commands in
Mathematica that enable you to obtain the symbolic
Laplace transform of a differential equation and the so-
lution of the initial-value problem by ﬁnding the inverse
transform. In Mathematica the Laplace transform of
a function y(t) is obtained using LaplaceTransform
[y[t], t, s]. In line two of the syntax we replace
LaplaceTransform [y[t], t, s] by the symbol Y. (If you
 {ln t}  	
s 	 ln s
s ,  s 
 0.
Y(1)  	
  0.5772156649
  	
0 e	t ln t dt
Y(s)
sdY
ds  Y  	1
s.
n  1
{ln t}  Y(s)
 {ln t}  s  {t ln t} 	 1
s.
f(t)  ln t, t 
 0.
{ln t}
t  0
f(t)  lnt
f(t)  2(1 	 cos kt)
t
f(t)  sin at
t
  f(t)
t    

s
F(u)du.
{f(t)}  F(s)
{f(t)>t}

0 te	2t sin 4t dt.
E(t)  

k0
 (	1)k (t 	 k).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
do not have Mathematica, then adapt the given proce-
dure by ﬁnding the corresponding syntax for the CAS
you have on hand.)
Consider the initial-value problem
.
Load the Laplace transform package. Precisely reproduce
and then, in turn, execute each line in the following
sequence of commands. Either copy the output by hand
or print out the results.
diffequat  y[t]  6y[t]  9y[t]  t Sin[t]
transformdeq  LaplaceTransform [diffequat, t, s] /.
{y[0]   2, y[0]   1,
LaplaceTransform [y[t], t, s]   Y}
soln  Solve[transformdeq, Y]//Flatten
Y  Y/.soln
InverseLaplaceTransform[Y, s, t]
y  6y  9y  t sin t,  y(0)  2, y(0)  	1
69. Appropriately modify the procedure of Problem 68 to
ﬁnd a solution of
.
70. The charge q(t) on a capacitor in an LC-series circuit is
given by
.
Appropriately modify the procedure of Problem 68 to
ﬁnd q(t). Graph your solution.
q(0)  0, q(0)  0
d 2q
dt2  q  1 	 4(t 	 )  6(t 	 3),
y(0)  0, y(0)  0, y(0)  1
y  3y 	 4y  0,
Unit Impulse
Mechanical systems are often acted on by an external force (or
electromotive force in an electrical circuit) of large magnitude that acts only for a
very short period of time. For example, a vibrating airplane wing could be struck by
lightning, a mass on a spring could be given a sharp blow by a ball peen hammer, and
a ball (baseball, golf ball, tennis ball) could be sent soaring when struck violently by
some kind of club (baseball bat, golf club, tennis racket). See Figure 7.5.1. The graph
of the piecewise-deﬁned function
(1)
a 
 0, t0 
 0, shown in Figure 7.5.2(a), could serve as a model for such a force. For a
small value of a, da (t 	 t0) is essentially a constant function of large magnitude that is
"on" for just a very short period of time, around t0. The behavior of da(t 	 t0) as 
is illustrated in Figure 7.5.2(b). The function da(t 	 t0) is called a unit impulse,
because it possesses the integration property 
.
Dirac Delta Function
In practice it is convenient to work with another

0 a(t 	 t0) dt  1
a : 0
a(t 	 t0) 
0, 
1
2a,
0,
0  t  t0 	 a
  t0 	 a  t  t0  a
t  t0  a,
FIGURE 7.5.1
A golf club applies a
force of large magnitude on the ball for a
very short period of time
THE DIRAC DELTA FUNCTION
INTRODUCTION
In the last paragraph on page 279, we indicated that as an immediate conse-
quence of Theorem 7.1.3, F(s)  1 cannot be the Laplace transform of a function f that is piecewise
continuous on [0, ) and of exponential order. In the discussion that follows we are going to intro-
duce a function that is very different from the kinds that you have studied in previous courses. We
shall see that there does indeed exist a function—or, more precisely, a generalized function—whose
Laplace transform is F(s)  1.
7.5
type of unit impulse, a "function" that approximates da(t 	 t0) and is defined by
the limit
(2)
(t 	 t0)  lim
a : 0a(t 	 t0).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.5
THE DIRAC DELTA FUNCTION
●
313
The latter expression, which is not a function at all, can be characterized by the two
properties
.
The unit impulse d(t 	 t0) is called the Dirac delta function.
It is possible to obtain the Laplace transform of the Dirac delta function by the for-
mal assumption that 
.
{(t 	 t0)}  lima : 0 {a(t 	 t0)}
(i) (t 	 t0) 
,
0,
t  t0
 t  t0
    and    (ii)

0
(t 	 t0) dt  1
FIGURE 7.5.2
Unit impulse
(b) behavior of a as a  0
t
t0
y
t
t0 −a
2a
1/2a
t0
y
t0 + a
(a) graph of a(t  t0)
EXAMPLE 1
Two Initial-Value Problems
Solve y  y  4 d(t 	 2p) subject to
(a) y(0)  1,
y(0)  0
(b) y(0)  0,
y(0)  0.
The two initial-value problems could serve as models for describing the motion of a
mass on a spring moving in a medium in which damping is negligible. At t  2p the
mass is given a sharp blow. In (a) the mass is released from rest 1 unit below the
equilibrium position. In (b) the mass is at rest in the equilibrium position.
SOLUTION
(a) From (3) the Laplace transform of the differential equation is
.
Using the inverse form of the second translation theorem, we ﬁnd
.
Since sin(t 	 2p)  sin t, the foregoing solution can be written as
(5)
y(t) 
cos t,      0  t  2
cos t  4 sin t,   t  2.
y(t)  cos t  4 sin (t 	 2) (t 	 2)
s2Y(s) 	 s  Y(s)  4e	2s    or    Y(s) 
s
s2  1  4e	2s
s2  1
THEOREM 7.5.1
Transform of the Dirac Delta Function
For t0 
 0,
(3)
{(t 	 t0)}  e	st0.
PROOF
To begin, we can write da(t 	 t0 ) in terms of the unit step function by
virtue of (11) and (12) of Section 7.3:
By linearity and (14) of Section 7.3 the Laplace transform of this last expression is
(4)
Since (4) has the indeterminate form 00 as 
, we apply L'Hôpital's Rule:
. 
Now when t0  0, it seems plausible to conclude from (3) that
The last result emphasizes the fact that d(t) is not the usual type of function that we have
been considering, since we expect from Theorem 7.1.3 that {f(t)} : 0 as s : .
 {(t)}  1.
{(t 	 t0)}  lim
a : 0 {a(t 	 t0)}  e	st0 lim
a : 0
 
esa 	 e	sa
2sa   e	st0
a : 0
{a(t 	 t0)}  1
2a
 	
e	s(t0	a)
s
	 e	s(t0a)
s 
  e	st0 
esa 	 e	sa
2sa .
a(t 	 t0)  1
2a
 [(t 	 (t0 	 a)) 	 (t 	 (t0  a))].
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
In Figure 7.5.3 we see from the graph of (5) that the mass is exhibiting simple
harmonic motion until it is struck at t  2p. The inﬂuence of the unit impulse is to
increase the amplitude of vibration to 
for t 
 2p.
(b) In this case the transform of the equation is simply
and so
(6)
The graph of (6) in Figure 7.5.4 shows, as we would expect from the initial conditions
that the mass exhibits no motion until it is struck at t  2p.
REMARKS
(i) If d(t 	 t0) were a function in the usual sense, then property (i) on page 313
would imply 
rather than 
. Because the
Dirac delta function did not "behave" like an ordinary function, even though its
users produced correct results, it was met initially with great scorn by mathe-
maticians. However, in the 1940s Dirac's controversial function was put on a
rigorous footing by the French mathematician Laurent Schwartz in his book
La Théorie de distribution, and this, in turn, led to an entirely new branch of
mathematics known as the theory of distributions or generalized functions.
In this theory (2) is not an accepted deﬁnition of d(t 	 t0), nor does one speak
of a function whose values are either  or 0. Although we shall not pursue this
topic any further, sufﬁce it to say that the Dirac delta function is best character-
ized by its effect on other functions. If f is a continuous function, then
(7)
can be taken as the deﬁnition of d(t 	 t0). This result is known as the sifting
property, since d(t 	 t0) has the effect of sifting the value f (t0) out of the
set of values of f on [0, ). Note that property (ii) (with f(t)  1) and (3) (with
f(t)  e	st) are consistent with (7).
(ii) In (iii) in the Remarks at the end of Section 7.2 we indicated that the trans-
fer function of a general linear nth-order differential equation with constant
coefﬁcients is W(s)  1P(s), where 
.
The transfer function is the Laplace transform of function w(t), called the
weight function of a linear system. But w(t) can also be characterized in
terms of the discussion at hand. For simplicity let us consider a second-order
linear system in which the input is a unit impulse at t  0:
.
Applying the Laplace transform and using 
shows that the trans-
form of the response y in this case is the transfer function
{(t)}  1
a2y  a1y  a0y  (t), y(0)  0, y(0)  0
P(s)  ansn  an	1sn	1      a0


0
 f(t) (t 	 t0) dt   f(t0)
 
0 (t 	 t0) dt  1
 
0 (t 	 t0) dt  0
 
0,   
0  t  2
4 sin t,  
t  2.
y(t)  4 sin (t 	 2) (t 	 2)
Y(s)  4e	2s
s2  1,
117
FIGURE 7.5.4
No motion until mass
is struck at t  2p in part (b) of Example 1
FIGURE 7.5.3
Mass is struck at t  2p
in part (a) of Example 1
t
y
1
−1
2
4
π
π
t
y
1
−1
2
4
π
π
.
Y(s) 
1
a2s2  a1s  a0

1
P(s)  W(s)  and  so y   	1 
1
P(s)  w(t)
From this we can see, in general, that the weight function y  w(t) of an nth-order
linear system is the zero-state response of the system to a unit impulse. For this
reason w(t) is also called the impulse response of the system.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.6
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
●
315
Coupled Springs
Two masses m1 and m2 are connected to two springs A and
B of negligible mass having spring constants k1 and k2, respectively. In turn the two
springs are attached as shown in Figure 7.6.1 on page 316. Let x1(t) and x2(t) denote
the vertical displacements of the masses from their equilibrium positions. When
the system is in motion, spring B is subject to both an elongation and a compression;
hence its net elongation is x2 	 x1. Therefore it follows from Hooke's law that
springs A and B exert forces 	k1x1 and k2(x2 	 x1), respectively, on m1. If no exter-
nal force is impressed on the system and if no damping force is present, then the net
force on m1 is 	k1x1  k2(x2 	 x1). By Newton's second law we can write
.
m1
 d 2x1
dt2  	k1x1  k2(x2 	 x1)
EXERCISES 7.5
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-13.
In Problems 1-12 use the Laplace transform to solve the
given initial-value problem.
1. y 	 3y  d(t 	 2),
y(0)  0
2. y  y  d(t 	 1),
y(0)  2
3. y  y  d(t 	 2p),
y(0)  0, y(0)  1
4. y  16y  d(t 	 2p),
y(0)  0, y(0)  0
5.
6. y  y  d(t 	 2p)  d(t 	 4p),
y(0)  1, y(0)  0
7. y  2y  d(t 	 1),
y(0)  0, y(0)  1
8. y 	 2y  1  d(t 	 2),
y(0)  0, y(0)  1
9. y  4y  5y  d(t 	 2p),
y(0)  0, y(0)  0
10. y  2y  y  d(t 	 1),
y(0)  0, y(0)  0
11. y  4y  13y  d(t 	 p)  d(t 	 3p),
y(0)  1, y(0)  0
12. y 	 7y  6y  et  d(t 	 2)  d(t 	 4),
y(0)  0, y(0)  0
13. A uniform beam of length L carries a concentrated load
w0 at 
. The beam is embedded at its left end and
x  1
2L
y(0)  0, y(0)  0
y  y   (t 	 1
2)   (t 	 3
2),
is free at its right end. Use the Laplace transform to
determine the deﬂection y(x) from
where y(0)  0, y(0)  0, y(L)  0, and y(L)  0.
14. Solve the differential equation in Problem 13 subject to
y(0)  0, y(0)  0, y(L)  0, y(L)  0. In this case
the beam is embedded at both ends. See Figure 7.5.5.
EI d 4y
dx4  w0 x 	 1
2L,
FIGURE 7.5.5
Beam in Problem 14
x
y
L
w0
Discussion Problems
15. Someone tells you that the solutions of the two IVPs
are exactly the same. Do you agree or disagree? Defend
your answer.
y  2y  10y  0,
y  2y  10y  (t),   y(0)  0,  y(0)  1
   y(0)  0,  y(0)  0
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Solving systems of two equations in two unknowns
INTRODUCTION
When initial conditions are speciﬁed, the Laplace transform of each equation
in a system of linear differential equations with constant coefﬁcients reduces the system of DEs to a
set of simultaneous algebraic equations in the transformed functions. We solve the system of
algebraic equations for each of the transformed functions and then ﬁnd the inverse Laplace trans-
forms in the usual manner.
7.6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

316
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
5
2.5
10
7.5
15
12.5
_0.4
0.2
0.4
_0.2
t
x1
(a) plot of x1(t)
(b) plot of x2(t)
5
2.5
10
7.5
15
12.5
_0.4
0.2
0.4
_0.2
t
x2
FIGURE 7.6.2
Displacements of the
two masses in Example 1
Similarly, the net force exerted on mass m2 is due solely to the net elongation of
B; that is, 	k2(x2 	 x1). Hence we have
.
In other words, the motion of the coupled system is represented by the system of
simultaneous second-order differential equations
(1)
In the next example we solve (1) under the assumptions that k1  6, k2  4,
m1  1, m2  1, and that the masses start from their equilibrium positions with
opposite unit velocities.
 m2x2  	k2(x2 	 x1).
 m1x1  	k1x1  k2(x2 	 x1)
m2
 d 2x2
dt2  	k2(x2 	 x1)
m2
k1
k2
k1
k (x2 − x1)
2
k (x2 − x1)
2
x2
x1 = 0
x2 = 0
x1
x1
A
m1
B
m1
m2
m2
(a) equilibrium
(b) motion
(c) forces
m1
FIGURE 7.6.1
Coupled spring/mass
system
EXAMPLE 1
Coupled Springs
Solve
(2)
subject to 
SOLUTION
The Laplace transform of each equation is
where 
. The preceding system is the
same as
(3)
Solving (3) for X1(s) and using partial fractions on the result yields
and therefore
Substituting the expression for X1(s) into the ﬁrst equation of (3) gives
and
  	 12
5  sin 12t 	 13
10  sin 213t.
 x2(t)  	
2
512  	1
12
s2  2 	
3
5112  	1
112
s2  12
 X2(s)  	
s2  6
(s2  2)(s2  12)  	 2> 5
s2  2 	
3> 5
s2  12
  	 12
10  sin 12t  13
5  sin 213t.
 x1(t)  	
1
512  	1
12
s2  2 
6
5112  	1
112
s2  12
X1(s) 
s2
(s2  2)(s2  12)  	 1>5
s2  2 
6>5
s2  12,
 	4 X1(s)  (s2  4) X2(s)  	1.
 (s2  10) X1(s) 	
 4X2(s)  1
X1(s)  {x1(t)} and X2(s)  {x2(t)}
 	4X1(s)  s2X2(s) 	 sx2(0) 	 x2 (0)  4X2(s)  0,
 s2X1(s) 	 sx1(0) 	 x1(0)  10X1(s) 	 4X2(s)  0
x1(0)  0, x1(0)  1, x2(0)  0, x2(0)  	1.
  	4x1  x2  4x2  0
x1  10x1 
 	 4x2  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.6
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
●
317
Finally, the solution to the given system (2) is
(4)
The graphs of x1 and x2 in Figure 7.6.2 reveal the complicated oscillatory motion of
each mass.
Networks
In (18) of Section 3.3 we saw the currents i1(t) and i2(t) in the
network shown in Figure 7.6.3, containing an inductor, a resistor, and a capacitor,
were governed by the system of ﬁrst-order differential equations
(5)
We solve this system by the Laplace transform in the next example.
 RC di2
dt  i2 	 i1  0.
 L di1
dt  Ri2  E(t)
x2(t)  	 12
5  sin 12t 	 13
10  sin 2 13t.
x1(t)  	 12
10  sin 12t  13
5  sin 2 13t
FIGURE 7.6.3
Electrical network
R
i1
L
i2
i3
C
E
EXAMPLE 2
An Electrical Network
Solve the system in (5) under the conditions E(t)  60 V, L  1 h, R  50 ,
C  10	4 f, and the currents i1 and i2 are initially zero.
SOLUTION
We must solve
subject to i1(0)  0, i2(0)  0.
Applying the Laplace transform to each equation of the system and simplifying
gives
where 
and 
. Solving the system for I1 and I2 and
decomposing the results into partial fractions gives
Taking the inverse Laplace transform, we ﬁnd the currents to be
i2(t)  6
5 	 6
5 e	100t 	 120te	100t.
 i1(t)  6
5 	 6
5 e	100t 	 60te	100t
 I2(s) 
12,000
s(s  100)2
  6>5
s
	
6>5
s  100 	
120
(s  100)2.
 I1(s)  60s  12,000
s(s  100)2  6>5
s
	
6>5
s  100 	
60
(s  100)2
I2(s)  {i2(t)}
I1(s)  {i1(t)}
 	200I1(s)  (s  200)I2(s)  0,
 sI1(s) 
 50I2(s)  60
s
 50(10	4) di2
dt  i2 	 i1  0
 di1
dt  50i2  60
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
Note that both i1(t) and i2(t) in Example 2 tend toward the value
as t : . Furthermore, since the current through the capacitor is
i3(t)  i1(t) 	 i2(t)  60te	100t, we observe that 
as 
.
Double Pendulum
Consider the double-pendulum system consisting of a
pendulum attached to a pendulum shown in Figure 7.6.4. We assume that the system
oscillates in a vertical plane under the inﬂuence of gravity, that the mass of each rod
is negligible, and that no damping forces act on the system. Figure 7.6.4 also shows
that the displacement angle u1 is measured (in radians) from a vertical line extending
downward from the pivot of the system and that u2 is measured from a vertical line
extending downward from the center of mass m1. The positive direction is to the
right; the negative direction is to the left. As we might expect from the analysis lead-
ing to equation (6) of Section 5.3, the system of differential equations describing the
motion is nonlinear:
t : 
i3(t) : 0
E>R  6
5
FIGURE 7.6.4
Double pendulum
1
θ
2
θ
l1
m1
m2
l2
(6)
 m2l2
22  m2l1l21 cos (1 	 2) 	 m2l1l2(1)2 sin (1 	 2)  m2l2g sin 2  0.
 (m1  m2)l1
21  m2l1l22 cos (1 	 2)  m2l1l2(2)2 sin (1 	 2)  (m1  m2)l1g sin 1  0
But if the displacements u1(t) and u2(t) are assumed to be small, then the approximations
cos(u1 	 u2)  1, sin(u1 	 u2)  0, sin u1  u1, sin u2  u2 enable us to replace system
(6) by the linearization
(7)
 m2l2
22  m2l1l21  m2l2g2  0.
 (m1  m2)l1
21  m2l1l22  (m1  m2)l1g1  0
(a) t  0
(b) t  1.4
(c) t  2.5
(d) t  8.5
FIGURE 7.6.5
Positions of masses on double pendulum at various times in 
Example 3
EXAMPLE 3
Double Pendulum
It is left as an exercise to ﬁll in the details of using the Laplace transform to solve
system (7) when m1  3, m2  1, l1  l2  16, u1(0)  1, u2(0)  	1, 
,
and 
. You should ﬁnd that
(8)
With the aid of a CAS the positions of the two masses at t  0 and at subsequent
times are shown in Figure 7.6.5. See Problem 21 in Exercises 7.6.
2(t)  1
2 cos 2
13 t 	 3
2 cos 2t.
1(t)  1
4 cos 2
13 t  3
4 cos 2t
2(0)  0
1(0)  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.6
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
●
319
EXERCISES 7.6
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-13.
In Problems 1-12 use the Laplace transform to solve the
given system of differential equations.
1.
2.
x(0)  0,
y(0)  1
x(0)  1,
y(0)  1
3.
4.
x(0)  	1,
y(0)  2
x(0)  0,
y(0)  0
5.
x(0)  0,
y(0)  0
6.
x(0)  0,
y(0)  1
7.
8.
x(0)  0,
x(0)  	2,
x(0)  1,
x(0)  0,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  1
y(0)  	1,
y(0)  5
9.
10.
x(0)  8,
x(0)  0,
x(0)  0,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  0,
y(0)  0
y(0)  0,
y(0)  0
11.
x(0)  0,
x(0)  2,
y(0)  0
12.
x(0)  0,  y(0)  1
2
dy
dt  3x 	
 y    (t 	 1)
dx
dt  4x 	 2y  2(t 	 1)
d 2x
dt2
  3y  te	t
 d 2x
dt2  3 dy
dt  3y  0
dx
dt  2x 	 2 d 3y
dt3  0
 d 2x
dt2 	 d 2y
dt2  4t
dx
dt 	 4x     d 3y
dt3  6 sin t
 d 2x
dt2  d 2y
dt2  t2
d 2y
dt2  dy
dt 	 4 dx
dt  0
d 2y
dt2  y 	 x  0
d 2x
dt2  dx
dt     dy
dt  0
d 2x
dt2  x 	 y  0
dx
dt     dy
dt  2y  0
dx
dt  x 	 dy
dt    y  0
   dx
dt  dy
dt 	 3x 	 3y  2
2 dx
dt  dy
dt 	 2x          1
dx
dt 	   x  dy
dt 	 y  
  et
dy
dt  5x 	 y
dx
dt  3x  dy
dt         1
dx
dt  x 	 2y
dy
dt  8x 	 t
 dy
dt  2x
dx
dt  2y  et
dx
dt  	x  y
13. Solve system (1) when k1  3, k2  2, m1  1, m2  1
and x1(0)  0, 
, x2(0)  1, 
.
14. Derive the system of differential equations describing the
straight-line vertical motion of the coupled springs shown
in Figure 7.6.6. Use the Laplace transform to solve the
system when k1  1, k2  1, k3  1, m1  1, m2  1 and
x1(0)  0, 
, x2(0)  0, 
.
x2(0)  1
x1(0)  	1
x2(0)  0
x1(0)  1
k
m2
k2
3
x2 = 0
m1
k1
x1 = 0
FIGURE 7.6.6
Coupled springs in Problem 14
15. (a) Show that the system of differential equations for
the currents i2(t) and i3(t) in the electrical network
shown in Figure 7.6.7 is
(b) Solve the system in part (a) if R  5 , L1  0.01 h,
L2  0.0125 h, E  100 V, i2(0)  0, and i3(0)  0.
(c) Determine the current i1(t).
 L2 di3
dt  Ri2  Ri3  E(t).
 L1 di2
dt  Ri2  Ri3  E(t)
FIGURE 7.6.7
Network in Problem 15
L1
R
E
i1
i2
i3
L2
16. (a) In Problem 12 in Exercises 3.3 you were asked to
show that the currents i2(t) and i3(t) in the electrical
network shown in Figure 7.6.8 satisfy
 	R1 di2
dt  R2 di3
dt  1
C i3  0.
 L di2
dt  L di3
dt  R1i2  E(t)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
Solve the system if R1  10 , R2  5 , L  1 h,
C  0.2 f,
i2(0)  0, and i3(0)  0.
(b) Determine the current i1(t).
E(t) 
120,
0,
0  t  2
t  2,
Computer Lab Assignments
21. (a) Use the Laplace transform and the information
given in Example 3 to obtain the solution (8) of the
system given in (7).
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph u1(t) and u2(t) in the
tu-plane. Which mass has extreme displacements of
greater magnitude? Use the graphs to estimate the
ﬁrst time that each mass passes through its equilib-
rium position. Discuss whether the motion of the
pendulums is periodic.
(c) Graph u1(t) and u2(t) in the u1u2-plane as parametric
equations. The curve deﬁned by these parametric
equations is called a Lissajous curve.
(d) The positions of the masses at t  0 are given
in
Figure 7.6.5(a). Note that we have used 
1 radian  57.3°. Use a calculator or a table
application in a CAS to construct a table of values
of the angles u1 and u2 for t  1, 2, . . . , 10 s. Then
plot the positions of the two masses at these times.
(e) Use a CAS to ﬁnd the ﬁrst time that u1(t)  u2(t)
and compute the corresponding angular value. Plot
the positions of the two masses at these times.
(f) Utilize the CAS to draw appropriate lines to sim-
ulate the pendulum rods, as in Figure 7.6.5. Use
the animation capability of your CAS to make a
"movie" of the motion of the double pendulum
from t  0 to t  10 using a time increment of
0.1. [Hint: Express the coordinates (x1(t), y1(t))
and (x2(t), y2(t)) of the masses m1 and m2, respec-
tively, in terms of u1(t) and u2(t).]
FIGURE 7.6.8
Network in Problem 16
R1
E
i1
L
i2
i3
C
R2
17. Solve the system given in (17) of Section 3.3 when
R1  6 , R2  5 , L1  1 h, L2  1 h, E(t)  50 sin t V,
i2(0)  0, and i3(0)  0.
18. Solve (5) when E  60 V, 
, R  50 ,
C  10	4 f, i1(0)  0, and i2(0)  0.
19. Solve (5) when E  60 V, L  2 h, R  50 ,
C  10	4 f, i1(0)  0, and i2(0)  0.
20. (a) Show that the system of differential equations for
the charge on the capacitor q(t) and the current i3(t)
in the electrical network shown in Figure 7.6.9 is
(b) Find the charge on the capacitor when L  1 h,
R1  1 , R2  1 , C  1 f,
i3(0)  0, and q(0)  0.
E(t) 
0,
50e	t,
0  t  1
t  1,
 L di3
dt  R2i3 	 1
C q  0.
 R1 dq
dt  1
C q  R1i3  E(t)
L  1
2 h
FIGURE 7.6.9
Network in Problem 20
R1
E
i1
i2
i3
L
C
R2
CHAPTER 7 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-13.
In Problems 1 and 2 use the deﬁnition of the Laplace
transform to ﬁnd 
.
1.
2. f (t) 
0,
1,
0,
 0  t  2
 2  t  4
 
t  4
f (t) 
t,
2 	 t, 0  t  1
 
t  1
{ f (t)}
In Problems 3-24 ﬁll in the blanks or answer true or false.
3. If f is not piecewise continuous on [0, ), then 
will not exist. _______
4. The function f(t)  (et)10 is not of exponential order.
_______
5. F(s)  s2(s2  4) is not the Laplace transform of a
function that is piecewise continuous and of exponential
order. _______
{ f (t)}
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 IN REVIEW
●
321
6. If 
and 
, then 
. _______
7.
_______
8.
_______
9.
_______
10.
_______
11.
_______
12.
_______
13.
_______
14.
_______
15.
_______
16.
_______
17.
_______
18.
_______
19.
_______
20.
_______
21.
exists for s 
 _______.
22. If 
, then 
_______.
23. If 
and k 
 0, then 
_______.
24.
_______ whereas 
_______.
In Problems 25-28 use the unit step function to ﬁnd an
equation for each graph in terms of the function y  f (t),
whose graph is given in Figure 7.R.1.
{eatt
0
  f () d} 
{t
0
 ea f () d} 
{eatf (t 	 k)(t 	 k)} 
{ f(t)}   F(s)
{te8t f (t)} 
{ f (t)}   F(s)
{e	5t}
 	1
1
L2s2  n2 2 
 	1
s  
s2  2 e	s 
 	1
e	5s
s2  
 	1
s
s2 	 10s  29 
 	1
1
s2 	 5 
 	1
1
(s 	 5)3 
 	1
1
3s 	 1 
 	1
20
s6 
{sin 2t (t 	 )} 
{t sin 2t} 
{e	3t sin 2t} 
{sin 2t} 
{te	7t} 
{e	7t} 
 	1{F(s)G(s)}   f (t)g(t)
{g(t)}  G(s)
{ f (t)}  F(s)
In Problems 29-32 express f in terms of unit step functions.
Find 
and 
.
{etf (t)}
{ f (t)}
FIGURE 7.R.2
Graph for Problem 25
t0
t
y
t0
t
y
y = f(t)
FIGURE 7.R.1
Graph for Problems 25-28
25.
FIGURE 7.R.3
Graph for Problem 26
FIGURE 7.R.4
Graph for Problem 27
FIGURE 7.R.5
Graph for Problem 28
t0
t
y
t0
t
y
t0
t
y
t1
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
FIGURE 7.R.6
Graph for Problem 29
FIGURE 7.R.7
Graph for Problem 30
FIGURE 7.R.8
Graph for Problem 31
FIGURE 7.R.9
Graph for Problem 32
1
1
2
3
4
t
f(t)
2
1
−1
t
f(t)
π
π
π
3
π 
π
y = sin 
3 
t, 
≤t ≤
1
2
3
2
1
t
f(t)
(3, 3)
1
2
1
t
f(t)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Problems 33-40 use the Laplace transform to solve the
given equation.
33. y 	 2y  y  et,
y(0)  0, y(0)  5
34. y 	 8y  20y  tet,
y(0)  0, y(0)  0
35. y  6y  5y  t 	 t (t 	 2),
y(0)  1, y(0)  0
36. y 	 5y  f (t), where 
37.
, where 
is given in 
Figure 7.R.10.
f(t)
y  2y  f(t), y(0)  1
f (t) 
t2,
0,
0  t  1
t  1, y(0)  1
45. A uniform cantilever beam of length L is embedded at
its left end (x  0) and free at its right end. Find the
deflection y(x) if the load per unit length is given by
.
46. When a uniform beam is supported by an elastic
foundation, the differential equation for its deﬂection
y(x) is
,
where k is the modulus of the foundation and 	ky is the
restoring force of the foundation that acts in the direction
opposite to that of the load w(x). See Figure 7.R.11. For
algebraic convenience suppose that the differential equa-
tion is written as
,
where a  (k4EI)1/4. Assume L  p and a  1. Find
the deﬂection y(x) of a beam that is supported on an
elastic foundation when
(a) the beam is simply supported at both ends and a con-
stant load w0 is uniformly distributed along its length,
(b) the beam is embedded at both ends and w(x) is a
concentrated load w0 applied at x  p2.
[Hint: In both parts of this problem use entries 35 and
36 in the table of Laplace transforms in Appendix III.]
d 4y
dx4  4a4y  w(x)
EI
EI d 4y
dx4  ky  w(x)
w(x)  2w0
L  	
L
2 	 x x 	 L
2 x 	 L
2
FIGURE 7.R.11
Beam on elastic foundation in Problem 46
0
x
y
L
w(x)
elastic foundation
47. (a) Suppose two identical pendulums are coupled by
means of a spring with constant k. See Figure 7.R.12.
Under the same assumptions made in the discussion
preceding Example 3 in Section 7.6, it can be shown
that when the displacement angles u1(t) and u2(t)
are small, the system of linear differential equations
describing the motion is
Use the Laplace transform to solve the system when
u1(0)  u0, u1(0)  0, u2(0)  c0, u2(0)  0, where
u0 and c0 constants. For convenience let v2  gl,
K  km.
(b) Use the solution in part (a) to discuss the motion
of the coupled pendulums in the special case when
 2  g
l2  k
m (1 	 2).
 1  g
l1  	 k
m (1 	 2)
322
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
FIGURE 7.R.10
Graph for Problem 37
1
2
3
1
t
f(t)
38.
, where
39.
40.
In Problems 41 and 42 use the Laplace transform to solve
each system.
41.
x  y  t
42.
x  y 
e2t
4x  y  0
2x  y  	e2t
x(0)  1,
y(0)  2
x(0)  0,
y(0)  0,
x(0)  0,
y(0)  0
43. The current i(t) in an RC-series circuit can be deter-
mined from the integral equation
,
where E(t) is the impressed voltage. Determine i(t)
when R  10 , C  0.5 f, and E(t)  2(t2  t).
44. A series circuit contains an inductor, a resistor, and a
capacitor for which 
, R  10 , and C  0.01 f,
respectively. The voltage
is applied to the circuit. Determine the instantaneous
charge q(t) on the capacitor for t 
 0 if q(0)  0 and
q(0)  0.
E(t) 
10,
0,
0  t  5
  t  5
L  1
2 h
Ri  1
C 
t
0
 i() d  E(t)

t
0
 f () f (t 	 ) d  6t3
y(t)  cos t 
t
0
 y() cos(t 	 ) d, y(0)  1
f(t)  12 

k0
(	1)k (t 	 k).
y  5y  4y  f(t), y(0)  0, y(0)  3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the initial conditions are u1(0)  u0,
u1(0)  0,
u2(0)  u0, u2(0)  0. When the initial conditions
are u1(0)  u0, u1(0)  0, u2(0)  	u0, u2(0)  0.
CHAPTER 7 IN REVIEW
●
323
FIGURE 7.R.12
Coupled pendulums in Problem 47
1
θ
θ2
m
l
l
m
(f) Show that each successive oscillation is 
shorter than the preceding one.
(g) Predict the long-term behavior of the system.
49. Range of a Projectile—No Air Resistance (a) A pro-
jectile, such as the canon ball shown in Fig-
ure 7.R.13, has weight 
and initial velocity
v0 that is tangent to its path of motion.  If air resis-
tance and all other forces except its weight are ig-
nored, we saw in Problem 23 of Exercises 4.9 that
motion of the projectile is describe by the system of
linear differential equations
Use the Laplace transform to solve this system sub-
ject to the initial conditions 
,
where 
is con-
stant and is the constant angle of elevation shown
in Figure 7.R.13.  The solutions 
and 
are para-
metric equations of the trajectory of the projectile.
(b) Use 
in part (a) to eliminate the parameter t in
. Use the resulting equation for y to show that the
horizontal range R of the projectile is given by
(c) From the formula in part (b), we see that R is a max-
imum when sin 
or when 
Show
that the same range—less than the maximum—can
be attained by ﬁring the gun at either of two comple-
mentary angles and 
The only difference
is that the smaller angle results in a low trajectory
whereas the larger angle gives a high trajectory.
(d) Suppose 
and 
Use part (b) to ﬁnd the horizontal range of the pro-
jectile. Find the time when the projectile hits the
ground.
(e) Use the parametric equations 
and 
in part (a)
along with the numerical data in part (d) to plot the
ballistic curve of the projectile. Repeat with 
and 
Superimpose both curves on the
same coordinate system.
v0  300 ft/s.
u  52
y(t)
x(t)
v0  300 ft/s.
g  32 ft/s2, u  38,
p>2 	 u.
u
u  p>4.
2u  1
R  v2
0
g sin 2u.
y(t)
x(t)
y(t)
x(t)
u
v0  v0
y(0)  0, y(0)  v0 sin u,
x(0)  0, x(0)  v0 cos u
m d 2y
dt 2  	mg.
m d 2x
dt 2  0
w  mg
2F>v2
48. Coulomb Friction Revisited
In Problem 27 in Chap-
ter 5 in Review we examined a spring/mass system in
which a mass m slides over a dry horizontal surface
whose coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is a constant 
.
The constant retarding force 
of the dry sur-
face that acts opposite to the direction of motion is
called Coulomb friction after the French physicist
Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (1736-1806). You
were asked to show that the piecewise-deﬁned differen-
tial equation for the displacement 
of the mass is
given by 
(a) Suppose that the mass is released from rest from a
point 
and that there are no other
external forces. Then the differential equations
describing the motion of the mass m are 
,
and so on, where 
, and 
. Show that the times 
correspond to 
. 
(b) Explain why, in general, the initial displacement
must satisfy 
(c) Explain why the interval 
is ap-
propriately called the "dead zone" of the system.
(d) Use the Laplace transform and the concept of the
meander function to solve for the displacement
(e) Show that in the case 
and
that on the interval 
your solution
agrees with parts (a) and (b) of Problem 28 in
Chapter 5 in Review.
[0, 2p)
x0  5.5
m  1, k  1, fk  1,
x(t) for t  0.
	F>v2  x  F>v2
v2&x0&
 F.
x(t)  0
T, 3T>2, . . .
0, T>2,
T  2p>v
g  32
v2  k>m, F  fk>m  g,
 x  v2x  F, T  t  3T>2
 x  v2x  	F, T>2  t  T
 x  v2x  F, 0  t  T>2
x(0)  x0 
 0
md2x
dt2  kx 
fk,        x  0 (motion to left)
	fk, x 
 0 (motion to right).
x(t)
fk  mg

FIGURE 7.R.13
Projectile in Problem 49
x
y
R
Horizontal Range
v0
θ
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50. Range of a Projectile—With Air Resistance
(a) Now
suppose that air resistance is a retarding force tan-
gent to the path but acts opposite to the motion. If
we take air resistance to be proportional to the ve-
locity of the projectile, then we saw in Problem 24 of
Exercises 4.9 that motion of the projectile is de-
scribe by the system of linear differential equations
where 
Use the Laplace transform to solve
this system subject to the initial conditions 
sin , where
and are constant.
u
v0  v0
u
cos u, y(0)  0, y(0)  v0
x(0)  v0
x(0)  0,
b 
 0.
m d 2y
dt 2  	mg 	 b dy
dt,
m d 2x
dt 2  	b dx
dt
324
●
CHAPTER 7
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM
(b) Suppose 
slug, 
and 
Use a CAS to ﬁnd the time when
the projectile hits the ground and then compute its
corresponding horizontal range.
(c) Repeat part (c) using the complementary angle
and compare the range with that found in
part (b). Does the property in part (c) of Problem 49
hold?
(d) Use the parametric equations 
and 
in part (a)
along with the numerical data in part (b) to plot the
ballistic curve of the projectile. Repeat with the
same numerical data in part (b) but take 
Superimpose both curves on the same coordinate
system. Compare these curves with those obtained
in part (e) of Problem 49.
u  52.
y(t)
x(t)
u  52
v0  300 ft/s.
u  38,
g  32 ft/s2, b  0.02,
m  1
4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

325
8.1 Preliminary Theory—Linear Systems
8.2 Homogeneous Linear Systems
8.2.1 Distinct Real Eigenvalues
8.2.2 Repeated Eigenvalues
8.2.3 Complex Eigenvalues
8.3 Nonhomogeneous Linear Systems
8.3.1 Undetermined Coefﬁcients
8.3.2 Variation of Parameters
8.4 Matrix Exponential
Chapter 8 in Review
We encountered systems of ordinary differential equations in Sections 3.3, 4.9, and
7.6 and were able to solve some of these systems by means of either systematic
elimination or by the Laplace transform. In this chapter we are going to concentrate
only on systems of linear ﬁrst-order differential equations. Although most of the
systems that are considered could be solved using elimination or the Laplace
transform, we are going to develop a general theory for these kinds of systems and
in the case of systems with constant coefﬁcients, a method of solution that utilizes
some basic concepts from the algebra of matrices. We will see that this general
theory and solution procedure is similar to that of linear higher-order differential
equations considered in Chapter 4. This material is fundamental to the analysis of
systems of nonlinear ﬁrst-order equations in Chapter 10.
Systems of Linear First-Order 
Differential Equations
8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Linear Systems
When each of the functions g1, g2, . . . , gn in (2) is linear
in the dependent variables x1, x2, . . . , xn, we get the normal form of a ﬁrst-order
system of linear equations:
We refer to a system of the form given in (3) simply as a linear system. We
assume that the coefﬁcients aij as well as the functions fi are continuous on a
common interval I. When fi(t)  0, i  1, 2, . . . , n, the linear system (3) is said to
be homogeneous; otherwise, it is nonhomogeneous.
Matrix Form of a Linear System
If X, A(t), and F(t) denote the respective
matrices
x1(t)
x2(t)
xn(t)
X 
 (
 
 
 )
,
a11(t)
a21(t)
an1(t)
a1n(t)
a2n(t)
ann(t)
a12(t)
a22(t)
an2(t)
. . .
. . .
. . .
 A(t) 
 (
  )
,
f1(t)
f2(t)
fn(t)
 F(t) 
 (
 )
,
...
...
...
...
 a11(t)x1  a12(t)x2  . . .  a1n(t)xn  f1(t)
 a21(t)x1  a22(t)x2  . . .  a2n(t)xn  f2(t)
 an1(t)x1  an2(t)x2  . . .  ann(t)xn  fn(t).
dx1
---
dt
dx2
---
dt
dxn
---
dt
...
...
(3)
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR SYSTEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Matrix notation and properties are used extensively throughout this chapter. It is imperative that
you review either Appendix II or a linear algebra text if you unfamiliar with these concepts.
INTRODUCTION
Recall that in Section 4.9 we illustrated how to solve systems of n linear
differential equations in n unknowns of the form
(1)
where the Pij were polynomials of various degrees in the differential operator D. In this chapter
we conﬁne our study to systems of ﬁrst-order DEs that are special cases of systems that have the
normal form
A system such as (2) of n ﬁrst-order equations is called a ﬁrst-order system.
 g1(t, x1, x2, . . . , xn)
 g2(t, x1, x2, . . . , xn)
 gn(t, x1, x2, . . . , xn).
dx1
---
dt
dx2
---
dt
dxn
---
dt
...
...
P11(D)x1  P12(D)x2  . . .  P1n(D)xn  b1(t)
P21(D)x1  P22(D)x2  . . .  P2n(D)xn  b2(t)
                                                               
Pn1(D)x1  Pn2(D)x2  . . .  Pnn(D)xn  bn(t),
...
...
8.1
(2) 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

then the system of linear ﬁrst-order differential equations (3) can be written as
or simply
(4)
If the system is homogeneous, its matrix form is then
(5)
X  AX.
X  AX  F.
  (
d--
dt
x1
x2
xn
 )
a11(t)
a21(t)
an1(t)
a1n(t)
a2n(t)
ann(t)
a12(t)
a22(t)
an2(t)
. . .
. . .
. . .
 (
  (
x1
x2
xn
 )
 (
 )
f1(t)
f2(t)
fn(t)
 )
...
...
...
...
...
8.1
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
327
EXAMPLE 1
Systems Written in Matrix Notation
(a) If 
, then the matrix form of the homogeneous system
(b) If 
, then the matrix form of the nonhomogeneous system
      dx
dt  6x    y  z      t
  dy
dt  8x  7y  z  10t
   dz
dt  2x  9y  z   6t
is X 
6
8
2
1
7
9
1
1
1X 
t
10t
6t.
X  
x
y
z
dx
dt  3x  4y
dy
dt  5x  7y
is  X 
3
5
4
7X.
X 
x
y
DEFINITION 8.1.1
Solution Vector
A solution vector on an interval I is any column matrix
whose entries are differentiable functions satisfying the system (4) on the
interval.
x1(t)
x2(t)
xn(t)
X 
 (
 
 )
...
A solution vector of (4) is, of course, equivalent to n scalar equations 
x1  f1(t), x2  f2(t), . . . , xn  fn(t) and can be interpreted geometrically as a set
of parametric equations of a space curve. In the important case n  2 the equations
x1  f1(t), x2  f2(t) represent a curve in the x1x2-plane. It is common practice to
call a curve in the plane a trajectory and to call the x1x2-plane the phase plane. We
will come back to these concepts and illustrate them in the next section.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

328
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 2
Veriﬁcation of Solutions
Verify that on the interval (, )
are solutions of 
.
(6)
SOLUTION
From 
and
we see that
and
Much of the theory of systems of n linear ﬁrst-order differential equations is
similar to that of linear nth-order differential equations.
Initial-Value Problem
Let t0 denote a point on an interval I and
where the gi, i  1, 2, . . . , n are given constants. Then the problem
(7)
is an initial-value problem on the interval.
 Subject to:     X(t0)  X0
 Solve: 
 X  A(t)X  F(t)
x1(t0)
x2(t0)
xn(t0)
 X(t0)  (
and
 )
1
2
n
 X0  (
 )
,
...
...
AX2 
1
5
3
3
3e6t
5e6t 
3e6t  15e6t
15e6t  15e6t 
18e6t
30e6t  X2.
AX1 
1
5
3
3
e2t
e2t 
e2t  3e2t
5e2t  3e2t 
2e2t
2e2t  X1,
X2 
18e6t
30e6t
X1 
2e2t
2e2t
X 
1
5
3
3X
X1 
1
1e2t 
e2t
e2t    and    X2 
3
5e6t 
3e6t
5e6t
THEOREM 8.1.1
Existence of a Unique Solution
Let the entries of the matrices A(t) and F(t) be functions continuous on a common
interval I that contains the point t0. Then there exists a unique solution of the initial-
value problem (7) on the interval.
Homogeneous Systems
In the next several deﬁnitions and theorems we are
concerned only with homogeneous systems. Without stating it, we shall always assume
that the aij and the fi are continuous functions of t on some common interval I.
Superposition Principle
The following result is a superposition principle for
solutions of linear systems.
THEOREM 8.1.2
Superposition Principle
Let X1, X2, . . . , Xk be a set of solution vectors of the homogeneous system (5)
on an interval I. Then the linear combination
where the ci, i  1, 2, . . . , k are arbitrary constants, is also a solution on the
interval.
X  c1X1  c2X2      ckXk,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

It follows from Theorem 8.1.2 that a constant multiple of any solution vector of a
homogeneous system of linear ﬁrst-order differential equations is also a solution.
8.1
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
329
EXAMPLE 3
Using the Superposition Principle
You should practice by verifying that the two vectors
are solutions of the system
(8)
By the superposition principle the linear combination
is yet another solution of the system.
Linear Dependence and Linear Independence
We are primarily inter-
ested in linearly independent solutions of the homogeneous system (5).
X  c1X1  c2X2  c1
cos t
1
2 cos t  1
2 sin t
cos t  sin t 
 c2
0
et
0
X 
1
1
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
X.
X1 
cos t
1
2  cos t  1
2 sin t
cos t  sin t  and X2 
0
et
0
DEFINITION 8.1.2
Linear Dependence/Independence
Let X1, X2, . . . , Xk be a set of solution vectors of the homogeneous system (5)
on an interval I. We say that the set is linearly dependent on the interval if
there exist constants c1, c2, . . . , ck, not all zero, such that
for every t in the interval. If the set of vectors is not linearly dependent on the
interval, it is said to be linearly independent.
c1X1  c2X2      ckXk  0
The case when k  2 should be clear; two solution vectors X1 and X2 are linearly
dependent if one is a constant multiple of the other, and conversely. For k  2 a set of
solution vectors is linearly dependent if we can express at least one solution vector as
a linear combination of the remaining vectors.
Wronskian
As in our earlier consideration of the theory of a single ordi-
nary differential equation, we can introduce the concept of the Wronskian
determinant as a test for linear independence. We state the following theorem
without proof.
THEOREM 8.1.3
Criterion for Linearly Independent Solutions
Let
 X1 
 
 (
x11
x21
xn1
x12
x22
xn2
 ) 
, 
X2 (
. . . ,
 ) 
, 
x1n
x2n
xnn
Xn (
 )
...
...
...
(continues on page 330)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

330
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
be n solution vectors of the homogeneous system (5) on an interval I. Then the set
of solution vectors is linearly independent on I if and only if the Wronskian
(9)
for every t in the interval.
W(X1, X2, . . . , Xn) 
 

 
x11
x21
xn1
x1n
x2n
xnn
x12
x22
xn2
. . .
. . .
. . .
...
...
0
It can be shown that if X1, X2, . . . , Xn are solution vectors of (5), then for every
t in I either 
or 
Thus if we can
show that W 	 0 for some t0 in I, then W 	 0 for every t, and hence the solutions are
linearly independent on the interval.
Notice that, unlike our deﬁnition of the Wronskian in Section 4.1, here the
deﬁnition of the determinant (9) does not involve differentiation.
W(X1, X2, . . . , Xn)  0.
W(X1, X2, . . . , Xn) 	 0
EXAMPLE 4
Linearly Independent Solutions
In Example 2 we saw that 
and 
are solutions of 
system (6). Clearly, X1 and X2 are linearly independent on the interval (, ), since
neither vector is a constant multiple of the other. In addition, we have
for all real values of t.
W(X1, X2)  
e2t
e2t
3e6t
5e6t  8e4t 	 0
X2 
3
5e6t
X1 
1
1e2t
DEFINITION 8.1.3
Fundamental Set of Solutions
Any set 
of n linearly independent solution vectors of the
homogeneous system (5) on an interval I is said to be a fundamental set of
solutions on the interval.
X1, X2, . . . , Xn
THEOREM 8.1.4
Existence of a Fundamental Set
There exists a fundamental set of solutions for the homogeneous system (5) on an
interval I.
The next two theorems are the linear system equivalents of Theorems 4.1.5
and 4.1.6.
THEOREM 8.1.5
General Solution—Homogeneous Systems
Let 
be a fundamental set of solutions of the homogeneous
system (5) on an interval I. Then the general solution of the system on the
interval is
where the ci, i  1, 2, . . . , n are arbitrary constants.
X  c1X1  c2X2      cnXn,
X1, X2, . . . , Xn
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.1
PRELIMINARY THEORY—LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
331
EXAMPLE 5
General Solution of System (6)
From Example 2 we know that 
and 
are linearly 
independent solutions of (6) on (, ). Hence X1 and X2 form a fundamental set
of solutions on the interval. The general solution of the system on the interval
is then
(10)
X  c1X1  c2X2  c1
1
1e2t  c2
3
5e6t.
X2 
3
5e6t
X1 
1
1e2t
EXAMPLE 6
General Solution of System (8)
The vectors
are solutions of the system (8) in Example 3 (see Problem 16 in Exercises 8.1). Now
for all real values of t. We conclude that X1, X2, and X3 form a fundamental set of
solutions on (, ). Thus the general solution of the system on the interval is the
linear combination X  c1X1  c2X2  c3X3; that is,
Nonhomogeneous Systems
For nonhomogeneous systems a particular
solution Xp on an interval I is any vector, free of arbitrary parameters, whose entries
are functions that satisfy the system (4).
X  c1
cos t
1
2cos t  1
2sin t
cos t  sin t 
 c2
0
1
0
et  c3
sin t
1
2sin t  1
2cos t
sin t  cos t 
.
W(X1, X2, X3)  p
cos t
1
2cos t  1
2sin t
cos t  sin t
0
et
0
sin t
1
2sin t  1
2cos t
sin t  cos t
p  et 	 0
X1 
cos t
1
2cos t  1
2 sin t
cos t  sin t 
,  X2 
0
1
0
et,  X3 
sin t
1
2sin t  1
2cos t
sin t  cos t
THEOREM 8.1.6
General Solution—Nonhomogeneous Systems
Let Xp be a given solution of the nonhomogeneous system (4) on an interval I
and let
denote the general solution on the same interval of the associated homo-
geneous system (5). Then the general solution of the nonhomogeneous system
on the interval is
The general solution Xc of the associated homogeneous system (5) is
called the complementary function of the nonhomogeneous system (4).
X  Xc  Xp.
Xc  c1X1  c2X2      cnXn
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

332
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 7
General Solution—Nonhomogeneous System
The vector 
is a particular solution of the nonhomogeneous system
(11)
on the interval (, ). (Verify this.) The complementary function of (11) on 
the same interval, or the general solution of 
, was seen in (10) of
Example 5 to be 
. Hence by Theorem 8.1.6
is the general solution of (11) on (, ).
X  Xc  Xp  c1 
1
1e2t  c2
3
5e6t 
3t  4
5t  6
Xc  c1
1
1e2t  c2
3
5e6t
X 
1
5
3
3X
X 
1
5
3
3X 
12t  11
3 
Xp 
3t  4
5t  6
EXERCISES 8.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-14.
In Problems 1-6 write the linear system in matrix form.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
In Problems 7-10 write the given system without the use of
matrices.
7. X 
4
1
2
3X 
1
1et
dz
dt   y  6z  et
dy
dt  5x  9z  4etcos 2t
dx
dt  3x  4y  etsin 2t
 dz
dt  x  y  z  t2  t  2
 dy
dt  2x  y  z  3t2
 dx
dt  x  y  z  t  1
 dz
dt  x  z
dz
dt   10x  4y  3z
 dy
dt  x  2z
dy
dt  6x  y
 dx
dt  x  y
 dx
dt  3x  4y  9z
 dy
dt  5x
 dy
dt  4x  8y
 dx
dt  4x  7y
 dx
dt  3x  5y
8.
9.
10.
In Problems 11-16 verify that the vector X is a solution of
the given system.
11.
12.
13.
14. X 
2
1
1
0X; X 
1
3et 
4
4tet
X 
1
1
1
4
1X; X 
1
2e3t/2
 dy
dt  2x  4y; X 
5 cos t
3 cos t  sin tet
 dx
dt  2x  5y
dy
dt  4x  7y; X 
1
2e5t
dx
dt  3x  4y
d
dt 
x
y 
3
1
7
1
x
y 
4
8sin t 
  t  4
2t  1e4t
d
dt 
x
y
z

1
3
2
1
4
5
2
1
6
x
y
z

1
2
2
et 
3
1
1
t
X 
7
4
0
5
1
2
9
1
3
X 
0
2
1
e5t 
8
0
3
e2t
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.
16.
In Problems 17-20 the given vectors are solutions of a
system X  AX. Determine whether the vectors form a
fundamental set on the interval (, ).
17.
18.
19.
20.
In Problems 21-24 verify that the vector Xp is a particular
solution of the given system.
21.
dy
dt  3x  2y  4t  18; Xp 
2
1t 
5
1
dx
dt  x  4y  2t  7
X1 
1
6
13
, X2 
1
2
1
e4t, X3 
2
3
2
e3t
X3 
3
6
12
 t
2
4
4
 X1 
1
2
4
 t
1
2
2
, X2 
1
2
4
,
X1 
1
1et, X2 
2
6et 
8
8tet
X1 
1
1e2t, X2 
1
1e6t
X 
1
1
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
X; X 
sin t
1
2 sin t  1
2 cos t 
sin t  cos t 
X 
1
6
1
2
1
2
1
0
1
X; X 
1
6
13
8.2
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
333
22.
23.
24.
25. Prove that the general solution of
on the interval (, ) is
26. Prove that the general solution of
on the interval (, ) is
  
1
0t2 
2
4t 
1
0.
 X  c1
1
1  12e12t  c2
1
1  12e12t
X 
1
1
1
1X 
1
1t2 
4
6t 
1
5
X  c1
6
1
5
et  c2
3
1
1
e2t  c3
2
1
1
e3t.
X 
0
1
1
6
0
1
0
1
0
X
X 
1
4
6
2
2
1
3
0
0
X 
1
4
3
sin 3t; Xp 
sin 3t
0
cos 3t
X 
2
3
1
4X 
1
7et; Xp 
1
1et 
1
1tet
X 
2
1
1
1X 
5
2; Xp 
1
3
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section II.3 of Appendix II
●Also the Student Resource Manual
INTRODUCTION
We saw in Example 5 of Section 8.1 that the general solution of the homogeneous
system 
is
. 
Because the solution vectors X1 and X2 have the form 
,
i  1, 2, 
Xi 
k1
k2e
it
X  c1X1  c2X2  c1
1
1e2t  c2
3
5e6t
X 
1
5
3
3X 
8.2
(continues on page 334)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

334
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
where k1, k2, l1, and l2 are constants, we are prompted to ask whether we can always ﬁnd a solution
of the form
(1)
for the general homogeneous linear ﬁrst-order system
(2)
where A is an n  n matrix of constants.
X  AX,
X 
 (
k1
k2
kn)
e lt  Kelt
...
THEOREM 8.2.1
General Solution—Homogeneous Systems
Let l1, l2, . . . , ln be n distinct real eigenvalues of the coefﬁcient matrix A of the
homogeneous system (2) and let K1, K2, . . . , Kn be the corresponding eigenvec-
tors. Then the general solution of (2) on the interval (, ) is given by
X  c1K1e
1t  c2K2e
2t      cnKne
nt.
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
If (1) is to be a solution vector of the homoge-
neous linear system (2), then X  Klelt, so the system becomes Klelt  AKelt.
After dividing out elt and rearranging, we obtain AK  lK or AK  lK  0. Since
K  IK, the last equation is the same as
(3)
The matrix equation (3) is equivalent to the simultaneous algebraic equations
Thus to ﬁnd a nontrivial solution X of (2), we must ﬁrst ﬁnd a nontrivial solution
of the foregoing system; in other words, we must ﬁnd a nontrivial vector K that
satisﬁes (3). But for (3) to have solutions other than the obvious solution
, we must have
This polynomial equation in l is called the characteristic equation of the matrix A;
its solutions are the eigenvalues of A. A solution K 	 0 of (3) corresponding to
an eigenvalue l is called an eigenvector of A. A solution of the homogeneous system
(2) is then X  Kelt.
In the discussion that follows we examine three cases: real and distinct eigen-
values (that is, no eigenvalues are equal), repeated eigenvalues, and, ﬁnally, complex
eigenvalues.
8.2.1
DISTINCT REAL EIGENVALUES
When the n  n matrix A possesses n distinct real eigenvalues l1, l2, . . . , ln, then a
set of n linearly independent eigenvectors K1, K2, . . . , Kn can always be found, and
is a fundamental set of solutions of (2) on the interval (, ).
X1  K1e
1t,    X2  K2e
2t,    . . . ,    Xn  Kne
nt
det(A  
I)  0.
k1  k2      kn  0
(a11  l)k1 
a12k2  . . . 
a1nkn  0
a2nkn  0
a21k1  (a22  l)k2  . . . 
                      
an1k1             an2k2  . . .  (ann  l)kn  0.
...
...
(A  
I)K  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.2
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
335
_1
_2
_3
2
3
1
_1
_2
_3
2
3
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
t
x
(a) graph of x  et  3e4t
(b) graph of y  et  2e4t
(c) trajectory deﬁned by
x  et  3e4t, y  et  2e4t
in the phase plane
_2
_4
_6
2
4
6
t
y
_2
_4
_6
_8
_10
12.5 15
10
5
7.5
2.5
2
4
x
y
FIGURE 8.2.1
A solution from (5)
yields three different curves in three
different planes
EXAMPLE 1
Distinct Eigenvalues
Solve
(4)
SOLUTION
We ﬁrst ﬁnd the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix of
coefﬁcients.
From the characteristic equation
we see that the eigenvalues are l1  1 and l2  4.
Now for l1  1, (3) is equivalent to
Thus k1  k2. When k2  1, the related eigenvector is
For 
2  4 we have
so 
therefore with k2  2 the corresponding eigenvector is
Since the matrix of coefﬁcients A is a 2  2 matrix and since we have found two lin-
early independent solutions of (4),
we conclude that the general solution of the system is
(5)
Phase Portrait
You should keep ﬁrmly in mind that writing a solution of a sys-
tem of linear ﬁrst-order differential equations in terms of matrices is simply an
alternative to the method that we employed in Section 4.9, that is, listing the individ-
ual functions and the relationship between the constants. If we add the vectors on the
right-hand side of (5) and then equate the entries with the corresponding entries in
the vector on the left-hand side, we obtain the more familiar statement
As was pointed out in Section 8.1, we can interpret these equations as parametric
equations of curves in the xy-plane or phase plane. Each curve, corresponding to
speciﬁc choices for c1 and c2, is called a trajectory. For the choice of constants
c1  c2  1 in the solution (5) we see in Figure 8.2.1 the graph of x(t) in the
tx-plane, the graph of y(t) in the ty-plane, and the trajectory consisting of the points
x  c1et  3c2e4t,    y  c1et  2c2e4t.
X  c1X1  c2X2  c1
1
1et  c2
3
2e4t.
X1 
1
1et    and    X2 
3
2e4t,
K2 
3
2.
k1  3
2 k2;
 2k1  3k2  0
 2k1  3k2  0
K1 
1
1.
 2k1  2k2  0.
 3k1  3k2  0
det(A  
I)  
2  
2
3
1  
  
2  3
  4  (
  1)(
  4)  0
 dy
dt  2x   y.
 dx
dt  2x  3y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(x(t), y(t)) in the phase plane. A collection of representative trajectories in the phase
plane, as shown in Figure 8.2.2, is said to be a phase portrait of the given linear
system. What appears to be two red lines in Figure 8.2.2 are actually four red
half-lines deﬁned parametrically in the ﬁrst, second, third, and fourth quadrants
by the solutions X2, X1, X2, and X1, respectively. For example, the Cartesian
equations 
, and y  x, x  0, of the half-lines in the ﬁrst and fourth
quadrants were obtained by eliminating the parameter t in the solutions x  3e4t,
y  2e4t, and x  et, y  et, respectively. Moreover, each eigenvector can be
visualized as a two-dimensional vector lying along one of these half-lines. The
eigenvector 
lies along 
in the ﬁrst quadrant, and 
lies
along y  x in the fourth quadrant. Each vector starts at the origin; K2 terminates
at the point (2, 3), and K1 terminates at (1, 1).
The origin is not only a constant solution x  0, y  0 of every 2  2 homoge-
neous linear system X  AX, but also an important point in the qualitative study of
such systems. If we think in physical terms, the arrowheads on each trajectory
in Figure 8.2.2 indicate the direction that a particle with coordinates (x(t), y(t)) on
that trajectory at time t moves as time increases. Observe that the arrowheads, with
the exception of only those on the half-lines in the second and fourth quadrants,
indicate that a particle moves away from the origin as time t increases. If we imagine
time ranging from  to , then inspection of the solution x  c1et  3c2e4t,
y  c1et  2c2e4t, c1 	 0, c2 	 0 shows that a trajectory, or moving particle,
"starts" asymptotic to one of the half-lines deﬁned by X1 or X1 (since e4t is negli-
gible for 
) and "ﬁnishes" asymptotic to one of the half-lines deﬁned by X2
and X2 (since et is negligible for 
).
We note in passing that Figure 8.2.2 represents a phase portrait that is typical of
all 2  2 homogeneous linear systems X  AX with real eigenvalues of opposite
signs. See Problem 17 in Exercises 8.2. Moreover, phase portraits in the two cases
when distinct real eigenvalues have the same algebraic sign are typical of all such
2  2 linear systems; the only difference is that the arrowheads indicate that a parti-
cle moves away from the origin on any trajectory as 
when both l1 and l2 are
positive and moves toward the origin on any trajectory when both l1 and l2 are neg-
ative. Consequently, we call the origin a repeller in the case l1  0, l2  0 and an
attractor in the case l1  0, l2  0. See Problem 18 in Exercises 8.2. The origin in
Figure 8.2.2 is neither a repeller nor an attractor. Investigation of the remaining case
when l  0 is an eigenvalue of a 2  2 homogeneous linear system is left as an
exercise. See Problem 49 in Exercises 8.2.
t : 
t : 
t : 
K1 
1
1
y  2
3
 x
K2 
3
2
y  2
3
 x, x  0
336
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
x
y
X1
X2
FIGURE 8.2.2
A phase portrait of
system (4)
EXAMPLE 2
Distinct Eigenvalues
Solve
(6)
SOLUTION
Using the cofactors of the third row, we ﬁnd
and so the eigenvalues are l1  3, l2  4, and l3  5.
det(A  
I)  p
4  
1
0
1
5  
1
   1
1
3  
p  (
  3)(
  4)(
  5)  0,
 dz
dt 
 y  3 z.
 dy
dt   x  5 y 
 z
 dx
dt  4x   y 
 z
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For l1  3 Gauss-Jordan elimination gives
Therefore k1  k3 and k2  0. The choice k3  1 gives an eigenvector and corre-
sponding solution vector
(7)
Similarly, for l2  4
implies that k1  10k3 and k2  k3. Choosing k3  1, we get a second eigenvector
and solution vector
(8)
Finally, when l3  5, the augmented matrices
yield
(9)
The general solution of (6) is a linear combination of the solution vectors in (7),
(8), and (9):
Use of Computers
Software packages such as MATLAB, Mathematica,
Maple, and DERIVE can be real time savers in ﬁnding eigenvalues and eigenvectors
of a matrix A.
8.2.2
REPEATED EIGENVALUES
Of course, not all of the n eigenvalues l1, l2, . . . , ln of an n  n matrix A need be
distinct; that is, some of the eigenvalues may be repeated. For example, the charac-
teristic equation of the coefﬁcient matrix in the system
(10)
X 
3
2
18
9X
X  c1
1
0
1e3t  c2
10
1
1e4t  c3
1
8
1e5t.
K3 
1
8
1
,    X3 
1
8
1
e5t.
(A  5I0)  (

9
1
0
1
1
8
0
0
0
1
0
1
 )
(

1
0
0
1
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
 )
row
operations
K2 
10
1
1
,    X2 
10
1
1
e4t.
(A  4I0)  (

0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
9
1
 )
 (

1
0
0
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
 )
row
operations
K1 
1
0
1
,    X1 
1
0
1
e3t.
(A  3I0)  (

1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
8
1
 )
(

1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
 )
.
row
operations
8.2
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
337
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

is readily shown to be (l  3)2  0, and therefore l1  l2  3 is a root of multi-
plicity two. For this value we ﬁnd the single eigenvector
(11)
is one solution of (10). But since we are obviously interested in forming the general
solution of the system, we need to pursue the question of ﬁnding a second solution.
In general, if m is a positive integer and (l  l1)m is a factor of the characteristic
equation while (l  l1)m1 is not a factor, then l1 is said to be an eigenvalue of
multiplicity m. The next three examples illustrate the following cases:
(i)
For some n  n matrices A it may be possible to ﬁnd m linearly inde-
pendent eigenvectors K1, K2, . . . , Km corresponding to an eigenvalue

1 of multiplicity m  n. In this case the general solution of the system
contains the linear combination
(ii)
If there is only one eigenvector corresponding to the eigenvalue l1 of
multiplicity m, then m linearly independent solutions of the form
where Kij are column vectors, can always be found.
Eigenvalue of Multiplicity Two
We begin by considering eigenvalues of
multiplicity two. In the ﬁrst example we illustrate a matrix for which we can ﬁnd two
distinct eigenvectors corresponding to a double eigenvalue.
X1  K11e l1t
X2  K21te l1t  K22e l1t
               
Xm  Km1                       e l1t  Km2                        e l1t  . . .  Kmme l1t, 
tm1
--------
(m  1)!
tm2
--------
(m  2)!
...
c1K1e
1t  c2K2e
1t      cmKme
1t.
K1 
3
1,    so    X1 
3
1e3t
338
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 3
Repeated Eigenvalues
Solve 
SOLUTION
Expanding the determinant in the characteristic equation
yields (l  1)2(l  5)  0. We see that l1  l2  1 and l3  5.
For l1  1 Gauss-Jordan elimination immediately gives
(A  I0)  (

2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
2
2
2
 )
(

1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
 ).
row
operations
det(A  
I)  p
1  
2
   2
2
1  
2
   2
2
1  
p  0
X 
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
X.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The ﬁrst row of the last matrix means k1  k2  k3  0 or k1  k2  k3. The choices
k2  1, k3  0 and k2  1, k3  1 yield, in turn, k1  1 and k1  0. Thus two
eigenvectors corresponding to l1  1 are
Since neither eigenvector is a constant multiple of the other, we have found two
linearly independent solutions,
corresponding to the same eigenvalue. Lastly, for l3  5 the reduction
implies that k1  k3 and k2  k3. Picking k3  1 gives k1  1, k2  1; thus a
third eigenvector is
We conclude that the general solution of the system is
The matrix of coefﬁcients A in Example 3 is a special kind of matrix known
as a symmetric matrix. An n  n matrix A is said to be symmetric if its transpose
AT (where the rows and columns are interchanged) is the same as A—that is, if
AT  A. It can be proved that if the matrix A in the system X  AX is symmetric
and has real entries, then we can always ﬁnd n linearly independent eigen-
vectors K1, K2, . . . , Kn, and the general solution of such a system is as given in
Theorem 8.2.1. As illustrated in Example 3, this result holds even when some of the
eigenvalues are repeated.
Second Solution
Now suppose that l1 is an eigenvalue of multiplicity two
and that there is only one eigenvector associated with this value. A second solution
can be found of the form
,
(12)
where
and
 )
K 
 (
k1
k2
kn
 )
.
P 
 (
p1
p2
pn
...
...
X2  Kte
1t  Pe
1t
X  c1
1
1
0
et  c2
0
1
1
et  c3
1
1
1
e5t.
K3 
1
1
1
.
(A  5I0)  (

4
2
2
2
2
4
0
0
0
2
4
2
 )
(

1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
 )
row
operations
 X1 
1
1
0
et     and    X2 
0
1
1
et,
 K1 
1
1
0
    and     K2 
0
1
1
.
8.2
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
339
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To see this, we substitute (12) into the system X  AX and simplify:
Since this last equation is to hold for all values of t, we must have
(13)
and
(14)
Equation (13) simply states that K must be an eigenvector of A associated with l1.
By solving (13), we ﬁnd one solution 
. To ﬁnd the second solution X2, we
need only solve the additional system (14) for the vector P.
X1  Ke
1t
(A  
1I)P  K.
(A  
1I)K  0
(AK  
1K)te
1t  (AP  
1P  K)e
1t  0.
340
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
x
y
X1
FIGURE 8.2.3
A phase portrait of
system (10)
EXAMPLE 4
Repeated Eigenvalues
Find the general solution of the system given in (10).
SOLUTION
From (11) we know that l1  3 and that one solution is
. Identifying 
, we ﬁnd from (14) that we must
now solve
.
Since this system is obviously equivalent to one equation, we have an inﬁnite
number of choices for p1 and p2. For example, by choosing p1  1, we ﬁnd 
.
However, for simplicity we shall choose 
so that p2  0. Hence 
.
Thus from (12) we ﬁnd 
. The general solution of (10) is  
then X  c1X1  c2X2 or
By assigning various values to c1 and c2 in the solution in Example 4, we
can plot trajectories of the system in (10). A phase portrait of (10) is given in
Figure 8.2.3. The solutions X1 and X1 determine two half-lines 
and
, respectively, shown in red in the ﬁgure. Because the single
eigenvalue is negative and 
as 
on every trajectory, we have
as 
. This is why the arrowheads in Figure 8.2.3 indicate
that a particle on any trajectory moves toward the origin as time increases and why
the origin is an attractor in this case. Moreover, a moving particle or trajectory
, approaches (0, 0)
tangentially to one of the half-lines as 
. In contrast, when the repeated eigen-
value is positive, the situation is reversed and the origin is a repeller. See Problem 21
in Exercises 8.2. Analogous to Figure 8.2.2, Figure 8.2.3 is typical of all 2  2
homogeneous linear systems X  AX that have two repeated negative eigenvalues.
See Problem 32 in Exercises 8.2.
Eigenvalue of Multiplicity Three
When the coefﬁcient matrix A has only
one eigenvector associated with an eigenvalue l1 of multiplicity three, we can ﬁnd a
t : 
y  c1e3t  c2te3t, c2 	 0
x  3c1e3t  c2(3te3t  1
2e3t),
t : 
(x(t), y(t)) : (0, 0)
t : 
e3t : 0
y  1
3x, x  0
y  1
3x, x  0
X  c1
3
1e3t  c2
3
1te3t 
1
2
0e3t.
X2 
3
1te3t 
1
2
0e3t
P 
1
2
0
p1  1
2
p2  1
6
(A  3I)P  K    or    6p1  18p2  3
2p1     6p2  1
K 
3
1 and P 
p1
p2
X1 
3
1e3t
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

second solution of the form (12) and a third solution of the form
,
(15)
where
By substituting (15) into the system X  AX, we ﬁnd that the column vectors K, P,
and Q must satisfy
(16)
(17)
and
(18)
Of course, the solutions of (16) and (17) can be used in forming the solutions X1
and X2.
 (A  
1I)Q  P.
 (A  
1I)P  K
 (A  
1I)K  0
and
 )
,
K 
 (
k1
k2
kn
...
 )
,
P 
 (
p1
p2
pn
...
 )
.
Q 
 (
q1
q2
qn
...
X3  K t2
2 e
1t  Pte
1t  Qe
1t
8.2
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
341
EXAMPLE 5
Repeated Eigenvalues
Solve 
.
SOLUTION
The characteristic equation (l  2)3  0 shows that l1  2 is an
eigenvalue of multiplicity three. By solving (A  2I)K  0, we ﬁnd the single
eigenvector
We next solve the systems (A  2I)P  K and (A  2I)Q  P in succession and
ﬁnd that
Using (12) and (15), we see that the general solution of the system is
.
X  c1
1
0
0
e2t  c2
1
0
0
te2t 
0
1
0
e2t
 c3
1
0
0
t2
2 e2t 
0
1
0
te2t 
0
6
5
1
5
e2t
P 
0
1
0
    and    Q 
0
6
5
1
5
.
K 
1
0
0
.
X 
2
0
0
1
2
0
6
5
2
X
REMARKS
When an eigenvalue l1 has multiplicity m, either we can ﬁnd m linearly
independent eigenvectors or the number of corresponding eigenvectors is less
than m. Hence the two cases listed on page 338 are not all the possibilities under
which a repeated eigenvalue can occur. It can happen, say, that a 5  5 matrix
has an eigenvalue of multiplicity ﬁve and there exist three corresponding lin-
early independent eigenvectors. See Problems 31 and 50 in Exercises 8.2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.2.3
COMPLEX EIGENVALUES
If l1  a  bi and l2  a  bi, b  0, i2  1 are complex eigenvalues of the
coefﬁcient matrix A, we can then certainly expect their corresponding eigenvectors
to also have complex entries.*
For example, the characteristic equation of the system
(19)
is
From the quadratic formula we ﬁnd l1  5  2i, l2  5  2i.
Now for l1  5  2i we must solve
Since k2  (1  2i)k1,† the choice k1  1 gives the following eigenvector and
corresponding solution vector:
In like manner, for l2  5  2i we ﬁnd
We can verify by means of the Wronskian that these solution vectors are linearly
independent, and so the general solution of (19) is
(20)
Note that the entries in K2 corresponding to l2 are the conjugates of the
entries in K1 corresponding to l1. The conjugate of l1 is, of course, l2. We
write this as 
and 
. We have illustrated the following general
result.
K2  K1

2  
1
X  c1
1
1  2ie(52i )t  c2
1
1  2ie(52i )t.
K2 
1
1  2i,    X2 
1
1  2ie(52i)t.
K1 
1
1  2i,    X1 
1
1  2ie(52i)t.
 5k1  (1  2i) k2  0.
 (1  2i)k1  
 k2  0
det(A  
I)  
6  
5
1
4  
  
2  10
  29  0.
dx
dt  6x  y
  dy
dt  5x  4y
342
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
*When the characteristic equation has real coefﬁcients, complex eigenvalues always appear in conjugate
pairs.
†Note that the second equation is simply (1  2i) times the ﬁrst.
THEOREM 8.2.2
Solutions Corresponding to a Complex Eigenvalue
Let A be the coefﬁcient matrix having real entries of the homogeneous system (2),
and let K1 be an eigenvector corresponding to the complex eigenvalue l1 
a  ib, a and b real. Then
are solutions of (2).
K1e
1t    and    K1e
1t
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

It is desirable and relatively easy to rewrite a solution such as (20) in terms of
real functions. To this end we ﬁrst use Euler's formula to write
Then, after we multiply complex numbers, collect terms, and replace c1  c2 by C1
and (c1  c2)i by C2, (20) becomes
(21)
where
and
It is now important to realize that the vectors X1 and X2 in (21) constitute a linearly
independent set of real solutions of the original system. Consequently, we are justi-
ﬁed in ignoring the relationship between C1, C2 and c1, c2, and we can regard C1 and
C2 as completely arbitrary and real. In other words, the linear combination (21) is
an alternative general solution of (19). Moreover, with the real form given in (21) we
are able to obtain a phase portrait of the system in (19). From (21) we ﬁnd x(t) and
y(t) to be
By plotting the trajectories (x(t), y(t)) for various values of C1 and C2, we obtain the
phase portrait of (19) shown in Figure 8.2.4. Because the real part of l1 is 5  0,
as 
. This is why the arrowheads in Figure 8.2.4 point away from the
origin; a particle on any trajectory spirals away from the origin as 
. The origin
is a repeller.
The process by which we obtained the real solutions in (21) can be generalized.
Let K1 be an eigenvector of the coefﬁcient matrix A (with real entries)
corresponding to the complex eigenvalue l1  a  ib. Then the solution vectors in
Theorem 8.2.2 can be written as
By the superposition principle, Theorem 8.1.2, the following vectors are also
solutions:
Both 
and 
are real numbers for any complex
number z  a  ib. Therefore, the entries in the column vectors 
and
are real numbers. By deﬁning
(22)
we are led to the following theorem.
B1  1
2 (K1  K1)    and    B2  i
2 (K1  K1),
1
2i(K1  K1)
1
2(K1  K1)
1
2i(z  z)  b
1
2(z  z)  a
 X2  i
2(K1e
1t  K1e
1t)  i
2(K1  K1)et cos t  1
2(K1  K1)et sin t.
 X1  1
2(K1e
1t  K1e
1t)  1
2(K1  K1)et cos t  i
2(K1  K1)et sin t
 K1e
1t  K1eteit  K1et(cos t  i sin t).
 K1e
1t  K1eteit  K1et(cos t  i sin t)
t : 
t : 
e5t : 
 y  (C1  2C2)e5t cos 2t  (2C1  C2)e5t sin 2t.
 x  C1e5t cos 2t  C2e5t sin 2t
 X2 
0
2cos 2t 
1
1sin 2te5t.
 X1 
1
1cos 2t 
0
2sin 2te5t
X  C1X1  C2X2,
 e(52i )t  e5te2ti  e5t(cos 2t  i sin 2t).
 e(52i )t  e5te2ti  e5t(cos 2t  i sin 2t)
8.2
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
343
FIGURE 8.2.4
A phase portrait of
system (19)
x
y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The matrices B1 and B2 in (22) are often denoted by
(24)
since these vectors are, respectively, the real and imaginary parts of the eigenvector
K1. For example, (21) follows from (23) with
 B1  Re(K1) 
1
1   and   B2  Im(K1) 
0
2.
 K1 
1
1  2i 
1
1  i
0
2,
B1  Re(K1)    and    B2  Im(K1)
344
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
THEOREM 8.2.3
Real Solutions Corresponding to a Complex Eigenvalue
Let l1  a  ib be a complex eigenvalue of the coefﬁcient matrix A in the
homogeneous system (2) and let B1 and B2 denote the column vectors deﬁned
in (22). Then
(23)
are linearly independent solutions of (2) on (, ).
 X2  [B2 cos t  B1 sin t]et
 X1  [B1 cos t  B2 sin t]et
EXAMPLE 6
Complex Eigenvalues
Solve the initial-value problem
(25)
SOLUTION
First we obtain the eigenvalues from
The eigenvalues are l1  2i and 
. For l1 the system
gives k1  (2  2i)k2. By choosing k2  1, we get
Now from (24) we form
Since a  0, it follows from (23) that the general solution of the system is
(26)
  c1
2 cos 2t  2 sin 2t
cos 2t
  c2
2 cos 2t  2 sin 2t
sin 2t
.
X  c1
2
1cos 2t 
2
0sin 2t  c2
2
0cos 2t 
2
1sin 2t
B1  Re(K1) 
2
1    and    B2  Im(K1) 
2
0.
K1 
2  2i
1  
2
1  i
2
0.
  
 k1  (2  2i) k2  0
(2  2i ) k1   
 8k2  0

2  
1  2i
det(A  
I)  
2  
1
8
2  
  
2  4  0.
X 
2
1
8
2X,  X(0) 
2
1.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

X 
X.
(29)

   0
   0
k1
m1
 k2
m1
   k2
m2
 0 0
   k2
m1
k2
m2
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
8.2
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
345
Some graphs of the curves or trajectories deﬁned by solution (26) of the system
are illustrated in the phase portrait in Figure 8.2.5. Now the initial condition
or, equivalently, x(0)  2 and y(0)  1 yields the algebraic system
2c1  2c2  2, c1  1, whose solution is c1  1, c2  0. Thus the solution 
to the problem is 
. The speciﬁc trajectory deﬁned 
parametrically by the particular solution x  2 cos 2t  2 sin 2t, y  cos 2t is the
red curve in Figure 8.2.5. Note that this curve passes through (2, 1).
X 
2 cos 2t  2 sin 2t
cos 2t

X(0) 
2
1
FIGURE 8.2.5
A phase portrait of (25)
in Example 6
x
y
(2, _1)
REMARKS
In this section we have examined exclusively homogeneous ﬁrst-order systems
of linear equations in normal form X  AX. But often the mathematical
model of a dynamical physical system is a homogeneous second-order system
whose normal form is X  AX. For example, the model for the coupled
springs in (1) of Section 7.6,
(27)
can be written as
where
Since M is nonsingular, we can solve for X as X  AX, where A  M1K.
Thus (27) is equivalent to
(28)
The methods of this section can be used to solve such a system in two ways:
•
First, the original system (27) can be transformed into a ﬁrst-order system
by means of substitutions. If we let 
and 
, then 
and
and so (27) is equivalent to a system of four linear ﬁrst-order DEs:
or
By ﬁnding the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the coefﬁcient matrix A in
(29), we see that the solution of this ﬁrst-order system gives the complete
state of the physical system—the positions of the masses relative to the
equilibrium positions (x1 and x2) as well as the velocities of the masses
(x3 and x4) at time t. See Problem 48(a) in Exercises 8.2.
x4  k2
m2
 x1  k2
m2
 x2
x3  
k1
m1
 k2
m1x1  k2
m1
 x2
x2  x4
x1  x3
x4  x2
x3  x1
x2  x4
x1  x3
X 
k1
m1
 k2
m1
     k2
m2
   k2
m1
k2
m2
X.
M 
m1
0
0
m2,    K 
k1  k2
k2
   k2
k2,    and    X 
x1(t)
x2(t).
MX  KX,
 m2x2  k2(x2  x1),
 m1x1  k1x1  k2(x2  x1)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

346
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
•
Second, because (27) describes free undamped motion, it can be argued
that real-valued solutions of the second-order system (28) will have
the form
,
(30)
where V is a column matrix of constants. Substituting either of the
functions in (30) into X  AX yields (A  v2I)V  0. (Verify.)
By identiﬁcation with (3) of this section we conclude that l  v2
represents an eigenvalue and V a corresponding eigenvector of A. It can
be shown that the eigenvalues 
, i  1, 2 of A are negative, and
so 
is a real number and represents a (circular) frequency
of vibration (see (4) of Section 7.6). By superposition of solutions the
general solution of (28) is then
(31)
where V1 and V2 are, in turn, real eigenvectors of A corresponding to l1
and l2.
The result given in (31) generalizes. If 
are
distinct negative eigenvalues and V1, V2, . . . , Vn are corresponding real
eigenvectors of the n  n coefﬁcient matrix A, then the homogeneous
second-order system X  AX has the general solution
(32)
where ai and bi represent arbitrary constants. See Problem 48(b) in
Exercises 8.2.
X  
n
i1
 (ai cos it  bi sin it)Vi,
1
2, 2
2, . . . , n
2
  (c1 cos 1t  c2 sin 1t)V1  (c3 cos 2t  c4 sin 2t)V2,
 X  c1V1 cos 1t  c2V1 sin 1t  c3V2 cos 2t  c4V2 sin 2t
i  1
i

i  i
2
X  V cos t    and    X  V sin t
EXERCISES 8.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-14.
8.2.1
DISTINCT REAL EIGENVALUES
In Problems 1-12 ﬁnd the general solution of the given
system.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
dz
dt  5y  2z
dz
dt  y  z
dy
dt  5x  10y  4z
dy
dt  2y
dx
dt  2x  7y
dx
dt  x  y  z
X 
6
3
2
1X
X 
10
8
5
12X
dy
dt  3
4x  2y
dy
dt   5
2x  2y
dx
dt   5
2x  2y
dx
dt  4x  2y
dy
dt  x  3y
dy
dt  4x  3y
dx
dt  2x  2y
dx
dt  x  2y
9.
10.
11.
12.
In Problems 13 and 14 solve the given initial-value problem.
13.
14. X 
1
0
1
1
2
1
4
0
1
X, X(0) 
1
3
0
X 
1
2
1
0
1
2X, X(0) 
3
5
X 
1
4
0
4
1
0
2
2
6
X
X 
1
3
4
1
8
1
3
2
1
4
0
3
1
2
X
X 
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
X
X 
1
1
0
1
2
3
0
1
1
X
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Computer Lab Assignments
In Problems 15 and 16 use a CAS or linear algebra software
as an aid in ﬁnding the general solution of the given system.
15.
16.
17. (a) Use computer software to obtain the phase portrait
of the system in Problem 5. If possible, include
arrowheads as in Figure 8.2.2. Also include four
half-lines in your phase portrait.
(b) Obtain the Cartesian equations of each of the four
half-lines in part (a).
(c) Draw the eigenvectors on your phase portrait of the
system.
18. Find phase portraits for the systems in Problems 2 and 4.
For each system ﬁnd any half-line trajectories and
include these lines in your phase portrait.
8.2.2
REPEATED EIGENVALUES
In Problems 19-28 ﬁnd the general solution of the given
system.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28. X 
4
0
0
1
4
0
0
1
4
X
X 
1
2
0
0
2
1
0
1
0
X
X 
1
0
0
0
3
1
0
1
1
X
X 
5
1
0
4
0
2
0
2
5
X
dz
dt  4x  2y  3z
dz
dt  x  y  z
dy
dt  2x  2z
dy
dt  x  y  z
dx
dt  3x  2y  4z
dx
dt  3x  y  z
X 
12
4
9
0X
X 
1
3
3
5X
dy
dt  5x  4y
dy
dt  9x  3y
dx
dt  6x  5y
dx
dt  3x  y
X 
 1 0 1 0
 2.8
0
5.1
2
1
0
  2
  0
3
3.1
  0
1.8
1 0 4 1.5
0
3
0
0
1
X
X 
0.9
0.7
1.1
2.1
6.5
1.7
3.2
4.2
3.4
X
8.2
HOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
347
In Problems 29 and 30 solve the given initial-value problem.
29.
30.
31. Show that the 5  5 matrix
has an eigenvalue l1 of multiplicity 5. Show that three
linearly independent eigenvectors corresponding to l1
can be found.
Computer Lab Assignments
32. Find phase portraits for the systems in Problems 20
and 21. For each system ﬁnd any half-line trajectories
and include these lines in your phase portrait.
8.2.3
COMPLEX EIGENVALUES
In Problems 33-44 ﬁnd the general solution of the given
system.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42. X 
4
0
4
0
6
0
1
0
4
X
X 
1
1
1
1
1
0
2
0
1
X
dz
dt  4x  3z
dz
dt  y
dy
dt  3x  6z
dy
dt  z
dx
dt  2x  y  2z
dx
dt  z
X 
1
1
8
3X
X 
4
5
5
4X
dy
dt  2x  6y
dy
dt  2x  3y
dx
dt  4x  5y
dx
dt  5x  y
dy
dt  2x  y
dy
dt  5x  2y
dx
dt  x  y
dx
dt  6x  y
A 
2
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
1
2
X 
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
X, X(0) 
1
2
5
X 
2
1
4
6X, X(0) 
1
6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

43.
44.
In Problems 45 and 46 solve the given initial-value problem.
45.
46.
Computer Lab Assignments
47. Find phase portraits for the systems in Problems 36, 37,
and 38.
48. (a) Solve (2) of Section 7.6 using the ﬁrst method
outlined in the Remarks (page 345)—that is, express
(2) of Section 7.6 as a ﬁrst-order system of four lin-
ear equations. Use a CAS or linear algebra software
as an aid in ﬁnding eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
a 4  4 matrix. Then apply the initial conditions to
your general solution to obtain (4) of Section 7.6.
(b) Solve (2) of Section 7.6 using the second method out-
lined in the Remarks—that is, express (2) of Sec-
tion 7.6 as a second-order system of two linear equa-
tions. Assume solutions of the form X  V sin vt
X 
6
5
1
4X, X(0) 
2
8
X 
1
1
1
12
2
1
14
3
2
X,  X(0) 
4
6
7
X 
2
1
1
4
2
0
4
0
2
X
X 
2
5
0
5
6
0
1
4
2
X
348
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
and X  V cos vt. Find the eigenvalues and eigen-
vectors of a 2  2 matrix. As in part (a), obtain (4)
of Section 7.6.
Discussion Problems
49. Solve each of the following linear systems.
(a)
(b)
Find a phase portrait of each system. What is the geo-
metric signiﬁcance of the line y  x in each portrait?
50. Consider the 5  5 matrix given in Problem 31. Solve
the system X  AX without the aid of matrix methods,
but write the general solution using matrix notation. Use
the general solution as a basis for a discussion of how the
system can be solved using the matrix methods of this
section. Carry out your ideas.
51. Obtain a Cartesian equation of the curve deﬁned
parametrically by the solution of the linear system in
Example 6. Identify the curve passing through (2, 1)
in Figure 8.2.5. [Hint: Compute x2, y2, and xy.]
52. Examine your phase portraits in Problem 47. Under
what conditions will the phase portrait of a 2  2
homogeneous linear system with complex eigenvalues
consist of a family of closed curves? consist of a family
of spirals? Under what conditions is the origin (0, 0) a
repeller? An attractor?
X 
1
1
1
1X
X 
1
1
1
1X
8.3.1
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS
The Assumptions
As in Section 4.4, the method of undetermined coefﬁcients
consists of making an educated guess about the form of a particular solution vector
Xp; the guess is motivated by the types of functions that make up the entries of the
NONHOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 4.4 (Undetermined Coefﬁcients)
●Section 4.6 (Variation of Parameters)
INTRODUCTION
In Section 8.1 we saw that the general solution of a nonhomogeneous linear
system X  AX  F(t) on an interval I is X  Xc  Xp, where 
is the complementary function or general solution of the associated homogeneous linear system
X  AX and Xp is any particular solution of the nonhomogeneous system. In Section 8.2 we saw
how to obtain Xc when the coefﬁcient matrix A was an n  n matrix of constants. In the present
section we consider two methods for obtaining Xp.
The methods of undetermined coefﬁcients and variation of parameters used in Chapter 4 to
ﬁnd particular solutions of nonhomogeneous linear ODEs can both be adapted to the solution of
nonhomogeneous linear systems X  AX  F(t). Of the two methods, variation of parameters
is the more powerful technique. However, there are instances when the method of undetermined
coefﬁcients provides a quick means of ﬁnding a particular solution.
Xc  c1X1  c2X2      cnXn
8.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

column matrix F(t). Not surprisingly, the matrix version of undetermined coefﬁcients
is applicable to X  AX  F(t) only when the entries of A are constants and the
entries of F(t) are constants, polynomials, exponential functions, sines and cosines,
or ﬁnite sums and products of these functions.
8.3
NONHOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
349
EXAMPLE 1
Undetermined Coefﬁcients
Solve the system 
on (, ).
SOLUTION
We ﬁrst solve the associated homogeneous system
The characteristic equation of the coefﬁcient matrix A,
yields the complex eigenvalues l1  i and 
. By the procedures of
Section 8.2 we ﬁnd
Now since F(t) is a constant vector, we assume a constant particular solution vector
. Substituting this latter assumption into the original system and equat-
ing entries leads to
Solving this algebraic system gives a1  14 and b1  11, and so a particular solution
is 
. The general solution of the original system of DEs on the interval
(, ) is then X  Xc  Xp or
X  c1
cos t  sin t
cos t   c2
cos t  sin t
sin t  
14
11.
Xp 
14
11
 0  a1 
 b1  3.
 0  a1  2b1  8
Xp 
a1
b1
Xc  c1
cos t  sin t
cos t   c2
cos t  sin t
sin t .

2  
1  i
det(A  
I)  
1  
1
2
1  
  
2  1  0,
X 
1
1
2
1X.
X 
1
1
2
1X 
8
3
EXAMPLE 2
Undetermined Coefﬁcients
Solve the system 
on (, ).
SOLUTION
The eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors of the associated
homogeneous system 
are found to be l1  2, l2  7, 
,
and 
. Hence the complementary function is
Xc  c1
1
4e2t  c2
1
1e7t.
K2 
1
1
K1 
1
4
X 
6
4
1
3X
X 
6
4
1
3X 
6t
10t  4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now because F(t) can be written 
, we shall try to ﬁnd a
particular solution of the system that possesses the same form:
Substituting this last assumption into the given system yields
or
From the last identity we obtain four algebraic equations in four unknowns
Solving the ﬁrst two equations simultaneously yields a2  2 and b2  6. We then
substitute these values into the last two equations and solve for a1 and b1. The results
are 
. It follows, therefore, that a particular solution vector is
.
The general solution of the system on (, ) is X  Xc  Xp or
.
X  c1
   1
4e2t  c2
1
1e7t 
2
6t 
4
7
10
7
Xp 
2
6t 
4
7
10
7
a1  4
7, b1  10
7
6a2    b2    6  0
4a2  3b2  10  0    and    6a1   b1  a2     0 
4a1  3b1  b2  4  0.
 
0
0 
(6a2  b2  6)t  6a1  b1  a2
(4a2  3b2  10)t  4a1  3b1  b2  4.
 
a2
b2 
6
4
1
3
a2
b2t 
a1
b1 
6
10t 
0
4
Xp 
a2
b2t 
a1
b1.
F(t) 
6
10t 
0
4
350
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 3
Form of Xp
Determine the form of a particular solution vector Xp for the system
SOLUTION
Because F(t) can be written in matrix terms as
a natural assumption for a particular solution would be
Xp 
a3
b3et 
a2
b2t 
a1
b1.
F(t) 
2
1et 
0
5t 
1
7
dy
dt  x  y  et  5t  7.
dx
dt  5x  3y  2et  1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.3
NONHOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
351
REMARKS
The method of undetermined coefﬁcients for linear systems is not as straightfor-
ward as the last three examples would seem to indicate. In Section 4.4 the form
of a particular solution yp was predicated on prior knowledge of the comple-
mentary function yc. The same is true for the formation of Xp. But there are fur-
ther difﬁculties: The special rules governing the form of yp in Section 4.4 do not
quite carry to the formation of Xp. For example, if F(t) is a constant vector, as
in Example 1, and l  0 is an eigenvalue of multiplicity one, then Xc contains
a constant vector. Under the Multiplication Rule on page 145 we would 
ordinarily try a particular solution of the form 
. This is not the
proper assumption for linear systems; it should be 
. 
Similarly, in Example 3, if we replace et in F(t) by e2t (l  2 is an eigenvalue),
then the correct form of the particular solution vector is
Rather than delving into these difﬁculties, we turn instead to the method of
variation of parameters.
Xp 
a4
b4te2t 
a3
b3e2t 
a2
b2t 
a1
b1.
Xp 
a2
b2t 
a1
b1
Xp 
a1
b1t
8.3.2
VARIATION OF PARAMETERS
A Fundamental Matrix
If X1, X2, . . . , Xn is a fundamental set of solutions of
the homogeneous system X  AX on an interval I, then its general solution on the in-
terval is the linear combination 
(1)
The last matrix in (1) is recognized as the product of an n  n matrix with an
n  1 matrix. In other words, the general solution (1) can be written as the product
,
(2)
where C is an n  1 column vector of arbitrary constants c1, c2, . . . , cn and the n  n
matrix, whose columns consist of the entries of the solution vectors of the system
X  AX,
is called a fundamental matrix of the system on the interval.
x11
x21
xn1
(t)  (
 )
,
x1n
x2n
xnn
x12
x22
xn2
. . .
. . .
. . .
...
...
X  (t)C
x11
x21
xn1
x12
x22
xn2
X  c1( )
  c2( )
  . . .  cn(
...
...
x1n
x2n
xnn
c1x11  c2x12  . . .  cnx1n
c1x21  c2x22  . . .  cnx2n
c1xn1  c2xn2  . . .  cnxnn
)
  (
)
.
...
...
 X  c1X1  c2X2      cnXn or
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In the discussion that follows we need to use two properties of a fundamental
matrix:
•
A fundamental matrix 
is nonsingular.
•
If 
is a fundamental matrix of the system X  AX, then
.
(3)
A reexamination of (9) of Theorem 8.1.3 shows that det 
is the same as the
Wronskian W(X1, X2, . . . , Xn). Hence the linear independence of the columns
of
on the interval I guarantees that det 
for every t in the interval. Since
is nonsingular, the multiplicative inverse 
exists for every t in the inter-
val. The result given in (3) follows immediately from the fact that every column of
is a solution vector of X  AX.
Variation of Parameters
Analogous to the procedure in Section 4.6 we ask
whether it is possible to replace the matrix of constants C in (2) by a column matrix
of functions
(4)
is a particular solution of the nonhomogeneous system
.
(5)
By the Product Rule the derivative of the last expression in (4) is
.
(6)
Note that the order of the products in (6) is very important. Since U(t) is a column
matrix, the products 
and 
are not deﬁned. Substituting (4) and (6)
into (5) gives
(7)
Now if we use (3) to replace 
, (7) becomes
or
(8)
Multiplying both sides of equation (8) by 
gives
.
Since 
, we conclude that a particular solution of (5) is
.
(9)
To calculate the indeﬁnite integral of the column matrix 
in (9), we inte-
grate each entry. Thus the general solution of the system (5) is X  Xc  Xp or
.
(10)
Note that it is not necessary to use a constant of integration in the evaluation of
for the same reasons stated in the discussion of variation of parame-
ters in Section 4.6.
1(t)F(t) dt
X  (t)C  (t)1(t)F(t) dt
1(t)F(t)
Xp  (t)1(t)F(t) dt
Xp  (t)U(t)
U(t)  1(t)F(t)    and so    U(t) 1(t)F(t) dt
1(t)
(t)U(t)  F(t).
(t)U(t)  A(t)U(t)  A(t)U(t)  F(t)
(t)
(t)U(t)  (t)U(t)  A(t)U(t)  F(t).
U(t)(t)
U(t)(t)
Xp  (t)U(t)  (t)U(t)
X  AX  F(t)
u1(t)
u2(t)
un(t)
U(t)  (
Xp  (t)U(t)
so
)
...
(t)
1(t)
(t)
(t) 	 0
(t)
(t)
(t)  A(t)
(t)
(t)
352
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.3
NONHOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
353
EXAMPLE 4
Variation of Parameters
Solve the system
(11)
on (, ).
SOLUTION
We ﬁrst solve the associated homogeneous system
.
(12)
The characteristic equation of the coefﬁcient matrix is
,
so the eigenvalues are l1  2 and l2  5. By the usual method we ﬁnd that the
eigenvectors corresponding to l1 and l2 are, respectively, 
and
. The solution vectors of the homogeneous system (12) are then
.
The entries in X1 form the ﬁrst column of 
, and the entries in X2 form the second
column of 
. Hence
.
From (9) we obtain the particular solution
Hence from (10) the general solution of (11) on the interval is
.
  c1
1
1e2t  c2
1
2e5t 
6
5
3
5 t 
27
50
21
50 
1
4
1
2 et
X 
e2t
e2t
e5t
2e5t
c1
c2 
6
5t  27
50  1
4et
3
5t  21
50  1
2et
 
6
5t  27
50  1
4et
3
5t  21
50  1
2et.
 
e2t
e2t
e5t
2e5t
 te2t  1
2e2t  1
3et
1
5te5t  1
25e5t  1
12e4t
 
e2t
e2t
e5t
2e5t  
2te2t  1
3et
  te5t  1
3e4t dt
Xp  (t)1(t)F(t) dt 
e2t
e2t
e5t
2e5t  
2
3e2t
1
3e5t
1
3e2t
1
3e5t
3t
et dt
(t) 
e2t
e2t
e5t
2e5t    and    1(t) 
2
3e2t
1
3e5t
1
3e2t
1
3e5t
(t)
(t)
X1 
1
1e2t 
e2t
e2t    and    X2 
1
2e5t 
e5t
2e5t
K2 
1
2
K1 
1
1
det(A  
I)  
3  
2
1
4  
  (
  2)(
  5)  0
X 
3
2
1
4X
X 
3
2
1
4X 
3t
et
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Initial-Value Problem
The general solution of (5) on an interval can be writ-
ten in the alternative manner
,
(13)
where t and t0 are points in the interval. This last form is useful in solving (5) subject
to an initial condition X(t0)  X0, because the limits of integration are chosen so that
the particular solution vanishes at t  t0. Substituting t  t0 into (13) yields
from which we get 
. Substituting this last result into
(13) gives the following solution of the initial-value problem:
.
(14)
X  (t)1(t0)X0  (t) 
t
t0
 1(s)F(s) ds
C  1(t0)X0
X0  (t0)C
X  (t)C  (t) 
t
t0
 1(s)F(s) ds
354
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
FIGURE 8.3.1
Network in Problem 10
R1
R2
L1
L2
i1
i2
i3
E
8.3.2
VARIATION OF PARAMETERS
In Problems 11-30 use variation of parameters to solve the
given system.
11.
12.
13. X 
3
3
4
5
1X 
   1
1et/2
dy
dt  3x  2y  4t
dx
dt  2x  y
dy
dt  2x  2y  1
dx
dt  3x  3y  4
EXERCISES 8.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-15.
8.3.1
UNDETERMINED COEFFICIENTS
In Problems 1-8 use the method of undetermined coefﬁ-
cients to solve the given system.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9. Solve 
subject to
.
X(0) 
4
5
X 
1
3
2
4X 
3
3
X 
0
0
5
0
5
0
5
0
0X 
5
10
40
X 
1
0
0
1
2
0
1
3
5X 
1
1
2e4t
X 
1
1
5
1X 
sin t
2 cos t
X 
4
9
1
3
6X 
3
10et
X 
1
4
4
1X 
4t  9e6t
t  e6t
X 
1
3
3
1X 
2t2
t  5
dy
dt  x  11y  6
dx
dt  5x  9y  2
dy
dt  x  2y  5
dx
dt  2x  3y  7
10. (a) The system of differential equations for the currents
i2(t) and i3(t) in the electrical network shown in
Figure 8.3.1 is
.
Use the method of undetermined coefﬁcients to
solve the system if R1  2 , R2  3 , L1  1 h,
L2  1 h, E  60 V, i2(0)  0, and i3(0)  0.
(b) Determine the current i1(t).
d
dt 
i2
i3 
R1>L1
R1>L2
R1>L1
(R1  R2)>L2
i2
i3 
E>L1
E>L2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
In Problems 31 and 32 use (14) to solve the given initial-
value problem.
31.
32. X 
1
1
1
1X 
1>t
1>t, X(1) 
2
1
X 
3
1
1
3X 
4e2t
4e4t, X(0) 
1
1
X 
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1X 
0
t
2et
X 
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
3X 
et
e2t
te3t
X 
1
1
2
1X 
tan t
1 
X 
1
1
2
2
1X 
csc t
sec tet
X 
0
1
1
0X 
1
cot t
X 
0
1
1
0X 
0
sec t tan t
X 
2
8
2
6X 
1
3 e2t
t
X 
1
1
1
1X 
cos t
sin tet
X 
1
1
1
1X 
3
3et
X 
0
1
1
0X 
sec t
0 
X 
3
2
2
1X 
1
1
X 
3
2
2
1X 
2et
et 
X 
1
1
8
1X 
et
tet
X 
1
1
8
1X 
12
12t
X 
0
1
2
3X 
2
e3t
X 
0
1
2
3X 
1
1et
X 
2
4
1
2X 
sin 2t
2 cos 2te2t
8.3
NONHOMOGENEOUS LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
355
33. The system of differential equations for the currents i1(t)
and i2(t) in the electrical network shown in Figure 8.3.2 is
.
Use variation of parameters to solve the system
if 
R1  8 , 
R2  3 , 
L1  1 h, 
L2  1 h,
E(t)  100 sin t V, i1(0)  0, and i2(0)  0.
d
dt 
i1
i2 
(R1  R2)>L2
R2>L1
    R2>L2
R2>L1
i1
i2 
E>L2
0 
FIGURE 8.3.2
Network in Problem 33
i1
i2
i3
R1
R2
E
L1
L2
Discussion Problems
34. If y1 and y2 are linearly independent solutions of the
associated homogeneous DE for y  P(x)y 
Q(x)y  f (x), show in the case of a nonhomogeneous
linear second-order DE that (9) reduces to the form of
variation of parameters discussed in Section 4.6.
Computer Lab Assignments
35. Solving a nonhomogeneous linear system X  AX  F(t)
by variation of parameters when A is a 3  3 (or larger)
matrix is almost an impossible task to do by hand.
Consider the system
(a) Use a CAS or linear algebra software to ﬁnd the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the coefﬁcient
matrix.
(b) Form a fundamental matrix 
and use the com-
puter to ﬁnd 
.
(c) Use the computer to carry out the computations of:
where C is a
column matrix of constants c1, c2, c3, and c4.
(d) Rewrite the computer output for the general solu-
tion of the system in the form X  Xc  Xp, where
Xc  c1X1  c2X2  c3X3  c4X4.
(t)C, and (t)C  1(t)F(t) dt,
1(t)F(t), 1(t)F(t) dt, (t)1(t)F(t) dt,
1(t)
(t)
X 
2
1
0
0
2
3
0
0
2
0
4
2
1
3
2
1
X 
tet
et
e2t
1
.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Homogeneous Systems
We shall now see that it is possible to deﬁne a ma-
trix exponential eAt so that
(1)
is a solution of the homogeneous system X  AX. Here A is an n  n matrix of
constants, and C is an n  1 column matrix of arbitrary constants. Note in (1) that the
matrix C post multiplies eAt because we want eAt to be an n  n matrix. While the
complete development of the meaning and theory of the matrix exponential would
require a thorough knowledge of matrix algebra, one way of deﬁning eAt is inspired
by the power series representation of the scalar exponential function eat:
(2)
The series in (2) converges for all t. Using this series, with 1 replaced by the identity
matrix I and the constant a replaced by an n  n matrix A of constants, we arrive at
a deﬁnition for the n  n matrix eAt.
  1  at  a2 t2
2!      k t k
k!      

k0
k tk
k!.
 eat  1  at  (at)2
2!      (at)k
k!    
X  eAtC
356
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
MATRIX EXPONENTIAL
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Appendix II.1 (Deﬁnitions II.10 and II.11)
INTRODUCTION
Matrices can be used in an entirely different manner to solve a system of
linear ﬁrst-order differential equations. Recall that the simple linear ﬁrst-order differential equation
x  ax, where a is constant, has the general solution x  ceat, where c is a constant. It seems
natural then to ask whether we can deﬁne a matrix exponential function eAt, where A is a matrix of
constants, so that a solution of the linear system X  AX is eAt.
8.4
DEFINITION 8.4.1
Matrix Exponential
For any n  n matrix A,
.
(3)
eAt  I  At  A2 t2
2!      Ak tk
k!      

k0
Ak tk
k!
It can be shown that the series given in (3) converges to an n  n matrix for
every value of t. Also, A2  AA, A3  A(A2), and so on.
EXAMPLE 1
Matrix Exponential Using (3)
Compute 
for the matrix
SOLUTION
From the various powers
A2 
22
0
0
32, A3 
23
0
0
33, A4 
24
0
0
34, . . . , An 
2n
0
0
3n, . . . ,
A 
2
0
0
3.
eAt
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.4
MATRIX EXPONENTIAL
●
357
we see from (3) that
In view of (2) and the identiﬁcations 
and 
the power series in the ﬁrst
and second rows of the last matrix represent, respectively, 
and so we have
.
The matrix in Example 1 is an example of a 
diagonal matrix. In general,
an 
matrix A is a diagonal matrix if all its entries off the main diagonal are
zero, that is,
.
Hence if A is any 
diagonal matrix it follows from Example 1 that
.
eAt 
ea11t
0
o
0
0
ea22t
o
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
0
0
o
eannt
n  n
A 
a11
0
o
0
0
a22
o
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
0
0
o
ann
n  n
2  2
eAt 
e2t
0
0
e3t
e2t and  e3t
a  3,
a  2
 
1  2t  22 t2
2! . . .
0
0
1  3t  32 t2
2! . . ..
 
1
0
0
1 
2
0
0
3t 
22
0
0
32 t2
2!  . . . 
2n
0
0
3n
 t n
n!  . . .
 eAt  I  At  A2
2! t2  . . .
  AI  At  A2 t2
2!      AeAt.
d
dt eAt  d
dt I  At  A2 t2
2!      Ak tk
k!      A  A2t  1
2! A3t2    
Because of (4), we can now prove that (1) is a solution of X  AX for every n  1
vector C of constants:
eAt is a Fundamental Matrix
If we denote the matrix exponential eAt by
X  d
dt eAtC  AeAtC  A(eAtC)  AX.
the symbol (t), then (4) is equivalent to the matrix differential equation
(t)  A(t) (see (3) of Section 8.3). In addition, it follows immediately from
Derivative of eAt
The derivative of the matrix exponential is analogous to the
differentiation property of the scalar exponential 
. To justify
,
(4)
we differentiate (3) term by term: 
d
dt eAt  AeAt
d
dt eat  aeat
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Deﬁnition 8.4.1 that (0)  eA0  I, and so det (0) 	 0. It turns out that these
two properties are sufﬁcient for us to conclude that (t) is a fundamental matrix of the
system X  AX.
Nonhomogeneous Systems
We saw in (4) of Section 2.3 that the general
358
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
solution of the single linear ﬁrst-order differential equation x  ax  f (t), where a
is a constant, can be expressed as
.
For a nonhomogeneous system of linear ﬁrst-order differential equations it can be
shown that the general solution of X  AX  F(t), where A is an n  n matrix of
constants, is
.
(5)
Since the matrix exponential eAt is a fundamental matrix, it is always nonsingular and
eAs  (eAs)1. In practice, eAs can be obtained from eAt by simply replacing t by s.
Computation of eAt
The deﬁnition of eAt given in (3) can, of course, always
be used to compute eAt. However, the practical utility of (3) is limited by the fact that
the entries in eAt are power series in t. With a natural desire to work with simple and
familiar things, we then try to recognize whether these series deﬁne a closed-form
function. Fortunately, there are many alternative ways of computing eAt; the follow-
ing discussion shows how the Laplace transform can be used.
Use of the Laplace Transform
We saw in (5) that X  eAt is a solution of 
X  Xc  Xp  eAtC  eAt
t
t0
eAsF(s) ds
x  xc  xp  ceat  eat
t
t0
easf (s) ds
EXAMPLE 2
Matrix Exponential Using (7)
Use the Laplace transform to compute eAt for 
.
SOLUTION
First we compute the matrix sI  A and ﬁnd its inverse:
 (sI  A)1 
s  1
 2
1
s  2
1

s  2
s(s  1)
2
s(s  1)
1
s(s  1)
s  1
s(s  1)
.
 sI  A 
s  1
2
1
s  2,
A 
1
2
1
2
X  AX. Indeed, since eA0  I, X  eAt is a solution of the initial-value problem
.
(6)
If 
, then the Laplace transform of (6) is
.
Multiplying the last equation by (sI  A)1 implies that x(s)  (sI  A)1
I  (sI  A)1. In other words, 
(7)
eAt  1{(sI  A)1}.
{eAt}  (sI  A)1 or
sx(s)  X(0)  Ax(s)    or    (sI  A)x(s)  I
x(s)  {X(t)}  {eAt}
X  AX,  X(0)  I
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Then we decompose the entries of the last matrix into partial fractions:
.
(8)
It follows from (7) that the inverse Laplace transform of (8) gives the desired result,
.
Use of Computers
For those who are willing to momentarily trade under-
standing for speed of solution, eAt can be computed with the aid of computer software.
See Problems 27 and 28 in Exercises 8.4.
eAt 
2  et
2  2et
1  et
1  2et
(sI  A)1 
2
s 
1
s  1
2
s 
2
s  1
 1
s 
1
s  1
 1
s 
2
s  1
8.4
MATRIX EXPONENTIAL
●
359
EXERCISES 8.4
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-16.
In Problems 1 and 2 use (3) to compute eAt and eAt.
1.
2.
In Problems 3 and 4 use (3) to compute eAt.
3.
4.
In Problems 5-8 use (1) to ﬁnd the general solution of the
given system.
5.
6.
7.
8.
In Problems 9-12 use (5) to ﬁnd the general solution of the
given system.
9.
10.
11.
12. X 
0
1
1
0X 
cosh t
sinh t
X 
0
1
1
0X 
1
1
X 
1
0
0
2X 
t
e4t
X 
1
0
0
2X 
3
1
X 
0
3
5
0
0
1
0
0
0X
X 
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2X
X 
0
1
1
0X
X 
1
0
0
2X
A 
0
3
5
0
0
1
0
0
0
A 
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
A 
0
1
1
0
A 
1
0
0
2
13. Solve the system in Problem 7 subject to the initial
condition
.
14. Solve the system in Problem 9 subject to the initial
condition
.
In Problems 15-18 use the method of Example 2 to com-
pute eAt for the coefﬁcient matrix. Use (1) to ﬁnd the general
solution of the given system.
15.
16.
17.
18.
Let P denote a matrix whose columns are eigenvectors
K1, K2, . . . , Kn corresponding to distinct eigenvalues
l1, l2, . . . , ln of an n  n matrix A. Then it can be shown
that A  PDP1, where D is a diagonal matrix deﬁned by
(9)
In Problems 19 and 20 verify the foregoing result for the
given matrix.
19.
20. A 
2
1
1
2
A 
2
3
1
6
l1
0
0
D  (
)
.
0
0
ln
0
l2
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
...
...
...
X 
0
2
1
2X
X 
5
1
9
1X
X 
4
1
2
1X
X 
4
4
3
4X
X(0) 
4
3
X(0) 
1
4
6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21. Suppose A  PDP1, where D is deﬁned as in (9). Use
(3) to show that eAt  PeDtP1.
22. If D is deﬁned as in (9), then ﬁnd eDt.
In Problems 23 and 24 use the results of Problems 19-22 to
solve the given system.
23.
24.
Discussion Problems
25. Reread the discussion leading to the result given in (7).
Does the matrix sI  A always have an inverse? Discuss.
26. A matrix A is said to be nilpotent if there exists
some positive integer m such that Am  0. Verify that
is nilpotent. Discuss why it is relatively easy to compute
eAt when A is nilpotent. Compute eAt and then use (1) to
solve the system X  AX.
A 
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
X 
2
1
1
2X
X 
2
3
1
6X
360
●
CHAPTER 8
SYSTEMS OF LINEAR FIRST-ORDER DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Computer Lab Assignments
27. (a) Use (1) to ﬁnd the general solution of
. Use a CAS to ﬁnd eAt. Then use 
the computer to ﬁnd eigenvalues and eigenvectors 
of the coefﬁcient matrix 
and form the 
general solution in the manner of Section 8.2.
Finally, reconcile the two forms of the general solu-
tion of the system.
(b) Use (1) to ﬁnd the general solution of
. Use a CAS to ﬁnd eAt. In the
case of complex output, utilize the software to do
the simpliﬁcation; for example, in Mathematica, if
m  MatrixExp[A t] has complex entries, then
try the command Simplify[ComplexExpand[m]].
28. Use (1) to ﬁnd the general solution of
.
Use MATLAB or a CAS to ﬁnd eAt.
X 
4
0
1
0
0
5
0
3
6
0
1
0
0
4
0
2
X
X 
3
2
1
1X
A 
4
3
2
3
X 
4
3
2
3X
CHAPTER 8 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-16.
In Problems 1 and 2 ﬁll in the blanks.
1. The vector 
is a solution of
for k  __________.
2. The vector 
is solution of 
the initial-value problem 
for c1  __________ and c2  __________.
3. Consider the linear system 
.
Without attempting to solve the system, determine
which one of the vectors
K1 
0
1
1, K2 
1
1
1, K3 
3
1
1, K4 
6
2
5
X 
4
1
1
6
3
4
6
2
3X
X 
1
6
10
3X, X(0) 
2
0
X  c1
1
1e9t  c2
5
3e7t
X 
1
2
4
1X 
8
1
X  k
4
5
is an eigenvector of the coefﬁcient matrix. What is
the solution of the system corresponding to this
eigenvector?
4. Consider the linear system X  AX of two differential
equations, where A is a real coefﬁcient matrix. What is
the general solution of the system if it is known that
l1  1  2i is an eigenvalue and 
is a corre-
sponding eigenvector?
In Problems 5-14 solve the given linear system.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10. X 
0
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
1X
X 
1
0
4
1
1
3
1
3
1X
X 
2
2
5
4X
X 
1
2
2
1X
dy
dt  2x  4y
dy
dt  x
dx
dt  4x  2y
dx
dt  2x  y
K1 
1
i
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15. (a) Consider the linear system X  AX of three ﬁrst-
order differential equations, where the coefﬁcient
matrix is
A 
5
3
5
3
5
5
3
3
3
X 
3
1
1
1X 
2
1e2t
X 
1
2
1
1X 
1
cot t
X 
1
1
2
2
1X 
0
et tan t
X 
2
0
8
4X 
2
16t
CHAPTER 8 IN REVIEW
●
361
and l  2 is known to be an eigenvalue of multi-
plicity two. Find two different solutions of the sys-
tem corresponding to this eigenvalue without using
a special formula (such as (12) of Section 8.2).
(b) Use the procedure of part (a) to solve
.
16. Verify that 
is a solution of the linear system
for arbitrary constants c1 and c2. By hand, draw a phase
portrait of the system.
X 
 1
0
0
1X
X 
c1
c2et
X 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1X
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

362
Numerical Solutions of
Ordinary Differential Equations
9.1 Euler Methods and Error Analysis
9.2 Runge-Kutta Methods
9.3 Multistep Methods
9.4 Higher-Order Equations and Systems
9.5 Second-Order Boundary-Value Problems
Chapter 9 in Review
Even if it can be shown that a solution of a differential equation exists, we might
not be able to exhibit it in explicit or implicit form. In many instances we have to
be content with an approximation of the solution. If a solution exists, it represents a
set of points in the Cartesian plane. In this chapter we continue to explore the basic
idea introduced in Section 2.6, that is, using the differential equation to construct an
algorithm to approximate the y-coordinates of points on the actual solution curve.
Our concentration in this chapter is primarily on ﬁrst-order initial-value problems
We saw in Section 4.10 that numerical procedures
developed for ﬁrst-order DEs extend in a natural way to systems of ﬁrst-order
equations. Because of this extension, we are able to approximate solutions of a
higher-order equation by rewriting it as a system of ﬁrst-order DEs. Chapter 9
concludes with a method for approximating solutions of linear second-order
boundary-value problems.
dy>dx  f(x, y), y(x0)  y0.
9
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A Comparison
In Problem 4 in Exercises 2.6 you were asked to use Euler's
method to obtain the approximate value of y(1.5) for the solution of the initial-value
problem y  2xy, y(1)  1. You should have obtained the analytic solution 
and results similar to those given in Tables 9.1.1 and 9.1.2.
y  ex21
9.1
EULER METHODS AND ERROR ANALYSIS
●
363
TABLE 9.1.1
Euler's Method with h  0.1
Actual 
Abs.
% Rel.
xn
yn
value
error
error
1.00
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.00
1.10
1.2000
1.2337
0.0337
2.73
1.20
1.4640
1.5527
0.0887
5.71
1.30
1.8154
1.9937
0.1784
8.95
1.40
2.2874
2.6117
0.3244
12.42
1.50
2.9278
3.4903
0.5625
16.12
TABLE 9.1.2
Euler's Method with h  0.05
Actual
Abs.
% Rel.
xn
yn
value
error
error
1.00
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.00
1.05
1.1000
1.1079
0.0079
0.72
1.10
1.2155
1.2337
0.0182
1.47
1.15
1.3492
1.3806
0.0314
2.27
1.20
1.5044
1.5527
0.0483
3.11
1.25
1.6849
1.7551
0.0702
4.00
1.30
1.8955
1.9937
0.0982
4.93
1.35
2.1419
2.2762
0.1343
5.90
1.40
2.4311
2.6117
0.1806
6.92
1.45
2.7714
3.0117
0.2403
7.98
1.50
3.1733
3.4903
0.3171
9.08
EULER METHODS AND ERROR ANALYSIS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 2.6
INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 2 we examined one of the simplest numerical methods for
approximating solutions of ﬁrst-order initial-value problems y  f(x, y), y(x0)  y0. Recall that the
backbone of Euler's method is the formula
(1)
where f is the function obtained from the differential equation y  f(x, y). The recursive use of (1)
for n  0, 1, 2, . . . yields the y-coordinates y1, y2, y3, . . . of points on successive "tangent lines" to
the solution curve at x1, x2, x3, . . . or xn  x0  nh, where h is a constant and is the size of the step
between xn and xn1. The values y1, y2, y3, . . . approximate the values of a solution y(x) of the IVP
at x1, x2, x3, . . . . But whatever advantage (1) has in its simplicity is lost in the crudeness of its
approximations.
yn1  yn  hf (xn, yn),
9.1
In this case, with a step size h  0.1 a 16% relative error in the calculation of
the approximation to y(1.5) is totally unacceptable. At the expense of doubling the
number of calculations, some improvement in accuracy is obtained by halving the
step size to h  0.05.
Errors in Numerical Methods
In choosing and using a numerical method
for the solution of an initial-value problem, we must be aware of the various sources
of errors. For some kinds of computation the accumulation of errors might reduce the
accuracy of an approximation to the point of making the computation useless. On the
other hand, depending on the use to which a numerical solution may be put, extreme
accuracy might not be worth the added expense and complication.
One source of error that is always present in calculations is round-off error.
This error results from the fact that any calculator or computer can represent numbers
using only a ﬁnite number of digits. Suppose, for the sake of illustration, that we have
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

364
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
a calculator that uses base 10 arithmetic and carries four digits, so that is repre-
sented in the calculator as 0.3333 and 
is represented as 0.1111. If we use this 
calculator to compute 
for x  0.3334, we obtain
With the help of a little algebra, however, we see that
so when 
. This exam-
ple shows that the effects of round-off error can be quite serious unless some care is
taken. One way to reduce the effect of round-off error is to minimize the number of
calculations. Another technique on a computer is to use double-precision arithmetic
to check the results. In general, round-off error is unpredictable and difﬁcult to ana-
lyze, and we will neglect it in the error analysis that follows. We will concentrate on
investigating the error introduced by using a formula or algorithm to approximate the
values of the solution.
Truncation Errors for Euler's Method
In the sequence of values y1, y2,
y3, . . . generated from (1), usually the value of y1 will not agree with the actual solu-
tion at x1—namely, y(x1)—because the algorithm gives only a straight-line
approximation to the solution. See Figure 2.6.2. The error is called the local truncation
error, formula error, or discretization error. It occurs at each step; that is, if we
assume that yn is accurate, then yn1 will contain local truncation error.
To derive a formula for the local truncation error for Euler's method, we use
Taylor's formula with remainder. If a function y(x) possesses k  1 derivatives that
are continuous on an open interval containing a and x, then
where c is some point between a and x. Setting k  1, a  xn, and x  xn1  xn  h,
we get
or
Euler's method (1) is the last formula without the last term; hence the local
truncation error in yn1 is
The value of c is usually unknown (it exists theoretically), so the exact error cannot
be calculated, but an upper bound on the absolute value of the error is 
In discussing errors that arise from the use of numerical methods, it is helpful to use
the notation O(hn). To deﬁne this concept, we let e(h) denote the error in a numerical
calculation depending on h. Then e(h) is said to be of order hn, denoted by O(hn), if there
exist a constant C and a positive integer n such that e(h)  Chn for h sufﬁciently small.
Thus the local truncation error for Euler's method is O(h2). We note that, in general, if
e(h) in a numerical method is of order hn and h is halved, the new error is approximately
C(h2)n  Chn2n; that is, the error is reduced by a factor of 12n.


where M 
max
xn x xn1  y(x).
Mh2> 2!,
y(c) h2
2!,    where  xn  c  xn1.
yn1
y(xn1)  yn  hf(xn, yn)  y(c)
.
h2
--
2!
y(xn1)  y(xn)  y(xn) h
1!  y(c) h2
2!
y(x)  y(a)  y(a) x  a
1!
 	 	 	  y(k)(a) (x  a)k
k!
 y(k1)(c) (x  a)k1
(k  1)! ,
x  0.3334, (x2  1
9)(x  1
3)  0.3334  0.3333  0.6667
x2  1
9
x  1
3
 (x  1
3)(x  1
3)
x  1
3
 x  1
3,
(0.3334)2  0.1111
0.3334  0.3333  0.1112  0.1111
0.3334  0.3333  1.
(x2  1
9)(x  1
3)
1
9
1
3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.1
EULER METHODS AND ERROR ANALYSIS
●
365
EXAMPLE 1
Bound for Local Truncation Errors
Find a bound for the local truncation errors for Euler's method applied to
y  2xy, y(1)  1.
SOLUTION
From the solution 
we get 
, so the local
truncation error is
where c is between xn and xn  h. In particular, for h  0.1 we can get an upper
bound on the local truncation error for y1 by replacing c by 1.1:
From Table 9.1.1 we see that the error after the ﬁrst step is 0.0337, less than the value
given by the bound.
Similarly, we can get a bound for the local truncation error for any of the ﬁve
steps given in Table 9.1.1 by replacing c by 1.5 (this value of c gives the largest value
of y(c) for any of the steps and may be too generous for the ﬁrst few steps). Doing
this gives
(2)
as an upper bound for the local truncation error in each step.
Note that if h is halved to 0.05 in Example 1, then the error bound is 0.0480,
about one-fourth as much as shown in (2). This is expected because the local trunca-
tion error for Euler's method is O(h2).
In the above analysis we assumed that the value of yn was exact in the calcula-
tion of yn1, but it is not because it contains local truncation errors from previous
steps. The total error in yn1 is an accumulation of the errors in each of the previous
steps. This total error is called the global truncation error. A complete analysis of
the global truncation error is beyond the scope of this text, but it can be shown that
the global truncation error for Euler's method is O(h).
We expect that, for Euler's method, if the step size is halved the error will
be approximately halved as well. This is borne out in Tables 9.1.1 and 9.1.2 where
the absolute error at x  1.50 with h  0.1 is 0.5625 and with h  0.05 is 0.3171,
approximately half as large.
In general it can be shown that if a method for the numerical solution of a
differential equation has local truncation error O(ha1), then the global truncation
error is O(ha).
For the remainder of this section and in the subsequent sections we study meth-
ods that give signiﬁcantly greater accuracy than does Euler's method.
Improved Euler's Method
The numerical method deﬁned by the formula
(3)
where
(4)
is commonly known as the improved Euler's method. To compute yn1 for
n  0, 1, 2, . . . from (3), we must, at each step, ﬁrst use Euler's method (4) to obtain
an initial estimate 
. For example, with n  0, (4) gives 
, and
then, knowing this value, we use (3) to get 
, where 
y1  y0  h f (x0, y0)  f (x1, y*1 )
2
y*1  y0  hf(x0, y0)
y*n1
 y*n1  yn  h f(xn, yn),
 yn1  yn  h f (xn, yn)  f (xn1, y*n1)
2
,
[2  (4)(1.5)2]e((1.5)21) (0.1)2
2
 0.1920
[2  (4)(1.1)2]e((1.1)21) (0.1)2
2
 0.0422.
y(c) h2
2  (2  4c2)e(c21) h2
2 ,
y  (2  4x2)ex21
y  ex21
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

366
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
x1  x0  h. These equations can be readily visualized. In Figure 9.1.1, observe that
m0  f(x0, y0) and 
are slopes of the solid straight lines shown passing
through the points (x0, y0) and 
, respectively. By taking an average of these
slopes, that is, 
, we obtain the slope of the parallel 
dashed skew lines. With the ﬁrst step, rather than advancing along the line through
(x0, y0) with slope f(x0, y0) to the point with y-coordinate 
obtained by Euler's
method, we advance instead along the red dashed line through (x0, y0) with slope mave
until we reach x1. It seems plausible from inspection of the ﬁgure that y1 is an
improvement over 
.
In general, the improved Euler's method is an example of a predictor-corrector
method. The value of 
given by (4) predicts a value of y(xn), whereas the value of
yn1 deﬁned by formula (3) corrects this estimate.
y*n1
y*1
y*1
mave  f (x0, y0)  f (x1, y1*)
2
(x1, y*1 )
m1  f (x1, y*1 )
( x 1 ,  y 1 ) 
( x 1 ,  y * 1 ) 
0 
1 
m ave 
x
y
x0
x1
h
(x0, y0)
(x1, 
)
(x1, 
)
m0 = f(x0, y0)
m1 = f(x1, y*1)
(x1, y(x1))
solution
curve
f(x0, y0) + f(x1, y*1)
2
mave =
FIGURE 9.1.1
Slope of red dashed
line is the average of m0 and m1
TABLE 9.1.4
Improved Euler's Method with h  0.05
Actual
Abs.
% Rel.
xn
yn
value
error
error
1.00
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.00
1.05
1.1077
1.1079
0.0002
0.02
1.10
1.2332
1.2337
0.0004
0.04
1.15
1.3798
1.3806
0.0008
0.06
1.20
1.5514
1.5527
0.0013
0.08
1.25
1.7531
1.7551
0.0020
0.11
1.30
1.9909
1.9937
0.0029
0.14
1.35
2.2721
2.2762
0.0041
0.18
1.40
2.6060
2.6117
0.0057
0.22
1.45
3.0038
3.0117
0.0079
0.26
1.50
3.4795
3.4904
0.0108
0.31
TABLE 9.1.3
Improved Euler's Method with h  0.1
Actual
Abs.
% Rel.
xn
yn
value
error
error
1.00
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.00
1.10
1.2320
1.2337
0.0017
0.14
1.20
1.5479
1.5527
0.0048
0.31
1.30
1.9832
1.9937
0.0106
0.53
1.40
2.5908
2.6117
0.0209
0.80
1.50
3.4509
3.4904
0.0394
1.13
A brief word of caution is in order here. We cannot compute all the values of 
ﬁrst and then substitute these values into formula (3). In other words, we cannot use
the data in Table 9.1.1 to help construct the values in Table 9.1.3. Why not?
Truncation Errors for the Improved Euler's Method
The local trunca-
tion error for the improved Euler's method is O(h3). The derivation of this result is
similar to the derivation of the local truncation error for Euler's method. Since the
y*n
EXAMPLE 2
Improved Euler's Method
Use the improved Euler's method to obtain the approximate value of y(1.5) for the
solution of the initial-value problem y  2xy, y(1)  1. Compare the results for
h  0.1 and h  0.05.
SOLUTION
With x0  1, y0  1, f(xn, yn)  2xnyn, n  0, and h  0.1, we ﬁrst
compute (4):
We use this last value in (3) along with x1  1  h  1  0.1  1.1:
The comparative values of the calculations for h  0.1 and h  0.05 are given in
Tables 9.1.3 and 9.1.4, respectively.
y1  y0  (0.1) 2x0y0  2x1y*1
2
 1  (0.1) 2(1)(1)  2(1.1)(1.2)
2
 1.232.
y*1  y0  (0.1)(2x0y0)  1  (0.1)2(1)(1)  1.2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

local truncation error for the improved Euler's method is O(h3), the global truncation
error is O(h2). This can be seen in Example 2; when the step size is halved from
h  0.1 to h  0.05, the absolute error at x  1.50 is reduced from 0.0394 to 0.0108,
a reduction of approximately (1
2)
2  1
4.
9.1
EULER METHODS AND ERROR ANALYSIS
●
367
EXERCISES 9.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-16.
In Problems 1-10 use the improved Euler's method to obtain
a four-decimal approximation of the indicated value. First
use h  0.1 and then use h  0.05.
1. y  2x  3y  1, y(1)  5;
y(1.5)
2. y  4x  2y, y(0)  2;
y(0.5)
3. y  1  y2, y(0)  0;
y(0.5)
4. y  x2  y2, y(0)  1;
y(0.5)
5. y  ey, y(0)  0;
y(0.5)
6. y  x  y2, y(0)  0;
y(0.5)
7. y  (x  y)2, y(0)  0.5;
y(0.5)
8.
9.
10. y  y  y2, y(0)  0.5;
y(0.5)
11. Consider the initial-value problem y  (x  y  1)2,
y(0)  2. Use the improved Euler's method with
h  0.1 and h  0.05 to obtain approximate values
of the solution at x  0.5. At each step compare the
approximate value with the actual value of the analytic
solution.
12. Although it might not be obvious from the differential
equation, its solution could "behave badly" near a point
x at which we wish to approximate y(x). Numerical pro-
cedures may give widely differing results near this
point. Let y(x) be the solution of the initial-value prob-
lem y  x2  y3, y(1)  1.
(a) Use a numerical solver to graph the solution on the
interval [1, 1.4].
(b) Using the step size h  0.1, compare the results
obtained from Euler's method with the results from
the improved Euler's method in the approximation
of y(1.4).
13. Consider the initial-value problem y  2y, y(0)  1.
The analytic solution is y  e2x.
(a) Approximate y(0.1) using one step and Euler's
method.
(b) Find a bound for the local truncation error in y1.
(c) Compare the error in y1 with your error bound.
(d) Approximate y(0.1) using two steps and Euler's
method.
y  xy2  y
x, y(1)  1; y(1.5)
y  xy  1y, y(0)  1; y(0.5)
(e) Verify that the global truncation error for Euler's
method is O(h) by comparing the errors in parts
(a) and (d).
14. Repeat Problem 13 using the improved Euler's method.
Its global truncation error is O(h2).
15. Repeat Problem 13 using the initial-value problem
y  x  2y, y(0)  1. The analytic solution is
16. Repeat Problem 15 using the improved Euler's method.
Its global truncation error is O(h2).
17. Consider the initial-value problem y  2x  3y  1,
y(1)  5. The analytic solution is
(a) Find a formula involving c and h for the local trunca-
tion error in the nth step if Euler's method is used.
(b) Find a bound for the local truncation error in each
step if h  0.1 is used to approximate y(1.5).
(c) Approximate y(1.5) using h  0.1 and h  0.05 with
Euler's method. See Problem 1 in Exercises 2.6.
(d) Calculate the errors in part (c) and verify that the
global truncation error of Euler's method is O(h).
18. Repeat Problem 17 using the improved Euler's
method, which has a global truncation error O(h2). See
Problem 1. You might need to keep more than four
decimal places to see the effect of reducing the order
of the error.
19. Repeat Problem 17 for the initial-value problem y  ey,
y(0)  0. The analytic solution is y(x)  ln(x  1).
Approximate y(0.5). See Problem 5 in Exercises 2.6.
20. Repeat Problem 19 using the improved Euler's
method, which has global truncation error O(h2). See
Problem 5. You might need to keep more than four
decimal places to see the effect of reducing the order
of error.
Discussion Problems
21. Answer the question "Why not?" that follows the three
sentences after Example 2 on page 366.
y(x)  1
9  2
3x  38
9  e3(x1).
y  1
2x  1
4  5
4e2x.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

368
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Runge-Kutta Methods
Fundamentally, all Runge-Kutta methods are gener-
alizations of the basic Euler formula (1) of Section 9.1 in that the slope function f is
replaced by a weighted average of slopes over the interval xn  x  xn1. That is,
(1)
Here the weights wi, i  1, 2, . . . , m, are constants that generally satisfy 
w1  w2  	 	 	  wm  1, and each ki, i  1, 2, . . . , m, is the function f evalu-
ated at a selected point (x, y) for which xn  x  xn1. We shall see that the ki are
defined recursively. The number m is called the order of the method. Observe that
by taking m  1, w1  1, and k1  f(xn, yn), we get the familiar Euler formula
yn1  yn  h f (xn, yn). Hence Euler's method is said to be a first-order Runge-
Kutta method.
The average in (1) is not formed willy-nilly, but parameters are chosen so that
(1) agrees with a Taylor polynomial of degree m. As we saw in the preceding section,
if a function y(x) possesses k  1 derivatives that are continuous on an open interval
containing a and x, then we can write
where c is some number between a and x. If we replace a by xn and x by
xn1  xn  h, then the foregoing formula becomes
where c is now some number between xn and xn1. When y(x) is a solution of
y  f (x, y) in the case k  1 and the remainder 
is small, we see that 
a Taylor polynomial y(xn1)  y(xn)  hy(xn) of degree one agrees with the
approximation formula of Euler's method
yn1  yn  hyn  yn  h f (xn, yn).
1
2 h2y(c)
y(xn1)  y(xn  h)  y(xn)  hy(xn)  h2
2! y(xn)  	 	 	 
hk1
(k  1)! y(k1)(c),
y(x)  y(a)  y(a) x  a
1!
 y(a) (x  a)2
2!
 	 	 	  y(k1)(c) (x  a)k1
(k  1)! ,
weighted average
yn1  yn  h (w1k1  w2k2  ...  wmkm).
RUNGE-KUTTA METHODS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 2.6 (see page 78)
INTRODUCTION
Probably one of the more popular as well as most accurate numerical proce-
dures used in obtaining approximate solutions to a ﬁrst-order initial-value problem y  f(x, y),
y(x0)  y0 is the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method. As the name suggests, there are Runge-Kutta
methods of different orders.
9.2
A Second-Order Runge-Kutta Method
To further illustrate (1), we con-
sider now a second-order Runge-Kutta procedure. This consists of ﬁnding con-
stants or parameters w1, w2, a, and b so that the formula
(2)
where
 k2  f(xn  
h, yn  hk1),
 k1  f(xn, yn)
 yn1  yn  h(w1k1  w2k2),
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

agrees with a Taylor polynomial of degree two. For our purposes it sufﬁces to say
that this can be done whenever the constants satisfy
(3)
This is an algebraic system of three equations in four unknowns and has inﬁnitely
many solutions:
(4)
where w2  0. For example, the choice 
yields 
,
and so (2) becomes
where
Since xn  h  xn1 and yn  hk1  yn  hf(xn, yn), the foregoing result is rec-
ognized to be the improved Euler's method that is summarized in (3) and (4) of
Section 9.1.
In view of the fact that w2  0 can be chosen arbitrarily in (4), there are many
possible second-order Runge-Kutta methods. See Problem 2 in Exercises 9.2.
We shall skip any discussion of third-order methods in order to come to the prin-
cipal point of discussion in this section.
k1  f (xn, yn)    and    k2  f (xn  h, yn  hk1).
yn1  yn  h
2 (k1  k2),
w1  1
2, 
  1, and   1
w2  1
2
w1  1  w2,    
  1
2w2
,    and      1
2w2
,
w1  w2  1,    w2
  1
2,     and    w2  1
2.
9.2
RUNGE-KUTTA METHODS
●
369
A Fourth-Order Runge-Kutta Method
A fourth-order Runge-Kutta
procedure consists of ﬁnding parameters so that the formula
(5)
where
agrees with a Taylor polynomial of degree four. This results in a system of 11 equa-
tions in 13 unknowns. The most commonly used set of values for the parameters
yields the following result:
(6)
While other fourth-order formulas are easily derived, the algorithm summarized in (6)
is so widely used and recognized as a valuable computational tool it is often referred to
as the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method or the classical Runge-Kutta method. It is (6)
that we have in mind, hereafter, when we use the abbreviation the RK4 method.
You are advised to look carefully at the formulas in (6); note that k2 depends on
k1, k3 depends on k2, and k4 depends on k3. Also, k2 and k3 involve approximations
to the slope at the midpoint 
of the interval deﬁned by xn  x  xn1.
xn  1
2 h
 k4  f (xn  h, yn  hk3).
 k3  f (xn  1
2h, yn  1
2hk2)
 k2  f (xn  1
2h, yn  1
2hk1)
 k1  f (xn, yn)
 yn1  yn  h
6 (k1  2k2  2k3  k4),
 k4  f (xn  
3h, yn  4hk1  5hk2  6hk3),
 k3  f (xn  
2h, yn  2hk1  3hk2)
 k2  f (xn  
1h, yn  1hk1)
 k1  f (xn, yn)
 yn1  yn  h(w1k1  w2k2  w3k3  w4k4),
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

370
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
TABLE 9.2.1
RK4 Method with h  0.1
Actual
Abs.
% Rel.
xn
yn
value
error
error
1.00
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.00
1.10
1.2337
1.2337
0.0000
0.00
1.20
1.5527
1.5527
0.0000
0.00
1.30
1.9937
1.9937
0.0000
0.00
1.40
2.6116
2.6117
0.0001
0.00
1.50
3.4902
3.4904
0.0001
0.00
Truncation Errors for the RK4 Method
In Section 9.1 we saw that global
truncation errors for Euler's method and for the improved Euler's method are, re-
spectively, O(h) and O(h2). Because the ﬁrst equation in (6) agrees with a Taylor
polynomial of degree four, the local truncation error for this method is y(5)(c) h55!
or O(h5), and the global truncation error is thus O(h4). It is now obvious why Euler's
method, the improved Euler's method, and (6) are ﬁrst-, second-, and fourth-order
Runge-Kutta methods, respectively.
EXAMPLE 1
RK4 Method
Use the RK4 method with h  0.1 to obtain an approximation to y(1.5) for the solu-
tion of y  2xy, y(1)  1.
SOLUTION
For the sake of illustration let us compute the case when n  0. From
(6) we ﬁnd
and therefore
The remaining calculations are summarized in Table 9.2.1, whose entries are
rounded to four decimal places.
Inspection of Table 9.2.1 shows why the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method is
so popular. If four-decimal-place accuracy is all that we desire, there is no need to
use a smaller step size. Table 9.2.2 compares the results of applying Euler's, the
improved Euler's, and the fourth-order Runge-Kutta methods to the initial-value
problem y  2xy, y(1)  1. (See Tables 9.1.1-9.1.4.)
 1  0.1
6  (2  2(2.31)  2(2.34255)  2.715361)  1.23367435.
 y1  y0  0.1
6  (k1  2k2  2k3  k4)
 2(x0  0.1)(y0  0.234255)  2.715361
 k4  f(x0  (0.1), y0  (0.1)2.34255)
 2(x0  1
2(0.1))(y0  1
2(0.231))  2.34255
 k3  f (x0  1
2(0.1), y0  1
2(0.1)2.31)
 2(x0  1
2(0.1))(y0  1
2(0.2))  2.31
 k2  f (x0  1
2(0.1), y0  1
2(0.1)2)
 k1  f (x0, y0)  2x0y0  2
TABLE 9.2.2
y  2xy, y(1)  1
Comparison of numerical methods with h  0.1
Comparison of numerical methods with h  0.05
Improved 
Actual
Improved
Actual
xn
Euler
Euler
RK4
value
xn
Euler
Euler
RK4
value
1.00
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.00
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.10
1.2000
1.2320
1.2337
1.2337
1.05
1.1000
1.1077
1.1079
1.1079
1.20
1.4640
1.5479
1.5527
1.5527
1.10
1.2155
1.2332
1.2337
1.2337
1.30
1.8154
1.9832
1.9937
1.9937
1.15
1.3492
1.3798
1.3806
1.3806
1.40
2.2874
2.5908
2.6116
2.6117
1.20
1.5044
1.5514
1.5527
1.5527
1.50
2.9278
3.4509
3.4902
3.4904
1.25
1.6849
1.7531
1.7551
1.7551
1.30
1.8955
1.9909
1.9937
1.9937
1.35
2.1419
2.2721
2.2762
2.2762
1.40
2.4311
2.6060
2.6117
2.6117
1.45
2.7714
3.0038
3.0117
3.0117
1.50
3.1733
3.4795
3.4903
3.4904
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.2
RUNGE-KUTTA METHODS
●
371
TABLE 9.2.3
RK4 Method
h
Approx.
Error
0.1
3.49021064
1.32321089  104
0.05 3.49033382
9.13776090  106
*The Runge-Kutta method of order four used in RKF45 is not the same as that given in (6).
EXAMPLE 2
Bound for Local Truncation Errors
Find a bound for the local truncation errors for the RK4 method applied to 
y  2xy, y(1)  1.
SOLUTION
By computing the ﬁfth derivative of the known solution 
we get
(7)
Thus with c  1.5, (7) yields a bound of 0.00028 on the local truncation error for
each of the ﬁve steps when h  0.1. Note that in Table 9.2.1 the error in y1 is much
less than this bound.
Table 9.2.3 gives the approximations to the solution of the initial-value problem
at x  1.5 that are obtained from the RK4 method. By computing the value of the an-
alytic solution at x  1.5, we can ﬁnd the error in these approximations. Because the
method is so accurate, many decimal places must be used in the numerical solution
to see the effect of halving the step size. Note that when h is halved, from h  0.1 to
h  0.05, the error is divided by a factor of about 24  16, as expected.
y(5)(c) h5
5!  (120c  160c3  32c5)ec21 h5
5!.
y(x)  ex21,
EXERCISES 9.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-17.
1. Use the RK4 method with h  0.1 to approximate
y(0.5), where y(x) is the solution of the initial-value
problem y  (x  y  1)2, y(0)  2. Compare this
approximate value with the actual value obtained in
Problem 11 in Exercises 9.1.
2. Assume that 
in (4). Use the resulting second-
order Runge-Kutta method to approximate y(0.5), where
y(x) is the solution of the initial-value problem in
Problem 1. Compare this approximate value with the ap-
proximate value obtained in Problem 11 in Exercises 9.1.
In Problems 3-12 use the RK4 method with h  0.1 to
obtain a four-decimal approximation of the indicated value.
3. y  2x  3y  1, y(1)  5;
y(1.5)
4. y  4x  2y, y(0)  2;
y(0.5)
5. y  1  y2, y(0)  0;
y(0.5)
w2  3
4
6. y  x2  y2, y(0)  1;
y(0.5)
7. y  ey, y(0)  0;
y(0.5)
8. y  x  y2, y(0)  0;
y(0.5)
9. y  (x  y)2, y(0)  0.5;
y(0.5)
10.
11.
12. y  y  y2, y(0)  0.5;
y(0.5)
13. If air resistance is proportional to the square of the instan-
taneous velocity, then the velocity v of a mass m dropped
from a given height is determined from
Let v(0)  0, k  0.125, m  5 slugs, and g  32 ft/s2.
m dv
dt  mg  kv2,    k  0.
y  xy2  y
x, y(1)  1; y(1.5)
y  xy  1y, y(0)  1; y(0.5)
Adaptive Methods
We have seen that the accuracy of a numerical method
for approximating solutions of differential equations can be improved by decreasing
the step size h. Of course, this enhanced accuracy is usually obtained at a cost—
namely, increased computation time and greater possibility of round-off error. In
general, over the interval of approximation there may be subintervals where a rela-
tively large step size sufﬁces and other subintervals where a smaller step is necessary
to keep the truncation error within a desired limit. Numerical methods that use a vari-
able step size are called adaptive methods. One of the more popular of the adaptive
routines is the Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method. Because Fehlberg employed two
Runge-Kutta methods of differing orders, a fourth- and a ﬁfth-order method, this al-
gorithm is frequently denoted as the RKF45 method.*
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

372
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
(a) Use the RK4 method with h  1 to approximate the
velocity v(5).
(b) Use a numerical solver to graph the solution of the
IVP on the interval [0, 6].
(c) Use separation of variables to solve the IVP and
then ﬁnd the actual value v(5).
14. A mathematical model for the area A (in cm2) that a
colony of bacteria (B. dendroides) occupies is given by
Suppose that the initial area is 0.24 cm2.
(a) Use the RK4 method with h  0.5 to complete the
following table:
dA
dt  A(2.128  0.0432A).*
18. Consider the initial-value problem y  2x  3y  1,
y(1)  5. The analytic solution is 
(a) Find a formula involving c and h for the local trunca-
tion error in the nth step if the RK4 method is used.
(b) Find a bound for the local truncation error in each
step if h  0.1 is used to approximate y(1.5).
(c) Approximate y(1.5) using the RK4 method with
h  0.1 and h  0.05. See Problem 3. You will need
to carry more than six decimal places to see the effect
of reducing the step size.
19. Repeat Problem 18 for the initial-value problem y  ey,
y(0)  0. The analytic solution is y(x)  ln(x  1).
Approximate y(0.5). See Problem 7.
Discussion Problems
20. A count of the number of evaluations of the function f
used in solving the initial-value problem y  f(x, y),
y(x0)  y0 is used as a measure of the computational
complexity of a numerical method. Determine the num-
ber of evaluations of f required for each step of Euler's,
the improved Euler's, and the RK4 methods. By consid-
ering some speciﬁc examples, compare the accuracy of
these methods when used with comparable computa-
tional complexities.
Computer Lab Assignments
21. The RK4 method for solving an initial-value problem
over an interval [a, b] results in a ﬁnite set of points
that are supposed to approximate points on the graph of
the exact solution. To expand this set of discrete points
to an approximate solution deﬁned at all points on the
interval [a, b], we can use an interpolating function.
This is a function, supported by most computer algebra
systems, that agrees with the given data exactly and as-
sumes a smooth transition between data points. These
interpolating functions may be polynomials or sets of
polynomials joined together smoothly. In Mathematica
the command yInterpolation[data] can be used to
obtain an interpolating function through the points
data  {{x0, y0}, {x1, y1}, . . . , {xn, yn}}. The inter-
polating function y[x] can now be treated like any other
function built into the computer algebra system.
(a) Find the analytic solution of the initial-value prob-
lem y  y  10 sin 3x; y(0)  0 on the interval
[0, 2]. Graph this solution and ﬁnd its positive roots.
(b) Use the RK4 method with h  0.1 to approximate a
solution of the initial-value problem in part (a).
Obtain an interpolating function and graph it. Find
the positive roots of the interpolating function of the
interval [0, 2].
y(x)  1
9  2
3x  38
9  e3(x1).
t (days)
1
2
3
4
5
A (observed)
2.78
13.53
36.30
47.50
49.40
A (approximated)
(b) Use a numerical solver to graph the solution of the
initial-value problem. Estimate the values A(1),
A(2), A(3), A(4), and A(5) from the graph.
(c) Use separation of variables to solve the initial-value
problem and compute the actual values A(1), A(2),
A(3), A(4), and A(5).
15. Consider the initial-value problem y  x2  y3, y(1)  1.
See Problem 12 in Exercises 9.1.
(a) Compare the results obtained from using the RK4
method over the interval [1, 1.4] with step sizes
h  0.1 and h  0.05.
(b) Use a numerical solver to graph the solution of the
initial-value problem on the interval [1, 1.4].
16. Consider the initial-value problem y  2y, y(0)  1.
The analytic solution is y(x)  e2x.
(a) Approximate y(0.1) using one step and the RK4
method.
(b) Find a bound for the local truncation error in y1.
(c) Compare the error in y1 with your error bound.
(d) Approximate y(0.1) using two steps and the RK4
method.
(e) Verify that the global truncation error for the RK4
method is O(h4) by comparing the errors in parts (a)
and (d).
17. Repeat Problem 16 using the initial-value problem
y  2y  x,
y(0)  1. The analytic solution is
y(x)  1
2x  1
4  5
4e2x.
*See V. A. Kostitzin, Mathematical Biology (London: Harrap, 1939).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.3
MULTISTEP METHODS
●
373
MULTISTEP METHODS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 9.1 and 9.2
INTRODUCTION
Euler's method, the improved Euler's method, and the Runge-Kutta methods
are examples of single-step or starting methods. In these methods each successive value yn1 is
computed based only on information about the immediately preceding value yn. On the other hand,
multistep or continuing methods use the values from several computed steps to obtain the value of
yn1. There are a large number of multistep method formulas for approximating solutions of DEs,
but since it is not our intention to survey the vast ﬁeld of numerical procedures, we will consider
only one such method here.
9.3
Adams-Bashforth-Moulton Method
The multistep method that is dis-
cussed in this section is called the fourth-order Adams-Bashforth-Moulton
method. Like the improved Euler's method it is a predictor-corrector method—that
is, one formula is used to predict a value 
, which in turn is used to obtain a cor-
rected value yn1. The predictor in this method is the Adams-Bashforth formula
(1)
for n  3. The value of 
is then substituted into the Adams-Moulton corrector
(2)
Notice that formula (1) requires that we know the values of y0, y1, y2, and y3 to
obtain y4. The value of y0 is, of course, the given initial condition. The local trunca-
tion error of the Adams-Bashforth-Moulton method is O(h5), the values of y1, y2, and
y3 are generally computed by a method with the same error property, such as the
fourth-order Runge-Kutta method.
 yn1  f (xn1, y*n1).
 yn1  yn  h
24(9yn1  19yn  5yn1  yn2)
y*n1
 yn3  f (xn3, yn3)
 yn2  f (xn2, yn2)
 yn1  f (xn1, yn1)
 yn  f (xn, yn)
y*n1  yn  h
24 (55yn  59yn1  37yn2  9yn3),
y*n1
EXAMPLE 1
Adams-Bashforth-Moulton Method
Use the Adams-Bashforth-Moulton method with h  0.2 to obtain an approximation
to y(0.8) for the solution of
SOLUTION
With a step size of h  0.2, y(0.8) will be approximated by y4. To get
started, we use the RK4 method with x0  0, y0  1, and h  0.2 to obtain
y1  1.02140000,    y2  1.09181796,    y3  1.22210646.
y  x  y  1,  y(0)  1.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

374
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Now with the identiﬁcations x0  0, x1  0.2, x2  0.4, x3  0.6, and
f (x, y)  x  y  1, we ﬁnd
With the foregoing values the predictor (1) then gives
To use the corrector (2), we ﬁrst need
Finally, (2) yields 
You should verify that the actual value of y(0.8) in Example 1 is 
y(0.8)  1.42554093. See Problem 1 in Exercises 9.3.
y4  y3  0.2
24 (9y4  19y3  5y2  y1)  1.42552788.
y4 f(x4, y*4)  0.8  1.42535975  1  1.22535975.
y*4  y3  0.2
24 (55y3  59y2  37y1  9y0) 1.42535975.
 y3  f (x3, y3)  (0.6)  (1.22210646)  1  0.82210646.
 y2  f (x2, y2)  (0.4)  (1.09181796)  1  0.49181796
 y1  f (x1, y1)  (0.2)  (1.02140000)  1  0.22140000
 y0  f (x0, y0)  (0)  (1)  1  0
Stability of Numerical Methods
An important consideration in using nu-
merical methods to approximate the solution of an initial-value problem is the stabil-
ity of the method. Simply stated, a numerical method is stable if small changes in the
initial condition result in only small changes in the computed solution. A numerical
method is said to be unstable if it is not stable. The reason that stability considera-
tions are important is that in each step after the ﬁrst step of a numerical technique we
are essentially starting over again with a new initial-value problem, where the initial
condition is the approximate solution value computed in the preceding step. Because
of the presence of round-off error, this value will almost certainly vary at least
slightly from the true value of the solution. Besides round-off error, another common
source of error occurs in the initial condition itself; in physical applications the data
are often obtained by imprecise measurements.
One possible method for detecting instability in the numerical solution of a spe-
ciﬁc initial-value problem is to compare the approximate solutions obtained when
decreasing step sizes are used. If the numerical method is unstable, the error may
actually increase with smaller step sizes. Another way of checking stability is to
observe what happens to solutions when the initial condition is slightly perturbed
(for example, change y(0)  1 to y(0)  0.999).
For a more detailed and precise discussion of stability, consult a numerical
analysis text. In general, all of the methods that we have discussed in this chapter
have good stability characteristics.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Multistep Methods
Many consid-
erations enter into the choice of a method to solve a differential equation
numerically. Single-step methods, particularly the RK4 method, are often chosen
because of their accuracy and the fact that they are easy to program. However, a
major drawback is that the right-hand side of the differential equation must be eval-
uated many times at each step. For instance, the RK4 method requires four function
evaluations for each step. On the other hand, if the function evaluations in the
previous step have been calculated and stored, a multistep method requires only
one new function evaluation for each step. This can lead to great savings in time and
expense.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As an example, solving y  f(x, y), y(x0)  y0 numerically using n steps by the
fourth-order Runge-Kutta method requires 4n function evaluations. The Adams-
Bashforth multistep method requires 16 function evaluations for the Runge-Kutta
fourth-order starter and n  4 for the n Adams-Bashforth steps, giving a total of
n  12 function evaluations for this method. In general the Adams-Bashforth multi-
step method requires slightly more than a quarter of the number of function evalua-
tions required for the RK4 method. If the evaluation of f(x, y) is complicated, the
multistep method will be more efﬁcient.
Another issue that is involved with multistep methods is how many times the
Adams-Moulton corrector formula should be repeated in each step. Each time
the corrector is used, another function evaluation is done, and so the accuracy is
increased at the expense of losing an advantage of the multistep method. In prac-
tice, the corrector is calculated once, and if the value of yn1 is changed by a large
amount, the entire problem is restarted using a smaller step size. This is often
the basis of the variable step size methods, whose discussion is beyond the scope
of this text.
9.4
HIGHER-ORDER EQUATIONS AND SYSTEMS
●
375
EXERCISES 9.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-17.
1. Find the analytic solution of the initial-value problem in
Example 1. Compare the actual values of y(0.2), y(0.4),
y(0.6), and y(0.8) with the approximations y1, y2, y3, and y4.
2. Write a computer program to implement the Adams-
Bashforth-Moulton method.
In Problems 3 and 4 use the Adams-Bashforth-Moulton
method to approximate y(0.8), where y(x) is the solution of
the given initial-value problem. Use h  0.2 and the RK4
method to compute y1, y2, and y3.
3. y  2x  3y  1,
y(0)  1
4. y  4x  2y,
y(0)  2
In Problems 5-8 use the Adams-Bashforth-Moulton method
to approximate y(1.0), where y(x) is the solution of the given
initial-value problem. First use h  0.2 and then use h  0.1.
Use the RK4 method to compute y1, y2, and y3.
5. y  1  y2,
y(0)  0
6. y  y  cos x,
y(0)  1
7. y  (x  y)2,
y(0)  0
8. y  xy  1y,  y(0)  1
HIGHER-ORDER EQUATIONS AND SYSTEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 1.1 (normal form of a second-order DE)
●Section 4.10 (second-order DE written as a system of ﬁrst-order DEs)
INTRODUCTION
So far, we have focused on numerical techniques that can be used to approx-
imate the solution of a ﬁrst-order initial-value problem y  f(x, y), y(x0)  y0. In order to approxi-
mate the solution of a second-order initial-value problem, we must express a second-order DE as a
system of two ﬁrst-order DEs. To do this, we begin by writing the second-order DE in normal form
by solving for y in terms of x, y, and y.
9.4
Second-Order IVPs
A second-order initial-value problem
(1)
y  f(x, y, y),  y(x0)  y0,  y(x0)  u0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

376
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
x
y
2
1
2
1
0.2
Euler's method 
approximate
y(0.2)
(a) Euler's method (red) and the
RK4 method (blue)
(b) RK4 method
x
y
10
20
5
15
2
1
RK4 method 
FIGURE 9.4.1
Numerical solution
curves generated by different methods
can be expressed as an initial-value problem for a system of first-order differen-
tial equations. If we let y  u, the differential equation in (1) becomes the system
(2)
Since y(x0)  u(x0), the corresponding initial conditions for (2) are then y(x0)  y0,
u(x0)  u0. The system (2) can now be solved numerically by simply applying a par-
ticular numerical method to each ﬁrst-order differential equation in the system. For
example, Euler's method applied to the system (2) would be
(3)
whereas the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method, or RK4 method, would be
(4)
where
In general, we can express every nth-order differential equation
y(n)  f(x, y, y, . . . , y(n1)) as a system of n first-order equations using the
substitutions y  u1, y  u2, y  u3, . . . , y (n1)  un.
k4  f (xn  h, yn  hm3, un  hk3).
m4  un  hk3
k3  f (xn  1
2h, yn  1
2hm2, un  1
2hk2)
m3  un  1
2hk2
k2  f (xn  1
2h, yn  1
2hm1, un  1
2hk1)
m2  un  1
2hk1
k1  f (xn, yn, un)
m1  un
un1  un  h
6 (k1  2k2  2k3  k4)
yn1  yn  h
6 (m1  2m2  2m3  m4)
un1  un  h f (xn, yn, un),
 yn1  yn  hun
 u  f(x, y, u).
 y  u
EXAMPLE 1
Euler's Method
Use Euler's method to obtain the approximate value of y(0.2), where y(x) is the
solution of the initial-value problem
(5)
SOLUTION
In terms of the substitution y  u, the equation is equivalent to the
system
.
Thus from (3) we obtain
Using the step size h  0.1 and y0  1, u0  2, we ﬁnd
In other words, y(0.2)  1.39 and y(0.2)  1.761.
With the aid of the graphing feature of a numerical solver, in Figure 9.4.1(a) we
compare the solution curve of (5) generated by Euler's method (h  0.1) on the
 u2  u1  (0.1)[x1u1  y1]  1.9  (0.1)[(0.1)(1.9)  1.2]  1.761.
 y2  y1  (0.1)u1  1.2  (0.1)(1.9)  1.39
 u1  u0  (0.1) [x0u0  y0]  2  (0.1)[(0)(2)  1]  1.9
 y1  y0  (0.1)u0  1  (0.1)2  1.2
 un1  un  h[xnun  yn].
 yn1  yn  hun
 u  xu  y
 y  u
y  xy  y  0,  y(0)  1,  y(0)  2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.4
HIGHER-ORDER EQUATIONS AND SYSTEMS
●
377
interval [0, 3] with the solution curve generated by the RK4 method (h  0.1). From
Figure 9.4.1(b) it appears that the solution y(x) of (4) has the property that 
and 
.
If desired, we can use the method of Section 6.2 to obtain two power series
solutions of the differential equation in (5). But unless this method reveals that the DE
possesses an elementary solution, we will still only be able to approximate y(0.2) using
a partial sum. Reinspection of the inﬁnite series solutions of Airy's differential equation
y  xy  0, given on page 242, does not reveal the oscillatory behavior of the
solutions y1(x) and y2(x) exhibited in the graphs in Figure 6.2.2. Those graphs were
obtained from a numerical solver using the RK4 method with a step size of h  0.1.
Systems Reduced to First-Order Systems
Using a procedure similar to
that just discussed for second-order equations, we can often reduce a system of
higher-order differential equations to a system of ﬁrst-order equations by ﬁrst solv-
ing for the highest-order derivative of each dependent variable and then making
appropriate substitutions for the lower-order derivatives.
x : 
y(x) : 0
EXAMPLE 2
A System Rewritten as a First-Order System
Write
as a system of ﬁrst-order differential equations.
SOLUTION
Write the system as
and then eliminate y by multiplying the second equation by 2 and subtracting. This
gives
.
Since the second equation of the system already expresses the highest-order derivative of
y in terms of the remaining functions, we are now in a position to introduce new vari-
ables. If we let x  u and y  v, the expressions for x and y become, respectively,
The original system can then be written in the form
It might not always be possible to carry out the reductions illustrated in Example 2.
Numerical Solution of a System
The solution of a system of the form
 g1(t, x1, x2, . . . , xn)
 g2(t, x1, x2, . . . , xn)
 gn(t, x1, x2, . . . , xn)
...
...
dx1
---
dt
dx2
---
dt
dxn
---
dt
 v  2x  2y  3t2.
 u  9x  4y  u  et  6t2
 y  v
 x  u
 v  y  2x  2y  3t2.
 u  x  9x  4y  u  et  6t2
x  9x  4y  x  et  6t2
 y  3t2  2x  2y
 x  2y  et  5x  x
 2x  y  2y  3t2
 x  x  5x  2y  et
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

378
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
can be approximated by a version of Euler's, the Runge-Kutta, or the
Adams-Bashforth-Moulton method adapted to the system. For instance, the
RK4 method applied to the system
(6)
looks like this:
(7)
yn1  yn  h
6 (k1  2k2  2k3  k4),
xn1  xn  h
6 (m1  2m2  2m3  m4)
x(t0)  x0,  y(t0)  y0,
 y  g(t, x, y)
 x  f(t, x, y)
where
(8)
k4  g(tn  h, xn  hm3, yn  hk3).
m4  f(tn  h, xn  hm3, yn   hk3)
k3  g(tn  1
2 h, xn  1
2 hm2, yn  1
2 hk2)
m3  f(tn  1
2h, xn  1
2 hm2, yn  1
2 hk2)
k2  g(tn  1
2 h, xn  1
2 hm1, yn  1
2 hk1)
m2  f(tn  1
2 h, xn  1
2 hm1, yn  1
2 hk1)
k1  g(tn, xn, yn)
m1  f (tn, xn, yn)
EXAMPLE 3
RK4 Method
Consider the initial-value problem
Use the RK4 method to approximate x(0.6) and y(0.6). Compare the results for
h  0.2 and h  0.1.
SOLUTION
We illustrate the computations of x1 and y1 with step size h  0.2. With
the identiﬁcations f(t, x, y)  2x  4y, g(t, x, y)  x  6y, t0  0, x0  1, and
y0  6 we see from (8) that
 k4  g(t0  h, x0  hm3, y0  hk3)  g(0.2, 9.608, 19.416)  106.888.
 m4  f (t0  h, x0  hm3, y0  hk3)  f (0.2, 9.608, 19.416)  96.88
 k3  g(t0  1
2h, x0  1
2hm2, y0  1
2hk2)  g(0.1, 3.12, 11.7)  67.08
 m3  f (t0  1
2h, x0  1
2hm2, y0  1
2hk2)  f (0.1, 3.12, 11.7)  53.04
 k2  g(t0  1
2h, x0  1
2hm1, y0  1
2hk1)  g(0.1, 1.2, 9.7)  57
 m2  f (t0  1
2h, x0  1
2hm1, y0  1
2hk1)  f (0.1, 1.2, 9.7)  41.2
 k1  g(t0, x0, y0)  g(0, 1, 6)  1(1)  6(6)  37
 m1  f (t0, x0, y0)  f (0, 1, 6)  2(1)  4(6)  22
 x(0)  1,   y(0)  6.
 y  x  6y
 x  2x  4y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.4
HIGHER-ORDER EQUATIONS AND SYSTEMS
●
379
Therefore from (7) we get
where, as usual, the computed values of x1 and y1 are rounded to four decimal
places. These numbers give us the approximation x1  x(0.2) and y1  y(0.2). The
subsequent values, obtained with the aid of a computer, are summarized in
Tables 9.4.1 and 9.4.2.
You should verify that the solution of the initial-value problem in Example 3 is
given by x(t)  (26t  1)e4t, y(t)  (13t  6)e4t. From these equations we see that
the actual values x(0.6)  160.9384 and y(0.6)  152.1198 compare favorably with
the entries in the last line of Table 9.4.2. The graph of the solution in a neighborhood
of t  0 is shown in Figure 9.4.2; the graph was obtained from a numerical solver
using the RK4 method with h  0.1.
In conclusion, we state Euler's method for the general system (6):
 yn1  yn  hg(tn, xn, yn).
 xn1  xn  h f(tn, xn, yn)
  6  0.2
6  (37  2(57)  2(67.08)  106.888)  19.0683,
 y1  y0  0.2
6  (k1  2k2  2k3  k4)
 1  0.2
6  (22  2(41.2)  2(53.04)  96.88)  9.2453
 x1  x0  0.2
6  (m1  2m2  2m3  m4)
FIGURE 9.4.3
Network in Problem 6
i1
i2
i3
R
R
L
L
R
E
t
x, y
_1
1
y(t)
x(t)
FIGURE 9.4.2
Numerical solution
curves for IVP in Example 3
TABLE 9.4.1
h  0.2
tn
xn
yn
0.00
1.0000
6.0000
0.20
9.2453
19.0683
0.40
46.0327
55.1203
0.60
158.9430
150.8192
TABLE 9.4.2
h  0.1
tn
xn
yn
0.00
1.0000
6.0000
0.10
2.3840
10.8883
0.20
9.3379
19.1332
0.30
22.5541
32.8539
0.40
46.5103
55.4420
0.50
88.5729
93.3006
0.60
160.7563
152.0025
EXERCISES 9.4
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-17.
1. Use Euler's method to approximate y(0.2), where y(x) is
the solution of the initial-value problem
Use h  0.1. Find the analytic solution of the problem,
and compare the actual value of y(0.2) with y2.
2. Use Euler's method to approximate y(1.2), where y(x) is
the solution of the initial-value problem
where x  0. Use h  0.1. Find the analytic solution of the
problem, and compare the actual value of y(1.2) with y2.
In Problems 3 and 4 repeat the indicated problem using the
RK4 method. First use h  0.2 and then use h  0.1.
3. Problem 1
4. Problem 2
5. Use the RK4 method to approximate y(0.2), where y(x)
is the solution of the initial-value problem
First use h  0.2 and then use h  0.1.
y  2y  2y  et cos t,  y(0)  1,  y(0)  2.
x2y  2xy  2y  0,  y(1)  4,  y(1)  9,
y  4y  4y  0,  y(0)  2,  y(0)  1.
6. When E  100 V, R  10 , and L  1 h, the sys-
tem of differential equations for the currents i1(t) and
i3(t) in the electrical network given in Figure 9.4.3 is
where i1(0)  0 and i3(0)  0. Use the RK4 method to
approximate i1(t) and i3(t) at t  0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and
0.5. Use h  0.1. Use a numerical solver to graph the
solution for 0  t  5. Use the graphs to predict the
behavior of i1(t) and i3(t) as 
.
t : 
 di3
dt  10i1  20i3,
 di1
dt  20i1  10i3  100
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
In Problems 7-12 use the Runge-Kutta method to approxi-
mate x(0.2) and y(0.2). First use h  0.2 and then use
h  0.1. Use a numerical solver and h  0.1 to graph the so-
lution in a neighborhood of t  0.
7. x  2x  y
8. x  x  2y
y  x
y  4x  3y
x(0)  6,
y(0)  2
x(0)  1,
y(0)  1
9. x  y  t
10. x  6x  y  6t
y  x  t
y  4x  3y  10t  4
x(0)  3,
y(0)  5
x(0)  0.5,
y(0)  0.2
11. x  4x  y  7t
12.
x y 4t
x  y  2y  3t
x  y  y  6t2  10
x(0)  1,
y(0)  2
x(0)  3,
y(0)  1
SECOND-ORDER BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 4.1 (page 118)
●Exercises 4.3 (Problems 37-40)
●Exercises 4.4 (Problems 37-40)
●Section 5.2
INTRODUCTION
We just saw in Section 9.4 how to approximate the solution of a second-
order initial-value problem 
y  f (x, y, y),
y(x0)  y0,
y(x0)  u0.
In this section we are going to examine two methods for approximating a solution of a second-
order boundary-value problem
y  f (x, y, y),
y(a)  a,
y(b)  b.
Unlike the procedures that are used with second-order initial-value problems, the methods of
second-order boundary-value problems do not require writing the second-order DE as a system
of first-order DEs.
9.5
Finite Difference Approximations
The Taylor series expansion, centered
at a point a, of a function y(x) is
If we set h  x  a, then the preceding line is the same as
For the subsequent discussion it is convenient then to rewrite this last expression in
two alternative forms:
(1)
and
(2)
If h is small, we can ignore terms involving h4, h5, . . . since these values are neg-
ligible. Indeed, if we ignore all terms involving h2 and higher, then solving (1) and
(2), in turn, for y(x) yields the following approximations for the ﬁrst derivative:
(3)
(4)
 y(x)  1
h [y(x)  y(x  h)].
 y(x)  1
h [y(x  h)  y(x)]
 y(x  h)  y(x)  y(x)h  y(x) h2
2  y (x) h3
6  	 	 	 .
 y(x  h)  y(x)  y(x)h  y(x) h2
2  y (x) h3
6  	 	 	
y(x)  y(a)  y(a) h
1!  y(a) h2
2!  y (a) h3
3!  	 	 	 .
y(x)  y(a)  y(a) x  a
1!
 y(a) (x  a)2
2!
 y (a) (x  a)3
3!
 	 	 	 .
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.5
SECOND-ORDER BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
381
Subtracting (1) and (2) also gives
(5)
On the other hand, if we ignore terms involving h3 and higher, then by adding (1) and
(2), we obtain an approximation for the second derivative y(x):
(6)
The right-hand sides of (3), (4), (5), and (6) are called difference quotients. The
expressions
and
are called ﬁnite differences. Speciﬁcally, y(x  h)  y(x) is called a forward
difference, y(x)  y(x  h) is a backward difference, and both y(x  h)  y(x  h)
and y(x  h)  2y(x)  y(x  h) are called central differences. The results given in
(5) and (6) are referred to as central difference approximations for the derivatives
y and y.
Finite Difference Method
Consider now a linear second-order boundary-
value problem
(7)
Suppose 
represents a regular partition of
the interval [a, b], that is, xi  a  ih, where i  0, 1, 2, . . . , n and h  (b  a)n.
The points
are called interior mesh points of the interval [a, b]. If we let
and if y and y in (7) are replaced by the central difference approximations (5) and (6),
we get
or, after simplifying,
(8)
The last equation, known as a ﬁnite difference equation, is an approximation
to the differential equation. It enables us to approximate the solution y(x) of (7)
at the interior mesh points x1, x2, . . . , xn1 of the interval [a, b]. By letting i
take on the values 1, 2, . . . , n  1 in (8), we obtain n  1 equations in the n  1
unknowns y1, y2, . . . , yn1. Bear in mind that we know y0 and yn, since
these
are
the prescribed boundary conditions y0  y(x0)  y(a)  a
and
yn  y(xn)  y(b)  b.
In Example 1 we consider a boundary-value problem for which we can compare
the approximate values that we ﬁnd with the actual values of an explicit solution.
1  h
2 Piyi1  (2  h2Qi)yi 1  h
2 Piyi1  h2 fi.
yi1  2 yi  yi1
h2
 Pi yi1  yi1
2 h
 Qiyi  fi
yi  y(xi),    Pi  P(xi),    Qi  Q(xi),    and    fi  f(xi)
x1  a  h,    x2  a  2h, . . . ,    xn1  a  (n  1)h
a  x0  x1  x2  	 	 	  xn1  xn  b
y  P(x)y  Q(x)y  f(x),    y(a)  
,  y(b)  .
y(x  h)  2y(x)  y(x  h)
y(x  h)  y(x), y(x)  y(x  h), y(x  h)  y(x  h),
 y(x)  1
h2 [y(x  h)  2y(x)  y(x  h)].
 y(x)  1
2h [ y(x  h)  y(x  h)].
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
EXAMPLE 1
Using the Finite Difference Method
Use the difference equation (8) with n  4 to approximate the solution of the
boundary-value problem y  4y  0, y(0)  0, y(1)  5.
SOLUTION
To use (8), we identify P(x)  0, Q(x)  4, f(x)  0, and
. Hence the difference equation is
(9)
Now the interior points are 
, so for
i  1, 2, and 3, (9) yields the following system for the corresponding y1, y2,
and y3:
With the boundary conditions y0  0 and y4  5 the foregoing system becomes
2.25y1 
y2
 0
y1  2.25y2 
y3  0
y2  2.25y3  5.
Solving the system gives y1  0.7256, y2  1.6327, and y3  2.9479.
Now the general solution of the given differential equation is y  c1 cosh 2x 
c2 sinh 2x. The condition y(0)  0 implies that c1  0. The other boundary condition
gives c2. In this way we see that a solution of the boundary-value problem is 
y(x)  (5 sinh 2x)sinh 2. Thus the actual values (rounded to four decimal places) of
this solution at the interior points are as follows: y(0.25)  0.7184, y(0.5)  1.6201,
and y(0.75)  2.9354.
The accuracy of the approximations in Example 1 can be improved by using a
smaller value of h. Of course, the trade-off here is that a smaller value of h necessitates
solving a larger system of equations. It is left as an exercise to show that with 
,
approximations to y(0.25), y(0.5), and y(0.75) are 0.7202, 1.6233, and 2.9386, respec-
tively. See Problem 11 in Exercises 9.5.
h  1
8
 y4  2.25y3  y2  0.
 y3  2.25y2  y1  0
 y2  2.25y1  y0  0
x1  0  1
4, x2  0  2
4, x3  0  3
4
yi1  2.25yi  yi1  0.
h  (1  0)>4  1
4
EXAMPLE 2
Using the Finite Difference Method
Use the difference equation (8) with n  10 to approximate the solution of
SOLUTION
In this case we identify P(x)  3, Q(x)  2, f(x)  4x2, and 
h  (2  1)10  0.1, and so (8) becomes
(10)
Now the interior points are x1  1.1, x2  1.2, x3  1.3, x4  1.4, x5  1.5, x6  1.6,
x7  1.7, x8  1.8, and x9  1.9. For i  1, 2, . . . , 9 and y0  1, y10  6, (10) gives a
system of nine equations and nine unknowns:
1.15y5  1.98y4  0.85y3  0.0784
1.15y4  1.98y3  0.85y2  0.0676
1.15y3  1.98y2  0.85y1  0.0576
1.15y2  1.98y1
 0.8016
1.15yi1  1.98yi  0.85yi1  0.04xi
2.
y  3y 2y  4x2,    y(1)  1,  y(2)  6.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We can solve this large system using Gaussian elimination or, with relative ease,
by means of a computer algebra system. The result is found to be y1  2.4047,
y2  3.4432, y3  4.2010, y4  4.7469, y5  5.1359, y6  5.4124, y7  5.6117,
y8  5.7620, and y9  5.8855.
Shooting Method
Another way of approximating a solution of a boundary-
  1.98y9  0.85y8  6.7556.
1.15y9  1.98y8  0.85y7  0.1296
1.15y8  1.98y7  0.85y6  0.1156
1.15y7  1.98y6  0.85y5  0.1024
1.15y6  1.98y5  0.85y4  0.0900
9.5
SECOND-ORDER BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
383
REMARKS
The approximation method using ﬁnite differences can be extended to boundary-
value problems in which the ﬁrst derivative is speciﬁed at a boundary—for
example, a problem such as y  f(x, y, y), y(a)  a, y(b)  b. See Problem 13
in Exercises 9.5.
EXERCISES 9.5
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-17.
In Problems 1-10 use the ﬁnite difference method and the
indicated value of n to approximate the solution of the given
boundary-value problem.
1. y  9y  0,
y(0)  4, y(2)  1;
n  4
2. y  y  x2,
y(0)  0, y(1)  0;
n  4
3. y  2y  y  5x,
y(0)  0, y(1)  0;
n  5
4. y  10y  25y  1,
y(0)  1, y(1)  0;
n  5
5. y  4y  4y  (x  1)e2x,
y(0)  3, y(1)  0;
n  6
6. y  5y  41x, y(1)  1, y(2)  1; n  6
7. x2y  3xy  3y  0,
y(1)  5, y(2)  0;
n  8
8. x2y  xy  y  ln x,
y(1)  0, y(2)  2;
n  8
9. y  (1  x)y  xy  x,
y(0)  0, y(1)  2;
n  10
10. y  xy  y  x,
y(0)  1, y(1)  0;
n  10
11. Rework Example 1 using n  8.
12. The electrostatic potential u between two concentric
spheres of radius r  1 and r  4 is determined from
d2u
dr2  2
r du
dr  0,  u(1)  50,  u(4)  100.
value problem y  f(x, y, y), y(a)  a, y(b)  b is called the shooting method.
The starting point in this method is the replacement of the second-order boundary-
value problem by a second-order initial-value problem
(11)
The number m1 in (11) is simply a guess for the unknown slope of the solution curve at
the known point (a, y(a)). We then apply one of the step-by-step numerical techniques
to the second-order equation in (11) to ﬁnd an approximation b1 for the value of y(b). If
b1 agrees with the given value y(b)  b to some preassigned tolerance, we stop; other-
wise, the calculations are repeated, starting with a different guess y(a)  m2 to obtain
a second approximation b2 for y(b). This method can be continued in a trial-and-error
manner, or the subsequent slopes m3, m4, . . . can be adjusted in some systematic way;
linear interpolation is particularly successful when the differential equation in (11) is
linear. The procedure is analogous to shooting (the "aim" is the choice of the initial
slope) at a target until the bull's-eye y(b) is hit. See Problem 14 in Exercises 9.5.
Of course, underlying the use of these numerical methods is the assumption,
which we know is not always warranted, that a solution of the boundary-value prob-
lem exists.
y  f(x, y, y),  y(a)  a, y(a)  m1.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

384
●
CHAPTER 9
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Use the method of this section with n  6 to approxi-
mate the solution of this boundary-value problem.
13. Consider the boundary-value problem y  xy  0,
y(0)  1, y(1)  1.
(a) Find the difference equation corresponding to the
differential equation. Show that for i  0, 1, 2, . . . ,
n  1 the difference equation yields n equations in
n  1 unknows y1, y0, y1, y2, . . . , yn1. Here y1
and y0 are unknowns, since y1 represents an
approximation to y at the exterior point x  h and
y0 is not speciﬁed at x  0.
(b) Use the central difference approximation (5) to
show that y1  y1  2h. Use this equation to elim-
inate y1 from the system in part (a).
(c) Use n  5 and the system of equations found in
parts (a) and (b) to approximate the solution of the
original boundary-value problem.
Computer Lab Assignments
14. Consider the boundary-value problem y  y  sin (xy),
y(0)  1, y(1)  1.5. Use the shooting method to approx-
imate the solution of this problem. (The approximation
can be obtained using a numerical technique—say, the
RK4 method with h  0.1; or, even better, if you have
access to a CAS such as Mathematica or Maple, the
NDSolve function can be used.)
CHAPTER 9 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-17.
In Problems 1-4 construct a table comparing the indicated
values of y(x) using Euler's method, the improved Euler's
method, and the RK4 method. Compute to four rounded dec-
imal places. First use h  0.1 and then use h  0.05.
1. y  2 ln xy,
y(1)  2;
y(1.1), y(1.2), y(1.3), y(1.4), y(1.5)
2. y  sin x2  cos y2,
y(0)  0;
y(0.1), y(0.2), y(0.3), y(0.4), y(0.5)
3.
y(0.6), y(0.7), y(0.8), y(0.9), y(1.0)
4. y  xy  y2,
y(1)  1;
y(1.1), y(1.2), y(1.3), y(1.4), y(1.5)
5. Use Euler's method to approximate y(0.2), where 
y(x) is the solution of the initial-value problem
y  (2x  1)y  1, y(0)  3, y(0)  1. First use
one step with h  0.2 and then repeat the calculations
using two steps with h  0.1.
y  1x  y, y(0.5)  0.5;
6. Use the Adams-Bashforth-Moulton method to approxi-
mate y(0.4), where y(x) is the solution of the initial-
value problem y  4x  2y, y(0)  2. Use h  0.1
and the RK4 method to compute y1, y2, and y3.
7. Use Euler's method with h  0.1 to approximate x(0.2)
and y(0.2), where x(t), y(t) is the solution of the initial-
value problem
8. Use the ﬁnite difference method with n  10 to
approximate the solution of the boundary-value problem
y  6.55(1  x)y  1, y(0)  0, y(1)  0.
x(0)  1,    y(0)  2.
y  x  y
x  x  y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.1 Autonomous Systems
10.2 Stability of Linear Systems
10.3 Linearization and Local Stability
10.4 Autonomous Systems as Mathematical Models
Chapter 10 in Review
In Chapter 8 we used matrix techniques to solve systems of linear ﬁrst-order
differential equations of the form 
When a system of differential
equations is not linear, it is usually not possible to ﬁnd solutions that can be
expressed  in terms of elementary functions. In this chapter we will demonstrate
that valuable information on the geometric nature of the solutions can be acquired
by ﬁrst analyzing special constant solutions obtained from the critical points of the
system and by searching for periodic solutions. The important concept of stability
will be introduced and illustrated with mathematical models from physics and
ecology.
X  AX  F(t).
Plane Autonomous Systems
10
385
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

386
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
Autonomous Systems
A system of ﬁrst-order differential equations is said
to be autonomous when the system can be written in the form
(1)
Observe that the independent variable t does not appear explicitly on the right-hand
side of each differential equation. Compare (1) with the general system given in (2)
of Section 8.1.
dxn
dt  gn(x1, x2, . . . , xn).




dx2
dt  g2(x1, x2, . . . , xn)
dx1
dt  g1(x1, x2, . . . , xn)
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●A rereading of pages 38-42 in Section 2.1 is highly recommended.
INTRODUCTION
We introduced the notions of autonomous ﬁrst-order DEs, critical points of
an autonomous DE, and the stability of a critical point in Section 2.1. This earlier consideration
of stability was purposely kept at a fairly intuitive level; it is now time to give the precise deﬁnition
of this concept. To do this, we need to examine autonomous systems of ﬁrst-order DEs. In this
section we deﬁne critical points of autonomous systems of two ﬁrst-order DEs; the autonomous
systems can be linear or nonlinear.
10.1
EXAMPLE 1
A Nonautonomous System
The system of nonlinear ﬁrst-order differential equations
is not autonomous because of the presence of t on the right-hand sides of
both DEs.
Note
When n  1 in (1), a single ﬁrst-order differential equation takes on the
form dxdt  g(x). This last equation is equivalent to (1) of Section 2.1 with the
symbols x and t playing the parts of y and x, respectively. Explicit solutions can be
constructed, since the differential equation dxdt  g(x) is separable, and we will
make use of this fact to give illustrations of the concepts in this chapter.
Second-Order DE as a System
Any second-order differential equation x 
g(x, x) can be written as an autonomous system. As we did in Section 4.10, if we let
y  x, then x  g(x, x) becomes y  g(x, y). Thus the second-order differential
equation becomes the system of two ﬁrst-order equations
x  y
y  g(x, y).
 x1  3x2  t 2
 tx1 sin x2
dx1
---
dt
dx2
---
dt
t dependence
t dependence
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.1
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
●
387
EXAMPLE 2
The Pendulum DE as an Autonomous System
In (6) of Section 5.3 we showed that the displacement angle u for a pendulum
satisﬁes the nonlinear second-order differential equation
If we let x  u and y  u, this second-order differential equation can be rewritten as
the autonomous system
Notation
If X(t) and g(X) denote the respective column vectors
then the autonomous system (1) may be written in the compact column vector form
X  g(X). The homogeneous linear system X  AX studied in Section 8.2 is an
important special case.
In this chapter it is also convenient to write (1) using row vectors. If we let
X(t)  (x1(t), x2(t), . . . , xn(t)) and
g(X)  (g1(x1, x2, . . . , xn), g2(x1, x2, . . . , xn), . . . , gn(x1, x2, . . . , xn)),
then the autonomous system (1) may also be written in the compact row vector form
X  g(X). It should be clear from the context whether we are using column or row
vector form; therefore we will not distinguish between X and XT, the transpose of
X. In particular, when n  2, it is convenient to use row vector form and write an
initial condition as X(0)  (x0, y0).
When the variable t is interpreted as time, we can refer to the system of differen-
tial equations in (1) as a dynamical system and a solution X(t) as the state of the
system or the response of the system at time t. With this terminology a dynamical
system is autonomous when the rate X(t) at which the system changes depends
only on the system's present state X(t). The linear system X  AX  F(t) studied
in Chapter 8 is then autonomous when F(t) is constant. In the case n  2 or 3 we can
call a solution a path or trajectory, since we may think of x  x1(t), y  x2(t), and
z  x3(t) as the parametric equations of a curve.
Vector Field Interpretation
When n  2, the system in (1) is called a plane
autonomous system, and we write the system as
(2)
The vector V(x, y)  (P(x, y), Q(x, y)) deﬁnes a vector ﬁeld in a region of
the plane, and a solution to the system may be interpreted as the resulting path of a
particle as it moves through the region. To be more speciﬁc, let V(x, y)  (P(x, y),
Q(x, y)) denote the velocity of a stream at position (x, y), and suppose that a
small particle (such as a cork) is released at a position (x0, y0) in the stream. If
X(t)  (x(t), y(t)) denotes the position of the particle at time t, then X(t)  (x(t), y(t))
 dy
dt  Q(x, y).
 dx
dt  P(x, y)
x1(t)
x2(t)
xn(t)
 X(t) 
 (
 
 )
,
 
 )
,
g1(x1,x2, . . . ,xn)
g2(x1,x2, . . . ,xn)
gn(x1,x2, . . . ,xn)
 g(X) 
 (
...
...
 y   g
l sin x.
 x  y
d 2
dt2  g
l sin   0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

is the velocity vector V. When external forces are not present and frictional forces
are neglected, the velocity of the particle at time t is the velocity of the stream at
position X(t):
Thus the path of the particle is a solution to the system that satisﬁes the initial
condition X(0)  (x0, y0). We will frequently call on this simple interpretation of
a plane autonomous system to illustrate new concepts.
X(t)  V(x(t), y(t))    or    
dx
dt  P(x(t), y(t))
dy
dt  Q(x(t), y(t)).
388
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
x
y
(−3, 1)
FIGURE 10.1.1
Vector ﬁeld of a ﬂuid
ﬂow in Example 3
FIGURE 10.1.2
Curve in (a) is called
an arc.
(b)
(a)
X(0)
X(0)
P
1
2
X(0)
FIGURE 10.1.3
Periodic solution or
cycle
EXAMPLE 3
Plane Autonomous System of a Vector Field
A vector ﬁeld for the steady-state ﬂow of a ﬂuid around a cylinder of radius 1 is
given by
where V0 is the speed of the ﬂuid far from the cylinder. If a small cork is released
at (3, 1), the path X(t)  (x(t), y(t)) of the cork satisﬁes the plane autonomous
system
subject to the initial condition X(0)  (3, 1). See Figure 10.1.1 and Problem 46 in
Exercises 2.4.
Types of Solutions
If P(x, y), Q(x, y), and the ﬁrst-order partial derivatives
	P	x, 	P	y, 	Q	x, and 	Q	y are continuous in a region R of the plane, then a
solution of the plane autonomous system (2) that satisﬁes X(0)  X0 is unique and
of one of three basic types:
(i)
A constant solution x(t)  x0, y(t)  y0 (or X(t)  X0 for all t). A
constant solution is called a critical or stationary point. When the
particle is placed at a critical point X0 (that is, X(0)  X0), it remains
there indeﬁnitely. For this reason a constant solution is also called an
equilibrium solution. Note that because X(t)  0, a critical point is a
solution of the system of algebraic equations
(ii)
A solution x  x(t), y  y(t) that deﬁnes an arc—a plane curve that does
not cross itself. Thus the curve in Figure 10.1.2(a) can be a solution to
a plane autonomous system, whereas the curve in Figure 10.1.2(b)
cannot be a solution. There would be two solutions that start from the
point P of intersection.
(iii)
A periodic solution x  x(t), y  y(t). A periodic solution is called a
cycle. If p is the period of the solution, then X(t  p)  X(t) and a particle
placed on the curve at X0 will cycle around the curve and return to X0 in
p units of time. See Figure 10.1.3.
 Q(x, y)  0.
 P(x, y)  0
 dy
dt  V0 
2xy
(x2  y2)2
 dx
dt  V01 
x2  y2
(x2  y2)2
V(x, y)  V01 
x2  y2
(x2  y2)2, 
2xy
(x2  y2)2,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.1
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
●
389
(b) Nonperiodic solution
(a) Periodic solution
x
y
3
3
−3
−3
−5
−5
x
y
5
5
(2, 0)
FIGURE 10.1.4
Solution curves in
Example 5
EXAMPLE 4
Finding Critical Points
Find all critical points of each of the following plane autonomous systems:
(a) x  x  y
(b) x  x2  y2  6
(c) x  0.01x(100  x  y)
y  x  y
y  x2  y
y  0.05y(60  y  0.2x)
SOLUTION
We ﬁnd the critical points by setting the right-hand sides of the
differential equations equal to zero.
(a) The solution to the system
consists of all points on the line y  x. Thus there are inﬁnitely many critical points.
(b) To solve the system
we substitute the second equation, x2  y, into the ﬁrst equation to obtain
y2  y  6  (y  3)(y  2)  0. If y  3, then x2  3, so there are no real
solutions. If y  2, then 
, so the critical points are 
and 
.
(c) Finding the critical points in part (c) requires a careful consideration of cases. The
equation 0.01x(100  x  y)  0 implies that x  0 or x  y  100.
If x  0, then by substituting in 0.05y(60  y  0.2x)  0, we have 
y(60  y)  0. Thus y  0 or 60, so (0, 0) and (0, 60) are critical points.
If x  y  100, then 0  y(60  y  0.2(100  y))  y(40  0.8y). It follows
that y  0 or 50, so (100, 0) and (50, 50) are critical points.
When a plane autonomous system is linear, we can use the methods in Chapter 8
to investigate solutions.
(12, 2)
(12, 2)
x 
12
 x2  y  0
 x2  y2  6  0
 x  y  0
 x  y  0
EXAMPLE 5
Discovering Periodic Solutions
Determine whether the given linear system possesses a periodic solution:
(a) x  2x  8y
(b) x  x  2y
y  x  2y
In each case sketch the graph of the solution that satisﬁes X(0)  (2, 0).
SOLUTION
(a) In Example 6 of Section 8.2 we used the eigenvalue-eigenvector
method to show that
Thus every solution is periodic with period p  p. The solution satisfying
X(0)  (2, 0) is x  2 cos 2t  2 sin 2t, y  sin 2t. This solution generates the
ellipse shown in Figure 10.1.4(a).
 y  c1 cos 2t  c2 sin 2t.
 x  c1(2 cos 2t  2 sin 2t)  c2(2 cos 2t  2 sin 2t)
y  1
2 x  y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(b) Using the eigenvalue-eigenvector method, we can show that
Because of the presence of et in the general solution, there are no periodic solutions (that
is, cycles). The solution satisfying X(0)  (2, 0) is x  2et cos t, y  et sin t, and the
resulting curve is shown in Figure 10.1.4(b).
Changing to Polar Coordinates
Except for the case of constant solutions, it is
usually not possible to ﬁnd explicit expressions for the solutions of a nonlinear auto-
nomous system. We can solve some nonlinear systems, however, by changing to polar
coordinates. From the formulas r2  x2  y2 and u  tan1(yx) we obtain
(3)
We can sometimes use (3) to convert a plane autonomous system in rectangular
coordinates to a simpler system in polar coordinates.
dr
dt  1
r x dx
dt  y dy
dt,  d
dt  1
r2 y dx
dt  x dy
dt.
x  2c1et cos t  2c2et sin t, y  c1et sin t  c2et cos t.
390
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
x
y
3
3
−3
−3
FIGURE 10.1.5
Solution curve in
Example 6
EXAMPLE 6
Changing to Polar Coordinates
Find the solution of the nonlinear plane autonomous system
satisfying the initial condition X(0)  (3, 3).
SOLUTION
Substituting for dxdt and dydt in the expressions for drdt and
dudt in (3), we obtain
Since (3, 3) is 
in polar coordinates, the initial condition X(0)  (3, 3) 
becomes 
and u(0)  p4. Using separation of variables, we see that the
solution of the system is
for r  0. (Check this!) Applying the initial condition then gives
The spiral
is sketched in Figure 10.1.5.
r 
1
  12 6  >4
r 
1
t  126,   t  
4.
r 
1
t  c1
,   t  c2
r(0)  312
(312, >4)
 d
dt  1
r2 [y(y  xr)  x(x  yr)]  1.
 dr
dt  1
r [x(y  xr)  y(x  yr)]  r2
 y  x  y1x2  y2
 x  y  x1x2  y2
EXAMPLE 7
Solutions in Polar Coordinates
When expressed in polar coordinates, a plane autonomous system takes the form
 d
dt  1.
 dr
dt  0.5(3  r)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Find and sketch the solutions satisfying the initial conditions X(0)  (0, 1) and 
X(0)  (3, 0).
SOLUTION
Applying separation of variables to drdt  0.5(3  r) and integrating
dudt leads to the solution r  3  c1e0.5t, u  t  c2.
If X(0)  (0, 1), then r(0)  1 and u(0)  p2, and so c1  2 and c2  p2.
The solution curve is the spiral r  3  2e0.5(up/2). Note that as 
, u increases
without bound and r approaches 3.
If X(0)  (3, 0), then r(0)  3 and u(0)  0. It follows that c1  c2  0, so r  3
and u  t. Hence x  r cos u  3 cos t and y  r sin u  3 sin t, so the solution is
periodic. The solution generates a circle of radius 3 about (0, 0). Both solutions are
shown in Figure 10.1.6.
t : 
10.1
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
●
391
x
y
4
−4
−4
4
FIGURE 10.1.6
Solution curves in
Example 7
EXERCISES 10.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-18.
In Problems 1-6 write the given nonlinear second-order
differential equation as a plane autonomous system. Find all
critical points of the resulting system.
1. x  9 sin x  0
2. x  (x)2  2x  0
3. x  x(1  x3)  x2  0
4.
5. x  x  x3 for   0
6.
In Problems 7-16 ﬁnd all critical points of the given plane
autonomous system.
7. x  x  xy
8. x  y2  x
y  y  xy
y  x2  y
9. x  3x2  4y
10. x  x3  y
y  x  y
y  x  y3
11.
12. x  2x  y  10
13. x  x2ey
14. x  sin y
y  y(ex  1)
y  exy  1
15. x  x(1  x2  3y2)
16. x  x(4  y2)
y  y(3  x2  3y2)
y  4y(1  x2)
In Problems 17-22 the given linear system is taken from
Exercises 8.2.
(a) Find the general solution and determine whether there
are periodic solutions.
 y  2x  y  15 
y
y  5
 y  y(16  y  x)
 x  x(10  x  1
2y)
x  x  x x   0 for   0
x  4 
x
1  x2  2x  0
(b) Find the solution satisfying the given initial condition.
(c) With the aid of a calculator or a CAS graph the solution
in part (b) and indicate the direction in which the curve
is traversed.
17. x  x  2y
y  4x  3y,
X(0)  (2, 2)
(Problem 1, Exercises 8.2)
18. x  6x  2y
y  3x  y,
X(0)  (3, 4)
(Problem 6, Exercises 8.2)
19. x  4x  5y
y  5x  4y,
X(0)  (4, 5)
(Problem 37, Exercises 8.2)
20. x  x  y
y  2x  y,
X(0)  (2, 2)
(Problem 34, Exercises 8.2)
21. x  5x  y
y  2x  3y,
X(0)  (1, 2)
(Problem 35, Exercises 8.2)
22. x  x  8y
y  x  3y,
X(0)  (2, 1)
(Problem 38, Exercises 8.2)
In Problems 23-26 solve the given nonlinear plane auto-
nomous system by changing to polar coordinates. Describe
the geometric behavior of the solution that satisﬁes the given
initial condition(s).
23. x  y  x(x2  y2)2
y  x  y(x2  y2)2,
X(0)  (4, 0)
24. x  y  x(x2  y2)
y  x  y(x2  y2),
X(0)  (4, 0)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25. x  y  x(1  x2  y2)
y  x  y(1  x2  y2),
X(0)  (1, 0), X(0)  (2, 0)
[Hint: The resulting differential equation for r is a
Bernoulli differential equation. See Section 2.5.]
26.
X(0)  (1, 0), X(0)  (2, 0)
 y  x 
y
1x2  y2 (4  x2  y2),
 x  y 
x
1x2  y2 (4  x2  y2)
392
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
If a plane autonomous system has a periodic solution, then
there must be at least one critical point inside the curve gen-
erated by the solution. In Problems 27-30 use this fact to-
gether with a numerical solver to investigate the possibility
of periodic solutions.
27. x  x  6y
28. x  x  6xy
y  xy  12
y  8xy  2y
29. x  y
30. x  xy
y  y(1  3x2  2y2)  x
y  1  x2  y2
Some Fundamental Questions
Suppose that X1 is a critical point of a plane
autonomous system and X  X(t) is a solution of the system that satisﬁes X(0)  X0.
If the solution is interpreted as a path of a moving particle, we are interested in the
answers to the following questions when X0 is placed near X1:
(i)
Will the particle return to the critical point? More precisely, does
(ii)
If the particle does not return to the critical point, does it remain close to
the critical point or move away from the critical point? It is conceivable,
for example, that the particle may simply circle the critical point, or it
may even return to a different critical point or to no critical point at all.
See Figure 10.2.1.
If in some neighborhood of the critical point case (a) or (b) in Figure 10.2.1 always
occurs, we call the critical point locally stable. If, however, an initial value X0 that
results in behavior similar to (c) can be found in any given neighborhood, we call the
critical point unstable. These concepts will be made more precise in Section 10.3,
where questions (i) and (ii) will be investigated for nonlinear systems.
Stability Analysis
We will ﬁrst investigate these two stability questions
for linear plane autonomous systems and lay the foundation for Section 10.3. The
solution methods of Chapter 8 enable us to give a careful geometric analysis of the
solutions to
x  ax  by
y  cx  dy
(1)
limt :  X(t)  X1?
X0
Critical point
(a) Locally stable
X0
Critical point
(b) Locally stable
X0
Critical point
Critical point
(c) Unstable
FIGURE 10.2.1
Critical points
STABILITY OF LINEAR SYSTEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 10.1, especially Examples 3 and 4
INTRODUCTION
We have seen that a plane autonomous system
gives rise to a vector ﬁeld V(x, y)  (P(x, y), Q(x, y)), and a solution X  X(t) of the system may be
interpreted as the resulting path of a particle that is initially placed at position X(0)  X0. If X0 is a
critical point of the system, then the particle remains stationary. In this section we examine the
behavior of solutions when X0 is chosen close to a critical point of the system.
 dy
dt  Q(x, y)
 dx
dt  P(x, y)
10.2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

in terms of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the coefﬁcient matrix
.
To ensure that X0  (0, 0) is the only critical point, we will assume that the
determinant   ad  bc  0. If t  a  d is the trace* of matrix A, then the char-
acteristic equation det(A  lI)  0 may be rewritten as
.
Therefore the eigenvalues of A are 
, and the usual three
cases for these roots occur according to whether t2  4 is positive, negative, or
zero. In the next example we use a numerical solver to discover the nature of the
solutions corresponding to these cases.
  ( 
 1 2  4)2
2      0
A 
a
c
b
d
10.2
STABILITY OF LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
393
*In general, if A is an n  n matrix, the trace of A is the sum of the main diagonal entries.
EXAMPLE 1
Eigenvalues and the Shape of Solutions
Find the eigenvalues of the linear system
in terms of c, and use a numerical solver to discover the shapes of solutions
corresponding to the cases
.
SOLUTION
The coefﬁcient matrix 
has trace t  2 and determinant
  1  c, and so the eigenvalues are
.
The nature of the eigenvalues is therefore determined by the sign of c.
If 
, then the eigenvalues are negative and distinct, 
. In
Figure 10.2.2(a) we have used a numerical solver to generate solution curves, or
trajectories, that correspond to various initial conditions. Note that except for the tra-
jectories drawn in red in the ﬁgure, the trajectories all appear to approach 0 from a
ﬁxed direction. Recall from Chapter 8 that a collection of trajectories in the xy-plane,
or phase plane, is called a phase portrait of the system.
When c  4, the eigenvalues have opposite signs, l  1 and 3, and an
interesting phenomenon occurs. All trajectories move away from the origin in a
fixed direction except for solutions that start along the single line drawn in red
in Figure 10.2.2(b). We have already seen behavior like this in the phase portrait
given in Figure 8.2.2. Experiment with your numerical solver and verify these
observations.
The selection c  0 leads to a single real eigenvalue l  1. This case is very
similar to the case 
with one notable exception. All solution curves in
Figure 10.2.2(c) appear to approach 0 from a ﬁxed direction as t increases.
Finally, when 
. Thus the eigenvalues are
conjugate complex numbers with negative real part 1. Figure 10.2.2(d) shows that
solution curves spiral in toward the origin 0 as t increases.
The behaviors of the trajectories that are observed in the four phase portraits
in Figure 10.2.2 in Example 1 can be explained by using the eigenvalue-eigenvec-
tor solution results from Chapter 8.
c  9,   1 
 19  1 
 3i
c  1
4
  1
2 and 3
2
c  1
4
   
 1 2  4
2
 2 
 14  4(1  c)
2
 1 
 1c

1
c
1
1
c  1
4, 4, 0, and 9
 y  cx  y
 x  x  y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Case I: Real Distinct Eigenvalues 
According to Theorem 8.2.1
in Section 8.2, the general solution of (1) is given by
,
(2)
where l1 and l2 are the eigenvalues and K1 and K2 are the corresponding eigenvec-
tors. Note that X(t) can also be written as
(3)
(a)
Both eigenvalues negative (t2  4  0, t  0, and   0)
Stable node (l2  l1  0): Since both eigenvalues are negative, it
follows from (2) that 
. If we assume that l2  l1, then
l2  l1  0, and so 
is an exponential decay function. We may
therefore conclude from (3) that 
for large values of t.
When c1  0, X(t) will approach 0 from one of the two directions
determined by the eigenvector K1 corresponding to l1. If c1  0,
and X(t) approaches 0 along the line determined by
the eigenvector K2. Figure 10.2.3 shows a collection of solution curves
around the origin. A critical point is called a stable node when both
eigenvalues are negative.
(b)
Both eigenvalues positive (t2  4  0, t  0, and   0)
Unstable node (0  l2  l1): The analysis for this case is similar to
(a). Again from (2), X(t) becomes unbounded as t increases. Moreover,
again assuming that l2  l1 and using (3), we see that X(t) becomes
unbounded in one of the directions determined by the eigenvector K1
(when c1  0) or along the line determined by the eigenvector K2
(when c1  0). Figure 10.2.4 shows a typical collection of solution
X(t)  c2K2e2t
X(t)  c1K1e1t
e(21)t
limt :  X(t)  0
X(t)  e1t[c1K1  c2K2e(21)t].
X(t)  c1K1e1t  c2K2e2t
(t2  4 Q 0)
394
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
x
y
_0.5
0.5
0.5
_0.5
(a) c 
(b) c  4
(c) c  0
1
4
(d) c  9
_0.5
0.5
0.5
_0.5
x
y
0.5
_0.5
x
y
0.5
_0.5
x
y
_0.5
0.5
0.5
_0.5
FIGURE 10.2.2
Phase portraits of linear system in Example 1 for various values of c
y
K2
K1
x
FIGURE 10.2.3
Stable node
FIGURE 10.2.4
Unstable node
y
K2
K1
x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

curves. This type of critical point, corresponding to the case when both
eigenvalues are positive, is called an unstable node.
(c)
Eigenvalues have opposite signs (t2  4  0 and   0)
Saddle point (l2  0  l1): The analysis of the solutions is identical to
(b) with one exception. When c1  0, 
, and since l2  0,
X(t) will approach 0 along the line determined by the eigenvector K2. If
X(0) does not lie on the line determined by K2, the line determined by
K1 serves as an asymptote for X(t). Thus the critical point is unstable
even though some solutions approach 0 as t increases. This unstable
critical point is called a saddle point. See Figure 10.2.5.
 X(t)  c2K2e2t
10.2
STABILITY OF LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
395
FIGURE 10.2.6
Saddle point
2
−2
2
−2
y = 2x/3
y
x
FIGURE 10.2.5
Saddle point
K1
K2
x
y
FIGURE 10.2.7
Stable node
x
y
y = x
EXAMPLE 2
Real Distinct Eigenvalues
Classify the critical point (0, 0) of each of the following linear systems X  AX as
either a stable node, an unstable node, or a saddle point.
(a)
(b)
In each case discuss the nature of the solutions in a neighborhood of (0, 0).
SOLUTION
(a) Since the trace t  3 and the determinant   4, the eigen-
values are
.
The eigenvalues have opposite signs, so (0, 0) is a saddle point. It is not hard to show
(see Example 1, Section 8.2) that eigenvectors corresponding to l1  4 and l2  1
are
,
respectively. If X(0)  X0 lies on the line y  x, then X(t) approaches 0. For any
other initial condition, X(t) will become unbounded in the directions determined by K1.
In other words, the line 
serves as an asymptote for all these solution curves. See
Figure 10.2.6.
(b) From t  29 and   100 it follows that the eigenvalues of A are l1  4
and l2  25. Both eigenvalues are negative, so (0, 0) is in this case a stable node.
Since eigenvectors corresponding to l1  4 and l2  25 are
,
respectively, it follows that all solutions approach 0 from the direction deﬁned by
K1 except those solutions for which X(0)  X0 lies on the line 
deter-
mined by K2. These solutions approach 0 along 
See Figure 10.2.7.        
Case II: A Repeated Real Eigenvalue (t2  4  0)
Recall from Sec-
tion 8.2 that the general solution takes on one of two different forms depending on
whether one or two linearly independent eigenvectors can be found for the repeated
eigenvalue l1.
(a)
Two linearly independent eigenvectors
If K1 and K2 are two linearly independent eigenvectors corresponding to
l1, then the general solution is given by
X(t)  c1K1e1t  c2K2e1t  (c1K1  c2K2)e1t.
y  5
2x.
y  5
2x
K1 
1
1    and    K2 
2
5
y  2
3x
K1 
3
2    and    K2 
1
1
   
 1 2  4
2
 3 
 132  4(4)
2
 3 
 5
2
 4, 1
A 
10
15
6
19
A 
2
2
3
1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If l1  0, then X(t) approaches 0 along the line determined by the vector
c1K1  c2K2 and the critical point is called a degenerate stable node
(see Figure 10.2.8(a)). The arrows in Figure 10.2.8(a) are reversed when
l1  0, and we have a degenerate unstable node.
396
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
x 
y 
c 1 K 1 + c 2 K 2 
K 1 
K 2 
x
y
K1
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 10.2.8
Degenerate stable nodes
(b)
A single linearly independent eigenvector
When only a single linearly independent eigenvector K1 exists, the
general solution is given by
,
where (A  l1I)P  K1 (see Section 8.2, (12)-(14)), and the solution
may be rewritten as
.
If l1  0, then 
, and it follows that X(t) approaches 0 in
one of the directions determined by the vector K1 (see Figure 10.2.8(b)).
The critical point is again called a degenerate stable node. When
l1  0, the solutions look like those in Figure 10.2.8(b) with the arrows
reversed. The line determined by K1 is an asymptote for all solutions.
The critical point is again called a degenerate unstable node.
Case III: Complex Eigenvalues (t2  4 P 0)
If l1  a  ib and
l1  a  ib are the complex eigenvalues and K1  B1  iB2 is a complex eigenvector
corresponding to l1, the general solution can be written as X(t)  c1X1(t)  c2X2(t),
where
X1(t)  (B1 cos bt  B2 sin bt)eat,
X2(t)  (B2 cos bt  B1 sin bt)eat.
See (23) and (24) in Section 8.2. A solution can therefore be written in the form
x(t)  eat (c11 cos bt  c12 sin bt),
y(t)  eat (c21 cos bt  c22 sin bt),
(4)
limt :  te1t  0
X(t)  te1tc2K1  c1
t  K1  c2
t  P
X(t)  c1K1e1t  c2(K1te1t  Pe1t)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and when a  0, we have
x(t)  c11 cos bt  c12 sin bt,
y(t)  c21 cos bt  c22 sin bt.
(5)
(a)
Pure imaginary roots (t2  4  0, t  0)
Center: When a  0, the eigenvalues are pure imaginary, and from (5)
all solutions are periodic with period p  2pb. Notice that if both c12
and c21 happened to be 0, then (5) would reduce to
x(t)  c11 cos bt,
y(t)  c22 sin bt,
which is a standard parametric representation for the ellipse
By solving the system of equations in (4) for cos bt
and sin bt and using the identity sin2bt  cos2bt  1, it is possible to
show that all solutions are ellipses with center at the origin. The critical
point (0, 0) is called a center, and Figure 10.2.9 shows a typical
collection of solution curves. The ellipses are either all traversed in the
clockwise direction or all traversed in the counterclockwise direction.
(b)
Nonzero real part (t2  4  0, t  0)
Spiral points: When a  0, the effect of the term eat in (4) is similar to
the effect of the exponential term in the analysis of damped motion given
in Section 5.1. When a  0, 
, and the elliptical-like solution
spirals closer and closer to the origin. The critical point is called a stable
spiral point. When a  0, the effect is the opposite. An elliptical-like
solution is driven farther and farther from the origin, and the critical
point is now called an unstable spiral point. See Figure 10.2.10.
et : 0
x2>c2
11  y2>c2
22  1.
10.2
STABILITY OF LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
397
y
x
FIGURE 10.2.9
Center
FIGURE 10.2.10
Spiral points
(a) Stable spiral point
(b) Unstable spiral point
y
x
y
x
EXAMPLE 3
Repeated and Complex Eigenvalues
Classify the critical point (0, 0) of each of the following linear systems X  AX:
(a)
(b)
In each case discuss the nature of the solution that satisﬁes X(0)  (1, 0). Determine
parametric equations for each solution.
SOLUTION
(a) Since t  6 and   9, the characteristic polynomial is
l2  6l  9  (l  3)2, so (0, 0) is a degenerate stable node. For the repeated
eigenvalue l  3 we ﬁnd a single eigenvector 
, so the solution 
X(t) that satisﬁes X(0)  (1, 0) approaches (0, 0) from the direction speciﬁed by the
line y  x3.
(b) Since t  0 and   1, the eigenvalues are l  
i, so (0, 0) is a center. The
solution X(t) that satisﬁes X(0)  (1, 0) is an ellipse that circles the origin every 2p
units of time.
From Example 4 of Section 8.2 the general solution of the system in (a) is
The initial condition gives c1  0 and c2  2, and so x  (6t  1)e3t, y  2te3t are
parametric equations for the solution.
The general solution of the system in (b) is
X(t)  c1
cos t  sin t
cos t   c2
cos t  sin t
sin t .
X(t)  c1
3
1e3t  c2
3
1te3t 
1
2
0e3t.
K1 
3
1
A 
1
1
2
1
A 
3
2
18
9
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The initial condition gives c1  0 and c2  1, so x  cos t  sin t, y  sin t are
parametric equations for the ellipse. Note that y  0 for small positive values of t, and
therefore the ellipse is traversed in the clockwise direction.
The solutions of (a) and (b) are shown in Figures 10.2.11(a) and 10.2.11(b), 
respectively.
Classifying Critical Points
Figure 10.2.12 conveniently summarizes the re-
sults of this section. The general geometric nature of the solutions can be determined
by computing the trace and determinant of A. In practice, graphs of the solutions are
most easily obtained not by constructing explicit eigenvalue-eigenvector solutions
but rather by generating the solutions using a numerical solver and the Runge-Kutta
method for ﬁrst-order systems.
398
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
y
x
1
−1
1
−1
(a) Degenerate stable node
(b) Center
y
x
1
−1
1
−1
FIGURE 10.2.11
Critical points in
Example 3
FIGURE 10.2.12
Geometric summary of Cases I, II, and III
Stable 
spiral
Center
Stable node
Unstable node
Degenerate
unstable node
Degenerate
stable node
Unstable 
spiral
Δ
Δ
Δ
2 = 4
τ
τ
2 - 4    < 0
τ
Saddle
EXAMPLE 4
Classifying Critical Points
Classify the critical point (0, 0) of each of the following linear systems X  AX:
(a)
(b)
for positive constants a, b, c, d, xˆ, and ˆy.
SOLUTION
(a) For this matrix t  0.01,   2.3798, so t2  4  0. Using
Figure 10.2.12, we see that (0, 0) is a stable spiral point.
(b) This matrix arises from the Lotka-Volterra competition model, which we will study
in Section 10.4. Since t  (axˆ  dˆy) and all constants in the matrix are positive, t  0.
The determinant may be written as 
. If bc  1, then   0 and the
critical point is a saddle point. If bc  1,   0 and the critical point is either a stable
node, a degenerate stable node, or a stable spiral point. In all three cases
.
The answers to the questions posed at the beginning of this section for the 
linear plane autonomous system (1) with ad  bc  0 are summarized in the next
theorem.
limt :  X(t)  0
   adxˆyˆ(1  bc)
A 
axˆ
cdyˆ
abxˆ
dyˆ
A 
1.01
1.10
3.10
1.02
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.2
STABILITY OF LINEAR SYSTEMS
●
399
THEOREM 10.2.1
Stability Criteria for Linear Systems
For a linear plane autonomous system X  AX with det A  0, let X  X(t)
denote the solution that satisﬁes the initial condition X(0)  X0, where X0  0.
(a)
if and only if the eigenvalues of A have negative real
parts. This will occur when   0 and t  0.
(b) X(t) is periodic if and only if the eigenvalues of A are pure imaginary.
This will occur when   0 and t  0.
(c) In all other cases, given any neighborhood of the origin, there is at least one
X0 in the neighborhood for which X(t) becomes unbounded as t increases.
limt: X(t)  0
REMARKS
The terminology that is used to describe the types of critical points varies from
text to text. The following table lists many of the alternative terms that you
may encounter in your reading.
Term
Alternative Terms
critical point
equilibrium point, singular point,
stationary point, rest point
spiral point
focus, focal point, vortex point
stable node or spiral point
attractor, sink
unstable node or spiral point
repeller, source
EXERCISES 10.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-18.
In Problems 1-8 the general solution of the linear system
X  AX is given.
(a) In each case discuss the nature of the solutions in a
neighborhood of (0, 0).
(b) With the aid of a calculator or a CAS graph the
solution that satisfies X(0)  (1, 1).
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
X(t)  c1
1
1et  c2
1
1tet 
0
1
5et
A 
6
5
5
4,
X(t)  etc1
2 cos 2t
sin 2t    c2
2 sin 2t
cos 2t  
A 
1
1
4
1,
A 
1
1
1
1, X(t)  etc1
sin t
cos t   c2
cos t
sin t
A 
1
3
2
4, X(t)  c1
1
1et  c2
4
6e2t
A 
2
2
2
5,  X(t)  c1
2
1et  c2
1
2e6t
6.
7.
8.
In Problems 9-16 classify the critical point (0, 0) of the
given linear system by computing the trace t and determi-
nant  and using Figure 10.2.12.
9. x  5x  3y
10. x  5x  3y
y 
2x  7y
y 
2x  7y
11. x  5x  3y
12. x  5x  3y
y  2x  5y
y  7x  4y
13.
14.
y  x  1
2y
y  x  1
2y
x  3
2x  1
4y
x  3
2x  1
4y
X(t)  c1
5 cos 2t
cos 2t  2 sin 2t  c2
5 sin 2t
2 cos 2t  sin 2t
A 
1
1
5
1,
A 
2
3
1
2, X(t)  c1
1
1et  c2
1
3et
X(t)  c1
2
1e4t  c2
2
1te4t 
1
1e4t
A 
2
1
4
6,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15. x  0.02x  0.11y
16. x 
0.03x  0.01y
y  0.10x  0.05y
y  0.01x  0.05y
17. Determine conditions on the real constant m so that
(0, 0) is a center for the linear system
18. Determine a condition on the real constant m so that
(0, 0) is a stable spiral point of the linear system
19. Show that (0, 0) is always an unstable critical point of
the linear system
where m is a real constant and m  1. When is (0, 0)
an unstable saddle point? When is (0, 0) an unstable
spiral point?
20. Let X  X(t) be the response of the linear dynamical
system
 y  x  y
 x  x  y
 y  x  y,
 x  x  y
 y  x  y.
 x  y
 y  x  y.
 x  x  y
that satisﬁes the initial condition X(0)  X0. Determine
conditions on the real constants a and b that will ensure
Can (0, 0) be a node or saddle
point?
21. Show 
that 
the 
nonhomogeneous 
linear 
system
X  AX  F has a unique critical point X1 when
  det A  0. Conclude that if X  X(t) is a solution
to the nonhomogeneous system, t  0 and   0, then
. [Hint: X(t)  Xc(t)  X1.]
22. In Example 4(b) show that (0, 0) is a stable node when
bc  1.
In Problems 23-26 a nonhomogeneous linear system
X  AX  F is given.
(a) In each case determine the unique critical point X1.
(b) Use a numerical solver to determine the nature of the
critical point in (a).
(c) Investigate the relationship between X1 and the critical
point (0, 0) of the homogeneous linear system X  AX.
23. x  2x  3y  6
24. x  5x  9y  13
y  x  2y  5
y  x  11y  23
25. x  0.1x  0.2y  0.35
26. x  3x  2y  1
y  0.1x  0.1y  0.25
y  5x  3y  2
limt : X(t)  X1
limt : X(t)  (0, 0).
400
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
LINEARIZATION AND LOCAL STABILITY
REVIEW MATERIAL
●The concept of linearization was ﬁrst introduced in Section 2.6.
INTRODUCTION
The key idea in this section is that of linearization. Recall from calculus and
Section 2.6 that a linearization of a differentiable function f(x) at a number x1 is the equation of the
tangent line to the graph of f at the point: 
For x close to x1 the points on the graph of f are close to the points on the tangent line so the values y(x)
obtained from the equation of the tangent line are said to be local linear approximations to the corre-
sponding function values f(x). Similarly, a linearization of a function of two variables f(x, y) that is
differentiable at a point (x1, y1) is the equation of the tangent plane to the graph of f at the point: 
where fx and fy are partial derivatives. In this section we will use linearization as a means of analyzing
nonlinear DEs and nonlinear systems; the idea is to replace them by linear DEs and linear systems. 
z  f(x1, y1)  fx(x1, y1)(x  x1)  fy(x1, y1)(y  y1),
y  f(x1)  f(x1)(x  x1).
10.3
Sliding Bead
We start this section by reﬁning the stability concepts introduced
in Section 10.2 in such a way that they will apply to nonlinear autonomous systems as
well. Although the linear system X  AX had only one critical point when
det A  0, we saw in Section 10.1 that a nonlinear system may have many critical
points. We therefore cannot expect that a particle placed initially at a point X0 will
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

remain near a given critical point X1 unless X0 has been placed sufﬁciently close to X1
to begin with. The particle might well be driven to a second critical point. To empha-
size this idea, consider the physical system shown in Figure 10.3.1, in which a bead
slides along the curve z  f (x) under the inﬂuence of gravity alone. We will show in
Section 10.4 that the x-coordinate of the bead satisﬁes a nonlinear second-order
differential equation x  g(x, x); therefore letting y  x satisﬁes the nonlinear
autonomous system
.
If the bead is positioned at P  (x, f (x)) and given zero initial velocity, the bead
will remain at P provided that f (x)  0. If the bead is placed near the critical point
located at x  x1, it will remain near x  x1 only if its initial velocity does not drive
it over the "hump" at x  x2 toward the critical point located at x  x3. Therefore
X(0)  (x(0), x(0)) must be near (x1, 0).
In the next deﬁnition we will denote the distance between two points X and Y by
. Recall that if X  (x1, x2, . . . , xn) and Y  (y1, y2, . . . , yn), then
.
 X  Y   2(x1  y1)2  (x2  y2)2      (xn  yn)2
 X  Y 
 y  g(x, y)
 x  y
10.3
LINEARIZATION AND LOCAL STABILITY
●
401
z   = f ( 
 
x ) 
 z
x1
x2
x3
x
FIGURE 10.3.1
Bead sliding on graph
of z  f (x)
r
X0
ρ
ρ
X0
(a) Stable
(b) Unstable
FIGURE 10.3.2
Critical points
DEFINITION 10.3.1
Stable Critical Points
Let X1 be a critical point of an autonomous system and let X  X(t) denote the
solution that satisﬁes the initial condition X(0)  X0, where X0  X1. We say
that X1 is a stable critical point when, given any radius r  0, there is a cor-
responding radius r  0 such that if the initial position X0 satisﬁes 
 r,
then the corresponding solution X(t) satisﬁes 
 r for all t  0.
If, in addition, 
whenever 
 r, we call X1 an
asymptotically stable critical point.
 X0  X1 
limt :  X(t)  X1
 X(t)  X1 
X0  X1
This deﬁnition is illustrated in Figure 10.3.2(a). Given any disk of radius r about
the critical point X1, a solution will remain inside this disk provided that X(0)  X0 is
selected sufﬁciently close to X1. It is not necessary that a solution approach the criti-
cal point in order for X1 to be stable. Stable nodes, stable spiral points, and centers are
all examples of stable critical points for linear systems. To emphasize that X0 must be
selected close to X1, the terminology locally stable critical point is also used.
By negating Deﬁnition 10.3.1, we obtain the deﬁnition of an unstable critical
point.
DEFINITION 10.3.2
Unstable Critical Point
Let X1 be a critical point of an autonomous system and let X  X(t) denote the
solution that satisﬁes the initial condition X(0)  X0, where X0  X1. We say
that X1 is an unstable critical point if there is a disk of radius r  0 with the
property that for any r  0 there is at least one initial position X0 that satisﬁes
 r, yet the corresponding solution X(t) satisﬁes 
 r
for at least one t  0.
 X(t)  X1 
 X0  X1 
If a critical point X1 is unstable, no matter how small the neighborhood about
X1, an initial position X0 can always be found that results in the solution leaving
some disk of radius r at some future time t. See Figure 10.3.2(b). Therefore unstable
nodes, unstable spiral points, and saddle points are all examples of unstable critical
points for linear systems. In Figure 10.3.1 the critical point (x2, 0) is unstable. The
slightest displacement or initial velocity results in the bead sliding away from the
point (x2, f (x2)).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

402
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
x
y
FIGURE 10.3.3
Asymptotically stable
critical point in Example 1
x
y
3
−3
3
−3
FIGURE 10.3.4
Unstable critical
point in Example 2
EXAMPLE 1
A Stable Critical Point
Show that (0, 0) is a stable critical point of the nonlinear plane autonomous system
considered in Example 6 of Section 10.1.
SOLUTION
In Example 6 of Section 10.1 we showed that in polar coordinates
r  1(t  c1), u  t  c2 is the solution of the system. If X(0)  (r0, u0) is the
initial condition in polar coordinates, then
.
Note that r  r0 for t  0, and r approaches (0, 0) as t increases. Therefore, given
r  0, a solution that starts less than r units from (0, 0) remains within r units of the
origin for all t  0. Hence the critical point (0, 0) is stable and is in fact asymptoti-
cally stable. A typical solution is shown in Figure 10.3.3.
r 
r0
r0t  1,      t  0
 y  x  y1x2  y2
 x  y  x1x2  y2
EXAMPLE 2
An Unstable Critical Point
When expressed in polar coordinates, a plane autonomous system takes the form
Show that (x, y)  (0, 0) is an unstable critical point.
SOLUTION
Since x  r cos u and y  r sin u, we have
From drdt  0.05r(3  r) we see that drdt  0 when r  0 and can conclude that
(x, y)  (0, 0) is a critical point by substituting r  0 into the new system.
The differential equation drdt  0.05r(3  r) is a logistic equation that can
be solved by using either separation of variables or equation (5) in Section 3.2. If
r(0)  r0 and r0  0, then
,
where c0  (3  r0)r0. Since 
, it follows that no matter how
close to (0, 0) a solution starts, the solution will leave a disk of radius 1 about the
origin. Therefore (0, 0) is an unstable critical point. A typical solution that starts near
(0, 0) is shown in Figure 10.3.4.
Linearization
It is rarely possible to determine the stability of a critical point
of a nonlinear system by ﬁnding explicit solutions, as in Examples 1 and 2. Instead,
we replace the term g(X) in the original autonomous system X  g(X) by a linear
lim
t :  
3
1  c0e0.15t  3
r 
3
1  c0e0.15t
 dy
dt  r cos  d
dt  dr
dt sin .
 dx
dt  r sin  d
dt  dr
dt cos 
 d
dt  1.
 dr
dt  0.05r(3  r)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

term A(X  X1) that most closely approximates g(X) in a neighborhood of X1. This
replacement process, called linearization, will be illustrated ﬁrst for the ﬁrst-order
differential equation x  g(x).
An equation of the tangent line to the curve y  g(x) at x  x1 is
y  g(x1)  g(x1)(x  x1), and if x1 is a critical point of x  g(x), we have
x  g(x)  g(x1)(x  x1) since g(x1) 0. The general solution to the linear differential
equation x  g(x1)(x  x1) is 
, where l1  g(x1). Thus if g(x1)  0,
then x(t) approaches x1. Theorem 10.3.1 asserts that the same behavior occurs in the
original differential equation, provided that x(0)  x0 is selected close enough to x1.
x  x1  ce1t
10.3
LINEARIZATION AND LOCAL STABILITY
●
403
5
4
t
x
/
π
4
/
π
FIGURE 10.3.5
In Example 3, p4 is
asymptotically stable and 5p4 is unstable
THEOREM 10.3.1
Stability Criteria for x  g(x)
Let x1 be a critical point of the autonomous differential equation x  g(x), where
g is differentiable at x1.
(a) If g(x1)  0, then x1 is an asymptotically stable critical point.
(b) If g(x1)  0, then x1 is an unstable critical point.
EXAMPLE 3
Stability in a Nonlinear First-Order DE
Both x  p4 and x  5p4 are critical points of the autonomous differential equation
x  cos x  sin x. This differential equation is difﬁcult to solve explicitly, but we can
use Theorem 10.3.1 to predict the behavior of solutions near these two critical points.
Since 
Therefore x  p4 is an asymptotically stable critical point, but x  5p4 is unsta-
ble. In Figure 10.3.5 we used a numerical solver to investigate solutions that start
near (0, p4) and (0, 5p4). Observe that solution curves that start close to
(0, 5p4) quickly move away from the line x  5p4, as predicted.
g(x)  sin x  cos x, g(>4)  12  0 and g(5>4)  12  0.
EXAMPLE 4
Stability Analysis of the Logistic DE
Without solving explicitly, analyze the critical points of the logistic differential
equation (see Section 3.2) 
, where r and K are positive constants.
SOLUTION
The two critical points are x  0 and x  K, so from
g(x)  r(K  2x)K we get g(0)  r and g(K)  r. By Theorem 10.3.1 we
conclude that x  0 is an unstable critical point and x  K is an asymptotically
stable critical point.
Jacobian Matrix
A similar analysis may be carried out for a plane auto-
nomous system. An equation of the tangent plane to the surface z  g(x, y) at 
X1  (x1, y1) is
,
and g(x, y) can be approximated by its tangent plane in a neighborhood of X1.
When X1 is a critical point of a plane autonomous system, P(x1, y1)  Q(x1, y1)  0,
and we have
.
 y  Q(x, y)  	Q
	x (x1, y1)(x  x1)  	Q
	y (x1, y1)(y  y1)
 x  P(x, y)  	P
	x (x1, y1)(x  x1)  	P
	y (x1, y1)(y  y1)
z  g(x1, y1)  	g
	x(x1, y1)(x  x1)  	g
	y(x1, y1)(y  y1)
x  r
K x(K  x)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The original system X  g(X) may be approximated in a neighborhood of the crit-
ical point X1 by the linear system X  A(X  X1), where
.
This matrix is called the Jacobian matrix at X1 and is denoted by g(X1). If we
let H  X  X1, then the linear system X  A(X  X1) becomes H  AH, which
is the form of the linear system that we analyzed in Section 10.2. The critical point
X  X1 for X  A(X  X1) now corresponds to the critical point H  0 for
H  AH. If the eigenvalues of A have negative real parts, then by Theorem 10.2.1,
0 is an asymptotically stable critical point for H  AH. If there is an eigenvalue
with positive real part, H  0 is an unstable critical point. Theorem 10.3.2 asserts
that the same conclusions can be made for the critical point X1 of the original system.
 A 
	P
	x (x1, y1) 	P
	y (x1, y1)
	Q
	x (x1, y1) 	Q
	y (x1, y1)
404
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
EXAMPLE 5
Stability Analysis of Nonlinear Systems
Classify (if possible) the critical points of each of the following plane autonomous
systems as stable or unstable:
(a) x  x2  y2  6
(b) x  0.01x(100  x  y)
y  x2  y
y  0.05y(60  y  0.2x)
SOLUTION
The critical points of each system were determined in Example 4 of
Section 10.1.
(a) The critical points are 
and 
, the Jacobian matrix is
,
and so
.
Since the determinant of A1 is negative, A1 has a positive real eigenvalue. Therefore
is an unstable critical point. Matrix A2 has a positive determinant and a
negative trace, so both eigenvalues have negative real parts. It follows that 
is a stable critical point.
(b) The critical points are (0, 0), (0, 60), (100, 0), and (50, 50), the Jacobian matrix is
,
 g(X) 
0.01(100  2x  y)
0.01y
0.01x
0.05(60  2y  0.2y)
(12, 2)
(12, 2)
A1  g((12, 2)) 
212
212
4
1  and  A2  g((12, 2)) 
212
212
4
1
g(X) 
2x
2x
2y
1
(12, 2)
(12, 2)
THEOREM 10.3.2
Stability Criteria for Plane Autonomous Systems
Let X1 be a critical point of the plane autonomous system X  g(X), where
P(x, y) and Q(x, y) have continuous ﬁrst partials in a neighborhood of X1.
(a) If the eigenvalues of A  g(X1) have negative real part, then X1 is an
asymptotically stable critical point.
(b) If A  g(X1) has an eigenvalue with positive real part, then X1 is an unstable
critical point.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and so
.
Since the matrix A1 has a positive determinant and a positive trace, both eigenvalues
have positive real parts. Therefore (0, 0) is an unstable critical point. The determinants
of matrices A2 and A3 are negative, so in each case, one of the eigenvalues is positive.
Therefore both (0, 60) and (100, 0) are unstable critical points. Since the matrix A4 has
a positive determinant and a negative trace, (50, 50) is a stable critical point.
In Example 5 we did not compute t 2  4 (as in Section 10.2) and attempt to
further classify the critical points as stable nodes, stable spiral points, saddle
points, and so on. For example, for 
in Example 5(a), t 2  4  0,
and if the system were linear, we would be able to conclude that X1 was a stable
spiral point. Figure 10.3.6 shows several solution curves near X1 that were obtained
with a numerical solver, and each solution does appear to spiral in toward the criti-
cal point.
Classifying Critical Points
It is natural to ask whether we can infer more
geometric information about the solutions near a critical point X1 of a nonlinear
autonomous system from an analysis of the critical point of the corresponding linear
system. The answer is summarized in Figure 10.3.7, but you should note the follow-
ing comments.
(i)
In ﬁve separate cases (stable node, stable spiral point, unstable spiral
point, unstable node, and saddle) the critical point may be categorized
like the critical point in the corresponding linear system. The solutions
have the same general geometric features as the solutions to the linear
system, and the smaller the neighborhood about X1, the closer the
resemblance.
(ii)
If t2  4 and t  0, the critical point X1 is unstable, but in this
borderline case we are not yet able to decide whether X1 is an unstable
spiral, unstable node, or degenerate unstable node. Likewise, if t2  4
X1  (12, 2)
 A3  g((100, 0)) 
1
0
1
2     A4  g((50, 50)) 
0.5
0.5
0.5
2.5
 A1  g((0, 0)) 
1
0
0
3 
 A2  g((0, 60)) 
0.4
0.6
0
3
10.3
LINEARIZATION AND LOCAL STABILITY
●
405
y
x
-2
-1
2
1
FIGURE 10.3.6
appears to
be a stable spiral point
(12, 2)
FIGURE 10.3.7
Geometric summary of some conclusions (see (i)) and some
unanswered questions (see (ii) and (iii)) about nonlinear autonomous systems
Stable 
spiral
Unstable 
spiral
Saddle
Stable node
Unstable node
2 = 4
Unstable 
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
τ
τ 
Stable 
?
2 - 4    < 0
τ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and t  0, the critical point X1 is stable but may be either a stable spiral,
a stable node, or a degenerate stable node.
(iii)
If t  0 and   0, the eigenvalues of A  g(X) are pure imaginary
and in this borderline case X1 may be either a stable spiral, an unstable
spiral, or a center. It is therefore not yet possible to determine whether X1
is stable or unstable.
406
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
EXAMPLE 6
Classifying Critical Points of a Nonlinear System
Classify each critical point of the plane autonomous system in Example 5(b) as a sta-
ble node, a stable spiral point, an unstable spiral point, an unstable node, or a saddle
point.
SOLUTION
For the matrix A1 corresponding to (0, 0),   3, t  4, so t2  4  4.
Therefore (0, 0) is an unstable node. The critical points (0, 60) and (100, 0) are sad-
dles, since   0 in both cases. For matrix A4,   0, t  0, and t2  4  0. It
follows that (50, 50) is a stable node. Experiment with a numerical solver to verify
these conclusions.
EXAMPLE 7
Stability Analysis for a Soft Spring
Recall 
from 
Section 
5.3 
that 
the 
second-order 
differential 
equation
mx  kx  k1x3  0, for k  0, represents a general model for the free,
undamped oscillations of a mass m attached to a nonlinear spring. If k  1 and
k1  1, the spring is called soft, and the plane autonomous system corresponding
to the nonlinear second-order differential equation x  x  x3  0 is
.
Find and classify (if possible) the critical points.
SOLUTION
Since x3  x  x(x2  1), the critical points are (0, 0), (1, 0), and
(1, 0). The corresponding Jacobian matrices are
.
Since det A2  0, critical points (1, 0) and (1, 0) are both saddle points. The eigen-
values of matrix A1 are 
i, and according to comment (iii), the status of the critical
point at (0, 0) remains in doubt. It may be either a stable spiral, an unstable spiral, or
a center.
The Phase-Plane Method
The linearization method, when successful, can
provide useful information on the local behavior of solutions near critical points. It
is of little help if we are interested in solutions whose initial position X(0)  X0
is not close to a critical point or if we wish to obtain a global view of the family of
solution curves. The phase-plane method is based on the fact that
and attempts to ﬁnd y as a function of x using one of the methods available for solv-
ing ﬁrst-order differential equations (Chapter 2). As we show in Examples 8 and 9,
the method can sometimes be used to decide whether a critical point such as (0, 0) in
Example 7 is a stable spiral, an unstable spiral, or a center.
dy
dx  dy>dt
dx>dt  Q(x, y)
P(x, y)
A1  g((0, 0)) 
0
1
1
0,    A2  g((1, 0))  g((1, 0)) 
0
2
1
0
 y   x3  x
 x   y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.3
LINEARIZATION AND LOCAL STABILITY
●
407
x
 −2
2
2
−2
y
FIGURE 10.3.8
Phase portrait of
nonlinear system in Example 8
FIGURE 10.3.9
Phase portrait of
nonlinear system in Example 9
y
x
2
−
−2
EXAMPLE 8
Phase-Plane Method
Use the phase-plane method to classify the sole critical point (0, 0) of the plane
autonomous system
.
SOLUTION
The determinant of the Jacobian matrix
is 0 at (0, 0), so the nature of the critical point (0, 0) remains in doubt. Using the
phase-plane method, we obtain the ﬁrst-order differential equation
,
which can be easily solved by separation of variables:
If X(0)  (0, y0), it follows that 
or 
. Figure 10.3.8 shows
a collection of solution curves corresponding to various choices for y0. The nature of
the critical point is clear from this phase portrait: No matter how close to (0, 0) the
solution starts, X(t) moves away from the origin as t increases. The critical point at
(0, 0) is therefore unstable.
y 
31x3  y3
0
y3  x3  y0
3
	 y2 dy 	 x2 dx    or    y3  x3  c.
dy
dx  dy>dt
dx>dt  x2
y2
g(X) 
0
2x
2y
0
 y  x2
 x  y2
EXAMPLE 9
Phase-Plane Analysis of a Soft Spring
Use the phase-plane method to determine the nature of the solutions to x  x  x3  0
in a neighborhood of (0, 0).
SOLUTION
If we let dxdt  y, then dydt  x3  x. From this we obtain the ﬁrst-
order differential equation
,
which can be solved by separation of variables. Integrating
After completing the square, we can write the solution as y2  (x2  1)2  c0. If
X(0)  (x0, 0), where 0  x0  1, then 
and so
.
Note that y  0 when x  x0. In addition, the right-hand side is positive when
x0  x  x0, so each x has two corresponding values of y. The solution X  X(t)
that satisﬁes X(0)  (x0, 0) is therefore periodic, so (0, 0) is a center.
Figure 10.3.9 shows a family of solution curves, or phase portrait, of the origi-
nal system. We used the original plane autonomous system to determine the direc-
tions indicated on each trajectory.
y2  (x2  1)2
2
 (x0
2  1)2
2
 (2  x2  x0
2)(x0
2  x2)
2
c0  1
2(x0
2  1)2,
1
2
	 y dy 	 (x3  x) dx    gives    y2
2  x4
4  x2
2  c.
dy
dx  dy>dt
dx>dt  x3  x
y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

408
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
EXERCISES 10.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-18.
1. Show that (0, 0) is an asymptotically stable critical point
of the nonlinear autonomous system
when a  0 and an unstable critical point when a  0.
[Hint: Switch to polar coordinates.]
2. When expressed in polar coordinates, a plane autonomous
system takes the form
Show that (0, 0) is an asymptotically stable critical point
if and only if a  0.
In Problems 3-10, without solving explicitly, classify the
critical points of the given ﬁrst-order autonomous differen-
tial equation as either asymptotically stable or unstable. All
constants are assumed to be positive.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
In Problems 11-20 classify (if possible) each critical point
of the given plane autonomous system as a stable node, a sta-
ble spiral point, an unstable spiral point, an unstable node, or
a saddle point.
11. x  1  2xy
12. x  x2  y2  1
y  2xy  y
y  2y
13. x  y  x2  2
14. x  2x  y2
y  x2  xy
y  y  xy
15. x  3x  y2  2
16. x  xy  3y  4
y  x2  y2
y  y2  x2
dA
dt  k 1A (K  1A), A  0
dP
dt  P(a  bP)(1  cP1), P  0, a  bc
dx
dt  k(  x)(  x)(  x),     
dx
dt  k(  x)(  x),    
m dv
dt  mg  kv
dT
dt  k(T  T0)
dx
dt  kx ln x
K, x  0
dx
dt  kx (n  1  x)
 d
dt  1.
 dr
dt  r(5  r)
y  x  y  xy
x  x  y  y2
17. x  2xy
18. x  x(1  x2  3y2)
y  y  x  xy  y3
y  y(3  x2  3y2)
19.
20. x  2x  y  10
y  y(16  y  x)
y  2x  y  15 
In Problems 21-26 classify (if possible) each critical point
of the given second-order differential equation as a stable
node, a stable spiral point, an unstable spiral point, an unsta-
ble node, or a saddle point.
21. u  (cos u  0.5) sin u,
u  p
22.
23. x  x(1  x3)  x2  0
24.
25. x  x  x3 for   0
26. x  x  xx  0 for   0
27. Show that the nonlinear second-order differential
equation
(1  a2x2)x  (b  a2(x)2)x  0
has a saddle point at (0, 0) when b  0.
28. Show that the dynamical system
x  ax  xy
y  1  by  x2
has a unique critical point when ab  1 and that this
critical point is stable when b  0.
29. (a) Show that the plane autonomous system
x  x  y  x3
y  x  y  y2
has two critical points by sketching the graphs of
x  y  x3  0 and x  y  y2  0. Classify
the critical point at (0, 0).
(b) Show that the second critical point
X1  (0.88054, 1.56327) is a saddle point.
30. (a) Show that (0, 0) is the only critical point of Raleigh's
differential equation
.
x  (1
3(x)3  x)  x  0
Hint: d
dx x  x   2 x .
x  4 
x
1  x2  2x  0
x  x  (1
2  3(x)2)x  x2
y
y  5
x  x(10  x  1
2y)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(b) Show that (0, 0) is unstable when   0. When is
(0, 0) an unstable spiral point?
(c) Show that (0, 0) is stable when   0. When is (0, 0)
a stable spiral point?
(d) Show that (0, 0) is a center when   0.
31. Use the phase-plane method to show that (0, 0) is a cen-
ter of the nonlinear second-order differential equation
x  2x3  0.
32. Use the phase-plane method to show that the solution
to the nonlinear second-order differential equation
x  2x  x2  0 that satisﬁes x(0)  1 and x(0)  0
is periodic.
33. (a) Find the critical points of the plane autonomous
system
x  2xy
y  1  x2  y2,
and show that linearization gives no information
about the nature of these critical points.
(b) Use the phase-plane method to show that the criti-
cal points in (a) are both centers.
[Hint: 
Let 
u  y2x
and 
show 
that 
(x  c)2  y2  c2  1.]
34. The origin is the only critical point of the nonlinear
second-order differential equation x  (x)2  x  0.
(a) Show that the phase-plane method leads to the
Bernoulli differential equation dydx  y  xy1.
(b) Show that the solution satisfying 
and
x(0)  0 is not periodic.
35. A solution of the nonlinear second-order differential
equation x  x  x3  0 satisﬁes x(0)  0 and
x(0)  v0. Use the phase-plane method to determine
when the resulting solution is periodic. [Hint: See
Example 9.]
36. The nonlinear differential equation x  x  1  x2
arises in the analysis of planetary motion using relativ-
ity theory. Classify (if possible) all critical points of the
corresponding plane autonomous system.
37. When a nonlinear capacitor is present in an LRC-circuit,
the voltage drop is no longer given by qC but is more
accurately described by aq  bq3, where a and b are
constants and a  0. Differential equation (34) of
Section 5.1 for the free circuit is then replaced by
.
L d 2q
dt2  R dq
dt  q  q3  0
x(0)  1
2
10.3
LINEARIZATION AND LOCAL STABILITY
●
409
Find and classify all critical points of this nonlinear
differential equation. [Hint: Divide into the two cases
b  0 and b  0.]
38. The nonlinear equation mx  kx  k1x3  0, for k  0,
represents a general model for the free, undamped oscil-
lations of a mass m attached to a spring. If k1  0, the
spring is called hard (see Example 1 in Section 5.3).
Determine the nature of the solutions to x  x  x3  0
in a neighborhood of (0, 0).
39. The nonlinear equation 
can be inter-
preted as a model for a certain pendulum with a constant
driving function.
(a) Show that (p6, 0) and (5p6, 0) are critical
points of the corresponding plane autonomous
system.
(b) Classify the critical point (5p6, 0) using lin-
earization.
(c) Use the phase-plane method to classify the critical
point (p6, 0).
Discussion Problems
40. (a) Show that (0, 0) is an isolated critical point of the
plane autonomous system
x  x4  2xy3
y  2x3y  y4
but that linearization gives no useful information
about the nature of this critical point.
(b) Use the phase-plane method to show that
x3  y3  3cxy. This classic curve is called a
folium of Descartes. Parametric equations for a
folium are
[Hint: The differential equation in x and y is
homogeneous.]
(c) Use graphing software or a numerical solver to
graph solution curves. Based on your graphs,
would you classify the critical point as stable or
unstable? Would you classify the critical point as
a node, saddle point, center, or spiral point?
Explain.
x 
3ct
1  t3,    y  3ct2
1  t3.
  sin   1
2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Nonlinear Pendulum
In (6) of Section 5.3 we showed that the displacement
angle u for a simple pendulum satisﬁes the nonlinear second-order differential
equation
.
When we let x  u and y  u, this second-order differential equation may be rewrit-
ten as the dynamical system
.
The critical points are (
kp, 0), and the Jacobian matrix is easily shown to be
.
If k  2n  1, then   0, and so all critical points (
(2n  1)p, 0) are saddle
points. In particular, the critical point at (p, 0) is unstable as expected. See
Figure 10.4.1. When k  2n, the eigenvalues are pure imaginary, and so the na-
ture of these critical points remains in doubt. Since we have assumed that there are
no damping forces acting on the pendulum, we expect that all of the critical points
(
2np, 0) are centers. This can be veriﬁed by using the phase-plane method. From
it follows that y2  (2gl)cos x  c. IfX(0)  (x0,0),theny2  (2gl)(cos x  cos x0).
Note that y  0 when x  x0 and that (2gl)(cos x  cos x0)  0 for x  x0  p.
Thus each such x has two corresponding values of y, so the solution X  X(t) that
satisﬁes X(0)  (x0, 0) is periodic. We may conclude that (0, 0) is a center. Observe
that x  u increases for solutions that correspond to large initial velocities, such as
the one drawn in red in Figure 10.4.2. In this case the pendulum spins or whirls in
complete circles about its pivot.
dy
dx  dy>dt
dx>dt   g
l sin x
y
g((
k, 0)) 
0
(1)k1 g
l
1
0
 y  g
l sin x
x  y
d 2
dt2  g
l sin   0
410
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
(b)   ,
(a)   0,  

0
 

0
π
−3
π
3
π
−
π
y
x
FIGURE 10.4.1
(0, 0) is stable and
(p, 0) is unstable
FIGURE 10.4.2
Phase portrait of
pendulum; wavy curves indicate that the
pendulum is whirling about its pivot
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 1.3, 3.3, and 10.3
INTRODUCTION
Many applications from physics give rise to nonlinear autonomous second-
order differential equations—that is, DEs of the form x  g(x, x). For example, in the analysis of
free, damped motion of Section 5.1 we assumed that the damping force was proportional to the
velocity x, and the resulting model mx  bx  kx is a linear differential equation. But if the mag-
nitude of the damping force is proportional to the square of the velocity, the new differential equation
mx  bxx  kx is nonlinear. The corresponding plane autonomous system is nonlinear:
.
In this section we will also analyze the nonlinear pendulum, motion of a bead on a curve, the Lotka-
Voterra predator-prey models, and the Lotka-Volterra competition model. Additional models are
presented in this exercises.
 y   
m yy  k
m x
 x  y
10.4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.4
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
●
411
FIGURE 10.4.3
Some forces acting
on sliding bead
z =  f ( x ) 
x
z
θ
θ
θ W = mg
mg sin
EXAMPLE 1
Periodic Solutions of the Pendulum DE
A pendulum in an equilibrium position with u  0 is given an initial angular veloc-
ity of v0 rad/s. Determine the conditions under which the resulting motion is
periodic.
SOLUTION
We are asked to examine the solution of the plane autonomous system
that satisﬁes X(0)  (0, v0). From y2  (2gl) cos x  c it follows that
.
To establish that the solution X(t) is periodic, it is sufﬁcient to show that there are two
x-intercepts x  
x0 between p and p and that the right-hand side is positive for
x  x0. Each such x then has two corresponding values of y.
If 
and this equation has two solutions
x  
x0 between p and p, provided that 
Note that
(2gl)(cos x  cos x0) is then positive for x  x0. This restriction on the initial
angular velocity may be written as 
Nonlinear Oscillations: The Sliding Bead
Suppose, as shown in Fig-
ure 10.4.3, that a bead with mass m slides along a thin wire whose shape is described
by the function z  f (x). A wide variety of nonlinear oscillations can be obtained by
changing the shape of the wire and by making different assumptions about the forces
acting on the bead.
The tangential force F due to the weight W  mg has magnitude mg sin u, and
therefore the x-component of F is Fx  mg sin u cos u. Since tan u  f(x), we
may use the identities 1  tan2u  sec2u and sin2u  1  cos2u to conclude that
.
We assume (as in Section 5.1) that a damping force D, acting in the direction opposite
to the motion, is a constant multiple of the velocity of the bead. The x-component of D
is therefore Dx  bx. If we ignore the frictional force between the wire and the bead
and assume that no other external forces are impressed on the system, it follows from
Newton's second law that
,
and the corresponding plane autonomous system is
.
If X1  (x1, y1) is a critical point of the system, y1  0, and therefore f(x1)  0. The
bead must therefore be at rest at a point on the wire where the tangent line is horizon-
tal. When f is twice differentiable, the Jacobian matrix at X1 is
,
so t  bm,   gf (x1), and t2  4  b2m2  4gf(x1). Using the results of
Section 10.3, we can make the following conclusions:
(i)
f (x1)  0:
A relative maximum therefore occurs at x  x1, and since   0, an
unstable saddle point occurs at X1  (x1, 0).
g(X1) 
0
gf (x1)
1
>m
 y  g 
f(x)
1  [ f(x)]2  
m y
 x  y
mx  mg 
f(x)
1  [ f(x)]2  x
Fx  mg sin  cos   mg 
f(x)
1  [ f(x)]2
0  22g>l.
1  (l>2g)0
2  1.
y  0, cos x  1  (l>2g)0
2,
y2  2g
l  cos x  1  l
2g 0
2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(ii)
f (x1)  0 and b  0:
A relative minimum therefore occurs at x  x1, and since t  0 and
  0, X1  (x1, 0) is a stable critical point. If b2  4gm2f (x1),
the system is overdamped, and the critical point is a stable node. If
b2  4gm2f (x1), the system is underdamped, and the critical point is
a stable spiral point. The exact nature of the stable critical point is still
in doubt if b2  4gm2f (x1).
(iii)
f (x1)  0 and the system is undamped (b  0):
In this case the eigenvalues are pure imaginary, but the phase-plane
method can be used to show that the critical point is a center. Therefore
solutions with X(0)  (x(0), x(0)) near X1  (x1, 0) are periodic.
412
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
z
x
π
π/
3
2
−π/2
π
−
z = sin x
x ′
x
(-2
(-2
π, 15)
π, 10)
15
10
5
-5
-π
π
FIGURE 10.4.5
b  0.01 in Example 2
FIGURE 10.4.4
 p2 and 3p2 are
stable in Example 2
π
x′
x
(-2
-
π, 10)
10
5
π
FIGURE 10.4.6
b  0 in Example 2
EXAMPLE 2
Bead Sliding Along a Sine Wave
A 10-gram bead slides along the graph of z  sin x. According to conclusion (ii),
the relative minima at x1  p2 and 3p2 give rise to stable critical points (see
Figure 10.4.4). Since f (p2)  f (3p2)  1, the system will be underdamped
provided that b2  4gm2. If we use SI units, m  0.01 kg and g  9.8 m/s2, then the
condition for an underdamped system becomes b2  3.92  103.
If b  0.01 is the damping constant, then both of these critical points are stable
spiral points. The two solutions corresponding to initial conditions X(0) 
(x(0), x(0))  (2p, 10) and X(0)  (2p, 15), respectively, were obtained by
using a numerical solver and are shown in Figure 10.4.5. When x(0)  10, the bead
has enough momentum to make it over the hill at x  3p2 but not over the hill at
x  p2. The bead then approaches the relative minimum based at x  p2. If
x(0)  15, the bead has the momentum to make it over both hills, but then it
rocks back and forth in the valley based at x  3p2 and approaches the point
(3p2, 1) on the wire. Experiment with other initial conditions using your
numerical solver.
Figure 10.4.6 shows a collection of solution curves obtained from a numerical
solver for the undamped case. Since b  0, the critical points corresponding to
x1  p2 and 3p2 are now centers. When X(0)  (2p, 10), the bead has
sufﬁcient momentum to move over all hills. The ﬁgure also indicates that when
the bead is released from rest at a position on the wire between x  3p2 and
x  p2, the resulting motion is periodic.
Lotka-Volterra Predator-Prey Model
Apredator-prey interaction between
two species occurs when one species (the predator) feeds on a second species (the
prey). For example, the snowy owl feeds almost exclusively on a common arctic
rodent called a lemming, while a lemming uses arctic tundra plants as its food
supply. Interest in using mathematics to help explain predator-prey interactions
has been stimulated by the observation of population cycles in many arctic mam-
mals. In the MacKenzie River district of Canada, for example, the principal prey
of the lynx is the snowshoe hare, and both populations cycle with a period of about
10 years.
There are many predator-prey models that lead to plane autonomous systems
with at least one periodic solution. The ﬁrst such model was constructed inde-
pendently by pioneer biomathematicians Arthur Lotka (1925) and Vito Volterra
(1926). If x denotes the number of predators and y denotes the number of prey, then
the Lotka-Volterra model takes the form
where a, b, c, and d are positive constants.
 y  cxy  dy  y(cx  d), 
 x  ax  bxy   x(a   by)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note that in the absence of predators (x  0), y  dy, and so the number of prey
grows exponentially. In the absence of prey, x  ax, and so the predator popula-
tion becomes extinct. The term cxy represents the death rate due to predation. The
model therefore assumes that this death rate is directly proportional to the number of
possible encounters xy between predator and prey at a particular time t, and the term
bxy represents the resulting positive contribution to the predator population.
The critical points of this plane autonomous system are (0, 0) and (dc, ab),
and the corresponding Jacobian matrices are
.
The critical point at (0, 0) is a saddle point, and Figure 10.4.7 shows a typical
proﬁle of solutions that are in the ﬁrst quadrant and near (0, 0).
Because the matrix A2 has pure imaginary eigenvalues 
, the criti-
cal point (dc, ab) may be a center. This possibility can be investigated by using
the phase-plane method. Since
,
we separate variables and obtain
.
The following argument establishes that all solution curves that originate in the ﬁrst
quadrant are periodic.
Typical graphs of the nonnegative functions F(x)  xdecx and G(y)  yaeby
are shown in Figure 10.4.8. It is not hard to show that F(x) has an absolute maximum
at x  dc, whereas G(y) has an absolute maximum at y  ab. Note that with the
exception of 0 and the absolute maximum, F and G each take on all values in their
range precisely twice.
These graphs can be used to establish the following properties of a solution
curve that originates at a noncritical point (x0, y0) in the ﬁrst quadrant:
(i)
If y  ab, the equation F(x)G(y)  c0 has exactly two solutions xm and
xM that satisfy xm  dc  xM.
(ii)
If xm  x1  xM and x  x1, then F(x)G(y)  c0 has exactly two
solutions y1 and y2 that satisfy y1  ab  y2.
(iii)
If x is outside the interval [xm, xM], then F(x)G(y)  c0 has no solutions.
We will give the demonstration of (i) and outline parts (ii) and (iii) in the exer-
cises. Since (x0, y0)  (dc, ab), F(x0)G(y0)  F(dc)G(ab). If y  ab, then
.
Therefore F(x)  c0G(ab) has precisely two solutions xm and xM that satisfy
xm  dc  xM. The graph of a typical periodic solution is shown in Figure 10.4.9.
0 
c0
G(a>b)  F(x0)G(y0)
G(a>b)
 F(d>c)G(a>b)
G(a>b)
 F(d>c)
a ln y  by  cx  d ln x  c1   or    (xdecx)(yaeby)  c0
	 a  by
y
 dy 	 
cx  d
x
 dx
dy
dx  y(cx  d)
x(a  by)
  
 1ad i
A1  g((0, 0)) 
a
0
0
d    and    A2  g((d>c, a>b)) 
0
ac>b
bd>c
0 
10.4
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
●
413
y
x
Prey
Predators
FIGURE 10.4.7
Solutions near (0, 0)
FIGURE 10.4.8
Graphs of F and G
help to establish properties (1)-(3)
x
F
x1
d/c
x2
Graph of F(x)
a/b
y 
G
y1
y2
Graph of G(y) 
(a) Maximum of F at x = d/c
(b) Maximum of G at y = a/b
x
y
xm
x1
xM
X0
d/c
a/b
FIGURE 10.4.9
Periodic solution of
the Lotka-Volterra model
EXAMPLE 3
Predator-Prey Population Cycles
If we let a  0.1, b  0.002, c  0.0025, and d  0.2 in the Lotka-Volterra predator-
prey model, the critical point in the ﬁrst quadrant is (dc, ab)  (80, 50), and we
know that this critical point is a center. See Figure 10.4.10, in which we have used
a numerical solver to generate these cycles. The closer the initial condition X0 is
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

to (80, 50), the more the periodic solutions resemble the elliptical solutions
to the corresponding linear system. The eigenvalues of g((80, 50)) are
, and so the solutions near the critical point have period
, or about 44.4.
Lotka-Volterra Competition Model
A competitive interaction occurs
when two or more species compete for the food, water, light, and space resources
of an ecosystem. The use of one of these resources by one population therefore
inhibits the ability of another population to survive and grow. Under what conditions
can two competing species coexist? A number of mathematical models have been
constructed that offer insights into conditions that permit coexistence. If x denotes
the number in species I and y denotes the number in species II, then the Lotka-
Volterra model takes the form
(1)
Note that in the absence of species II (y  0), x  (r1K1)x(K1  x), and so
the ﬁrst population grows logistically and approaches the steady-state population K1
(see Section 3.3 and Example 4 in Section 10.3). A similar statement holds for
species II growing in the absence of species I. The term a21xy in the second equa-
tion stems from the competitive effect of species I on species II. The model there-
fore assumes that this rate of inhibition is directly proportional to the number of
possible competitive pairs xy at a particular time t.
This plane autonomous system has critical points at (0, 0), (K1, 0), and (0, K2).
When a12a21  0, the lines K1  x  a12y  0 and K2  y  a21x  0 intersect to
produce a fourth critical point 
. Figure 10.4.11 shows the two conditions
under which 
is in the ﬁrst quadrant. The trace and determinant of the Jacobian
matrix at 
are, respectively,
.
In case (a) of Figure 10.4.11, K1a12  K2 and K2a21  K1. It follows that a12a21  1,
t  0, and   0. Since
t2  4  0, and so 
is a stable node. Therefore if X(0)  X0 is sufﬁciently
close to 
,
and we may conclude that coexistence is pos-
sible. The demonstration that case (b) leads to a saddle point and the investigation of
the nature of critical points at (0, 0), (K1, 0), and (0, K2) are left to the exercises.
When the competitive interactions between two species are weak, both of the
coefﬁcients a12 and a21 will be small, so the conditions K1a12  K2 and K2a21  K1
may be satisﬁed. This might occur when there is a small overlap in the ranges of two
predator species that hunt for a common prey.
lim t
 :
  X(t)  Xˆ ,
Xˆ  (xˆ, yˆ)
(xˆ, yˆ)
 xˆ r1
K1
 yˆ r2
K2
2
 4a12a21xˆyˆ r1r2
K1K2
,
 2  4 xˆ r1
K1
 yˆ r2
K2
2
 4(a12a21  1)xˆyˆ r1r2
K1K2
  xˆ r1
K1
 yˆ r2
K2
    and      (1  a12a21)xˆyˆ r1r2
K1K2
(xˆ, yˆ)
(xˆ, yˆ)
Xˆ  (xˆ, yˆ)
 y  r2
K2
 y(K2  y  21x).
 x  r1
K1
 x(K1  x  12y)
p  10 12
  
1ad i  
12 10 i
414
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
40
80
120
160
50
100
y
Prey
Predators
x
FIGURE 10.4.10
Phase portrait of the
Lotka-Volterra model in Example 3
α
K1
K1/  12
α
α α
K2/  21
K2
(x, y)
K1
α
K1/  12
α
K2/  21
K2
(x, y)
(a)
12
21  1
α α
12
21  1
(b)
x
y
x
y
FIGURE 10.4.11
Two conditions
when critical point 
is in the ﬁrst
quadrant
(xˆ, yˆ)
EXAMPLE 4
A Lotka-Volterra Competition Model
A competitive interaction is described by the Lotka-Volterra competition model
Classify all critical points of the system.
 y  0.001y(100  y  3.0x).
 x  0.004x(50  x  0.75y)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SOLUTION
You should verify that critical points occur at (0, 0), (50, 0), (0, 100)
and at (20, 40). Since a12a21  2.25  1, we have case (b) in Figure 10.4.11, so the
critical point at (20, 40) is a saddle point. The Jacobian matrix is
,
and we obtain
g(X) 
0.2  0.008x  0.003y
0.003y
0.003x
0.1  0.002y  0.003x
10.4
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS
●
415
.
g((0, 0)) 
0.2
0
0
0.1,    g((50, 0)) 
0.2
0
0.15
0.05,    g((0, 100)) 
0.1
0.3
0
0.1
Therefore (0, 0) is an unstable node, whereas both (50, 0) and (0, 100) are stable
nodes. (Check this!)
Coexistence can also occur in the Lotka-Volterra competition model if there is at
least one periodic solution that lies entirely in the ﬁrst quadrant. It is possible to
show, however, that this model has no periodic solutions.
EXERCISES 10.4
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-19.
Nonlinear Pendulum
1. A pendulum is released at u  p3 and is given an ini-
tial angular velocity of v0 rad/s. Determine the condi-
tions under which the resulting motion is periodic.
2. (a) If a pendulum is released from rest at u  u0, show
that the angular velocity is again 0 when u  u0.
(b) The period T of the pendulum is the amount of time
needed for u to change from u0 to u0 and back to
u0. Show that
.
Sliding Bead
3. A bead with mass m slides along a thin wire whose shape
is described by the function z  f(x). If X1  (x1, y1) is a
critical point of the plane autonomous system associated
with the sliding bead, verify that the Jacobian matrix at
X1 is
.
4. A bead with mass m slides along a thin wire whose
shape is described by the function z  f (x). When
f (x1)  0, f (x1)  0, and the system is undamped,
the critical point X1  (x1, 0) is a center. Estimate
the period of the bead when x(0) is near x1 and
x(0)  0.
5. A bead is released from the position x(0)  x0 on the
curve z  x22 with initial velocity x(0)  v0 cm/s.
(a) Use the phase-plane method to show that the
resulting solution is periodic when the system is
undamped.
g(X1) 
0
gf (x1)
1
>m
T  B
2L
g   	
0
0
 
1
1cos   cos 0
 d
(b) Show that the maximum height zmax to which the
bead rises is given by 
.
6. Rework Problem 5 with z  cosh x.
Predator-Prey Models
7. (Refer to Figure 10.4.9.) If xm  x1  xM and x  x1,
show that F(x)G(y)  c0 has exactly two solutions y1
and y2 that satisfy y1  ab  y2. [Hint: First show that
G(y)  c0F(x1)  G(ab).]
8. From (i) and (iii) on page 413, conclude that the maxi-
mum number of predators occurs when y  ab.
9. In many ﬁshery science models, the rate at which a
species is caught is assumed to be directly proportional
to its abundance. If both predator and prey are being
exploited in this manner, the Lotka-Volterra differential
equations take the form
where 1 and 2 are positive constants.
(a) When 2  d, show that there is a new critical point
in the ﬁrst quadrant that is a center.
(b) Volterra's principle states that a moderate amount
of exploitation increases the average number of prey
and decreases the average number of predators.
Is this ﬁsheries model consistent with Volterra's
principle?
10. A predator-prey interaction is described by the Lotka-
Volterra model
 y  0.2y  0.025xy.
 x  0.1x  0.02xy
 y  cxy  dy  2 y,
 x  ax  bxy  1x
zmax  1
2[ev0
2/g(1  x0
2)  1]
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(a) Find the critical point in the ﬁrst quadrant, and use
a numerical solver to sketch some population
cycles.
(b) Estimate the period of the periodic solutions that
are close to the critical point in part (a).
Competition Models
11. A competitive interaction is described by the Lotka-
Volterra competition model
.
Find and classify all critical points of the system.
12. In (1) show that (0, 0) is always an unstable node.
13. In (1) show that (K1, 0) is a stable node when
K1  K2a21 and a saddle point when K1  K2a21.
14. Use Problems 12 and 13 to establish that (0, 0), (K1, 0),
and (0, K2) are unstable when 
is a stable
node.
15. In (1) show that 
is a saddle point when
K1a12  K2 and K2a21  K1.
Miscellaneous Mathematical Models
16. Damped Pendulum
If we assume that a damping
force acts in the direction opposite to the motion of a
pendulum and with a magnitude directly proportional to
the angular velocity dudt, the displacement angle u for
the pendulum satisﬁes the nonlinear second-order dif-
ferential equation
.
(a) Write the second-order differential equation as a
plane autonomous system. Find all critical points of
the system.
(b) Find a condition on m, l, and b that will make (0, 0)
a stable spiral point.
17. Nonlinear Damping
In the analysis of free, damped
motion in Section 5.1 we assumed that the damping force
was proportional to the velocity x. Frequently, the magni-
tude of this damping force is proportional to the square of
the velocity, and the new differential equation becomes
.
(a) Write the second-order differential equation as a
plane autonomous system, and ﬁnd all critical points.
(b) The system is called overdamped when (0, 0) is a
stable node and is called underdamped when (0, 0)
x   
m xx  k
m x
ml d 2
dt2  mg sin    d
dt
Xˆ  (xˆ, yˆ)
Xˆ  (xˆ, yˆ)
 y  0.06y(10  0.1y  0.3x)
 x  0.08x(20  0.4x  0.3y)
416
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
is a stable spiral point. Physical considerations sug-
gest that (0, 0) must be an asymptotically stable
critical point. Show that the system is necessarily
underdamped. 
Discussion Problems
18. A bead with mass m slides along a thin wire whose
shape may be described by the function z  f(x). Small
stretches of the wire act like an inclined plane, and
in mechanics it is assumed that the magnitude of the
frictional force between the bead and wire is directly
proportional to mg cos u (see Figure 10.4.3).
(a) Explain why the new differential equation for the
x-coordinate of the bead is
for some positive constant m.
(b) Investigate the critical points of the correspond-
ing plane autonomous system. Under what condi-
tions is a critical point a saddle point? A stable
spiral point?
19. An undamped oscillation satisﬁes a nonlinear second-
order differential equation of the form x  f(x)  0,
where f(0)  0 and xf(x)  0 for x  0 and d  x  d.
Use the phase-plane method to investigate whether it
is possible for the critical point (0, 0) to be a stable
spiral
point. 
20. The Lotka-Volterra predator-prey model assumes that
in the absence of predators the number of prey grows
exponentially. If we make the alternative assumption
that the prey population grows logistically, the new
system is
,
where a, b, c, r, and K are positive and K  ab.
(a) Show that the system has critical points at
(0, 0), (0, K), and 
, where 
and
.
(b) Show that the critical points at (0, 0) and (0, K)
are saddle points, whereas the critical point at
is either a stable node or a stable spiral point.
(c) Show that 
is a stable spiral point if
. Explain why this case will occur
when the carrying capacity K of the prey is large.
yˆ 
4bK2
r  4bK
(xˆ, yˆ)
(xˆ, yˆ)
cxˆ  r
K (K  yˆ)
yˆ  a>b
(xˆ, yˆ)
 y  cxy  r
K y(K  y)
 x  ax  bxy
that y2  2F(x)  c.]
[Hint: Let F(x)  	x
0  f (u) du and show
x  g   f(x)
1  [ f(x)]2  
m x
Hint: d
dy yy  2y.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21. The dynamical system
arises in a model for the growth of microorganisms in a
chemostat, a simple laboratory device in which a
nutrient from a supply source ﬂows into a growth cham-
ber. In the system, x denotes the concentration of the
microorganisms in the growth chamber, y denotes the
 y  
y
1  y x  y  
 x   
y
1  y x  x
CHAPTER 10 IN REVIEW
●
417
concentration of nutrients, and a  1 and b  0 are
constants that can be adjusted by the experimenter. Find
conditions on a and b that ensure that the system has 
a single critical point 
in the ﬁrst quadrant, and 
investigate the stability of this critical point.
22. Use the methods of this chapter together with a numeri-
cal solver to investigate stability in the nonlinear
spring/mass system modeled by
See Problem 8 in Exercises 5.3.
x  8x  6x3  x5  0.
(xˆ, yˆ)
CHAPTER 10 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-19.
Answer Problems 1-10 without referring back to the text.
Fill in the blank, or answer true or false.
1. The second-order differential equation x  f (x) 
g(x)  0 can be written as a plane autonomous 
system. 
2. If X  X(t) is a solution to a plane autonomous system
and X(t1)  X(t2) for t1  t2, then X(t) is a periodic
solution. 
3. If the trace of the matrix A is 0 and det A  0, then the
critical point (0, 0) of the linear system X  AX may
be classiﬁed as 
.
4. If the critical point (0, 0) of the linear system X  AX
is a stable spiral point, then the eigenvalues of A
are
.
5. If the critical point (0, 0) of the linear system X  AX
is a saddle point and X  X(t) is a solution, then
does not exist. 
6. If the Jacobian matrix A  g(X1) at a critical point of a
plane autonomous system has positive trace and deter-
minant, then the critical point X1 is unstable. 
7. It is possible to show, using linearization, that a
nonlinear plane autonomous system has periodic
solutions. 
8. All 
solutions 
to 
the 
pendulum 
equation
are periodic. 
9. For what value(s) of a does the plane autonomous
system
possess periodic solutions? 
 y  x  y
 x  x  2y
d 2
dt2  g
l sin   0
limt
 :
 
   X(t)
10. For what values of n is x  np an asymptotically stable
critical point of the autonomous ﬁrst-order differential
equation x  sin x? 
11. Solve the nonlinear plane autonomous system
by switching to polar coordinates. Describe the geomet-
ric behavior of the solution that satisﬁes the initial con-
dition X(0)  (1, 0).
12. Discuss the geometric nature of the solutions to the lin-
ear system X  AX given that the general solution is
(a)
(b)
13. Classify the critical point (0, 0) of the given linear sys-
tem by computing the trace t and determinant .
(a) x  3x  4y
(b) x  3x  2y
y  5x  3y
y  2x  y
14. Find and classify (if possible) the critical points of the
plane autonomous system
.
15. Determine the value(s) of a for which (0, 0) is a stable
critical point for the plane autonomous system (in polar
coordinates)
   1.
 r  ar
 y  4y  2xy  y2
 x  x  xy  3x2
X(t)  c1
1
1et  c2
1
2e2t
X(t)  c1
1
1et  c2
1
2e2t
 y  x  y(1x2  y2)
3.
 x  y  x(1x2  y2)
3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16. Classify the critical point (0, 0) of the plane autonomous
system corresponding to the nonlinear second-order dif-
ferential equation
,
where m is a real constant.
17. Without solving explicitly, classify (if possible) the crit-
ical points of the autonomous ﬁrst-order differential
equation x  (x2  1)ex/2 as asymptotically stable or
unstable.
18. Use the phase-plane method to show that the solutions
to the nonlinear second-order differential equation
that satisfy x(0)  x0
and
x(0)  0 are periodic.
19. In Section 5.1 we assumed that the restoring force F of
the spring satisﬁed Hooke's law F  ks, where s is the
elongation of the spring and k is a positive constant of
proportionality. If we replace this assumption with the
nonlinear law F  ks3, the new differential equation for
damped motion of the hard spring becomes
,
where ks3  mg. The system is called overdamped
when (0, 0) is a stable node and is called underdamped
when (0, 0) is a stable spiral point. Find new conditions
on m, k, and b that will lead to overdamping and
underdamping.
mx  x  k(s  x)3  mg
x  2x 1(x)2  1
x  (x2  1) x  x  0
418
●
CHAPTER 10
PLANE AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
20. The rod of a pendulum is attached to a movable joint at
a point P and rotates at an angular speed of v (rad/s) in
the plane perpendicular to the rod. See Figure 10.R.1.
As a result the bob of the rotating pendulum experiences
an additional centripetal force, and the new differential
equation for u becomes
.
(a) If v2  gl, show that (0, 0) is a stable critical
point and is the only critical point in the domain
p  u  p. Describe what occurs physically
when u(0)  u0, u(0)  0, and u0 is small.
(b) If v2  gl, show that (0, 0) is unstable and there are
two additional stable critical points 
in the
domain p  u  p. Describe what occurs physi-
cally when u(0)  u0, u(0)  0, and u0 is small.
(
ˆ, 0)
ml d 2
dt2  2ml sin  cos   mg sin    d
dt
ω
θ
Pivot
P
FIGURE 10.R.1
Rotating pendulum in Problem 20
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.1 Orthogonal Functions
11.2 Fourier Series
11.3 Fourier Cosine and Sine Series
11.4 Sturm-Liouville Problem
11.5 Bessel and Legendre Series
11.5.1 Fourier-Bessel Series
11.5.2 Fourier-Legendre Series
Chapter 11 in Review
When you studied vectors in calculus you saw that two nonzero vectors are
orthogonal when their inner (or dot) product is zero. Beyond calculus the notions of
vectors, orthogonality, and inner product often lose their geometric interpretation.
These concepts have been generalized; it is perfectly common in mathematics to
think of a function as a vector. We can then say that two different functions are
orthogonal when their inner product is zero. We will see in this chapter that the
inner product of these vectors (functions) is actually a deﬁnite integral.
The concepts of orthogonal functions and the expansion of a given function f in
terms of an inﬁnite set of orthogonal functions is fundamental to the material that is
covered in Chapters 12 and 13.
Fourier Series 
11
419
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

420
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
Inner Product
Recall that if u and v are two vectors in R3 or 3-space, then
the inner product (u, v) (in calculus this is called the dot product and written as uv)
possesses the following properties:
(i)
(u, v)  (v, u),
(ii)
(ku, v)  k(u, v), k a scalar,
(iii)
(u, u)  0 if u  0 and (u, u)  0 if u  0,
(iv)
(u  v, w)  (u, w)  (v, w).
We expect that any generalization of the inner product concept should have these
same properties.
Suppose that f1 and f2 are functions deﬁned on an interval [a, b].* Since a deﬁnite
integral on [a, b] of the product f1(x)f2(x) possesses the foregoing properties (i)-(iv) of
an inner product whenever the integral exists, we are prompted to make the following
deﬁnition.
*The interval could also be (, ), [0, ), and so on.
ORTHOGONAL FUNCTIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●The notions of generalized vectors and vector spaces can be found in any linear algebra text.
INTRODUCTION
The concepts of geometric vectors in two and three dimensions, orthogonal
or perpendicular vectors, and the inner product of two vectors have been generalized. It is perfectly
routine in mathematics to think of a function as a vector. In this section we will examine an inner
product that is different from the one you studied in calculus. Using this new inner product, we
deﬁne orthogonal functions and sets of orthogonal functions. Another topic in a standard calculus
course is the expansion of a function f in a power series. In this section we will also see how to
expand a suitable function f in terms of an inﬁnite set of orthogonal functions.
11.1
DEFINITION 11.1.1
Inner Product of Functions
The inner product of two functions f1 and f2 on an interval [a, b] is the number
( f1, f 2) 
b
a
 f1(x) f 2(x) dx.
Orthogonal Functions
Motivated by the fact that two geometric vectors u
and v are orthogonal whenever their inner product is zero, we deﬁne orthogonal
functions in a similar manner.
DEFINITION 11.1.2
Orthogonal Functions
Two functions f1 and f2 are orthogonal on an interval [a, b] if
(1)
( f1, f 2) 
b
a
 f1(x) f 2(x) dx  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.1
ORTHOGONAL FUNCTIONS
●
421
EXAMPLE 1
Orthogonal Functions
(a) The functions f1(x)  x2 and f2(x)  x3 are orthogonal on the interval [1, 1],
since 
(b) The functions f1(x)  x2 and f2(x)  x4 are not orthogonal on the interval [1, 1],
since
Unlike in vector analysis, in which the word orthogonal is a synonym for perpen-
dicular, in this present context the term orthogonal and condition (1) have no geometric
signiﬁcance. Note that the zero function is orthogonal to every function.
Orthogonal Sets
We are primarily interested in inﬁnite sets of orthogonal
functions that are all deﬁned on the same interval [a, b].
( f1, f2) 
1
1
 x2  x4 dx 
1
1
 x6 dx  1
7 x7
1
1  1
7 (1  (1))  2
7  0.
( f1, f2) 
1
1
 x2  x3 dx 
1
1
 x5dx  1
6 x6
1
1  1
6 (1  1)  0.
DEFINITION 11.1.3
Orthogonal Set
A set of real-valued functions {f0(x), f1(x), f2(x), . . .} is said to be orthogonal
on an interval [a, b] if
(2)
(m, n) 
b
a
 m(x)n(x) dx  0, m Y n.
Orthonormal Sets
The norm, or length u, of a vector u can be expressed in
EXAMPLE 2
Orthogonal Set of Functions
Show that the set {1, cos x, cos 2x, . . .} is orthogonal on the interval [p, p].
SOLUTION
If we make the identiﬁcation f0(x)  1 and fn(x)  cos nx, we must
then show that 
We have, in the ﬁrst case,
  1
n  sin nx
	
	  1
n [sin n	  sin(n	)]  0,    n  0,
 (0, n) 
	
	
 0(x) n(x) dx 
	
	
 cos nx dx
	
	 0(x) n(x) dx  0, n  0, and 	
	 m(x) n(x) dx  0, m  n.
terms of the inner product. The expression (u, u)  u2 is called the square norm,
and so the norm is u 
Similarly, the square norm of a function fn
is
fn(x)2  (fn,
fn), and so the norm, or its generalized length, is
fn(x) 
In other words, the square norm and norm of a function fn in
an orthogonal set {fn(x)} are, respectively,
fn(x)2 
and
fn(x) 
(3)
If {fn(x)} is an orthogonal set of functions on the interval [a, b] with the additional
property that fn(x)  1 for n  0, 1, 2, . . . , then {fn(x)} is said to be an ortho-
normal set on the interval.
B
b
a
f2
n(x) dx.

b
a
 n
2(x) dx
1(n, n).
1(u, u).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and, in the second,
; trig identity
   1
2 
sin (m  n)x
m  n
 sin (m  n)x
m  n 
	
	
 0,    m  n.
   1
2 
	
	
[cos(m  n)x  cos(m  n)x] dx
 
	
	
cos mx cos nx dx
 (m, n) 
	
	
 m(x) n(x) dx
422
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
EXAMPLE 3
Norms
Find the norm of each function in the orthogonal set given in Example 2.
SOLUTION
For f0(x)  1 we have, from (3),
f0 (x)2 
so f0(x) 
For fn(x)  cos nx, n  0, it follows that
fn (x)2 
Thus for n  0, fn(x) 
Normalization
Any orthogonal set of nonzero functions {fn(x)}, n 
0, 1, 2, . . . can be made into an orthonormal set by normalizing each function in
the set, that is, by dividing each function by its norm. The next example illustrates
the idea.
1	.

	
	
 cos2nx dx  1
2 
	
	
 [1  cos 2nx] dx  	.
12	.

	
	
  dx  2	,
EXAMPLE 4
Orthonormal Set
In Example 2 we proved that the set
{1, cos x, cos 2x, . . .}
is orthogonal on the interval 
. In Example 3, we then saw that the norms of
the functions in the foregoing set are
f0(x)  1  
and
fn(x)   cos nx 
By dividing each function by its norm we obtain the set
which is orthonormal on the interval [p, p].
Vector Analogy
In the introduction to this section, we stated that our purpose
for studying orthogonal functions is to be able to expand a function in terms of an

1
12	
, cos x
1	
, cos 2x
1	
, . . .
1	, n  1, 2, . . . .
12	
[p, p]
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

inﬁnite set {fn(x)} of orthogonal functions. To motivate this concept we shall make
one more analogy between vectors and functions. Suppose that v1, v2, and v3 are
three mutually orthogonal nonzero vectors in R3. Such an orthogonal set can be used
as a basis for R3; this means any three-dimensional vector u can be written as a
linear combination
(4)
where the ci, i  1, 2, 3, are scalars called the components of the vector u. Each
component ci can be expressed in terms of u and the corresponding vector vi. To see
this, we take the inner product of (4) with v1:
(u, v1)  c1(v1, v1)  c2(v2, v1)  c3(v3, v1)  c1v12  c20  c30.
Hence
In like manner we ﬁnd that the components c2 and c3 are given by
Hence (4) can be expressed as
(5)
Orthogonal Series Expansion
Suppose {fn(x)} is an inﬁnite orthogonal set
u  (u, v1)
'v1'2 v1  (u, v2)
'v2'2 v2  (u, v3)
'v3'2 v3  	
3
n1
(u, vn)
'vn'2
vn.
c2  (u, v2)
'v2'2     and    c3  (u, v3)
'v3'2 .
c1  (u, v1)
'v1'2  .
u  c1v1  c2v2  c3v3,
11.1
ORTHOGONAL FUNCTIONS
●
423
  c0(0, m)  c1(1, m)  
 
 
  cn(n, m)  
 
 
.
 
b
a
 f (x)m(x) dx  c0 
b
a
 0(x)m(x) dx  c1 
b
a
 1(x)m(x) dx  
 
 
  cn 
b
a
 n(x)m(x) dx  
 
 
By orthogonality each term on the right-hand side of the last equation is zero except
when m  n. In this case we have
It follows that the required coefﬁcients are
In other words,
(7)
 f (x)  	

n0
 cnn(x),
cn  b
a f (x)n(x) dx
b
a2
n(x)dx
,    n  0, 1, 2, . . . .

b
a
 f (x)n(x) dx  cn 
b
a
 2
n(x) dx.
of functions on an interval [a, b]. We ask: If y  f (x) is a function deﬁned on the
interval [a, b], is it possible to determine a set of coefﬁcients cn, n  0, 1, 2, . . . , for
which
?
(6)
As in the foregoing discussion on ﬁnding components of a vector we can ﬁnd the
desired coefﬁcients cn by using the inner product. Multiplying (6) by fm(x) and inte-
grating over the interval [a, b] gives
f (x)  c00(x)  c11(x)  
 
 
  cnn(x)  
 
 
 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The usual assumption is that w(x)  0 on the interval of orthogonality [a, b].
The set {1, cos x, cos 2x, . . .} in Example 2 is orthogonal with respect to the weight
function w(x)  1 on the interval [p, p].
If {fn(x)} is orthogonal with respect to a weight function w(x) on the interval
[a, b], then multiplying (6) by w(x)fn(x) and integrating yields
(10)
where
fn(x)2 
(11)
The series (7) with coefﬁcients given by either (8) or (10) is said to be an orthogonal
series expansion of f or a generalized Fourier series.
Complete Sets
The procedure outlined for determining the coefﬁcients 
in
(8) was formal; that is, fundamental questions about whether or not an orthogonal
series expansion of a function f such as (7) actually converges to the function were
ignored. It turns out that for some speciﬁc orthogonal sets such series expansions do
indeed converge to the function. In the subsequent sections of this chapter, we will
state conditions on the type of functions deﬁned on the interval 
of orthogonal-
ity that are sufﬁcient to guarantee that an orthogonal series coverges to its function
f. To make one last point about the kind of set 
must be, let's go back to the
vector analogy on pages 422-423. If 
is a set of mutually orthogonal
nonzero vectors in R3, we can say that the set 
is complete in R3 because
three such vectors is all we need to write any vector u in that space in the form (5).
We could not write (5) using fewer than three vectors; a set, say, 
, would be
incomplete in R3. As a necessary consequence of completeness of 
it is
easy to see that the only vector u in 3-space that is orthogonal to each of the vectors
and 
is the zero vector. If u were orthogonal to 
and 
, then
and (5) shows 
Similarly, in the discus-
sion of orthogonal series expansions, the function f as well as each of the functions
u  0.
(u, v3)  0
(u, v1)  0, (u, v2)  0,
v3
v1, v2,
v3
v1, v2,
{v1, v2, v3}
{v1, v2}
{v1, v2, v3}
{v1, v2, v3}
{fn(x)}
[a, b]
cn

b
a
w(x)n
2(x) dx.
cn  b
a f (x) w(x)n(x) dx
'n(x)'2
,
424
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
DEFINITION 11.1.4
Orthogonal Set/Weight Function
A set of real-valued functions {f0(x), f1(x), f2(x), . . .} is said to be
orthogonal with respect to a weight function w(x) on an interval [a, b] if

b
a
w(x)m(x)n(x) dx  0,
m  n. 
where
(8)
With inner product notation, (7) becomes
(9)
Thus (9) is seen to be the function analogue of the vector result given in (5).
f (x)  	

n0
 ( f, n)
'n(x)'2  n(x).
 cn  b
a f (x)n(x) dx
'n(x)'2
.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.1
ORTHOGONAL FUNCTIONS
●
425
EXERCISES 11.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-19.
In Problems 1-6 show that the given functions are orthog-
onal on the indicated interval.
1. f1(x)  x, f2(x)  x2;
[2, 2]
2. f1(x)  x3, f2(x)  x2  1;
[1, 1]
3. f1(x)  ex, f2(x)  xex  ex;
[0, 2]
4. f1(x)  cos x, f2(x)  sin2x;
[0, p]
5. f1(x)  x, f2(x)  cos 2x;
[p
2, p
2]
6. f1(x)  ex, f2(x)  sin x;
[p
4, 5p
4]
In Problems 7-12 show that the given set of functions is
orthogonal on the indicated interval. Find the norm of each
function in the set.
7. {sin x, sin 3x, sin 5x, . . .};
[0, p
2]
8. {cos x, cos 3x, cos 5x, . . .};
[0, p
2]
9. {sin nx}, n  1, 2, 3, . . . ;
[0, p]
10.
;
[0, p]
11.
12.
In Problems 13 and 14 verify by direct integration that the
functions are orthogonal with respect to the indicated weight
function on the given interval.
13. H0(x)  1, H1(x)  2x, H2(x)  4x2  2;
w(x) 
, (, )
14. L 0(x)  1, L1(x)  x  1, 
w(x)  ex, [0, )
15. Let {fn(x)} be an orthogonal set of functions on [a, b]
such that f0(x)  1. Show that 
for
n  1, 2, . . . .
b
an(x) dx  0
L2(x)  1
2 x2  2x  1;
ex2
m  1, 2, 3, . . . ; [p, p]
1, cos n	
p x, sin m	
p x,  n  1, 2, 3, . . . ,
1, cos  n	
p x, n  1, 2, 3, . . . ; [0, p]
sin n	
p x, n  1, 2, 3, . . .
16. Let {fn(x)} be an orthogonal set of functions on [a, b]
such that f0(x)  1 and f1(x)  x.
Show that
for n  2, 3, . . . and any
constants a and b.
17. Let {fn(x)} be an orthogonal set of functions on [a, b].
Show that fm(x)  fn(x)2  fm(x)2  fn(x)2,
m  n.
18. From Problem 1 we know that f1(x)  x and f2(x)  x2
are orthogonal on the interval [2, 2]. Find constants c1
and c2 such that f3(x)  x  c1x2  c2x3 is orthogonal
to both f1 and f2 on the same interval.
19. The set of functions {sin nx}, n  1, 2, 3, . . . , is
orthogonal on the interval [p, p]. Show that the set
is not complete.
20. Suppose f1, f2, and f3 are functions continuous on the inter-
val [a, b]. Show that ( f1  f2, f3)  ( f1, f3)  ( f2, f3).
Discussion Problems
21. Areal-valued function f is said to be periodic with period
T if f(x  T)  f(x). For example, 4p is a period of sin x,
since sin(x  4p)  sin x. The smallest value of T for
which f(x  T)  f(x) holds is called the fundamental
period of f. For example, the fundamental period of
f(x)  sin x is T  2p. What is the fundamental period
of each of the following functions?
(a) f (x)  cos 2px
(b)
(c) f (x)  sin x  sin 2x
(d) f (x)  sin 2x  cos 4x
(e) f (x)  sin 3x  cos 2x
(f)
An and Bn depend only on n
22. In Problem 9 we saw that set 
is
orthogonal on the interval 
Show that the set is also
orthogonal on the interval 
but is not complete 
in the set of all continuous functions deﬁned on 
[Hint: Consider f(x)  1.]
[p, p].
[p, p]
[0, p].
{sin nx}, n  1, 2, 3, . . .
f (x)  A0 	

n1An cos  n	
p
 x  Bn sin  n	
p
 x,
f (x)  sin 4
L x
b
a (x  )n(x) dx  0
in 
are part of a larger class, or space, S of functions. The class S could be,
say, the set of continuous functions on an interval 
or the set of piecewise-
continuous functions on 
We also want the set 
to be complete in S in
the sense that 
must contain sufﬁciently many functions so that every function
f in S can written in the form (7). As in our vector analogy, this means that the only
function that is orthogonal to each member of the set 
is the zero function.
See Problem 22 in Exercises 11.1.
We assume for the remainder of the discussion in this chapter that any orthog-
onal set used in a series expansion of a function is complete in some class of
functions S. 
{fn(x)}
{fn(x)}
{fn (x)}
[a, b].
[a, b],
{fn(x)}
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

426
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
FOURIER SERIES
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Reread—or, better, rework—Problem 12 in Exercises 11.1.
INTRODUCTION
We have just seen that if {f0(x), f1(x), f2(x), . . .} is an orthogonal set on an
interval [a, b] and if f is a function deﬁned on the same interval, then we can formally expand f in an
orthogonal series
where the coefﬁcients cn are determined by using the inner product concept. The orthogonal set of
trigonometric functions
(1)
will be of particular importance later on in the solution of certain kinds of boundary-value problems
involving linear partial differential equations. The set (1) is orthogonal on the interval [p, p]. See
Problem 12 in Exercises 11.1.
1,  cos  	
p x, cos 2	
p  x, cos 3	
p  x, . . ., sin 	
p x, sin 2	
p  x,  sin 3	
p
 x, . . .
c00(x)  c11(x)  c22(x)  
 
 
 ,
11.2
A Trigonometric Series
Suppose that f is a function deﬁned on the interval
(5)
  
  	

n1an
p
p
cos m	
p
 x cos n	
p
 x dx  bn
p
p
cos m	
p
 x sin n	
p
 x dx.
 
p
p
f (x) cos m	
p
 x dx  a0
2
p
p
cos m	
p
 x dx
(p, p) and can be expanded in an orthogonal series consisting of the trigonometric
functions in the orthogonal set (1); that is,
(2)
The coefﬁcients a0, a1, a2, . . . , b1, b2, . . . can be determined in exactly the same for-
mal manner as in the general discussion of orthogonal series expansions on page 423.
Before proceeding, note that we have chosen to write the coefﬁcient of 1 in the set (1)
as 
rather than a0. This is for convenience only; the formula of an will then reduce
to a0 for n  0.
Now integrating both sides of (2) from p to p gives
(3)
Since cos(npx
p) and sin(npx
p), n  1 are orthogonal to 1 on the interval, the
right side of (3) reduces to a single term:
Solving for a0 yields
(4)
Now we multiply (2) by cos(mpx
p) and integrate:
a0  1
p
 
p
p
  f (x) dx.

p
p
 f (x) dx  a0
2
p
p
dx  a0
2
 x
p
p pa0.

p
p
 f (x) dx  a0
2
p
p
 dx  	

n1an
p
p
cos n	
p  x dx  bn
p
p
sin n	
p  x dx.
1
2 a0
f (x)  a0
2  	

n1an cos n	
p
 x  bn sin n	
p
 x.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

By orthogonality we have
and
Thus (5) reduces to
and so
(6)
Finally, if we multiply (2) by sin(mpx
p), integrate, and make use of the results
and
we ﬁnd that
(7)
The trigonometric series (2) with coefﬁcients 
and 
deﬁned by (4), (6),
and (7), respectively, is said to be the Fourier series of f.  Although the French math-
ematical physicist Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier (1768-1830) did not invent the se-
ries that bears his name, he is at least responsible for sparking the interest of mathe-
maticians in trigonometric series by his less than rigorous use of them in his
researches on the conduction of heat. The formulas in (4), (6), and (7) that give the
coefﬁcients in a Fourier series are known as the Euler formulas.
bn
a0, an,
bn  1
p
 
p
p
 f (x) sin n	
p  x dx.

p
p
sin m	
p
 x sin n	
p
 x dx 
0,
p,
m  n
m  n,

p
p
sin m	
p
 x dx  0,  m   0,    
p
p
sin m	
p
 x  cos n	
p
 x dx  0,
an  1
p
 
p
p
  f (x) cos n	
p  x dx.

p
p
f (x) cos n	
p
 x dx  anp,

p
p
cos m	
p  x cos n	
p  x dx 
0,
p,
m  n
m  n.

p
p
cos m	
p  x dx  0,  m  0,    
p
p
cos m	
p  x sin n	
p  x dx  0,
11.2
FOURIER SERIES
●
427
DEFINITION 11.2.1
Fourier Series
The Fourier series of a function f defined on the interval (p, p) is given
by
(8)
where
(9)
(10)
(11)
 bn  1
p
 
p
p
  f (x) sin npx
p  dx.
 an  1
p
 
p
p
  f (x) cos npx
p  dx
 a0  1
p
p
p
  f (x) dx
 f (x)  a0
2  	

n1an sin n	x
p   bn sin n	x
p  
Convergence of a Fourier Series
In the absence of any stated conditions that
guarantee the validity of the steps leading to the coefﬁcients 
and 
the equality
sign in (8) should not be taken in a strict or literal sense. Some texts use the symbol ~ to
bn,
a0, an,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

signify that (8) is simply the corresponding trigonometric series with coefﬁcients
generated using f in formulas (9)-(11). In view of the fact that most functions in
applications are of the type that guarantee convergence of the series, we shall use the
equality symbol. Is it possible for a series (8) to converge at number x in the interval
and yet not be equal to 
The answer is an emphatic Yes.
Piecewise Continuous Functions
Before stating conditions under which a
Fourier series converges, we need to pause brieﬂy to review two topics from the ﬁrst
semester of calculus. We shall use the symbols 
to denote the one-
sided limits 
called, respectively, the right- and left-hand limits of f at x. A function f is said to be
piecewise continuous on a closed interval 
if there are 
•
a ﬁnite number of points 
in 
at which f has a ﬁnite
(or jump) discontinuity, and
•
f is continuous on each open interval 
As a consequence of this deﬁnition, the one-sided limits 
must exist
at every x satisfying 
The limits 
must also exist but it is
not required that f be continuous or even deﬁned at either a or b.
Our ﬁrst theorem gives sufﬁcient conditions for convergence of a Fourier series
at a point x.
f(a) and f(b)
a  x  b.
f(x) and f(x)
(xk, xk1).
[a, b]
x1  x2  . . .  xn
[a, b]
h0
h0
f (x)  lim
h : 0 f (x  h), f (x)  lim
h : 0 f(x  h),
f(x) and f(x)
f(x)?
(p, p),
428
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
In Section 7.1 we deﬁned piecewise
continuity on an unbounded interval 
[0, ). See Figure 7.1.1 on page 277.


THEOREM 11.2.1
Conditions for Convergence
Let f and f be piecewise continuous on the interval [p, p]. Then for all x in the
interval (p, p), the Fourier series of f converges to f(x) at a point continuity. At a
point of discontinuity the Fourier series converges to the average
where f(x) and f(x) are the right- and left-hand limits of f at x, respectively.
f (x)  f (x)
2
,
EXAMPLE 1
Expansion in a Fourier Series
Expand
(12)
in a Fourier series.
SOLUTION
The graph of f is given in Figure 11.2.1. With p  p we have from 
(9) and (10) that
  1
n	 cos nx
n 
	
0
 1  (1)n
n2	
,
 1
	
 (	  x) sin nx
n 
	
0
 1
n
 
	
0
sin nx dx
an  1
	
 
	
	  
f (x) cos nx dx  1
	
 
0
	
0 dx 
	
0
(	  x) cos nx dx
a0  1
	
 
	
	
  f (x) dx  1
	
 
0
	
0 dx 
	
0
(	  x) dx  1
	
 	x  x2
2
	
0
 	
2
f (x) 
0,
	  x,
	  x  0
  0  x  	
x
y
π
π
−π
FIGURE 11.2.1
Piecewise-continuous
function f in Example 1
; integration 
by parts
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where we have used cos np  (1)n. In like manner we ﬁnd from (11) that 
Therefore
(13)
Note that an deﬁned by (10) reduces to a0 given by (9) when we set n  0. But as
Example 1 shows, this might not be the case after the integral for an is evaluated.
f (x)  	
4 	

n1
1  (1)n
n2	
 cos nx  1
n sin nx.
bn  1
	
 
	
0
(	  x) sin nx dx  1
n.
11.2
FOURIER SERIES
●
429
x
−1
π
−π
y'
FIGURE 11.2.2
Piecewise continuous
derivative in Example 2
f
FIGURE 11.2.3
Periodic extension of function f shown in Figure 11.2.1 
EXAMPLE 2
Example 1 Revisited 
The equality in (13) of Example 1 is justiﬁed because both f and are piecewise contin-
uous on the interval 
See Figures 11.2.1 and 11.2.2. Because f is continuous for
every x in the interval 
except at 
the series (13) will converge to the
value 
At  
the function f is discontinuous, so the series (13) will converge to
Periodic Extension
Observe that each of the functions in the basic set (1) has
f(0)  f(0)
2

p
2.
x  0
f(x).
x  0,
(p, p),
[p, p].
f
EXAMPLE 3
Example 1 Revisited
The Fourier series (13) in Example 1 converges to the periodic extension of the func-
tion (12) on the entire x-axis. See Figure 11.2.3. At 
and at
the series converges to the values
,  
respectively. The solid black dots in Figure 11.2.3 represent the value p>2.
f(0)  f(0)
2
 p
2    and    f(p)  f(p)
2
 0
p, 3p, 5p, . . .
0, 2p, 4p, . . .
x
y
π
π
π
−4
π
−3
π
−2
π
− 
π
2
π
3
π
4
a different fundamental period*—namely, 2p
n, n  1—but since a positive integer
multiple of a period is also a period, we see that all the functions have in common the
period 2p. (Verify.) Hence the right-hand side of (2) is 2p-periodic; indeed, 2p is the
fundamental period of the sum. We conclude that a Fourier series not only repre-
sents the function on the interval (p, p) but also gives the periodic extension of f
outside this interval. We can now apply Theorem 11.2.1 to the periodic extension of
f, or we may assume from the outset that the given function is periodic with period
2p; that is, f(x  2p)  f (x). When f is piecewise continuous and the right- and left-
hand derivatives exist at x  p and x  p, respectively, then the series (8) con-
verges to the average
at these endpoints and to this value extended periodically to 3p, 5p, 7p, and
so on.
f (p)  f (p)
2
*See Problem 21 in Exercises 11.1.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Sequence of Partial Sums
It is interesting to see how the sequence of par-
tial sums {SN(x)} of a Fourier series approximates a function. For example, the ﬁrst
three partial sums of (13) in Example 1 are
430
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
(c) S15(x)
(d) S15(x)
y
x
2
1
3
1
2
3
y
x
-10
-5
10
5
1
2
3
(a) S3(x)
(b) S8(x)
y
x
-3 -2 -1
-3 -2 -1
-3 -2 -1
2
3
1
1
2
3
y
x
2
1
3
1
2
3
FIGURE 11.2.4
Partial sums of Fourier series (13) in Example 1
S1(x)  	
4 ,    S2(x)  	
4  2
	 cos x  sin x,    and    S3(x)  	
4  2
	 cos x  sin x  1
2 sin 2x.
In Figure 11.2.4 we have used a CAS to graph the partial sums S3(x), S8(x), and
S15(x) of (13) on the interval (p, p). Figure 11.2.4(d) shows the periodic extension
using S15(x) on (4p, 4p).
EXERCISES 11.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-19.
In Problems 1-16 ﬁnd the Fourier series of f on the given
interval. Give the number to which the Fourier series con-
verges at a point of discontinuity of f.
1.
2.
3.
4. f (x) 
0, 1  x  0
x,   0  x  1
f (x) 
1, 1  x  0
x,   0  x  1
f (x) 
1,
2,
	  x  0
0  x  	
f (x) 
0, 	  x  0
1,  0  x  	
5.
6.
7. f (x)  x  p,
p  x  p
8. f (x)  3  2x,
p  x  p
9.
10. f (x) 
0,
cos x,
	>2  x  0
 
0  x  	>2 
f (x) 
0,
sin x,
	  x  0
0  x  	 
f (x) 
	 2,
	 2  x2,
	  x  0
0  x  	 
f (x) 
0, 	  x  0
   x 2,  0  x  	
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.3
FOURIER COSINE AND SINE SERIES
●
431
11.
12.
13.
14.
15. f (x)  ex,
p  x  p
16.
In Problems 17 and 18 sketch the periodic extension of the
indicated function.
17. The function f in Problem 9
18. The function f in Problem 14
19. Use the result of Problem 5 to show that
and
20. Use Problem 19 to ﬁnd a series that gives the numerical
value of p2
8.
	 2
12  1  1
22  1
32  1
42  
 
 
.
	 2
6   1  1
22  1
32  1
42  
 
 
f (x) 
0,
ex  1,
	  x  0
    0  x  	
f (x)  2  x, 2  x  0
2,      0  x  2
f (x)  1,   5  x  0
1  x,    0  x  5
f (x) 
0, 2  x  0
x,     0  x  1
1,     1  x  2
f (x) 
   0,
2,
   1,
   0,
2  x  1
1  x  0
   0  x  1
   1  x  2
21. Use the result of Problem 7 to show that
22. Use the result of Problem 9 to show that
23. (a) Use the complex exponential form of the cosine
and sine,
to show that (8) can be written in the complex form
where 
where n  1, 2, 3, . . . .
(b) Show that c0, cn, and cn of part (a) can be written
as one integral
24. Use the results of Problem 23 to ﬁnd the complex form of
the Fourier series of f(x)  ex on the interval [p, p].
cn  1
2p
 
p
p
  f (x)ein	x/p dx,  n  0, 1, 2, . . . .
c0  a0
2 ,  cn  an  ibn
2
,  and  cn  an  ibn
2
,
f (x)  	

n
cnein	x/p,
 sin n	
p  x  ein	x/p  ein	x/p
2i
,
 cos n	
p  x  ein	x/p  ein	x/p
2
	
4  1
2 
1
1  3 
1
3  5 
1
5  7 
1
7  9  
 
 
.
	
4  1  1
3  1
5  1
7  
 
 
.
FOURIER COSINE AND SINE SERIES
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 11.1 and 11.2
INTRODUCTION
The effort that is expended in evaluation of the deﬁnite integrals that deﬁne
the coefﬁcients the a0, an, and bn in the expansion of a function f in a Fourier series is reduced
signiﬁcantly when f is either an even or an odd function. Recall that a function f is said to be
On a symmetric interval such as (p, p) the graph of an even function possesses symmetry with
respect to the y-axis, whereas the graph of an odd function possesses symmetry with respect to the
origin.
even if  f(x)   f (x)    and    odd if  f (x)  f (x).
11.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

432
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
Even and Odd Functions
It is likely that the origin of the terms even and
odd derives from the fact that the graphs of polynomial functions that consist of all
even powers of x are symmetric with respect to the y-axis, whereas graphs of poly-
nomials that consist of all odd powers of x are symmetric with respect to origin. For
example,
See Figures 11.3.1 and 11.3.2. The trigonometric cosine and sine functions are even
and odd functions, respectively, since cos(x)  cos x and sin(x)  sin x. The
exponential functions f (x)  ex and f (x)  ex are neither odd nor even.
Properties
The following theorem lists some properties of even and odd
functions.
f(x)  x2 is even
since f(x)  (x)2  x2  f(x)
even integer
f(x)  x3 is odd
since f(x)  (x)3  x3  f(x).
odd integer
x
−x
y
x
y = x2
f(−x)
f(x)
FIGURE 11.3.1
Even function; graph
symmetric with respect to y-axis
FIGURE 11.3.2
Odd function; graph
symmetric with respect to origin
−x
x
y = x3
f(−x)
f(x)
x
y
THEOREM 11.3.1
Properties of Even/Odd Functions
(a) The product of two even functions is even.
(b) The product of two odd functions is even.
(c) The product of an even function and an odd function is odd.
(d) The sum (difference) of two even functions is even.
(e) The sum (difference) of two odd functions is odd.
(f)
If f is even, then 
(g) If f is odd, then a
a  f (x) dx  0.
a
a f (x) dx  2a
0 f (x) dx.
PROOF OF (b)
Let us suppose that f and g are odd functions. Then we
have f (x)  f (x) and g(x)  g(x). If we deﬁne the product of f and g as
F (x)  f (x)g(x), then
This shows that the product F of two odd functions is an even function. The proofs of
the remaining properties are left as exercises. See Problem 48 in Exercises 11.3.
Cosine and Sine Series
If f is an even function on (p, p), then in view of the
foregoing properties the coefﬁcients (9), (10), and (11) of Section 11.2 become
   f(x) cos     
even
1-p
2-p
   f(x) dx 
a0 
   f(x) dx
 p
p
p
0
1-p
n
---
p
an 
 p
p
   f(x) sin
x dx  0.
odd
1-p
n
---
p
bn 
 p
p
   f(x) cos
x dx
2-p
n
---
p
p
0
x dx 
F(x)  f (x) g(x)  (f(x))(g(x))  f (x) g(x)  F(x).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Similarly, when f is odd on the interval (p, p),
We summarize the results in the following deﬁnition.
an  0,  n  0, 1, 2, . . . ,    bn  2
p
 
p
0
 f (x) sin n	
p  x dx.
11.3
FOURIER COSINE AND SINE SERIES
●
433
DEFINITION 11.3.1
Fourier Cosine and Sine Series
(i) The Fourier series of an even function f deﬁned on the interval (p, p) is
the cosine series
(1)
where
(2)
(3)
(ii) The Fourier series of an odd function f deﬁned on the interval (p, p) is
the sine series
(4)
where
(5)
 bn  2
p
 
p
0
 f (x) sin np
p  x dx.
 f (x)  	

n1
bn sin np
p  x,
 an  2
p
 
p
0
 f (x) cos np
p  x dx.
 a0  2
p
 
p
0
 f (x) dx
 f (x)  a0
2  	

n1
an cos np
p  x,
Because the term 
is 0 at 
a sine series (4)
converges to 0 at those points regardless of whether f is deﬁned at these points.
x  p, x  0, and x  p,
sin(npx>p)
EXAMPLE 1
Expansion in a Sine Series
Expand f (x)  x, 2  x  2 in a Fourier series.
SOLUTION
Inspection of Figure 11.3.3 shows that the given function is odd on the
interval (2, 2), and so we expand f in a sine series. With the identiﬁcation 2p  4
we have p  2. Thus (5), after integration by parts, is
Therefore
(6)
The function in Example 1 satisﬁes the conditions of Theorem 11.2.1. Hence
the series (6) converges to the function on (2, 2) and the periodic extension 
(of period 4) given in Figure 11.3.4.
f (x)  4
	
 	

n1
(1)n1
n
 sin n	
2  x.
bn 
2
0
x sin n	
2  x dx  4(1)n1
n	
.
x
y
y = x,  −2 < x < 2 
FIGURE 11.3.3
Odd function in
Example 1
FIGURE 11.3.4
Periodic extension of function shown in Figure 11.3.3
y
x
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
2
4
6
8
10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

434
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
−1
1
x
y
π
−π
FIGURE 11.3.5
Odd function in
Example 2
FIGURE 11.3.6
Partial sums of sine series (7)
(a) S1(x)
(b) S2(x)
(c) S3(x)
(d) S15(x)
y
x
-3 -2 -1
-3 -2 -1
-3 -2 -1
-3 -2 -1
2
1
-1
-0.5
0.5
1
y
x
2
1
3
3
-0.5
0.5
1
y
x
2
1
-1
-0.5
0.5
1
y
x
2
1
3
3
-1
-0.5
0.5
1
_L
L
x
y
FIGURE 11.3.7
Even reﬂection
EXAMPLE 2
Expansion in a Sine Series
The function 
shown in Figure 11.3.5 is odd on the 
interval (p, p). With p  p we have, from (5),
and so
(7)
Gibbs Phenomenon
With the aid of a CAS we have plotted the graphs S1(x),
S2(x), S3(x), and S15(x) of the partial sums of nonzero terms of (7) in Figure 11.3.6.
As seen in Figure 11.3.6(d), the graph of S15(x) has pronounced spikes near the dis-
continuities at x  0, x  p, x  p, and so on. This "overshooting" by the partial
sums SN from the functional values near a point of discontinuity does not smooth out
but remains fairly constant, even when the value N is taken to be large. This behav-
ior of a Fourier series near a point at which f is discontinuous is known as the Gibbs
phenomenon.
The periodic extension of f in Example 2 onto the entire x-axis is a meander
function (see page 310).
f (x)  2
	 	

n1
1  (1)n
n
 sin nx.
bn  2
	
 
	
0
(1) sin nx dx  2
	 1  (1)n
n
,
f (x) 
1, 	  x  0
  1,    0  x  	,
Half-Range Expansions
Throughout the preceding discussion it was
understood that a function f was deﬁned on an interval with the origin as its
midpoint—that is, (p, p). However, in many instances we are interested in repre-
senting a function that is deﬁned only for 0  x  L by a trigonometric series. This
can be done in many different ways by supplying an arbitrary deﬁnition of f(x) for
L  x  0. For brevity we consider the three most important cases. If y  f (x) is
deﬁned on the interval (0, L), then
(i)
reﬂect the graph of f about the y-axis onto (L, 0); the function is now
even on (L, L) (see Figure 11.3.7); or
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(ii)
reﬂect the graph of f through the origin onto (L, 0); the function is now
odd on (L, L) (see Figure 11.3.8); or
(iii)
deﬁne f on (L, 0) by y  f(x  L) (see Figure 11.3.9).
Note that the coefﬁcients of the series (1) and (4) utilize only the deﬁnition of
the function on (0, p) (that is, half of the interval (p, p)). Hence in practice there
is no actual need to make the reﬂections described in (i) and (ii). If f is deﬁned for
0  x  L, we simply identify the half-period as the length of the interval p  L. The
coefﬁcient formulas (2), (3), and (5) and the corresponding series yield either an even
or an odd periodic extension of period 2L of the original function. The cosine and
sine series that are obtained in this manner are known as half-range expansions.
Finally, in case (iii) we are deﬁning the function values on the interval (L, 0) to be
same as the values on (0, L). As in the previous two cases there is no real need to do
this. It can be shown that the set of functions in (1) of Section 11.2 is orthogonal on
the interval [a, a  2p] for any real number a. Choosing a  p, we obtain the
limits of integration in (9), (10), and (11) of that section. But for a  0 the limits of
integration are from x  0 to x  2p. Thus if f is deﬁned on the interval (0, L), we
identify 2p  L or p  L
2. The resulting Fourier series will give the periodic exten-
sion of f with period L. In this manner the values to which the series converges will
be the same on (L, 0) as on (0, L).
11.3
FOURIER COSINE AND SINE SERIES
●
435
x
y
L
_L
L
f(x) = f(x + L)
x
y
_L
FIGURE 11.3.9
Identity reﬂection
FIGURE 11.3.8
Odd reﬂection
EXAMPLE 3
Expansion in Three Series
Expand f (x)  x2, 0  x  L,
(a) in a cosine series
(b) in a sine series
(c) in a Fourier series.
SOLUTION
The graph of the function is given in Figure 11.3.10.
(a) We have
where integration by parts was used twice in the evaluation of an.
Thus
(8)
(b) In this case we must again integrate by parts twice:
Hence
(9)
(c) With p  L
2, 1
p  2
L, and np
p  2np
L we have
and
Therefore
(10)
f (x)  L2
3  L2
	
 	

n1
 
1
n2	 cos 2n	
L  x  1
n sin 2n	
L  x.
bn  2
L
 
L
0
x2 sin 2n	
L  x dx   L2
n	.
a0  2
L
 
L
0
x2 dx  2
3 L2, an  2
L
 
L
0
x2 cos 2n	
L
 x dx  L2
n2	2,
f (x)  2L2
	
 	

n1
(1)n1
n

2
n3	2 [(1)n  1]
 
sin n	
L  x.
bn  2
L
 
L
0
x2 sin n	
L
 x dx  2L2(1)n1
n	
 4L2
n3	3 [(1)n  1].
f (x)  L2
3  4L2
	2  	

n1
(1)n
n2  cos n	
L  x.
a0  2
L
 
L
0
x2 dx  2
3
 L2,    an  2
L
 
L
0
x2 cos n	
L  x dx  4L2(1)n
n2	2
,
x
y
L
y = x , 0 < x < L
FIGURE 11.3.10
Function f in
Example 3 is neither odd nor even.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The series (8), (9), and (10) converge to the 2L-periodic even extension of f, the
2L-periodic odd extension of f, and the L-periodic extension of f, respectively. The
graphs of these periodic extensions are shown in Figure 11.3.11.
436
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
y
y
y
x
x
x
−4L −3L −2L
2L
3L
4L
−L
L
(a) cosine series
(b) sine series
(c) Fourier series
−4L −3L −2L
2L
3L
4L
−L
L
−4L −3L −2L
2L
3L
4L
−L
L
FIGURE 11.3.11
Same function on (0, L) but different periodic extensions
FIGURE 11.3.12
Periodic forcing
function for spring/mass system in
Example 4
t
f(t)
−
π
π
1
2
3
4
5
Periodic Driving Force
Fourier series are sometimes useful in determining a
particular solution of a differential equation describing a physical system in which
the input or driving force f (t) is periodic. In the next example we ﬁnd a periodic par-
ticular solution of the nonhomogeneous linear differential equation
(11)
by ﬁrst representing f by a half-range sine expansion and then assuming a partic-
ular solution of the form
(12)
xp(t) 	

n1
Bn sin n	
p  t.
m d 2x
dt2  kx  f (t)
EXAMPLE 4
Particular Solution of a DE
An undamped spring/mass system, in which the mass 
slug and the
spring constant k  4 lb/ft, is driven by the 2-periodic external force f (t) shown in
Figure 11.3.12. Although the force f (t) acts on the system for t  0, note that if we
extend the graph of the function in a 2-periodic manner to the negative t-axis, we
obtain an odd function. In practical terms this means that we need only ﬁnd the half-
range sine expansion of f (t)  pt, 0  t  1. With p  1 it follows from (5) and
integration by parts that
From (11) the differential equation of motion is seen to be
(13)
1
16 d 2x
dt2  4x  	

n1
2(1)n1
n
 sin n	t.
bn  2
1
0
	t sin n	t dt  2(1)n1
n
.
m  1
16
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To ﬁnd a particular solution xp(t) of (13), we substitute (12) into the equation and
equate coefﬁcients of sin npt. This yields
Thus
(14)
Observe in the solution (14) that there is no integer n  1 for which the
denominator 64  n2p2 of Bn is zero. In general, if there is a value of n, say N, for
which Np
p  v, where 
then the system described by (11) is in a state
of pure resonance. In other words, we have pure resonance if the Fourier series
expansion of the driving force f (t) contains a term sin(Np
L)t (or cos(Np
L)t) that
has the same frequency as the free vibrations.
Of course, if the 2p-periodic extension of the driving force f onto the negative
t-axis yields an even function, then we expand f in a cosine series.
  1k>m,
xp(t)  	

n1
 32(1)n1
n(64  n2	2) sin n	t.
 1
16 n2	2  4Bn  2(1)n1
n
    or    Bn 
32(1)n1
n(64  n2	2).
11.3
FOURIER COSINE AND SINE SERIES
●
437
EXERCISES 11.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-19.
In Problems 1-10 determine whether the function is even,
odd, or neither.
1. f (x)  sin 3x
2. f (x)  x cos x
3. f (x)  x2  x
4. f (x)  x3  4x
5. f (x)  ex
6. f (x)  ex  ex
7.
8.
9. f (x)  x3,
0  x  2
10.
In Problems 11-24 expand the given function in an appropri-
ate cosine or sine series.
11.
12.
13.
p  x  p
14. f (x)  x,
p  x  p
15. f (x)  x2,
1  x  1
16.
1  x  1
f (x)  x  x ,
f (x)   x ,
f (x) 
1,
0,
1,
2  x  1
1  x  1
   1  x  2
f (x) 
1,
1,
	  x  0
   0  x  	
f (x)   x5 
f (x) 
x  5,
x  5,
2  x  0
0  x  2
f (x) 
x2,
x2,
1  x  0
0  x  1
17. f (x)  p2  x2,
p  x  p
18. f (x)  x3,
p  x  p
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
p  x  p
24. f (x)  cos x,
p
2  x  p
2
In Problems 25-34 ﬁnd the half-range cosine and sine
expansions of the given function.
25.
26.
27. f (x)  cos x,
0  x  p
2
28. f (x)  sin x,
0  x  p
f (x) 
0,
1,
0  x  1
2
1
2  x  1
f (x) 
1,
0,
0  x  1
2
1
2  x  1
f (x)   sin x ,
f (x) 
	,
 x,
 	,
2	  x  	
 	  x  	
  	  x  2	
f (x) 
   1,
x,
   x,
   1,
2  x  1
1  x  0
 0  x  1
 1  x  2
f (x) 
x  1,
x  1,
1  x  0
 0  x  1
f (x) 
x  1,
x  1,
	  x  0
 0  x  	
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

438
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
29.
30.
31.
32.
33. f (x)  x2  x,
0  x  1
34. f (x)  x(2  x),
0  x  2
In Problems 35-38 expand the given function in a Fourier
series.
35. f (x)  x2,
0  x  2p
36. f (x)  x,
0  x  p
37. f (x)  x  1,
0  x  1
38. f (x)  2  x,
0  x  2
In Problems 39 and 40 proceed as in Example 4 to ﬁnd a
particular solution xp(t) of equation (11) when m  1,
k  10, and the driving force f (t) is as given. Assume that
when f (t) is extended to the negative t-axis in a periodic
manner, the resulting function is odd.
39.
40.
f (t)  1  t,
0  t  2;
f (t  2)  f (t)
In Problems 41 and 42 proceed as in Example 4 to ﬁnd a par-
ticular solution xp(t) of equation (11) when 
and the driving force f(t) is as given. Assume that when f(t)
is extended to the negative t-axis in a periodic manner, the
resulting function is even.
41. f (t)  2pt  t2,
0  t  2p;
f (t  2p)  f (t)
42.
43. (a) Solve the differential equation in Problem 39,
x  10x  f (t), subject to the initial conditions
x(0)  0, x(0)  0.
(b) Use a CAS to plot the graph of the solution x(t) in
part (a).
44. (a) Solve the differential equation in Problem 41,
subject to the initial conditions
x(0)  1, x(0)  0.
(b) Use a CAS to plot the graph of the solution x(t) in
part (a).
1
4 x   12x  f (t),
f (t) 
t,
1  t,
0  t  1
2
1
2  t  1; f (t  1)  f (t)
k  12,
m  1
4,
f (t) 
   5,
5,
0  t  	
	  t  2	; f (t  2	)  f (t)
f (x) 
1,
2  x,
0  x  1
1  x  2
f (x) 
x,
1,
0  x  1
1  x  2
f (x) 
0,
x  	,
0  x  	
	  x  2	
f (x) 
x,
	  x,  0  x  	>2
	>2  x  	
45. Suppose a uniform beam of length L is simply supported
at x  0 and at x  L. If the load per unit length is given
by w(x)  w0x
L, 0  x  L, then the differential equa-
tion for the deﬂection y(x) is
where E, I, and w0 are constants. (See (4) in Section 5.2.)
(a) Expand w(x) in a half-range sine series.
(b) Use the method of Example 4 to ﬁnd a particular
solution yp(x) of the differential equation.
46. Proceed as in Problem 45 to find a particular solu-
tion yp(x) when the load per unit length is as given in
Figure 11.3.13.
EI d4y
dx4  w0x
L ,
x
w(x)
L/3
2L/3
L
w0
FIGURE 11.3.13
Graph for Problem 46
47. When a uniform beam is supported by an elastic foun-
dation and subject to a load per unit length w(x), the dif-
ferential equation for its deﬂection y(x) is
where k is the modulus of the foundation. Suppose that
the beam and elastic foundation are inﬁnite in length
(that is,   x  ) and that the load per unit length
is the periodic function
Use the method of Example 4 to ﬁnd a particular solution
yp(x) of the differential equation.
Discussion Problems
48. Prove properties (a), (c), (d), (f), and (g) in Theorem 11.3.1.
49. There is only one function that is both even and odd.
What is it?
50. As we know from Chapter 4, the general solution of the
differential equation in Problem 47 is y  yc  yp.
Discuss why we can argue on physical grounds that the
solution of Problem 47 is simply yp. [Hint: Consider
y  yc  yp as 
]
x : .
w(x) 
 0,
w0,
 0
	  x  	>2
	>2  x  	>2
   	>2  x  	,
w(x  2	)  w(x).
EI d4y
dx4  ky  w(x),
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Computer Lab Assignments
In Problems 51 and 52 use a CAS to plot graphs of partial
sums {SN(x)} of the given trigonometric series. Experiment
with different values of N and graphs on different intervals
of the x-axis. Use your graphs to conjecture a closed-form
expression for a function f deﬁned for 0  x  L that is rep-
resented by the series.
51.
 1 2(1)n
n
 sin nx
f(x) 	
4 	

n1
(1)n  1
n2	
 cos nx
11.4
STURM-LIOUVILLE PROBLEM
●
439
52.
53. Is your answer in Problem 51 or in Problem 52 unique?
Give a function f deﬁned on a symmetric interval about
the origin (a, a) that has the same trigonometric series
(a) as in Problem 51,
(b) as in Problem 52.
f (x)  1
4  4
	 2 	

n1
 1
n2
 1  cos n	
2   cos n	
2  x
STURM-LIOUVILLE PROBLEM
REVIEW MATERIAL
●The concept of eigenvalues and eigenvectors was ﬁrst introduced in Section 5.2. A review of
that section (especially Example 2) is strongly recommended.
INTRODUCTION
In this section we will study some special types of boundary-value problems
in which the ordinary differential equation in the problem contains a parameter l. The values of l
for which the BVP possesses nontrivial solutions are called eigenvalues, and the corresponding
solutions are called eigenfunctions. Boundary-value problems of this type are especially important
throughout Chapters 12 and 13. In this section we also see that there is a connection between
orthogonal sets and eigenfunctions of a boundary-value problem.
11.4
Review of ODEs
For convenience we present here a brief review of some of
the linear ODEs that will occur frequently in the sections and chapters that follow.
The symbol a represents a constant.
Constant-coefﬁcient equations
General solutions
y  ay  0
y  c1eax
y  a2y  0,
a  0
y  c1 cos ax  c2 sin ax
y  a2y  0,
a  0
Cauchy-Euler equation
General solutions, x  0
x2y  xy  a2y  0,
a  0
Parametric Bessel equation (n  0)
General solution, x  0
xy  y  a2xy  0,
y  c1J0(ax)  c2Y0(ax)
Legendre's equation 
Particular solutions are
(n  0, 1, 2, . . .)
polynomials
(1  x2)y  2xy  n(n  1)y  0,
y  P0(x)  1,
y  P1(x)  x,
y  P2(x)  1
2 (3x2  1), . . .

 y  c1xa  c2 xa,
 y  c1  c2 ln x, 
a  0
a  0

y  c1eax  c2eax, or
y  c1 cosh x  c2 sinh x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Regarding the two forms of the general solution of y  a2y  0, we will make use of
the following informal rule immediately in Example 1 as well as in future
discussions:
Use the exponential form y  c1eax  c2eax when the domain of x is an inﬁnite
or semi-inﬁnite interval; use the hyperbolic form y  c1 cosh ax  c2 sinh ax
when the domain of x is a ﬁnite interval.
Eigenvalues and Eigenfunctions
Orthogonal functions arise in the solution
of differential equations. More to the point, an orthogonal set of functions can be
generated by solving a certain kind of two-point boundary-value problem involving
a linear second-order differential equation containing a parameter l. In Example 2 of
Section 5.2 we saw that the boundary-value problem
(1)
possessed nontrivial solutions only when the parameter l took on the values
ln  n2p2
L2, n  1, 2, 3, . . . , called eigenvalues. The corresponding nontrivial
solutions yn  c2 sin(npx
L), or simply yn  sin(npx
L), are called the eigenfunc-
tions of the problem. For example, for (1)
For our purposes in this chapter it is important to recognize that the set of trigono-
metric functions generated by this BVP, that is, {sin(npx
L)}, n  1, 2, 3, . . . , is an
orthogonal set of functions on the interval [0, L] and is used as the basis for the
Fourier sine series. See Problem 10 in Exercises 11.1.
BVP:        y 2y  0,    y(0)  0,    y(L)  0
Trivial solution:        y  0
not an eigenvalue
never an eigenfunction
BVP:        y          y  0,    y(0)  0,    y(L)  0.
Nontrivial solution:        y3  sin(3x/L)
eigenfunction
is an eigenvalue (n  3)
92
----
L2
y   y  0,  y(0)  0,  y(L)  0,
440
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
This rule will be useful in
Chapters 12-14.

EXAMPLE 1
Eigenvalues and Eigenfunctions
Consider the boundary-value problem
(2)
As in Example 2 of Section 5.2 there are three possible cases for the parameter l:
zero, negative, or positive; that is, l  0, l  a2  0, and l  a2  0, where
a  0. The solution of the DEs
(3)
(4)
(5)
are, in turn,
(6)
(7)
(8)
 y  c1 cos ax  c2 sin ax.
 y  c1 cosh ax  c2 sinh ax,
 y  c1  c2x,
 y   a2y  0,    a2,
 y   a2y  0,   a2,
 y   0,    0,
y   y  0,  y(0)  0,  y(L)  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When the boundary conditions y(0)  0 and y(L)  0 are applied to each of these
solutions, (6) yields y  c1, (7) yields only y  0, and (8) yields y  c1 cos ax
provided that a  np
L, n  1, 2, 3, . . . . Since y  c1 satisﬁes the DE in (3) and
the boundary conditions for any nonzero choice of c1, we conclude that l  0
is an eigenvalue. Thus the eigenvalues and corresponding eigenfunctions of the
problem are l0  0, y0  c1, c1  0, and 
n  1, 2, . . . ,
yn  c1 cos(npx
L), c1  0. We can, if desired, take c1  1 in each case. Note also
that the eigenfunction y0  1 corresponding to the eigenvalue l0  0 can be incor-
porated in the family yn  cos(npx
L) by permitting n  0. The set {cos (npx
L)},
n  0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , is orthogonal on the interval [0, L]. You are asked to ﬁll in the
details of this example in Problem 3 in Exercises 11.4.
Regular Sturm-Liouville Problem
The problems in (1) and (2) are special
n  2
n  n2	2
L2,
11.4
STURM-LIOUVILLE PROBLEM
●
441
cases of an important general two-point boundary value problem. Let p, q, r, and r
be real-valued functions continuous on an interval [a, b], and let r(x)  0 and 
p(x)  0 for every x in the interval. Then
(9)
(10)
(11)
is said to be a regular Sturm-Liouville problem. The coefﬁcients in the boundary con-
ditions (10) and (11) are assumed to be real and independent of l. In addition, A1 and B1
are not both zero, and A2 and B2 are not both zero. The boundary-value problems in (1)
and (2) are regular Sturm-Liouville problems. From (1) we can identify r(x)  1, q(x) 
0, and p(x)  1 in the differential equation (9); in boundary condition (10) we identify
a  0, A1  1, B1  0, and in (11), b  L, A2  1, B2  0. From (2) the identiﬁcations
would be a  0, A1  0, B1  1 in (10), b  L, A2  0, B2  1 in (11).
The differential equation (9) is linear and homogeneous. The boundary condi-
tions in (10) and (11), both a linear combination of y and y equal to zero at a point,
are also homogeneous. A boundary condition such as A2y(b)  B2y(b)  C2, where
C2 is a nonzero constant, is nonhomogeneous. A boundary-value problem that con-
sists of a homogeneous linear differential equation and homogeneous boundary
conditions is, of course, said to be a homogeneous BVP; otherwise, it is nonhomo-
geneous. The boundary conditions (10) and (11) are referred to as separated because
each condition involves only a single boundary point.
Because a regular Sturm-Liouville problem is a homogeneous BVP, it always
possesses the trivial solution y  0. However, this solution is of no interest to us.
As in Example 1, in solving such a problem, we seek numbers l (eigenvalues) and
nontrivial solutions y that depend on l (eigenfunctions).
Properties
Theorem 11.4.1 is a list of the more important of the many prop-
erties of the regular Sturm-Liouville problem. We shall prove only the last property.
  
 A2y(b)  B2y(b)  0
 Subject to:     A1y(a)  B1y(a)  0
 Solve: 
 d
dx[r(x)y]  (q(x)  p(x))y  0
THEOREM 11.4.1
Properties of the Regular Sturm-Liouville Problem
(a) There exist an inﬁnite number of real eigenvalues that can be arranged in
increasing order 
such that 
as
(b) For each eigenvalue there is only one eigenfunction (except for nonzero con-
stant multiples).
(c) Eigenfunctions corresponding to different eigenvalues are linearly indepen-
dent.
(d) The set of eigenfunctions corresponding to the set of eigenvalues is orthog-
onal with respect to the weight function p(x) on the interval [a, b].
n : .
n : 
1  2  3  
 
 
  n  
 
 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now the eigenfunctions ym and yn must both satisfy the boundary conditions (10) and
(11). In particular, from (10) we have
For this system to be satisﬁed by A1 and B1, not both zero, the determinant of the
coefﬁcients must be zero:
A similar argument applied to (11) also gives
Since both members of the right-hand side of (14) are zero, we have established the
orothogonality relation
(15)

b
a
p(x)ym(x)yn(x) dx  0,    m  n.
 ym(b) yn(b)  yn(b) ym (b)  0.
 ym(a)yn(a) yn(a)ym(a)  0.
 A1
 yn(a)  B1yn(a)  0.
 A1ym(a)  B1ym(a)  0
PROOF OF (d)
Let ym and yn be eigenfunctions corresponding to eigenvalues lm
and ln, respectively. Then
(12)
(13)
Multiplying (12) by yn and (13) by ym and subtracting the two equations gives
Integrating this last result by parts from x  a to x  b then yields
(m  n) p(x) ymyn  ym
   d
dx [r(x)yn ]  yn d
dx [r(x)ym].
 d
dx [r(x)yn]  (q(x)  n
 p(x))yn  0.
 d
dx
 [r(x)ym ]  (q(x)  m p(x))ym  0
442
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
(14)
(m  n)
b
a
p(x)ym yn dx  r(b)[ym(b)yn (b)  yn(b)ym (b)]  r(a)[ym(a)yn (a)  yn(a)ym (a)].
FIGURE 11.4.1
Positive roots 
x1, x2, x3, . . . of tan x  x in Example 2
x
y
x1
y = −x
y = tan x
x2
x3
x4
EXAMPLE 2
A Regular Sturm-Liouville Problem
Solve the boundary-value problem
(16)
SOLUTION
We proceed exactly as in Example 1 by considering three cases in
which the parameter l could be zero, negative, or positive: l  0, l  a2  0, and
l  a2  0, where a  0. The solutions of the DE for these values are listed
in (3)-(5). For the cases l  0 and l  a2  0 we ﬁnd that the BVP in (16)
possesses only the trivial solution y  0. For l  a2  0 the general solution of the
differential equation is y  c1 cos ax  c2 sin ax. Now the condition y(0)  0
implies that c1  0 in this solution, so we are left with y  c2 sin ax. The second
boundary condition y(1)  y(1)  0 is satisﬁed if
In view of the demand that c2  0, the last equation can be written
(17)
If for a moment we think of (17) as tan x  x, then Figure 11.4.1 shows the plausi-
bility that this equation has an inﬁnite number of roots, namely, the x-coordinates of
tan a  a.
c2 sin a  c2a cos a  0.
y   y  0,  y(0)  0, y(1)  y(1)  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.4
STURM-LIOUVILLE PROBLEM
●
443
the points where the graph of y  x intersects the inﬁnite number of branches
of the graph of y  tan x. The eigenvalues of the BVP (16) are then 
where an, n  1, 2, 3, . . . , are the consecutive positive roots a1, a2, a3, . . . of (17).
With the aid of a CAS it is easily shown that, to four rounded decimal
places, a1  2.0288, a2  4.9132, a3  7.9787, and a4  11.0855, and the
corresponding solutions are y1  sin 2.0288x, y2  sin 4.9132x, y3  sin 7.9787x,
and y4  sin 11.0855x. In general, the eigenfunctions of the problem are {sin anx},
n  1, 2, 3, . . . .
With the identiﬁcation r(x)  1, q(x)  0, p(x)  1, A1  1, B1  0, A2  1,
B2  1 we see that (16) is a regular Sturm-Liouville problem. We conclude that
{sin anx}, n  1, 2, 3, . . . , is an orthogonal set with respect to the weight function
p(x)  1 on the interval [0, 1].
In some circumstances we can prove the orthogonality of solutions of (9)
without the necessity of specifying a boundary condition at x  a and at x  b.
Singular Sturm-Liouville Problem
There are several other important condi-
tions under which we seek nontrivial solutions of the differential equation (9):
•
r(a)  0, and a boundary condition of the type given in (11) is
specified at x  b;
(18)
•
r(b)  0, and a boundary condition of the type given in (10) is
specified at x  a;
(19)
•
r(a)  r(b)  0, and no boundary condition is speciﬁed at either
x  a or at x  b;
(20)
•
r(a)  r(b), and boundary conditions y(a)  y(b), y(a)  y(b).
(21)
The differential equation (9) along with one of conditions (18)-(20), is said to be a
singular boundary-value problem. Equation (9) with the conditions speciﬁed in (21)
is said to be a periodic boundary-value problem (the boundary conditions are also
said to be periodic). Observe that if, say, r(a)  0, then x  a may be a singular point
of the differential equation, and consequently, a solution of (9) may become un-
bounded as 
However, we see from (14) that if r(a)  0, then no boundary
condition is required at x  a to prove orthogonality of the eigenfunctions provided
that these solutions are bounded at that point. This latter requirement guarantees the
existence of the integrals involved. By assuming that the solutions of (9) are bounded
on the closed interval [a, b], we can see from inspection of (14) that
•
if r(a)  0, then the orthogonality relation (15) holds with no 
boundary condition speciﬁed at x  a;
(22)
•
if r(b)  0, then the orthogonality relation (15) holds with no 
boundary condition speciﬁed at x  b;*
(23)
•
if r(a)  r(b)  0, then the orthogonality relation (15) holds 
with no boundary conditions speciﬁed at either x  a or x  b;
(24)
•
if r(a)  r(b), then the orthogonality relation (15) holds with 
the periodic boundary conditions y(a)  y(b), y(a)  y(b).
(25)
We note that a Sturm-Liouville problem is also singular when the interval under con-
sideration is inﬁnite. See Problems 9 and 10 in Exercises 11.4.
Self-Adjoint Form
By carrying out the indicated differentiation in (9), we see
that the differential equation is the same as
(26)
Examination of (26) might lead one to believe, given the coefﬁcient of y is the
derivative of the coefﬁcient of y, that few differential equations have form (9).
r(x)y   r(x)y  (q(x)  p(x))y  0.
x : a.
n  an
2,
*Conditions (22) and (23) are equivalent to choosing A1  0, B1  0, and A2  0, B2  0, respectively.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

On the contrary, if the coefﬁcients are continuous and a(x)  0 for all x in some
interval, then any second-order differential equation
(27)
can be recast into the so-called self-adjoint form (9). To this end, we basically
proceed as in Section 2.3, where we rewrote a linear ﬁrst-order equation a1(x)y 
a0(x)y  0 in the form 
by dividing the equation by a1(x) and then
multiplying by the integrating factor m  eP(x)dx, where, assuming no common
factors, P(x)  a0(x)
a1(x). So ﬁrst, we divide (27) by a(x). The ﬁrst two terms are
where for emphasis we have written Y  y. Second, we multiply
this equation by the integrating factor e(b(x)/a(x))dx, where a(x) and b(x) are assumed
to have no common factors:
Y  b(x)
a(x)
 Y  
 
 
 ,
d
dx [y]  0
a(x)y   b(x)y  (c(x)  d(x))y  0
444
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
144444444244444443
e(b(x)/a(x))dxY b(x)
a(x) e(b(x)/a(x))dxY  
 
 
 
d
dx e(b(x)/a(x))dxY  
 
 
 
d
dx e(b(x)/a(x))dx y  
 
 
 .
derivative of a product
In summary, by dividing (27) by a(x) and then multiplying by e(b(x)/a(x))dx, we get
(28)
Equation (28) is the desired form given in (26) and is the same as (9):
For example, to express 2y  6y  ly  0 in self-adjoint form, we write
and then multiply by e3dx  e3x. The resulting equation is
.
It is certainly not necessary to put a second-order differential equation (27) into
the self-adjoint form (9) to solve the DE. For our purposes we use the form given in
(9) to determine the weight function p(x) needed in the orthogonality relation (15).
The next two examples illustrate orthogonality relations for Bessel functions and for
Legendre polynomials.
e3xy  3e3xy     e3xy  0 
[e3xy]    e3xy  0
or
r(x)
r(x)
p(x)
d--
dx
1-2
1-2
y   3y   1
2y  0
d--
dx [e
(b/a)dxy]  (        e
(b/a)dx           e
(b/a)dx) y  0
r(x)
q(x)
p(x)
c(x)
----
a(x)
d(x)
----
a(x)
e(b/a)dx y   b(x)
a(x) e(b/a)dx y 
c(x)
a(x) e(b/a)dx   d(x)
a(x) e(b/a)dxy  0.
EXAMPLE 3
Parametric Bessel Equation
In Section 6.4 we saw that the parametric Bessel differential equation of order
n is x2y  xy  (a2x2  n2)y  0, where n is a ﬁxed nonnegative integer and
a
is
a
positive parameter. The general solution of this equation is
y  c1Jn(ax)  c2Yn(ax). After dividing the parametric Bessel equation by the
lead coefﬁcient x2 and multiplying the resulting equation by the integrating factor
e(1/x)dx  eln x  x, x  0, we obtain
xy  y 2x  n2
xy  0    or    d
dx [xy] 2x  n2
xy  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.4
STURM-LIOUVILLE PROBLEM
●
445
By comparing the last result with the self-adjoint form (9), we make the identi-
ﬁcations r(x)  x, q(x)  n2
x, l  a2, and p(x)  x. Now r(0)  0, and of the
two solutions Jn(ax) and Yn(ax), only Jn(ax) is bounded at x  0. Thus in view of
(22) above, the set {Jn(aix)}, i  1, 2, 3, . . . , is orthogonal with respect to the
weight function p(x)  x on the interval [0, b]. The orthogonality relation is
(29)
provided that the ai, and hence the eigenvalues 
i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , are deﬁned
by means of a boundary condition at x  b of the type given in (11):
(30)
For any choice of A2 and B2, not both zero, it is known that (30) has an inﬁnite
number of roots xi  aib. The eigenvalues are then 
More will be
said about eigenvalues in the next chapter.
i  2
i  (xi >b)2.
A2Jn(ab)  B2aJn(ab)  0.
i  2
i ,

b
0
xJn(ix)Jn(jx) dx  0,    i  j,
The extra factor of a comes from the
Chain Rule: 
aJn (ax).
d
dx Jn(ax)  Jn(ax) d
dx ax  
EXAMPLE 4
Legendre's Equation
Legendre's differential equation (1  x2)y  2xy  n(n  1)y  0 is exactly of
the form given in (26) with r(x)  1  x2 and r(x)  2x. Hence the self-adjoint
form (9) of the differential equation is immediate,
(31)
From (31) we can further identify q(x)  0, l  n(n  1), and p(x)  1. Recall from
Section 6.3 that when n  0, 1, 2, . . . , Legendre's DE possesses polynomial solu-
tions Pn(x). Now we can put the observation that r(1)  r(1)  0 together with the
fact that the Legendre polynomials Pn(x) are the only solutions of (31) that are
bounded on the closed interval [1, 1] to conclude from (24) that the set {Pn(x)},
n  0, 1, 2, . . . , is orthogonal with respect to the weight function p(x)  1 on
[1, 1]. The orthogonality relation is

1
1
Pm(x)Pn(x) dx  0,    m  n.
d
dx
 (1  x2)y  n(n  1)y  0.
EXERCISES 11.4
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-20.
In Problems 1 and 2 ﬁnd the eigenfunctions and the equa-
tion that deﬁnes the eigenvalues for the given boundary-
value problem. Use a CAS to approximate the ﬁrst four
eigenvalues l1, l2, l3, and l4. Give the eigenfunctions
corresponding to these approximations.
1. y  ly  0,
y(0)  0, y(1)  y(1)  0
2. y  ly  0,
y(0)  y(0)  0, y(1)  0
3. Consider y  ly  0 subject to y(0)  0, y(L)  0.
Show that the eigenfunctions are 
. 
1, cos 	
L x, cos 2	
L
 x, . . .
This set, which is orthogonal on [0, L], is the basis for
the Fourier cosine series.
4. Consider y  ly  0 subject to the periodic boundary
conditions y(L)  y(L), y(L)  y(L). Show that
the eigenfunctions are
.
This set, which is orthogonal on [L, L], is the basis for
the Fourier series.
5. Find the square norm of each eigenfunction in
Problem 1.
1, cos 	
L
 x, cos 2	
L
 x, . . . , sin 	
L
 x, sin 2	
L
 x, sin 3	
L
 x, . . .
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

446
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
6. Show that for the eigenfunctions in Example 2,
.
7. (a) Find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the
boundary-value problem
.
(b) Put the differential equation in self-adjoint form.
(c) Give an orthogonality relation.
8. (a) Find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the
boundary-value problem
.
(b) Put the differential equation in self-adjoint form.
(c) Give an orthogonality relation.
9. Laguerre's differential equation
xy  (1  x)y  ny  0,
n  0, 1, 2, . . .
has polynomial solutions Ln(x). Put the equation in self-
adjoint form and give an orthogonality relation.
10. Hermite's differential equation
y  2xy  2ny  0,
n  0, 1, 2, . . .
has polynomial solutions Hn(x). Put the equation in self-
adjoint form and give an orthogonality relation.
11. Consider the regular Sturm-Liouville problem:
.
(a) Find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the
boundary-value problem. [Hint: Let x  tan u and
then use the Chain Rule.]
(b) Give an orthogonality relation.
y(0)  0, y(1)  0
d
dx
 (1  x2)y 

1  x2y  0,
y  y  y  0, y(0)  0, y(2)  0
x2y  xy  y  0,  y(1)  0, y(5)  0
'sin anx'2  1
2[1  cos2an]
12. (a) Find the eigenfunctions and the equation that deﬁnes
the eigenvalues for the boundary-value problem
,
.
Let l  a2, a  0.
(b) Use Table 6.4.1 of Section 6.4 to ﬁnd the approxi-
mate values of the ﬁrst four eigenvalues l1, l2, l3,
and l4.
Discussion Problems
13. Consider the special case of the regular Sturm-Liouville
problem on the interval [a, b]:
.
Is l  0 an eigenvalue of the problem? Defend your
answer.
Computer Lab Assignments
14. (a) Give an orthogonality relation for the Sturm-Liouville
problem in Problem 1.
(b) Use a CAS as an aid in verifying the orthogonality
relation for the eigenfunctions y1 and y2 that
correspond to the ﬁrst two eigenvalues l1 and l2,
respectively.
15. (a) Give an orthogonality relation for the Sturm-
Liouville problem in Problem 2.
(b) Use a CAS as an aid in verifying the orthogonality
relation for the eigenfunctions y1 and y2 that
correspond to the ﬁrst two eigenvalues l1 and l2,
respectively.
y(a)  0, y(b)  0
d
dx [r(x)y]  p(x)y   0,
 y is bounded at x  0, y(3)  0
x2y  xy  (x2  1)y  0,  x  0
BESSEL AND LEGENDRE SERIES
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Because the results in Examples 3 and 4 of Section 11.4 will play a major role in the discussion
that follows, you are strongly urged to reread those examples in conjunction with (6)-(11) of
Section 11.1.
INTRODUCTION
Fourier series, Fourier cosine series, and Fourier sine series are three ways of
expanding a function in terms of an orthogonal set of functions. But such expansions are by no means
limited to orthogonal sets of trigonometric functions. We saw in Section 11.1 that a function f deﬁned
on an interval (a, b) could be expanded, at least in a formal manner, in terms of any set of a functions
{fn(x)} that is orthogonal with respect to a weight function on [a, b]. Many of these orthogonal
series expansions or generalized Fourier series stem from Sturm-Liouville problems which, in turn,
11.5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.5
BESSEL AND LEGENDRE SERIES
●
447
11.5.1
FOURIER-BESSEL SERIES
We saw in Example 3 of Section 11.4 that for a ﬁxed value of n the set of Bessel func-
tions {Jn(aix)}, i  1, 2, 3, . . . , is orthogonal with respect to the weight function
p(x)  x on an interval [0, b] whenever the ai are deﬁned by means of a boundary
condition of the form
.
(1)
The eigenvalues of the corresponding Sturm-Liouville problem are 
. From (7)
and (8) of Section 11.1 the orthogonal series, or generalized Fourier series, expansion
of a function f deﬁned on the interval (0, b) in terms of this orthogonal set is
,
(2)
where
.
(3)
The square norm of the function Jn(aix) is deﬁned by (11) of Section 11.1.
.
(4)
The series (2) with coefﬁcients (3) is called a Fourier-Bessel series, or simply, a
Bessel series.
Differential Recurrence Relations
The differential recurrence relations that
were given in (21) and (20) of Section 6.3 are often useful in the evaluation of the
coefﬁcients (3). For convenience we reproduce those relations here:
(5)
(6)
Square Norm
The value of the square norm (4) depends on how the eigenvalues
 d
dx [xnJn(x)]  xnJn1(x).
 d
dx [xnJn(x)]  xnJn1(x)
'Jn(ix)'2 
b
0
xJ 2
n (ix) dx
ci  b
0 xJn(ix) f (x) dx
'Jn(ix)'2
f (x)  	

i1
ciJn(aix)
i  i
2
A2Jn(ab)  B2aJn(ab)  0
are deﬁned. If y  Jn(ax), then we know from Example 3 of Section 11.4 that
.
After we multiply by 2xy, this equation can be written as
.
Integrating the last result by parts on [0, b] then gives
.
22
b
0
xy2 dx  ([xy]2  (2x2  n2)y2)
b
0
d
dx [xy]2  (a2x2  n2) d
dx [y]2  0
d
dx [xy] a2x  n2
x  y  0
i  i
2
arise from attempts to solve linear partial differential equations that serve as models for physical
systems. Fourier series and orthogonal series expansions, as well as the two series considered in this
section, will appear in the subsequent consideration of these applications in Chapters 12 and 13.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Since y  Jn(ax), the lower limit is zero because Jn(0)  0 for n  0. Furthermore,
for n  0 the quantity [xy]2  a2x2y2 is zero at x  0. Thus
,
(7)
where we have used the Chain Rule to write 
.
We now consider three cases of (1).
Case I:
If we choose A2  1 and B2  0, then (1) is
.
(8)
There are an inﬁnite number of positive roots xi  aib of (8) (see Figure 6.4.1),
which deﬁne the ai as ai  xi
b. The eigenvalues are positive and are then
. No new eigenvalues result from the negative roots of (8), since
Jn(x)  (1)nJn(x). (See page 262.) The number 0 is not an eigenvalue for any n
because Jn(0)  0 for n  1, 2, 3, . . . and J0(0)  1. In other words, if l  0, we
get the trivial function (which is never an eigenfunction) for n  1, 2, 3, . . . , and for
n  0, l  0 (or, equivalently, a  0) does not satisfy the equation in (8). When (6)
is written in the form 
, it follows from (7) and (8) that the
square norm of Jn(aix) is
.
(9)
Case II:
If we choose A2  h  0, and B2  b, then (1) is
.
(10)
Equation (10) has an inﬁnite number of positive roots xi  aib for each positive
integer n  1, 2, 3, . . . . As before, the eigenvalues are obtained from
. l  0 is not an eigenvalue for n  1, 2, 3, . . . . Substituting
into (7), we ﬁnd that the square norm of Jn(ai x) is now
.
(11)
Case III:
If h  0 and n  0 in (10), the ai are deﬁned from the roots of
.
(12)
Even though (12) is just a special case of (10), it is the only situation for which l  0
is an eigenvalue. To see this, observe that for n  0 the result in (6) implies that
is equivalent to J1(ab)  0. Since x1  a1b  0 is root of the last equa-
tion, a1  0, and because J0(0)  1 is nontrivial, we conclude from 
that l1  0 is an eigenvalue. But obviously, we cannot use (11) when a1  0, h  0,
and n  0. However, from the square norm (4),
.
(13)
For ai  0 we can use (11) with h  0 and n  0:
.
(14)
The following deﬁnition summarizes three forms of the series (2) corresponding to
the square norms in the three cases.
'J0(ai
 x)'2  b2
2  J0
2(aib)
'1'2 
b
0
x dx  b2
2
1  a1
2  x1
2>b2
J0(ab)   0
J0(ab)   0
'Jn(ai
  x)'2  ai
2b2  n2  h2
2ai
2
 Jn
2(ai
 b)
aibJn(aib)  hJn(ai
 b)
i  ai
2  xi
2>b2
hJn(ab)  abJn(ab)  0
'Jn(aix)'2  b2
2  Jn1
2
(ai
 b)
xJn(x)  nJn(x)  xJn1(x)
i  ai
2  xi
2>b2
Jn(ab)   0
y  aJn(ax)
2a2
b
0
xJn
2(ax) dx  a2b2[Jn(ab)]2  (a2b2  n2)[Jn(ab)]2
448
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Convergence of a Fourier-Bessel Series
Sufﬁcient conditions for the con-
vergence of a Fourier-Bessel series are not particularly restrictive.
11.5
BESSEL AND LEGENDRE SERIES
●
449
DEFINITION 11.5.1
Fourier-Bessel Series
The Fourier-Bessel series of a function f deﬁned on the interval (0, b) is given
by
(i)
(15)
(16)
where the ai are deﬁned by Jn(ab)  0.
(ii)
(17)
(18)
where the ai are deﬁned by 
.
(iii)
(19)
,
(20)
where the ai are deﬁned by 
.
J0(ab)  0
c1  2
b2
b
0
xf(x) dx, ci 
2
b2J0
2(ai
 b) 
b
0
xJ0(aix)f (x) dx
f (x)  c1  	

i2
ci
 J0(ai
 x)
hJn(ab)  abJn(ab)  0
ci 
2ai
2
ai
2b2  n2  h2Jn
2(aib) 
b
0
xJn(ai
 x)f (x) dx,
f (x)  	

i1
ciJn(ai
 x)
ci 
2
b2Jn1
2 (aib) 
b
0
xJn(ai
 x) f (x) dx,
f (x)  	

i1
ciJn(ai
 x)
THEOREM 11.5.1
Conditions for Convergence
Let 
be piecewise continuous on the interval 
Then for all x in the
interval 
the Fourier-Bessel series of f converges to 
at a point of continu-
ity. At a point of discontinuity, the Fourier-Bessel series converges to the average
,
where 
denote the limit of f at x from the right and from the left,
respectively. 
f(x) and f(x)
f(x)  f(x)
2
f(x)
(0, b),
[0, b].
f and f
EXAMPLE 1
Expansion in a Fourier-Bessel Series
Expand f (x)  x, 0  x  3, in a Fourier-Bessel series, using Bessel functions of
order one that satisfy the boundary condition J1(3a)  0.
SOLUTION
We use (15) where the coefﬁcients ci are given by (16) with b  3:
.
ci 
2
32J2
2(3ai) 
3
0
x2J1(ai
 x) dx
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

450
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
y
x
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
(a) S5(x), 0  x  3
(b) S10(x), 0  x  50
y
50
40
30
20
10
-1
1
2
3
x
FIGURE 11.5.1
Graphs of two partial
sums of the Fourier-Bessel series in
Example 2
To evaluate this integral, we let t  ai x, dx  dt
ai, 
, and use (5) in the 
form 
:
.
Therefore the desired expansion is
.
You are asked to ﬁnd the ﬁrst four values of the ai for the foregoing Fourier-
Bessel series in Problem 1 in Exercises 11.5.
f (x)  2 	

i1
 
1
ai
 J2(3ai)
 J1(ai
 x)
ci 
2
9ai
3J2
2(3ai) 
3ai
0
 d
dt
  [t2J2(t)] dt 
2
ai
 J2(3ai)
d
dt [t2J2(t)]  t2J1(t)
x2  t2>ai
2
EXAMPLE 2
Expansion in a Fourier-Bessel Series
If the ai in Example 1 are deﬁned by 
, then the only thing that
changes in the expansion is the value of the square norm. Multiplying the boundary
condition by 3 gives 
, which now matches (10) when h  3,
b  3, and n  1. Thus (18) and (17) yield, in turn,
and
.
Use of Computers
Since Bessel functions are "built-in functions" in a CAS, it
is a straightforward task to ﬁnd the approximate values of the ai and the coefﬁcients
ci in a Fourier-Bessel series. For example, in (10) we can think of xi  aib as a posi-
tive root of the equation 
. Thus in Example 2 we have used a
CAS to ﬁnd the ﬁrst ﬁve positive roots xi of 
, and from these roots
we obtain the ﬁrst ﬁve values of ai: a1  x1
3  0.98320, a2  x2
3  1.94704,
a3  x3
3  2.95758, a4  x4
3  3.98538, and a5  x5
3  5.02078. Knowing
the roots xi  3ai and the ai, we again use a CAS to calculate the numerical values of
J2(3ai), 
, and ﬁnally the coefﬁcients ci. In this manner we ﬁnd that the ﬁfth
partial sum S5(x) for the Fourier-Bessel series representation of f(x)  x, 0  x  3
in Example 2 is
The graph of S5(x) on the interval (0, 3) is shown in Figure 11.5.1(a). In Figure 11.5.1(b)
we have graphed S10(x) on the interval (0, 50). Notice that outside the interval of
deﬁnition (0, 3) the series does not converge to a periodic extension of f because
Bessel functions are not periodic functions. See Problems 11 and 12 in Exercises 11.5.
11.5.2
FOURIER-LEGENDRE SERIES
From Example 4 of Section 11.4 we know that the set of Legendre polynomials
{Pn(x)}, n  0, 1, 2, . . . , is orthogonal with respect to the weight function p(x)  1
on the interval [1, 1]. Furthermore, it can be proved that the square norm of a
polynomial Pn(x) depends on n in the following manner:
'Pn(x)'2 
1
1
Pn
2(x) dx 
2
2n  1.
    
  1.07106 J1(2.95758x)  0.70306 J1(3.98538x)  0.50343
 J1(5.02078x).
 S5(x)  4.01844
 J1(0.98320x)  1.86937J1(1.94704x)
J1
2(3i)
3J1(x)  xJ1(x)  0
hJn(x)  xJn(x)  0
f (x)  18	

i1
 
aiJ2(3ai)
9ai
2  8J1
2(3ai)
 J1(aix)
ci 
18ai J2(3ai)
9ai
2  8J1
2(3ai)
3J1(3a)  3aJ1(3a)  0
J1(3a)  aJ1(3a)  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The orthogonal series expansion of a function in terms of the Legendre polynomials
is summarized in the next deﬁnition.
11.5
BESSEL AND LEGENDRE SERIES
●
451
DEFINITION 11.5.2
Fourier-Legendre Series
The Fourier-Legendre series of a function f deﬁned on the interval (1, 1) is
given by
,
(21)
where
.
(22)
cn  2n  1
2
 
1
1
 f (x)Pn(x) dx
f (x)  	

n0
cn
  Pn(x)
EXAMPLE 3
Expansion in a Fourier-Legendre Series
Write out the ﬁrst four nonzero terms in the Fourier-Legendre expansion of
SOLUTION
The ﬁrst several Legendre polynomials are listed on page 266. From
these and (22) we ﬁnd
.
Hence
.
f (x)  1
2
 P0(x)  3
4
 P1(x)  7
16
 P3(x)  11
32
 P5(x)  
 
 
c5  11
2  
1
1
  f (x)P5(x) dx  11
2  
1
0
1  1
8
  (63x5  70x3  15x) dx  11
32 
c4  9
2 
1
1
  f (x)P4(x) dx  9
2 
1
0
1  1
8
  (35x4  30x2  3) dx  0 
c3  7
2 
1
1
  f (x)P3(x) dx  7
2 
1
0
1  1
2
  (5x3  3x) dx   7
16 
c2  5
2 
1
1
  f (x)P2(x) dx  5
2 
1
0
1  1
2
  (3x2  1) dx  0 
c1  3
2 
1
1
  f (x)P1(x) dx  3
2 
1
0
1  x dx  3
4 
c0  1
2 
1
1
  f (x)P0(x) dx  1
2 
1
0
1  1 dx  1
2 
f (x) 
0,  1  x  0
1,    0  x  1.
Convergence of a Fourier-Legendre Series
Sufﬁcient conditions for con-
vergence of a Fourier-Legendre series are given in the next theorem.
THEOREM 11.5.2
Conditions for Convergence
Let f and f be piecewise continuous on the interval [1, 1]. Then for all x in the
interval 
the Fourier-Legendre series of f converges to 
at a point of
continuity. At a point of discontinuity the Fourier-Legendre series converges to
the average
,
where 
denote the limit of f at x from the right and from the left,
respectively. 
f(x) and f(x)
f (x)  f (x)
2
f(x)
(1, 1),
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Like the Bessel functions, Legendre polynomials are built-in functions in com-
puter algebra systems such as Maple and Mathematica, so each of the coefﬁcients
just listed can be found by using the integration application of such a program.
Indeed, using a CAS, we further ﬁnd that c6  0 and 
. The ﬁfth partial sum
of the Fourier-Legendre series representation of the function f deﬁned in Example 3
is then
.
The graph of S5(x) on the interval (1, 1) is given in Figure 11.5.2.
Alternative Form of Series
In applications the Fourier-Legendre series
S5(x)  1
2
 P0(x)  3
4
 P1(x)  7
16
 P3(x)  11
32
 P5(x)  65
256
 P7(x)
c7   65
256
452
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
y
x
-1
-0.5
1
0.5
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
FIGURE 11.5.2
Partial sum S5(x) of
the Fourier-Legendre series in Example 3
EXERCISES 11.5
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-20.
11.5.1
FOURIER-BESSEL SERIES
In Problems 1 and 2 use Table 6.4.1 in Section 6.4.
1. Find the ﬁrst four ai  0 deﬁned by J1(3a)  0.
2. Find the ﬁrst four ai  0 deﬁned by 
.
In Problems 3-6 expand f (x)  1, 0  x  2, in a Fourier-
Bessel series, using Bessel functions of order zero that sat-
isfy the given boundary condition.
3. J0(2a)  0
4.
5.
6.
In Problems 7-10 expand the given function in a Fourier-
Bessel series, using Bessel functions of the same order as in
the indicated boundary condition.
7. f (x)  5x, 0  x  4,
8. f (x)  x2, 0  x  1,
J2(a)  0
9. f (x)  x2, 0  x  3,
[Hint: t3  t2t.]
10. f (x)  1  x2, 0  x  1,
J0(a)  0
J0 (3a)  0
3J1 (4a)  4a J1 (4a)  0
J0(2a)  aJ0(2a)  0
J0(2a)  2aJ0(2a)  0
J0(2a)  0
J0 (2a)  0
Computer Lab Assignments
11. (a) Use a CAS to plot the graph of 
on an interval so that the ﬁrst ﬁve positive x-intercepts
of the graph are shown.
(b) Use the root-ﬁnding capability of your CAS to
approximate the ﬁrst ﬁve roots xi of the equation
.
(c) Use the data obtained in part (b) to ﬁnd the ﬁrst
ﬁve
positive 
values 
of 
ai
that 
satisfy
. (See Problem 7.)
(d) If instructed, ﬁnd the ﬁrst ten positive values of ai.
12. (a) Use the values of ai in part (c) of Problem 11 and a
CAS to approximate the values of the ﬁrst ﬁve
coefﬁcients ci of the Fourier-Bessel series obtained
in Problem 7.
(b) Use a CAS to plot the graphs of the partial sums
SN(x), N  1, 2, 3, 4, 5 of the Fourier-Bessel series
in Problem 7.
(c) If instructed, plot the graph of the partial sum S10(x)
on the interval (0, 4) and on (0, 50).
Discussion Problems
13. If the partial sums in Problem 12 are plotted on a
symmetric interval such as (30, 30) would the graphs
possess any symmetry? Explain.
3J1 (4a)  4aJ1(4a)  0
3J1(x)  xJ1(x)  0
y  3J1(x)  xJ1(x)
appears in an alternative form. If we let x  cos u, then x  1 implies that u  0
whereas x  1 implies that u  p. Since dx  sin u du, (21) and (22) become,
respectively,
(23)
(24)
where f(cos u) has been replaced by F(u).
cn  2n  1
2
 
	
0
F() Pn(cos ) sin  d,
F()  	

n0
cnPn(cos )
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 11 IN REVIEW
●
453
14. (a) Sketch, by hand, a graph of what you think the
Fourier-Bessel series in Problem 3 converges to on
the interval (2, 2).
(b) Sketch, by hand, a graph of what you think the
Fourier-Bessel series would converge to on the inter-
val (4, 4) if the values ai in Problem 7 were
deﬁned by 
.
11.5.2
FOURIER-LEGENDRE SERIES
In Problems 15 and 16 write out the ﬁrst ﬁve nonzero terms
in the Fourier-Legendre expansion of the given function. If
instructed, use a CAS as an aid in evaluating the coefﬁcients.
Use a CAS to plot the graph of the partial sum S5(x).
15.
16. f(x)  ex,
1  x  1
17. The ﬁrst three Legendre polynomials are P0(x)  1,
P1(x)  x, and 
. If x  cos u, then
P0(cos u)  1 and P1(cos u)  cos u. Show that
.
18. Use the results of Problem 17 to ﬁnd a Fourier-Legendre
expansion (23) of F(u)  1  cos 2u.
19. A Legendre polynomial Pn(x) is an even or odd func-
tion, depending on whether n is even or odd. Show that
if f is an even function on the interval (1, 1), then (21)
and (22) become, respectively,
(25)
.
(26)
c2n  (4n  1) 
1
0
 f (x)P2n(x) dx
f (x)  	

n0
c2nP2n(x)
P2(cos )  1
4
 (3cos 2  1)
P2(x)  1
2
 (3x2  1)
f (x) 
0,
x,
1  x  0
   0  x  1
3J2(4a)  4aJ2(4a)  0
The series (25) can also be used when f is deﬁned only
on the interval (0, 1). The series then represents f on 
(0, 1) and an even extension of f on the interval (1, 0).
20. Show that if f is an odd function on the interval (1, 1),
then (21) and (22) become, respectively,
(27)
.
(28)
The series (27) can also be used when f is deﬁned only
on the interval (0, 1). The series then represents f on
(0, 1) and an odd extension of f on the interval (1, 0).
In Problems 21 and 22 write out the ﬁrst four nonzero terms
in the indicated expansion of the given function. What func-
tion does the series represent on the interval (1, 1)? Use a
CAS to plot the graph of the partial sum S4(x).
21. f (x)  x,
0  x  1;
use (25)
22. f (x)  1,
0  x  1;
use (27)
Discussion Problems
23. Discuss: Why is a Fourier-Legendre expansion of a
polynomial function that is deﬁned on the interval
(1, 1) necessarily a ﬁnite series?
24. Using only your conclusions from Problem 23—that is,
do not use (22)—ﬁnd the ﬁnite Fourier-Legendre series
of f (x)  x2. The series of f(x)  x3.
c2n1  (4n  3) 
1
0
 f (x)P2n1(x) dx
f (x)  	

n0
c2n1P2n1(x)
CHAPTER 11 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-20.
In Problems 1-6 ﬁll in the blank or answer true or false
without referring back to the text.
1. The functions f (x)  x2  1 and g(x)  x5 are orthogo-
nal on the interval [p, p]. _______
2. The product of an odd function f with an odd function
g is _______.
3. To expand f(x)  x  1, p  x  p, in an appropri-
ate trigonometric series, we would use a _____ series.
4. y  0 is never an eigenfunction of a Sturm-Liouville
problem. _______
5. l  0 is never an eigenvalue of a Sturm-Liouville
problem. _______
6. If the function 
is ex- 
panded in a Fourier series, the series will converge to
_______ at x  1, to _______ at x  0, and to
_______ at x  1.
7. Suppose the function f (x)  x2  1, 0  x  3, is
expanded in a Fourier series, a cosine series, and a sine
series. Give the value to which each series will converge
at x  0.
8. What is the corresponding eigenfunction for the boundary-
value problem 
for l  25?
y  y  0, y(0)  0, y(	> 2)  0
f (x) 
x  1, 1  x  0
x,   0  x  1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19. Find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the
boundary-value problem
20. Give an orthogonality relation for the eigenfunctions in
Problem 19.
21. Expand 
, in a Fourier-Bessel
series, using Bessel functions of order zero that satisfy
the boundary-condition J0(4a)  0.
22. Expand 
, in a Fourier-Legendre
series.
23. Suppose the function y  f(x) is deﬁned on the interval
.
(a) Verify the identity f(x)  fe(x)  fo(x), where
(b) Show that fe is an even function and fo an odd
function.
24. The function f(x)  ex is neither even or odd. Use
Problem 23 to write f as the sum of an even function and
an odd function. Identify fe and fo. 
25. Suppose that f is an integrable 2p-periodic function.
Prove that for any number a,

2p
0
f(x) dx 
a2p
a
f(x) dx.
fe(x)  f(x)  f(x)
2
    and    fo(x)  f(x)  f(x)
2
.
(, )
f (x)  x4, 1  x  1
f (x) 
1, 0  x  2
0, 2  x  4
x2y  xy  9y  0,  y(1)  0,  y(e)  0.
9. Chebyshev's differential equation
has a polynomial solution 
for n  0, 1, 2, . . . .
Specify the weight function w(x) and the interval over
which the set of Chebyshev polynomials {Tn(x)} is
orthogonal. Give an orthogonality relation.
10. The set of Legendre polynomials {Pn(x)}, where
P0(x)  1, P1(x)  x, . . . , is orthogonal with respect to
the weight function w(x)  1 on the interval [1, 1].
Explain why 
11. Without doing any work, explain why the cosine series
of 
is the ﬁnite series
.
12. (a) Show that the set
is orthogonal on the interval [0, L].
(b) Find the norm of each function in part (a). Construct
an orthonormal set.
13. Expand 
in a Fourier series.
14. Expand f(x)  2x2  1, 1  x  1 in a Fourier series.
15. Expand 
(a) in a cosine series
(b) in a Fourier series.
16. In Problems 13, 14, and 15, sketch the periodic exten-
sion of f to which each series converges.
17. Discuss: Which of the two Fourier series of f in
Problem 15 converges to 
on the interval (1, 1)?
18. Consider the portion of the periodic function f shown in
Figure 11.R.1. Expand f in an appropriate Fourier series.
F(x)  f (x),   0  x  1
f (x), 1  x  0
f (x)  ex, 0  x  1
f (x)   x   x, 1  x  1
sin 	
2L x, sin 3	
2L x, sin 5	
2L x, . . .  
f (x)  1
2  1
2 cos 2x
f (x)  cos2x, 0  x  	
1
1 Pn(x) dx  0 for n  0.
y  Tn(x)
(1  x2)y  xy  n2y  0
454
●
CHAPTER 11
FOURIER SERIES
FIGURE 11.R.1
Graph for Problem 18
y
4
2
−2
−4
2
6
x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12
Boundary-Value Problems 
in Rectangular Coordinates
12.1 Separable Partial Differential Equations
12.2 Classical PDEs and Boundary-Value Problems
12.3 Heat Equation
12.4 Wave Equation
12.5 Laplace's Equation
12.6 Nonhomogeneous Boundary-Value Problems
12.7 Orthogonal Series Expansions
12.8 Higher-Dimensional Problems
Chapter 12 in Review
In this and the next two chapters the emphasis will be on two procedures that are
used in solving partial differential equations that occur in problems involving
temperature distributions, vibrations, and potentials. These problems, called
boundary-value problems, are described by relatively simple linear second-order
PDEs. The thrust of these procedures is to ﬁnd solutions of a linear partial
differential equation by reducing it to two or more linear ordinary differential
equations.
We begin with a method called separation of variables (which is not related to
the method in Section 2.2). The application of this method leads us back to the
important concepts in Chapter 11—namely, eigenvalues, eigenfunctions, and the
expansion of a function in an inﬁnite series of orthogonal functions.  
455
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

456
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
Linear Partial Differential Equation
If we let u denote the dependent vari-
able and let x and y denote the independent variables, then the general form of a linear
second-order partial differential equation is given by
,
(1)
where the coefﬁcients A, B, C, . . . , G are functions of x and y. When G(x, y)  0,
equation (1) is said to be homogeneous; otherwise, it is nonhomogeneous. For
example, the linear equations
are homogeneous and nonhomogeneous, respectively.
Solution of a PDE
A solution of a linear partial differential equation (1) is
a function u(x, y) of two independent variables that possesses all partial derivatives
occurring in the equation and that satisﬁes the equation in some region of the
xy-plane.
It is not our intention to examine procedures for ﬁnding general solutions of
linear partial differential equations. Not only is it often difﬁcult to obtain a general
solution of a linear second-order PDE, but a general solution is usually not all that
useful in applications. Thus our focus throughout will be on ﬁnding particular
solutions of some of the more important linear PDEs—that is, equations that appear
in many applications.
Separation of Variables
Although there are several methods that can be
tried to ﬁnd particular solutions of a linear PDE, the one we are interested in at the
moment is called the method of separation of variables. In this method we seek a
particular solution of the form of a product of a function of x and a function of y:
.
With this assumption it is sometimes possible to reduce a linear PDE in two variables
to two ODEs. To this end we note that
,
where the primes denote ordinary differentiation.
u
x  XY,    u
y  XY,    2u
x2  XY,    2u
y2  XY 
u(x, y)  X(x)Y(y)
2u
x2  2u
y2  0    and    2u
x2  u
y  xy
A 2u
x2  B 2u
x y  C 2u
y2  D u
x  E u
y  Fu  G
SEPARABLE PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 2.3, 4.3, and 4.4
●Reread "Two Equations Worth Knowing" on pages 134-135.
INTRODUCTION
Partial differential equations (PDEs), like ordinary differential equations
(ODEs), are classiﬁed as either linear or nonlinear. Analogous to a linear ODE, the dependent
variable and its partial derivatives in a linear PDE are only to the ﬁrst power. For the remaining
chapters of this text we shall be interested in, for the most part, linear second-order PDEs.
12.1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12.1
SEPARABLE PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
●
457
EXAMPLE 1
Separation of Variables
Find product solutions of
.
SOLUTION
Substituting u(x, y)  X(x)Y(y) into the partial differential equation
yields
.
After dividing both sides by 4XY, we have separated the variables:
.
Since the left-hand side of the last equation is independent of y and is equal to the
right-hand side, which is independent of x, we conclude that both sides of the equa-
tion are independent of x and y. In other words, each side of the equation must be a
constant. In practice it is convenient to write this real separation constant as l
(using l would lead to the same solutions).
From the two equalities
we obtain the two linear ordinary differential equations
.
(2)
Now, as in Example 1 of Section 11.4 we consider three cases for l: zero, negative,
or positive, that is, l  0, l  a2  0, and l  a2 	 0, where a 	 0.
Case I
If l  0, then the two ODEs in (2) are
.
Solving each equation (by, say, integration), we ﬁnd X  c1  c2x and Y  c3. Thus
a particular product solution of the given PDE is
,
(3)
where we have replaced c1c3 and c2c3 by A1 and B1, respectively.
Case II
If l  a2, then the DEs in (2) are
.
From their general solutions
we obtain another particular product solution of the PDE,
or
(4)
where A2  c4c6 and B2  c5c6.
Case III
If l  a2, then the DEs
and their general solutions
X  c7 cos 2
x  c8 sin 2
x    and    Y  c9e
2y
X  4
2X  0    and    Y  
2Y  0
u  A2e
2y cosh 2
x  B2e
2y sinh 2
x,
u  XY  (c4 cosh 2
x  c5 sinh 2
x)c6e
2y
X  c4 cosh 2
x  c5 sinh 2
x    and    Y  c6e
2y
X  4a2X  0    and    Y  a2Y  0
u  XY  (c1  c2x)c3  A1  B1x
X  0    and    Y  0
X  4X  0    and    Y  Y  0
X
4X  Y
Y  
X
4X  Y
Y
XY  4XY
2u
x2  4 u
y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

458
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
give yet another particular solution
,
(5)
where A3  c7c9 and B3  c8c9.
It is left as an exercise to verify that (3), (4), and (5) satisfy the given PDE. See
Problem 29 in Exercises 12.1.
Superposition Principle
The following theorem is analogous to
Theorem 4.1.2 and is known as the superposition principle.
u  A3e
2y cos 2
x  B3e
2y sin 2
x
THEOREM 12.1.1
Superposition Principle
If u1, u2, . . . , uk are solutions of a homogeneous linear partial differential equa-
tion, then the linear combination
,
where the ci, i  1, 2, . . . , k, are constants, is also a solution.
u  c1u1  c2u2      ckuk
Throughout the remainder of the chapter we shall assume that whenever we
have an inﬁnite set u1, u2, u3, . . . of solutions of a homogeneous linear equation, we
can construct yet another solution u by forming the inﬁnite series
,
where the ck, k  1, 2, . . . are constants.
Classiﬁcation of Equations
A linear second-order partial differential equation
in two independent variables with constant coefﬁcients can be classiﬁed as one of three
types. This classiﬁcation depends only on the coefﬁcients of the second-order deriva-
tives. Of course, we assume that at least one of the coefﬁcients A, B, and C is not zero.
u  

k1
ckuk
DEFINITION 12.1.1
Classiﬁcation of Equations
The linear second-order partial differential equation
where A, B, C, D, E, F and G are real constants, is said to be
elliptic if 
 B2  4AC  0.
parabolic if 
 B2  4AC  0,
hyperbolic if B2  4AC 	 0,
A 2u
x2  B 2u
x y  C 2u
y2  D u
x  E u
y  Fu  G,
EXAMPLE 2
Classifying Linear Second-Order PDEs
Classify the following equations:
(a)
(b)
(c)
SOLUTION
(a) By rewriting the given equation as
,
3 2u
x2  u
y  0
2u
x2  2u
y2  0
2u
x2  2u
y2
3 2u
x2  u
y
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

we can make the identiﬁcations A  3, B  0, and C  0. Since B2  4AC  0, the
equation is parabolic.
(b) By rewriting the equation as
we see that A  1, B  0, C  1, and B2  4AC  4(1)(1) 	 0. The equation
is hyperbolic.
(c) With A  1, B  0, C  1, and B2  4AC  4(1)(1)  0 the equation is
elliptic.
2u
x2  2u
y2  0,
12.1
SEPARABLE PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
●
459
REMARKS
(i) In case you are wondering, separation of variables is not a general method
for ﬁnding particular solutions; some linear partial differential equations are
simply not separable. You are encouraged to verify that the assumption u  XY
does not lead to a solution for the linear PDE 2ux2  uy  x.
(ii) A detailed explanation of why we would want to classify a linear second-
order PDE as hyperbolic, parabolic, or elliptic is beyond the scope of this text,
but you should at least be aware that this classiﬁcation is of practical importance.
We are going to solve some PDEs subject to only boundary conditions and oth-
ers subject to both boundary and initial conditions; the kinds of side conditions
that are appropriate for a given equation depend on whether the equation is
hyperbolic, parabolic, or elliptic. On a related matter, we shall see in Chapter 15
that numerical-solution methods for linear second-order PDEs differ in confor-
mity with the classiﬁcation of the equation.
EXERCISES 12.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-21.
In Problems 1-16 use separation of variables to ﬁnd, if
possible, product solutions for the given partial differential
equation.
1.
2.
3. ux  uy  u
4. ux  uy  u
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12. a2 2u
x2  2u
t2  2k u
t, k 	 0
a2 2u
x2  2u
t2
k 2u
x2  u
t, k 	 0
k 2u
x2  u  u
t, k 	 0
y 2u
x y  u  0
2u
x2  2u
x y  2u
y2  0
y u
x  x u
y  0
x u
x  y u
y
u
x  3 u
y  0
u
x  u
y
13.
14.
15. uxx  uyy  u
16. a2uxx  g  utt,
g a constant
In Problems 17-26 classify the given partial differential
equation as hyperbolic, parabolic, or elliptic.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21. 2u
x2  9 2u
x y
2u
x2  2u
x y  3 2u
y2  0
2u
x2  6 2u
x y  9 2u
y2  0
3 2u
x2  5 2u
x y  2u
y2  0
2u
x2  2u
x y  2u
y2  0
x2 2u
x2  2u
y2  0
2u
x2  2u
y2  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

460
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
In Problems 27 and 28 show that the given partial differen-
tial equation possesses the indicated product solution.
27.
28.
u  (c1 cos 
  c2 sin 
)(c3r
  c4r
)
2u
r2  1
r u
r  1
r2 2u
2  0;
u  ek
2tc1J0(
r)  c2Y0(
r)
k
 
2u
r2  1
r u
r  u
t ;
k 2u
x2  u
t, k 	 0
a2 2u
x2  2u
t2
2u
x2  2u
y2  u
2u
x2  2 2u
x y  2u
y2  u
x  6 u
y  0
2u
x y  2u
y2  2 u
x  0
29. Verify that each of the products u  XY in (3), (4), and
(5) satisﬁes the second-order PDE in Example 1.
30. Deﬁnition 12.1.1 generalizes to linear PDEs with coef-
ﬁcients that are functions of x and y. Determine the
regions in the xy-plane for which the equation
is hyperbolic, parabolic, or elliptic.
Discussion Problems
In Problems 31 and 32 discuss whether product solutions 
u  X(x)Y(x) can be found for the given partial differential
equation. [Hint: Use the superposition principle.]
31.
32.
2u
xy  u
x  0
2u
x2  u  0
(xy  1) 2u
x2  (x  2y) 2u
x y  2u
y2  xy2u  0
CLASSICAL PDEs AND BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Reread the material on boundary-value problems in Sections 4.1, 4.3, and 5.2.
INTRODUCTION
We are not going to solve anything in this section. We are simply going to
discuss the types of partial differential equations and boundary-value problems that we will be work-
ing with in the remainder of this chapter as well as in Chapters 13-15. The words boundary-value
problem have a slightly different connotation than they did in Sections 4.1, 4.3, and 5.2. If, say, u(x, t)
is a solution of a PDE, where x represents a spatial dimension and t represents time, then we may be
able to prescribe the value of u, or ux, or a linear combination of u and ux at a speciﬁed x as
well as to prescribe u and ut at a given time t (usually, t  0). In other words, a "boundary-value
problem" may consist of a PDE, along with boundary conditions and initial conditions.
12.2
Classical Equations
We shall be concerned principally with applying
the method of separation of variables to ﬁnd product solutions of the following clas-
sical equations of mathematical physics:
(1)
(2)
(3)
or slight variations of these equations. The PDEs (1), (2), and (3) are known, respec-
tively, as the one-dimensional heat equation, the one-dimensional wave equation,
and the two-dimensional form of Laplace's equation. "One-dimensional" in the
case of equations (1) and (2) refers to the fact that x denotes a spatial variable, whereas
t represents time; "two-dimensional" in (3) means that x and y are both spatial
2u
x2  2u
y2  0
a2 2u
x2  2u
t2
k2u
x2  u
t ,  k 	 0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

variables. If you compare (1)-(3) with the linear form in Theorem 12.1.1 (with t play-
ing the part of the symbol y), observe that the heat equation (1) is parabolic, the wave
equation (2) is hyperbolic, and Laplace's equation is elliptic. This observation will be
important in Chapter 15.
Heat Equation
Equation (1) occurs in the theory of heat ﬂow—that is, heat
transferred by conduction in a rod or in a thin wire. The function u(x, t) represents
temperature at a point x along the rod at some time t. Problems in mechanical vibra-
tions often lead to the wave equation (2). For purposes of discussion, a solution
u(x, t) of (2) will represent the displacement of an idealized string. Finally, a solution
u(x, y) of Laplace's equation (3) can be interpreted as the steady-state (that is, time-
independent) temperature distribution throughout a thin, two-dimensional plate.
Even though we have to make many simplifying assumptions, it is worthwhile
to see how equations such as (1) and (2) arise.
Suppose a thin circular rod of length L has a cross-sectional area A and coin-
cides with the x-axis on the interval [0, L]. See Figure 12.2.1. Let us suppose the
following:
•
The ﬂow of heat within the rod takes place only in the x-direction.
•
The lateral, or curved, surface of the rod is insulated; that is, no heat
escapes from this surface.
•
No heat is being generated within the rod.
•
The rod is homogeneous; that is, its mass per unit volume r is a constant.
•
The speciﬁc heat g and thermal conductivity K of the material of the rod are
constants.
To derive the partial differential equation satisﬁed by the temperature u(x, t), we
need two empirical laws of heat conduction:
(i)
The quantity of heat Q in an element of mass m is
,
(4)
where u is the temperature of the element.
(ii)
The rate of heat ﬂow Qt through the cross-section indicated in
Figure 12.2.1 is proportional to the area A of the cross section and
the partial derivative with respect to x of the temperature:
.
(5)
Since heat ﬂows in the direction of decreasing temperature, the minus sign in (5) is
used to ensure that Qt is positive for ux  0 (heat ﬂow to the right) and negative for
ux 	 0 (heat ﬂow to the left). If the circular slice of the rod shown in Figure 12.2.1
between x and x  x is very thin, then u(x, t) can be taken as the approximate tem-
perature at each point in the interval. Now the mass of the slice is m  r(A x), and
so it follows from (4) that the quantity of heat in it is
.
(6)
Furthermore, when heat ﬂows in the positive x-direction, we see from (5) that heat
builds up in the slice at the net rate
.
(7)
By differentiating (6) with respect to t, we see that this net rate is also given by
.
(8)
Equating (7) and (8) gives
.
(9)
K
 ux(x  x, t)  ux(x, t)
x
 ut
Qt  A x ut
KAux(x, t)  [KAux(x  x, t)]  KA [ux(x  x, t)  ux(x, t)]
Q  A x u
Qt  KAux
Q  mu
12.2
CLASSICAL PDEs AND BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
461
x
0        x     x + Δx        L
Cross section of area A 
FIGURE 12.2.1
One-dimensional
ﬂow of heat
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

462
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
Finally, by taking the limit of (9) as 
we obtain (1) in the form*
(Kgr)uxx  ut. It is customary to let k  Kgr and call this positive constant the
thermal diffusivity.
Wave Equation
Consider a string of length L, such as a guitar string,
stretched taut between two points on the x-axis—say, x  0 and x  L. When the
string starts to vibrate, assume that the motion takes place in the xu-plane in such
a manner that each point on the string moves in a direction perpendicular to the x-axis
(transverse vibrations). As is shown in Figure 12.2.2(a), let u(x, t) denote the vertical
displacement of any point on the string measured from the x-axis for t 	 0. We fur-
ther assume the following:
•
The string is perfectly ﬂexible.
•
The string is homogeneous; that is, its mass per unit length r is a
constant.
•
The displacements u are small in comparison to the length of the string.
•
The slope of the curve is small at all points.
•
The tension T acts tangent to the string, and its magnitude T is the same at
all points.
•
The tension is large compared with the force of gravity.
•
No other external forces act on the string.
Now in Figure 12.2.2(b) the tensions T1 and T2 are tangent to the ends of the
curve on the interval [x, x  x]. For small u1 and u2 the net vertical force acting on
the corresponding element s of the string is then
where T  T1  T2. Now r s  r x is the mass of the string on [x, x  x],
so Newton's second law gives
or
If the limit is taken as 
the last equation becomes uxx  (rT)utt. This of
course is (2) with a2  Tr.
Laplace's Equation
Although we shall not present its derivation, Laplace's
equation in two and three dimensions occurs in time-independent problems involv-
ing potentials such as electrostatic, gravitational, and velocity in ﬂuid mechanics.
Moreover, a solution of Laplace's equation can also be interpreted as a steady-state
temperature distribution. As illustrated in Figure 12.2.3, a solution u(x, y) of (3)
could represent the temperature that varies from point to point—but not with time—
of a rectangular plate. Laplace's equation in two dimensions and in three dimensions
is abbreviated as 2u  0, where
are called the two-dimensional Laplacian and the three-dimensional Laplacian,
respectively, of a function u.
2u  2u
x2  2u
y2    and    2u  2u
x2  2u
y2  2u
z2
x : 0,
 ux(x  x, t)  ux(x, t)
x
 
T utt.
 T[ux(x  x, t)  ux(x, t)]   x utt
  T [ux(x  x, t)  ux(x, t)],†
 T sin 2  T sin 1  T tan 2  T tan 1
x : 0,
u
Δs
u(x, t)
0
x   x  + Δx
L
x
x
u
Δs
x + Δx
x
θ1
θ2
T1
T2
(a) Segment of string
(b) Enlargement of segment
FIGURE 12.2.2
Flexible string
anchored at x  0 and x  L
100
60
0
120
80
?F
-20
180
160
140
20
40
200
220
(x, y)
y
Thermometer
Temperature as a
function of position
on the hot plate
W
O
x
H 
FIGURE 12.2.3
Steady-state
temperatures in a rectangular plate
*The deﬁnition of the second partial derivative is 
†tan u2  ux(x  x, t) and tan u1  ux(x, t) are equivalent expressions for slope.
uxx  lim
x : 0
ux(x  x, t)  ux(x, t)
x
.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We often wish to ﬁnd solutions of equations (1), (2), and (3) that satisfy certain
side conditions.
Initial Conditions
Since solutions of (1) and (2) depend on time t, we can
prescribe what happens at t  0; that is, we can give initial conditions (IC). If f (x)
denotes the initial temperature distribution throughout the rod in Figure 12.2.1, then
a solution u(x, t) of (1) must satisfy the single initial condition u(x, 0)  f (x),
0  x  L. On the other hand, for a vibrating string we can specify its initial dis-
placement (or shape) f (x) as well as its initial velocity g(x). In mathematical terms
we seek a function u(x, t) that satisﬁes (2) and the two initial conditions:
.
(10)
For example, the string could be plucked, as shown in Figure 12.2.4, and released
from rest (g(x)  0).
Boundary Conditions
The string in Figure 12.2.4 is secured to the x-axis at
x  0 and x  L for all time. We interpret this by the two boundary conditions (BC):
.
Note that in this context the function f in (10) is continuous, and consequently,
f (0)  0 and f (L)  0. In general, there are three types of boundary conditions
associated with equations (1), (2), and (3). On a boundary we can specify the values
of one of the following:
.
Here un denotes the normal derivative of u (the directional derivative of u in
the direction perpendicular to the boundary). A boundary condition of the ﬁrst
type (i) is called a Dirichlet condition; a boundary condition of the second type (ii)
is called a Neumann condition; and a boundary condition of the third type (iii) is
known as a Robin condition. For example, for t 	 0 a typical condition at the right-
hand end of the rod in Figure 12.2.1 can be
Condition (i) simply states that the boundary x  L is held by some means at a
constant temperature u0 for all time t 	 0. Condition (ii) indicates that the boundary
x  L is insulated. From the empirical law of heat transfer, the ﬂux of heat across a
boundary (that is, the amount of heat per unit area per unit time conducted across the
boundary) is proportional to the value of the normal derivative un of the temper-
ature u. Thus when the boundary x  L is thermally insulated, no heat ﬂows into or
out of the rod, so
We can interpret (iii) to mean that heat is lost from the right-hand end of the rod by
being in contact with a medium, such as air or water, that is held at a constant tem-
perature. From Newton's law of cooling, the outward ﬂux of heat from the rod is pro-
portional to the difference between the temperature u(L, t) at the boundary and the
u
xxL  0.
(iii) u
xxL  h(u(L, t)  um),    h 	 0 and um constants.
(ii)  u
xxL  0,    or
(i)   u(L, t)  u0,    u0 a constant,
(i) u,    (ii) u
n,    or    (iii) u
n  hu,    h a constant
u(0, t)  0,    u(L, t)  0, t 	 0
u(x, 0)  f (x), u
t t0  g(x),  0  x  L
12.2
CLASSICAL PDEs AND BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
463
x
L
h
0
u = 0
at x = 0
u = 0
at x = L
u
FIGURE 12.2.4
Plucked string
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

464
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
temperature um of the surrounding medium. We note that if heat is lost from the left-
hand end of the rod, the boundary condition is
.
The change in algebraic sign is consistent with the assumption that the rod is at a
higher temperature than the medium surrounding the ends so that u(0, t) 	 um and
u(L, t) 	 um. At x  0 and x  L the slopes ux(0, t) and ux(L, t) must be positive and
negative, respectively.
Of course, at the ends of the rod we can specify different conditions at the same
time. For example, we could have
We note that the boundary condition in (i) is homogeneous if u0  0; if u0  0,
the boundary condition is nonhomogeneous. The boundary condition (ii) is homoge-
neous; (iii) is homogeneous if um  0 and nonhomogeneous if um  0.
Boundary-Value Problems
Problems such as
(11)
and
(12)
are called boundary-value problems.
Modifications
The partial differential equations (1), (2), and (3) must be
modified to take into consideration internal or external influences acting on the
physical system. More general forms of the one-dimensional heat and wave equa-
tions are, respectively,
(13)
and
(14)
For example, if there is heat transfer from the lateral surface of a rod into a
surrounding medium that is held at a constant temperature um, then the heat equa-
tion (13) is
.
In (14) the function F could represent the various forces acting on the string. For ex-
ample, when external, damping, and elastic restoring forces are taken into account,
k 2u
x2  h(u  um)  u
t
a2 2u
x2  F(x, t, u, ut)  2u
t2.
k 2u
x2  G(x, t, u, ux)  u
t
Subject to:   (BC) 
u
x x0  0, u
xxa  0,  0  y  b
u(x, 0)  0, u(x, b)  f (x),  0  x  a
Solve:       2u
x2   2u
y2  0,  0  x  a,  0  y  b
(IC) u(x, 0)  f (x), u
t t0  g(x), 0  x  L
Subject to:    (BC) u(0, t)  0, 
u(L, t)  0,  t 	 0
Solve:     a2 2u
x2  2u
t2 ,  0  x  L,  t 	 0
 u
xx0  0    and    u(L, t)  u0,  t 	 0.
 u
xx0  h(u(0, t)  um)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(14) assumes the form
(15)
a2         f(x, t)           c        ku
damping
force
restoring
force
external
force
∂2u
----
∂x2
∂2u
----
∂t2
∂u
---
∂t
12.2
CLASSICAL PDEs AND BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
465
EXERCISES 12.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-21.
In Problems 1-6 a rod of length L coincides with the interval
[0, L] on the x-axis. Set up the boundary-value problem for
the temperature u(x, t).
1. The left end is held at temperature zero, and the right end
is insulated. The initial temperature is f(x) throughout.
2. The left end is held at temperature u0, and the right end
is held at temperature u1. The initial temperature is zero
throughout.
3. The left end is held at temperature 100, and there is heat
transfer from the right end into the surrounding medium
at temperature zero. The initial temperature is f(x)
throughout.
4. The ends are insulated, and there is heat transfer from
the lateral surface into the surrounding medium at tem-
perature 50. The initial temperature is 100 throughout.
5. The left end is at temperature 
the right end is
held at zero, and there is heat transfer from the lateral sur-
face of the rod into the surrounding medium held at tem-
perature zero. The initial temperature is f(x) throughout.
6. The ends are insulated, and there is heat transfer from the
lateral surface of the rod into the surrounding medium
held at temperature 
The initial temperature is 
throughout.
In Problems 7-10 a string of length L coincides with the
interval [0, L] on the x-axis. Set up the boundary-value prob-
lem for the displacement u(x, t).
100
50.
sin(pt>L),
7. The ends are secured to the x-axis. The string is released
from rest from the initial displacement x(L  x).
8. The ends are secured to the x-axis. Initially, the string is
undisplaced but has the initial velocity sin(pxL).
9. The left end is secured to the x-axis, but the right end
moves in a transverse manner according to sin pt.
The string is released from rest from the initial dis-
placement f (x). For t 	 0 the transverse vibrations are
damped with a force proportional to the instantaneous
velocity.
10. The ends are secured to the x-axis, and the string is
initially at rest on that axis. An external vertical force
proportional to the horizontal distance from the left end
acts on the string for t 	 0.
In Problems 11 and 12 set up the boundary-value problem
for the steady-state temperature u(x, y).
11. A thin rectangular plate coincides with the region
deﬁned by 0  x  4, 0  y  2. The left end and the
bottom of the plate are insulated. The top of the plate is
held at temperature zero, and the right end of the plate is
held at temperature f (y).
12. A semi-inﬁnite plate coincides with the region deﬁned
by 0  x  p, y  0. The left end is held at temperature
ey, and the right end is held at temperature 100 for
0  y  1 and temperature zero for y 	 1. The bottom of
the plate is held at temperature f(x).
REMARKS
The analysis of a wide variety of diverse phenomena yields mathematical
models (1), (2), or (3) or their generalizations involving a greater number of
spatial variables. For example, (1) is sometimes called the diffusion equation,
since the diffusion of dissolved substances in solution is analogous to the ﬂow
of heat in a solid. The function u(x, t) satisfying the partial differential equation
in this case represents the concentration of the dissolved substance. Similarly,
equation (2) arises in the study of the ﬂow of electricity in a long cable or trans-
mission line. In this setting (2) is known as the telegraph equation. It can be
shown that under certain assumptions the current and the voltage in the line are
functions satisfying two equations identical with (2). The wave equation (2)
also appears in the theory of high-frequency transmission lines, ﬂuid mechan-
ics, acoustics, and elasticity. Laplace's equation (3) is encountered in the static
displacement of membranes.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

466
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
Solution of the BVP
To start, we use the product u(x, t)  X(x)T(t) to separate
variables in (1). Then, if l is the separation constant, the two equalities
(4)
lead to the two ordinary differential equations
(5)
(6)
Before solving (5), note that the boundary conditions (2) applied to u(x, t)  X(x)T(t)
are
Since it makes sense to expect that T(t)  0 for all t, the foregoing equalities hold
only if X(0)  0 and X(L)  0. These homogeneous boundary conditions together
with the homogeneous DE (5) constitute a regular Sturm-Liouville problem:
.
(7)
The solution of this BVP was discussed thoroughly in Example 2 of Section 5.2. In
that example we considered three possible cases for the parameter l: zero, negative,
or positive. The corresponding solutions of the DEs are, in turn, given by
(8)
(9)
(10)
When the boundary conditions X(0)  0 and X(L)  0 are applied to (8) and (9),
these solutions yield only X(x)  0, and so we would have to conclude that u  0.
But when X(0)  0 is applied to (10), we ﬁnd that c1  0 and X(x)  c2 sin ax. The
second boundary condition then implies that X(L)  c2 sin aL  0. To obtain a non-
trivial solution, we must have c2  0 and sin aL  0. The last equation is satisﬁed
when aL  np or a  npL. Hence (7) possesses nontrivial solutions when
 X(x)  c1 cos ax  c2 sin ax, 
   a2 	 0.
 X(x)  c1 cosh ax  c2 sinh ax,       a2  0
 X(x)  c1  c2x,  
   0
X  X  0, X(0)  0,  X(L)  0
u(0, t)  X(0)T(t)  0    and    u(L, t)  X(L)T(t)  0.
 T  kT  0.
X  X   0
X
X  T
kT  
x
0
L
u = 0
u = 0
FIGURE 12.3.1
Temperatures in 
a rod of length L
HEAT EQUATION
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Section 12.1
●A rereading of Example 2 in Section 5.2 and Example 1 of Section 11.4 is recommended.
INTRODUCTION
Consider a thin rod of length L with an initial temperature f(x) throughout
and whose ends are held at temperature zero for all time t 	 0. If the rod shown in Figure 12.3.1
satisﬁes the assumptions given on page 461, then the temperature u(x, t) in the rod is determined
from the boundary-value problem
(1)
(2)
(3)
In this section we shall solve this BVP.
u(x, 0)  f (x), 0  x  L.
u(0, t)  0, u(L, t)  0, t 	 0
k 2u
x2  u
t,  0  x  L,  t 	 0
12.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

n  1, 2, 3, . . . . These values of l are the eigenvalues of the
problem; the eigenfunctions are
(11)
From (6) we have 
, so
(12)
where we have replaced the constant c2c3 by An. Each of the product functions un(x, t)
given in (12) is a particular solution of the partial differential equation (1), and each
un(x, t) satisﬁes both boundary conditions (2) as well. However, for (12) to satisfy the
initial condition (3), we would have to choose the coefﬁcient An in such a manner that
(13)
In general, we would not expect condition (13) to be satisﬁed for an arbitrary but
reasonable choice of f. Therefore we are forced to admit that un(x, t) is not a solution
of the given problem. Now by the superposition principle (Theorem 12.1.1) the
function 
or
(14)
must also, although formally, satisfy equation (1) and the conditions in (2). Substituting
t  0 into (14) implies that
This last expression is recognized as a half-range expansion of f in a sine series.
If we make the identiﬁcation An  bn, n  1, 2, 3, . . . , it follows from (5) of
Section 11.3 that
(15)
We conclude that a solution of the boundary-value problem described in (1), (2), and
(3) is given by the inﬁnite series
.
(16)
In the special case when the initial temperature is u(x, 0)  100, L  p, and
k  1, you should verify that the coefﬁcients (15) are given by
and that (16) is
(17)
Use of Computers
Since u is a function of two variables, the graph of the so-
lution (17) is a surface in 3-space. We could use the 3D-plot application of a computer
algebra system to approximate this surface by graphing partial sums Sn(x, t) over a
rectangular region deﬁned by 
Alternatively, with the aid of
the 2D-plot application of a CAS we can plot the solution u(x, t) on the x-interval
[0, p] for increasing values of time t. See Figure 12.3.2(a). In Figure 12.3.2(b) the
solution u(x, t) is graphed on the t-interval [0, 6] for increasing values of x (x  0 is
the left end and x  p2 is the midpoint of the rod of length L  p.) Both sets of
graphs verify what is apparent in (17)—namely, 
as t : .
u(x, t) : 0
0  x  , 0  t  T.
u(x, t)  200
  

n1
1  (1)n
n
en2t sin nx.
An  200
 
1  (1)n
n

u(x, t)  2
L
 

n1
L
0
f (x) sin n
L  x dxek(n2 2/L2)t sin n
L  x
An  2
L 
L
0
 f (x) sin n
L x dx.
u(x, 0)  f (x)  

n1
An sin n
L  x.
u(x, t)  

n1
Anek(n2 2/L2)t sin n
L  x
u(x, t)  n1
  un
un(x, 0)  f (x)  An sin n
L  x.
un  X(x)T(t)  An ek(n2 2/L2)t sin n
L  x,
T(t)  c3ek(n2 2/L2)t
X(x)  c2 sin n
L  x,    n  1, 2, 3, . . . .
n  an
2  n22>L2,
u
x
t=0
t=0.35
t=0.6
t=1
t=1.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
100
80
60
40
20
(a) u(x, t) graphed as a function of
x for various ﬁxed times
(b) u(x, t) graphed as a function of
t for various ﬁxed positions
u
t
x=0
x= /4
x= /6
x= /12
6
5
4
3
2
1
100
80
60
40
20
t=0.05
x= /2
FIGURE 12.3.2
Graphs of (17)
when one variable is held ﬁxed
12.3
HEAT EQUATION
●
467
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

468
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
FIGURE 12.3.3
Rod losing heat in Problem 5
Insulated
Insulated
x
Heat transfer from
lateral surface of
the rod
0
L
0
0
6. Solve Problem 5 if the ends x  0 and x  L are held at
temperature zero.
EXERCISES 12.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-21.
In Problems 1 and 2 solve the heat equation (1) subject to the
given conditions. Assume a rod of length L.
1.
2.
3. Find the temperature u(x, t) in a rod of length L if the
initial temperature is f(x) throughout and if the ends
x  0 and x  L are insulated.
4. Solve Problem 3 if L  2 and
5. Suppose heat is lost from the lateral surface of a thin rod
of length L into a surrounding medium at temperature
zero. If the linear law of heat transfer applies, then the
heat equation takes on the form
0  x  L, t 	 0, h a constant. Find the temperature
u(x, t) if the initial temperature is f(x) throughout and the
ends x  0 and x  L are insulated. See Figure 12.3.3.
k 2u
x2  hu  u
t,
f (x) 
x, 0  x  1
0, 1  x  2.
 u(x, 0)  x(L  x)
u(0, t)   0, 
u(L, t)  0
 u(x, 0) 
1,
0,
0 
 x  L>2
L>2  x  L
u(0, t)   0, 
u(L, t)  0
7. A thin wire coinciding with the x-axis on the interval
[L, L] is bent into the shape of a circle so that the ends
x  L and x  L are joined. Under certain conditions,
the temperature u(x, t) in the wire satisﬁes the boundary-
value problem
u(L, t)  u(L, t),
t 	 0
u(x, 0)  f(x),
L  x  L.
Find the temperature u(x, t).
8. Find the temperature u(x, t) for the boundary-value
problem (1)-(3) when f(x)  10 sin(5px/L).
Discussion Problems
9. Figure 12.3.2(b) shows the graphs of u(x, t) for 0  t  6
for x  0, x  p12, x  p6, x  p4, and x  p2.
Describe or sketch the graphs of u(x, t) on the same time
interval but for the ﬁxed values x  3p4, x  5p6,
x  11p12, and x  p.
Computer Lab Assignments
10. (a) Solve the heat equation (1) subject to
(b) Use the 3D-plot application of your CAS to
graph the partial sum S5(x, t) consisting of the ﬁrst
ﬁve nonzero terms of the solution in part (a) for
0  x  100, 0  t  200. Assume that k  1.6352.
Experiment with various three-dimensional view-
ing perspectives of the surface (called the
ViewPoint option in Mathematica).
u(x, 0) 
0.8x,     0  x  50
0.8(100  x), 50  x  100.
u(0, t)   0,    u(100, t)  0, t 	 0
u
x
x L
 u
xxL,  t 	 0
k2u
x2  u
t,  L  x  L, t 	 0,
WAVE EQUATION
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Reread pages 462-464 of Section 12.2.
INTRODUCTION
We are now in a position to solve the boundary-value problem (11) that was
discussed in Section 12.2. The vertical displacement u(x, t) of the vibrating string of length L shown
in Figure 12.2.2(a) is determined from
(1)
(2)
(3)
 u(x, 0)  f (x), u
t t0  g(x), 0  x  L.
 u(0, t)  0, u(L, t)  0, t 	 0
 a2 2u
x2  2u
t2,   0  x  L,  t 	 0
12.4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution of the BVP
With the usual assumption that u(x, t)  X(x)T(t), sep-
arating variables in (1) gives
so that
(4)
(5)
As in the preceding section, the boundary conditions (2) translate into X(0)  0
and X(L)  0. Equation (4) along with these boundary conditions is the regular
Sturm-Liouville problem
.
(6)
Of the usual three possibilities for the parameter, l  0, l  a2  0, and
l  a2 	 0, only the last choice leads to nontrivial solutions. Corresponding to
l  a2, a 	 0, the general solution of (4) is
X(0)  0 and X(L)  0 indicate that c1  0 and c2 sin aL  0. The last equation
again implies that aL  np or a  npL. The eigenvalues and corresponding
eigenfunctions of (6) are ln  n2p2L2 and 
The general solution of the second-order equation (5) is then
By rewriting c2c3 as An and c2c4 as Bn, solutions that satisfy both the wave equation
(1) and boundary conditions (2) are
(7)
and
.
(8)
Setting t  0 in (8) and using the initial condition u(x, 0)  f (x) gives
.
Since the last series is a half-range expansion for f in a sine series, we can write
An  bn:
.
(9)
To determine Bn, we differentiate (8) with respect to t and then set t  0:
For this last series to be the half-range sine expansion of the initial velocity g on
the interval, the total coefﬁcient BnnpaL must be given by the form bn in (5) of
Section 11.3, that is,
Bn na
L
 2
L 
L
0
g(x) sin n
L  x dx
 u
t t0  g(x)  

n1Bn na
L  sin n
L  x.
 u
t  

n1An na
L  sin na
L  t  Bn na
L  cos na
L  tsin n
L  x
An  2
L 
L
0
 f (x) sin n
L  x dx
u(x, 0)  f (x)  

n1
 An sin n
L  x
u(x, t)  

n1An cos na
L  t  Bn sin na
L  tsin n
L  x
un An cos na
L  t  Bn sin na
L  tsin n
L  x
T(t)  c3 cos na
L  t  c4 sin na
L  t.
X(x)  c2 sin n
L  x, n  1, 2, 3, . . . .
X  c1 cos ax  c2 sin ax.
X  X  0, X(0)  0, X(L)  0
 T   a2T  0.
 X  X  0
X
X  T 
a2T  
12.4
WAVE EQUATION
●
469
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

470
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
from which we obtain
.
(10)
The solution of the boundary-value problem (1)-(3) consists of the series
(8) with coefﬁcients An and Bn deﬁned by (9) and (10), respectively.
We note that when the string is released from rest, then g(x)  0 for every x in
the interval [0, L], and consequently, Bn  0.
Plucked String
A special case of the boundary-value problem in (1)-(3) is the
model of the plucked string. We can see the motion of the string by plotting the solu-
tion or displacement u(x, t) for increasing values of time t and using the animation
feature of a CAS. Some frames of a "movie" generated in this manner are given in
Figure 12.4.1; the initial shape of the string is given in Figure 12.4.1(a). You are asked
to emulate the results given in the ﬁgure plotting a sequence of partial sums of (8). See
Problems 7 and 22 in Exercises 12.4.
Bn 
2
na 
L
0
g(x) sin n
L  x dx
FIGURE 12.4.1
Frames of a CAS "movie"
(a) t = 0 initial shape
(b) t = 0.2
(c) t = 0.7
(d) t = 1.0
(e) t = 1.6
(f) t = 1.9
x
x
u
x
x
u
x
x
u
u
u
u
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
-1
1
0
-1
1
0
-1
1
0
-1
1
0
-1
1
0
-1
1
0
Standing Waves
Recall from the derivation of the one-dimensional wave
equation in Section 12.2 that the constant a appearing in the solution of the boundary-
value problem in (1), (2), and (3) is given by 
where r is mass per unit length
and T is the magnitude of the tension in the string. When T is large enough, the vibrat-
ing string produces a musical sound. This sound is the result of standing waves. The
solution (8) is a superposition of product solutions called standing waves or normal
modes:
In view of (6) and (7) of Section 5.1 the product solutions (7) can be written as
(11)
where 
and fn is deﬁned by sin fn  AnCn and cos fn  BnCn.
For n  1, 2, 3, . . . the standing waves are essentially the graphs of sin(npxL), with
a time-varying amplitude given by
Alternatively, we see from (11) that at a ﬁxed value of x each product function
un(x, t) represents simple harmonic motion with amplitude Cnsin(npxL) and
frequency fn  na2L. In other words, each point on a standing wave vibrates with
a different amplitude but with the same frequency. When n  1,
u1(x, t)  C1 sin
a
L  t  1 sin 
L x
Cn sin
na
L  t  n.
Cn  1An
2  Bn
2
un(x, t)  Cn sin 
na
L  t  n sin n
L  x,
u(x, t)  u1(x, t)  u2(x, t)  u3(x, t)     .
1T>,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

is called the ﬁrst standing wave, the ﬁrst normal mode, or the fundamental
mode of vibration. The ﬁrst three standing waves, or normal modes, are shown in
Figure 12.4.2. The dashed graphs represent the standing waves at various values of
time. The points in the interval (0, L), for which sin(npL)x  0, correspond to
points on a standing wave where there is no motion. These points are called nodes.
For example, in Figures 12.4.2(b) and 12.4.2(c) we see that the second standing
wave has one node at L2 and the third standing wave has two nodes at L3 and
2L3. In general, the nth normal mode of vibration has n  1 nodes.
The frequency
of the ﬁrst normal mode is called the fundamental frequency or ﬁrst harmonic and
is directly related to the pitch produced by a stringed instrument. It is apparent that
the greater the tension on the string, the higher the pitch of the sound. The
frequencies fn of the other normal modes, which are integer multiples of the funda-
mental frequency, are called overtones. The second harmonic is the ﬁrst overtone,
and so on.
f1  a
2L  1
2L B
T

12.4
WAVE EQUATION
●
471
0
L
(a) First standing wave
(b) Second standing wave
(c) Third standing wave
Node
0
L
L
2
Nodes
0
L
L
3
2L
3
x
x
x
FIGURE 12.4.2
First three standing
waves
FIGURE 12.4.3
Initial displacement in Problem 3
L
L/3 2L/3
f(x)
x
1
4.
5.
6. u(0, t)  0,
u(1, t)  0
u(x, 0)  0.01 sin 3px,
u
tt0  0
u(x, 0)  0, u
tt0   sin x
u(0, t)  0, u(, t)  0
u
tt0   0
u(x, 0)  1
6x(2  x2),
u(0, t)   0, u(, t)  0
FIGURE 12.4.4
Vibrating elastic bar in Problem 8
x
0
L
u(x, t)
9. A string is stretched and secured on the x-axis at x  0
and x  p for t 	 0. If the transverse vibrations take
place in a medium that imparts a resistance proportional
to the instantaneous velocity, then the wave equation
takes on the form
2u
x2  2u
t2  2 u
t,  0    1,  t 	 0.
EXERCISES 12.4
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-22.
In Problems 1-8 solve the wave equation (1) subject to the
given conditions.
1.
2.
3. u(0, t)  0,
u(L, t)  0
u(x, 0) given in Figure 12.4.3,
u
t t0  0
u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  x(L  x)
u(0, t)   0, u(L, t)  0
u(x, 0)  1
4 x(L  x), u
t t0  0
u(0, t)   0, u(L, t)  0
7. u(0, t)  0,
u(L, t)  0
8.
This problem could describe the longitudinal displace-
ment u(x, t) of a vibrating elastic bar. The boundary
conditions at x  0 and x  L are called free-end
conditions. See Figure 12.4.4.
u(x, 0)  x, u
tt0  0
u
xx0  0, u
xxL  0
u(x, 0) 
2hx
L ,
2h1  x
L,
0  x  L
2
L
2  x  L
, u
tt0
 0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

472
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
Find the displacement u(x, t) if the string starts from rest
from the initial displacement f(x).
10. Show that a solution of the boundary-value problem
is
u
t t0   0, 0  x  
u(x, 0) 
x,    0  x  >2
  x, >2  x  
u(0, t)  0, u(, t)  0, t 	 0
2u
x2  2u
t2  u,    0  x  , t 	 0
positive roots of the equation
cosh x cos x  1.
(b) Show graphically that the equation in part (a) has an
inﬁnite number of roots.
(c) Use a calculator or a CAS to ﬁnd approximations to
the ﬁrst four eigenvalues. Use four decimal places.
13. Consider the boundary-value problem given in (1), (2),
and (3) of this section. If g(x)  0 for 0  x  L, show
that the solution of the problem can be written as
.
[Hint: Use the identity 
2 sin u1 cos u2  sin(u1  u2)  sin(u1  u2).]
14. The vertical displacement u(x, t) of an inﬁnitely long
string is determined from the initial-value problem
(12)
This problem can be solved without separating variables.
(a) Show that the wave equation can be put into the
form 2uhj  0 by means of the substitutions
j  x  at and h  x  at.
(b) Integrate the partial differential equation in part (a),
ﬁrst with respect to h and then with respect to j,
to show that u(x, t)  F(x  at)  G(x  at), where
F and G are arbitrary twice differentiable functions,
is a solution of the wave equation. Use this solution
and the given initial conditions to show that
and
where x0 is arbitrary and c is a constant of
integration.
(c) Use the results in part (b) to show that
 G(x)  1
2 f (x)  1
2a
 
x
x 0
 g(s)ds  c,
 F(x)  1
2 f (x)  1
2a
 
x
x 0
 g(s)ds  c
u(x, 0)  f (x), u
t t0  g(x).
a2 2u
x2  2u
t2,    x  , t 	 0
u(x, t)  1
2 [ f (x  at)  f (x  at)]
sin(2k  1)x cos1(2k  1)2  1 t.
u(x, t)  4
  

k1
 (1)k1
 (2k  1)2
11. The transverse displacement u(x, t) of a vibrating beam
of length L is determined from a fourth-order partial
differential equation
If the beam is simply supported, as shown in Figure
12.4.5, the boundary and initial conditions are
Solve for u(x, t). [Hint: For convenience use l  a4
when separating variables.]
 u(x, 0)  f (x), u
t t0  g(x), 0  x  L.
2u
x2x0  0,    2u
x2xL  0, t 	 0
 u(0, t)  0,    u(L, t)  0, t 	 0
a2 4u
x4  2u
t2  0,  0  x  L,  t 	 0.
FIGURE 12.4.5
Simply supported beam in Problem 11
u
x
L
0
. (13)
u(x, t)  1
2 [ f (x  at)  f (x  at)]  1
2a 
xat
xat  g(s) ds
12. If the ends of the beam in Problem 11 are embedded
at x  0 and x  L, the boundary conditions become,
for t 	 0,
(a) Show that the eigenvalues of the problem are
where xn, n  1, 2, 3, . . . , are the
n  xn
2>L2,
u
xx0  0, u
xxL  0.
u(0, t)  0, u(L, t)  0
Note that when the initial velocity g(x)  0, we
obtain
This last solution can be interpreted as a super-
position of two traveling waves, one moving to
the right (that is, 
) and one moving to the
1
2 f (x  at)
u(x, t)  1
2 [ f (x  at)  f (x  at)],    x  .
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

left
. Both waves travel with speed
a and have the same basic shape as the initial
displacement f(x). The form of u(x, t) given in (13) is
called d'Alembert's solution.
In Problems 15-18 use d'Alembert's solution (13) to solve
the initial-value problem in Problem 14 subject to the given
initial conditions.
15. f (x)  sin x,
g(x)  1
16. f (x)  sin x,
g(x)  cos x
17. f (x)  0,
g(x)  sin 2x
18.
Computer Lab Assignments
19. (a) Use a CAS to plot d'Alembert's solution in Problem
18 on the interval [5, 5] at the times t  0, t  1,
t  2, t  3, and t  4. Superimpose the graphs on
one coordinate system. Assume that a  1.
(b) Use the 3D-plot application of your CAS to plot
d'Alembert's solution u(x, t) in Problem 18 for
5  x  5, 0  t  4. Experiment with various
three-dimensional viewing perspectives of this
surface. Choose the perspective of the surface for
which you feel the graphs in part (a) are most
apparent.
20. A model for an inﬁnitely long string that is initially held
at the three points (1, 0), (1, 0), and (0, 1) and then
simultaneously released at all three points at time t  0
is given by (12) with
f (x) 
1   x ,
0,
 x   1
 x  	 1   and   g(x)  0.
f (x)  ex2, g(x)  0
(1
2 f (x  at))
12.5
LAPLACE'S EQUATION
●
473
(a) Plot the initial position of the string on the interval
[6, 6].
(b) Use a CAS to plot d'Alembert's solution (13) on
[6, 6] for t  0.2k, k  0, 1, 2, . . . , 25. Assume
that a  1.
(c) Use the animation feature of your computer algebra
system to make a movie of the solution. Describe the
motion of the string over time.
21. An inﬁnitely long string coinciding with the x-axis
is struck at the origin with a hammer whose head is
0.2 inch in diameter. A model for the motion of the
string is given by (12) with
(a) Use a CAS to plot d'Alembert's solution (13) on
[6, 6] for t  0.2k, k  0, 1, 2, . . . , 25. Assume
that a  1.
(b) Use the animation feature of your computer algebra
system to make a movie of the solution. Describe the
motion of the string over time.
22. The model of the vibrating string in Problem 7 is called
the plucked string. The string is tied to the x-axis at
x  0 and x  L and is held at x  L2 at h units above
the x-axis. See Figure 12.2.4. Starting at t  0 the string
is released from rest.
(a) Use a CAS to plot the partial sum S6(x, t)—that is,
the ﬁrst six nonzero terms of your solution—for
t  0.1k, k  0, 1, 2, . . . , 20. Assume that a  1,
h  1, and L  p.
(b) Use the animation feature of your computer alge-
bra system to make a movie of the solution to
Problem 7.
f (x)  0   and   g(x) 
1,  x   0.1
0,  x   0.1.
LAPLACE'S EQUATION
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Reread page 462 of Section 12.2 and Example 1 in Section 11.4.
INTRODUCTION
Suppose we wish to ﬁnd the steady-state temperature u(x, y) in a rectangular
plate whose vertical edges x  0 and x  a are insulated, as shown in Figure 12.5.1. When no heat
escapes from the lateral faces of the plate, we solve the following boundary-value problem:
(1)
(2)
.
(3)
u(x, 0)  0,  u(x, b)  f (x), 0  x  a
u
xx0  0, u
xxa  0, 0  y  b
2u
x2  2u
y2  0, 0  x  a, 0  y  b
12.5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

474
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
Solution of the BVP
With u(x, y)  X(x)Y(y) separation of variables in (1)
leads to
(4)
(5)
The three homogeneous boundary conditions in (2) and (3) translate into X(0)  0,
X(a)  0, and Y(0)  0. The Sturm-Liouville problem associated with the equation
in (4) is then
(6)
Examination of the cases corresponding to l  0, l  a2  0, and l  a2 	 0,
where a 	 0, has already been carried out in Example 1 in Section 11.4.* Here is a
brief summary of that analysis.
For l  0, (6) becomes
The solution of the DE is X  c1  c2x. The boundary conditions imply X  c1.
By imposing c1  0, this problem possesses a nontrivial solution. For l  a2  0,
(6) possesses only the trivial solution. For l  a2 	 0, (6) becomes
The solution of the DE in this problem is X  c1 cos ax  c2 sin ax. The boundary
condition X(0)  0 implies that c2  0, so X  c1 cos ax. Differentiating this last
expression and then setting x  a gives c1 sin aa  0. Since we have assumed that
a 	 0, this last condition is satisﬁed when aa  np or a  npa, n  1, 2, . . . . The
eigenvalues of (6) are then l0  0 and 
n  1, 2, . . . . If we cor-
respond l0  0 with n  0, the eigenfunctions of (6) are
We now solve equation (5) subject to the single homogeneous boundary
condition Y(0)  0. There are two cases. For l0  0, equation (5) is simply Y  0;
therefore its solution is Y  c3  c4y. But Y(0)  0 implies that c3  0, so Y  c4y.
For ln  n2p2a2, (5) is 
Because 0  y  b deﬁnes a ﬁnite 
interval, we use (according to the informal rule indicated on page 440) the hyperbolic
form of the general solution:
Y(0)  0 again implies that c3  0, so we are left with Y  c4 sinh (npya).
Thus product solutions un  X(x)Y(y) that satisfy the Laplace's equation (1) and
the three homogeneous boundary conditions in (2) and (3) are
where we have rewritten c1c4 as A0 for n  0 and as An for n  1, 2, . . . .
A0y, n  0,    and    An sinh n
a  y cos n
a  x,    n  1, 2, . . . ,
Y  c3 cosh (ny>a)  c4 sinh (ny>a).
Y   n22
a2  Y  0.
X  c1,   n  0,    and    X  c1 cos n
a  x,    n  1, 2, . . . .
n  an
2  n22>a2,
X  a2X  0,  X(0)  0, X(a)  0.
X  0,  X(0)  0,  X(a)  0.
X  X  0,  X(0)  0,  X(a)  0.
Y  Y  0.
X  X  0
X
X   Y
Y  
FIGURE 12.5.1
Steady-state
temperatures in a rectangular plate
Insulated
Insulated
u = 0
u = f(x)
(a, b)
x
y
*In that example the symbols y and L play the part of X and a in the current discussion.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The superposition principle yields another solution:
(7)
We are now in a position to use the last boundary condition in (3). Substituting
x  b in (7) gives
which is a half-range expansion of f in a cosine series. If we make the identiﬁcations
A0b  a02 and Ansinh (npba)  an, n  1, 2, 3, . . . , it follows from (2) and
(3) of Section 11.3 that
(8)
and
(9)
The solution of the boundary-value problem (1)-(3) consists of the series
in (7), with coefﬁcients A0 and An deﬁned in (8) and (9), respectively.
Dirichlet Problem
A boundary-value problem in which we seek a solution of
an elliptic partial differential equation such as Laplace's equation 2u  0, within a
bounded region R (in the plane or in 3-space) such that u takes on prescribed values
on the entire boundary of the region is called a Dirichlet problem. In Problem 1 in
Exercises 12.5 you are asked to show that the solution of the Dirichlet problem for a
rectangular region
is
u(x, 0)  0,  u(x, b)  f (x),   0  x  a
u(0, y)  0,  u(a, y)  0,
 0  y  b
2u
x2  2u
y2  0,  0  x  a,  0  y  b
An 
2
a sinh n
a  b
  
a
0
 f (x) cos n
a  x dx.
 An sinh n
a  b  2
a
 
a
0
 f (x) cos n
a  x dx
 A0  1
ab
 
a
0
 f (x) dx
 2A0b  2
a 
a
0
 f (x) dx
u(x, b)  f (x)  A0b  

n1An
   sinh n
a  b cos n
a  x,
u(x, y)  A0y  

n1
An sinh n
a  y cos n
a  x.
12.5
LAPLACE'S EQUATION
●
475
(10)
u(x, y)  

n1
An sinh n
a  y sin n
a  x,    where    An 
2
a sinh n
a
 b
 
a
0
 f (x) sin n
a  x dx.
In the special case when f (x)  100, a  1, b  1, the coefﬁcients An in (10) are
given by 
With the help of a CAS we plotted the surface 
deﬁned by u(x, y) over the region R: 0  x  1, 0  y  1, in Figure 12.5.2(a). You
can see in the ﬁgure that the boundary conditions are satisﬁed; especially note that
along y  1, u  100 for 0  x  1. The isotherms, or curves in the rectangular re-
gion along which the temperature u(x, y) is constant, can be obtained by using the con-
tour plotting capabilities of a CAS and are illustrated in Figure 12.5.2(b). The isotherms
can also be visualized as the curves of intersection (projected into the xy-plane) of
horizontal planes u  80, u  60, and so on, with the surface in Figure 12.5.2(a).
Notice that throughout the region the maximum temperature is u  100 and occurs on
An  200 1  (1)n
n sinh n.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

476
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
the portion of the boundary corresponding to y  1. This is no coincidence. There is a
maximum principle that states a solution u of Laplace's equation within a bounded
region R with boundary B (such as a rectangle, circle, sphere, and so on) takes on its
maximum and minimum values on B. In addition, it can be proved that u can have no
relative extrema (maxima or minima) in the interior of R. This last statement is clearly
borne out by the surface shown in Figure 12.5.2(a).
Superposition Principle
A Dirichlet problem for a rectangle can be readily
solved by separation of variables when homogeneous boundary conditions are spec-
iﬁed on two parallel boundaries. However, the method of separation of variables is
not applicable to a Dirichlet problem when the boundary conditions on all four sides
of the rectangle are nonhomogeneous. To get around this difﬁculty, we break the
problem
(11)
into two problems, each of which has homogeneous boundary conditions on parallel
boundaries, as shown:
u(x, 0)  f (x),  u(x, b)  g(x),  0  x  a
u(0, y)  F(y),   u(a, y)  G(y),  0  y  b
2u
x2  2u
y2  0,  0  x  a,  0  y  b
x
0
1
100
0
50
y
0.5
0.5
1
u(x, y)
(a) Surface
(b) Isotherms
x
y
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10
20
40
60
80
1
FIGURE 12.5.2
Surface is graph
of partial sums when f (x)  100 and 
a  b  1 in (10)
Problem 1
                  0,
u1(0, y)  0,
u1(x, 0)  f(x),
0  x  a,
0  x  a
∂2u1
----
∂x2
∂2u1
----
∂y2
Problem 2
                  0,
u2(0, y)  F(y),
u2(x, 0)  0,
0  x  a,
0  x  a
∂2u2
----
∂x2
∂2u2
----
∂y2
u1(a, y)  0,
u1(x, b)  g(x),
0  y  b
0  y  b
0  y  b
u2(x, b)  0,
u2(a, y)  G(y),
0  y  b
Suppose u1 and u2 are the solutions of Problems 1 and 2, respectively. If we
deﬁne u(x, y)  u1(x, y)  u2(x, y), it is seen that u satisﬁes all boundary conditions
in the original problem (11). For example,
and so on. Furthermore, u is a solution of Laplace's equation by Theorem 12.1.1.
In other words, by solving Problems 1 and 2 and adding their solutions, we have
solved the original problem. This additive property of solutions is known as the
superposition principle. See Figure 12.5.3.
 u(x, b)  u1(x, b)  u2(x, b)  g(x)  0  g(x),
 u(0, y)  u1(0, y)  u2(0, y)  0  F(y)  F(y),
x
y
2u = 0
Δ
F(y)
F(y)
G(y)
G(y)
f(x)
g(x)
(a, b)
x
y
2u1 = 0
Δ
0
0
f(x)
g(x)
(a, b)
x
y
2u2 =
=
+
 0
Δ
0
0
(a, b)
FIGURE 12.5.3
Solution u  Solution u1 of Problem 1  Solution u2 of Problem 2
We leave as exercises (see Problems 13 and 14 in Exercises 12.5) to show that a
solution of Problem 1 is
u1(x, y)  

n1An cosh n
a  y  Bn sinh n
a  y
 
sin n
a  x,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where
and that a solution of Problem 2 is
where
 Bn 
1
sinh n
b  a
 
2
b
 
b
0
 G(y) sin n
b  y dy  An cosh n
b  a.
 An  2
b
 
b
0
F(y) sin n
b  y dy
u2(x, y)  

n1An cosh n
b  x  Bn sinh n
b  x
 
sin n
b  y,
 Bn 
1
sinh n
a  b
 
2
a
 
a
0
g(x) sin n
a  x dx  An cosh n
a  b,
 An  2
a
 
a
0
 f (x) sin np
a x dx
12.5
LAPLACE'S EQUATION
●
477
EXERCISES 12.5
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-22.
In Problems 1-10 solve Laplace's equation (1) for a rectan-
gular plate subject to the given boundary conditions.
1. u(0, y)  0,
u(a, y)  0
u(x, 0)  0,
u(x, b)  f (x)
2. u(0, y)  0,
u(a, y)  0
3. u(0, y)  0,
u(a, y)  0
u(x, 0)  f (x),
u(x, b)  0
4.
u(x, 0)  x,
u(x, b)  0
5. u(0, y)  0,
u(1, y)  1  y
6.
7.
u(x, 0)  0,
u(x, p)  0
8. u(0, y)  0,
u(1, y)  0
9. u(0, y)  0,
u(1, y)  0
u(x, 0)  100,
u(x, 1)  200
u
yy0  u(x, 0), u(x, 1)  f (x)
u
xx0  u(0, y), u(, y)  1
u
yy0  0,
 u
yy  0
 u(0, y)  g(y), u
xx1  0
u
yy0  0, u
yy1  0
u
xx0  0, u
xxa  0
u
yy0  0, u(x, b)  f (x)
10.
u(x, 0)  0,
u(x, 1)  0
In Problems 11 and 12 solve Laplace's equation (1) for the
given semi-inﬁnite plate extending in the positive y-direction.
In each case assume that u(x, y) is bounded as 
11.
y : .
u(0, y)  10y, u
xx1  1
FIGURE 12.5.4
Plate in Problem 11
x
y
u = 0
u = 0
 0
u = f(x)
π
12.
FIGURE 12.5.5
Plate in Problem 12
y
Insulated
Insulated
x
 0
u = f(x)
π
In Problems 13 and 14 solve Laplace's equation (1) for a rec-
tangular plate subject to the given boundary conditions.
13. u(0, y)  0,
u(a, y)  0
u(x, 0)  f (x),
u(x, b)  g(x)
14. u(0, y)  F(y),
u(a, y)  G(y)
u(x, 0)  0,
u(x, b)  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

478
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
Explain why a necessary condition for a solution u to
exist is that g satisfy
This is sometimes called a compatibility condition. Do
some extra reading and explain the compatibility condi-
tion on physical grounds.
20. Consider the boundary-value problem
u(0, y)  u0 cos y,
u(1, y)  u0(1  cos 2y)
Discuss how the following answer was obtained:
Carry out your ideas.
Computer Lab Assignments
21. (a) Use the contour-plot application of your CAS to
graph the isotherms u  170, 140, 110, 80, 60, 30
for the solution of Problem 9. Use the partial sum
S5(x, y) consisting of the ﬁrst ﬁve nonzero terms of
the solution.
(b) Use the 3D-plot application of your CAS to graph
the partial sum S5(x, y).
22. Use the contour-plot application of your CAS to graph
the isotherms u  2, 1, 0.5, 0.2, 0.1, 0.05, 0, 0.05
for the solution of Problem 10. Use the partial sum
S5(x, y) consisting of the first five nonzero terms of
the solution.
u(x, y)  u0x  u0 sinh(1 x)
sinh 1
 cos y 
u0
sinh 2 sinh 2x cos 2y.
u
yyp  0.
u
yy0  0,
2u
x2  2u
y2  0,  0  x  1,  0  y  p

b
0
 g(y)dy  0.
In Problems 15 and 16 use the superposition principle to
solve Laplace's equation (1) for a square plate subject to the
given boundary conditions.
15. u(0, y)  1,
u(p, y)  1
u(x, 0)  0,
u(x, p)  1
16. u(0, y)  0,
u(2, y)  y(2  y)
Discussion Problems
17. (a) In Problem 1 suppose that a  b  p
and
f (x)  100x(p  x). Without using the solution
u(x, y), sketch, by hand, what the surface would
look like over the rectangular region deﬁned by
0  x  p, 0  y  p.
(b) What is the maximum value of the temperature u for
0  x  p, 0  y  p?
(c) Use the information in part (a) to compute the
coefﬁcients for your answer in Problem 1. Then
use the 3D-plot application of your CAS to graph
the partial sum S5(x, y) consisting of the ﬁrst
ﬁve nonzero terms of the solution in part (a) for
0  x  p, 0  y  p. Use different perspectives
and then compare with your sketch from part (a).
18. In Problem 16 what is the maximum value of the tem-
perature u for 0  x  2, 0  y  2?
19. Solve the Neumann problem for a rectangle:
0  x  a
0  y  b.
u
x
xa
 g(y),
u
x
x0
 0,
u
yyb
 0,
u
yy0  0,
2u
x2  2u
y2  0,  0  x  0,  0  y  b
u(x, 0)  0, u(x, 2) 
x,   0  x  1
2  x, 1  x  2
NONHOMOGENEOUS BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 12.3-12.5
INTRODUCTION
A boundary-value problem is said to be nonhomogeneous if either the partial
differential equation or the boundary conditions are nonhomogeneous. The method of separation of
variables that we employed in the preceding three sections may not be applicable to a nonhomoge-
neous boundary-value problem directly. However, in the ﬁrst of the two techniques examined in this
section we employ a change of variable that transforms a nonhomogeneous boundary-value problem
into a two problems: one a relatively simple BVP for an ODE and the other a homogeneous BVP for
a PDE. The latter problem is solvable by separation of variables. The second technique is basically a
frontal attack on the BVP using orthogonal series expansions.
12.6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Nonhomogeneous BVPs
When heat is generated at a rate r within a rod of
ﬁnite length, the heat equation takes on the form
(1)
Equation (1) is nonhomogeneous and is readily shown not to be separable. On the other
hand, suppose we wish to solve the homogeneous heat equation kuxx  ut when the
boundary conditions at x  0 and x  L are nonhomogeneous—say, the boundaries
are held at nonzero temperatures: u(0, t)  u0 and u(L, t)  u1. Even though the sub-
stitution u(x, t)  X(t)T(t) separates kuxx  ut, we quickly ﬁnd ourselves at an impasse
in determining eigenvalues and eigenfunctions, since no conclusion can be drawn
about X(0) and X(L) from u(0, t)  X(0)T(t)  u0 and u(L, t)  X(L)T(t)  u1.
What follows are two solution methods that are distinguished by different types
of nonhomogeneous BVPs.
Method 1
Consider a BVP involving a time-independent nonhomogeneous
equation and time-independent boundary conditions such as
(2)
where u0 and u1 are constants. By changing the dependent variable u to a new
dependent variable v by the substitution u(x, t)  v(x, t)  c(x), the problem in
(2) can be reduced to two problems:
Notice that Problem A involves an ODE that can be solved by integration, whereas
Problem B is a homogeneous BVP that is solvable by the usual separation of variables.
A solution of the original problem (2) is the sum of the solutions of Problems A and B.
The following example illustrates this ﬁrst method.
 Problem B: 
 k 2v
x2  v
t,
 v(0, t)  0, v(L, t)  0
 v(x, 0)  f (x)  (x)
 Problem A:  {k   F(x)  0,  (0)  u0,  (L)  u1
u(x, 0)  f (x),  0  x  L,
u(0, t)   u0, u(L, t)  u1, t 	 0
k 2u
x2  F(x)  u
t,  0  x  L, t 	 0
k 2u
x2  r  u
t,  0  x  L, t 	 0.
12.6
NONHOMOGENEOUS BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
479
EXAMPLE 1
Using Method 1
Suppose r is a positive constant. Solve (1) subject to
SOLUTION
Both the partial differential equation and the boundary condition at
x  1 are nonhomogeneous. If we let u(x, t)  v(x, t)  c(x), then
Substituting these results into (1) gives
(3)
Equation (3) reduces to a homogeneous equation if we demand that c satisfy
k   r  0    or        r
k.
k 2v
x2  k   r  v
t.
2u
x2  2v
x2       and    u
t  v
t.
 u(x, 0)  f (x), 0  x  1.
 u(0, t)  0,  u(1, t)  u0, t 	 0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

480
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
Integrating the last equation twice reveals that
(4)
Furthermore,
We have v(0, t)  0 and v(1, t)  0, provided that
Applying the latter two conditions to (4) gives, in turn, c2  0 and c1  r2k  u0.
Consequently,
Finally, the initial condition u(x, 0)  v(x, 0)  c(x) implies that v(x, 0)  u(x, 0) 
c(x)  f (x)  c(x). Thus to determine v(x, t), we solve the new boundary-value
problem
by separation of variables. In the usual manner we ﬁnd
where
(5)
A solution of the original problem is obtained by adding c(x) and v(x, t):
(6)
where the coefﬁcients An are deﬁned in (5).
Observe in (6) that 
as 
In the context of solving forms of
the heat equation, c is called a steady-state solution. Since 
as 
it
is called a transient solution.
Method 2
Another type of problem involves a time-dependent nonhomo-
geneous equation and homogeneous boundary conditions. Unlike Method 1, in
which u(x, t) is found by solving two separate problems, it is possible to ﬁnd the entire
solution of a problem such as
(7)
by making the assumption that time-dependent coefﬁcients un(t) and Fn(t) can be
found such that both u(x, t) and F(x, t) in (7) can be expanded in the series
(8)
u(x, t)  

n1
un(t) sin n
L  x    and    F(x, t)  

n1
Fn(t) sin n
L  x,
u(x, 0)  f (x), 0  x  L,
u(0, t)   0, u(L, t)  0, t 	 0
k 2u
x2  F(x, t)  u
t,  0  x  L, t 	 0
t : ,
v(x, t) : 0
t : .
u(x, t) : (x)
u(x, t)   r
2k x2 
r
2k  u0x  

n1
An
 ekn2 2t sin nx,
An  2
1
0
 	f (x)  r
2k x2 
r
2k  u0x
sin nx dx.
v(x, t)  

n1
An ekn2 2t sin nx,
v(x, 0)  f (x)  r
2k
 x2 
r
2k  u0x,  0  x  1
v(0, t)  0, v(1, t)  0, t 	 0
k 2v
x2  v
t, 0  x  1, t 	 0
(x)   r
2k
 x2 
r
2k  u0x.
(0)  0    and    (1)  u0.
 u(1, t)  v(1, t)   (1)  u0.
 u(0, t)  v(0, t)  (0)  0
 (x)   r
2k
 x2  c1x  c2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where sin(npxL), n  1, 2, 3, . . . , are the eigenfunctions of X  lX  0,
X(0)  0, X(L)  0 corresponding to the eigenvalues 
The lat-
ter problem would have been obtained had separation of variables been applied to the
associated homogeneous PDE in (7). In (8) observe that the assumed form for u(x, t)
already satisﬁes the boundary conditions in (7). The basic idea here is to substitute
the ﬁrst series in (8) into the nonhomogeneous PDE in (7), collect terms, and equate
the resulting series with the actual series expansion found for F(x, t).
The next example illustrates this method.
n  
n
2  n22>L2.
12.6
NONHOMOGENEOUS BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS
●
481
EXAMPLE 2
Using Method 2
Solve
SOLUTION
With k  1, L  1, the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of X  lX  0,
X(0)  0, X(1)  0 are found to be 
and sin npx, n  1, 2, 3, . . . . If we
assume that
(9)
then the formal partial derivatives of u are
(10)
Now the assumption that we can write F(x, t)  (1  x) sin t as
implies that
Hence,
(11)
Substituting the series in (10) and (11) into ut  uxx  (1  x) sin t, we get
To determine un(t), we now equate the coefﬁcients of sin npx on each side of the pre-
ceding equality:
This last equation is a linear ﬁrst-order ODE whose solution is
un(t)  2
n
 	
n22sin t  cos t
n44  1 
  Cnen2 2t,
un(t)  n22un(t)  2 sin t
n .


n1	un(t)  n22un(t)
sin nx  

n1
2 sin t
n  sin nx.
(1  x)sin t  

n1
 2
n
 sin t sin nx.
Fn(t)  2
1 
1
0
(1  x)
 sin t sin n x dx  2 sin t 
1
0
(1  x) sin nx dx  2
n 
 sin t.
(1  x)sin t  

n1
Fn(t) sin n x
2u
x2  

n1
un(t)(n22) sin nx    and    u
t  

n1
un(t) sin nx.
u(x, t)  

n1
un(t) sin nx,
n  an
2  n22
u(x, 0)  0, 0  x  1.
u(0, t)   0, u(1, t)  0, t 	 0,
2u
x2  (1  x) sin t  u
t,  0  x  1, t 	 0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

482
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
where Cn denotes the arbitrary constant. Therefore the assumed form of u(x, t)
in (9) can be written as the sum of two series:
(12)
Finally, we apply the initial condition u(x, 0)  0 to (12). By rewriting the resulting
expression as one series,
we conclude from this identity that the total coefﬁcient of sin npx must be zero, so
Hence from (12) we see that a solution of the given problem is
u(x, t)  2

   

n1
 n22sin t  cos t
n(n44  1)
 sin nx  2

   

n1
 
1
n(n44  1) en2 2t sin nx.
Cn 
2
n(n44  1).
0  

n1	
2
n(n44  1)  Cn
sin nx,
u(x, t)  

n1
 2
n
 	
n22sin t  cos t
n44  1 
sin nx  

n1
Cnen2 2t sin nx.
EXERCISES 12.6
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-22.
In Problems 1-12 use Method 1 of this section to solve the
given boundary-value problem.
In Problems 1 and 2 solve the heat equation kuxx  ut, 
0  x  1, t 	 0, subject to the given conditions.
1. u(0, t)  100,
u(1, t)  100
u(x, 0)  0
2. u(0, t)  u0,
u(1, t)  0
u(x, 0)  f (x)
In Problems 3 and 4 solve the partial differential equation (1)
subject to the given conditions.
3. u(0, t)  u0,
u(1, t)  u0
u(x, 0)  0
4. u(0, t)  u0,
u(1, t)  u1
u(x, 0)  f (x)
5. Solve the boundary-value problem
The partial differential equation is a form of the heat
equation when heat is generated within a thin rod from
radioactive decay of the material.
u(x, 0)  f (x), 0  x  1.
 u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0, t 	 0
k 2u
x2  Aex  u
t,   	 0, 0  x  1, t 	 0
6. Solve the boundary-value problem
The partial differential equation is a form of the heat
equation when heat is lost by radiation from the lat-
eral surface of a thin rod into a medium at temperature
zero.
7. Find a steady-state solution c(x) of the boundary-value
problem
8. Find a steady-state solution c(x) if the rod in Problem 7
is semi-inﬁnite extending in the positive x-direction,
radiates from its lateral surface into a medium of
temperature zero, and
u(x, 0)  f (x), x 	 0.
u(0, t)   u0,   lim
x : u(x, t)  0, t 	 0
 u(x, 0)  f (x), 0  x  1.
u(0, t)  u0, u(1, t)  0, t 	 0
k 2u
x2  h(u  u0)  u
t,  0  x  1, t 	 0
u(x, 0)  0, 0  x  .
u(0, t)   0, u(, t)  u0, t 	 0
 k 2u
x2  hu  u
t,  0  x  , t 	 0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9. When a vibrating string is subjected to an external
vertical force that varies with the horizontal distance
from the left end, the wave equation takes on the form
where A is a constant. Solve this partial differential
equation subject to
10. A string initially at rest on the x-axis is secured on the
x-axis at x  0 and x  1. If the string is allowed to fall
under its own weight for t 	 0, the displacement u(x, t)
satisﬁes
where g is the acceleration of gravity. Solve for u(x, t).
11. Find the steady-state temperature u(x, y) in the 
semi-inﬁnite plate shown in Figure 12.6.1. Assume
that the temperature is bounded as 
[Hint: Try
u(x, y)  v(x, y)  c(y).]
x : .
a2 2u
x2  g  2u
t2,  0  x  1, t 	 0,
 u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  0, 0  x  1.
 u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0, t 	 0
a2 2u
x2  Ax  2u
t2 ,
12.7
ORTHOGONAL SERIES EXPANSIONS
●
483
electrical potential. Solve the equation subject to the
conditions
In Problems 13-18 use Method 2 of this section to solve the
given boundary-value problem.
13.
u(0, t)  0,
u(p, t)  0,
t 	 0
u(x, 0)  0,
0  x  p
14.
u(x, 0)  0,
0  x  p
15.
u(0, t)  0,
u(1, t)  0,
t 	 0
u(x, 0)  x(1  x),
0  x  1
16.
u(0, t)  0,
u(p, t)  0,
t 	 0,
17.
u(0, t)  sin t,
u(1, t)  0,
t 	 0
u(x, 0)  0,
0  x  1
18.
u(0, t)  t2,
u(1, t)  1,
t 	 0
u(x, 0)  x2,
0  x  1
2u
x2  2t  3tx  u
t,  0  x  1,  t 	 0
2u
x2  u
t,  0  x  1,  t 	 0
u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  0, 0  x  p
2u
x2  cos t sin x  2u
t2,  0  x  , t 	 0
2u
x2  1  x  x cos t  u
t, 0  x  1, t 	 0
u
xx0  0, u
xx  0, t 	 0
2u
x2  xe3t  u
t,  0  x  , t 	 0
2u
x2  xe3t  u
t,  0  x  , t 	 0
 u(x, 0)  0, 0  x  .
 u(0, y)  0, u(, y)  1, y 	 0
x
y
 0
u = u1
u = 0
1
u = u0
FIGURE 12.6.1
Plate in Problem 11
12. The partial differential equation
where h 	 0 is a constant, is known as Poisson's
equation and occurs in many problems involving
2u
x2  2u
y2  h,
ORTHOGONAL SERIES EXPANSIONS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●The results in (7)-(11) of Section 11.1 form the backbone of the discussion that follows.
A review that material is recommended.
INTRODUCTION
For certain types of boundary conditions, the method of separation of variables
and the superposition principle lead to an expansion of a function in a trigonometric series that is not
a Fourier series. To solve the problems in this section, we will use the concept of orthogonal series
expansions or generalized Fourier series.
12.7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

484
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
EXAMPLE 1
Using Orthogonal Series Expansions
The temperature in a rod of unit length in which there is heat transfer from its right
boundary into a surrounding medium kept at a constant temperature zero is deter-
mined from
Solve for u(x, t).
SOLUTION
Proceeding as in Section 12.3 with u(x, t)  X(x)T(t) and using l as the
separation constant, we ﬁnd the separated equations and boundary conditions to be,
respectively,
(1)
(2)
(3)
Equation (1) and the homogeneous boundary conditions (3) make up a regular
Sturm-Liouville problem:
(4)
By analyzing the usual three cases in which l is zero, negative, or positive, we ﬁnd
that only the last case will yield nontrivial solutions. Thus with l  a2 	 0, a 	 0,
the general solution of the DE in (4) is
(5)
The ﬁrst boundary condition in (4) immediately gives c1  0. Applying the second
condition in (4) to X(x)  c2 sin ax yields
(6)
From the analysis in Example 2 of Section 11.4 we know that the last equation in
(6) has an inﬁnite number of roots. If the consecutive positive roots are denoted an,
n  1, 2, 3, . . . , then the eigenvalues of the problem are 
and the corre-
sponding eigenfunctions are X(x)  c2 sin anx, n  1, 2, 3, . . . . The solution of
the ﬁrst-order DE (2) is 
so
Now at t  0, u(x, 0)  1, 0  x  1, so
(7)
The series in (7) is not a Fourier sine series; rather, it is an expansion of u(x, 0)  1
in terms of the orthogonal functions arising from the regular Sturm-Liouville prob-
lem (4). It follows that the set of eigenfunctions {sin anx}, n  1, 2, 3, . . . , where
the a's are deﬁned by tana  ah, is orthogonal with respect to the weight
function p(x)  1 on the interval [0, 1]. By matching (7) with (7) of Section 11.1, it
1  

n1
An sin 
nx.
un  XT  Anek
n
2t sin 
nx    and    u(x, t)  

n1
Anek
n
2t sin 
nx.
T(t)  c3ekan
2  t,
n  an
2,

 cos 
  h sin 
  0    or    tan 
  
h.
X(x)  c1 cos ax  c2 sin ax.
X   X  0, X(0)  0, X(1)  hX(1)  0.
X(0)  0    and    X(1)  hX(1).
T  kT  0
X   X  0
 u(x, 0)  1, 0  x  1.
 u(0, t)  0, u
xx1  hu(1, t), h 	 0, t 	 0
 k 2u
x2  u
t,  0  x  1, t 	 0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12.7
ORTHOGONAL SERIES EXPANSIONS
●
485
follows from (8) of that section, with f(x)  1 and fn(x)  sin anx, that the coefﬁ-
cients An are given by
(8)
To evaluate the square norm of each of the eigenfunctions, we use a trigonometric
identity:
(9)
Using the double-angle formula sin 2an  2 sin an cos an and the ﬁrst equation in
(6) in the form an cos an  h sin an, we simplify (9) to
Also
Consequently, (8) becomes
Finally, a solution of the boundary-value problem is
u(x, t)  2h

n1
 
1  cos 
n

n(h  cos2
n)
 ekan
2 t sin 
nx.
An  2h(1  cos 
n)

n(h  cos2
n).

1
0
sin 
n x dx   1

n
  cos 
n x
1
0  1

n
 (1  cos 
n).

1
0
sin2
n x dx  1
2h
 (h  cos2
n).

1
0
sin2
nx dx  1
2 
1
0
(1  cos 2
x) dx  1
2
 1 
1
2
n
 sin 2
n.
An  1
0
 sin 
nx dx
1
0
 sin2
nx dx.
1
0
θ
FIGURE 12.7.1
Twisted shaft in
Example 2
EXAMPLE 2
Using Orthogonal Series Expansions
The twist angle u(x, t) of a torsionally vibrating shaft of unit length is determined from
See Figure 12.7.1. The boundary condition at x  1 is called a free-end condition.
Solve for u(x, t).
SOLUTION
Proceeding as in Section 12.4 with u(x, t)  X(x)T(t) and using l
once again as the separation constant, the separated equations and boundary condi-
tions are
(10)
(11)
(12)
A regular Sturm-Liouville problem in this case consists of equation (10) and the
homogeneous boundary conditions in (12):
(13)
X   X  0,  X(0)  0, X(1)  0.
X(0)  0   and    X(1)  0.
 T   a2T  0
 X   X  0
 (x, 0)  x, 
tt0  0, 0  x  1.
 (0, t)  0, 
xx1  0, t 	 0
 a2 2
x2  2
t2,  0  x  1, t 	 0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

486
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
As in Example 1, (13) possesses nontrivial solutions only for l  a2 	 0, a 	 0.
The boundary conditions X(0)  0 and X(1)  0 applied to the general solution
(14)
give, in turn, c1  0 and c2 cos a  0. Since the cosine function is zero at
odd multiples of p2, a  (2n  1)p2, and the eigenvalues of (13) are
The solution of the second-order
DE (11) is T(t)  c3 cos aant  c4 sin aant. The initial condition T(0)  0 gives
c4  0, so
To satisfy the remaining initial condition, we form
(15)
When t  0, we must have, for 0  x  1,
(16)
As in Example 1 the set of eigenfunctions 
n  1, 2, 3, . . . , 
is orthogonal with respect to the weight function p(x)  1 on the interval [0, 1].
Although the series in (16) looks like a Fourier sine series, it is not, because the
argument of the sine function is not an integer multiple of pxL (here L  1). The
series again is an orthogonal series expansion or generalized Fourier series. Hence
from (8) of Section 11.1 the coefﬁcients in (16) are
Carrying out the two integrations, we arrive at
The twist angle is then
(17)
We can use a CAS to plot u(x, t) deﬁned in (17) either as a three-dimensional
surface or as two-dimensional curves by holding one of the variables constant. In
Figure 12.7.2 we have plotted the surface deﬁned by u(x, t) over the rectangular
region 0  x  1, 0  t  10. The cross sections of this surface are interesting.
In Figure 12.7.3 we have plotted u as a function of time t on the interval [0, 10] using
four speciﬁed values of x and a partial sum of (17) (with a  1). As can be seen in the
four parts of Figure 12.7.3, the twist angle of each cross section of the rod oscillates
back and forth (positive and negative values of u) as time t increases. Figure 12.7.3(d)
portrays what we would intuitively expect in the absence of any damping, the end of
the rod x  1 is displaced initially 1 radian (u(1, 0)  1); when in motion, this end
oscillates indeﬁnitely between its maximum displacement of 1 radian and minimum
displacement of 1 radian. The graphs in Figure 12.7.3(a)-(c) show what appears to
be a "pausing" behavior of u at its maximum (minimum) displacement of each of the
(x, t)  8
2 
  

  
n1
 
(1)n1
(2n  1)2 cos a 
2n  1
2 t sin 
2n  1
2 x.
An 
8(1)n1
(2n  1)22.
An 
1
0
x sin 
2n  1
2 x dx

1
0
sin2 
2n  1
2 x dx
.
sin 
2n  1
2
 x,
(x, 0)  x  

n1
An sin 
2n  1
2 x.
(x, t)  

n1
An cos a 
2n  1
2 t sin 
2n  1
2 x.
n  XT  An cos a 
2n  1
2 t sin 
2n  1
2 x.
n  an
2  (2n  1)22>4, n  1, 2, 3, . . . .
X(x)  c1 cos ax  c2 sin ax
FIGURE 12.7.2
Surface is the graph of
a partial sum of (17) in Example 2
10
8
6
4
2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
-1
0
0
(x,t)
t
x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12.7
ORTHOGONAL SERIES EXPANSIONS
●
487
speciﬁed cross sections before changing direction and heading toward its minimum
(maximum). This behavior diminishes as x : 1.
2
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
(a) x = 0.2
(b) x = 0.5
(c) x = 0.8
(d) x = 1
(0.2, t)
(0.5, t)
(0.8, t)




(1, t)
4
6
8
10
t
t
2
0
0
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
4
6
8
10
2
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
4
6
8
10
t
t
2
0
0
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
4
6
8
10
FIGURE 12.7.3
Angular displacements u as a function of time at various cross sections
of the rod in Example 2
EXERCISES 12.7
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-23.
1. In Example 1 ﬁnd the temperature u(x, t) when the left
end of the rod is insulated.
2. Solve the boundary-value problem
3. Find the steady-state temperature for a rectangular plate
for which the boundary conditions are
4. Solve the boundary-value problem
 u
yy0  0,    u
yy1  hu(x, 1), h 	 0, x 	 0.
 u(0, y)  u0, lim
x : u(x, y)  0, 0  y  1
2u
x2  2u
y2  0, 0  y  1, x 	 0
u(x, 0)  0, u(x, b)  f (x), 0  x  a.
 u(0, y)  0, u
xxa  hu(a, y), 0  y  b
u(x, 0)  f (x), 0  x  1.
u(0, t)  0, u
xx1  h(u(1, t)  u0),  h 	 0,  t 	 0
k 2u
x2  u
t, 0  x  1,  t 	 0
5. Find the temperature u(x, t) in a rod of length L if the ini-
tial temperature is f(x) throughout and if the end x  0 is
kept at temperature zero and the end x  L is insulated.
6. Solve the boundary-value problem
The solution u(x, t) represents the longitudinal displace-
ment of a vibrating elastic bar that is anchored at its left
end and is subjected to a constant force of magnitude F0
at its right end. See Figure 12.4.4 in Exercises 12.4. E is
a constant called the modulus of elasticity.
7. Solve the boundary-value problem
 u(x, 0)  0, u
yy1  0, 0  x  1.
 u
xx0  0, u(1, y)  u0, 0  y  1
 2u
x2  2u
y2  0, 0  x  1, 0  y  1
 u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  0, 0  x  L.
 u(0, t)  0, E u
xxL  F0, t 	 0
 a2 2u
x2  2u
t2, 0  x  L, t 	 0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

488
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
8. The initial temperature in a rod of unit length is f (x)
throughout. There is heat transfer from both ends, x  0
and x  1, into a surrounding medium kept at a constant
temperature zero. Show that
where
.
The eigenvalues are 
where
the an
are the consecutive positive roots of
tan a  2ah(a2  h2).
9. Use Method 2 of Section 12.6 to solve the boundary-
value problem
Computer Lab Assignments
10. A vibrating cantilever beam is embedded at its left end
(x  0) and free at its right end (x  1). See Figure 12.7.4.
The transverse displacement u(x, t) of the beam is
 u(x, 0)  0, 0  x  1.
 u(0, t)  0, u
xx1  u(1, t), t 	 0
 k 2u
x2  xe2t  u
t,  0  x  1, t 	 0
n  an
2, n  1, 2, 3, . . . ,
An 
2
(
2
n  2h  h2) 
1
0
 f (x)(
n cos
nx  h sin
nx) dx
u(x, t)  

n1
 Anek
n
2 t(
n cos
nx  h sin
nx),
determined from the boundary-value problem
Use a CAS to ﬁnd approximations to the ﬁrst two positive
eigenvalues of the problem. [Hint: See Problems 11 and
12 in Exercises 12.4.]
u(x, 0)  f (x), u
t t0  g(x), 0  x  1.
2u
x2x1  0,
 3u
x3x1  0, t 	 0
u(0, t)  0,
 u
xx0  0, t 	 0
 4u
x4  2u
t2  0, 0  x  1, t 	 0
u
x
1
FIGURE 12.7.4
Vibrating cantilever beam in Problem 10
Heat and Wave Equations in Two Dimensions
Suppose the rectangular
region in Figure 12.8.1(a) is a thin plate in which the temperature u is a function of
time t and position (x, y). Then, under suitable conditions, u(x, y, t) can be shown to
satisfy the two-dimensional heat equation
(1)
On the other hand, suppose Figure 12.8.1(b) represents a rectangular frame over
which a thin ﬂexible membrane has been stretched (a rectangular drum). If the
membrane is set in motion, then its displacement u, measured from the xy-plane
k 
2u
x2  2u
y2  u
t.
11. (a) Find an equation that deﬁnes the eigenvalues when
the ends of the beam in Problem 10 are embedded
at x  0 and x  1.
(b) Use a CAS to ﬁnd approximations to the ﬁrst two
positive eigenvalues.
HIGHER-DIMENSIONAL PROBLEMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 12.3 and 12.4
INTRODUCTION
Up to now we have solved boundary-value problems involving the one-
dimensional heat and wave equations. In this section we show how to extend the method of separa-
tion of variables to problems involving the two-dimensional versions of these partial differential
equations.
12.8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12.8
HIGHER-DIMENSIONAL PROBLEMS
●
489
(transverse vibrations), is also a function of t and position (x, y). When the vibrations
are small, free, and undamped, u(x, y, t) satisﬁes the two-dimensional wave
equation
(2)
To separate variables in (1) and (2), we assume a product solution of the form
u(x, y, t)  X(x)Y(y)T(t). We note that
As we see next, with appropriate boundary conditions, boundary-value problems
involving (1) and (2) lead to the concept of Fourier series in two variables.
2u
x2  XYT,    2u
y2  XYT,    and    u
t  XYT.
a2 
2u
x2  2u
y2   2u
t2.
y
x
c
b
(b, c)
u
y
x
c
b
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 12.8.1
(a) Rectangular plate
and (b) rectangular membrane
EXAMPLE 1
Temperatures in a Plate
Find the temperature u(x, y, t) in the plate shown in Figure 12.8.1(a) if the initial
temperature is f(x, y) throughout and if the boundaries are held at temperature zero
for time t 	 0.
SOLUTION
We must solve
subject to
Substituting u(x, y, t)  X(x)Y(y)T(t), we get
(3)
Since the left-hand side of the last equation in (3) depends only on x and the right
side depends only on y and t, we must have both sides equal to a constant l:
and so
(4)
(5)
By the same reasoning, if we introduce another separation constant m in (5), then
yield
(6)
Now the homogeneous boundary conditions
Thus we have two Sturm-Liouville problems:
(7)
and
(8)
 Y  Y  0, Y(0)  0, Y(c)  0.
 X  X  0, X(0)  0, X(b)  0
u(0, y, t)  0, u(b, y, t)  0
u(x, 0, t)  0, u(x, c, t)  0   imply that   
X(0)  0, X(b)  0
Y(0)  0, Y(c)  0.
Y  Y  0   and   T  k(  )T  0.
Y
Y     and   T
kT    
Y
Y  T
kT  .
 X  X  0
 X
X   Y
Y  T
kT  
k(XYT  XYT)  XYT    or    X
X   Y
Y  T
kT .
 u(x, y, 0)  f (x, y), 0  x  b, 0  y  c.
 u(x, 0, t)  0, u(x, c, t)  0, 0  x  b,  t 	 0
 u(0, y, t)  0, u(b, y, t)  0, 0  y  c,  t 	 0
k
2u
x2  2u
y2  u
t,  0  x  b, 0  y  c, t 	 0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

490
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
The usual consideration of cases (l  0, l  a2 	 0, l  a2  0, m  0, and
so on) leads to two independent sets of eigenvalues,
The corresponding eigenfunctions are
m  m22
b2    and   n  n22
c2 .
(9)
X(x)  c2 sin m
b  x, m  1, 2, 3 . . . ,    and    Y(y)  c4 sin n
c  y, n  1, 2, 3, . . . .
After we substitute the known values of ln and mn in the ﬁrst-order DE in (6), its
general solution is found to be 
A product solution of
the two-dimensional heat equation that satisﬁes the four homogeneous boundary
conditions is then
where Amn is an arbitrary constant. Because we have two sets of eigenvalues, we are
prompted to try the superposition principle in the form of a double sum
(10)
At t  0 we must have
(11)
We can ﬁnd the coefﬁcients Amn by multiplying the double sum (11) by the product
sin(mpxb) sin(npyc) and integrating over the rectangle deﬁned by the inequali-
ties 0  x  b, 0  y  c. It follows that
(12)
Thus the solution of the BVP consists of (10) with the Amn deﬁned in (12).
The series (11) with coefficients (12) is called a sine series in two vari-
ables or a double sine series. We summarize next the cosine series in two
variables.
The double cosine series of a function f (x, y) deﬁned over a rectangular region
deﬁned by 0  x  b, 0  y  c is given by
where
For a problem leading to a double-cosine series see Problem 2 in Exercises 12.8.
 Amn  4
bc
 
c
0
b
0
f (x, y) cos m
b  x cos n
c  y dx dy.
 A0n  2
bc
 
c
0
b
0
f (x, y) cos n
c  y dx dy
 Am0  2
bc
 
c
0
b
0
f (x, y) cos m
b  x dx dy
 A00  1
bc
 
c
0
b
0
f (x, y) dx dy
  

m1
 

n1
Amn cos m
b
 x cos n
c
 y,
 f (x, y)  A00  

m1
Am0 cos m
b  x  

n1
A0n cos n
c  y
Amn  4
bc
 
c
0
b
0
 f (x, y) sin m
b  x sin n
c  y dxdy.
u(x, y, 0)  f (x, y)  

m1
 

n1
Amn sin m
b  x sin n
c  y.
u(x, y, t)  

m1
 

n1
Amnek[(m/b)2(n/c)2]t sin m
b  x sin n
c  y.
umn(x, y, t)  Amn ek[(m/b)2(n/c)2]t sin m
b  x sin n
c  y,
T(t)  c5 ek[(m/b)2(n/c)2]t.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 12 IN REVIEW
●
491
EXERCISES 12.8
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-23.
In Problems 1 and 2 solve the heat equation (1) subject to the
given conditions.
1. u(0, y, t)  0,
u(p, y, t)  0
u(x, 0, t)  0,
u(x, p, t)  0
u(x, y, 0)  u0
2.
u(x, y, 0)  xy
In Problems 3 and 4 solve the wave equation (2) subject to
the given conditions.
3. u(0, y, t)  0,
u(p, y, t)  0
u(x, 0, t)  0,
u(x, p, t)  0
u(x, y, 0)  xy(x  p)(y  p)
4. u(0, y, t)  0,
u(b, y, t)  0
u(x, 0, t)  0,
u(x, c, t)  0
u(x, y, 0)  f (x, y)
u
t t0  g(x, y)
u
t t0  0
u
yy0  0, u
yy1
 0
u
xx0  0, u
xx1  0
The steady-state temperature u(x, y, z) in the rectangular par-
allelepiped shown in Figure 12.8.2 satisﬁes Laplace's equa-
tion in three dimensions:
(13)
2u
x2  2u
y2  2u
z2  0.
y
x
z
(a, b, c)
FIGURE 12.8.2
Rectangular parallelepiped in
Problems 5 and 6
5. Solve Laplace's equation (13) if the top (z  c) of
the parallelepiped is kept at temperature f(x, y) and the
remaining sides are kept at  temperature zero.
6. Solve Laplace's equation (13) if the bottom (z  0) of
the parallelepiped is kept at temperature f (x, y) and the
remaining sides are kept at temperature zero.
CHAPTER 12 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-23.
1. Use separation of variables to ﬁnd product solutions of
.
2. Use separation of variables to ﬁnd product solutions of
.
Is it possible to choose a separation constant so that both
X and Y are oscillatory functions?
3. Find a steady-state solution c(x) of the boundary-value
problem
4. Give a physical interpretation for the boundary condi-
tions in Problem 3.
 u(x, 0)  0, 0  x  .
 u(0, t)  u0,  u
xx  u(, t)  u1, t 	 0
 k 2u
x2  u
t, 0  x  , t 	 0,
2u
x2  2u
y2  2 u
x  2 u
y  0
2u
x y  u
5. At t  0 a string of unit length is stretched on the positive
x-axis. The ends of the string x  0 and x  1 are secured
on the x-axis for t 	 0. Find the displacement u(x, t) if the
initial velocity g(x) is as given in Figure 12.R.1.
x
g(x)
h
1
4
1
2
3
4
1
FIGURE 12.R.1
Initial velocity g(x) in Problem 5
6. The partial differential equation
is a form of the wave equation when an external vertical
force proportional to the square of the horizontal distance
from the left end is applied to the string. The string is se-
cured at x  0 one unit above the x-axis and on the x-axis
at x  1 for t 	 0. Find the displacement u(x, t) if the
string starts from rest from the initial displacement f(x).
2u
x2  x2  2u
t2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

492
●
CHAPTER 12
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN RECTANGULAR COORDINATES
7. Find the steady-state temperature u(x, y) in the square
plate shown in Figure 12.R.2.
11. Solve the boundary-value problem
12. Solve the boundary-value problem
13. Find a formal series solution of the problem
14. The concentration c(x, t) of a substance that both
diffuses in a medium and is convected by the cur-
rents in the medium satisfies the partial differential
equation
k and h constants. Solve the PDE subject to
where c0 is a constant.
15. Solve the boundary-value problem
where 
are constants.
u0 and  u1
u(x, 0)  u0,   0  x  1,
u(0, t)  u0,    u
x
x1
 u(1, t)  u1,   t 	 0
2u
x2  u
t,   0  x  1,  t 	 0
 c(x, 0)  c0, 0  x  1,
 c(0, t)  0, c(1, t)  0, t 	 0
k 2c
x2  h c
x  c
t,
 u
tt0  0, 0  x  .
u(0, t)  0, u(, t)  0,  t 	 0
 2u
x2  2 u
x  2u
t2  2 u
t  u, 0  x  , t 	 0
u(x, 0)  400  sin x, 0  x  .
u(0, t)  400, u(, t)  200,
 t 	 0
2u
x2  sin x  u
t, 0  x  , t 	 0
 u(x, 0)  sin x, 0  x  .
u(0, t)  0, u(, t)  0, t 	 0
2u
x2  u
t,  0  x  ,  t 	 0
y
u = 0
u = 0
u = 0
u = 50
(   ,    )
π π
x
x
y
π
0
Insulated
Insulated
u = 50
x
−L
L
y
u = 0
u = 0
FIGURE 12.R.2
Square plate in Problem 7
FIGURE 12.R.3
Semi-inﬁnite plate in Problem 8
FIGURE 12.R.4
Inﬁnite plate in Problem 10
8. Find the steady-state temperature u(x, y) in the semi-
inﬁnite plate shown in Figure 12.R.3.
9. Solve Problem 8 if the boundaries y  0 and y  p are
held at temperature zero for all time.
10. Find the temperature u(x, t) in the inﬁnite plate of width
2L shown in Figure 12.R.4 if the initial temperature is u0
throughout. [Hint: u(x, 0)  u0, L  x  L is an even
function of x.]
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13.1 Polar Coordinates
13.2 Polar and Cylindrical Coordinates
13.3 Spherical Coordinates
Chapter 13 in Review
All the boundary-value problems that we have considered up to this point were
expressed only in terms of a rectangular coordinate system. But if we wish to ﬁnd,
say, temperatures in a circular plate, in a circular cylinder, or in a sphere, we would
naturally try to describe the problem in polar coordinates, cylindrical coordinates,
or spherical coordinates, respectively. In this chapter we shall see that by trying to
solve boundary-value problems in these latter three coordinate systems by the
method of separation of variables, the theory of Fourier-Bessel series and Fourier-
Legendre series is put to practical use.
Boundary-Value Problems 
in Other Coordinate Systems
13
493
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Laplacian in Polar Coordinates
The relationships between polar coordinates
in the plane and rectangular coordinates are given by
.
See Figure 13.1.1. The ﬁrst pair of equations transforms polar coordinates (r, u) into
rectangular coordinates (x, y); the second pair of equations enables us to transform
rectangular coordinates into polar coordinates. These equations also make it possi-
ble to convert the two-dimensional Laplacian 2u  2ux2  2uy2 into polar
coordinates. You are encouraged to work through the details of the Chain Rule and
show that
 u
y  u
r r
y  u
 
y  sin  u
r  cos 
r
 u

 u
x  u
r r
x  u
 
x  cos  u
r  sin 
r  u

x  r cos ,    y  r sin ,    and    r2  x2  y2,    tan   y
x
494
●
CHAPTER 13
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN OTHER COORDINATE SYSTEMS
(1)
(2)
 2u
y2  sin2  2u
r2  2 sin  cos 
r
 2u
r   cos2
r2  2u
 2  cos2
r
 u
r  2 sin  cos 
r2
 u
.
 2u
x2  cos2  2u
r2  2 sin  cos 
r
 2u
r   sin2
r2  2u
2  sin2
r
 u
r  2 sin  cos 
r2
 u

Adding (1) and (2) and simplifying yields the Laplacian of u in polar coordinates
.
In this section we focus only on boundary-value problems involving Laplace's
equation 2u  0 in polar coordinates:
.
(3)
Our ﬁrst example is a Dirichlet problem for a circular disk. We wish to
solve Laplace's equation (3) for the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in a
circular disk or plate of radius c when the temperature on the circumference is
u(c, u)  f (u), 0  u  2p. See Figure 13.1.2. It is assumed that the two faces of
the plate are insulated. This seemingly simple problem is unlike any we encountered
in the previous chapter.
2u
r2  1
r u
r  1
r2 2u
 2  0
2u  2u
r2  1
r u
r  1
r2 2u
 2
FIGURE 13.1.1
Polar coordinates 
of a point (x, y) are (r, u)
FIGURE 13.1.2
Dirichlet problem
for a circle
x
x
y
r
θ
( x, y ) or 
( r , ) 
θ 
y
x
u = f ( )
θ
c
y
POLAR COORDINATES
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Cauchy-Euler ODEs in Section 4.7
●Review of ODEs in Section 11.4 (page 439)
INTRODUCTION
Because only steady-state temperature problems in polar coordinates are
considered in this section, the ﬁrst thing we must do is convert the familiar Laplace's equation in
rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates.
13.1
EXAMPLE 1
Steady Temperatures in a Circular Plate
Solve Laplace's equation (3) subject to u(c, u)  f (u), 0  u  2p.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SOLUTION
Before attempting separation of variables, we note that the single
boundary condition is nonhomogeneous. In other words, there are no explicit condi-
tions in the statement of the problem that enable us to determine either the coefﬁ-
cients in the solutions of the separated ODEs or the required eigenvalues. However,
there are some implicit conditions.
First, our physical intuition leads us to expect that the temperature u(r, u) should
be continuous and therefore bounded inside the circle r  c. In addition, the temper-
ature u(r, u) should be single-valued; this means that the value of u should be the
same at a speciﬁed point in the circle regardless of the polar description of that point.
Because (r, u  2p) is an equivalent description of the point (r, u), we must have
u(r, u)  u(r, u  2p). That is, u(r, u) must be periodic in u with period 2p. If we
seek a product solution u  R(r)	(u), then 	(u) needs to be 2p-periodic.
With all this in mind we choose to write the separation constant in the separation
of variables as l:
.
The separated equations are then
(4)
(5)
We are seeking a solution of the problem
.
(6)
Although (6) is not a regular Sturm-Liouville problem, nonetheless the problem
generates eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. The latter form an orthogonal set on the
interval [0, 2p].
Of the three possible general solutions of (5),
(7)
(8)
(9)
we can dismiss (8) as inherently nonperiodic unless c1  c2  0. Similarly, solution
(7) is nonperiodic unless we deﬁne c2  0. The remaining constant solution 
	(u)  c1, c1 
 0, can be assigned any period, and so l  0 is an eigenvalue. Finally,
solution (9) will be 2p-periodic if we take a  n, where n  1, 2, . . . . The
eigenvalues of (6) are then l0  0 and ln  n2, n  1, 2, . . . . If we correspond l0  0
with n  0, the eigenfunctions of (6) are
When ln  n2, n  0, 1, 2, . . . , the solutions of the Cauchy-Euler DE (4) are
(10)
(11)
Now observe in (11) that rn  1rn. In either of the solutions (10) or (11) we must
deﬁne c4  0 to guarantee that the solution u is bounded at the center of the plate
(which is r  0). Thus product solutions un  R(r)	(u) for Laplace's equation in
polar coordinates are
u0  A0, n  0,  and  un  rn(An cos n  Bn sin n), n  1, 2, . . . ,
 R(r)  c3rn  c4rn,     n  1, 2, . . . .
 R(r)  c3  c4 ln r,
 n  0,
	()  c1,  n  0,    and    	()  c1 cos n  c2 sin n,  n  1, 2, . . . .
 	()  c1 cos   c2 sin ,    
   2  0
 	()  c1 cosh   c2 sinh ,       2  0
 	()  c1  c2, 
   0
	  	  0, 	()  	(  2)
	  	  0.
r2R  rR  R  0
r2R  rR
R
  	
	  
13.1
POLAR COORDINATES
●
495
For example, note that cos n(u  2p) 
cos(nu  2np)  cos nu.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where we have replaced c3c1 by A0 for n  0 and by An for n  1, 2, . . . ; the
combination c3c2 has been replaced by Bn. The superposition principle then gives
.
(12)
By applying the boundary condition at r  c to (12), we recognize
as an expansion of f in a full Fourier series. Consequently, we can make the
identifications
.
That is,
(13)
(14)
(15)
The solution of the problem consists of the series given in (12), where the coefﬁ-
cients A0, An, and Bn are deﬁned in (13), (14), and (15).
Observe in Example 1 that corresponding to each positive eigenvalue
ln  n2, n  1, 2, . . . , there are two different eigenfunctions—namely, cos nu and
sin nu. In this situation the eigenvalues are sometimes called double eigenvalues.
 Bn  1
cn 
2
0
 f () sin n d.
 An  1
cn 
2
0
 f () cos n d
 A0  1
2p 
2
0
 f () d
A0  a0
2 ,  cnAn  an,  and  cnBn  bn
f ()  A0  

n1
cn(An cos n  Bn sin n)
u(r, )  A0  

n1
rn(An cos n  Bn sin n)
496
●
CHAPTER 13
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN OTHER COORDINATE SYSTEMS
FIGURE 13.1.3
Semicircular plate
in Example 2
x
u = u0
c
y
u = 0 at
=
θ
π
=
θ
u = 0
0
 at
=
θ
π
EXAMPLE 2
Steady Temperatures in a Semicircular Plate
Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in the semicircular plate shown in Figure 13.1.3.
SOLUTION
The boundary-value problem is
Deﬁning u  R(r)	(u) and separating variables gives
and
(16)
(17)
The homogeneous conditions stipulated at the boundaries u  0 and u  p translate
into 	(0)  0 and 	(p)  0. These conditions together with equation (17) constitute
a regular Sturm-Liouville problem:
(18)
This familiar problem possesses eigenvalues ln  n2
and eigenfunctions 
	(u)  c2 sin nu, n  1, 2, . . . . Also, by replacing l by n2, the solution of (16) is
	  	  0,  	(0)  0, 	()  0.
 	  	  0.
 r2R  rR  R  0
r2R  rR
R
  	
	  
 u(r, 0)  0, u(r, )  0, 0  r  c.
 u(c, )  u0, 0    
2u
r2  1
r u
r  1
r2 2u
 2  0,  0    , 0  r  c
This is Example 2 in
Section 5.2 with L  p. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R(r)  c3rn  c4rn. The reasoning that was used in Example 1, namely, that we
expect a solution u of the problem to be bounded at r  0, prompts us to deﬁne
c4  0. Therefore un  R(r)	(u)  Anrn sin nu, and
The remaining boundary condition at r  c gives the sine series
Consequently,
and so
Hence the solution of the problem is given by
.
u(r, )  2u0
  

n1
 1  (1)n
n
 
r
c
n
sin n
 An  2u0
cn 1  (1)n
n
.
 Ancn  2
 

0
u0 sin n d,
 u0  

n1
 Ancn sin n.
u(r, )  

n1
 Anrn sin n.
13.1
POLAR COORDINATES
●
497
EXERCISES 13.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-23.
In Problems 1-4 ﬁnd the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in
a circular plate of radius r  1 if the temperature on the cir-
cumference is as given.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5. Solve the exterior Dirichlet problem for a circular plate of
radius c if u(c, u)  f(u), 0  u  2p. In other words,
ﬁnd the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in a plate that
coincides with the entire xy-plane in which a circular hole
of radius c has been cut out around the origin and the tem-
perature on the circumference of the hole is f(u). [Hint:
Assume that the temperature is bounded as 
.]
6. Find the steady-state temperature in the quarter-circular
plate shown in Figure 13.1.4.
r : 
u(1, )  , 0    2
u(1, )  2  2, 0    2
u(1, ) 
,
  ,
0    
    2
u(1, ) 
u0, 0    
0,      2
7. If the boundaries u  0 and u  p2 in Figure 13.1.4
are insulated, we then have, respectively,
Find the steady-state temperature if
8. Find the steady-state temperature 
in the wedge-
shaped plate shown in Figure 13.1.5. [Hint: Assume
that the temperature is bounded as 
and as
]
r : .
r : 0
u(r, u)
u(c, ) 
1,  0    >4
0, >4    >2.
u
0  0,  u
/2  0.
FIGURE 13.1.4
Quarter-circular plate in Problem 6
x
y
c
u = 0
u = f (  )
θ
u = 0
FIGURE 13.1.5
Wedge-shaped plate in Problem 8
y
x
u = 0
u = 30
y = x
9. Find the steady-state temperature 
in the plate in
the form of an annulus bounded between two concentric
u(r, u)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

498
●
CHAPTER 13
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN OTHER COORDINATE SYSTEMS
where 
is a constant, and the edges 
and 
are insulated.
16. The plate in the ﬁrst quadrant shown in Figure 13.1.8 is
one-eighth of the annular plate ring in Figure 13.1.6.
Find the steady-steady temperature u(r, u).
u  p
u  0
u0
10. If the boundary conditions for the annular plate in
Figure 13.1.6 are
where 
are constants, show that the steady-
state temperature is given by
.
[Hint: Try a solution of the form u(r, u)  v(r, u)  c(r).]
11. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in the annular
plate shown in Figure 13.1.6 if a  1, b  2, and
12. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in the semian-
nular plate shown in Figure 13.1.7 if
u(r, 0)  0, 
 u(r, )  0, a  r  b.
u(a, )  (  ),  u(b, )  0, 0    
u(1, u)  75sinu,  u(2, u)  60cosu,  0  u  2p.
u(r, )  u0 ln(r>b)  u1ln(r>a)  
ln(a>b)
u0 and u1
u(a, u)  u0,  u(b, u)  u1,  0  u  2p,
Discussion Problems
17. Consider the annular plate in Figure 13.1.6. Discuss
how the steady-state temperature 
can be found
when the boundary conditions are
18. Carry out your ideas from Problem 17 to ﬁnd the steady-
state temperature 
in the annular plate shown in
Figure 13.1.6. When the boundary conditions are
19. Consider the steady-state temperature 
in the
semiannular plate shown in Figure 13.1.7 with 
and
Show in this case the choice of 
as the separation
constant along with 
in (4) and (5) leads to
eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. Discuss how to find
Carry out your ideas.
Computer Lab Assignments
20. (a) Find the series solution for u(r, u) in Example 1 when
(b) Use a CAS or a graphing utility to plot the partial
sum S5(r, u) consisting of the first five nonzero
terms of the solution in part (a) for r  0.9,
r  0.7, r  0.5, r  0.3, and r  0.1. Superimpose
the graphs on the same coordinate axes.
(c) Approximate the temperatures u(0.9, 1.3), u(0.7, 2),
u(0.5, 3.5), u(0.3, 4), u(0.1, 5.5). Then approximate
u(0.9, 2p  1.3), u(0.7, 2p  2), u(0.5, 2p  3.5),
u(0.3, 2p  4), u(0.1, 2p  5.5).
(d) What is the temperature at the center of the circular
plate? Why is it appropriate to call this value the
average temperature in the plate? [Hint: Look at the
graphs in part (b) and look at the numbers in part (c).]
u(1, ) 
100, 0    
0,      2.
u(r, u).
  a2

u(r, 0)  0,  u(r, p)  r,  1  r  2.
u(1, u)  0,  u(2, u)  0,  0  u  p
b  2,
a  1,
u(r, u)
u(1
2, u) 100(10.5 cosu),  u(1, u)  200,  0  u  2p.
u(r, u)
u(a, u)  f(u),  u(b, u)  g(u),  0  u  2p.
u(r, u)
FIGURE 13.1.7
Semiannular plate in Problem 12
y
x
 
b
a
FIGURE 13.1.8
Plate in Problem 16
u
b
a
= 0
u = 100
u = 0
u = 0
y = x
y
x
FIGURE 13.1.6
Annular plate in Problem 9
u = 0
y
x
u = f( )
θ
b
a
circles of radius a and b shown in Figure 13.1.6.
[Hint: Proceed as in Example 1.]
13. Find the steady-state temperature 
in the semian-
nular plate shown in Figure 13.1.7 if 
and
where 
is a constant.
14. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in a semicircu-
lar plate of radius r  1 if
where 
is a constant.
15. Find the steady-state temperature 
in a semicir-
cular plate of radius 
if
u(2, ) 
u0,  0    >2
0,   >2    ,
r  2
u(r, u)
u0
u(r, 0)  0, u(r, )  u0, 1  r  2,
 u(1, )  u0, 0    
u0
 u(r, 0)  0, u(r, )  0, 1  r  2,
u(1, u)  0,  u(2, u)  u0,  0  u  p
a  1, b  2,
u(r, u)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Radial Symmetry
The two-dimensional heat and wave equations
expressed in polar coordinates are, in turn,
,
(1)
where u  u(r, u, t). To solve a boundary-value problem involving either of these equa-
tions by separation of variables, we must deﬁne u  R(r)	(u)T(t). As in Section 12.8,
this assumption leads to multiple inﬁnite series. See Problem 16 in Exercises 13.2. In
the discussion that follows we shall consider the simpler, but still important, problems
that possess radial symmetry—that is, problems in which the unknown function u is
independent of the angular coordinate u. In this case the heat and wave equations in (1)
take, respectively, the forms
,
(2)
where u  u(r, t). Vibrations described by the second equation in (2) are said to be
radial vibrations.
The ﬁrst example deals with the free undamped radial vibrations of a thin circular
membrane. We assume that the displacements are small and that the motion is such that
each point on the membrane moves in a direction perpendicular to the xy-plane (trans-
verse vibrations)—that is, the u-axis is perpendicular to the xy-plane. A physical model
to keep in mind while working through this example is a vibrating drumhead.
k
2u
r2  1
r u
r  u
t  and  a2
2u
r2  1
r u
r  2u
t2
k
2u
r2  1
r u
r  1
r2 2u
 2  u
t  and  a2
2u
r2  1
r u
r  1
r2 2u
 2  2u
t2
k
2u
x2  2u
y2  u
t  and  a2
2u
x2  2u
y2  2u
t2
13.2
POLAR AND CYLINDRICAL COORDINATES
●
499
FIGURE 13.2.1
Initial displacement
of a circular membrane in Example 1
u
y
x
u = 0 at r = c
at t = 0
u = f(r) 
POLAR AND CYLINDRICAL COORDINATES
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Parametric Bessel differential equation in Section 6.4
●Parametric modiﬁed Bessel differential equation in Section 6.4
●Forms of Fourier-Bessel series in Deﬁnition 11.5.1
INTRODUCTION
In this section we are going to consider boundary-value problems involving
forms of the heat and wave equation in polar coordinates and a form of Laplace's equation in cylin-
drical coordinates. There is a commonality throughout the examples and exercises: Each boundary-
value problem in this section possesses radial symmetry.
13.2
EXAMPLE 1
Radial Vibrations of a Circular Membrane
Find the displacement u(r, t) of a circular membrane of radius c clamped along its
circumference if its initial displacement is f(r) and its initial velocity is g(r). See
Figure 13.2.1.
SOLUTION
The boundary-value problem to be solved is
u(r, 0)  f (r), u
t t0  g(r),  0  r  c.
u(c, t)  0, t  0
a2
2u
r2  1
r u
r  2u
t2,  0  r  c, t  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Substituting u  R(r)T(t) into the partial differential equation and separating
variables gives
(3)
Note that in (3) we have returned to our usual separation constant l. The two equa-
tions obtained from (3) are
(4)
and
(5)
Because of the vibrational nature of the problem, equation (5) suggests that we use
only l  a2  0, a  0, since this choice leads to periodic functions. Also, take a
second look at equation (4); it is not a Cauchy-Euler equation but is the parametric
Bessel equation of order n  0, that is, rR  R  a2rR  0. From (13) of Section 6.4
the general solution of the last equation is
(6)
The general solution of the familiar equation (5) is
.
Now recall that 
, so the implicit assumption that the
displacement u(r, t) should be bounded at r  0 forces us to deﬁne c2  0 in (6).
Thus R  c1J0(ar).
Since the boundary condition u(c, t)  0 is equivalent to R(c)  0, we must have
c1J0(ac)  0. We rule out c1  0 (this would lead to a trivial solution of the PDE), so
consequently,
.
(7)
If xn  anc are the positive roots of (7), then an  xnc, and so the eigenvalues of the
problem are 
, and the eigenfunctions are c1J0(anr). Product solu-
tions that satisfy the partial differential equation and the boundary conditions are
,
(8)
where we have done the usual relabeling of constants. The superposition prin-
ciple gives
.
(9)
The given initial conditions determine the coefﬁcients An and Bn.
Setting t  0 in (9) and using u(r, 0)  f (r) gives
(10)
The last result is recognized as the Fourier-Bessel expansion of the function f on the in-
terval (0, c). Hence by a direct comparison of (7) and (10) with (8) and (15) of Section
11.5 we can identify the coefﬁcients An with those given in (16) of Section 11.5:
(11)
Next, we differentiate (9) with respect to t, set t  0, and use ut(r, 0)  g(r):
This is now a Fourier-Bessel expansion of the function g. By identifying the total
coefﬁcient aanBn with (16) of Section 11.5, we can write
.
(12)
Bn 
2
anc2J1
2(nc) 
c
0
rJ0(nr)g(r) dr
g(r)  

n1
anBnJ0(nr).
An 
2
c2J1
2(nc) 
c
0
 rJ0(nr) f(r) dr.
f (r)  

n1
 AnJ0(n r).
u(r, t)  

n1
(An cos ant  Bn sin ant) J0(nr)
un  R(r)T(t)  (An cos ant  Bn sin ant) J0(nr)
n  2
n  x2
n >c2
J0(c)  0
Y0(r) :  as r : 0
 T(t)  c3 cos at  c4 sin at
 R(r)  c1J0(r)  c2Y0(r).
 T   a2T  0.
 rR  R  rR  0
R  1
r R
R
 T 
a2T  .
500
●
CHAPTER 13
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN OTHER COORDINATE SYSTEMS
See Figure 6.4.2 on page 259. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Finally, the solution of the original boundary-value problem is the series in (9) with
coefﬁcients An and Bn deﬁned in (11) and (12).
Standing Waves
Analogous to (11) of Section 12.4, the product solutions (8)
13.2
POLAR AND CYLINDRICAL COORDINATES
●
501
FIGURE 13.2.2
Standing waves
n = 3
n = 1
(a)
(b)
(c)
n = 2
FIGURE 13.2.3
Frames of a CAS "movie"
are called standing waves. For n  1, 2, 3, . . . the standing waves are basically the
graph of J0(anr) with the time varying amplitude
The standing waves at different values of time are represented by the dashed
graphs in Figure 13.2.2. The zeros of each standing wave in the interval (0, c)
are the roots of J0(anr)  0 and correspond to the set of points on a standing wave
where there is no motion. The set of points is called a nodal line. If (as in
Example 1) the positive roots of J0(anc)  0 are denoted by xn, then xn  anc
implies that an  xnc, and consequently, the zeros of the standing wave are
determined from
Now, from Table 6.4.1, the ﬁrst three positive zeros of J0 are (approximately) x1  2.4,
x2  5.5, and x3  8.7. Thus for n  1 the ﬁrst positive root of
Since we are seeking zeros of the standing waves in the open interval (0, c), the last
result means that the ﬁrst standing wave has no nodal line. For n  2 the ﬁrst two
positive roots of
Thus the second standing wave has one nodal line deﬁned by r  x1cx2  2.4c5.5.
Note that r 	 0.44c  c. For n  3 a similar analysis shows that there are two nodal
lines deﬁned by r  x1cx3  2.4c8.7 and r  x2cx3  5.5c8.7. In general, the
nth standing wave has n  1 nodal lines r  x1cxn, r  x2cxn, . . . , r  xn1cxn.
Since r  constant is an equation of a circle in polar coordinates, we see in
Figure 13.2.2 that the nodal lines of a standing wave are concentric circles.
Use of Computers
It is possible to see the effect of a single drumbeat for the
model solved in Example 1 by means of the animation capabilities of a computer
algebra system. In Problem 17 in Exercises 13.2 you are asked to ﬁnd the solution
given in (9) when
Some frames of a "movie" of the vibrating drumhead are given in Figure 13.2.3.
c  1, f (r)  0,  and  g(r) 
v0, 0  r  b
0,   b  r  1.
J0
x2
c  r  0  are determined from  5.5
c  r  2.4  and  5.5
c  r  5.5.
J0 
x1
c  r  0  is  2.4
c  r  2.4  or  r  c.
J0(nr)  J0 
xn
c  r  0.
Ancos ant  Bn sin ant. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Laplacian in Cylindrical Coordinates
In Figure 13.2.4 we can see that the
relationship between the cylindrical coordinates (r, u, z) of a point in space and its
rectangular coordinates (x, y, z) is given by
It follows immediately from the derivation of the Laplacian in polar coordinates (see
Section 13.1) that the Laplacian of a function u in cylindrical coordinates is
2u  2u
r2  1
r u
r  1
r2 2u
 2  2u
z2.
x  r cos ,  y  r sin ,  z  z.
502
●
CHAPTER 13
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN OTHER COORDINATE SYSTEMS
FIGURE 13.2.4
Cylindrical
coordinates of a point (x, y, z) 
are (r, u, z).
θ 
( x, y, z ) or 
( r ,   ,  z )  
z
y
x
r
θ
z
FIGURE 13.2.5
Circular cylinder
in Example 2
z
y
x
u = 0
at r = 2
u = 0 at z = 0
u = u0 at z = 4
EXAMPLE 2
Steady Temperatures in a Circular Cylinder
Find the steady-state temperature u in the circular cylinder shown in Figure 13.2.5.
SOLUTION
The boundary conditions suggest that the temperature u has radial sym-
metry. Accordingly, u(r, z) is determined from
Using u  R(r)Z(z) and separating variables gives
(13)
and
(14)
(15)
By considering the cases l  0, l  a2, and l  a2 we determine that the
choice l  a2 leads to eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. The solution of (14) is then
Since the solution of (15) is deﬁned on the ﬁnite interval [0, 4], we write its general
solution as
As in Example 1, the assumption that the temperature u is bounded at r  0
demands that c2  0. The condition u(2, z)  0 implies that R(2)  0. This equation,
(16)
deﬁnes the positive eigenvalues 
of the problem. Finally, Z(0)  0 implies
that c3  0. Hence we have R(r)  c1J0(anr), Z(z)  c4 sinh anz, and
The remaining boundary condition at z  4 then yields the Fourier-Bessel series
u0  

n1
 An sinh 4nJ0(nr),
u(r, z)  

n1
 An sinh nzJ0(nr).
un  R(r)Z(z)  An sinh nzJ0(nr)
n  2
n
J0(2a)  0,
 Z(z)  c3 cosh az  c4 sinh az.
 R(r)  c1J0(r)  c2Y0(r).
Z   Z  0.
rR  R  lrR  0
R  1
r R
R
  Z
Z  
 u(r, 0)  0, u(r, 4)  u0, 0  r  2.
 u(2, z)  0, 0  z  4
 2u
r2  1
r u
r  2u
z2  0,  0  r  2, 0  z  4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

so in view of the deﬁning equation (16) the coefﬁcients are given by (16) of
Section 11.5,
To evaluate the last integral, we ﬁrst use the substitution t  anr, followed by
. From
we get
Thus the temperature in the cylinder is
In boundary-value problems involving a ﬁnite circular cylinder such as that in
Example 2, it is not uncommon to encounter modiﬁed Bessel functions. See Problems 7
and 8 in Exercises 13.2.
u(r, z)  u0 

n1
 
1
an sinh 4anJ1(2an) sinh anz J0(anr).
An 
u0
n sinh 4nJ1(2n).
An sinh 4an 
u0
2a2nJ 1
2(2an) 
2an
0
 d
dt [tJ1(t)] dt 
u0
anJ1(2an)
d
dt [tJ1(t)]  tJ0(t)
An sinh 4an 
2u0
22J1
2(2an) 
2
0
rJ0(anr) dr.
13.2
POLAR AND CYLINDRICAL COORDINATES
●
503
EXERCISES 13.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-24.
1. Find the displacement u(r, t) in Example 1 if f(r)  0
and the circular membrane is given an initial unit
velocity in the upward direction.
2. A circular membrane of unit radius 1 is clamped along
its circumference. Find the displacement u(r, t) if the
membrane starts from rest from the initial displacement
f (r)  1  r2, 0  r  1. [Hint: See Problem 10 in
Exercises 11.5.]
3. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, z) in the cylinder
in Example 2 if the boundary conditions are u(2, z)  0,
0  z  4, u(r, 0)  u0, u(r, 4)  0, 0  r  2.
4. If the lateral side of the cylinder in Example 2 is insu-
lated, then
.
(a) Find the steady-state temperature u(r, z) when
u(r, 4)  f (r), 0  r  2.
(b) Show that the steady-state temperature in part (a)
reduces to u(r, z)  u0z4 when f(r)  u0. [Hint:
Use (12) of Section 11.5.]
5. Find the steady-state temperature 
in the cylinder
in Figure 13.2.5 if the lateral side is kept at temperature
0, the top 
is kept at temperature 50, and the base
is insulated.
6. Find the steady-state temperature 
in the cylinder
in Figure 13.2.5 if the lateral side is kept at temperature
50 and the top 
and base 
are insulated.
z  0
z  4
u(r, z)
z  0
z  4
u(r, z)
u
rr2  0,  0  z  4
7. Find the steady-state temperatures u(r, z) in the circular
cylinder deﬁned by 
if the bound-
ary conditions are
With l as the separation constant in (13) show that the
case l  a2 in (14) and (15) leads to eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions. [Hint: Review the discussion of the modi-
ﬁed Bessel functions in Section 6.4 and Figure 6.4.4.]
8. Find the steady-state temperatures u(r, z) in the circular
cylinder deﬁned by 
if the bound-
ary conditions are
9. The temperature u(r, t) in a circular plate of radius c is
determined from the boundary-value problem
Solve for u(r, t).
10. Solve Problem 9 if the edge r  c of the plate is
insulated.
u(r, 0)  f (r), 0  r  c.
u(c, t)  0, t  0
k
2u
r2  1
r u
r  u
t,  0  r  c, t  0
 u
zz0
 0,  u
zz1  0, 0  r  1.
 u(1, z)  z, 0  z  1
0  r  1, 0  z  1
u(r, 0)  0,  u(r, 1)  0,  0  r  1.
u(1, z)  1  z, 0  z  1
0  r  1, 0  z  1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11. When there is heat transfer from the lateral side of an
inﬁnite circular cylinder of unit radius (see Figure 13.2.6)
into a surrounding medium at temperature zero, the tem-
perature u(r, t) inside the cylinder is determined from
Solve for u(r, t).
u(r, 0)  f (r), 0  r  1.
u
rr1  hu(1, t),  h  0, t  0
k
2u
r2  1
r u
r  u
t,  0  r  1, t  0
504
●
CHAPTER 13
BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN OTHER COORDINATE SYSTEMS
14. Solve the boundary-value problem
Assume that b is a constant.
15. The horizontal displacement u(x, t) of a heavy uniform
chain of length L oscillating in a vertical plane satisﬁes
the partial differential equation
See Figure 13.2.8.
(a) Using l as a separation constant, show that the or-
dinary differential equation in the spatial variable
x is xX  X  lX  0. Solve this equation by
means of the substitution x  t24.
(b) Use the result of part (a) to solve the given partial
differential equation subject to
[Hint: Assume that the oscillations at the free end 
x  0 are ﬁnite.]
u(x, 0)  f (x), u
t t0  0, 0  x  L.
u(L, t)  0, t  0
g 
x x u
x  2u
t2,  0  x  L, t  0.
u(r, 0)  0, 0  r  1.
u(1, t)  0, t  0
2u
r2  1
r u
r    u
t,  0  r  1, t  0
FIGURE 13.2.6
Inﬁnite cylinder in Problem 11
z
y
x
1
FIGURE 13.2.8
Oscillating chain in Problem 15
x
L
u
0
12. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, z) in a semi-inﬁnite
cylinder of unit radius (z  0) if there is heat transfer from
its lateral side into a surrounding medium at temperature
zero and if the temperature of the base z  0 is held at a
constant temperature u0.
13. A circular plate is a composite of two different materials
in the form of concentric circles. See Figure 13.2.7. The
temperature u(r, t) in the plate is determined from the
boundary-value problem
Solve for u(r, t). [Hint: Let u(r, t)  v(r, t)  c(r).]
u(r, 0) 
200, 0  r  1
100, 1  r  2.
u(2, t)  100, t  0
2u
r2  1
r u
r  u
t,  0  r  2, t  0
FIGURE 13.2.7
Composite circular plate in Problem 13
u = 100
y
x
2
1
16. In this problem we consider the general case—that is,
with u dependence—of the vibrating circular membrane
of radius c:
(a) Assume that u  R(r)	(u)T(t) and that the separa-
tion constants are l and n. Show that the sepa-
rated differential equations are
r2R  rR  (r2  )R  0.
T  a2T  0,   	  	  0
u
tt0  g(r, ), 0  r  c, 0    2.
u(r, , 0)  f (r, ), 0  r  c, 0    2
u(c, , t)  0, 0    2, t  0
a2
2u
r2  1
r u
r  1
r2 2u
2  2u
t2 ,  0  r  c, t  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(b) Let l  a2 and n  b2 and solve the separated
equations.
(c) Determine the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of
the problem.
(d) Use the superposition principle to determine a mul-
tiple series solution. Do not attempt to evaluate the
coefﬁcients.
Computer Lab Assignments
17. Consider an idealized drum consisting of a thin mem-
brane stretched over a circular frame of unit radius.
When such a drum is struck at its center, one hears a
sound that is frequently described as a dull thud rather
than a melodic tone. We can model a single drumbeat
using the boundary-value problem solved in Example 1.
(a) Find the solution u(r, t) given in (9) when c  1,
f (r)  0, and
(b) Show that the frequency of the standing wave 
un(r, t) is fn  aan2p, where an is the nth positive
zero of J0(x). Unlike the solution of the one-
dimensional wave equation in Section 12.4, the fre-
quencies are not integer multiples of the fundamen-
tal frequency f1. Show that f2 	 2.295f1 and 
f3 	 3.598f1. We say that the drumbeat produces
anharmonic overtones. As a result, the displace-
ment function u(r, t) is not periodic, so our ideal
drum cannot produce a sustained tone.
(c) Let a  1, 
and v0  1 in your solution in
part (a). Use a CAS to graph the ﬁfth partial sum 
S5(r, t) at the times t  0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, . . . , 5.9, 6.0
b  1
4,
g(r) 
v0, 0  r  b
0,   b  r  1.
13.3
SPHERICAL COORDINATES
●
505
for 1  r  1. Use the animation capabilities of
your CAS to produce a movie of these vibrations.
(d) For a greater challenge, use the 3D-plot application
of your CAS to make a movie of the motion of the
circular drum head that is shown in cross section in
part (c). [Hint: There are several ways of proceed-
ing. For a ﬁxed time, either graph u as a function of
x and y using 
or use the equivalent of
Mathematica's RevolutionPlot3D.]
18. (a) Consider Example 1 with a  1, c  10, g(r)  0,
and f (r)  1  r10, 0  r  10. Use a CAS as an
aid in ﬁnding the numerical values of the ﬁrst three
eigenvalues l1, l2, l3 of the boundary-value prob-
lem and the ﬁrst three coefﬁcients A1, A2, A3 of the
solution u(r, t) given in (9). Write the third partial
sum S3(r, t) of the series solution.
(b) Use a CAS to plot the graph of S3(r, t) for t  0, 4,
10, 12, 20.
19. Solve Problem 7 with boundary conditions u(c, t) 
200, u(r, 0)  0. With these imposed conditions, one
would expect intuitively that at any interior point of
the plate, u(r, t) : 200 as t : . Assume that c  10
and that the plate is cast iron so that k  0.1 (approxi-
mately). Use a CAS as an aid in ﬁnding the numerical
values of the ﬁrst ﬁve eigenvalues l1, l2, l3, l4, l5
of the boundary-value problem and the ﬁve coefﬁ-
cients A1, A2, A3, A4, A5 in the solution u(r, t). Let the
corresponding approximate solution be denoted by
S5(r, t). Plot S5(5, t) and S5(0, t) on a sufﬁciently large
time interval 0  t  T. Use the plots of S5(5, t) and
S5(0, t) to estimate the times (in seconds) for which
u(5, t) 	 100 and u(0, t) 	 100. Repeat for u(5, t) 	 200
and u(0, t) 	 200.
r  1x2  y2
Laplacian in Spherical Coordinates
As shown in Figure 13.3.1, a point in
3-space is described in terms of rectangular coordinates and in spherical coordinates.
The rectangular coordinates x, y, and z of the point are related to its spherical coordi-
nates r, u, and f through the equations
(1)
 x  r sin  cos ,  y  r sin  sin ,  z  r cos .
SPHERICAL COORDINATES
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Legendre's differential equation in Section 6.4
●Forms of Fourier-Legendre series in Section 11.5
INTRODUCTION
We conclude our examination of boundary-value problems in different coor-
dinate systems by next considering problems involving the heat, wave, and Laplace's equation in
spherical coordinates.
13.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 13.3.1
Spherical coordinates
of a point (x, y, z) are (r, u, f).
θ φ
(x, y, z) or
(r,
,
)
z
r
θ
φ
y
x
FIGURE 13.3.2
Dirichlet problem
for a sphere in Example 1
u = f( )
at r = c
θ
z
c
y
x
506
●
CHAPTER 13 BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN OTHER COORDINATE SYSTEMS
By using the equations in (1), it can be shown that the three-dimensional Laplacian
2u in the spherical coordinate system is
(2)
As you might imagine, problems involving (2) can be quite formidable. Consequently,
we shall consider only a few of the simpler problems that are independent of the
azimuthal angle f.
The next example is a Dirichlet problem for a sphere.
2u  2u
r2  2
r u
r 
1
r2sin2 2u
2  1
r2 2u
 2  cot 
r2  u
.
EXAMPLE 1
Steady Temperatures in a Sphere
Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) within the sphere shown in Figure 13.3.2.
SOLUTION
The temperature is determined from
If u  R(r)	(u), then the partial differential equation separates as
and so
(3)
(4)
After we substitute x  cos u, 0  u  p, (4) becomes
(5)
The latter equation is a form of Legendre's equation (see Problem 46 in Exercises 6.4).
Now the only solutions of (5) that are continuous and have continuous derivatives on
the closed interval [1, 1] are the Legendre polynomials Pn(x) corresponding to
l  n(n  1), n  0, 1, 2, . . . . Therefore we take the solutions of (4) to be
Furthermore, when l  n(n  1), the general solution of the Cauchy-Euler
equation (3) is
Since we again expect u(r, u) to be bounded at r  0, we deﬁne c2  0. Hence 
un  AnrnPn(cos u), and
At r  c,
Therefore Ancn are the coefﬁcients of the Fourier-Legendre series (23) of Section 11.5:
It follows that the solution is
u(r, )  

n0
2n  1
2
 

0
 f () Pn(cos ) sin  d
r
c
n
Pn(cos ).
An  2n  1
2cn
 

0
 f ()Pn(cos ) sin  d.
 f ()  

n0
 AncnPn(cos ).
 u(r, )  

n0
 AnrnPn(cos ).
R(r)  c1rn  c2r(n1).
	(u)  Pn(cos ).
(1  x2) d 2	
dx2  2x d	
dx   	  0, 1  x  1.
sin  	  cos  	   sin  	  0.
r2R  2rR  R  0
 r2R  2rR
R
  	  cot  	
	
 ,
 u(c, )  f (), 0    .
2u
r2  2
r u
r  1
r2 2u
 2  cot 
r2  u
  0,  0  r  c, 0    
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13.3
SPHERICAL COORDINATES
●
507
EXERCISES 13.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-24.
1. Solve the BVP in Example 1 if
Write out the ﬁrst four nonzero terms of the series
solution. [Hint: See Example 3 in Section 11.5.]
2. The solution u(r, u) in Example 1 of this section could
also be interpreted as the potential inside the sphere due
to a charge distribution f (u) on its surface. Find the
potential outside the sphere.
3. Find the solution of the problem in Example 1 if 
f(u)  cos u, 0  u  p. [Hint: P1(cos u)  cos u. Use
orthogonality.]
4. Find the solution of the problem in Example 1 if 
f (u)  1  cos 2u, 0  u  p. [Hint: See Problem 18
in Exercises 11.5.]
5. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) within a hol-
low sphere a  r  b if its inner surface r  a is kept
at temperature f (u) and its outer surface r  b is kept at
temperature zero. The sphere in the ﬁrst octant is shown
in Figure 13.3.3.
f () 
50,     0    >2
 0, >2    .
8. Solve Problem 6 for r  c.
9. The time-dependent temperature within a sphere of unit
radius is determined from
Solve for u(r, t). [Hint: Verify that the left-hand side of
the partial differential equation can be written as
. Let ru(r, t)  v(r, t)  c(r). Use only
functions that are bounded as 
]
10. A uniform solid sphere of radius 1 at an initial constant
temperature u0 throughout is dropped into a large container
of ﬂuid that is kept at a constant temperature u1 (u1  u0)
for all time. See Figure 13.3.4. Since there is heat transfer
across the boundary r  1, the temperature u(r, t) in the
sphere is determined from the boundary-value problem
Solve for u(r, t). [Hint: Proceed as in Problem 9.]
 u(r, 0)  u0, 0  r  1.
u
rr1  h(u(1, t)  u1), 0  h  1
2u
r2  2
r u
r  u
t, 0  r  1, t  0
r : 0.
1
r 2
r2 (ru)
u(r, 0)  0, 0  r  1.
u(1, t)  100, t  0
2u
r2  2
r u
r  u
t,  0  r  1, t  0
FIGURE 13.3.3
Hollow sphere in Problem 5
θ
u = f( )
at r = a
z
y
u = 0
at r = b
x
FIGURE 13.3.4
Container of ﬂuid in Problem 10
1
u1
6. The steady-state temperature in a hemisphere of radius
r  c is determined from
Solve for u(r, u). [Hint: Pn(0)  0 only if n is odd. Also
see Problem 20 in Exercises 11.5.]
7. Solve Problem 6 when the base of the hemisphere is
insulated; that is,
u
/2  0,  0  r  c.
>2
u(r, )  f (), 0   
u(r, >2)  0, 0  r  c
0  r  c, 0    >2
2u
r2  2
r u
r  1
r2 2u
 2  cot 
r2  u
  0,
11. Solve the boundary-value problem involving spherical
vibrations:
[Hint: Verify that the left side of the partial differential
equation is 
. Let v(r, t)  ru(r, t).]
a2 1
r 2
r2
 (ru)
u(r, 0)  f (r), u
t t0  g(r), 0  r  c.
u(c, t)  0, t  0
a2
2u
r2  2
r u
r  2u
t2,  0  r  c, t  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

508
●
CHAPTER 13 BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEMS IN OTHER COORDINATE SYSTEMS
12. A conducting sphere of radius r  c is grounded and
placed in a uniform electric ﬁeld that has intensity E in
the z-direction. The potential u(r, u) outside the sphere
is determined from the boundary-value problem
Show that
.
[Hint: Explain why 
for
all nonnegative integers except n  1. See (24) of Sec-
tion 11.5.]

0 cos  Pn(cos ) sin  d  0
u(r, )   Er cos   E c3
r2 cos 
 lim 
r : u(r, )  Ez  Er cos .
 u(c, )  0, 0    
2u
r2  2
r u
r  1
r2 2u
 2  cot 
r2  u
  0, r  c, 0    
13. In spherical coordinates, the 3-dimensional form of
Helmholtz's 
partial 
differential 
equation
is
where the Laplacian is given in (2).
Proceed as in Example 1 but use 
and the separation constant   
to
show that the radial dependence of the solution u is deﬁned
by the equation 
.
Solve this differential equation. [Hint: See Problem 54
in Exercises 6.4.]
r2 d 2R
dr 2  2r dR
dr  [k2r2  n(n  1)]R  0
n(n  1)
R(r)	(u)(f)
u(r, u, f) 
2u  k2u  0
1. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in a circular
plate of radius c if the temperature on the circumference
is given by
2. Find the steady-state temperature in the circular plate in
Problem 1 if
3. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in a semicircu-
lar plate of radius 1 if
4. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in the semicir-
cular plate in Problem 3 if u(1, u)  sin u, 0  u  p.
5. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in the plate
shown in Figure 13.R.1.
u(r, 0)  0, u(r, )  0, 0  r  1.
u(1, )  u0(  2),
 0    
u(c, ) 
1,
0,
1,
   0    >2
  >2    3>2
3>2    2.
u(c, ) 
u0, 0    
u0,     2.
7. Suppose heat is lost from the ﬂat surfaces of a very thin
circular unit disk into a surrounding medium at temper-
ature zero. If the linear law of heat transfer applies, the
heat equation assumes the form
See Figure 13.R.3. Find the temperature u(r, t) if the
edge r  1 is kept at temperature zero and if initially the
temperature of the plate is unity throughout.
2u
r2  1
r u
r  hu  u
t,  h  0, 0  r  1, t  0.
FIGURE 13.R.1
Wedge-shaped plate in Problem 5
x
y
insulated
y = x
1
2
u = 0
u = u0
u = 0
1
FIGURE 13.R.2
Inﬁnite plate in Problem 6
u = 0
x
u = f( )
θ
u = 0
1
y
FIGURE 13.R.3
Circular plate in Problem 7
1
u = 0
0
0
6. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in the inﬁnite
plate shown in Figure 13.R.2.
CHAPTER 13 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-24.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 13 IN REVIEW
●
509
8. Suppose xk is a positive zero of J0. Show that a solution
of the boundary-value problem
is u(r, t)  u0J0(xkr) cos axkt.
9. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, z) in the cylinder
in Figure 13.2.5 if the lateral side is kept at temperature
50, the top z  4 is kept at temperature 0, and the base
z  0 is insulated.
10. Solve the boundary-value problem
11. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in a sphere of
unit radius if the surface is kept at
[Hint: See Problem 22 in Exercises 11.5.]
12. Solve the boundary-value problem
[Hint: Proceed as in Problems 9 and 10 in Exercises 13.3,
but let v(r, t)  ru(r, t). See Section 12.7.]
13. The function u(x)  Y0(aa)J0(ax)  J0(aa)Y0(ax), a  0
is a solution of the parametric Bessel equation
on the interval [a, b]. If the eigenvalues 
are
deﬁned by the positive roots of the equation
show that the functions
 un(x)  Y0(na)J0(nx)  J0(na)Y0(nx)
 um(x)  Y0(ma)J0(mx)  J0(ma)Y0(mx)
Y0(a)J0(b)  J0(a)Y0(b)  0,
n  2
n
x2 d 2u
dx2  x du
dx  2x2u  0
u(r, 0)  f (r), u
t t0  g(r), 0  r  1.
u
rr1  0, t  0
2u
r2  2
r u
r  2u
t2,  0  r  1, t  0
u(1, ) 
   100,
100,   0    >2
 >2    .
u(r, 0)  f (r), u(r, 1)  g(r), 0  r  1.
u
rr1  0, 0  z  1
2u
r2  1
r u
r  2u
z2  0,  0  r  1, 0  z  1
u(r, 0)  u0J0(xkr), u
t t0  0, 0  r  1
u(1, t)  0, t  0
a2
2u
r2  1
r u
r  2u
t2,  0  r  1, t  0
are orthogonal with respect to the weight function 
p(x)  x on the interval [a, b]; that is,
[Hint: Follow the procedure on pages 441-442.]
14. Use the results of Problem 13 to solve the following
boundary-value problem for the temperature u(r, t) in an
annular plate:
15. Discuss how to solve
with the boundary conditions given in Figure 13.R.4.
Carry out your ideas and ﬁnd u(r, z). [Hint: Review (11)
of Section 12.5.]
2u
r2  1
r u
r  2u
z2  0,  0  r  c, 0  z  L
 u(r, 0)  f (r), a  r  b.
 u(a, t)  0, u(b, t)  0, t  0
2u
r2  1
r u
r  u
t,  a  r  b, t  0

b
a
xum(x)un(x) dx  0,  m 
 n.
FIGURE 13.R.4
Cylinder in Problem 15
∇2 u = 0
u
z
 = h( )
at r = c
u
r
 = f( )
at z = L
u
r
 = g( )
at z = 0
16. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, u) in the semian-
nular plate shown in Figure 13.1.7 if a  1, b  2, and
the boundary conditions are
[Hint: Use l as the separation constant in (4) and (5)
of Section 13.1.]
17. Find the steady-state temperature u(r, z) in a ﬁnite cylin-
der deﬁned by 
if the boundary
conditions are
[Hint: Use l as the separation constant in (13) of
Section 13.2.]
 u(r, 0)  0, u
zz1  0, 0  r  1.
 u(1, z)  u0, 0  z  1
0  r  1, 0  z  1
u(r, 0)  f(r),  u(r, )  0, 1  r  2.
u(1, )  0,  
 u(2, )  0,  0    
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Integral Transforms
14.1 Error Function
14.2 Laplace Transform
14.3 Fourier Integral
14.4 Fourier Transforms
Chapter 14 in Review
The method of separation of variables is a powerful but not universally applicable
method for solving boundary-value problems.  If the partial differential equation is
nonhomogeneous, if the boundary conditions are time dependent, or if the domain
of the spatial variable is an inﬁnite interval 
or a semi-inﬁnite interval
we may be able to solve problems that involve the heat and wave equations
by means of the familiar Laplace transform.  In Section 14.4 we introduce three
new integral transforms—the Fourier transforms.
(a, ),
(, )
14
510
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.1
ERROR FUNCTION
●
511
Properties and Graphs
The deﬁnitions of the error function erf(x) and
complementary error function erfc(x) are, respectively,
.
(1)
With the aid of polar coordinates it can be demonstrated that
Thus from the additive interval property of deﬁnite integrals, 
, the last
result can be written as
This shows that erf(x) and erfc(x) are related by the identity
.
(2)
The graphs of erf(x) and erfc(x) for x  0 are given in Figure 14.1.1. Note that 
erf(0)  0, erfc(0)  1 and that 
as 
. Other numerical
values of erf(x) and erfc(x) can be obtained from a CAS or tables. In tables the error
function is often referred to as the probability integral. The domain of erf(x) and of
erfc(x) is (, ). In Problem 13 in Exercises 14.1 you are asked to obtain the graph
of each function on this interval and to deduce a few additional properties.
Table 14.1.1, of Laplace transforms, will be useful in the exercises in the next
section. The proofs of these results are complicated and will not be given.
x : 
erf(x) : 1, erfc(x) : 0
erf(x)  erfc(x)  1
2
1
 
x
0
eu2 du 

x
eu2 du  1.

0  x
0  
x


0
eu2 du  1
2
    or    
2
1
 

0
eu2 du  1.
erf(x) 
2
1
 
x
0
eu2 du    and    erfc(x) 
2
1
 

x
eu2 du
TABLE 14.1.1
Laplace Transforms
f(t), a  0
f (t), a  0
1.
4.
2.
5.
3.
6.
bea1s
s 1s  b
eabeb2t erfcb1t 
a
21t  erfc
a
21t
ea1s
s
erfc
a
21t
ea1s
1s 1s  b
eabeb2t erfcb1t 
a
21t
ea1s
a
21t3 ea2/4t
ea1s
s1s
2 B
t

 ea2/4t  a erfc
a
21t
ea1s
1s
1
1t
 ea2/4t
{f (t)}  F(s)
{ f (t)}  F(s)
x
erfc(x)
y
2
1.5
1
0.5
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
erf(x)
FIGURE 14.1.1
Graphs of erf(x)
and erfc(x) for x  0
ERROR FUNCTION
REVIEW MATERIAL
●See (10) and Example 7 in Section 2.3.
INTRODUCTION
There are many functions in mathematics that are deﬁned in terms of an
integral. For example, in many traditional calculus texts the natural logarithm is deﬁned in the
following manner: 
. In earlier chapters we saw, albeit brieﬂy, the error function
erf(x), the complementary error function erfc(x), the sine integral function Si(x), the Fresnel sine
integral S(x), and the gamma function 	(a); all these functions are deﬁned by means of an integral.
Before applying the Laplace transform to boundary-value problems, we need to know a little more
about the error function and the complementary error function. In this section we examine the
graphs and a few of the more obvious properties of erf(x) and erfc(x).
ln x  x
1 dt>t, x  0
14.1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

512
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
EXERCISES 14.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-25.
1. (a) Show that 
.
(b) Use the convolution theorem and the results of
Problem 43 in Exercises 7.1 to show that
2. Use the result of Problem 1 to show that
.
3. Use the result of Problem 1 to show that
4. Use the result of Problem 2 to show that
5. Use the result of Problem 4 to show that
6. Find the inverse transform 
[Hint: Rationalize a denominator, followed by a ratio-
nalization of a numerator.]
  1
1
 1  1s  1.
 
1
1pt  et erfc(1t) 
1
 1s  1.
  {et erfc(1t)} 
1
1s (1s  1).
  {et erf(1t)} 
1
1s (s  1)
.
  {erfc(1t)}  1
s 1 
1
1s  1
  {erf(1t)} 
1
s 1s  1
.
erf(1t) 
1
1
 
t
0
 e
1
 d
7. Let C, G, R, and x be constants. Use Table 14.1.1 to show
that
8. Let a be a constant. Show that
 1
C
Cs  G (1  ex1RCsRG)  eGt/C erf
x
2 B
RC
t .
LAPLACE TRANSFORM
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Linear second-order initial-value problems (Sections 4.3 and 4.4)
●Operational properties of the Laplace Transform (Sections 7.2-7.4)
INTRODUCTION
The Laplace transform of a function f(t), t  0, is deﬁned to be
whenever the improper integral converges. This integral transforms the
function f (t) into a function F of the transform parameter s, that is, 
. Similar to
Chapter 7, where the Laplace transform was used mainly to solve linear ordinary differential
equations, in this section we use the Laplace transform to solve linear partial differential equations.
But in contrast to Chapter 7, where the Laplace transform reduced a linear ODE with constant coef-
ﬁcients to an algebraic equation, in this section we see that a linear PDE with constant coefﬁcients
is transformed into an ODE.
{ f (t)}  F(s)
{ f (t)}  
0 est f (t) dt
14.2
.
 erf 
2n  1  a
21t 
  1
sinh a 1s
s sinh 1s  	

n0
 erf 
2n  1  a
21t 
[Hint: Use the exponential deﬁnition of the hyperbolic
sine. Expand 
in a geometric series.]
9. Use the Laplace transform and Table 14.1.1 to solve the
integral equation
10. Use the third and ﬁfth entries in Table 14.1.1 to derive
the sixth entry.
11. Show that 
.
12. Show that 
.
Computer Lab Assignments
13. The functions erf(x) and erfc(x) are deﬁned for x  0.
Use a CAS to superimpose the graphs of erf(x) 
and erfc(x) on the same axes for 10  x  10. 
Do the graphs possess any symmetry? What are 
limx: erf(x) and limx: erfc(x)?

a
a
eu2 du  1 erf(a)

b
a
eu2 du  1
2  [erf(b)  erf(a)]
y(t)  1 
t
0
 y(
)
1t  
 d
.
1
(1  e21s)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.2
LAPLACE TRANSFORM
●
513
Transform of a Function of Two Variables
The boundary-value problems
that we consider in this section will involve either the one-dimensional wave and heat
equations or slight variations of these equations. These PDEs involve an unknown func-
tion of two independent variables u(x, t), where the variable t represents time t  0. The
Laplace transform of the function u(x, t) with respect to t is deﬁned by
,
where x is treated as a parameter. We continue the convention of using capital letters
to denote the Laplace transform of a function by writing
.
Transform of Partial Derivatives
The transforms of the partial derivatives
u
t and 2u
t2 follow analogously from (6) and (7) of Section 7.2:
(1)
.
(2)
Because we are transforming with respect to t, we further suppose that it is
legitimate to interchange integration and differentiation in the transform of
2u
x2:
 
2u
t2  s2U(x, s)  su(x, 0)  ut (x, 0)

u
t  sU(x, s)  u(x, 0),
{u(x, t)}  U(x, s)
{u(x, t)} 

0
est u(x, t) dt

2u
x2 

0
est 2u
x2
 dt 

0
2
x2 [est u(x, t)] dt  d 2
dx2 

0
est u(x, t) dt  d 2
dx2 {u(x, t)};
that is,
(3)
In view of (1) and (2) we see that the Laplace transform is suited to problems
with initial conditions—namely, those problems associated with the heat equation or
the wave equation.

2u
x2  d 2U
dx2.
EXAMPLE 1
Laplace Transform of a PDE
Find the Laplace transform of the wave equation 
.
SOLUTION
From (2) and (3),
becomes
or
.
(4)
The Laplace transform with respect to t of either the wave equation or the heat
equation eliminates that variable, and for the one-dimensional equations the trans-
formed equations are then ordinary differential equations in the spatial variable x. In
solving a transformed equation, we treat s as a parameter.
a2 d 2U
dx2  s2U  su(x, 0)  ut(x, 0)
a2 d 2
dx2
 {u(x, t)}  s2{u(x, t)}  su(x, 0)  ut(x, 0)
a2 2u
x2  
2u
t2
a2 2u
x2  2u
t2, t  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

514
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
EXAMPLE 2
Using the Laplace Transform to Solve a BVP
Solve
subject to
.
SOLUTION
The partial differential equation is recognized as the wave equation
with a  1. From (4) and the given initial conditions the transformed equation is
,
(5)
where 
. Since the boundary conditions are functions of t, we
must also ﬁnd their Laplace transforms:
.
(6)
The results in (6) are boundary conditions for the ordinary differential equation (5).
Since (5) is deﬁned over a ﬁnite interval, its complementary function is
.
The method of undetermined coefﬁcients yields a particular solution
.
Hence
.
But the conditions U(0, s)  0 and U(1, s)  0 yield, in turn, c1  0 and c2  0. We
conclude that
.
Therefore
.
u(x, t)  1
 sin x sin t
 u(x, t)   1
1
s2   2 sin x  1
 sin x  1

s2   2
 U(x, s) 
1
s2   2 sin x
U(x, s)  c1 cosh sx  c2 sinh sx 
1
s2   2 sin x
Up(x, s) 
1
s2   2 sin x
Uc(x, s)  c1 cosh sx  c2 sinh sx
{u(0, t)}  U(0, s)  0    and    {u(1, t)}  U(1, s)  0
U(x, s)  {u(x, t)}
d 2U
dx2  s2U  sin x
 u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  sin x, 0  x  1
u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0, t  0
2u
x2  2u
t2 ,  0  x  1,  t  0
EXAMPLE 3
Using the Laplace Transform to Solve a BVP
A very long string is initially at rest on the nonnegative x-axis. The string is secured
at x  0, and its distant right end slides down a frictionless vertical support. The
string is set in motion by letting it fall under its own weight. Find the displace-
ment u(x, t).
SOLUTION
Since the force of gravity is taken into consideration, it can be shown
that the wave equation has the form
a2 2u
x2  g  2u
t2,  x  0,  t  0.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.2
LAPLACE TRANSFORM
●
515
Here g represents the constant acceleration due to gravity. The boundary and initial
conditions are, respectively,
.
The second boundary condition, 
, indicates that the string is 
horizontal at a great distance from the left end. Now from (2) and (3),
becomes
or, in view of the initial conditions,
The transforms of the boundary conditions are
.
With the aid of undetermined coefﬁcients, the general solution of the transformed equa-
tion is found to be
.
The boundary condition 
implies that c2  0, and U(0, s)  0 gives 
c1  g
s3. Therefore
.
Now by the second translation theorem we have
or
To interpret the solution, let us suppose that t  0 is ﬁxed. For 0  x  at the
string is the shape of a parabola passing through (0, 0) and 
For x  at the
string is described by the horizontal line 
. See Figure 14.2.1.
Observe that the problem in the next example could be solved by the procedure
in Section 12.6. The Laplace transform provides an alternative solution.
u  1
2gt2
(at, 1
2gt2).
u(x, t) 
 1
2 gt2,       
0  t  x
a
 g
2a2 (2axt  x2), t  x
a.
u(x, t)   1 
g
s3 e(x/a)s  g
s3  1
2 g t  x
a
2
 t  x
a  1
2 gt2
U(x, s)  g
s3 e(x/a)s  g
s3
limx :  dU>dx  0
U(x, s)  c1e(x/a)s  c2e(x/a)s  g
s3
{u(0, t)}  U(0, s)  0    and     lim
x :  u
x  lim
x :  dU
dx  0
d 2U
dx2  s2
a2 U  g
a2s.
a2 d 2U
dx2  g
s  s2U  su(x, 0)  ut(x, 0)
a2 2u
x2  {g}  
2u
t2
limx :  u>x  0
 u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  0,  x  0
 u(0, t)  0, lim
x :  u
x  0, t  0
FIGURE 14.2.1
"Inﬁnitely long"
string falling under its own weight in
Example 3
x
(at,−  gt 2)
1
2
Vertical
support
"at ∞"
at
u
EXAMPLE 4
A Solution in Terms of erf(x)
Solve the heat equation
2u
x2  u
t,    0  x  1, t  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

subject to
SOLUTION
From (1) and (3) and the given initial condition,
becomes
(7)
The transforms of the boundary conditions are
.
(8)
Since we are concerned with a ﬁnite interval on the x-axis, we choose to write the
general solution of (7) as
.
Applying the two boundary conditions in (8) yields c1  0 and c2 
,
respectively. Thus
.
Now the inverse transform of the latter function cannot be found in most tables.
However, by writing
and using the geometric series
we ﬁnd
.
If we assume that the inverse Laplace transform can be done term by term, it follows
from entry 3 of Table 14.1.1 that
.
(9)
The solution (9) can be rewritten in terms of the error function using
erfc(x)  1  erf(x):
.
(10)
Figure 14.2.2(a), obtained with the aid of the 3D-plot application in a CAS,
shows the surface over the rectangular region 0  x  1, 0  t  6, deﬁned by the
partial sum S10(x, t) of the solution (10) with u0  100. It is apparent from the sur-
face and the accompanying two-dimensional graphs that at a ﬁxed value of x (the
curve of intersection of a plane slicing the surface perpendicular to the x-axis on
u(x, t)  u0 	

n0
 erf
2n  1  x
21t   erf
2n  1  x
21t 
  u0 	

n0
 erfc
2n  1  x
21t   erfc
2n  1  x
21t 
  u0 	

n0
  1
e(2n1x)1s
s
   1
e(2n1x)1s
s

 u(x, t)  u0 1 sinh(1sx)
s sinh1s
sinh(1sx)
s sinh1s
 	

n0
 
e(2n1x)1s
s
 e(2n1x)1s
s

1
1  e21s  	

n0
e2n1s
sinh(1sx)
s sinh1s
 e1 sx  e1sx
s(e1s  e1s)
 e(x1)1s  e(x1)1s
s(1  e21s)
U(x, s)  u0 sinh(1sx)
s sinh1s
u0 
(s sinh 1s)
U(x, s)  c1 cosh(1sx)  c2 sinh(1sx)
U(0, s)  0 and U(1, s)  u0
s
d 2U
dx2  sU  0.

2u
x2  
u
t
 u(x, 0)  0, 0  x  1.
 u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  u0, t  0
516
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.2
LAPLACE TRANSFORM
●
517
the interval [0, 1] the temperature u(x, t) increases rapidly to a constant value as time
increases. See Figures 14.2.2(b) and 14.2.2(c). For a ﬁxed time (the curve of intersec-
tion of a plane slicing the surface perpendicular to the t-axis) the temperature u(x, t)
naturally increases from 0 to 100. See Figures 14.2.2(d) and 14.2.2(e).
FIGURE 14.2.2
Graph of solution given in (10). In (b) and (c) x is held constant.
In (d) and (e) t is held constant.
(b) x  0.2
(c) x  0.7
(d) t  0.1
(e) t  4
(a)
u(0.2,t)
6
2
1
5
4
3
6
2
1
5
4
3
100
t
u(0.7,t)
100
80
60
40
20
80
60
40
20
t
u(x,0.1)
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
120
100
80
60
40
20
120
100
80
60
40
20
x
u(x,4)
x
0
0
6
4
t
2
0.2 0.4
x 0.6 0.8 10
25
50
75
100
(x, t)
u
EXERCISES 14.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-25.
1. A string is stretched along the x-axis between (0, 0) and
(L, 0). Find the displacement u(x, t) if the string starts
from rest in the initial position A sin(px
L).
2. Solve the boundary-value problem
.
3. The displacement of a semi-inﬁnite elastic string is
determined from
Solve for u(x, t).
4. Solve the boundary-value problem in Problem 3 when
.
Sketch the displacement u(x, t) for t  1.
f (t) 
sin t,
0,
0  t  1
  t  1
 u(x, 0)  0,   u
t t0  0, x  0.
u(0, t)  f (t), lim
x :  u(x, t)  0, t  0
a2 2u
x2  2u
t2,  x  0, t  0
u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  2 sin x  4 sin 3x
u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0
2u
x2  2u
t2,  0  x  1, t  0
5. In Example 3 ﬁnd the displacement u(x, t) when the left
end of the string at x  0 is given an oscillatory motion
described by f (t)  A sin vt.
6. The displacement u(x, t) of a string that is driven by an
external force is determined from
Solve for u(x, t).
7. A uniform bar is clamped at x  0 and is initially at rest.
If a constant force F0 is applied to the free end at 
x  L, the longitudinal displacement u(x, t) of a cross
section of the bar is determined from
Solve for u(x, t). [Hint: Expand 1
(1  e2sL/a) in a
geometric series.]
8. A uniform semi-inﬁnite elastic beam moving along the
x-axis with a constant velocity v0 is brought to a
u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  0, 0  x  L.
u(0, t)  0, E u
xxL  F0, E a constant, t  0
a2 2u
x2  2u
t2,  0  x  L, t  0
 u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  0, 0  x  1.
 u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0, t  0
2u
x2  sin x sin t  2u
t2,  0  x  1, t  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

stop by hitting a wall at time t  0. See Figure 14.2.3.
The longitudinal displacement u(x, t) is determined
from
Solve for u(x, t).
u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  v0, x  0.
u(0, t)  0, 
lim
x :  u
x  0, t  0
a2 2u
x2  2u
t2,  x  0, t  0
518
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
16.
,
17.
,
18.
,
19. Solve the boundary-value problem
20. Show that a solution of the boundary-value problem
where r is a constant, is given by
21. A rod of length L is held at a constant temperature
u0 at its ends x  0 and x  L. If the rod's initial
temperature is u0  u0 sin(xp
L), solve the heat
equation uxx  ut, 0  x  L, t  0 for the tempera-
ture u(x, t).
22. If there is a heat transfer from the lateral surface of
a thin wire of length L into a medium at constant
temperature um, then the heat equation takes on the
form
,
where h is a constant. Find the temperature u(x, t) if the
initial temperature is a constant u0 throughout and
the ends x  0 and x  L are insulated.
23. A rod of unit length is insulated at x  0 and is kept at
temperature zero at x  1. If the initial temperature of
the rod is a constant u0, solve kuxx  ut, 0  x  1,
t  0 for the temperature u(x, t). [Hint: Expand
in a geometric series.]
24. An inﬁnite porous slab of unit width is immersed
in a solution of constant concentration c0. A dissolved
1
(1  e21s/k)
k 2u
x2  h(u  um)  u
t,  0  x  L, t  0
u(x, t)  rt  r 
t
0
 erfc
x
21k
 d
.
 u(x, 0)  0, x  0,
 u(0, t)  0, 
lim
x :  u
x  0, t  0
 k 2u
x2  r  u
t, x  0, t  0
u(x, 0)  0,   x  1.
u
xx1  100  u(1, t), 
lim
x :  u(x, t)  0, t  0
2u
x2  u
t,   x  1, t  0
u(x, 0)  100
u(0, t) 
20,
0,
0  t  1
t  1, lim
x :  u(x, t)  100
 u(x, 0)  60
u(0, t)  60  40(t  2), lim
x :  u(x, t)  60
 u(x, 0)  0
u
xx0  f (t), lim
x :  u(x, t)  0
x
Wall
x = 0
Beam
v0
FIGURE 14.2.3
Moving elastic beam in Problem 8
9. Solve the boundary-value problem
.
10. Solve the boundary-value problem
In Problems 11-18 use the Laplace transform to solve the
heat equation uxx  ut, x  0, t  0, subject to the given
conditions.
11.
,
12.
,
13.
,
14.
,
15.
,
[Hint: Use the convolution theorem.]
 u(x, 0)  0
u(0, t)  f (t), lim
x :  u(x, t)  0
 u(x, 0)  0
u
xx0  u(0, t)  50, lim
x :  u(x, t)  0
 u(x, 0)  u0
u
xx0  u(0, t), lim
x :  u(x, t)  u0
 u(x, 0)  u1x
 u(0, t)  u0, lim
x :  u(x, t)
x
 u1
 u(x, 0)  u1
 u(0, t)  u0, lim
x :  u(x, t)  u1
u(x, 0)  ex, u
t t0  0, x  0.
u(0, t)  1, lim
x :  u(x, t)  0, t  0
2u
x2  2u
t2, x  0, t  0
u(x, 0)  xex, u
t t0  0, x  0
u(0, t)  0,  lim
x :  u(x, t)  0, t  0
2u
x2  2u
t2,  x  0, t  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.2
LAPLACE TRANSFORM
●
519
substance in the solution diffuses into the slab. The con-
centration c(x, t) in the slab is determined from
where D is a constant. Solve for c(x, t).
25. A very long telephone transmission line is initially at a
constant potential u0. If the line is grounded at x  0 and
insulated at the distant right end, then the potential u(x, t)
at a point x along the line at time t is determined from
where R, C, and G are constants known as resistance,
capacitance, and conductance, respectively. Solve for
u(x, t). [Hint: See Problem 7 in Exercises 14.1.]
26. Show that a solution of the boundary-value problem
is
27. In Problem 9 of Exercises 13.3 you were asked to ﬁnd
the time-dependent temperatures 
within a unit
sphere. The temperatures outside the sphere are de-
scribed by the boundary-value problem
Use the Laplace transform to ﬁnd 
[Hint: After
transforming the PDE, let 
28. Starting at t  0, a concentrated load of magnitude F0
moves with a constant velocity v0 along a semi-
infinite string. In this case the wave equation becomes
,
 a2 2u
x2  2u
t2  F0t  x
v0
v(r, t)  ru(r, t).]
u(r, t).
u(r, 0)  0,   r  1.
u(1, t)  100,  lim
r : u(r, t)  0,   t  0
2u
r2  2
r u
r  u
t,  r  1,  t  0
u(r, t)
u(x, t)  u0x
21 
t
0
 eh
x2/4

 3/2
 d
.
u(x, 0)  0,  x  0
u(0, t)  u0, lim
x :  u(x, t)  0, t  0
2u
x2  hu  u
t,  x  0, t  0, h constant
u(x, 0)  u0, x  0,
u(0, t)  0,  lim
x :  u
x  0,  t  0
2u
x2  RC u
t  RGu  0,  x  0, t  0
c(x, 0)  0, 0  x  1,
c(0, t)  c0, c(1, t)  c0,  t  0
D 2c
x2  c
t,  0  x  1,  t  0
where d(t  x
v0) is the Dirac delta function. Solve the
above PDE subject to
(a) when v0  a
(b) when v0  a.
Computer Lab Assignments
29. (a) The temperature in a semi-inﬁnite solid is modeled
by the boundary-value problem
Solve for u(x, t). Use the solution to determine ana-
lytically the value of 
.
(b) Use a CAS to graph u(x, t) over the rectangular
region deﬁned by 0  x  10, 0  t  15. Assume
that u0  100 and k  1. Indicate the two boundary
conditions and initial condition on your graph. Use
2D and 3D plots of u(x, t) to verify your answer to
part (a).
30. (a) In Problem 29 if there is a constant ﬂux of heat
into the solid at its left-hand boundary, then the
boundary condition is 
.
Solve for u(x, t). Use the solution to determine ana-
lytically the value of 
.
(b) Use a CAS to graph u(x, t) over the rectangular
region deﬁned by 0  x  10, 0  t  15. Assume
that u0  100 and k  1. Use 2D and 3D plots of
u(x, t) to verify your answer to part (a).
31. Humans gather most of our information on the outside
world through sight and sound. But many creatures use
chemical signals as their primary means of communica-
tion; for example, honeybees, when alarmed, emit a
substance and fan their wings feverishly to relay the warn-
ing signal to the bees that attend to the queen. These mo-
lecular messages between members of the same species
are called pheromones. The signals may be carried by
moving air or water or by a diffusion process in which the
random movement of gas molecules transports the chem-
ical away from its source. Figure 14.2.4 shows an ant
emitting an alarm chemical into the still air of a tunnel. If
c(x, t) denotes the concentration of the chemical x cen-
timeters from the source at time t, then c(x, t) satisﬁes
k 2c
x2  c
t,  x  0, t  0
limt :  u(x, t), x  0
u
xx0  A, A  0, t  0
limt :  u(x, t), x  0
u(x, 0)  0,  x  0.
u(0, t)  u0, lim
x :  u(x, t)  0, t  0
k 2u
x2  u
t,  x  0, t  0
 u(x, 0)  0, u
t t0  0, x  0
 u(0, t)  0, lim
x :  u(x, t)  0, t  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and k
is a positive constant. The emission of
pheromones as a discrete pulse gives rise to a boundary
condition of the form
,
where d(t) is the Dirac delta function.
(a) Solve the boundary-value problem if it is further
known that
c(x, 0)  0,
x  0
and
t  0.
limx :  c(x, t)  0,
c
xx0
 A(t)
520
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
FIGURE 14.2.4
Ant responding to chemical signal
in Problem 31
x
0
.
(1)
f (x)  1
2p 
p
p
  f (t) dt  1
p 	

n1
p
p
  f (t) cos n
p  t dt cos n
p  x 
p
p
  f (t) sin n
p  t dt  sin n
p  x
If we let an  np
p, a  an1  an  p
p, then (1) becomes
.
(2)
f (x)  1
2 
p
p
 f (t) dt   1
 	

n1
p
p
  f (t) cos nt dt cos nx 
p
p
  f (t) sin n
  t dt  sin nx 
We now expand the interval (p, p) by letting 
. Since 
implies that
, the limit of (2) has the form 
which is suggestive
of the deﬁnition of the integral 
. Thus if 
exists, the limit of the
ﬁrst term in (2) is zero, and the limit of the sum becomes
.
(3)
The result given in (3) is called the Fourier integral of f on (, ). As the follow-
ing summary shows, the basic structure of the Fourier integral is reminiscent of that
of a Fourier series.
f (x)  1
 

0
 


 f (t) cos t dt cos x 


 f (t) sin t dt sin x d

  f(t) dt

0F() d
lim : 0 n1
  F(an) ,
 : 0
p : 
p : 
(b) Use a CAS to graph the solution in part (a) for
x  0 at the ﬁxed times t  0.1, t  0.5, t  1,
t  2, and t  5.
(c) For any ﬁxed time t, show that 
.
Thus Ak represents the total amount of chemical
discharged.

0 c(x, t) dx  Ak
FOURIER INTEGRAL
REVIEW MATERIAL
●The Fourier integral has different forms that are analogous to the four forms of Fourier series
given in Deﬁnitions 11.2.1 and 11.3.1 and Problem 23 in Exercises 11.2. A review of these
various forms is recommended.
INTRODUCTION
In Chapters 11-13 we used Fourier series to represent a function f deﬁned on
a ﬁnite interval such as (p, p) or (0, L). When f and f are piecewise continuous on such an inter-
val, a Fourier series represents the function on the interval and converges to the periodic extension
of f outside the interval. In this way we are justiﬁed in saying that Fourier series are associated only
with periodic functions. We shall now derive, in a nonrigorous fashion, a means of representing
certain kinds of nonperiodic functions that are deﬁned on either an inﬁnite interval (, ) or a
semi-inﬁnite interval (0, ).
14.3
Fourier Series to Fourier Integral
Suppose a function f is deﬁned on the in-
terval (p, p). If we use the integral deﬁnitions of the coefﬁcients (9), (10), and (11)
of Section 11.2 in (8) of that section, then the Fourier series of f on the interval is
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.3
FOURIER INTEGRAL
●
521
FIGURE 14.3.1
Piecewise-continuous
function deﬁned on (, ) in Example 1
y
x
2
1
*This means that the integral 
converges.

  f(x) dx
DEFINITION 14.3.1
Fourier Integral
The Fourier integral of a function f deﬁned on the interval (, ) is
given by
,
(4)
where
(5)
.
(6)
B() 


 f (x) sin x dx
A() 


 f (x) cos x dx
f (x)  1
 

0
[ A() cos x  B() sin x] d
Convergence of a Fourier Integral
Sufﬁcient conditions under which a
Fourier integral converges to f (x) are similar to, but slightly more restrictive than, the
conditions for a Fourier series.
THEOREM 14.3.1
Conditions for Convergence
Let f and f be piecewise continuous on every ﬁnite interval and let f be absolutely
integrable on (, ).* Then the Fourier integral of f on the interval converges to
f(x) at a point of continuity. At a point of discontinuity the Fourier integral will
converge to the average
,
where f(x) and f(x) denote the limit of f at x from the right and from the left,
respectively.
f (x)  f (x)
2
EXAMPLE 1
Fourier Integral Representation
Find the Fourier integral representation of the function
SOLUTION
The function, whose graph is shown in Figure 14.3.1, satisﬁes the
hypotheses of Theorem 14.3.1. Hence from (5) and (6) we have at once
 B()  


 f (x) sin x dx 
2
0
 sin x dx  1  cos 2

.
  
2
0
 cos x dx  sin 2

  
0

 f (x) cos x dx 
2
0
 f (x) cos x dx 

2
 f (x) cos x dx 
 A() 


  f (x) cos x dx
f (x)  
0,   x  0
1, 0  x  2
0,   x  2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Substituting these coefﬁcients into (4) then gives
When we use trigonometric identities, the last integral simpliﬁes to
.
(7)
The Fourier integral can be used to evaluate integrals. For example, it follows
from Theorem 14.3.1 that (7) converges to f (1)  1; that is,
The latter result is worthy of special note, since it cannot be obtained in the "usual"
manner; the integrand (sin x)
x does not possess an antiderivative that is an elemen-
tary function.
Cosine and Sine Integrals
When f is an even function on the interval (, ),
then the product f (x) cos ax is also an even function, whereas f (x) sin ax is an odd
function. As a consequence of property (g) of Theorem 11.3.1, B(a)  0, and so
(4) becomes
Here we have also used property ( f ) of Theorem 11.3.1 to write
Similarly, when f is an odd function on (, ), products f(x) cos ax and f(x) sin ax
are odd and even functions, respectively. Therefore A(a)  0, and
We summarize these results in the following deﬁnition.
f (x)  2
 

0 

0
f (t) sin t dt sin x d.



 f (t) cos t dt  2 

0
 f (t) cos t dt.
f (x)  2
 

0 

0
f (t) cos t dt cos x d.
2
 

0
 
sin 
  d  1    and so    

0
 sin 
  d  
2.
f (x)  2
 

0
  sin  cos (x  1)

 d
f (x)  1
 

0
  
sin 2
  cos x 
1  cos 2

 sin x d.
522
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
DEFINITION 14.3.2
Fourier Cosine and Sine Integrals
(i)
The Fourier integral of an even function f deﬁned on the interval (, )
is the cosine integral
(8)
where
(9)
(ii) The Fourier integral of an odd function f deﬁned on the interval (, )
is the sine integral
(10)
where
(11)
 B() 

0
f (x) sin x dx.
 f (x)  2
 

0
 B() sin x d,
 A() 

0
f (x) cos x dx.
 f (x)  2
 

0
 A() cos x d,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.3
FOURIER INTEGRAL
●
523
FIGURE 14.3.3
Function deﬁned
on (0, ) in Example 3
FIGURE 14.3.4
(a) is the even
extension of f; (b) is the odd extension 
of f
x
y
1
(a) cosine integral
(b) sine integral
x
y
x
y
FIGURE 14.3.2
Piecewise-continuous
even function deﬁned on (, ) in
Example 2
y
x
a
−a
1
EXAMPLE 2
Cosine Integral Representation
Find the Fourier integral representation of the function
SOLUTION
It is apparent from Figure 14.3.2 that f is an even function. Hence we
represent f by the Fourier cosine integral (8). From (9) we obtain
so
(12)
The integrals (8) and (10) can be used when f is neither odd nor even and deﬁned
only on the half-line (0, ). In this case (8) represents f on the interval (0, ) and its
even (but not periodic) extension to (, 0), whereas (10) represents f on (0, ) and
its odd extension to the interval (, 0). The next example illustrates this concept.
f (x)  2
 

0
 
sin a cos x

 d.
 
a
0
 cos x dx  sin a

,
 A() 

0
 f (x) cos x dx 
a
0
 f (x) cos x dx 

a
f (x) cos x dx 
f(x) 
1,  x   a
0,  x   a.
EXAMPLE 3
Cosine and Sine Integral Representations
Represent f (x)  ex, x  0
(a) by a cosine integral
(b) by a sine integral.
SOLUTION
The graph of the function is given in Figure 14.3.3.
(a) Using integration by parts, we ﬁnd
Therefore the cosine integral of f is
(13)
(b) Similarly, we have
The sine integral of f is then
(14)
Figure 14.3.4 shows the graphs of the functions and their extensions represented by
the two integrals in (13) and (14).
Use of Computers
We can examine the convergence of a Fourier integral in a
manner similar to graphing partial sums of a Fourier series. To illustrate, let's use part
(b) of Example 3. Then by deﬁnition of an improper integral the Fourier sine integral
representation (14) of f (x)  ex, x  0, can be written as 
,
where x is considered a parameter in
.
(15)
Fb(x)  2
 
b
0
  sin x
1  2  d
f (x)  limb :   Fb(x)
f (x)  2
 

0
 
 sin x
1  2  d.
B() 

0
ex sin x dx 

1  2.
f (x)  2
 

0
 
cos x
1  2 d.
A() 

0
ex cos x dx 
1
1  2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now the idea is this: Since the Fourier sine integral (14) converges, for a speciﬁed
value of b  0 the graph of the partial integral Fb(x) in (15) will be an
approximation to the graph of f in Figure 14.3.4(b). The graphs of Fb(x) for b  5
and b  20 given in Figure 14.3.5 were obtained by using Mathematica and its
NIntegrate application. See Problem 21 in Exercises 14.3.
524
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
1.5
y
x
1
0.5
0
_0.5
_1
_3
_2
_1
0
1
2
3
1.5
y
x
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
_3
_2
_1
0
1
2
3
(a)
(b)
F5(x)
F20(x)
FIGURE 14.3.5
Convergence of Fb(x) to f(x) in Example 3(b) as b : 
Complex Form
The Fourier integral (4) also possesses an equivalent complex
form, or exponential form, that is analogous to the complex form of a Fourier series
(see Problem 23 in Exercises 11.2). If (5) and (6) are substituted into (4), then
(16)
(17)
(18)
We note that (16) follows from the fact that the integrand is an even function of a. In
(17) we have simply added zero to the integrand;
because the integrand is an odd function of a. The integral in (18) can be expressed as
(19)
where
(20)
This latter form of the Fourier integral will be put to use in the next section when
we return to the solution of boundary-value problems.
C() 


 f (x)eix dx.
f (x)  1
2 


C()eix d,
i 


 


 f (t) sin (t  x) dt d  0
  1
2 


 


 f (t)eit dteix  d.
  1
2 


 


 f (t) ei(tx) dt d
  1
2 


 


 f (t)[cos (t  x)  i sin (t  x)] dt d
  1
2 


 


 f (t) cos (t  x) dt d
  1
 

0


 f (t) cos (t  x) dt d
 f (x)  1
 

0


 f (t) [cos t cos x  sin t sin x] dt d
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.3
FOURIER INTEGRAL
●
525
In Problems 1-6 ﬁnd the Fourier integral representation of
the given function.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
In Problems 7-12 represent the given function by an appro-
priate cosine or sine integral.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11. f (x)  e| x | sin x
12. f (x)  xe| x |
In Problems 13-16 ﬁnd the cosine and sine integral repre-
sentations of the given function.
13. f (x)  ekx,
k  0,
x  0
14. f (x)  ex  e3x,
x  0
15. f (x)  xe2x,
x  0
16. f (x)  ex cos x,
x  0
f (x) 
x,
0,
 x   
 x   
f (x) 
 x ,
0,
 x   
 x   
f (x) 
0,
,
0,
 x   1
1   x   2
 x   2
f (x) 
  0,     x  1
5, 1  x  0
  5,  0  x  1
  0,    x  1
f (x) 
ex,  x   1
0,   x   1
f (x) 
0,   x  0
ex, x  0
f (x) 
0,       x  0
sin x, 0  x  
0,       x  
f (x) 
0,    x  0
x, 0  x  3
0,     x  3
f (x) 
0,     x  
4,   x  2
0,     x  2
f (x) 
  0,     x  1
1, 1  x  0
  2,  0  x  1
  0,    x  1
In Problems 17 and 18 solve the given integral equation for
the function f.
17.
18.
19. (a) Use (7) to show that
[Hint: a is a dummy variable of integration.]
(b) Show in general that for k  0,
20. Use the complex form (19) to ﬁnd the Fourier integral
representation of f(x)  e|x|. Show that the result is the
same as that obtained from (8).
Computer Lab Assignments
21. While the integral (12) can be graphed in the same man-
ner discussed on pages 523-524 to obtain Figure 14.3.5,
it can also be expressed in terms of a special function
that is built into a CAS.
(a) Use a trigonometric identity to show that an
alternative form of the Fourier integral repre-
sentation (12) of the function f in Example 2
(with a  1) is
.
(b) As a consequence of part (a), 
where
.
Show that the last integral can be written as
,
where Si(x) is the sine integral function. See
Problem 55 in Exercises 2.3.
(c) Use a CAS and  the sine integral form of Fb(x) in
part (b) to obtain the graphs on the interval [3, 3]
for b  4, 6, and 15. Then graph Fb(x) for larger
values of b  0.
Fb(x)  1

 [Si(b(x  1))  Si(b(x  1))]
Fb(x)  1
 
b
0
 sin (x  1)  sin (x  1)

  d
f (x)  lim
b :  Fb(x),
f (x)  1
 

0
 sin (x  1)  sin (x  1)

  d


0
 sin kx
x
 dx  
2.


0
 sin 2x
x
 dx  
2.


0
f (x) sin x dx 
1,
0,
0    1
  1


0
f (x) cos x dx  e
EXERCISES 14.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-25.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Transform Pairs
The Laplace transform F(s) of a function f(t) is deﬁned by
an integral, but up to now we have been using the symbolic representation
to denote the inverse Laplace transform of F(s). Actually, the
inverse Laplace transform is also an integral transform.
If 
, then the inverse Laplace transform is
.
The last integral is called a contour integral; its evaluation requires the use of com-
plex variables and is beyond the scope of this text. The point here is this: Integral
transforms appear in transform pairs. If f (x) is transformed into F(a) by an
integral transform
,
then the function f can be recovered by another integral transform
,
called the inverse transform. The functions K and H in the integrands are called
the kernels of their respective transforms. We identify K(s, t)  est as the kernel
of the Laplace transform and H(s, t)  est
2pi as the kernel of the inverse Laplace
transform.
Fourier Transform Pairs
The Fourier integral is the source of three new in-
tegral transforms. From (20)-(19), (11)-(10), and (9)-(8) of Section 14.3 we are
prompted to deﬁne the following Fourier transform pairs.
f (x) 
d
c
F()H(, x) d
F() 
b
a
  f (x)K(, x) dx
 1{F(s)}  1
2i 
i
i  estF(s) ds  f (t)
{f (t)}  
0  est  f (t) dt  F(s)
f (t)   1{F(s)}
526
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
FOURIER TRANSFORMS
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Deﬁnition 14.3.2
●Equations (19) and (20) in Section 14.3
INTRODUCTION
So far in this text we have studied and used only one integral transform: the
Laplace transform. But in Section 14.3 we saw that the Fourier integral had three alternative forms:
the cosine integral, the sine integral, and the complex or exponential form. In the present section we
shall take these three forms of the Fourier integral and develop them into three new integral trans-
forms, not surprisingly called Fourier transforms. In addition, we shall expand on the concept of
a transform pair, that is, an integral transform and its inverse. We shall also see that the inverse of an
integral transform is itself another integral transform.
14.4
DEFINITION 14.4.1
Fourier Transform Pairs
(i)
Fourier 
(1)
transform:
Inverse Fourier 
(2)
transform:
 1{F()}  1
2 


F()eix d  f (x)
 { f (x)} 


 f (x)eix dx  F()
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.4
FOURIER TRANSFORMS
●
527
(ii) Fourier sine 
(3)
transform:
Inverse Fourier 
(4)
sine transform:
(iii) Fourier cosine
(5)
transform:
Inverse Fourier 
(6)
cosine transform:
 1
c {F()}  2
 

0
F() cos x da  f(x)
c{f (x)} 

0
f(x) cos x dx  F()
 1
s {F()}  2
 

0
F() sin x da  f (x)
s{ f (x)} 

0
 f (x) sin x dx  F()
Existence
The conditions under which (1), (3), and (5) exist are more stringent
than those for the Laplace transform. For example, you should verify that {1},
s{1}, and c{1} do not exist. Sufﬁcient conditions for existence are that f be
absolutely integrable on the appropriate interval and that f and f  be piecewise con-
tinuous on every ﬁnite interval.
Operational Properties
Since our immediate goal is to apply these new
transforms to boundary-value problems, we need to examine the transforms of
derivatives.
Fourier Transform
Suppose that f is continuous and absolutely integrable on
the interval (, ) and f  is piecewise continuous on every ﬁnite interval. If
as 
, then integration by parts gives
that is,
.
(7)
Similarly, under the added assumptions that f  is continuous on (, ), f (x)
is piecewise continuous on every ﬁnite interval and 
as 
, we have
.
(8)
It is important to be aware that the sine and cosine transforms are not suitable for
transforming the ﬁrst derivative (or, for that matter, any derivative of odd order). It is
readily shown that
.
The difﬁculty is apparent; the transform of f(x) is not expressed in terms of the orig-
inal integral transform.
Fourier Sine Transform
Suppose that f and f  are continuous, f is absolutely
integrable on the interval [0, ), and f  is piecewise continuous on every ﬁnite
s{f (x)}  c{f (x)}    and    c{f (x)}  s{f(x)}  f (0)
 { f (x)}  (i)2  {f(x)}  2F()
x : 
f (x) : 0
 {f(x)}  i F()
  i


 f (x)eix dx,
  f (x) eix

  i 


 f (x)eix dx
  {f(x)} 


f(x)eix dx
x : 
f(x) : 0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

interval. If 
and 
as 
, then
that is,
.
(9)
Fourier Cosine Transform
Under the same assumptions that lead to (9) we
ﬁnd the Fourier cosine transform of f (x) to be
.
(10)
A natural question is "How do we know which transform to use on a given
boundary-value problem?" Clearly, to use a Fourier transform, the domain of the
variable to be eliminated must be (, ). To utilize a sine or cosine transform, the
domain of at least one of the variables in the problem must be [0, ). But the deter-
mining factor in choosing between the sine transform and the cosine transform is the
type of boundary condition speciﬁed at zero.
In the examples that follow, we shall assume without further mention that both
u and u
x (or u
y) approach zero as 
. This is not a major restriction,
since these conditions hold in most applications.
x : 
c{f (x)}  2F()  f(0)
s{ f (x)}  2F()   f (0)
  f (0)  2s{ f (x)},
   f (x) cos x 

0   

0
 f (x) sin x dx
  f(x) sin x

0  

0
 f(x) cos x dx
 s{f (x)} 

0
f (x) sin x dx
x : 
f  : 0
f : 0
528
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
Remember this when working
the problems in Exercises 14.4. 
EXAMPLE 1
Using the Fourier Transform
Solve the heat equation 
,   x  , t  0, subject to
SOLUTION
The problem can be interpreted as ﬁnding the temperature u(x, t) in an
inﬁnite rod. Because the domain of x is the inﬁnite interval (, ), we use the
Fourier transform (1) and deﬁne
.
If we transform the partial differential equation and use (8),
yields
.
Solving the last equation gives 
. Now the transform of the initial
condition is
.
{u(x, 0)} 


 f (x)eix dx 
1
1
 u0 eix dx  u0
ei  ei
i
U(, t)  cek2t
k2U(, t)  dU
dt   or   dU
dt  k2U(, t)  0
 k 2u
x2   
u
t
{u(x, t)} 


 u(x, t)eix dx  U(, t)
u(x, 0)  f (x),   where   f (x) 
u0,   x   1
0,   x   1.
k 2u
x2  u
t
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.4
FOURIER TRANSFORMS
●
529
This result is the same as 
. Applying this condition to the solution
U(a, t) gives U(a, 0)  c  (2u0 sin a)
a, so
.
It then follows from the inverse Fourier transform (2) that
.
The last expression can be simpliﬁed somewhat by using Euler's formula
eiax  cos ax  i sin ax and noting that
, 
since the integrand is an odd function of a. Hence we ﬁnally have
(11)
It is left to the reader to show that the solution (11) can be expressed in terms of
the error function. See Problem 23 in Exercises 14.4.
u(x, t)  u0
 


 sin  cos x

 ek2t d.



 sin 
  ek2t sin x  d  0
u(x, t)  u0
 


 sin 
  ek2teix d
U(, t)  2u0
sin 
  ek2t
U(, 0)  2u0
sin 

EXAMPLE 2
Using the Cosine Transform
The steady-state temperature in a semi-inﬁnite plate is determined from
Solve for u(x, y).
SOLUTION
The domain of the variable y and the prescribed condition at y  0 
indicate that the Fourier cosine transform is suitable for the problem. We deﬁne
In view of (10),
becomes
.
Since the domain of x is a ﬁnite interval, we choose to write the solution of the
ordinary differential equation as
.
(12)
Now 
are in turn equivalent to
U(0, )  0   and   U(, ) 
1
1  2.
c{u(0, y)}  c{0} and c{u(, y)}  c{ey}
U(x, )  c1 cosh x  c2 sinh x
d 2U
dx2  2U(x, )  uy(x, 0)  0   or   d 2U
dx2  2U  0
c
2u
x2  c
2u
y2  c{0}
c{u(x, y)} 

0
u(x, y) cos y dy  U(x, ).
u
yy0  0, 0  x  .
u(0, y)  0, u(, y)  ey, y  0
2u
x2  2u
y2  0,  0  x  , y  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When we apply these latter conditions, the solution (12) gives c1  0 and
c2  1
[(1  a2) sinh ap]. Therefore
,
so from (6) we arrive at
(13)
Had u(x, 0) been given in Example 2 rather than uy(x, 0), then the sine transform
would have been appropriate.
u(x, y)  2
 

0
 
sinh x
(1  2) sinh  cos y d.
U(x, ) 
sinh x
(1  2) sinh 
530
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
In Problems 1-21 use the Fourier integral transforms of this
section to solve the given boundary-value problem. Make
assumptions about boundedness where necessary.
1.
2.
3. Find the temperature u(x, t) in a semi-inﬁnite rod if
u(0, t)  u0, t  0 and u(x, 0)  0, x  0.
4. Use the result 
, to show that
the solution of Problem 3 can be written as
.
5. Find the temperature u(x, t) in a semi-inﬁnite rod if
u(0, t)  0, t  0, and
6. Solve Problem 3 if the condition at the left boundary is
,
where A is a constant.
u
xx0  A, t  0
u(x, 0) 
1,
0,
0  x  1
x  1.
u(x, t)  u0  2u0
  

0
 sinx

 ek2t d


0
 sin x

 d  
2, x  0
u(x, 0) 
   0,            x  1
100, 1  x  0
  100,    0  x  1
       0,            x  1
k 2u
x2  u
t,   x  , t  0
u(x, 0)  ex,    x  
k 2u
x2  u
t,   x  , t  0
7. Solve Problem 5 if the end x  0 is insulated.
8. Find the temperature u(x, t) in a semi-inﬁnite rod if
u(0, t)  1, t  0, and u(x, 0)  ex, x  0.
9. (a)
(b) If g(x)  0, show that the solution of part (a) can be
written as 
.
10. Find the displacement u(x, t) of a semi-inﬁnite string if
11. Solve the problem in Example 2 if the boundary condi-
tions at x  0 and x  p are reversed: u(0, y)  ey,
u(p, y)  0, y  0.
12. Solve the problem in Example 2 if the boundary condi-
tion at y  0 is u(x, 0)  1, 0  x  p.
13. Find the steady-state temperature u(x, y) in a plate
deﬁned by x  0, y  0 if the boundary x  0 is insu-
lated and, at y  0,
14. Solve Problem 13 if the boundary condition at x  0 is
u(0, y)  0, y  0.
15.
 u(x, 0)  f(x), u(x, 2)  0, x  0
 u(0, y)  0, 0  y  2
2u
x2  2u
y2  0, x  0, 0  y  2
u(x, 0) 
50, 0  x  1
 0,   x  1.
 u(x, 0)  xex, u
t t0  0, x  0
u(0, t)  0, t  0
u(x, t)  1
2[ f (x  at)   f (x  at)]
u(x, 0)  f(x),  u
t t0  g(x),   x  
 a2 2u
x2  2u
t2,   x  , t  0
EXERCISES 14.4
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-25.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.4
FOURIER TRANSFORMS
●
531
16.
In Problems 17 and 18 ﬁnd the steady-state temperature 
in the plate given in the ﬁgure. [Hint: One way of proceeding is
to express Problems 17 and 18 as two- and three-boundary-value
problems, respectively. Use the superposition principle. See
Section 12.5.]
17.
u(x, y)
u
yy0  0, 0  x  
 u(0, y)  f(y), u
xx  0, y  0
2u
x2  2u
y2  0, 0  x  , y  0
21. Use the transform 
given in Problem 19 to
ﬁnd the steady-state temperature in the inﬁnite strip
shown in Figure 14.4.3.
 {ex2/4p2}
FIGURE 14.4.2
Plate in Problem 18
FIGURE 14.4.1
Plate in Problem 17
u = e −y
u = e −x
x
y
x
y
u = 0
u = e −y
u = 100
u = f (x)
1
0
π
18.
19. Use the result 
to solve the
boundary-value problem
20. If
, then the con-
volution theorem for the Fourier transform is given by
.
Use this result and 
to show
that a solution of the boundary-value problem
is
 u(x, t) 
1
21kt 


f (
)e(x
)2/4kt d
.
 u(x, 0)  f (x),   x  
 k 2u
x2  u
t,    x  , t  0
 {ex2/4p2}  2 1pep22



 f (
)g(x  
) d
   1{F()G()}
 { f (x)}  F() and  {g(x)}  G()
u(x, 0)  ex2,   x  .
k 2u
x2  u
t,    x  , t  0
{ex2/4p2}  2 1pep22
FIGURE 14.4.3
Inﬁnite strip in Problem 21
x
y
u = e −x2
1
Insulated
.
 1
2 arctan x  1
y 
u(x, y)  100
  arctan x
y  1
2 arctan x  1
y
23. Use the solution given in Problem 20 to rewrite the so-
lution of Example 1 in an alternative integral form.
Then use the change of variables 
and the results of Problem 11 in Exercises 14.1 to show
that the solution of Example 1 can be expressed as
.
24. The steady-state temperatures 
in a semi-inﬁnite
cylinder are described by the boundary-value problem
Use an appropriate Fourier transform to ﬁnd 
[Hint: See Problem 4 and the parametric form of the
modiﬁed Bessel equation on page 260.]
25. Find the steady-state temperatures 
in the semi-
inﬁnite cylinder in Problem 24 if the base of the cylinder
is insulated and
Discussion Problems
26. (a) Suppose 
where
Find f(x).
F(a) 
1  a,  0  a  1
0,          a  1.

0 f(x)cosaxdx   F(a),
u(1, z) 
1,  0  z  1
0,  z  1.
u(r, z)
u(r, z).
u(r, 0)  u0,    0  r  1.
u(1, z)  0,     z  0
2u
r2  1
r u
r  2u
z2  0,  0  r  1,  z  0
u(r, z)
u(x, t)  u0
2  erf
x  1
21kt  erf
x  1
21kt
v  (x  
) 
21kt
22. The solution of Problem 14 can be integrated. Use entries
42 and 43 of the table in Appendix III to show that
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

532
●
CHAPTER 14
INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS
CHAPTER 14 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-26.
In Problems 1-17 solve the given boundary-value problem
by an appropriate integral transform. Make assumptions
about boundedness where necessary.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
u(x, 0)  0,
x  0 [Hint: Use Theorem 7.4.2.]
6.
7.
 u(x, 0) 
0,     x  0
u0, 0  x  
0,      x  
 k 2u
x2  u
t,   x  , t  0
 u(x, 0)  sin x, u
t t0  sin x,  0  x  1
 u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0, t  0
2u
x2  2u
t2, 0  x  1, t  0
 u(0, t)  t, lim
x :  u(x, t)  0
2u
x2  u
t, x  0, t  0
 u(x, 0)  0,   x  
u
t  2u
x2  ex,   x  , t  0
 u(x, 0)  u0, x  0
 u(0, t)  0, lim
x :  u
x  0, t  0
2u
x2  hu  u
t, h  0, x  0, t  0
 u(x, 0)  50 sin 2x, 0  x  1
 u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0, t  0
2u
x2  u
t, 0  x  1, t  0
 u(x, 0)  0, u
yy  ex, x  0
u
xx 0  0, 0  y  
2u
x2  2u
y2  0, x  0, 0  y  
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
[Hint: Use the identity
sinh(x  y)  sinh x cosh y  cosh x sinh y,
and then use Problem 8 in Exercises 14.1.]
13.
u(x, 0) 
0,    x  0
ex, x  0
k 2u
x2  u
t,   x  , t  0
u(x, 0)  0, 0  x  1
u(0, t)  u0, u(1, t)  u0, t  0
2u
x2  u
t, 0  x  1, t  0
u
yy0
 0, u
yy
 Bex, x  0
u(0, y)  A, 0  y  
2u
x2  2u
y2  0, x  0, 0  y  
u(x, 0)  0, 0  x  1
u
xx0  0, u(1, t)  0, t  0
2u
x2  r  u
t, 0  x  1, t  0
u(x, 0) 
100, 0  x  1
    0,     x  1
u(0, y) 
50, 0  y  1
  0,     y  1
2u
x2  2u
y2  0, x  0, y  0
u
yy0
 0, 0  x  
u(0, y)  0, u(, y) 
0, 0  y  1
1, 1  y  2
0,     y  2
2u
x2  2u
y2  0, 0  x  , y  0
(b) Use part (a) to show that
Computer Lab Assignments
27. Assume that u0  100 and k  1 in the solution in
Problem 23. Use a CAS to graph u(x, t) over the 


0
sin2x
x2 dx  p
2 .
rectangular region deﬁned by 4  x  4, 0  t  6.
Use a 2D plot to superimpose the graphs of u(x, t) for
t  0.05, 0.125, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, and 15 on the interval
[4, 4]. Use the graphs to conjecture the values
of
and 
. Then prove these
results analytically using the properties of erf(x).
limx :  u(x, t)
limt : u(x, t)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.
15.
16. Show that a solution of the BVP
is
.
u(x, y)  1
 

0
 


 f (t) cosh y cos (t  x)
cosh 
 dt d
u
yy0  0, u(x, 1)  f (x),   x  
2u
x2  2u
y2  0,    x  , 0  y  1
u(x, 0)  ex, x  0
u
xx0  0, t  0
k 2u
x2  u
t,  x  0, t  0
u(x, 0)  100, x  0
u
xx0  50, lim
x :  u(x, t)  100, t  0
2u
x2  u
t, x  0, t  0
CHAPTER 14 IN REVIEW
●
533
17.
18. Solve the boundary-value problem
using an appropriate Fourier transform.
19. Solve the boundary-value problem in Problem 18 using
the Laplace transform. Give two different forms of the
solution 
20. Show that the solution in Problem 18 is equivalent to
one of the two forms of 
in Problem 19. You may
need a CAS to carry out an integration.
u(x, t)
u(x, t).
u(x, 0)  0,  x  0,
u
xx0  100, lim
x :  u(x, t)  0, t  0,
2u
x2  u
t,  x  0,  t  0
u(x, 0)  0,  x  0
lim
x : u(x, t)  0,  t  0
u(0, t) 
u0, 0  t  1
  0, t  1
,
2u
x2  u
t,  x  0,  t  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

534
●
CHAPTER 15
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Numerical Solutions of 
Partial Differential Equations
15.1 Laplace's Equation
15.2 Heat Equation
15.3 Wave Equation
Chapter 15 in Review
We saw in Section 9.5 that one way of approximating a solution of a second-order
boundary-value problem was to work with a ﬁnite difference equation replacement
of the linear ordinary differential equation. The difference equation was constructed
by replacing the ordinary derivatives 
and 
by difference quotients.
The same idea carries over to boundary-value problems involving linear partial
differential equations. In the succeeding sections of this chapter we will form a
difference equation replacement for the two-dimensional form of Laplace's
equation, and the one-dimensional forms of the heat and wave equations by replacing
the partial derivatives 2ux2, 2uy2, 2ut2, and ut by difference
quotients.
dy>dx
d 2y>dx2
15
534
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.1
LAPLACE'S EQUATION
●
535
Difference Equation Replacement
Suppose that we are seeking a solution
u(x, y) of Laplace's equation
(1)
in a planar region R that is bounded by some curve C. See Figure 15.1.1. Analogous
to (6) of Section 9.5, by using the central differences
2u
x2  2u
y2  0
u(x  h, y)  2u(x, y)  u(x  h, y)  and  u(x, y  h)  2u(x, y)  u(x, y  h),
approximations for the second partial derivatives uxx and uyy can be obtained using
the difference quotients
(2)
(3)
By adding (2) and (3), we obtain a ﬁve-point approximation to the Laplacian:
Hence we can replace Laplace's equation (1) by the difference equation
(4)
If we adopt the notation u(x, y)  uij and
then (4) becomes
.
(5)
ui1, j  ui, j1  ui1, j  ui, j1  4uij  0
 u(x  h, y)  ui1, j, u(x, y  h)  ui, j1,
 u(x  h, y)  ui1, j, u(x, y  h)  ui, j1
u(x  h, y)  u(x, y  h)  u(x  h, y)  u(x, y  h)  4u(x, y)  0.
2u
x2  2u
y2  1
h2[u(x  h, y)  u(x, y  h)  u(x  h, y)  u(x, y  h)  4u(x, y)].
 2u
y2  1
h2[u(x, y  h)  2u(x, y)  u(x, y  h)].
 2u
x2  1
h2[u(x  h, y)  2u(x, y)  u(x  h, y)]
FIGURE 15.1.1
Planar region R
with boundary C
R
2u = 0
Δ
C
y
x
LAPLACE'S EQUATION
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 9.5, 12.1, 12.2, and 12.5
INTRODUCTION
In Section 12.1 we saw that linear second-order PDEs in two independent
variables are classiﬁed as elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic. Roughly, elliptic PDEs involve partial
derivatives with respect to spatial variables only, and as a consequence solutions of such equations
are determined by boundary conditions alone. Parabolic and hyperbolic equations involve partial
derivatives with respect to both spatial and time variables, so solutions of such equations generally
are determined from boundary and initial conditions. A solution of an elliptic PDE (such as
Laplace's equation) can describe a physical system whose state is in equilibrium (steady-state); a so-
lution of a parabolic PDE (such as the heat equation) can describe a diffusional state, whereas a hy-
perbolic PDE (such as the wave equation) can describe a vibrational state.
In this section we begin our discussion with approximation methods that are appropriate for
elliptic equations. Our focus will be on the simplest but probably the most important PDE of the
elliptic type: Laplace's equation.
15.1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

536
●
CHAPTER 15
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
To understand (5) a little better, suppose a rectangular grid consisting of horizontal
lines spaced h units apart and vertical lines spaced h units apart is placed over the
region R. The number h is called the mesh size. See Figure 15.1.2(a). The points
Pij  P(ih, jh), where i and j are integers, of intersection of the horizontal and ver-
tical lines, are called mesh points or lattice points. A mesh point is an interior
point if its four nearest neighboring mesh points are points of R. Points in R or
on C that are not interior points are called boundary points. For example, in
Figure 15.1.2(a) we have
and so on. Of the points just listed, P21 and P22 are interior points, whereas P20 and
P11 are boundary points. In Figure 15.1.2(a) interior points are the dots shown in
red, and the boundary points are shown in black. Now from (5) we see that
(6)
so, as can be seen in Figure 15.1.2(b), the value uij at an interior mesh point of R is
the average of the values of u at four neighboring mesh points. The neighboring
points Pi1, j, Pi, j1, Pi1, j, and Pi, j1 correspond to the four points on the compass
E, N, W, and S, respectively.
Dirichlet Problem
Recall that in the Dirichet problem for Laplace's equa-
tion 2u  0 the values of u(x, y) are prescribed on the boundary of a region R. The
basic idea is to ﬁnd an approximate solution to Laplace's equation at interior mesh
points by replacing the partial differential equation at these points by the difference
equation (5). Hence the approximate values of u at the mesh points—namely, the
uij—are related to each other and possibly to known values of u if a mesh point lies
on the boundary. In this manner we obtain a system of linear algebraic equations that
we solve for the unknown uij. The following example illustrates the method for a
square region.
uij  1
4ui1, j  ui, j1  ui1, j  ui, j1,
P20  P(2h, 0),  P11  P(h, h),  P21  P(2h, h),  P22  P(2h, 2h),
FIGURE 15.1.2
Region R overlaid
with rectangular grid
y
x
0
0
0
P 12 
P 11 
P 22 
P 21 
0
2
3
2
3
8
9
8
9
FIGURE 15.1.3
Square region R
for Example 1
x
h
h
6h
2h
5h
3h
4h
3h
4h
2h
5h
6h
7h
P13
P12
P11
P 22 
P 21 
P20
P31
R
C
h
h
Pi, j + 1
P i j 
Pi + 1, j
Pi −1, j
Pi, j − 1
(a)
(b)
y
EXAMPLE 1
A BVP Revisited
In Problem 16 of Exercises 12.5 you were asked to solve the boundary-value problem
utilizing the superposition principle. To apply the present numerical method, let us
start with a mesh size of 
. As we see in Figure 15.1.3, that choice yields
four interior points and eight boundary points. The numbers listed next to the bound-
ary points are the exact values of u obtained from the speciﬁed condition along that
boundary. For example, at 
we have x  2 and 
, and so
the condition u(2, y) gives 
Similarly, at 
the
condition u(x, 2) gives 
. We now apply (5) at each interior point. For
example, at P11 we have i  1 and j  1, so (5) becomes
.
u21  u12  u01  u10  4u11  0
u(2
3, 2)  2
3
P13  P(2
3, 2)
u(2, 2
3)  2
3(2  2
3)  8
9.
y  2
3
P31  P(3h, h)  P(2, 2
3)
h  2
3
 u(x, 0)  0, u(x, 2) 
x,   0  x  1
2  x, 1  x  2
 u(0, y)  0, u(2, y)  y(2  y), 0  y  2
2u
x2  2u
y2  0,  0  x  2, 0  y  2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.1
LAPLACE'S EQUATION
●
537
Since 
and 
, the foregoing equation becomes
4u11  u21  u12  0. Repeating this, in turn, at P21, P12, and P22 we get three
additional equations:
(7)
Using a computer algebra system to solve the system, we ﬁnd the approximate val-
ues at the four interior points to be
u21    u12  4u22  14
9 .
  u11       4u12    u22  2
3
  u11  4u21          u22  8
9
4u11    u21    u12       0
u10  u(2
3, 0)  0
u01  u(0, 2
3)  0
u11  7
36  0.1944, u21  5
12  0.4167, u12  13
36  0.3611, u22  7
12  0.5833.
As in the discussion of ordinary differential equations, we expect that a
smaller value of h will improve the accuracy of the approximation. However, using
a smaller mesh size means, of course, that there are more interior mesh points, and
correspondingly there is a much larger system of equations to be solved. For a
square region whose length of side is L, a mesh size of h  Ln will yield a total
of (n  1)2 interior mesh points. In Example 1, for n  8 the mesh size is a reason-
able 
, but the number of interior points is (8  1)2  49. Thus we have
49 equations in 49 unknowns. In the next example we use a mesh size of 
.
h  1
2
h  2
8  1
4
y
P 13 
P 11 
P 22 
P 21 P 31 
P 23 
P 12 
P 32 
P 33 
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
x
1
2
1
2
3
4
3
4
FIGURE 15.1.4
Region R
in Example 1 with additional 
mesh points
EXAMPLE 2
Example 1 with More Mesh Points
As we see in Figure 15.1.4, with n  4 a mesh size 
for the square in
Example 1 gives 32  9 interior mesh points. Applying (5) at these points and using
the indicated boundary conditions, we get nine equations in nine unknowns. So that
you can verify the results, we give the system in an unsimpliﬁed form:
(8)
In this case a CAS yields
 u13  145
448  0.3237,   u23  131
224  0.5848,   u33  39
64  0.6094.
 u12  47
224  0.2098,   u22  13
32  0.4063,  
 u32  135
224  0.6027
 u11  7
64  0.1094,  
 u21  51
224  0.2277,   u31  177
448  0.3951
 3
4    1
2   u23  u32  4u33  0.
 u33   1  u13  u22  4u23  0
 u23   1
2    0  u12  4u13  0
 1  u33  u22  u31  4u32  0
 u32  u23  u12  u21  4u22  0
 u22  u13  u11   0  4u12  0
 3
4   u32  u21   0  4u31  0
 u31  u22  u11   0  4u21  0
 u21  u12   0   0  4u11  0
h  2
4  1
2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

538
●
CHAPTER 15
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
After we simplify (8), it is interesting to note that the 9 	 9 matrix of coefﬁcients is
(
)
.
4
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
4
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
4
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
4
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
4
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
4
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
4
(9)
This is an example of a sparse matrix in that a large percentage of the entries are
zeros. The matrix (9) is also an example of a banded matrix. These kinds of matri-
ces are characterized by the properties that the entries on the main diagonal and on
diagonals (or bands) parallel to the main diagonal are all nonzero.
Gauss-Seidel Iteration
Problems that require approximations to solutions of
partial differential equations invariably lead to large systems of linear algebraic equa-
tions. It is not uncommon to have to solve systems involving hundreds of equations.
Although a direct method of solution such as Gaussian elimination leaves unchanged
the zero entries outside the bands in a matrix such as (9), it does ﬁll in the positions
between the bands with nonzeros. Since storing very large matrices uses up a large
portion of computer memory, it is usual practice to solve a large system in an indirect
manner. One popular indirect method is called Gauss-Seidel iteration.
We shall illustrate this method for the system in (7). For the sake of simplicity
we replace the double-subscripted variables u11, u21, u12, and u22 by x1, x2, x3, and x4,
respectively.
EXAMPLE 3
Gauss-Seidel Iteration
Step 1:
Solve each equation for the variables on the main diagonal of the system.
That is, in (7) solve the ﬁrst equation for x1, the second equation for x2, and so on:
(10)
These equations can be obtained directly by using (6) rather than (5) at the interior
points.
Step 2:
Iterations. We start by making an initial guess for the values of x1, x2, x3,
and x4. If this were simply a system of linear equations and we knew nothing
about the solution, we could start with x1  0, x2  0, x3  0, x4  0. But since
the solution of (10) represents approximations to a solution of a boundary-value
problem, it would seem reasonable to use as the initial guess for the values of 
x1  u11, x2  u21, x3  u12, and x4  u22 the average of all the boundary condi-
tions. In this case the average of the numbers at the eight boundary points shown in
Figure 15.1.3 is approximately 0.4. Thus our initial guess is x1  0.4, x2  0.4, 
x3  0.4, and x4  0.4. Iterations of the Gauss-Seidel method use the x values as
soon as they are computed. Note that the ﬁrst equation in (10) depends only on x2
and x3; thus substituting x2  0.4 and x3  0.4 gives x1  0.2. Since the second and
 x4      0.25x2  0.25x3   
 0.3889.
 x3  0.25x1         0.25x4  0.1667
 x2  0.25x1         0.25x4  0.2222
 x1      0.25x2  0.25x3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.1
LAPLACE'S EQUATION
●
539
third equations depend on x1 and x4, we use the newly calculated values x1  0.2
and x4  0.4 to obtain x2  0.3722 and x3  0.3167. The fourth equation depends
on x2 and x3, so we use the new values x2  0.3722 and x3  0.3167 to get
x4  0.5611. In summary, the ﬁrst iteration has given the values
Note how close these numbers are already to the actual values given at the end of
Example 1.
The second iteration starts with substituting x2  0.3722 and x3  0.3167 into
the ﬁrst equation. This gives x1  0.1722. From x1  0.1722 and the last computed
value of x4 (namely, x4  0.5611), the second and third equations give, in turn,
x2  0.4055 and x3  0.3500. Using these two values, we ﬁnd from the fourth equa-
tion that x4  0.5678. At the end of the second iteration we have
The third through seventh iterations are summarized in Table 15.1.1.
x1  0.1722,  x2  0.4055,  x3  0.3500,  x4  0.5678.
x1  0.2,  x2  0.3722,  x3  0.3167,  x4  0.5611.
TABLE 15.1.1
Iteration
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
x1
0.1889
0.1931
0.1941
0.1944
0.1944
x2
0.4139
0.4160
0.4165
0.4166
0.4166
x3
0.3584
0.3605
0.3610
0.3611
0.3611
x4
0.5820
0.5830
0.5833
0.5833
0.5833
Note
To apply Gauss-Seidel iteration to a general system of n linear equa-
tions in n unknowns, the variable xi must actually appear in the ith equation of the
system. Moreover, after each equation is solved for xi, i  1, 2, . . . , n, the result-
ing system has the form X  AX  B, where all the entries on the main diagonal
of A are zero.
y
y =
x = 1
1
2
100 100
P 11 P 21 P 31 
100
0
0
0
0
0
x
FIGURE 15.1.5
Rectangular region R
REMARKS
(i) In the examples given in this section the values of uij were determined by
using known values of u at boundary points. But what do we do if the region is
such that boundary points do not coincide with the actual boundary C of the
region R? In this case the required values can be obtained by interpolation.
(ii) It is sometimes possible to cut down the number of equations to solve by
using symmetry. Consider the rectangular region 0  x  2, 0  y  1, shown
in Figure 15.1.5. The boundary conditions are u  0 along the boundaries
x  0, x  2, y  1, and u  100 along y  0. The region is symmetric about
the lines x  1 and 
, and the interior points P11 and P31 are equidistant
from the neighboring boundary points at which the speciﬁed values of u are the
same. Consequently, we assume that u11  u31, so the system of three equations
in three unknowns reduces to two equations in two unknowns. See Problem 2 in
Exercises 15.1.
(iii) In the context of approximating a solution to Laplace's equation the iteration
technique illustrated in Example 3 is often referred to as Liebman's method.
(iv) Although it may not be noticeable on a computer, convergence of Gauss-
Seidel iteration, or Liebman's method, might not be particularly fast. Also, in
a more general setting, Gauss-Seidel iteration might not converge at all. For
conditions that are sufﬁcient to guarantee convergence of Gauss-Seidel itera-
tion, you are encouraged to consult texts on numerical analysis.
y  1
2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

540
●
CHAPTER 15
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
In Problems 1-8 use a computer as a computation aid.
In Problems 1-4 use (5) to approximate the solution of
Laplace's equation at the interior points of the given region.
Use symmetry when possible.
1. u(0, y)  0,
u(3, y)  y(2  y),
0  y  2
u(x, 0)  0,
u(x, 2)  x(3  x),
0  x  3
mesh size: h  1
2. u(0, y)  0,
u(2, y)  0,
0  y  1
u(x, 0)  100,
u(x, 1)  0,
0  x  2
mesh size: 
3. u(0, y)  0,
u(1, y)  0,
0  y  1
u(x, 0)  0,
u(x, 1)  sin px,
0  x  1
mesh size: 
4. u(0, y)  108y2(1  y),
u(1, y)  0,
0  y  1
u(x, 0)  0,
u(x, 1)  0,
0  x  1
mesh size: 
In Problems 5 and 6 use (6) and Gauss-Seidel iteration to
approximate the solution of Laplace's equation at the inte-
rior points of a unit square. Use the mesh size 
. In
Problem 5 the boundary conditions are given; in Problem 6
the values of u at boundary points are given in Figure 15.1.6.
5. u(0, y)  0,
u(1, y)  100y,
0  y  1
u(x, 0)  0,
u(x, 1)  100x,
0  x  1
6.
h  1
4
h  1
3
h  1
3
h  1
2
equation 
. Show that the differ-
ence equation replacement for Poisson's equation is
(b) Use the result in part (a) to approximate the solution
of the Poisson equation 
at the inte-
rior points of the region in Figure 15.1.7. The mesh
size is 
, u  1 at every point along ABCD, and
u  0 at every point along DEFGA. Use symmetry
and, if necessary, Gauss-Seidel iteration.
h  1
2
2u
x2  2u
y2  2
ui1, j  ui, j1  ui1, j  ui, j1  4uij  h2f (x, y).
2u
x2  2u
y2  f(x, y)
FIGURE 15.1.6
Region for Problem 6
y
x
20 30
20
40
P 13 
P 11 
P 22 
P 21 P 31 
10
20
P 23 
P 12 
P 32 
P 33 
60
20
10
40
70
50
FIGURE 15.1.8
Region for Problem 8
y
x
FIGURE 15.1.7
Region for Problem 7
D
E
y
x
A
B
C
F
G
8. Use the result in part (a) of Problem 7 to approximate
the solution of the Poisson equation
at the interior points of the region in Figure 15.1.8. The
mesh size is 
, and u  0 at every point on the bound-
ary of the region. If necessary, use Gauss-Seidel iteration.
h  1
8
2u
x2  2u
y2  64
7. (a) In Problem 12 of Exercises 12.6 you solved a
potential problem using a special form of Poisson's
EXERCISES 15.1
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-26.
HEAT EQUATION
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 9.5, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, and 15.1
INTRODUCTION
The basic idea in the discussion that follows is the same as in Section 15.1:
We approximate a solution of a PDE—this time a parabolic PDE—by replacing the equation with a
ﬁnite difference equation. But unlike the preceding section we shall consider two ﬁnite-difference
approximation methods for parabolic partial differential equations: one called an explicit method
and the other called an implicit method.
For the sake of deﬁniteness we consider only the one-dimensional heat equation.
15.2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.2
HEAT EQUATION
●
541
Difference Equation Replacement
To approximate a solution u(x, t) of the
one-dimensional heat equation
(1)
we again replace each derivative by a difference quotient. By using the central
difference approximation (2) of Section 15.1,
and the forward difference approximation (3) of Section 9.5,
equation (1) becomes
.
(2)
If we let l  ckh2 and
then, after simplifying, (2) is
(3)
In the case of the heat equation (1), typical boundary conditions are u(0, t)  u1,
u(a, t)  u2, t 
 0, and an initial condition is u(x, 0)  f(x), 0  x  a. The function f
can be interpreted as the initial temperature distribution in a homogeneous rod extend-
ing from x  0 to x  a; u1 and u2 can be interpreted as constant temperatures at the end-
points of the rod. Although we shall not prove it, the boundary-value problem consisting
of (1) and these two boundary conditions and one initial condition has a unique solution
when f is continuous on the closed interval [0, a]. This latter condition will be assumed,
and so we replace the initial condition by u(x, 0)  f(x), 0  x  a. Moreover, instead
of working with the semi-inﬁnite region in the xt-plane deﬁned by the inequalities
0  x  a, t  0, we use a rectangular region deﬁned by 0  x  a, 0  t  T, where
T is some speciﬁed value of time. Over this region we place a rectangular grid consist-
ing of vertical lines h units apart and horizontal lines k units apart. See Figure 15.2.1. If
we choose two positive integers n and m and deﬁne
then the vertical and horizontal grid lines are deﬁned by
As illustrated in Figure 15.2.2, the plan here is to use formula (3) to estimate the
values of the solution u(x, t) at the points on the ( j  1)st time line using only values
from the jth time line. For example, the values on the ﬁrst time line ( j  1) depend on
the initial condition ui,0  u(xi, 0)  f(xi) given on the zeroth time ( j  0). This kind
of numerical procedure is called an explicit ﬁnite difference method.
xi  ih, i  0, 1, 2, . . . , n  and  tj  jk, j  0, 1, 2, . . . , m.
h  a
n  and  k  T
m,
ui, j1  ui1, j  (1  2) uij  ui1, j.
u(x, t)  uij, u(x  h, t)  ui1, j, u(x  h, t)  ui1, j, u(x, t  k)  ui, j1,
c
h2 [u(x  h, t)  2u(x, t)  u(x  h, t)]  1
k [u(x, t  k)  u(x, t)]
u
t  1
h [u(x, t  h)  u(x, t)]
2u
x2  1
h2 [u(x  h, t)  2u(x, t)  u(x  h, t)]
c 2u
x2  u
t
h
k
2h
3h
. . .
3k
2k
T
a
. . .
0
t
x
( j + 1)st time
line
jth time line
k
ui −1, j
ui j
ui + 1, j
h
u i ,  j  +  1 
FIGURE 15.2.1
Rectangular region
in xt-plane
FIGURE 15.2.2
u at t  j  1 is
determined from three values of u
at t  j
EXAMPLE 1
Using the Finite Difference Method
Consider the boundary-value problem
u(x, 0)  sin x, 0  x  1.
u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0, 0  t  0.5
2u
x2  u
t,  0  x  1, 0  t  0.5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

542
●
CHAPTER 15
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
First we identify c  1, a  1, and T  0.5. If we choose, say, n  5 and m  50,
then h  15  0.2, k  0.550  0.01, l  0.25,
Thus (3) becomes
.
By setting j  0 in this formula, we get a formula for the approximations to the tem-
perature u on the ﬁrst time line:
If we then let i  1, . . . , 4 in the last equation, we obtain, in turn,
The ﬁrst equation in this list is interpreted as
From the initial condition u(x, 0)  sin px the last line becomes
This number represents an approximation to the temperature u(0.2, 0.01).
Since it would require a rather large table of over 200 entries to summarize all
the approximations over the rectangular grid determined by h and k, we give only se-
lected values in Table 15.2.1.
u11  0.25(0.951056516  2(0.587785252)  0)  0.531656755.
  0.25(u(0.4, 0)  2u(0.2, 0)  u(0, 0)).
 u11  0.25(u(x2, 0)  2u(x1, 0)  u(0, 0))
 u41  0.25(u50  2u40  u30).
 u31  0.25(u40  2u30  u20)
 u21  0.25(u30  2u20  u10)
 u11  0.25(u20  2u10  u00)
ui,1  0.25(ui1,0  2ui,0  ui1,0).
ui, j1  0.25(ui1, j  2uij  ui1, j)
xi  i 1
5, i  0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,  tj  j 1
100, j  0, 1, 2, . . . , 50.
TABLE 15.2.1
Explicit Difference Equation Approximation with h  0.2, 
k  0.01, l  0.25
Time
x  0.20
x  0.40
x  0.60
x  0.80
0.00
0.5878
0.9511
0.9511
0.5878
0.10
0.2154
0.3486
0.3486
0.2154
0.20
0.0790
0.1278
0.1278
0.0790
0.30
0.0289
0.0468
0.0468
0.0289
0.40
0.0106
0.0172
0.0172
0.0106
0.50
0.0039
0.0063
0.0063
0.0039
TABLE 15.2.2
Actual
Approx.
u(0.4, 0.05)  0.5806
u25  0.5758
u(0.6, 0.06)  0.5261
u36  0.5208
u(0.2, 0.10)  0.2191
u1,10  0.2154
u(0.8, 0.14)  0.1476
u4,14  0.1442
You should verify, using the methods of Chapter 12, that an exact solution of the
boundary-value problem in Example 1 is given by 
. Using this
solution, we compare in Table 15.2.2 a sample of actual values with their correspond-
ing approximations.
Stability
These approximations are comparable to the exact values and are
accurate enough for some purposes. But there is a problem with the foregoing
method. Recall that a numerical method is unstable if round-off errors or any other
errors grow too rapidly as the computations proceed. The numerical procedure
illustrated in Example 1 can exhibit this kind of behavior. It can be proved that the
procedure is stable if l is less than or equal to 0.5 but unstable otherwise. To obtain
l  0.25  0.5 in Example 1, we had to choose the value k  0.01; the necessity of
u(x, t)  e 2t sin x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.2
HEAT EQUATION
●
543
using very small step sizes in the time direction is the principal fault of this method.
You are urged to work Problem 12 in Exercises 15.2 and witness the predictable
instability when l  1.
Crank-Nicholson Method
There are implicit ﬁnite difference methods for
solving parabolic partial differential equations. These methods require that we solve a
system of equations to determine the approximate values of u on the ( j  1)st time
line. However, implicit methods do not suffer from instability problems.
The algorithm introduced by J. Crank and P. Nicholson in 1947 is used mostly
for solving the heat equation. The algorithm consists of replacing the second partial
derivative in 
by an average of two central difference quotients, one 
evaluated at t and the other at t  k:
c 2u
x2  u
t
.
(4)
 1
k [u(x, t  k)  u(x, t)]
c
2 
u(x  h, t)  2u(x, t)  u(x  h, t)
h2
  u(x  h, t  k)  2u(x, t  k)  u(x  h, t  k)
h2

If we again deﬁne l  ckh2, then after rearranging terms, we can write (4) as
,
(5)
where 
a  2(1  1l) 
and 
b  2(1  1l), 
j  0, 1, . . . , m  1, 
and
i  1, 2, . . . , n  1.
For each choice of j the difference equation (5) for i  1, 2, . . . , n  1 gives
n  1 equations in n  1 unknowns ui, j1. Because of the prescribed boundary con-
ditions, the values of ui, j1 are known for i  0 and for i  n. For example, in the
case n  4 the system of equations for determining the approximate values of u on
the ( j  1)st time line is
or
(6)
where
In general, if we use the difference equation (5) to determine values of u on the
( j  1)st time line, we need to solve a linear system AX  B, where the coefﬁcient
matrix A is a tridiagonal matrix,
a
1
0
0
0
0
1
a
1
0
0
0
0
1
a
1
0
0
0
0
1
a
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
a
1
0
0
0
0
1
a
A  (
)
,
...
...
. . .
. . .
.
.
.
 b3  u4, j  u3, j  u2, j  u4, j1.
 b2  u3, j  u2, j  u1, j
 b1  u2, j  u1, j  u0, j  u0, j1
 u2, j1  u3, j1  b3,
 u1, j1  au2, j1   u3, j1  b2
u1, j1   u2, j1      b1
 u2, j1  au3, j1  u4, j1  u4, j  u3, j  u2, j
 u1, j1  au2, j1  u3, j1  u3, j  u2, j  u1, j
 u0, j1  au1, j1  u2, j1  u2, j  u1, j  u0, j
ui1, j1  aui, j1  ui1, j1  ui1, j  uij  ui1, j
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

544
●
CHAPTER 15
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
and the entries of the column matrix B are
 bn1  un, j  un1, j  un2, j  un, j1.


 b3  u4, j  u3, j  u2, j
 b2  u3, j  u2, j  u1, j
 b1  u2, j  u1, j  u0, j  u0, j1
TABLE 15.2.3
Crank-Nicholson Method with h  0.25, k  0.01, l  0.25
Time
x  0.25
x  0.50
x  0.75
x  1.00
x  1.25
x  1.50
x  1.75
0.00
0.7071
1.0000
0.7071
0.0000
0.7071
1.0000
0.7071
0.05
0.6289
0.8894
0.6289
0.0000
0.6289
0.8894
0.6289
0.10
0.5594
0.7911
0.5594
0.0000
0.5594
0.7911
0.5594
0.15
0.4975
0.7036
0.4975
0.0000
0.4975
0.7036
0.4975
0.20
0.4425
0.6258
0.4425
0.0000
0.4425
0.6258
0.4425
0.25
0.3936
0.5567
0.3936
0.0000
0.3936
0.5567
0.3936
0.30
0.3501
0.4951
0.3501
0.0000
0.3501
0.4951
0.3501
Like Example 1, the boundary-value problem in Example 2 possesses an
exact solution given by 
. The sample comparisons listed in
Table 15.2.4 show that the absolute errors are of the order 102 or 103. Smaller
errors can be obtained by decreasing either h or k.
u(x, t)  e2t/4 sin x
TABLE 15.2.4
Actual
Approx.
u(0.75, 0.05)  0.6250
u35  0.6289
u(0.50, 0.20)  0.6105
u2, 20  0.6259
u(0.25, 0.10)  0.5525
u1, 10  0.5594
In Problems 1-12 use a computer as a computation aid.
1. Use the difference equation (3) to approximate the solu-
tion of the boundary-value problem
Use n  8 and m  40.
u(x, 0) 
1, 0  x  1
0, 1  x  2.
u(0, t)  0, u(2, t)  0, 0  t  1
2u
x2  u
t,  0  x  2, 0  t  1
2. Using the Fourier series solution obtained in Problem 1 of
Exercises 12.3, with L  2, one can sum the ﬁrst 20 terms
to estimate the values for u(0.25, 0.1), u(1, 0.5), and
u(1.5, 0.8) for the solution u(x, t) of Problem 1 above. A
student wrote a computer program to do this and obtained
the results u(0.25, 0.1)  0.3794, u(1, 0.5)  0.1854,
and u(1.5, 0.8)  0.0623. Assume that these results are
accurate for all digits given. Compare these values with
the approximations obtained in Problem 1 above. Find the
absolute errors in each case.
3. Solve Problem 1 by the Crank-Nicholson method with
n  8 and m  40. Use the values for u(0.25, 0.1),
EXERCISES 15.2
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-26.
EXAMPLE 2
Using the Crank-Nicholson Method
Use the Crank-Nicholson method to approximate the solution of the boundary-value
problem
using n  8 and m  30.
SOLUTION
From the identiﬁcations a  2, T  0.3, 
, 
and c  0.25 we get l  0.04. With the aid of a computer we get the results in
Table 15.2.3. As in Example 1. the entries in this table represent only a selected number
from the 210 approximations over the rectangular grid determined by h and k.
k 
1
100  0.01,
h  1
4  0.25
 u(x, 0)  sin x, 0  x  2,
 u(0, t)  0, u(2, t)  0, 0  t  0.3
 0.25 2u
x2  u
t,  0  x  2, 0  t  0.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

u(1, 0.5), and u(1.5, 0.8) given in Problem 2 to compute
the absolute errors.
4. Repeat Problem 1 using n  8 and m  20. Use the val-
ues for u(0.25, 0.1), u(1, 0.5), and u(1.5, 0.8) given in
Problem 2 to compute the absolute errors. Why are the
approximations so inaccurate in this case?
5. Solve Problem 1 by the Crank-Nicholson method with
n  8 and m  20. Use the values for u(0.25, 0.1),
u(1, 0.5), and u(1.5, 0.8) given in Problem 2 to compute
the absolute errors. Compare the absolute errors with
those obtained in Problem 4.
6. It was shown in Section 12.2 that if a rod of length L is
made of a material with thermal conductivity K, speciﬁc
heat g, and density r, the temperature u(x, t) satisﬁes the
partial differential equation
Consider the boundary-value problem consisting of the
foregoing equation and the following conditions:
Use the difference equation (3) in this section with
n  10 and m  10 to approximate the solution of the
boundary-value problem when
(a) L  20, K  0.15, r  8.0, g  0.11, f (x)  30
(b) L  50, K  0.15, r  8.0, g  0.11, f (x)  30
(c) L  20, K  1.10, r  2.7, g  0.22, 
f (x)  0.5x(20  x)
(d) L  100, K  1.04, r  10.6, g  0.06,
7. Solve Problem 6 by the Crank-Nicholson method with
n  10 and m  10.
f (x) 
0.8x,     0  x  50
0.8(100  x), 50  x  100
 u(x, 0)  f (x), 0  x  L.
 u(0, t)  0, u(L, t)  0, 0  t  10
K
 2u
x2  u
t ,  0  x  L.
8. Repeat Problem 6 if the endpoint temperatures are
u(0, t)  0, u(L, t)  20, 0  t  10.
9. Solve Problem 8 by the Crank-Nicholson method.
10. Consider the boundary-value problem in Example 2.
Assume that n  4.
(a) Find the new value of l.
(b) Use the Crank-Nicholson difference equation (5)
to ﬁnd the system of equations for u11, u21, and
u31—that is, the approximate values of u on the
ﬁrst time line. [Hint: Set j  0 in (5) and let i take
on the values 1, 2, 3.]
(c) Solve the system of three equations without the aid
of a computer program. Compare your results with
the corresponding entries in Table 15.2.3.
11. Consider a rod whose length is L  20 for which
K  1.05, r  10.6, and g  0.056. Suppose
(a) Use the method outlined in Section 12.6 to ﬁnd the
steady-state solution c(x).
(b) Use the Crank-Nicholson method to approximate the
temperatures u(x, t) for 0  t  Tmax. Select Tmax
large enough to allow the temperatures to approach
the steady-state values. Compare the approximations
for t  Tmax with the values of c(x) found in part (a).
12. Use the difference equation (3) to approximate the
solution of the boundary-value problem
Use n  5 and m  25.
u(x, 0)  sin x, 0  x  1.
u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0, 0  t  1
2u
x2  u
t,  0  x  1, 0  t  1
u(x, 0)  50.
u(0, t)   20,  u(20, t)  30
15.3
WAVE EQUATION
●
545
Difference Equation Replacement
Suppose u(x, t) represents a solution of
the one-dimensional wave equation
.
(1)
c2 2u
x2  2u
t2
WAVE EQUATION
REVIEW MATERIAL
●Sections 9.5, 12.1, 12.2, 12.4, and 15.2
INTRODUCTION
In this section we approximate a solution of the one-dimensional wave
equation using the ﬁnite difference method that we used in the preceding two sections. The one-
dimensional wave equation is the archetype of a hyperbolic partial differential equation.
15.3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

546
●
CHAPTER 15
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Using two central differences,
we replace equation (1) by
 2u
t2  1
k2 [u(x, t  k)  2u(x, t)  u(x, t  k)],
 2u
x2  1
h2 [u(x  h, t)  2u(x, t)  u(x  h, t)]
(2)
c2
h2 [u(x  h, t)  2u(x, t)  u(x  h, t)]  1
k2 [u(x, t  k)  2u(x, t)  u(x, t  k)].
We solve (2) for u(x, t  k), which is ui, j1. If l  ckh, then (2) yields
(3)
for i  1, 2, . . . , n  1 and j  1, 2, . . . , m  1.
In the case in which the wave equation (1) is a model for the vertical
displacements u(x, t) of a vibrating string, typical boundary conditions are
u(0, t)  0, u(a, t)  0, t 
 0, and initial conditions are u(x, 0)  f (x), 
utt0  g(x), 0  x  a. The functions f and g can be interpreted as the initial
position and the initial velocity of the string. The numerical method based on
equation (3), like the ﬁrst method considered in Section 15.2, is an explicit ﬁnite
difference method. As before, we use the difference equation (3) to approximate the
solution u(x, t) of (1), using the boundary and initial conditions, over a rectangular
region in the xt-plane deﬁned by the inequalities 0  x  a, 0  t  T, where T is
some speciﬁed value of time. If n and m are positive integers and
the vertical and horizontal grid lines on this region are deﬁned by
As shown in Figure 15.3.1, (3) enables us to obtain the approximation ui, j1 on the
( j  1)st time line from the values indicated on the jth and ( j  1)st time lines.
Moreover, we use
; boundary conditions
and
.
; initial condition
There is one minor problem in getting started. You can see from (3) that for j  1
we need to know the values of ui,1 (that is, the estimates of u on the ﬁrst time line)
in order to ﬁnd ui,2. But from Figure 15.3.1, with j  0, we see that the values of ui,1 on
the ﬁrst time line depend on the values of ui,0 on the zeroth time line and on the values
of ui,1. To compute these latter values, we make use of the initial-velocity condition
ut(x, 0)  g(x). At t  0 it follows from (5) of Section 9.5 that
(4)
To make sense of the term u(xi, k)  ui,1 in (4), we have to imagine u(x, t)
extended backward in time. It follows from (4) that
This last result suggests that we deﬁne
(5)
in the iteration of (3). By substituting (5) into (3) when j  0, we get the special case
(6)
ui,1  2
2  (ui1,0  ui1,0)  (1  2)ui,0  kg(xi).
ui,1   ui,1  2kg(xi)
u(xi,k)  u(xi, k)  2kg(xi).
g(xi)  ut(xi, 0)  u(xi, k)  u(xi, k)
2k
.
ui,0  u(xi, 0)  f (xi)
u0, j  u(0, jk)  0,  un, j  u(a, jk)  0
xi  ih, i  0, 1, 2, . . . , n  and  tj  jk, j  0, 1, 2, . . . , m.
h  a
n  and  k  T
m,
ui, j1  2 ui1, j  2(1  2)uij  2 ui1, j  ui, j1
( j − 1)st time
line
( j + 1)st time
line
h
k
ui j
ui + 1, j
ui −1, j
ui, j − 1
jth time line
u i ,  j  +  1 
FIGURE 15.3.1
u at t  j  1 is
determined from three values of u at 
t  j and one value at t  j  1.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.3
WAVE EQUATION
●
547
TABLE 15.3.1
Explicit Difference Equation Approximation with h  0.2,
k  0.05, l  0.5
Time
x  0.20
x  0.40
x  0.60
x  0.80
0.00
0.5878
0.9511
0.9511
0.5878
0.10
0.4782
0.7738
0.7738
0.4782
0.20
0.1903
0.3080
0.3080
0.1903
0.30
0.1685
0.2727
0.2727
0.1685
0.40
0.4645
0.7516
0.7516
0.4645
0.50
0.5873
0.9503
0.9503
0.5873
0.60
0.4912
0.7947
0.7947
0.4912
0.70
0.2119
0.3428
0.3428
0.2119
0.80
0.1464
0.2369
0.2369
0.1464
0.90
0.4501
0.7283
0.7283
0.4501
1.00
0.5860
0.9482
0.9482
0.5860
EXAMPLE 1
Using the Finite Difference Method
Approximate the solution of the boundary-value problem
using (3) with n  5 and m  20.
SOLUTION
We make the identiﬁcations c  2, a  1, and T  1. With n  5 and
m  20 we get 
, 
, and l  0.5. Thus, with g(x)  0, equa-
tions (6) and (3) become, respectively,
(7)
(8)
For i  1, 2, 3, 4, equation (7) yields the following values for the ui,1 on the ﬁrst time
line:
(9)
Note that the results given in (9) were obtained from the initial condition
u(x, 0)  sin px. For example, u20  sin(0.2p), and so on. Now j  1 in (8) gives
and so for i  1, 2, 3, 4 we get
.
Using the boundary conditions, the initial conditions, and the data obtained in (9), we
get from these equations the approximations for u on the second time line. These last
results and an abbreviation of the remaining calculations are given in Table 15.3.1.
 u42  0.25u51  1.5u41  0.25u31  u40
 u32  0.25u41  1.5u31  0.25u21  u30
 u22  0.25u31  1.5u21  0.25u11  u20
 u12  0.25u21  1.5u11  0.25u01  u10
ui,2  0.25ui1,1  1.5ui,1  0.25ui1,1  ui,0,
 u41  0.125(u50  u30)  0.75u40  0.55972100.
 u31  0.125(u40  u20)  0.75u30  0.90564761
 u21  0.125(u30  u10)  0.75u20  0.90564761
 u11  0.125(u20  u00)  0.75u10  0.55972100
 ui, j1  0.25ui1, j  1.5uij  0.25ui1, j  ui, j1.
 ui,1  0.125(ui1,0  ui1,0)  0.75ui,0
k  1
20  0.05
h  1
5  0.2
u(x, 0)  sin px, u
t t0  0, 0  x  1,
u(0, t)   0, u(1, t)  0, 0  t  1
4 2u
x2  2u
t2,  0  x  1, 0  t  1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

548
●
CHAPTER 15
NUMERICAL SOLUTIONS OF PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
It is readily veriﬁed that the exact solution of the BVP in Example 1 is 
u(x, t)  sin px cos 2pt. With this function we can compare actual values with ap-
proximations. For example, some selected comparisons are given in Table 15.3.2.
As you can see in the table, the approximations are in the same ballpark as the
actual values, but the accuracy is not particularly impressive. We can, however,
obtain more accurate results. The accuracy of the algorithm varies with the choice
of l. Of course, l is determined by the choice of integers n and m, which in turn
determine the values of the step sizes h and k. It can be proved that the best accu-
racy is always obtainable from this method when the ratio l  kch is equal to
one—in other words, when the step in the time direction is k  hc. For example,
the choice n  8 and m  16 yields 
, and l  1. The sample values
listed in Table 15.3.3 clearly show the improved accuracy.
h  1
8, k  1
16
TABLE 15.3.2
Actual
Approx.
u(0.4, 0.25)  0
u25  0.0185
u(0.6, 0.3)  0.2939
u36  0.2727
u(0.2, 0.5)  0.5878
u1,10  0.5873
u(0.8, 0.7)  0.1816
u4,14  0.2119
TABLE 15.3.3
Actual
Approx.
u(0.25, 0.3125)  0.2706
u25  0.2706
u(0.375, 0.375)  0.6533
u36  0.6533
u(0.125, 0.625)  0.2706
u1,10  0.2706
Stability
We note in conclusion that this explicit ﬁnite difference method for
the wave equation is stable when l  1 and unstable when l  1.
In Problems 1, 3, 5, and 6 use a computer as a computation
aid.
1. Use the difference equation (3) to approximate the solu-
tion of the boundary-value problem
when
(a) c  1, a  1, T  1, f (x)  x(1  x); n  4 and 
m  10
(b) c  1, a  2, T  1, 
; n  5 and
m  10
(c)
 n  10 and m  25.
f (x) 
0,   0   x  0.5
0.5, 0.5  x  1
c  12, a  1, T  1, 
f (x)  e16(x1)2
u(x, 0)  f (x),  u
t t0  0, 0  x  a
u(0, t)  0,  u(a, t)  0, 0  t  T
c2 2u
x2  2u
t2,  0  x  a, 0  t  T
2. Consider the boundary-value problem
(a) Use the methods of Chapter 12 to verify that the so-
lution of the problem is u(x, t)  sin px cos pt.
(b) Use the method of this section to approximate the
solution of the problem without the aid of a com-
puter program. Use n  4 and m  5.
(c) Compute the absolute error at each interior grid point.
3. Approximate the solution of the boundary-value prob-
lem in Problem 2 using a computer program with
(a) n  5, m  10
(b) n  5, m  20.
4. Given the boundary-value problem
u(x, 0)  x(1  x),  u
t t0  0, 0  x  1,
u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0, 0  t  1
2u
x2  2u
t2,  0  x  1, 0  t  1
u(x, 0)  sin  x,  u
t t0  0, 0  x  1.
u(0, t)  0,  u(1, t)  0, 0  t  0.5
2u
x2  2u
t2,  0  x  1, 0  t  0.5
EXERCISES 15.3
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-29.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 15 IN REVIEW
●
549
use 
in equation (6) to compute the values of
ui,1 by hand.
5. It was shown in Section 12.2 that the equation of a
vibrating string is
where T is the constant magnitude of the tension in the
string and r is its mass per unit length. Suppose a string
of length 60 centimeters is secured to the x-axis at its ends
and is released from rest from the initial displacement
f (x) 
0.01x,      0  x  30
0.30  x  30
100 , 30  x  60.
T
 2u
x2  2u
t2 ,
h  k  1
5
Use the difference equation (3) in this section to
approximate the solution of the boundary-value problem
when h  10, 
and where r  0.0225 gcm,
T  1.4 	 107 dynes. Use m  50.
6. Repeat Problem 5 using
and h  10, 
. Use m  50.
k  2.51>T
f (x) 
0.2x,       0  x  15
0.30  x  15
150 , 15  x  60
k  51>T
TABLE 15.R.1
Time
x  0.00
x  0.20
x  0.40
x  0.60
x  0.80
x  1.00
0.00
0.0000
0.2000
0.4000
0.6000
0.8000
0.0000
0.01
0.0000
0.0000
0.02
0.0000
0.0000
0.03
0.0000
0.0000
0.04
0.0000
0.0000
0.05
0.0000
0.0000
TABLE 15.R.2
Time
x  0.00
x  0.20
x  0.40
x  0.60
x  0.80
x  1.00
0.00
0.0000
0.2000
0.4000
0.6000
0.8000
1.0000
0.01
0.0000
0.0000
0.02
0.0000
0.0000
0.03
0.0000
0.0000
0.04
0.0000
0.0000
0.05
0.0000
0.0000
CHAPTER 15 IN REVIEW
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-31.
1. Consider the boundary-value problem
Approximate the solution of the differential equation at
the interior points of the region with mesh size 
.
Use Gaussian elimination or Gauss-Seidel iteration.
2. Solve Problem 1 using mesh size 
. Use Gauss-
Seidel iteration.
3. Consider the boundary-value problem
(a) Note that the initial temperature u(x, 0)  x indi-
cates that the temperature at the right boundary
x  1 should be u(1, 0)  1, whereas the boundary
conditions imply that u(1, 0)  0. Write a computer
program for the explicit ﬁnite difference method so
u(x, 0)  x, 0  x  1.
u(0, t)  0, u(1, t)  0, t 
 0
2u
x2  u
t,  0  x  1, 0  t  0.05
h  1
4
h  1
2
u(x, 0)  0,  u(x, 1)  0,  0  x  2.
u(0, y)  0,  u(2, y)  50,  0  y  1
2u
x2  2u
y2  0,  0  x  2, 0  y  1
that the boundary conditions prevail for all times
considered, including t  0. Use the program to
complete Table 15.R.1.
(b) Modify your computer program so that the initial
condition prevails at the boundaries at t  0. Use
this program to complete Table 15.R.2.
(c) Are Tables 15.R.1 and 15.R.2 related in any way?
Use a larger time interval if necessary.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Euler's integral deﬁnition of the gamma function is
(1)
Convergence of the integral requires that x  1  1 or x  0. The recurrence
relation
(2)
which we saw in Section 6.4, can be obtained from (1) with integration by parts. Now
when 
and thus (2) gives
,
and so on. In this manner, it is seen that when n is a positive integer, (n  1)  n!.
For this reason, the gamma function is often called the generalized factorial
function.
Although the integral form (1) does not converge for x  0, it can be shown
by means of alternative deﬁnitions that the gamma function is deﬁned for all real and
complex numbers except x  n, n  0, 1, 2, . . . . As a consequence, (2) is actually
valid for x  n. The graph of (x), considered as a function of a real variable x, is
as given in Figure I.1. Observe that the nonpositive integers correspond to vertical
asymptotes of the graph.
In Problems 31 and 32 of Exercises 6.4 we used the fact that 
This
result can be derived from (1) by setting 
:
(3)
When we let t  u2, (3) can be written as 
But
so
Switching to polar coordinates u  r cos u, v  r sin u enables us to evaluate the
double integral:
Hence
(4)
[(1
2)]
2  	  or  (1
2)  1	.
4

0

0
e(u2v2 ) du dv  4
	/2
0 

0
er 2 r dr d  	.
[(1
2)]
2 2

0
eu2 du2

0
ev2 dv  4

0

0
e(u2v2) du dv.

0 eu2 du  
0 ev2 dv,
(1
2)  2 
0 eu2 du.
(1
2) 

0
t1/2et dt.
x  1
2
(1
2)  1	.
 (4)  3(3)  3  2  1
 (3)  2(2)  2  1
 (2)  1(1)  1
x  1, (1)  
0 et dt  1,
(x  1)  x(x),
(x) 

0
tx1et dt.
FIGURE I.1
Graph of 
for x
neither 0 nor a negative integer
(x)
APP-1
Γ(x)
x
Appendix I
Gamma Function
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXAMPLE 1
Value of 
Evaluate 
SOLUTION
In view of (2) and (4), it follows that, with 
Therefore
(1
2)  2(1
2)  21	.
(1
2)  1
2(1
2).
x  1
2,
(1
2).
(1
2)
EXERCISES FOR APPENDIX I
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-31.
1. Evaluate.
(a) (5)
(b) (7)
(c)
(d)
2. Use (1) and the fact that 
to evaluate
[Hint: Let t  x5.]
3. Use (1) and the fact that 
to evaluate
4. Evaluate 
[Hint: Let t  ln x.]

1
0
x3 ln 1
x
3
dx.


0
x4ex3 dx.
(5
3)  0.89


0
x5ex 5 dx.
(6
5)  0.92
(5
2)
(3
2)
5. Use the fact that 
to show that (x)
is unbounded as 
6. Use (1) to derive (2) for x  0.
7. A deﬁnition of the gamma function due to Carl
Friedrich Gauss that is valid for all real numbers, except
is given by
Use this deﬁnition to show that 
.
(x  1)  x(x)
(x)  lim
n: 
n!nx
x(x  1)(x  2) . . . (x  n).
x  0, 1, 2, . . . ,
x : 0.
(x) 
1
0
t x1et dt
APP-2
●
APPENDIX I
GAMMA FUNCTION
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

II.1
BASIC DEFINITIONS AND THEORY
APP-3
Appendix II
Matrices
DEFINITION II.1
Matrix
A matrix A is any rectangular array of numbers or functions:
(1)
a11
a21
am1
a1n
a2n
amn
a12
a22
am2
. . .
. . .
. . .
A 
 (
.)
...
...
If a matrix has m rows and n columns, we say that its size is m by n (written
m  n). An n  n matrix is called a square matrix of order n.
The entry in the ith row and jth column of an m  n matrix A is written
aij. An m  n matrix A is then abbreviated as A  (aij)mn or simply A  (aij).
A 1  1 matrix is sximply one constant or function.
DEFINITION II.2
Equality of Matrices
Two m  n matrices A and B are equal if aij  bij for each i and j.
DEFINITION II.3
Column Matrix
A column matrix X is any matrix having n rows and one column:
b11
b21
bn1
 X 
 ( )
  (bi1)n1.
...
A column matrix is also called a column vector or simply a vector.
DEFINITION II.4
Multiples of Matrices
A multiple of a matrix A is deﬁned to be
where k is a constant or a function.
ka11
ka21
kam1
ka1n
ka2n
kamn
ka12
ka22
kam2
. . .
. . .
. . .
kA 
 (
)
  (kaij)mn,
...
...
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APP-4
●
APPENDIX II
MATRICES
EXAMPLE 1
Multiples of Matrices
(a)
(b)
We note in passing that, for any matrix A, the product kA is the same as Ak. For
example,
e3t 
2
5 
2e3t
5e3t 
2
5 e3t.
et  
1
2
4 
et
2et
4et
5 
2
4
1
5
3
1
6 
10
20
1
15
5
30
DEFINITION II.5
Addition of Matrices
The sum of two m  n matrices A and B is deﬁned to be the matrix
A  B  (aij  bij)mn.
In other words, when adding two matrices of the same size, we add the correspond-
ing entries.
EXAMPLE 2
Matrix Addition
The sum of 
and 
is
A  B 
   2  4
1  7
   3  (8)
   0  9
   4  3
   6  5
6  1
 10  (1)
5  2  
   6
6
5
   9
7
11
5
9
3.
B   
4
7
8
9
3
5
1
1
2
A 
2
1
3
0
4
6
6
10
5
EXAMPLE 3
A Matrix Written as a Sum of Column Matrices
The single matrix 
can be written as the sum of three column vectors:
The difference of two m  n matrices is deﬁned in the usual manner:
A  B  A  (B), where B  (1)B.

3t2  2et
t2  7t
5t  
3t2
t2
0 
0
7t
5t 
2et
0
0  
3
1
0t 2 
0
7
5t 
2
0
0et.

3t2  2et
t2  7t
5t 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APPENDIX II
MATRICES
●
APP-5
q
q
DEFINITION II.6
Multiplication of Matrices
Let A be a matrix having m rows and n columns and B be a matrix having
n rows and p columns. We deﬁne the product AB to be the m  p matrix
 (  aikbkj)mp
.
k1
n
a11b11  a12b21 
a21b11  a22b21 
am1b11  am2b21 
 a1nbn1
 a2nbn1 
 amnbn1

 (
)
...
. . .
. . .
. . .
a11b1p  a12b2p 
a21b1p  a22b2p 
am1b1p  am2b2p 
 a1nbnp
 a2nbnp 
 amnbnp
...
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
a11
a21
am1
a1n
a2n
amn
a12
a22
am2
. . .
. . .
. . .
AB 
 (
) (
)
...
...
b11
b21
bn1
b1p
b2p
bnp
b12
b22
bn2
. . .
. . .
. . .
...
...
Note carefully in Deﬁnition II.6 that the product AB  C is deﬁned only when
the number of columns in the matrix A is the same as the number of rows in B. The
size of the product can be determined from
Also, you might recognize that the entries in, say, the ith row of the ﬁnal matrix AB
are formed by using the component deﬁnition of the inner, or dot, product of the ith
row of A with each of the columns of B.
AmnBnp  Cmp.
EXAMPLE 4
Multiplication of Matrices
(a) For 
and 
(b) For 
and 
In general, matrix multiplication is not commutative; that is, AB  BA.
Observe in part (a) of Example 4 that 
whereas in part (b) 
the product BA is not deﬁned, since Deﬁnition II.6 requires that the ﬁrst matrix (in
this case B) have the same number of columns as the second matrix has rows.
We are particularly interested in the product of a square matrix and a column
vector.
BA 
30
53
48
82,
AB 
5  (4)  8  2
5  (3)  8  0
1  (4)  0  2
1  (3)  0  0
2  (4)  7  2
2  (3)  7  0 
4
15
4
3
6
6.
B 
4
3
2
0,
A 
5
8
1
0
2
7
AB 
4  9  7  6
4  (2)  7  8
3  9  5  6
3  (2)  5  8 
78
48
57
34.
B 
9
2
6
8,
A 
4
7
3
5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APP-6
●
APPENDIX II
MATRICES
EXAMPLE 5
Multiplication of Matrices
(a)
(b)
Multiplicative Identity
For a given positive integer n the n  n matrix
is called the multiplicative identity matrix. It follows from Deﬁnition II.6 that for
any n  n matrix A.
Also, it is readily veriﬁed that, if X is an n  1 column matrix, then IX  X.
Zero Matrix
A matrix consisting of all zero entries is called a zero matrix and
is denoted by 0. For example,
and so on. If A and 0 are m  n matrices, then
Associative Law
Although we shall not prove it, matrix multiplication is
associative. If A is an m  p matrix, B a p  r matrix, and C an r  n matrix, then
is an m  n matrix.
Distributive Law
If all products are deﬁned, multiplication is distributive
over addition:
Determinant of a Matrix
Associated with every square matrix A of constants
is a number called the determinant of the matrix, which is denoted by det A.
A(B  C)  AB  AC    and    (B  C)A  BA  CA.
A(BC)  (AB)C
A  0  0  A  A.
0 
0
0,    0 
0
0
0
0,    0 
0
0
0
0
0
0,
AI  IA  A.
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
I 
 (
)
...
0
0
1
...

4
2
3
8
x
y 
4x  2y
3x  8y

2
1
3
0
4
5
1
7
9
3
6
4 
2  (3)  (1)  6  3  4
0  (3)      4  6  5  4
1  (3)  (7)  6  9  4 
0
44
9
EXAMPLE 6
Determinant of a Square Matrix
For 
we expand det A by cofactors of the ﬁrst row:
  3(20  2)  6(8  1)  2(4  5)  18.
 det A  p
3 
 6 
 2
2 
 5 
 1
1 
 2 
 4
p   3
5
1
2
4  6
2
1
1
4  2
2
5
1
2
A 
3
6
2
2
5
1
1
2
4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APPENDIX II
MATRICES
●
APP-7
It can be proved that a determinant det A can be expanded by cofactors using any
row or column. If det A has a row (or a column) containing many zero entries,
then wisdom dictates that we expand the determinant by that row (or column).
DEFINITION II.7
Transpose of a Matrix
The transpose of the m  n matrix (1) is the n  m matrix AT given by
In other words, the rows of a matrix A become the columns of its transpose AT.
a11
a12
a1n
am1
am2
amn
a21
a22
a2n
. . .
. . .
. . .
AT 
 (
.)
...
...
EXAMPLE 7
Transpose of a Matrix
(a) The transpose of 
is 
(b) If 
then  XT  (5 0 3).
X 
5
0
3,
AT 
3
2
1
6
5
2
2
1
4.
A 
3
6
2
2
5
1
1
2
4
DEFINITION II.8
Multiplicative Inverse of a Matrix
Let A be an n  n matrix. If there exists an n  n matrix B such that
where I is the multiplicative identity, then B is said to be the multiplicative 
inverse of A and is denoted by B  A1.
AB  BA  I,
DEFINITION II.9
Nonsingular/Singular Matrices
Let A be an n  n matrix. If det A  0, then A is said to be nonsingular. If 
det A  0, then A is said to be singular.
The following theorem gives a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for a square
matrix to have a multiplicative inverse.
THEOREM II.1
Nonsingularity Implies A Has an Inverse
An n  n matrix A has a multiplicative inverse A1 if and only if A is
nonsingular.
The following theorem gives one way of ﬁnding the multiplicative inverse for a
nonsingular matrix.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APP-8
●
APPENDIX II
MATRICES
THEOREM II.2
A Formula for the Inverse of a Matrix
Let A be an n  n nonsingular matrix and let Cij  (1)ijMij, where Mij is the
determinant of the (n  1)  (n  1) matrix obtained by deleting the ith row and
jth column from A. Then
(2)
A1 
1
det A (Cij)T.
Each Cij in Theorem II.2 is simply the cofactor (signed minor) of the corresponding
entry aij in A. Note that the transpose is utilized in formula (2).
For future reference we observe in the case of a 2  2 nonsingular matrix
that C11  a22, C12  a21, C21  a12, and C22  a11. Thus
(3)
For a 3  3 nonsingular matrix
and so on. Carrying out the transposition gives
(4)
A1 
1
det A
 
C11
C21
C31
C12
C22
C32
C13
C23
C33.
 C11  
a 22
a 23
a32
a33,    C12  
a 21
a 23
a31
a33,    C13  
a 21
a 22
a31
a32,
A 
a11
a12
a13
a 21
a 22
a 23
a31
a32
a33,
A1 
1
det A
 
a 22
a 21
a12
a11
T

1
det A 
a 22
a12
a 21
a11.
A 
a11
a12
a 21
a 22
EXAMPLE 9
Inverse of a 3  3 Matrix
Find the multiplicative inverse for A 
2
2
0
2
1
1
3
0
1.
EXAMPLE 8
Inverse of a 2  2 Matrix
Find the multiplicative inverse for 
SOLUTION
Since det A  10  8  2  0, A is nonsingular. It follows from
Theorem II.1 that A1 exists. From (3) we ﬁnd
Not every square matrix has a multiplicative inverse. The matrix 
is singular, since det A  0. Hence A1 does not exist.
A 
2
2
3
3
A1  1
2
 
10
4
2
1 
5
2
1
1
2.
A 
1
4
2
10.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SOLUTION
Since det A  12  0, the given matrix is nonsingular. The cofactors
corresponding to the entries in each row of det A are
If follows from (4) that
You are urged to verify that A1A  AA1  I.
Formula (2) presents obvious difﬁculties for nonsingular matrices larger than
3  3. For example, to apply (2) to a 4  4 matrix, we would have to calculate
sixteen 3  3 determinants.* In the case of a large matrix there are more efﬁcient
ways of ﬁnding A1. The curious reader is referred to any text in linear algebra.
Since our goal is to apply the concept of a matrix to systems of linear ﬁrst-order
differential equations, we need the following deﬁnitions.
A1  1
12
 
1
2
2
5
2
2
3
6
6 
1
12
1
6
1
6
5
12
1
6
1
6
1
4
1
2
1
2.
 C31  
2
0
1
1  2 
 C32  
2
0
2
1  2    C33  
2
2
2
1  6.
 C21  
2
0
0
1  2    C22  
2
0
3
1  2 
 C23  
2
2
3
0  6
 C11  
1
1
0
1  1 
 C12  
2
1
3
1  5 
 C13  
2
1
3
0  3
APPENDIX II
MATRICES
●
APP-9
*Strictly speaking, a determinant is a number, but it is sometimes convenient to refer to a determinant as
if it were an array.
DEFINITION II.10
Derivative of a Matrix of Functions
If A(t)  (aij(t))mn is a matrix whose entries are functions differentiable on a
common interval, then
dA
dt 
d
dt
 ai j
mn
.
DEFINITION II.11
Integral of a Matrix of Functions
If A(t)  (aij(t))mn is a matrix whose entries are functions continuous on a
common interval containing t and t0, then

t
t 0
A(s) ds 
t
t 0
ai j(s) ds
mn
.
EXAMPLE 10
Derivative/Integral of a Matrix
If
X(t) 
sin 2t
e3t
8t  1,   then   X(t) 
d
dt sin 2t
d
dt
 e3t
d
dt
 (8t  1)

2 cos 2t
3e3t
8 
To differentiate (integrate) a matrix of functions, we simply differentiate
(integrate) each entry. The derivative of a matrix is also denoted by A(t).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and
II.2 GAUSSIAN AND GAUSS-JORDAN ELIMINATION
Matrices are an invaluable aid in solving algebraic systems of n linear equations in
n variables or unknowns,
(5)
If A denotes the matrix of coefﬁcients in (5), we know that Cramer's rule could be
used to solve the system whenever det A  0. However, that rule requires a
herculean effort if A is larger than 3  3. The procedure that we shall now consider
has the distinct advantage of being not only an efﬁcient way of handling large
systems, but also a means of solving consistent systems (5) in which det A  0 and
a means of solving m linear equations in n unknowns.
a11x1  a12x2      a1nxn  b1
a21x1  a22x2      a2nxn  b2
                             M                  M
an1x1  an2x2      annxn  bn.

t
0
X(s) ds 
t
0 sin 2s ds
t
0 e3s ds
t
0 (8s  1) ds 
1
2
 cos 2t  1
2
1
3 e3t  1
3
4t2  t .
APP-10
●
APPENDIX II
MATRICES
DEFINITION II.12
Augmented Matrix
The augmented matrix of the system (5) is the n  (n  1) matrix
a11
a21
an1
a1n
a2n
ann
a12
a22
an2 
. . .
. . .
. . .
(
...
b1
b2
bn)
.
...
If B is the column matrix of the bi, i  1, 2, . . . , n, the augmented matrix of (5)
is denoted by 
Elementary Row Operations
Recall from algebra that we can transform an
algebraic system of equations into an equivalent system (that is, one having the same
solution) by multiplying an equation by a nonzero constant, interchanging the posi-
tions of any two equations in a system, and adding a nonzero constant multiple of an
equation to another equation. These operations on equations in a system are, in turn,
equivalent to elementary row operations on an augmented matrix:
(i)
Multiply a row by a nonzero constant.
(ii)
Interchange any two rows.
(iii)
Add a nonzero constant multiple of one row to any other row.
Elimination Methods
To solve a system such as (5) using an augmented ma-
trix, we use either Gaussian elimination or the Gauss-Jordan elimination method.
In the former method, we carry out a succession of elementary row operations until
we arrive at an augmented matrix in row-echelon form:
(i)
The ﬁrst nonzero entry in a nonzero row is 1.
(ii)
In consecutive nonzero rows the ﬁrst entry 1 in the lower row appears to
the right of the ﬁrst 1 in the higher row.
(iii)
Rows consisting of all 0's are at the bottom of the matrix.
(AB).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APPENDIX II
MATRICES
●
APP-11
In the Gauss-Jordan method the row operations are continued until we obtain an aug-
mented matrix that is in reduced row-echelon form. A reduced row-echelon matrix
has the same three properties listed above in addition to the following one:
(iv)
A column containing a ﬁrst entry 1 has 0's everywhere else.
*We can always interchange equations so that the ﬁrst equation contains the variable x1.
EXAMPLE 11
Row-Echelon/Reduced Row-Echelon Form
(a) The augmented matrices
are in row-echelon form. You should verify that the three criteria are satisﬁed.
(b) The augmented matrices
are in reduced row-echelon form. Note that the remaining entries in the columns
containing a leading entry 1 are all 0's.
Note that in Gaussian elimination we stop once we have obtained an augmented
matrix in row-echelon form. In other words, by using different sequences of row
operations we may arrive at different row-echelon forms. This method then requires
the use of back-substitution. In Gauss-Jordan elimination we stop when we have
obtained the augmented matrix in reduced row-echelon form. Any sequence of row
operations will lead to the same augmented matrix in reduced row-echelon form.
This method does not require back-substitution; the solution of the system will be
apparent by inspection of the ﬁnal matrix. In terms of the equations of the original
system, our goal in both methods is simply to make the coefﬁcient of x1 in the ﬁrst
equation* equal to 1 and then use multiples of that equation to eliminate x1 from other
equations. The process is repeated on the other variables.
To keep track of the row operations on an augmented matrix, we utilize the
following notation:
Symbol
Meaning
Rij
Interchange rows i and j
cRi
Multiply the ith row by the nonzero constant c
cRi  Rj
Multiply the ith row by c and add to the jth row

1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
7
p   1
0  and  
0
0
0
0
1
0
6
0
0
1 
6
4

1
0
0
5
1
0
0
0
0
2
p   1
0  and  
0
0
0
0
1
0
6
0
2
1 
2
4
EXAMPLE 12
Solution by Elimination
Solve
using (a) Gaussian elimination and (b) Gauss-Jordan elimination.
 5x1  7 x2  4 x3  9
 x1  2 x2 
 x3  1
 2x1  6 x2 
 x3  7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SOLUTION
(a) Using row operations on the augmented matrix of the system, we
obtain
APP-12
●
APPENDIX II
MATRICES
(

2
1
5
1
1
4
7
1
9
6
2
7
 )
(

1
2
5
1
1
4
2
6
7
R12
1
7
9
 )
(

1
0
0
1
3
1
2
2
3
1
9
14
 )
2R1  R2
5R1  R3
(

1
0
0
1
1
1
14
2
1
3
 )
(

1
0
0
1
2
1
0
3R2  R3
1
 )
(

1
0
0
1
1
2
1
0
1
5
 ).
 R2
 R3
1_
2
2__
11
3_
2
9_
2
3_
2
11
__
2
55
__
2
9_
2
3_
2
9_
2
The last matrix is in row-echelon form and represents the system
Substituting x3  5 into the second equation then gives x2  3. Substituting both
these values back into the ﬁrst equation ﬁnally yields x1  10.
(b) We start with the last matrix above. Since the ﬁrst entries in the second and third
rows are 1's, we must, in turn, make the remaining entries in the second and
third columns 0's:
The last matrix is now in reduced row-echelon form. Because of what the matrix
means in terms of equations, it is evident that the solution of the system is x1  10,
x2  3, x3  5.
(

1
0
0
1
1
1
5
2
1
0
 )
(

1
0
0
4
1
0
1
0
2R2  R1
10
5)
(

1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
10
3
5
 )
.
    4R3  R1
 R3  R2
3_
2
3_
2
9_
2
3_
2
9_
2
    
 x3  5.
 x2  3
2
  x3  9
2
 x1  2x2 
 x3  1
EXAMPLE 13
Gauss-Jordan Elimination
Solve
SOLUTION
We solve the system using Gauss-Jordan elimination:
In this case, the last matrix in reduced row-echelon form implies that the original
system of three equations in three unknowns is really equivalent to two equations in
three unknowns. Since only z is common to both equations (the nonzero rows), we
  R2
  R3
1__
11
1__
11
(

1
4
2
2
3
7
7
5
19
3
1
5
 )
(

1
0
0
2
11
11
3
11
11
7
33
33
 )
4R1  R2
2R1  R3
(

1
0
0
2
1
1
7
3
3
3
1
1
 )
(

1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
3R2  R1
R2  R3
1
3
0
 ).
 2x  5 y  7z  19.
 4x 
 y  3z  5
 x  3 y  2z  7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APPENDIX II
MATRICES
●
APP-13
can assign its values arbitrarily. If we let z  t, where t represents any real number,
then we see that the system has inﬁnitely many solutions: x  2  t, y  3  t,
z  t. Geometrically, these equations are the parametric equations for the line of
intersection of the planes x  0y  z  2 and 0x  y  z  3.
Using Row Operations to Find an Inverse
Because of the number of deter-
minants that must be evaluated, formula (2) in Theorem II.2 is seldom used to ﬁnd the
inverse when the matrix A is large. In the case of 3  3 or larger matrices the method
described in the next theorem is a particularly efﬁcient means for ﬁnding A1.
(

2
2
5
1
4
6
0
3
5
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
 )
(

1
2
5
4
6
0
3
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
 )
R1
2R1  R2
5R1  R3
1_
2
1_
2
1_
2
(

1
0
0
5
0
3
5
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
 )
1_
2
1_
2
17
__
2
5_
2
THEOREM II.3
Finding A1 Using Elementary Row Operations
If an n  n matrix A can be transformed into the n  n identity I by a
sequence of elementary row operations, then A is nonsingular. The same
sequence of operations that transforms A into the identity I will also trans-
form I into A1.
It is convenient to carry out these row operations on A and I simultaneously
by means of an n  2n matrix obtained by augmenting A with the identity I as
shown here:
The procedure for ﬁnding A1 is outlined in the following diagram:
( A  I  )  
(I  A1). 
Perform row operations
on A until I is obtained. This
means that A is nonsingular.
By simultaneously applying
the same row operations
to I, we get A1.
(A  I)  (
a11
a21
an1
a1n
a2n
ann
a12
a22
an2 
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
...
1
1
0
0
0
0
...
...
0
0
1
...)
.

EXAMPLE 14
Inverse by Elementary Row Operations
Find the multiplicative inverse for 
SOLUTION
We shall use the same notation as we did when we reduced an
augmented matrix to reduced row-echelon form:
A 
2
0
1
2
3
4
5
5
6.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Because I appears to the left of the vertical line, we conclude that the matrix to the
right of the line is
If row reduction of (AI) leads to the situation
where the matrix B contains a row of zeros, then necessarily A is singular. Since fur-
ther reduction of B always yields another matrix with a row of zeros, we can never
transform A into I.
II.3
THE EIGENVALUE PROBLEM
Gauss-Jordan elimination can be used to ﬁnd the eigenvectors of a square matrix.
(A  I)
(B  C),
row
operations
A1 
2
5
3
8
17
10
5
10
6.
(

1
0
0
1
0
1
0
5
0
10
0
0
6
 )
30R3
 R3  R1
 R3  R2
1_
2
1_
3
1_
3
1_
2
5_
3
(

1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
2
8
5
5
17
10
3
10
6
 )
.
5_
3
1_
3
(

1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0 )
R2
R3
R2  R3
1_
5
1_
3
1_
2
1_
2
5_
3
17
__
10
1_
3
1_
2
1_
3
1_
5
0

0
0 )
1_
2
1_
3
1_
3
1_
5
(

1
0
0
0
1
0
1_
2
5_
3
1_
3
1__
30
1_
6
APP-14
●
APPENDIX II
MATRICES
EXAMPLE 15
Eigenvector of a Matrix
Verify that 
is an eigenvector of the matrix
A 
0
1
3
2
3
3
2
1
1.
K 
1
1
1
DEFINITION II.13
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
Let A be an n  n matrix. A number l is said to be an eigenvalue of A if there
exists a nonzero solution vector K of the linear system
(6)
The solution vector K is said to be an eigenvector corresponding to the 
eigenvalue l.
AK  	K.
The word eigenvalue is a combination of German and English terms adapted
from the German word eigenwert, which, translated literally, is "proper value."
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors are also called characteristic values and character-
istic vectors, respectively.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APPENDIX II
MATRICES
●
APP-15
SOLUTION
By carrying out the multiplication AK, we see that
We see from the preceding line and Deﬁnition II.13 that l  2 is an 
eigenvalue of A.
Using properties of matrix algebra, we can write (6) in the alternative form
(7)
where I is the multiplicative identity. If we let
then (7) is the same as
(8)
Although an obvious solution of (8) is k1  0, k2  0, . . . , kn  0, we are seeking
only nontrivial solutions. It is known that a homogeneous system of n linear equa-
tions in n unknowns (that is, bi  0, i  1, 2, . . . , n in (5)) has a nontrivial solution
if and only if the determinant of the coefﬁcient matrix is equal to zero. Thus to ﬁnd a
nonzero solution K for (7), we must have
(9)
Inspection of (8) shows that the expansion of det(A  lI) by cofactors results in an
nth-degree polynomial in l. The equation (9) is called the characteristic equation
of A. Thus the eigenvalues of A are the roots of the characteristic equation. To ﬁnd
an eigenvector corresponding to an eigenvalue l, we simply solve the system of
equations (A  lI)K  0 by applying Gauss-Jordan elimination to the augmented
matrix (A  	I0).
det(A  	I)  0.
(a11  l)k1 
a21k1 
an1k1 
a12k2 
(a22  l)k2 
an2k2 


 (ann  l)kn  0.
a1nk n  0
a2nk n  0...
...
. . .
. . .
. . .
K 
k1
k2
M
kn
,
(A  	I)K  0,
AK  (
0
2
2
1
1
1
3
3
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
) ( ) 
 ( ) 
 (2) ( ) 
 (2)K.
eigenvalue
EXAMPLE 16
Eigenvalues/Eigenvectors
Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of 
SOLUTION
To expand the determinant in the characteristic equation, we use the
cofactors of the second row:
From l3  l2  12l  l(l  4)(l  3)  0 we see that the eigenvalues
are l1  0, l2  4, and l3  3. To ﬁnd the eigenvectors, we must now reduce
three times corresponding to the three distinct eigenvalues.
(A  	I0)
det(A  	I)  p
1  	
2
1
6
1  	
0
1
2
1  	
p  	3  	2  12	  0.
A 
1
2
1
6
1
0
1
2
1.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For l1  0 we have
Thus we see that 
and 
Choosing k3  13, we get the
eigenvector*
For l2  4,
K1 
1
6
13.
k2   6
13 k3.
k1   1
13 k3
6__
13
6__
13
1__
13
6R1  R2
R1  R3
 R2
1__
13
(A  0I  0)  (
1
6
1
2
1
2
1
0
1
0
0
0
 )
(


1
0
0
1
6
0
0
0
0
2
13
0
 )
2R2  R1
(

1
0
0
2
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
 )
(

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
 )
.
APP-16
●
APPENDIX II
MATRICES
 R2
 R3
2R2  R1
R2  R3
(

1
0
0
2
1
1
3
2
2
0
0
0
 )
(

1
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
 )
6R1  R2
5R1  R3 (

1
0
0
3
18
16
0
0
0
2
9
8
 )
1_
9
1_
8
R3  
R31
(A  4I  0)  (

5
6
1
2
3
2
1
0
3
0
0
0
 )
(

1
6
5
3
0
1
0
0
0
2
3
2
 )
implies that k1  k3 and k2  2k3. Choosing k3  1 then yields the second
eigenvector
Finally, for l3  3 Gauss-Jordan elimination gives
so k1  k3 and 
The choice of k3  2 leads to the third eigenvector:
When an n  n matrix A possesses n distinct eigenvalues l1, l2, . . . , ln, it can
be proved that a set of n linearly independent† eigenvectors K1, K2, . . . , Kn can be
found. However, when the characteristic equation has repeated roots, it may not be
possible to ﬁnd n linearly independent eigenvectors for A.
K3 
2
3
2.
k2  3
2
 k3.
(A  3I  0)  (

2
6
1
1
0
4
0
0
0
2
4
2
 )
(

1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
 )
,
row
operations
3_
2
K2 
1
2
1.
*Of course, k3 could be chosen as any nonzero number. In other words, a nonzero constant multiple of an
eigenvector is also an eigenvector.
†Linear independence of column vectors is deﬁned in exactly the same manner as for functions.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APPENDIX II
MATRICES
●
APP-17
EXAMPLE 17
Eigenvalues/Eigenvectors
Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of 
SOLUTION
From the characteristic equation
we see that l1  l2  5 is an eigenvalue of multiplicity two. In the case of a 2  2
matrix there is no need to use Gauss-Jordan elimination. To ﬁnd the eigenvector(s)
corresponding to l1  5, we resort to the system 
in its equivalent form
It is apparent from this system that k1  2k2. Thus if we choose k2  1, we ﬁnd the
single eigenvector
K1 
2
1.
 k1  2k2  0.
 2k1  4k2  0
(A  5I0)
det(A  	I)  
3  	
4
1
7  	  (	  5)2  0
A 
3
4
1
7.
EXAMPLE 18
Eigenvalues/Eigenvectors
Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of 
.
SOLUTION
The characteristic equation
shows that l1  11 and that l2  l3  8 is an eigenvalue of multiplicity two.
For l1  11 Gauss-Jordan elimination gives
Hence k1  k3 and k2  k3. If k3  1, then
Now for l2  8 we have
(A  8I  0)  (

1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
 )
(

1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
 )
.
row
operations
K1 
1
1
1.
(A  11I  0)  (

2
1
1
1
1
2
0
0
0
1
2
1
 )
(

1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
 )
.
row
operations
det(A  	I)  p
9  	
1
1
1
9  	
1
1
1
9  	
p  (	  11)(	  8)2  0
A 
9
1
1
1
9
1
1
1
9
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In the equation k1  k2  k3  0, we are free to select two of the variables arbitrar-
ily. Choosing, on the one hand, k2  1, k3  0 and, on the other, k2  0, k3  1, we
obtain two linearly independent eigenvectors
K2 
1
1
0   and   K3 
1
0
1.
APP-18
●
APPENDIX II
MATRICES
EXERCISES FOR APPENDIX II
Answers to selected odd-numbered problems begin on page ANS-31.
II.1
BASIC DEFINITIONS AND THEORY
1. If 
and 
ﬁnd
(a) A  B
(b) B  A
(c) 2A  3B
2. If 
and 
ﬁnd
(a) A  B
(b) B  A
(c) 2(A  B)
3. If 
and 
ﬁnd
(a) AB
(b) BA
(c) A2  AA
(d) B2  BB
4. If 
and 
ﬁnd
(a) AB
(b) BA
5. If 
and 
ﬁnd
(a) BC
(b) A(BC)
(c) C(BA)
(d) A(B  C)
6. If 
and
ﬁnd
(a) AB
(b) BA
(c) (BA)C
(d) (AB)C
7. If 
and 
ﬁnd
(a) ATA
(b) BTB
(c) A  BT
B  (2
4
5),
A 
4
8
10
C 
1
2
4
0
1
1
3
2
1,
A  (5
6
7), B 
3
4
1,
C 
0
2
3
4,
A 
1
2
2
4, B 
6
3
2
1,
B 
4
6
3
1
3
2,
A 
1
4
5
10
8
12
B 
1
6
3
2,
A 
2
3
5
4
B 
3
1
0
2
4
2,
A 
2
0
4
1
7
3
B 
2
6
8
10,
A 
4
5
6
9
8. If 
and 
ﬁnd
(a) A  BT
(b) 2AT  BT
(c) AT(A  B)
9. If 
and 
ﬁnd
(a) (AB)T
(b) BTAT
10. If 
and 
ﬁnd
(a) AT  BT
(b) (A  B)T
In Problems 11-14 write the given sum as a single column
matrix.
11.
12.
13.
14.
In Problems 15-22 determine whether the given matrix is
singular or nonsingular. If it is nonsingular, ﬁnd A1 using
Theorem II.2.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20. A 
3
2
1
4
1
0
2
5
1
A 
2
1
0
1
2
1
1
2
1
A 
7
10
2
2
A 
4
8
3
5
A 
2
5
1
4
A 
3
6
2
4

1
3
4
2
5
1
0
4
2
  t2t  1
t  
t
1
4 
2
8
6

2
3
1
4
2
5 
1
6
2
3
7
2
3t
2
t
1  (t  1)
1
t
3  2
3t
4 
5t
4 
1
2  2 
2
8  3 
2
3
B 
3
11
7
2,
A 
5
9
4
6
B 
5
10
2
5,
A 
3
4
8
1
B 
2
3
5
7,
A 
1
2
2
4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APPENDIX II
MATRICES
●
APP-19
21.
22.
In Problems 23 and 24 show that the given matrix is
nonsingular for every real value of t. Find A1(t) using
Theorem II.2.
23.
24.
In Problems 25-28 ﬁnd dXdt.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29. Let 
Find
(a)
(b)
(c)
30. Let 
and 
Find
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e) A(t)B(t)
(f)
(g)
II.2
GAUSSIAN AND GAUSS-JORDAN
ELIMINATION
In Problems 31-38 solve the given system of equations by
either Gaussian elimination or Gauss-Jordan elimination.
31.
x  y  2z  14
32. 5x  2y  4z  10
2x  y 
z  0
x  y 
z  9
6x  3y  4z  1
4x  3y  3z  1
33.
y 
z  5
34. 3x 
y 
z  4
5x  4y  16z  10
4x  2y 
z  7
x  y 
5z  7
x 
y  3z  6

t
1
A(s)B(s) ds
d
dtA(t)B(t)

2
1
B(t) dt

1
0
A(t) dt
dB
dt
dA
dt
B(t) 
6t
2
1>t
4t.
A(t) 
1
t2  1
3t
t2
t

t
0
A(s) ds

2
0
A(t) dt
dA
dt
A(t) 
e4t
cos 
t
2t
3t2  1.
X 
5te2t
t sin 3t
X  2 
1
1e2t  4 
2
1e3t
X 
1
2 sin 2t  4 cos 2t
3 sin 2t  5 cos 2t
X 
5et
2et
7et
A(t) 
2et sin t
2et cos t
 et cos t
      et sin t
A(t) 
2et
e4t
4et
3e4t
A 
4
1
1
6
2
3
2
1
2
A 
2
1
1
1
2
3
3
2
4
35.
2x  y  z  4
36.
x 
2z  8
10x  2y  2z  1
x  2y  2z  4
6x  2y  4z  8
2x  5y  6z  6
37.
x1  x2  x3  x4  1
38. 2x1  x2  x3  0
x1  x2  x3  x4  3
x1  3x2  x3  0
x1  x2  x3  x4  3
7x1  x2  3x3  0
4x1  x2  2x3  x4  0
In Problems 39 and 40 use Gauss-Jordan elimination to
demonstrate that the given system of equations has no
solution.
39.
x  2y  4z  2
40.
x1  x2  x3  3x4  1
2x  4y  3z  1
x2  x3  4x4  0
x  2y  z  7
x1  2x2  2x3  x4  6
4x1  7x2  7x3
 9
In Problems 41-46 use Theorem II.3 to ﬁnd A1 for the
given matrix or show that no inverse exists.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
II.3
THE EIGENVALUE PROBLEM
In Problems 47-54 ﬁnd the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
the given matrix.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54. 
1
6
0
0
2
1
0
1
2

0
4
0
1
4
0
0
0
2

3
0
0
0
2
0
4
0
1

5
1
0
0
5
9
5
1
0

1
1
1
4
1

8
1
16
0

2
1
2
1

1
2
7
8
A 
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
A 
1
2
3
1
1
0
2
1
2
1
3
0
1
1
2
1
A 
1
2
3
0
1
4
0
0
8
A 
1
3
0
1
2
1
0
1
2
A 
2
4
2
4
2
2
8
10
6
A 
4
2
3
2
1
0
1
2
0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Problems 55 and 56 show that the given matrix has
complex eigenvalues. Find the eigenvectors of the matrix.
55.
56.
Miscellaneous Problems
57. If A(t) is a 2  2 matrix of differentiable functions and
X(t) is a 2  1 column matrix of differentiable func-
tions, prove the product rule
58. Derive formula (3). [Hint: Find a matrix
for which AB  I. Solve for b11, b12, b21, and b22. Then
show that BA  I.]
B 
b11
b12
b21
b22
d
dt [A(t)X(t)]  A(t)X(t)  A(t)X(t).

2
1
0
5
2
4
0
1
2

1
2
5
1
APP-20
●
APPENDIX II
MATRICES
59. If A is nonsingular and AB  AC, show that B  C.
60. If A and B are nonsingular, show that (AB)1  B1A1.
61. Let A and B be n  n matrices. In general, is
62. A square matrix A is said to be a diagonal matrix if
all its entries off the main diagonal are zero—that is,
aij  0, i  j. The entries aii on the main diagonal may
or may not be zero. The multiplicative identity matrix I
is an example of a diagonal matrix.
(a) Find the inverse of the 2  2 diagonal matrix
when a11  0, a22  0.
(b) Find the inverse of a 3  3 diagonal matrix A
whose main diagonal entries aii are all nonzero.
(c) In general, what is the inverse of an n  n diagonal
matrix A whose main diagonal entries aii are all
nonzero?
A 
a11
0
0
a22
(A  B)2  A2  2AB  B2?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APP-21
f (t)
1. 1
2. t
3. tn
n a positive integer
4. t1/2
5. t1/2
6. ta
7. sin kt
8. cos kt
9. sin2 kt
10. cos2 kt
11. eat
12. sinh kt
13. cosh kt
14. sinh2kt
15. cosh2kt
16. teat
17. tn eat
n a positive integer
n!
(s  a)n1,
1
(s  a)2
s2  2k2
s(s2  4k2)
2k2
s(s2  4k2)
s
s2  k2
k
s2  k2
1
s  a
s2  2k2
s(s2  4k2)
2k2
s(s2  4k2)
s
s2  k2
k
s2  k2
(  1)
s1
, a  1
1
2s3/2
B

s
n!
sn1,
1
s2
1
s
{ f (t)}  F(s)
Appendix III
Laplace Transforms
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APP-22
●
APPENDIX III
LAPLACE TRANSFORMS
f (t)
18. eat sin kt
19. eat cos kt
20. eat sinh kt
21. eat cosh kt
22. t sin kt
23. t cos kt
24. sin kt  kt cos kt
25. sin kt  kt cos kt
26. t sinh kt
27. t cosh kt
28.
29.
30. 1  cos kt
31. kt  sin kt
32.
33.
34. sin kt sinh kt
35. sin kt cosh kt
36. cos kt sinh kt
37. cos kt cosh kt
s3
s4  4k4
k(s2  2k2)
s4  4k4
k(s2  2k2)
s4  4k4
2k2s
s4  4k4
s
(s2  a2)(s2  b2)
cos bt  cos at
a2  b2
1
(s2  a2)(s2  b2)
a sin bt  b sin at
ab (a2  b2)
k3
s2(s2  k2)
k2
s(s2  k2)
s
(s  a)(s  b)
aeat  bebt
a  b
1
(s  a)(s  b)
eat  ebt
a  b
s2  k2
(s2  k2)2
2ks
(s2  k2)2
2k3
(s2  k2)2
2ks2
(s2  k2)2
s2  k2
(s2  k2)2
2ks
(s2  k2)2
s  a
(s  a)2  k2
k
(s  a)2  k2
s  a
(s  a)2  k2
k
(s  a)2  k2
{ f (t)}  F(s)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

f (t)
38. J0(kt)
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50. eat f (t)
F(s  a)
51.
52.
easF(s)
53.
eas
54. f (n)(t)
55. tn f(t)
56.
F(s)G(s)
57. d(t)
1
58. d(t  t0)
est0

t
0
f (	)g(t  	) d	
(1)n dn
dsn F(s)
snF(s)  s(n1) f (0)  
 
 
  f (n1)(0)
{ g(t  a)}
g(t)(t  a)
f (t  a)(t  a)
eas
s
(t  a)
 erfc 
a
2 1t
bea1s
s(1s  b)
eabeb2terfc b 1t 
a
2 1t
ea1s
1s(1s  b)
eabeb2t erfc b 1t 
a
2 1t
ea1s
s1s
2 B
t
 ea2/4t  a erfc 
a
21t
ea1s
s
erfc 
a
21t
ea1s
a
21t3 ea2/4t
ea 1s
1s
1
1t
 ea2/4t
1
2 arctan a  b
s
 1
2 arctan a  b
s
sin at cos bt
t
arctan 
a
s
sin at
t
ln s2  k2
s2
2(1  cosh kt)
t
ln s2  k2
s2
2(1  cos kt)
t
ln s  a
s  b
ebt  eat
t
1
1s2  k2
{ f (t)}  F(s)
APPENDIX III
LAPLACE TRANSFORMS
●
APP-23
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-1
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED 
ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
EXERCISES 1.1 (PAGE 10)
1. linear, second order
3. linear, fourth order
5. nonlinear, second order
7. linear, third order
9. linear in x but nonlinear in y
15. domain of function is [2, ); largest interval of
deﬁnition for solution is (2, )
17. domain of function is the set of real numbers except
x  2 and x  2; largest intervals of deﬁnition for
solution are (, 2), (2, 2), or (2, )
19.
deﬁned on (, ln 2) or on (ln 2, )
27. m  2
29. m  2, m  3
31. m  0, m  1
33. y  2
35. no constant solutions
EXERCISES 1.2 (PAGE 17)
1. y  1(1  4ex)
3. y  1(x2  1); (1, )
5. y  1(x2  1); (, )
7. x  cos t  8 sin t
9.
11.
13. y  5ex1
15. y  0, y  x3
17. half-planes deﬁned by either y  0 or y  0
19. half-planes deﬁned by either x  0 or x  0
21. the regions deﬁned by y  2, y  2, or 2  y  2
23. any region not containing (0, 0)
25. yes
27. no
29. (a) y  cx
(b) any rectangular region not touching the y-axis
(c) No, the function is not differentiable at x  0.
31. (b) y  1(1  x) on (, 1);
y  1(x  1) on (1, );
(c) y  0 on (, )
39.
41. y  0
43. no solution
EXERCISES 1.3 (PAGE 28)
1.
3.
7. dx
dt  kx(1000  x)
dP
dt  k1P  k2P2
dP
dt  kP  r; dP
dt  kP  r
y  3sin 2x
y  3
2
 ex  1
2
 ex
x  13
4  cos t  1
4 sin t
X  et  1
et  2
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
CHAPTER 1 IN REVIEW (PAGE 33)
1.
3. y  k2y  0
5. y  2y	  y  0
7. (a), (d)
9. (b)
11. (b)
13. y  c1 and y  c2ex, c1 and c2 constants
15. y	  x2  y2
17. (a) The domain is the set of all real numbers.
(b) either (, 0) or (0, )
19. For x0  1 the interval is (, 0), and for x0  2 the
interval is (0, ).
21. (c)
23. (, )
25. (0, )
31.
33.
35. y0  3, y1  0
37.
EXERCISES 2.1 (PAGE 43)
21. 0 is asymptotically stable (attractor); 3 is unstable
(repeller).
23. 2 is semi-stable.
25. 2 is unstable (repeller); 0 is semi-stable; 2 is
asymptotically stable (attractor).
27. 1 is asymptotically stable (attractor); 0 is unstable
(repeller).
39. 0  P0  hk
41. 1mg>k
dP
dt  k(P  200  10t)
y  3
2 e3x3  9
2 ex1  2x.
y  1
2 e3x  1
2 ex  2x
y 
x2,
x2,
x  0
x 
 0
dy
dx  10y
dy
dx  x  1x2  y2
y
dx
dt  kx  r, k  0
dA
dt  k(M  A), k  0
d 2r
dt2  gR2
r 2  0
mdv
dt  vdm
dt  kv  mg  R
m d 2x
dt2  kx
m dv
dt  mg  kv2
L di
dt  Ri  E(t)
dh
dt   c
450
 1h
dA
dt 
7
600  t A  6
dA
dt 
1
100
 A  0; A(0)  50
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-2
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 2
EXERCISES 2.2 (PAGE 51)
1.
3.
5. y  cx4
7. 3e2y  2e3x  c
9.
11. 4 cos y  2x  sin 2x  c
13. (ex  1)2  2(ey  1)1  c
15. S  cekr
17.
19. ( y  3)5 ex  c(x  4)5 ey
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
33.
35. (a)
37. y  1 and y  1 are singular solutions of Problem 21;
of Problem 22
39. y  1
41.
45.
47.
49.
57. y(x)  (4hL2)x2  a
EXERCISES 2.3 (PAGE 61)
1. y  ce5x, (, )
3.
; 
is transient
5.
; 
is transient
7. y  x1 ln x  cx1, (0, ); solution is transient
9. y  cx  x cos x, (0, )
11.
; 
is transient
13.
; 
is transient
15. x  2y6  cy4, (0, )
17. y  sin x  c cos x, (p2, p2)
19. (x  1)exy  x2  c, (1, ); solution is transient
21. (sec u  tan u)r  u  cos u  c, (p2, p2)
23. y  e3x  cx1e3x, (0, ); solution is transient
25.
27.
29. i  E
R i0  E
ReRt>L; (, )
y  x1ex  (2  e)x1; (0, )
y  1
5x  1
25  76
25e5x; (, )
cx2ex
y  1
2
 x2ex  cx2ex, (0, )
cx4
y  1
7
 x3  1
5
 x  cx4, (0, )
cex3
y  1
3  cex3, (, )
cex
y  1
4
 e3x  cex, (, )
y  221xe1x  e1x  4
y  [1  c(1  2x)]2
y  tan x  sec x  c
y  1  1
10
 tan ( 1
10
 x)
y  0
y  2, y  2, y  2 3  e4x1
3  e4x1
y  ln(2  ex); (, ln2)
y  2x2  x  1;  , 
1  15
2
.
y  ex
4 e-t2dt
y  1
2
 x  13
2
 11  x2
y  e(11/x)
x
x  tan (4t  3
4
 )
y  sin (1
2
 x2  c)
P 
cet
1  cet
1
3
 x3 ln x  1
9
 x3  1
2
 y2  2y  ln  y   c
y  1
3
 e3x  c
y  1
5
 cos 5x  c
31.
33.
35.
37.
39.
41.
43.
53. E(t)  E0e(t4)/RC
EXERCISES 2.4 (PAGE 69)
1.
3.
5. x2y2  3x  4y  c
7. not exact
9.
11. not exact
13. xy  2xex  2ex  2x3  c
15. x3y3  tan1 3x  c
17.
19. t4y  5t3  ty  y3  c
21.
23. 4ty  t2  5t  3y2  y  8
25. y2 sin x  x3y  x2  y ln y  y  0
27. k  10
29. x2y2 cos x  c
31. x2y2  x3  c
33. 3x2y3  y4  c
35.
37.
39. (c)
45. (a)
(b) 12.7 ft/s
EXERCISES 2.5 (PAGE 74)
1.
3.
5.
7. ln(x2  y2)  2 tan1(yx)  c
9. 4x  y(lny  c)2
11. y3  3x3 lnx  8x3
13. lnx  ey/x  1
15. y3  1  cx3
17.
19. et/y  ct
21.
23. y  x  1  tan(x  c)
y3  9
5 x1  49
5  x6
y3  x  1
3  ce3x
x  y lnx  cy
(x  y)lnx  y   y  c(x  y)
y  x lnx  cx
v(x)  8 
B
x
3  9
x2
y2(x)  x2  1x4  x3  4
y1(x)  x2  1x4  x3  4
ey 2 (x2  4)  20
2ye3x  10
3
 e3x  x  c
1
3
 x3  x2y  xy2  y  4
3
lncos x   cos x sin y  c
xy3  y2 cos x  1
2
 x2  c
5
2
 x2   4xy  2y4  c
x2  x  3
2
 y2  7y  c
y  ex21  1
2
 1 ex2 (erf(x)  erf(1))
y 
2x  1  4e2x,
4x2 ln x  (1  4e2)x2,
0  x  1
x  1
y 
1
2  3
2
 ex2,
(1
2
 e  3
2)ex2,
0  x  1
x 
 1
y 
1
2
 (1  e2x),
1
2
 (e6  1)e2x,
0  x  3
x  3
y  2  3ecos x; (, )
(x  1)y  xlnx  x  21; (0, )
y  2x  1  5>x; (0, )
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-3
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 3
25. 2y  2x  sin 2(x  y)  c
27. 4( y  2x  3)  (x  c)2
29.
35. (b)
EXERCISES 2.6 (PAGE 79)
1. y2  2.9800,
y4  3.1151
3. y10  2.5937,
y20  2.6533; y  ex
5. y5  0.4198,
y10  0.4124
7. y5  0.5639,
y10  0.5565
9. y5  1.2194,
y10  1.2696
13. Euler: y10  3.8191,
y20  5.9363
RK4: y10  42.9931,
y20  84.0132
CHAPTER 2 IN REVIEW (PAGE 80)
1. Ak, a repeller for k  0, an attractor for k  0
3. true
5.
7. true
9.
11.
13.
15. semi-stable for n even and unstable for n odd; 
semi-stable for n even and asymptotically stable 
for n odd.
19. 2x  sin 2x  2 ln( y2  1)  c
21. (6x  1)y3  3x3  c
23.
25.
27. y  csc x, (p, 2p)
29. (b)
EXERCISES 3.1 (PAGE 90)
1. 7.9 yr; 10 yr
3. 760; approximately 11 persons/yr
5. 11 h
7. 136.5 h
9. I(15)  0.00098I0 or approximately 0.1% of I0
11. 15,600 years
13. T(1)  36.67° F; approximately 3.06 min
15. approximately 82.1 s; approximately 145.7 s
17. 390°
19. about 1.6 hours prior to the discovery of the body
21. A(t)  200  170et/50
y  1
4 (x  2 1y0  x0)2, (x0  2 1y0, )
y  1
4  c(x2  4)4
Q  ct1  1
25 t4 (1  5 ln t)
dy
dx  ( y  1)2 ( y  3)2
dy
dx  (sinx)y  x
y  c1eex
d3y
dx3  x siny
y  2
x  (1
4 x  cx3)1
cot(x  y)  csc(x  y)  x  12  1
23. A(t)  1000  1000et/100
25.
27. 64.38 lb
29.
31.
33.
35. (a)
(b)
as 
(c)
39. (a)
(c)
41. (a)
43. (a) As 
.
(b) x(t)  rk  (rk)ekt; (ln 2)k
47. (c) 1.988 ft
EXERCISES 3.2 (PAGE 100)
1. (a) N  2000
(b)
3. 1,000,000;
5.29 mo
5. (b)
(c) For 0  P0  1, time of extinction is
.
7.
;
time of extinction is
9. 29.3 g; 
as 
; 0 g of A and 30 g of B
11. (a)
(b)
or 30.36 min
13. (a) approximately 858.65 s or 14.31 min
(b) 243 s or 4.05 min
576 110 s
h(t) 1H  4Ah
Aw
 t
2
; I is 0  t  1HAw 4Ah
t : 
X : 60
t  2
13
 tan1 5
13  tan1 
2P0  5
13 	
P(t)  5
2  13
2
  tan 13
2
 t  tan1 
2P0  5
13 	
t   1
3
 ln 4(P0  1)
P0  4
P(t)  4(P0  1)  (P0  4)e3t
(P0  1)  (P0  4)e3t
N(t) 
2000 et
1999  et; N(10)  1834
t : , x(t) : r>k
P(t)  P0 e(k1k2)t
331
3 seconds
v(t)  g
4k
 
k
 t  r0  gr0
4k  
r0
k
 t  r0
3
  m
k v0  mg
k 
s(t)   mg
k  t  m
k v0  mg
k ekt/m
t : 
v : mg
k
v(t)  mg
k v0  mg
k ekt /m
i(t) 
60  60et/10,  0  t  20
60(e2  1)et/10,   t  20
q(t) 
1
100 
1
100e50t; i(t)  1
2e50t
i(t)  3
5  3
5 e500t; i : 3
5 as t : 
A(t)  1000  10t  1
10(100  t)2; 100 min
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-4
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
15. (a)
(b)
(c)
,
where c2  (mk)ln cosh c1
17. (a)
,
where r is the weight density of water
(b)
(c)
19. (a) W  0 and W  2
(b) W(x)  2 sech2(x  c1)
(c) W(x)  2 sech2x
21. (a)
(b) approximately 724 months
(b) approximately 12,839 and 28,630,966
EXERCISES 3.3 (PAGE 110)
1.
3. 5, 20, 147 days. The time when y(t) and z(t) are the
same makes sense because most of A and half of B
are gone, so half of C should have been formed.
5.
7. (a)
(b) x1(t)  x2(t)  150;
x2(30) 
 47.4 lb
13.
15. i(0)  i0, s(0)  n  i0, r(0)  0
L2
di3
dt  R1i2  (R1  R3) i3  E(t)
L1
di2
dt  (R1  R2)i2  R1
  i3   E(t)
 dx2
dt  2 
x1
100  t  3 
x2
100  t
 dx1
dt  3 
x2
100  t  2 
x1
100  t
dx2
dt  2
25 x1  2
25 x2
dx1
dt  6  2
25 x1  1
50 x2
z(t)  x0 1 
2
2  1
 e1t 
1
2  1
 e2 t
y(t) 
x01
2  1
 (e1t  e2t)
x(t)  x0 e1t
P(t) 
1
(0.001350t  100.01)100
B
mg  V
k
v(t)  B
mg  V
k
 tanh 
1kmg  kV
m
 t  c1
m dv
dt  mg  kv2  V
s(t)  m
k
 ln cosh B
kg
m t  c1  c2
B
mg
k
where c1  tanh1 B
k
mg
 v0
v(t)  B
mg
k
 tanh B
kg
m
 t  c1
CHAPTER 3 IN REVIEW (PAGE 113)
1. dPdt  0.15P
3. P(45)  8.99 billion
5.
7. (a)
(b)
9.
11.
13. x  y  1  c2ey
15. (a)
(b)
(c)
EXERCISES 4.1 (PAGE 127)
1.
3. y  3x  4x ln x
9. (, 2)
11. (a)
(b)
13. (a) y  ex cos x  ex sin x
(b) no solution
(c) y  ex cos x  ep/2ex sin x
(d) y  c2ex sin x, where c2 is arbitrary
15. dependent
17. dependent
19. dependent
21. independent
23. The functions satisfy the DE and are linearly independent
on the interval since W(e3x, e4x)  7ex  0;
y  c1e3x  c2e4x.
25. The functions satisfy the DE and are linearly independent
on the interval since W(ex cos 2x, ex sin 2x)  2e2x  0;
y  c1ex cos 2x  c2ex sin 2x.
27. The functions satisfy the DE and are linearly
independent on the interval since W(x3, x4)  x6  0;
y  c1x3  c2x4.
29. The functions satisfy the DE and are linearly independent
on the interval since W(x, x2, x2 ln x)  9x6  0;
y  c1x  c2x2  c3x2 ln x.
35. (b) yp  x2  3x  3e2x;
yp  2x2  6x  1
3 e2x
y  sinh x
sinh 1
y 
e
e2  1 (ex  ex)
y  1
2 ex  1
2 ex
89%, 11%
1.3  109 years
A(t) 
l2
l1  l2
K0[1  e(l1l2)t]
C(t) 
l1
l1  l2
K0[1  e(l1l2)t],
K(t)  K0e(l1l2)t,
x(t) 
ac1eak1t
1  c1eak1t , y(t)  c2(1  c1eak1t)k2 /k1
i(t) 
4t  1
5
 t2, 0  t  10
20,     
t 
 10
T(t)  BT1  T2
1  B
 T1  T2
1  B  ek(1B)t
BT1  T2
1  B ,  BT1  T2
1  B
x  10 ln
10  1100  y2
y
  1100  y2
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-5
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 4
EXERCISES 4.2 (PAGE 131)
1. y2  xe2x
3. y2  sin 4x
5. y2  sinh x
7. y2  xe2x/3
9. y2  x4 lnx
11. y2  1
13. y2  x cos(ln x)
15. y2  x2  x  2
17.
19.
EXERCISES 4.3 (PAGE 137)
1. y  c1  c2ex/4
3. y  c1e3x  c2e2x
5. y  c1e4x  c2xe4x
7. y  c1e2x/3  c2ex/4
9. y  c1cos 3x  c2sin 3x
11. y  e2x(c1cos x  c2sin x)
13.
15. y  c1  c2ex  c3e5x
17. y  c1ex  c2e3x  c3xe3x
19. u  c1et  et (c2cos t  c3sin t)
21. y  c1ex  c2xex  c3x2ex
23.
25.
27. u  c1er  c2rer  c3er  c4rer  c5e5r
29.
31.
33. y  0
35.
37. y  e5x  xe5x
39. y  0
41.
49. y  6y	  5y  0
51. y  2y	  0
53. y  9y  0
55. y  2y	  2y  0
57. y	  8y  0
EXERCISES 4.4 (PAGE 147)
1. y  c1ex  c2e2x  3
3.
5.
7.
9. y  c1  c2ex  3x
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
 12
25 
 sin 2x  9
25 cos 2x
y  c1ex  c2xex  1
2 cos x 
y  c1ex cos 2x  c2ex sin 2x  1
4
  xex sin 2x
y  c1 cos x  c2 sin x  1
2
 x2 cos x  1
2
 x sin x
y  c1 cos 2x  c2 sin 2x  3
4
 x cos 2x
y  c1ex/2  c2xex/2  12  1
2
 x2ex/2 
y  c1 cos 13x  c2 sin 13x  (4x2  4x  4
3)e3x
y  c1e2x  c2xe2x  x2  4x  7
2
y  c1e5x  c2xe5x  6
5 x  3
5
y  cosh 13x  5
13 sinh13x
y  1
2 1  5
13 e13x  1
2 1  5
13 e13x;
y  5
36  5
36 e6x  1
6 xe6x
y  1
3 e(t1)  1
3 e5(t1)
y  2 cos 4x  1
2 sin 4x
 c3 x cos 1
2 13 x  c4 x sin 1
2 13 x
y  c1 cos 1
2 13 x  c2 sin 1
2 13 x
y  c1  c2 x  ex/2 (c3 cos 1
2 13 x  c4 sin 1
2 13 x)
y  ex /3(c1 cos 1
3
 12 x  c2 sin 1
3
 12 x)
y2  e2x, yp  5
2 e3x
y2  e2x, yp  1
2
21.
23.
25. y  c1 cos x  c2 sin x  c3x cos x  c4x sin x
 x2  2x  3
27.
29. y  200  200ex/5  3x2  30x
31. y  10e2x cos x  9e2x sin x  7e4x
33.
35.
37. y  6 cos x  6(cot 1) sin x  x2  1
39.
41.
EXERCISES 4.5 (PAGE 155)
1. (3D  2)(3D  2)y  sin x
3. (D  6)(D  2)y  x  6
5. D(D  5)2y  ex
7. (D  1)(D  2)(D  5)y  xex
9. D(D  2)(D2  2D  4)y  4
15. D4
17. D(D  2)
19. D2  4
21. D3(D2  16)
23. (D  1)(D  1)3
25. D(D2  2D  5)
27. 1, x, x2, x3, x4
29. e6x, e3x/2
31.
33. 1, e5x, xe5x
35. y  c1e3x  c2e3x  6
37. y  c1  c2ex  3x
39.
41.
43.
45. y  c1ex  c2e3x  ex  3
47.
49.
51.
53.
55. y  c1cos 5x  c2sin 5x  2x cos 5x
57.
 sin x  2 cos x  x cos x
59.
61.
63.
65.
67.
69.
71. y  2e2x cos 2x  3
64
 e2x sin 2x  1
8
 x3  3
16
 x2  3
32
 x
y   cos x  11
3  sin x  8
3 cos 2x  2x cos x
y   41
125  41
125
 e5x  1
10
 x2  9
25
 x
y  5
8
 e8x  5
8
 e8x  1
4
y  c1  c2x  c3ex  c4xex  1
2
 x2ex  1
2
 x2
y  c1ex  c2xex  c3x2ex  1
6
 x3ex  x  13
y  c1  c2x  c3e8x  11
256
 x2  7
32
 x3  1
16
 x4
y  ex/2c1 cos 13
2  x  c2 sin 13
2
 x
y  ex (c1cos 2x  c2sin 2x)  1
3
 ex sin x
y  c1ex  c2ex  1
6
 x3ex  1
4
 x2ex  1
4
 xex  5
y  c1e3x  c2xe3x  1
49
 xe4x 
2
343
 e4x
y  c1 cos 5x  c2 sin 5x  1
4 sin x
y  c1e3x  c2e4x  1
7
 xe4x
y  c1  c2x  c3ex  2
3
 x4  8
3
 x3  8x2
y  c1e2x  c2xe2x  1
2
 x  1
cos 15x, sin 15x
y 
cos 2x  5
6 sin 2x  1
3 sin x,
2
3 cos 2x  5
6 sin 2x,
0  x  >2
  x  >2
y 
4 sin 13x
sin 13  13 cos 13  2x
y  11  11ex  9xex  2x  12x2ex  1
2
 e5x
x  F0
22 sin t  F0
2
 t cos t
y  12 sin 2x  1
2
y  c1ex  c2xex  c3x2ex  x  3  2
3
 x3ex
y  c1  c2x  c3e6x  1
4 x2  6
37 cos x  1
37 sin x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-6
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 4
EXERCISES 4.6 (PAGE 161)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11. y  c1ex  c2e2x  (ex  e2x) ln(1  ex)
13. y  c1e2x  c2ex  e2x sin ex
15.
17.
19.
21.
23. y  c1x1/2 cos x  c2x1/2 sin x  x1/2
25.
27.
EXERCISES 4.7 (PAGE 168)
1. y  c1x1  c2x2
3. y  c1  c2 ln x
5. y  c1 cos(2 ln x)  c2 sin(2 ln x)
7.
9.
11. y  c1x2  c2x2 ln x
13.
15.
17. y  c1  c2x  c3x2  c4x3
19.
21. y  c1x  c2x ln x  x(ln x)2
23. y  c1x1  c2x  ln x
25. y  2  2x2
27. y  cos(ln x)  2 sin(ln x)
29.
31. y  c1x10  c2x2
33.
35.
37. y  2(x)1/2  5(x)1/2 ln(x), x  0
39.
41. y  c1cos[ln(x  2)]  c2sin[ln(x  2)]
y  c1(x  3)2  c2(x  3)7
y  x2[c1 cos(3 ln x)  c2 sin(3 ln x)]  4
13  3
10
 x
y  c1x1  c2x8  1
30
 x2
y  3
4  ln x  1
4
 x2
y  c1  c2x5  1
5
 x5 ln x
y  c1x3  c2 cos(12 ln x)  c3 sin(12 ln x)
y  x1/2[c1 cos(1
6
 13 ln x)  c2 sin(1
6
 13 ln x)]
y  c1 cos (1
5 ln x)  c2 sin (1
5 ln x)
y  c1x(216)  c2x(216)
y  c1ex  c2ex  c3e2x  1
30
 e4x
 sin x lnsec x  tan x 
y  c1  c2 cos x  c3 sin x  ln cos x 
y  4
9
 e4x  25
36
 e2x  1
4
 e2x  1
9
 ex
y  1
4
 ex/2  3
4
 ex/2  1
8
 x2ex/2  1
4
 xex/2
 1
3
 ex cos x lncos x 
y  c1ex sin x  c2ex cos x  1
3
 xex sin x
y  c1et  c2tet  1
2
 t2et ln t  3
4 t2et
x0  0
y  c1e2x  c2e2x  1
4
 e2x ln x   e2x
x
x0
 e4t
t  dt,
y  c1ex  c2ex  1
2
 x sinh x
y  c1 cos x  c2 sin x  1
2  1
6 cos 2x
y  c1 cos x  c2 sin x  1
2 x cos x
y  c1 cos x  c2 sin x  x sin x  cos x lncos x 
EXERCISES 4.8 (PAGE 179)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
where yp(x)
33.
where 
35.
37.
39.
41.
43.
EXERCISES 4.9 (PAGE 184)
1. x  c1et  c2tet
y  (c1  c2)et  c2tet
3. x  c1 cos t  c2 sin t  t  1
y  c1 sin t  c2 cos t  t  1
yp(x)  1
2(lnx)2  1
2 lnx
yp(x)  excos x  exsin x  ex
yp(x)  sin(x  1)
sin1
 sinx
sin1  1
yp(x)  1
2x2  1
2x
yp(x)  (x  1)
x
0
tf(t)dt  x
1
x
(t  1)f(t)dt
yp(x) 
0,                 x  0
10  10cos x,   0  x  3
20cos x,        x  3
y  cosx  sinx  yp(x), 

1  cosh x, x  0
1  cosh x, x 
 0
y(x)  5ex  3ex  yp(x),
y  46
45x3  1
20x2  1
36  1
6ln x
y  4x  2x2  x lnx
y  (cos1 2)ex  (1  sin1 cos1)e2x e2xsinex
y  xsinx  cosxlnsinx
y  e5x  6xe5x  1
2x2e5x
y  25
16e2x  9
16e2x  1
4xe2x
yp(x)  cosx  p
2 sinx  x sinx  cosx lnsinx
yp(x)  1
2x2e5x
yp(x)  1
4xe2x  1
16e2x  1
16e2x
y  c1cos3x  c2sin3x  1
3
x
x0
sin3(x  t)(t  sint)dt
y  c1ex  c2xex 
x
x0
(x  t)e(xt)etdt
y  c1e4x  c2e4x  1
4
x
x0
sinh4(x  t)te2tdt
yp(x)  1
3
x
x0
sin3(x  t)f(t)dt
yp(x) 
x
x0
(x  t)e(xt)f(t)dt
yp(x)  1
4
x
x0
sinh 4(x  t)f(t)dt
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-7
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 5
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19. x  6c1et  3c2e2t  2c3e3t
y  c1et  c2e2t  c3e3t
z  5c1et  c2e2t  c3e3t
21. x  e3t3  te3t3
y  e3t3  2te3t3
23. mx  0
my  mg;
x  c1t  c2
EXERCISES 4.10 (PAGE 189)
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19. y  11  x2
y  1  x  1
2
 x2  2
3
 x3  1
4
 x4  7
60
 x5    
y  1  x  1
2
 x2  1
2
 x3  1
6
 x4  1
10
 x5    
y   1
c1
 11  c2
1x2  c2
y  tan (1
4
   1
2
 x), 1
2
   x  3
2
 
y  2
3 (x  1)3>2  4
3
1
3
 y3  c1y  x  c2
y  1
c2
1
 ln c1x  1   1
c1
 x  c2
y  ln cos (c1  x)   c2
y  1
2
 gt2  c3t  c4
 ( 1
2
 13c2  1
2
 c3)et/2 cos 1
2
 13t
z  c1et  (1
2
 c2  1
2
 13c3)et/2 sin 1
2
 13t
 ( 1
2
 13c2  1
2
 c3)et/2 cos 1
2
 13t
y  c1et  (1
2
 c2  1
2
 13c3)et/2 sin 1
2
 13t
x  c1et  c2et/2 sin 1
2
 13t  c3et/2 cos 1
2
 13t
y  (c1  c2  2)  (c2  1)t  c4et  1
2
 t2
x  c1  c2t  c3et  c4et  1
2
 t2
y  3
4
 c1e4t  c2  5et
x  c1e4t  4
3
 et
 (1
2
 13c2  3
2
 c3)et/2 sin 1
2
 13t
y  (3
2
 c2  1
2
 13c3)et/2 cos 1
2
 13t
x  c1et  c2et/2 cos 1
2
 13t  c3et/2 sin 1
2
 13t
y  c1  c2
 sin t  c3
     cos t  4
15
 e3t
x  c1  c2
 cos t  c3
     sin t  17
15
 e3t
y  c1e2t  c2e2t  c3 sin 2t  c4 cos 2t  1
5
 et
x  c1e2t  c2e2t  c3 sin 2t  c4 cos 2t  1
5
 et
y  c1 sin t  c2 cos t  c3 sin 16t  c4 cos 16t
x  1
2
 c1 sin t  1
2
 c2 cos t  2c3 sin 16t  2c4 cos 16t
CHAPTER 4 IN REVIEW (PAGE 190)
1. y  0
3. false
5.
7.
9.
11. (, 0); (0, )
13. y  c1e3x  c2e5x  c3xe5x  c4ex  c5xex  c6x2ex;
y  c1x3  c2x5  c3x5 ln x  c4x  c5xln x 
 c6x(ln x)2
15.
17. y  c1  c2e5x  c3xe5x
19.
21.
23.
25.
27. y  c1x1/3  c2x1/2
29. y  c1x2  c2x3  x4  x2 ln x
31. (a)
;
(b)
33. (a) y  c1cosh x  c2sinh x  c3x cosh x
 c4x sinh x
(b) yp  Ax2 cosh x  Bx2 sinh x
35. y  exp cos x
37.
39. y  x2  4
43.
y  c1et  c2e2t  3
45. x  c1et  c2e5t  tet
y  c1et  3c2e5t  tet  2et
EXERCISES 5.1 (PAGE 205)
1.
3.
5. (a)
(b) 4 ft/s; downward
(c) t  (2n  1)
16
, n  0, 1, 2, . . .
 x (
4)  1
2; x (9
32)  12
4
 x (
12)   1
4; x (
8)   1
2; x (
6)   1
4;
x(t)  1
4
 cos 4 16 t
12 
8
 
x  c1et  3
2
 c2e2t  5
2
y  13
4
 ex  5
4
 ex  x  1
2
 sin x
y  c1ex  c2ex  Axex ,   
y  c1ex  c2ex  Aex ,   ;
 Bx sin x,   
y  c1
 cos x  c2sin x  Ax cos x
 B sin x,   
y  c1
 cos x  c2sin x  A cos x
 ex cos x ln sec x  tan x 
y  ex (c1 cos x  c2 sin x)
y  c1  c2e2x  c3e3x  1
5
 sin x  1
5
 cos x  4
3
 x
 46
125
 x  222
625
y  e3x/2 (c2 cos 1
2
 111x  c3 sin 1
2
 111x) 4
5
 x3  36
25
 x2
y  c1ex /3  e3x/2 (c2 cos 1
2
 17x  c3 sin 1
2
 17x)
y  c1e(113)x  c2e(113)x
yp  x2  x  2
x2y  3xy	  4y  0
y  c1cos5x  c2sin5x
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-8
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 5
7. (a) the 20-kg mass
(b) the 20-kg mass; the 50-kg mass
(c) t  np, n  0, 1, 2, . . . ; at the equilibrium position;
the 50-kg mass is moving upward whereas the 20-kg
mass is moving upward when n is even and
downward when n is odd.
9. (a)
(b)
(c)
11. (a)
(b)
(c) 15 cycles
(d) 0.721 s
(e)
(f) x(3)  0.597 ft
(g) x	(3)  5.814 ft/s
(h) x(3)  59.702 ft/s2
(i)
(j)
(k)
13.
17. (a) above
(b) heading upward
19. (a) below
(b) heading upward
21.
that is, the weight is approximately
0.14 ft below the equilibrium position.
23. (a)
(b)
25. (a)
(b)
(c) t  1.294 s
27. (a)
(b)
(c)
29.
31.
33.
 2e2t sin 4t
x(t)  1
2 cos 4t  9
4 sin 4t  1
2
 e2t cos 4t
x(t)  1
4
 e4t  te4t  1
4 cos 4t
 10
3  (cos 3t  sin 3t)
x(t)  et/2 
 4
3 cos 247
2
 t 
64
3 147 sin 
247
2
 t
0    5
2
  5
2
  5
2
x(t)  25
2  e2t sin (4t  4.249)
x(t)  e2t (cos 4t  1
2 sin 4t)
x(t)  2
3
 e2t  5
3
 e8t
x(t)  4
3
 e2t  1
3
 e8t
1
4
 s; 1
2
 s, x (1
2)  e2;
120 lb/ft; x(t)  23
12  sin 813 t 
0.3545  n
5 , n  0, 1, 2, . . .
0.1451  n
5 ; 0.3545  n
5 , n  0, 1, 2, . . .
81
3 ft/s
(2n  1)
20
 0.0927, n  0, 1, 2, . . .
5
6 ft;  
5
  5
6
 sin (10t  0.927)
 x(t)  2
3
 cos 10t  1
2
 sin 10t 
x(t)  213
4  cos(2t  0.983)
x(t)  213
4  sin(2t  0.588)
x(t)  1
2 cos 2t  3
4 sin 2t
35. (a)
where 2l  bm and v2  km
(b)
37.
39. (b)
45. 4.568 C; 0.0509 s
47. q(t)  10  10e3t(cos 3t  sin 3t)
i(t)  60e3t sin 3t; 10.432 C
49.
53.
57.
EXERCISES 5.2 (PAGE 215)
1. (a)
3. (a)
5. (a)
(c) x 
 0.51933, ymax 
 0.234799
7.
9. ln  n2, n  1, 2, 3, . . . ;
y  sin nx
11.
y  cos (2n  1)x
2L
n  (2n  1)22
4L2
, n  1, 2, 3, . . . ;
  w0
2P
 x2  w0EI
P2
 
w0EI
P2
 sinh B
P
EI
 L  w0L 1EI
P 1P 
sinh B
P
EI
  x
cosh 
B
P
EI
 L
y(x)    w0EI
P2
  cosh B
P
EI
 x
y(x) 
w0
360EI
 (7L4x  10L2x3  3x5)
y(x) 
w0
48EI
 (3L2x2  5Lx3  2x4)
y(x) 
w0
24EI
 (6L2x2  4Lx3  x4)

E0C
1   2LC sin t
i(t)  i0 cos 
t
1LC 
1
1LC q0 
E0C
1   2LC
 
sin 
t
1LC
 1LCi0 sin 
t
1LC 
E0C
1   2LC cos t
q(t) q0 
E0C
1   2LC
 
cos 
t
1LC
q(t)  1
2
 e10t (cos 10t  sin 10t)  3
2
 ; 3
2 C
 ip  100
13  cos t  150
13  sin t
 qp  100
13  sin t  150
13  cos t
F0
2
 t sin t
x(t)  cos 2t  1
8 sin 2t  3
4
 t sin 2t  5
4
 t cos 2t
 32
13 sin t
x(t)  e2t (56
13 cos 2t  72
13 sin 2t)  56
13 cos t
d 2x
dt2  2 dx
dt  2x  2h(t),
m d 2x
dt2  k(x  h)   dx
dt  or
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-9
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 6
13. ln  n2, n  0, 1, 2, . . . ;
y  cos nx
15.
17. ln  n2, n  1, 2, 3, . . . ;
y  sin(n ln x)
19. ln  n4p4,
n  1, 2, 3, . . . ;
y  sin npx
21. x  L4, x  L2, x  3 L4
25.
27.
EXERCISE 5.3 (PAGE 224)
7.
15. (a) 5 ft
(b)
(c)
; 7.5 ft
17. (a)
.
When t  0, x  a, y  0, dydx  0.
(b) When r  1,
When r  1,
(c) The paths intersect when r  1.
19. (a)
(b) use at 
(c) use cos 
(d)
CHAPTER 5 IN REVIEW (PAGE 228)
1. 8 ft
3.
5. False; there could be an impressed force driving the
system.
7. overdamped
9. y  0 since l  8 is not an eigenvalue
11. 14.4 lb
13.
15. 0  m  2
17.
19. x(t)  e4t (26
17 cos 2
 12 t  28
17 12 sin 2 12 t)  8
17
 et
  8
3
 13
x(t)  2
3e2t  1
3 e4t
5
4 m
vb 
 21,797 cm/s
umax 
 1  1
2 u2
max
umax, sin 1g>l t  1
u(t)  v0B
l
g  sinB
g
l t
y(x)  1
2 
1
2a (x2  a2)  1
a
 ln a
x	

ar
1  r2
y(x)  a
2 
1
1  r 
x
a
1r

1
1  r 
x
a
1r	
xy  r 11  (y	)2
0  t  3
8 110
4 110 ft/s
d 2x
dt2  x  0
u(r) 
u0  u1
b  a
 ab
r  u1b  u0a
b  a
n  n
 1T
L 1 , n  1, 2, 3, . . . ; y  sin nx
L
n  n22
25 , n  1, 2, 3, . . . ; y  ex sin nx
5
21. (a)
(b)
(c)
25.
27.
EXERCISES 6.1 (PAGE 237)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
35.
37.
EXERCISES 6.2 (PAGE 246)
1. 5; 4
3.
5.
7.
 
1
10  9  7  6  4  3
 x10    	
y2(x)  c1  x 
1
4  3
 x4 
1
7  6  4  3
 x7
 
1
9  8  6  5  3  2
 x9    	
y1(x)  c0  1 
1
3  2
 x3 
1
6  5  3  2
 x6
y2(x)  c1  x  1
2!
 x2  1
3!
 x3  1
4!
 x4  . . .	
y1(x)  c0
y2(x)  c1  x  1
3!
 x3  1
5!
 x5  1
7!
 x7  . . .	
y1(x)  c0  1  1
2!
 x2  1
4!
 x4  1
6!
 x6  . . .	
y  c0

k0
1
k! 
x2
2
k
y  c0

k0
1
k! (5x)k
c0  2c2  

k1
[(k  2)(k  1)ck2  (2k  1)ck]x k
2c1  

k1
[2(k  1)ck1  6ck1]xk


k0
[(k  1)ck1  ck]x k


k3
(k  2)ck2xk
1  1
2x2  5
24x4  61
720 x6  . . ., (p>2, p>2)
x  2
3x3  2
15 x5 
4
315x7  . . . 


n0
(1)n
(2n  1)!(x  2p)2n1


n1
1
n xn


n0
(1)n
2n1 xn


n0
(1)n
n!2n x n
(75
32, 75
32), R  75
32
[0, 2
3], R  1
3
(5, 15), R  10
[1
2, 1
2), R  1
2
(1,1], R  1
mx  fk sgn(x	)  kx  0
m d 2x
dt2  kx  0
t  n
50, n  0, 1, 2, . . .
i(t)  2
3 cos 100t  2
3 cos 50t
q(t)   1
150 sin 100t  1
75 sin 50t
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-10
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 6
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
 8x  2ex
21. y(x)  3  12x2  4x4
23.
EXERCISES 6.3 (PAGE 255)
1. x  0, irregular singular point
3. x  3, regular singular point;
x  3, irregular singular point
5. x  0, 2i, 2i, regular singular points
7. x  3, 2, regular singular points
9. x  0, irregular singular point;
x  5, 5, 2, regular singular points
11.
13.
15.
  C2 1  2x  2 x2 
23
3  3!
 x3    	
 
23
9  7  5  3!
 x3    	
y(x)  C1x3/2  1  2
5
 x 
22
7  5  2
 x2
r1  3
2, r2  0
r1  1
3, r2  1
for x  1: p(x)  5(x  1)
x  1 , q(x)  x2  x
for x  1: p(x)  5, q(x)  x(x  1)2
x  1
 y2(x)  c1 [x  1
12
 x4 
1
180
 x6    ]
 y1(x)  c0 [1  1
6
 x3 
1
120
 x5    ]
y(x)  2 1  1
2!
 x2  1
3!
 x3  1
4!
 x4    	  6x
 y2(x)  c1x  1
6
 x3 
14
2  5!
 x5  34  14
4  7!
 x7    	
 y1(x)  c0 1  1
4
 x2 
7
4  4!
 x4  23  7
8  6!
 x6    	
 y2(x)  c1 [x  1
2
 x2  1
2
 x3  1
4
 x4    ]
 y1(x)  c0
 [1  1
2
 x2  1
6
 x3  1
6
 x4    ]
y1(x)  c0; y2(x)  c1

n1
 1
n
 xn
  82  52  22
10!
 x10    	
 y2(x)  c1 x  22
4!
 x4  52  22
7!
 x7
 y1(x)  c0 1  1
3!
 x3  42
6!
 x6  72  42
9!
 x9    	
 y2(x)  c1 x  1
3!
 x3  5
5!
 x5  45
7!
 x7    	
 y1(x)  c0 1  1
2!
 x2  3
4!
 x4  21
6!
 x6    	
17.
19.
21.
23.
25. r1  0, r2  1
27. r1  1, r2  0
29. r1  r2  0
where y1(x)  

n0
 1
n!
 xn  ex

1
3  3!
 x3 
1
4  4!
 x4    	
y(x)  C1y(x)  C2 y1(x) ln x  y1(x)x  1
4
 x2
  1
12
 x3  1
72
 x4    ]
y(x)  C1x  C2 [ x ln x  1  1
2
 x2
  1
x
 [C1 sinh x  C2
  cosh x]
  C1x1 

n0
 
1
(2n  1)!
 x2n1  C2x1 

n0
 1
(2n)!
 x2n
y(x)  C1 

n0
 
 
1
(2n  1)!
 x2n  C2x1 

n0
  1
(2n)!
 x2n
 C2x1/3[1  1
2
 x  1
5
 x2 
7
120
 x3    ]
y(x)  C1x2/3 [1  1
2
 x  5
28
 x2  1
21
 x3    ]
r1  2
3, r2  1
3
 C2 1  1
3
 x  1
6
 x2  1
6
 x3    	

23  4
11  9  7
 x3    	
y(x)  C1x5/2 1  2  2
7
 x  22  3
9  7
 x2
r1  5
2, r2  0
 C2 1  1
2
 x 
1
5  2
 x2 
1
8  5  2
 x3    	
  
1
33  3!
 x3    	
y(x)  C1x1/3 1  1
3
 x 
1
32  2
 x2 
r1  1
3, r2  0
 
23
17  9  3!
 x3    	
 c2 1  2x 
22
9  2
 x2

23
31  23  15  3!
 x3    	
y(x)  c1x7/8 1  2
15
 x 
22
23  15  2
 x2
r1  7
8, r2  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-11
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 7
33. (b)
(c)
EXERCISES 6.4 (PAGE 267)
1. y  c1J1/3(x)  c2J1/3(x)
3. y  c1J5/2(x)  c2J5/2(x)
5. y  c1J0(x)  c2Y0(x)
7. y  c1J2(3x)  c2Y2(3x)
9. y  c1J2/3(5x)  c2J2/3(5x)
11. y  c1x1/2J1/2(ax)  c2x1/2J1/2(ax)
13. y  x1/2 [c1J1(4x1/2)  c2Y1(4x1/2)]
15. y  x [c1J1(x)  c2Y1(x)]
17. y  x1/2 [c1J3/2(x)  c2Y3/2(x)
19.
23. y  x1/2 [c1J1/2(x)  c2J1/2(x)]
 C1 sin x  C2 cos x
25.
35.
45. P2(x), P3(x), P4(x), and P5(x) are given in the text,
,
47. l1  2, l2  12, l3  30
53.
CHAPTER 6 IN REVIEW (PAGE 271)
1. False
3.
7. x2(x  1)y  y	  y  0
9.
11.
13. r1  3, r2  0
15.
17. 1
6
 
2 [x  1
2
 x3  1
8
 x5  1
48
 x7    ]
y(x)  3[1  x2  1
3
 x4  1
15
 x6    ]
y2(x)  C2 [1  x  1
2
 x2]
y1(x)  C1x3 [1  1
4
 x  1
20
 x2 
1
120
 x3    ]
y2(x)  c1 [x  1
2
 x3  1
4
 x4    ]
y1(x)  c0 [1  3
2
 x2  1
2
 x3  5
8
 x4    ]
y2(x)  C2 [1  x  1
6
 x2  1
90
 x3    ]
y1(x)  C1x1/2 [1  1
3
 x  1
30
 x2 
1
630
 x3    ]
r1  1
2, r2  0
[1
2, 1
2]
 y  x  4x3  16
5 x 5
P7(x)  1
16
 (429x7  693x5  315x3  35x)
P6(x)  1
16
 (231x6  315x4  105x2  5)
y  c1x1/2J1/3(2
3
 ax3/2)  c2x1/2J1/3(2
3
 ax3/2)
  C1x3/2sin(1
8
 x2)  C2 x3/2 cos(1
8
 x2)
 y  x1/2 [c1J1/2(1
8
 x2)  c2J1/2(1
8
 x2)]
y  x1[c1J1/2(1
2
 x2)  c2J1/2(1
2
 x2)]
y  C1x sin 
1
x   C2x cos 
1
x 
y2(t)  t1 

n0
 (1)n
(2n)!
 (1 t)2n 
cos (1
 t)
 
t
y1(t)  

n0
 
(1)n
(2n  1)!
 (1 t)2n 
sin (1
 t)
1
 
t
19. x  0 is an ordinary point
21.
EXERCISES 7.1 (PAGE 280)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
33. Use sinh 
and linearity to show that
35.
37.
39.
43.
45.
EXERCISES 7.2 (PAGE 288)
1.
3. t  2t4
5.
7. t  1  e2t
9.
11.
13.
15. 2 cos 3t  2 sin 3t
17.
19.
21. 0.3e0.1t  0.6e0.2t
23.
25.
27. 4  3et  cos t  3 sin t
1
5  1
5 cos 15
 t
1
2
 e2t  e3t  1
2
 e6t
3
4
 e3t  1
4
 et
1
3  1
3
 e3t
cos t
2
5
7
 sin 7t
1
4
 et/4
1  3t  3
2
 t 2  1
6
 t 3
1
2
 t2
31p
4s5>2
1p
s1>2
4 cos 5  (sin 5)s
s2  16
2
s2  16
1
2(s  2)  1
2s
{sinh kt} 
k
s2  k2.
kt  ekt  ekt
2
8
s3 
15
s2  9
1
s 
2
s  2 
1
s  4
1
s 
1
s  4
6
s4  6
s3  3
s2  1
s
2
s3  6
s2  3
s
4
s2  10
s
48
s5
s2  1
(s2  1)2
1
s2  2s  2
1
(s  4)2
e7
s  1
1
s  1
s2  1
s2
 es
1
s
 es  1
s2
 es
1  es
s2  1
1
s2  1
s2
 es
2
s
 es  1
s

1
32  2!
 x6 
1
33  3!
 x9    	

1
4  7  10 x10    	 
5
2
 x2  1
3
 x3
 c1 x  1
4
 x4 
1
4  7
 x7
y(x)  c0 1  1
3
 x3 
1
32  2!
 x6 
1
33  3!
 x9    	
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-12
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 7
29.
31. y  1  et
33.
35.
37.
39.
41.
EXERCISES 7.3 (PAGE 297)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13. e3t sin t
15. e2t cos t  2e2t sin t
17. et  tet
19.
21. y  te4t  2e4t
23. y  et  2tet
25.
27.
29.
31. y  (e  1)tet  (e  1)et
33.
37.
39.
41.
43.
45.
47.
49. (c)
51. (f)
53. (a)
55.
57.
59.
61.
63.
65.
67.
69.
 [1  cos(t  2)] (t  2)
y   sin t  [1  cos(t  )](t  )
  1
3
 sin (t  2) (t  2)
y   cos 2t  1
6
 sin 2(t  2) (t  2)
  1
2
 (t  1) (t  1)  1
4
 e2(t1) (t  1)
y   1
4  1
2
 t  1
4
 e2t  1
4
 (t  1)
y  [5  5e(t1)] (t  1)
f (t)  (t  a)  (t  b); {f (t)}  eas
s
 ebs
s
f (t)  t  t
  (t  2); {f (t)}  1
s2  e2s
s2  2 e2s
s
f (t)  t2 (t  1); {f (t)}  2 es
s3  2 es
s2  es
s
f (t)  2  4(t  3); {f (t)}  2
s  4
s
 e3s
(t  1)  e(t1) (t  1)
sin t (t  )
1
2
 (t  2)2  (t  2)
s
s2  4
 es
e2s
s2  2 e2s
s
es
s2
x(t)   3
2
 e7t/2cos 
115
2
 t 
7 115
10 e7t/2 sin 
115
2 t
y  1
2  1
2
 et cos t  1
2
 et sin t
y  3
2
 e3t sin 2t
y  1
9
 t  2
27  2
27
 e3t  10
9
 te3t
5  t  5et  4tet  3
2
 t2 et
1
2
 t2 e2t
s
s2  25 
s  1
(s  1)2  25  3 
s  4
(s  4)2  25
3
(s  1)2  9
1
(s  2)2 
2
(s  3)2 
1
(s  4)2
6
(s  2)4
1
(s  10)2
y  1
4
 et  1
4
 e3t cos 2t  1
4
 e3t sin 2t
y  8
9
 et /2  1
9
 e2t  5
18
 et  1
2
 et
y  10 cos t  2 sin t  12 sin 12 t
y  4
3
 et  1
3
 e4t
y  1
10
 e4t  19
10
 e6t
1
3
 sin t  1
6
 sin 2t
71.
73.
75. (a)
(b) imax 
 0.1 at t 
 1.7, imin 
 0.1 at t 
 4.7
77.
79.
81. (a)
 k[T  70  57.5t  (230  57.5t)(t  4)]
EXERCISES 7.4 (PAGE 309)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31. et  1
3s2  1
s2(s2  1)2
1
s2(s  1)
s  1
s[(s  1)2  1]
1
s(s  1)
s  1
(s  1)[(s  1)2  1]
6
s5
y  2
3
 t 3  c1t 2
  1
8
 (t  ) sin 4(t  )(t  )
y   1
4 sin 4t  1
8
 t sin 4t
y  2 cos 3t  5
3
 sin 3t  1
6
 t sin 3t
y  1
2
 et  1
2
 cos t  1
2
 t cos t  1
2
 t sin t
12s  24
[(s  2)2  36]2
6s2  2
(s2  1)3
s2  4
(s2  4)2
1
(s  10)2
dT
dt
 
w0
60EIL 
5L
2
 x4  x5 x  L
2
5
x  L
2	
y(x)   w0L2
48EI
  x2  w0L
24EI
  x3
 
w0
24EI x  L
2
4
x  L
2
y(x)   w0L2
16EI
  x2  w0L
12EI
 x3 
w0
24EI
  x4
 
1
101 sint  3
2 t  3
2 
  10
101 cost  3
2 t  3
2 
  10
101
 e10(t3/2) t  3
2
i(t)   1
101
 e10t 
1
101
 cos t  10
101
 sin t
q(t)  2
5 (t  3)  2
5
 e5(t3) (t  3)
  25
4
 cos 4(t  5) (t  5)
  5
16
 sin 4(t  5) (t  5)  25
4  (t  5)
x(t)   5
4
 t  5
16
 sin 4t  5
4
 (t  5) (t  5)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-13
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 7
33.
37. f(t)  sin t
39.
41. f(t)  et
43.
45.
47.
49.
51.
53.
55.
57.
EXERCISES 7.5 (PAGE 315)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
EXERCISES 7.6 (PAGE 319)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
y   2
3!
 t3  1
4!
 t 4
x  8  2
3!
 
 t3  1
4! t 4
y  1
2
 t  3
4 12 sin 12 t
y  8
3
 e3t  5
2
 e2t  1
6
x  1
2
 t  3
4 12 sin 12 t
x  2e3t  5
2
  e2t  1
2
y  2 cos 3t  7
3  sin 3t
y  1
3
 e2t  2
3
 et
x  cos 3t  5
3
  sin 3t
x  1
3
 e2t  1
3
 et
y(x) 
P0
EI
 
L
4
 x2  1
6
 x3, 0  x  L
2
P0L2
4EI
 
1
2
 x  L
12, L
2  x  L
 1
3
 e2(t3) sin 3(t  3) (t  3)
 1
3
 e2(t) sin 3(t  ) (t  )
y  e2t cos 3t  2
3
 e2t sin 3t
y  e2(t2) sin t (t  2)
y  1
2  1
2
 e2t  [1
2  1
2
 e2(t1)] (t  1)
y  cos t (t  
2)  cos t (t  3
2 )
y  sin t  sin t (t  2)
y  e3(t2) (t  2)
  1
3
 e(tn) sin 3(t  n)](t  n)
  4 

n1
(1)n [1  e(tn) cos 3(t  n)
x(t)   2(1  et cos 3t  1
3
 et sin 3t)
  2
R 

n1
(1)n (1  eR(tn)/L)(t  n)
i(t)   1
R
 (1  eRt/L)
coth (s>2)
s2  1
a
s 
1
bs 
1
ebs  1
1  eas
s(1  eas)
  100[e10(t2)  e20(t2)](t  2)
i(t)   100[e10(t1)  e20(t1)](t  1)
y(t)  sin t  1
2
 t sin t
f (t)  3
8
 e2t  1
8
 e2t  1
2
 cos 2t  1
4
 sin 2t
f (t)  1
8
 et  1
8
 et  3
4
 tet  1
4
 t 2et
et  1
2
 t 2  t  1
11.
13.
15. (b)
(c) i1  20  20e900t
17.
19.
CHAPTER 7 IN REVIEW (PAGE 320)
1.
3. false
5. true
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21. 5
23. ek(sa)F(s  a)
25.
27.
29.
;
;
31.
;
;
33.
35.
 
9
100
 e5(t2) (t  2)
  1
5
 (t  2) (t  2)  1
4
 e(t2) (t  2)
y    6
25  1
5
 t  3
2
 et  13
50
 e5t  4
25 (t  2)
y  5tet  1
2
 t2 et
{et f (t)} 
2
s  1 
1
(s  1)2 e2(s1)
{f (t)}  2
s  1
s2 e2s
f (t)  2  (t  2) (t  2)
 
1
s  1 e4(s1)
{etf (t)}   
1
(s  1)2 
1
(s  1)2 e(s1)
{f (t)}  1
s2  1
s2 es  1
s e4s
f (t)  t  (t  1)(t  1)  (t  4)
f (t  t0)(t  t0)
f (t)(t  t0)
cos (t  1)(t  1)  sin (t  1)(t  1)
e5t cos 2t  5
2 e5t sin 2t
1
2
 t 2 e5t
1
6 t 5
4s
(s2  4)2
2
s2  4
1
s  7
1
s2  2
s2 es
i2  6
5  6
5 e100t cosh 50 12 t  612
5  e100t sinh 5012 t
i1  6
5  6
5 e100t cosh 5012 t  912
10  e100t sinh 5012 t
i3  30
13 e2t  250
1469 e15t  280
113 cos t  810
113 sin t
i2  20
13 e2t  375
1469 e15t  145
113 cos t  85
113 sin t
i3  80
9  80
9  e900t
i2  100
9  100
9  e900t
x2  2
5 sin t  16
15  sin 16 t  4
5 cos t  1
5 cos 16 t
x1  1
5 sin t  216
15
 sin 16 t  2
5 cos t  2
5 cos 16 t
y  1
3  1
3
 et  1
3
 tet
x  1
2
 t2  t  1  et
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-14
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 8
37.
39.
41.
43. i(t)  9  2t  9et/5
45.
47. (a)
49. (a)
(b)
and use the double-angle formula for sin 
(d) approximately 2729 ft; approximately 11.54 s
EXERCISES 8.1 (PAGE 332)
1.
,
where 
3.
5.
7.
9.
17. Yes; W(X1, X2)  2e8t  0 implies that X1 and X2
are linearly independent on (, ).
dz
dt  2x  5y  6z  2et  t
dy
dt  3x  4y  z  2et  t
dx
dt  x  y  2z  et  3t
dy
dt  x  3y  et
dx
dt  4x  2y  et
where X 
x
y
z
X	 
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1X 
0
3t2
t2 
t
0
t 
1
0
2,
X	 
3
6
10
4
1
4
9
0
3X, where X 
x
y
z
X   
x
y
X	 
3  5
4  8X
2u
y(x)  
g
2v2
0 cos2 u x2  sin u
cos u x;  solve y(x)  0
x(t)  (v0 cos u) t,  y(t)  1
2 gt2  (v0 sin u)t
2(t)  0  0
2
 cos t  0  0
2
 cos 12  2K
 t
1(t)  0  0
2
 cos t  0  0
2
 cos 12  2K
 t
  1
5 x  L
2
5
 x  L
2	
y(x) 
w0
12EIL   1
5 x5  L
2 x4  L2
2  x3  L3
4  x2
y  t  9
4 e2t  1
4 e2t
x  1
4  9
8 e2t  1
8 e2t
y  1  t  1
2
 t 2
  [1
4  1
2 (t  3)  1
4
 e2(t3) ](t  3)
  2[1
4  1
2 (t  2)  1
4
 e2(t2)](t  2)
y(t)  e2t  [ 1
4  1
2
 (t  1)  1
4
 e2(t1)](t  1)
19. No; W(X1, X2, X3)  0 for every t. The solution
vectors are linearly dependent on (, ). Note
that X3  2X1  X2.
EXERCISES 8.2 (PAGE 346)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
 c3 
0
1
1
 
 t2
2
 et 
0
1
0tet 
1
2
0
0et	
X  c1
0
1
1et  c2 
0
1
1tet 
0
1
0et	
 c3 
2
0
1te5t 
1
2
1
2
1e5t	
X  c1
4
5
2  c2 
2
0
1e5t
X  c1
1
1
1et  c2 
1
1
0e2t  c3 
1
0
1e2t
X  c1
1
1e2t  c2
1
1te2t 
1
3
0e2t	
X  c1
 
1
3  c2 
1
3t 
1
4
1
4	
X  3
1
1et/2  2
0
1et/2
X  c1 
4
0
1et  c2 
12
6
5et/2  c3 
4
2
1e3t/2
X  c1 
1
0
1et  c2 
1
4
3e3t  c3 
1
1
3e2t
X  c1 
1
0
0et  c2 
2
3
1e2t  c3 
1
0
2et
X  c1 
5
2e8t  c2 
1
4e10t
X  c1 
2
1e3t  c2 
2
5et
X  c1 
1
2e5t  c2 
1
1et
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-15
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 8
29.
31. Corresponding to the eigenvalue l1  2 of multiplicity
ﬁve, the eigenvectors are
33.
35.
37.
39.
41.
43.
45.
EXERCISES 8.3 (PAGE 354)
1.
3.

1
4
1
4t 
2
3
4
X  c1
1
1e2t  c2 
1
1e4t 
1
4
3
4 t2
X  c1
1
1et  c2 
3
1et 
1
3
 6 
5 cos 5t  sin 5t
sin 5t
sin 5t

X  
25
7
6et 
cos 5t  5 sin 5t
cos 5t
cos 5t

 c3 
3 cos 3t  4 sin 3t
5 sin 3t
0
e2t
X  c1
 
28
5
25e2t  c2
 
4 cos 3t  3 sin 3t
5 cos 3t
0
e2t
X  c1
0
2
1et  c2 
sin t
cos t
cos tet  c3 
cos t
sin t
sin tet
X  c1
1
0
0  c2 
cos t
cos t
sin t  c3 
sin t
sin t
cos t
X  c1
5 cos 3t
4 cos 3t  3sin3t  c2 
5sin3t
4 sin 3t  3 cos 3t
X  c1
cos t
cos t  sin te4t  c2 
sin t
sin t  cos te4t
X  c1
cos t
2 cos t  sin te4t  c2 
sin t
2 sin t  cos te4t
K1 
1
0
0
0
0
,  K2 
0
0
1
0
0
 
,  K3 
0
0
0
1
0
.
X  7
2
1e4t  13
2t  1
t  1e4t
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
33.
 4
29
83
69sin t

i1
i2  2
1
3e2t  6
29
3
1e12t  4
29
19
42cos t
X 
2
2te2t 
1
1e2t 
2
2te4t 
2
0e4t

1
4
 e2t  1
2
 te2t
et  1
4
 e2t  1
2
 te2t
1
2
 t2e3t

X  c1
1
1
0  c2 
1
1
0e2t  c3 
0
0
1e3t

cos t
1
2 sin tet ln sin t  
2 cos t
sin tet ln cos t 
X  c1
2 sin t
cos tet  c2 
2 cos t
sin tet 
3 sin t
3
2 cos ttet

sin t
sin t tan t 
sin t
cos t
 
ln cos t 
X  c1
cos t
sin t  c2 
sin t
cos t 
cos t
sin tt
X  c1
cos t
sin tet  c2 
sin t
cos tet 
cos t
sin ttet

sin t
cos t
 
ln cos t 
X  c1
cos t
sin t  c2 
sin t
cos t 
cos t
sin tt
X  c1
1
1et  c2
t
1
2  tet 
1
2
2et
X  c1
4
1e3t  c2 
2
1e3t 
12
0t 
4
3
4
3
X  c1
2
1et  c2
1
1e2t 
3
3et 
4
2tet
X  c1
2
1et/2  c2 
10
3e3t/2 
13
2
13
4tet/2 
15
2
9
4et/2
X  c1
1
1  c2 
3
2et 
11
11t 
15
10
X  13
1
1et  2
4
6e2t 
9
6
X  c1
1
0
0et  c2 
1
1
0e2t  c3 
1
2
2e5t 
3
2
7
2
2e4t
X  c1
1
3e3t  c2 
1
9e7t 
55
36
19
4
 
 
et
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-16
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 9
EXERCISES 8.4 (PAGE 359)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
23.
CHAPTER 8 IN REVIEW (PAGE 360)
1.
5.
7. X  c1
cos 2t
sin 2tet  c2 
sin 2t
cos 2tet
X  c1
1
1et  c2 
1
1tet 
0
1et	
k  1
3
X  c3 
1
1e3t  c4 
1
3e5t
X  c1
3
2 e3t  1
2 e5t
3
2 e3t  3
2 e5t  c2 
1
2 e3t  1
2 e5t
1
2 e3t  3
2 e5t or
X  c1
1  3t
t e2t  c2 
9t
1  3te2t
eAt 
e2t  3te2t
te2t
9te2t
e2t  3te2t;
X  c3 
3
2e2t  c4 
1
2e2t
X  c1
3
2
 e2t  1
2
 e2t
e2t  e2t  c2 
3
4 e2t  3
4 e2t
1
2 e2t  3
2 e2t or
eAt 
3
2
 e2t  1
2
 e2t
e2t  e2t
3
4
 e2t  3
4
 e2t
1
2
 e2t  3
2
 e2t;
X 
t  1
t
2t  4
t
t  1
2t  6
t
t
2t  1
X  c1
cosh t 
sinh t  c2 
sinh t
cosh t 
1
1
X  c3 
1
0et  c4 
0
1e2t 
3
1
2
X  c1
t  1
t
2t  c2 
t
t  1
2t  c3 
t
t
2t  1
X  c1
1
0et  c2 
0
1e2t
eAt 
t  1
t
2t
t
t  1
2t
t
t
2t  1
eAt 
et
0
0
e2t;  eAt 
et
0
0
e2t
9.
11.
13.
15. (b)
EXERCISES 9.1 (PAGE 367)
1. for h  0.1, y5  2.0801;
for h  0.05, y10  2.0592
3. for h  0.1, y5  0.5470;
for h  0.05, y10  0.5465
5. for h  0.1, y5  0.4053;
for h  0.05, y10  0.4054
7. for h  0.1, y5  0.5503;
for h  0.05, y10  0.5495
9. for h  0.1, y5  1.3260;
for h  0.05, y10  1.3315
11. for h  0.1, y5  3.8254;
for h  0.05, y10  3.8840;
at x  0.5 the actual value is y(0.5)  3.9082
13. (a) y1  1.2
(b)
(c) Actual value is y(0.1)  1.2214. Error is 0.0214.
(d) If h  0.05, y2  1.21.
(e) Error with h  0.1 is 0.0214. Error with h  0.05
is 0.0114.
15. (a) y1  0.8
(b)
for 0  c  0.1.
(c) Actual value is y(0.1)  0.8234. Error is 0.0234.
(d) If h  0.05, y2  0.8125.
(e) Error with h  0.1 is 0.0234. Error with h  0.05
is 0.0109.
17. (a) Error is 19h2e3(c1).
(b)
(c) If h  0.1, y5  1.8207.
If h  0.05, y10  1.9424.
(d) Error with h  0.1 is 0.2325. Error with h  0.05
is 0.1109.
y(c) h2
2  19(0.1)2(1)  0.19
y(c) h2
2  5e2c (0.1)2
2
 0.025e2c  0.025
  0.0244
y(c) h2
2  4e2c (0.1)2
2
 0.02e2c  0.02e0.2
X  c1
1
1
0  c2 
1
0
1  c3
1
1
1e3t

sin t 
sin t  cos t ln csc t  cot t 
X  c1
cos t
cos t  sin t  c2 
sin t
sin t  cos t 
1
1
X  c1
1
0e2t  c2 
4
1e4t 
16
4t 
11
1
X  c1
2
3
1e2t  c2 
0
1
1e4t  c3 
7
12
16e3t
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19. (a) Error is 
.
(b)
(c) If h  0.1, y5  0.4198. If h  0.05, y10  0.4124.
(d) Error with h  0.1 is 0.0143. Error with h  0.05
is 0.0069.
EXERCISES 9.2 (PAGE 371)
1. y5  3.9078; actual value is y(0.5)  3.9082
3. y5  2.0533
5. y5  0.5463
7. y5  0.4055
9. y5  0.5493
11. y5  1.3333
13. (a) 35.7130
(c)
15. (a) for h  0.1, y4  903.0282;
for h  0.05, y8  1.1  1015
17. (a) y1  0.82341667
(b)
(c) Actual value is y(0.1)  0.8234134413. Error is
3.225  106  3.333  106.
(d) If h  0.05, y2  0.82341363.
(e) Error with h  0.1 is 3.225  106. Error with
h  0.05 is 1.854  107.
19. (a)
(b)
(c) From calculation with h  0.1, y5  0.40546517.
From calculation with h  0.05, y10  0.40546511.
EXERCISES 9.3 (PAGE 375)
1. y(x)  x  ex; actual values are y(0.2)  1.0214,
y(0.4)  1.0918, y(0.6)  1.2221, y(0.8)  1.4255;
approximations are given in Example 1.
3. y4  0.7232
5. for h  0.2, y5  1.5569;
for h  0.1, y10  1.5576
7. for h  0.2, y5  0.2385;
for h  0.1, y10  0.2384
EXERCISES 9.4 (PAGE 379)
1. y(x)  2e2x  5xe2x; y(0.2)  1.4918,
y2  1.6800
3. y1  1.4928, y2  1.4919
5. y1  1.4640, y2  1.4640
7. x1  8.3055, y1  3.4199;
x2  8.3055, y2  3.4199
24
(c  1)5 h5
5!  24 (0.1)5
5!
 2.0000  106
y(5) (c) h5
5! 
24
(c  1)5 h5
5!
  3.333  106
y(5)(c) h5
5!  40e2c h5
5!  40e2(0) (0.1)5
5!
v(t)  B
mg
k  tanh B
kg
m t; v(5)  35.7678
y(c) h2
2   (1) (0.1)2
2
 0.005
1
(c  1)2 h2
2
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-17
9. x1  3.9123, y1  4.2857;
x2  3.9123, y2  4.2857
11. x1  0.4179, y1  2.1824;
x2  0.4173, y2  2.1821
EXERCISES 9.5 (PAGE 383)
1. y1  5.6774, y2  2.5807, y3  6.3226
3. y1  0.2259, y2  0.3356, y3  0.3308,
y4  0.2167
5. y1  3.3751, y2  3.6306, y3  3.6448, y4  3.2355,
y5  2.1411
7. y1  3.8842, y2  2.9640, y3  2.2064, y4  1.5826,
y5  1.0681, y6  0.6430, y7  0.2913
9. y1  0.2660, y2  0.5097, y3  0.7357, y4  0.9471,
y5  1.1465, y6  1.3353, y7  1.5149, y8  1.6855,
y9  1.8474
11. y1  0.3492, y2  0.7202, y3  1.1363, y4  1.6233,
y5  2.2118, y6  2.9386, y7  3.8490
13. (c) y0  2.2755, y1  2.0755, y2  1.8589,
y3  1.6126, y4  1.3275
CHAPTER 9 IN REVIEW (PAGE 384)
1. Comparison of numerical methods with h  0.1:
Comparison of numerical methods with h  0.05:
3. Comparison of numerical methods with h  0.1:
Improved
xn
Euler
Euler
RK4
0.60
0.6000
0.6048
0.6049
0.70
0.7095
0.7191
0.7194
0.80
0.8283
0.8427
0.8431
0.90
0.9559
0.9752
0.9757
1.00
1.0921
1.1163
1.1169
Improved
xn
Euler
Euler
RK4
1.10
2.1469
2.1554
2.1556
1.20
2.3272
2.3450
2.3454
1.30
2.5409
2.5689
2.5695
1.40
2.7883
2.8269
2.8278
1.50
3.0690
3.1187
3.1197
Improved
xn
Euler
Euler
RK4
1.10
2.1386
2.1549
2.1556
1.20
2.3097
2.3439
2.3454
1.30
2.5136
2.5672
2.5695
1.40
2.7504
2.8246
2.8278
1.50
3.0201
3.1157
3.1197
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 9
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Comparison of numerical methods with h  0.05:
5. h  0.2: y(0.2) 
 3.2;
h  0.1: y(0.2) 
 3.23
7. x(0.2) 
 1.62, y(0.2) 
 1.84
EXERCISES 10.1 (PAGE 391)
1. x	  y
y	  9 sin x; critical points at (np, 0)
3. x	  y
y	  x2  y(x3  1); critical point at (0, 0)
5. x	  y
y	  x3  x;
critical points at (0, 0), 
7. (0, 0) and (1, 1)
9. (0, 0) and 
11. (0, 0), (10, 0), (0, 16), and (4, 12)
13. (0, y), y arbitrary
15. (0, 0), (0, 1), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 0)
17. (a) x  c1e5t  c2et
(b) x  2et
y  2c1e5t  c2et
y  2et
19. (a) x  c1(4 cos 3t  3 sin 3t)  c2(4 sin 3t  3 cos 3t)
y  c1(5 cos 3t)  c2(5 sin 3t)
(b) x  4 cos 3t  3 sin 3t
y  5 cos 3t
21. (a) x  c1(sin t  cos t)e4t  c2(sin t  cos t)e4t
y  2c1(cos t)e4t  2c2(sin t)e4t
(b) x  (sin t  cos t)e4t
y  2(cos t)e4t
23.
the solution spirals toward the origin as t increases.
25.
u  t  c2; r  1, u  t (or x  cos t
and y  sin t) is the solution that satisﬁes X(0)  (1, 0);
u  t is the solution that satisﬁes
X(0)  (2, 0). This solution spirals toward the circle
r  1 as t increases.
27. There are no critical points and therefore no periodic
solutions.
29. There appears to be a periodic solution enclosing the
critical point (0, 0).
r 
1
11  3
4e2t
 ,
r 
1
11  c1e2t
 ,
r  
1
414t  c1
 ,   t  c2; r  4 
1
411024t  1
 ,   t;
(
 4
3, 4
3)

1
1
 , 0,  1
1
 , 0
Improved
xn
Euler
Euler
RK4
0.60
0.6024
0.6049
0.6049
0.70
0.7144
0.7193
0.7194
0.80
0.8356
0.8430
0.8431
0.90
0.9657
0.9755
0.9757
1.00
1.1044
1.1168
1.1169
EXERCISES 10.2 (PAGE 399)
1. (a) If X(0)  X0 lies on the line y  2x, then X(t)
approaches (0, 0) along this line. For all other
initial conditions, X(t) approaches (0, 0) from the
direction determined by the line y  x2.
3. (a) All solutions are unstable spirals that become
unbounded as t increases.
5. (a) All solutions approach (0, 0) from the direction
speciﬁed by the line y  x.
7. (a) If X(0)  X0 lies on the line y  3x, then X(t)
approaches (0, 0) along this line. For all other
initial conditions, X(t) becomes unbounded and
y  x serves as the asymptote.
9. saddle point
11. saddle point
13. degenerate stable node
15. stable spiral
17.
19. m  1 for a saddle point; 1  m  3 for an
unstable spiral point
23. (a) (3, 4)
(b) unstable node or saddle point
(c) (0, 0) is a saddle point.
25. (a)
(b) unstable spiral point
(c) (0, 0) is an unstable spiral point.
EXERCISES 10.3 (PAGE 408)
1. r  r0et
3. x  0 is unstable; x  n  1 is asymptotically stable.
5. T  T0 is unstable.
7. x  a is unstable; x  b is asymptotically stable.
9. P  c is asymptotically stable; P  ab is unstable.
11.
is a stable spiral point.
13.
are saddle points; 
is a
stable spiral point.
15. (1, 1) is a stable node; (1, 1) is a saddle point; (2, 2)
is a saddle point; (2, 2) is an unstable spiral point.
17. (0, 1) is a saddle point; (0, 0) is unclassiﬁed; (0, 1) is
stable but we are unable to classify further.
19. (0, 0) is an unstable node; (10, 0) is a saddle point;
(0, 16) is a saddle point; (4, 12) is a stable node.
21. u  0 is a saddle point. It is not possible to classify
either u  p3 or u  p3.
23. It is not possible to classify x  0.
25. It is not possible to classify x  0, but 
and
and are each saddle points.
29. (a) (0, 0) is a stable spiral point.
33. (a) (1, 0), (1, 0)
35.  v0   1
2
 12
x  1  1
x  1  1
(
 1
2
 , 7
4)
12, 0 and 12, 0
(
 1
2
 , 1)
(
 1
2
 , 2)
   1
ANS-18
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

37. If b  0, (0, 0) is the only critical point and is
stable. If b  0, (0, 0),
and
where
are critical points. (0, 0) is stable,
while
and
are each saddle points.
39. (b) (5p6, 0) is a saddle point.
(c) (p6, 0) is a center.
EXERCISES 10.4 (PAGE 415)
1.
5. (a) First show that 
9. (a) The new critical point is 
(b) yes
11. (0, 0) is an unstable node, (0, 100) is a stable node,
(50, 0) is a stable node, and (20, 40) is a saddle point.
17. (a) (0, 0) is the only critical point.
CHAPTER 10 IN REVIEW (PAGE 417)
1. true
3. a center or a saddle point
5. false
7. false
9. a  1
11.
The solution curve spirals
toward the origin.
13. (a) center
(b) degenerate stable node
15. (0, 0) is a stable critical point for a  0.
17. x  1 is unstable; x  1 is asymptotically stable.
19. The system is overdamped when b2  12 kms2 and
underdamped when b2  12 kms2.
EXERCISES 11.1 (PAGE 425)
7.
9.
11.
21. (a) T  1
(b) T  pL 2
(c) T  2p
(d) T  p
(e) T  2p
(f) T  2p
EXERCISES 11.2 (PAGE 430)
1.
3.
;
5.

(1)n1
n

2
n3 [(1)n  1] sin nx
f (x)  2
6  

n1
2(1)n
n2
 cos nx
1
2 at x  0
f (x)  3
4  

n1
(1)n  1
n22
 cos nx  1
n sin nx
f (x)  1
2  1
 

n1
1  (1)n
n
 sin nx; 1
2 at x  0
'1'  1p; 'cos (nx>p)'  1p>2
1/2
1
2
 1
r  1   
313t  1,   t.
(d>c  2>c, a>b  1>b).
y2  v0
2  g ln 
1  x2
1  x0
2.
0   13g>L
( ˆx, 0)
( ˆx, 0),
ˆx2  >,
( ˆx, 0),
( ˆx, 0),
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-19
7.
9.
11.
;
13.
15.
17.
21. Set x  p2.
EXERCISES 11.3 (PAGE 437)
1. odd
3. neither even nor odd
5. even
7. odd
9. neither even nor odd
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
f (x)  2
 

n1
1  cos n
2
n
 sin nx
f (x)  1
2  2
 

n1
sin n
2
n
 cos nx
f (x)  2
  2
 

n2
1  (1)n
1  n2  cos nx
f (x)  3
4  4
2 

n1
cos n
2  1
n2
 cos n
2 x
f (x)  2
 

n1
1  (1)n(1  )
n
 sin nx
f (x)  22
3
 4 

n1
(1)n1
n2
 cos nx
f (x)  1
3  4
2 

n1
(1)n
n2
 cos nx
f (x)  
2  2
 

n1
(1)n  1
n2
 cos nx
f (x)  2
 

n1
1  (1)n
n
 sin nx
x
1
π
−π
y
−  π
3 −  π
2
  π
2
  π
3
f (x)  2 sinh 

 
1
2  

n1
 (1)n
1  n2 (cos nx  n sin nx)	
 (1)n1
n
 sin n
5  x
f (x)  9
4  5

n1
(1)n  1
n22
 cos n
5  x
1 at x  1, 1
2 at x  0, 1
2 at x  1
 3
n 1  cos n
2 sin n
2  x
f (x)   1
4  1
 

n1 1
n sin n
2  cos n
2 x
f (x)  1
  1
2 sin x  1
 

n2
(1)n  1
1  n2  cos nx
f (x)    2

n1
(1)n1
n
 sin nx
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 11
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

27.
29.
31.
33.
35.
37.
39.
41.
43.
45. (b)
47.
EXERCISES 11.4 (PAGE 445)
1. y  cos anx; a deﬁned by cot a  a;
l1  0.7402, l2  11.7349, 
l3  41.4388, l4  90.8082
y1  cos 0.8603x, y2  cos 3.4256x,
y3  cos 6.4373x, y4  cos 9.5293x
5.
7. (a) n 
n
ln 5
2
, yn  sin 
n
ln 5 ln x, n  1, 2, 3, . . .
1
2
 [1  sin2 n]
yp(x)  w0
2k  2w0
  

n1
 sin(n/2)
n(EIn4  k) cos nx
yp(x)  2w0L4
EI5  

n1
 (1)n1
n5
 sin n
L  x
x (t)  10

 

n1
 1  (1)n
10  n2  
1
n sin nt 
1
110 sin 110t
xp(t)  2
18  16 

n1
 
1
n2(n2  48) cos nt
xp(t)  10
  

n1
 1  (1)n
n(10  n2) sin nt
f (x)  3
2  1
 

n1
 1
n sin 2nx
f (x)  42
3
 4 

n1
1
n2 cos nx  
n sin nx
f (x)  4 

n1
(1)n1
n
 (1)n  1
n33  sin nx
f (x)  5
6  2
2 

n1
3(1)n  1
n2
 cos nx
f (x)  

n1
4
n22 sin n
2  2
n (1)n sin n
2  x
f (x)  3
4  4
2 

n1
cos n
2  1
n2
 cos n
2 x
f (x)  4
 

n1
sin n
2
n2
 sin nx
f (x)  
4  2
 

n1
2 cos n
2  (1)n  1
n2
 cos nx
f (x)  8
 

n1
 
n
4n2  1 sin 2nx
f (x)  2
  4
 

n1
(1)n
1  4n2 cos 2nx
(b)
(c)
9.
11. (a) ln  16n2, yn  sin (4n tan1 x),
n  1, 2, 3, . . .
(b)
EXERCISES 11.5 (PAGE 452)
1. a1  1.277, a2  2.339, a3  3.391, a4  4.441
3.
5.
7.
9.
15.
21.
CHAPTER 11 IN REVIEW (PAGE 453)
1. true
3. cosine
5. false
7. 5.5, 1, 0
9.
13.
15. (a)
(b) f (x)  

n1
2n[1  (1)n e1]
1  n22
 sin nx
f (x)  1  e1  2 

n1
1  (1)n e1
1  n22
 cos nx
 2
n (1)n sin nx
f (x)  1
2  2

 

n1
1
n2
 [(1)n  1] cos nx

1
1
 
1
11  x2 Tm (x)Tn (x) dx  0, m  n
1
11  x2
 , 1  x  1,
f (x)   x  on (1, 1)
f (x)  1
2
 P0(x)  5
8
 P2(x)  3
16
 P4(x)     ,
f (x)  1
4
 P0(x)  1
2
 P1(x)  5
16
 P2(x)  3
32
 P4(x)    
f (x)  9
2  4

i1
 J2(3i )
2
i J2
0 (3i )
 J0(i x)
f (x)  20

i1
 
i J2(4i )
(22
i  1)J2
1 (4i )
 J1(i x)
f (x)  4 

i1
 
i J1(2i )
(42
i  1)J2
0 (2i )
 J0(i x)
f (x)  

i1
 
1
i J1(2i )
 J0(i x)
m  n

1
0
1
1  x2
 sin (4m tan1 x) sin (4n tan1 x) dx  0,


0
exLm(x)Ln(x) dx  0, m  n
d
dx
 [xexy	]  nexy  0;

5
1
 1
x sin 
m
ln 5 ln x
 
sin 
n
ln 5 ln x
 
dx  0, m  n
d
dx
 [xy	]  
x
 y  0
ANS-20
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 11
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19.
21.
EXERCISES 12.1 (PAGE 459)
1. The possible cases can be summarized in one form
where c1 and c2 are constants.
3.
5.
7. not separable
9.
11. u  (c1cosh ax  c2sinh ax)(c3cosh aat  c4sinh aat)
u  (c5 cos ax  c6 sin ax)(c7 cos aat  c8 sin aat)
u  (c9 x  c10)(c11t  c12)
13. u  (c1 cosh ax  c2 sinh ax)(c3 cos ay  c4 sin ay)
u  (c5 cos ax  c6 sin ax)(c7 cosh ay  c8 sinh ay)
u  (c9 x  c10)(c11 y  c12)
15. For l  a2  0 there are three possibilities:
(i)
For 0  a2  1,
(ii) For a2  1,
(iii) For a2  1,
The results for the case l  a2 are similar. For l  0,
17. elliptic
19. parabolic
21. hyperbolic
23. parabolic
25. hyperbolic
EXERCISES 12.2 (PAGE 465)
1.
u(x, 0)  f(x),
0  x  L
3.
u(x, 0)  f(x), 0  x  L
u(0, t)  100, u
xxL  hu(L, t), t  0
k 2u
x2  u
t
 , 0  x  L, t  0
u(0, t)  0, u
xxL  0, t  0
k 2u
x2  u
t
 , 0  x  L, t  0
u  (c1x  c2)(c3 cosh y  c4 sinh y)
u  (c1 cosh x  c2 sinh x)(c3y  c4)
 c4 sin 12  1y)
u  (c1 cosh x  c2 sinh x)(c3 cos 12  1y
 c4 sinh 11  2y)
u  (c1 cosh x  c2 sinh x)(c3 cosh 11  2y
u  et(A3x  B3)
u  et(A2ek2t cos x  B2ek2t sin x)
u  et(A1ek2t cosh x  B1ek2t sinh x)
u  c1(xy)c2
u  c1eyc2(xy)
u  c1ec2(xy),
f (x)  1
4
 

i1
 J1(2i )
i
 J2
1 (4i )
 J0(i x)
yn  cos 
2n  1
2
  ln x
n  (2n  1)22
36
, n  1, 2, 3, . . . ,
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-21
5.
u(0, t)  sin(ptL), u(L, t)  0, t  0
u(x, 0)  f (x), 0  x  L
7.
u(0, t)  0, u(L, t)  0, t  0
9.
u(0, t)  0, u(L, t)  sin pt, t  0
11.
EXERCISES 12.3 (PAGE 468)
1.
3.
5.
7.
 Bn  1
L
 
L
L
f (x)sin npx
L dx
 An  1
L
 
L
L
f (x)cos npx
L dx,
where   A0  1
2L
 
L
L
f (x) dx,
u(x, t)  A0  

k1
ek(n/L)2t Ancos n
L x  Bnsin n
L x,
 2
L
 

n1
L
0
f (x) cos n
L
 x dx
 
ek(n2 2/L2)t cos n
L
 x	
u(x, t)  eht 
1
L
 
L
0
f (x) dx
2
L
 

n1
L
0
f (x) cos n
L
 x dx
 
ek(n2 2/L2)t cos n
L
 x
u(x, t)  1
L
 
L
0
f (x) dx
u(x, t)  2

 

n1
cos n
2  1
n

 
ek(n22/L2)t sin n
L x
u
yy0  0, u(x, 2)  0, 0  x  4
u
xx0  0, u(4, y)  f (y), 0  y  2
2u
x2  2u
y2  0, 
 0  x  4, 0  y  2
u(x, 0)  f (x), u
t t0  0, 0  x  L
a2 2u
x2  2 u
t  2u
t2
 , 0  x  L, t  0
u(x, 0)  x(L  x), u
t t0  0, 0  x  L
a2 2u
x2  2u
t2
 , 0  x  L, t  0
k 2u
x2  hu  u
t
 , 0  x  L, t  0, h a constant
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 12
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISES 12.4 (PAGE 471)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
where
15.
17.
EXERCISES 12.5 (PAGE 477)
1.
3.
5. u(x, y)  1
2 x  2
2
 

n1
 1  (1)n
n2 sinh n sinh nx cos ny
 sinh n
a  (b  y) sin n
a  x
u(x, y)  2
a
 

n1 
 
1
sinh n
a  b
 
a
0
 f (x) sin n
a  x dx
 sinh n
a  y sin n
a  x
u(x, y)  2
a
 

n1 
   
1
sinh n
a  b
 
a
0
 f (x) sin n
a  x dx
u(x, t)  1
2a sin 2x sin 2at
u(x, t)  sin x cos 2at  t
Bn 
2L
n22a
 
L
0
g(x) sin n
L
 x dx
An  2
L
  
L
0
 f (x) sin n
L  x dx
x sin n
L  x,
u(x, t)  

n1An cos n22
L2  at  Bn sin n22
L2  at
where An  2

 

0
f (x) sin nx dx and qn  1n2  2
u(x, t)  et 

n1
Ancos qnt  
qn
 sin qnt
 
sin nx,
u(x, t)  8h
2
 

n1
sin n
2
n2
 cos na
L  t sin n
L  x
u(x, t)  1
a sin at sin x
 1
72 cos 7a
L  t sin 7
L x    
 1
52 cos 5a
L  t sin 5
L  x
u(x, t)  6 13
2  cos a
L  t sin 
L x
u(x, t)  L2
3
  

n1
1  (1)n
n3
 cos na
L  t sin n
L x
7.
9.
11.
13.
15. u  u1  u2, where
EXERCISES 12.6 (PAGE 482)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
 2A
a23
 

n1
(1)n
n3  cos nat sin nx
u(x, t)  A
6a2
 (x  x3)
(x)  u0 1  sinh 1h/k x
sinh 1h/k 
and  An  2 
1
0
[ f (x)  (x)] sin nx dx
where  (x)  A
k2 [ex  (e  1)x  1]
u(x, t)  (x)  

n1
 An ekn22t sin nx,
 [(1)n  1]ekn2 2t sin nx
u(x, t)  u0  r
2k x (x  1)  2 

n1
 
u0
n 
r
kn33	
u(x, t)  100  200
  

n1
 (1)n  1
n
 ekn2 2t sin nx
 sinh nx  sinh n(  x)
sinh n
 sin ny
u2(x, y)  2

 

n1
[1  (1)n]
n
u1(x, y)  2

 

n1
1  (1)n
n sinh n  sinh ny sin nx
 An cosh n
a  b
Bn 
1
sinh n
a  b
 
2
a
 
a
0
g(x) sin n
a  x dx
 where An  2
a
 
a
0
f (x) sin n
a  x dx
u(x, y)  

n1An cosh n
a  y  Bn sinh n
a  y
 
sin n
a  x,
u(x, y)  2

 

n1

0
f (x) sin nx dx eny sin nx
 Bn  200 [1  (1)n]
n
 [2  cosh n]
sinh n
 where  An  200 [1  (1)n]
n
u(x, y)  

n1
(An cosh n y  Bn sinh n y) sin nx,
 n cosh nx  sinh nx
n cosh n  sinh n sin ny
u(x, y)  2

  

n1
[1  (1)n]
n
ANS-22
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 12
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.
13.
15.
17.
EXERCISES 12.7 (PAGE 487)
1.
where
the an are the consecutive positive roots of cot a  ah
3.
where
and the an are the consecutive positive roots of
tan aa  ah
5.
where
7.
9.
EXERCISES 12.8 (PAGE 491)
1.
where Amn  4u0
mn2 [1  (1)m][1  (1)n]
u(x, y, t)  

m1 

n1
Amnek(m2n2)t sin mx sin ny,
 e2t  ek2
n t sin n x
u(x, t)  

n1
 
4 sin n
2
n (k2
n  2)(1  cos2n)
 cosh 
2n  1
2 x sin 
2n  1
2  y
u(x, y)  4u0

 

n1
 
1
(2n  1) cosh 
2n  1
2 
An  2
L
 
L
0
f (x) sin 
2n  1
2L x dx
u(x, t)  

n1
An ek(2n1)2 2t/4L2 sin 
2n  1
2L x,
An 
2h
sinh n b(ah  cos2n a) 
a
0
 f (x) sin n x dx
u(x, y)  

n1
An sinh ny sin nx,
u(x, t)  2h

n1
 
sin n
n(h  sin2n) ek2
nt  cos nx,
 2
p 

n1
 
n2p2en2p2t  n2p2cost  sint
n(n4p4  1)
 	sin npx.
u(x, t)  (1  x)sint 
 (1)n 
2n
n44  1	
 
en2 2t sin nx


n1
 
4  2(1)n
n33
u(x, t)  

n1
 2
n  1
n22  (1)n n22 cos t  sin t
n44  1 	
 
sin nx
 2

n1
 
(1)n
n(n2  3) en2t sin nx
u(x, t)  2

n1
 (1)n1
n(n2  3) e3t sin nx
 2

 

n1
 u0(1)n  u1
n
 enx sin ny
u(x, y)  (u0  u1)y  u1
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-23
3.
5.
CHAPTER 12 IN REVIEW (PAGE 491)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11. u(x, t)  et sin x
13.
15.
EXERCISES 13.1 (PAGE 497)
1.
3.
5.
where
Bn  cn

 
2
0
 f () sin n d
An  cn

 
2
0
 f () cos n d
A0  1
2
 
2
0
f () d
u(r, )  A0 

n1
rn(An cos n  Bn
 sin n),
u(r, )  22
3
 4

n1
 rn
n2 cos n
u(r, )  u0
2  u0

 

n1
1  (1)n
n
 rn sin n
 

n1
 
cos n
n(1  cos2n) e2
nt  sin nx.
u(x, t)  u0  1
2(u1  u0)x  2(u1  u0)
 sin 1n2  1 t] sin nx
u(x, t)  e(xt)

n1
An [1n2  1 cos 1n2  1t
u(x, y)  100

 

n1
1  (1)n
n
 enx sin ny
u(x, y)  100

 

n1
 1  (1)n
n sinh n  sinh nx sin ny
u(x, t)  2h
2a
 

n1
 
cos n
4  cos 3n
4
n2
 sin nat sin nx
(x)  u0  (u1  u0)
1    x
u  c1e(c2 xy/c2)
 sin m
a  x sin n
b  y dx dy
 Amn 
4
ab sinh (cmn)
 
b
0
a
0
f (x, y)
 where mn  1(m>a)2  (n>b)2
u(x, y, z)  

m1
  

n1
Amn sinh mn z sin m
a  x sin n
b  y,
where Amn 
16
m3n32
 [(1)m  1][(1)n  1]
u(x, y, t)  

m1 

n1
Amn sin mx sin ny cos a 1m2  n2 t,
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
EXERCISES 13.2 (PAGE 503)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15. (b)
where An 
2
LJ2
1(2n1L)
 1L
0
 vJ0(2nv) f(v2) dv
u(x, t) 

n1
An cos (n1gt) J0(2n1x),
u(r, t)  100  50 

n1
 J1(n) J0 (n r)
n J1
2 (2n)  e 2
nt
where An 
22
n
(2
n  h2) J0
2 (n) 
1
0
rJ0 (n r) f(r) dr
u(r, t) 

n1
An J0(n r)eka2
nt,
where An 
2
c2J1
2 (n c)
c
0
rJ0(n r) f(r) dr
u(r, t) 

n1
An J0(n r)eka2
nt,
u(r, z) 2
p 

n1
I0(npr)
I0(np)  sinnpz
u(r, z)  50

n1
 
cosh(n z)
n cosh(4n) J1(2n) J0 (n r)
u(r, z)  u0

n1
 
sinh n (4  z)
n sinh(4n) J1(2n) J0 (n r)
u(r, t)  2
ac
 

n1
 sin n at
2
n J1(n c) J0(n r)
u(r, )  u0
2  2u0

 


n1
 
sin n
2
n
 
r
2
n
cos n
u(r, )  2u0
p  

n1
 1 (1)n
n
 r n  rn
2n  2n sin nu
u(r, )  40r  1
rcos  25r  4
rsin u

b
a
n

a
b
n	
 
Bn  1

 
2
0
f () sin n d

b
a
n

a
b
n	
 
An  1

 
2
0
f () cos n d
where A0 ln 
a
b  1
2
 
2
0
   
f () d
 [An cos n  Bn sin n],
u(r, )  A0 ln 
r
b 

n1
b
r
n

r
b
n	
u(r, )  1
2  2

 

n1
 
sin n
2
n
 
r
c
2n
cos 2n
EXERCISES 13.3 (PAGE 507)
1.
3.
5.
where
7.
, where
9.
11.
CHAPTER 13 IN REVIEW (PAGE 508)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
17. u(x, z)  4u0
p 

n1
 
I0(2n1
2 pr)
(2n  1)I0(2n1
2 p) sin 
2n  1
2 pz 
 11
16 r5P5(cos )    	
u(r, )  100
3
2 rP1(cos )  7
8 r3P3(cos )
u(r, z)  50  50

n1
 
cosh(n z)
n cosh(4n) J1(2n) J0(n r)
u(r, t)  2eht 

n1
 
1
n J1(n) J0(n r) en
2 t
u(r, )  2u0
  

n1
 r4n  r4n
24n  24n 1  (1)n
n
 sin 4n
u(r, )  4u0
  

n1
 1  (1)n
n3
 rn sin n
u(r, )  2u0
  

n1
 1  (1)n
n
 
r
c
n
 sin n
Bn 
2
n a 
c
0
rg(r) sin n
c
 r dr
 where      An  2
c
 
c
0
r f (r) sin n
c  r dr
u(r, t)  1
r 

n1An cos na
c  t  Bn sin na
c  t sin n
c  r,
u(r, t)  100  200
r  

n1
 (1)n
n
 en2 2t sin nr
A2n  4n  1
c2n
 
/2
0
f ()P2n(cos ) sin  d
u(r, ) 

n0
A2n
 r2n P2n (cos )
b2n1  a2n1
b2n1 an1  An  2n  1
2 

0
f () Pn(cos ) sin  d
u(r, ) 

n0
An
 b2n1  r2n1
b2n1 rn1  Pn(cos ),
u(r, )  r
c cos
 7
16 
r
c
3
P3(cos )  11
32 
r
c
5
P5(cos )    	
u(r, )  50 
1
2 P0(cos )  3
4 
r
cP1(cos )
ANS-24
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISES 14.1 (PAGE 512)
1. (a) Let t  u2 in the integral 
9.
11. Use the property 
.
EXERCISES 14.2 (PAGE 517)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
 erfc
2n  1  x
2 1kt 	
u(x, t)  u0  u0 

n0
(1)n erfc
2n  1  x
2 1kt 
u(x, t)  u0  u0e(2/L2)t sin 

L
 x
 erfc
1  x
21t	
u(x, t)  100 e1xt erfc1t  1  x
21t
u(x, t)  60  40 erfc
x
21t  2 (t  2)
u(x, t) 
x
2 1
 
t
0
 f (t  )
 3/2
 ex 2/4 d
 ext erfc1t 
x
21t	
u(x, t)  u0 1  erfc
x
21t
u(x, t)  u1  (u0  u1) erfc
x
21t
 xex cosh t  ex t sinh t
u(x, t)  2(t  x) sinh (t  x)(t  x)
  t  2nL  L  x
a

t  2nL  L  x
a

  t  2nL  L  x
a

u(x, t)  a F0
E
 

n0
(1)n t  2nL  L  x
a

 t  x
a  1
2 gt2
u(x, t) 
1
2 gt  x
a
2
 A sin t  x
a	
u(x, t)  ft  x
a
 
t  x
a
u(x, t)  A cos at
L  sin x
L

b
0

a
0

b
0

0
a
y(t)  et erfc(1t )
erf(1t).
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-25
25.
27.
EXERCISES 14.3 (PAGE 525)
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19. Let x  2 in (7). Use a trigonometric identity and replace
a by x. In part (b) make the change of variable 2x  kt.
EXERCISES 14.4 (PAGE 530)
1.
3.
5. u(x, t)  2

 

0
 1  cos 

 ek2t sin x d
u(x, t)  2u0

 


 1  ek2t

 sin x d
  1

 


 cos x
1  2 ek2t d
 u(x, t)  1

 


 ek2t
1  2 eix d
f (x)  2
  
1
1  x2, x  0
f (x)  8

 

0
  sin x
(4  2)2 d
f (x)  2

 

0
 (4  2) cos x
(4  2)2
 d
f (x)  2

 

0
  sin x
k2  2 d
f (x)  2k

 

0
cos x
k2  2 d
f (x)  4

 

0
  sin x
4  4  d
f (x)  2

 

0
 ( sin   cos   1) cos x
2
 d
f (x)  10

 

0
 (1  cos ) sin x

 d
f (x)  1

 

0
 cos x   sin x
1  2
 d
B()  sin 3  3 cos 3
2
 where       A()  3 sin 3  cos 3  1
2
f (x)  1

 

0
[A() cos x  B() sin x] d,
f (x)  1

 

0
 sin  cos x  3(1  cos ) sin x

 d
u(r, t)  100
r  erfc
r  1
21t
 
u(x, t)  u0eGt /C erf 
x
2
  
B
RC
t 
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 14
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISES 15.2 (PAGE 544)
The tables in this section give a selection of the total number of approximations.
7.
9. (a)
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
25.
CHAPTER 14 IN REVIEW (PAGE 532)
1.
3. u(x, t)  u0
   eht erf
x
21t
u(x, y)  2

 

0
sinh y
(1  2) cosh  cos x d
u(r, z)  2

 

0
 I0(r)
 I0() sin  cos z dz.
 
1
2 1
 


 e2/4 cosh y
cosh 
 cos x d
 u(x, y) 
1
2 1
 


 e2/4 cosh y
cosh 
 eix d
u(x, t) 
1
11  4kt ex 2/(14kt)
u(x, y)  2

 

0

1  2 [ex sin y  ey sin x] d
u(x, y)  2

 

0
F() sinh (2  y)
sinh 2
 sin x d
u(x, y)  100

 

0
 sin 
  ey cos x d
u(x, y)  2

 

0
 sinh (  x)
(1  2) sinh  cos y d
 G()
  sin at
a  eix d
u(x, t)  1
2
 


 F() cos at
u(x, t)  2

 

0
 sin 
  ek2t cos x d
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
EXERCISES 15.1 (PAGE 540)
1.
3.
5. u21  u12  12.50, u31  u13  18.75, u32  u23  37.50,
u11  6.25, u22  25.00, u33  56.25
7. (b) u14  u41  0.5427, u24  u42  0.6707,
u34  u43  0.6402, u33  0.4451, u44  0.9451
u11  u21  13>16, u22  u12  313>16
u11  11
15
 , u21  14
15
 
u(x, t)  100
1p
t
0
 ex 2>4(tt)
1t  t dt
u(x, t)  200B
t
 ex 2>4t  100 x erfc
x
21t, or
u(x, t) 
u0 erfc
x
21t,  0  t  1
u0 erfc
x
21t  u0 erfc
x
21t  1,  t 1
 
u(x, t)  2

 

0
 ek2t
2  1 cos x d
u(x, y)  1
2
 


 cos x   sin x
1  2
 ek2t d
u(x, y)  2

 

0 
B cosh y
(1  2) sinh   A
 sin x d
 [ex sin y  2ey sin x] d
u(x, y)  100

 

0 
1  cos 
 
u(x, t)  u0
2
 


 sin (  x)  sin x

 ek2t d
u(x, t) 
t
0
 erfc
x
21 d
ANS-26
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 15
Time
x  0.25
x  0.50
x  0.75
x  1.00
x  1.25
x  1.50
x  1.75
0.000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.100
0.3728
0.6288
0.6800
0.5904
0.3840
0.2176
0.0768
0.200
0.2248
0.3942
0.4708
0.4562
0.3699
0.2517
0.1239
0.300
0.1530
0.2752
0.3448
0.3545
0.3101
0.2262
0.1183
0.400
0.1115
0.2034
0.2607
0.2757
0.2488
0.1865
0.0996
0.500
0.0841
0.1545
0.2002
0.2144
0.1961
0.1487
0.0800
0.600
0.0645
0.1189
0.1548
0.1668
0.1534
0.1169
0.0631
0.700
0.0499
0.0921
0.1201
0.1297
0.1196
0.0914
0.0494
0.800
0.0387
0.0715
0.0933
0.1009
0.0931
0.0712
0.0385
0.900
0.0301
0.0555
0.0725
0.0785
0.0725
0.0554
0.0300
1.000
0.0234
0.0432
0.0564
0.0610
0.0564
0.0431
0.0233
1.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-27
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 15
Time
x  0.25
x  0.50
x  0.75
x  1.00
x  1.25
x  1.50
x  1.75
0.000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.100
0.4015
0.6577
0.7084
0.5837
0.3753
0.1871
0.0684
0.200
0.2430
0.4198
0.4921
0.4617
0.3622
0.2362
0.1132
0.300
0.1643
0.2924
0.3604
0.3626
0.3097
0.2208
0.1136
0.400
0.1187
0.2150
0.2725
0.2843
0.2528
0.1871
0.0989
0.500
0.0891
0.1630
0.2097
0.2228
0.2020
0.1521
0.0814
0.600
0.0683
0.1256
0.1628
0.1746
0.1598
0.1214
0.0653
0.700
0.0530
0.0976
0.1270
0.1369
0.1259
0.0959
0.0518
0.800
0.0413
0.0762
0.0993
0.1073
0.0989
0.0755
0.0408
0.900
0.0323
0.0596
0.0778
0.0841
0.0776
0.0593
0.0321
1.000
0.0253
0.0466
0.0609
0.0659
0.0608
0.0465
0.0252
Absolute errors are approximately 2.2  102, 3.7  102, 1.3  102.
3.
Time
x  0.25
x  0.50
x  0.75
x  1.00
x  1.25
x  1.50
x  1.75
0.00
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.10
0.3972
0.6551
0.7043
0.5883
0.3723
0.1955
0.0653
0.20
0.2409
0.4171
0.4901
0.4620
0.3636
0.2385
0.1145
0.30
0.1631
0.2908
0.3592
0.3624
0.3105
0.2220
0.1145
0.40
0.1181
0.2141
0.2718
0.2840
0.2530
0.1876
0.0993
0.50
0.0888
0.1625
0.2092
0.2226
0.2020
0.1523
0.0816
0.60
0.0681
0.1253
0.1625
0.1744
0.1597
0.1214
0.0654
0.70
0.0528
0.0974
0.1268
0.1366
0.1257
0.0959
0.0518
0.80
0.0412
0.0760
0.0991
0.1071
0.0987
0.0754
0.0408
0.90
0.0322
0.0594
0.0776
0.0839
0.0774
0.0592
0.0320
1.00
0.0252
0.0465
0.0608
0.0657
0.0607
0.0464
0.0251
Absolute errors are approximately 1.8  102, 3.7  102, 1.3  102.
5.
Time
x  2.00
x  4.00
x  6.00
x  8.00
x  10.00
x  12.00
x  14.00
x  16.00
x  18.00
0.00
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
2.00
27.6450
29.9037
29.9970
29.9999
30.0000
29.9999
29.9970
29.9037
27.6450
4.00
25.6452
29.6517
29.9805
29.9991
29.9999
29.9991
29.9805
29.6517
25.6452
6.00
23.9347
29.2922
29.9421
29.9963
29.9996
29.9963
29.9421
29.2922
23.9347
8.00
22.4612
28.8606
29.8782
29.9898
29.9986
29.9898
29.8782
28.8606
22.4612
10.00
21.1829
28.3831
29.7878
29.9782
29.9964
29.9782
29.7878
28.3831
21.1829
7. (a)
Time
x  5.00
x  10.00
x  15.00
x  20.00
x  25.00
x  30.00
x  35.00
x  40.00
x  45.00
0.00
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
2.00
29.5964
29.9973
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
29.9973
29.5964
4.00
29.2036
29.9893
29.9999
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
29.9999
29.9893
29.2036
6.00
28.8212
29.9762
29.9997
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
29.9997
29.9762
28.8213
8.00
28.4490
29.9585
29.9992
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
29.9993
29.9585
28.4490
10.00
28.0864
29.9363
29.9986
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
29.9986
29.9363
28.0864
(b)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-28
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 15
Time
x  2.00
x  4.00
x  6.00
x  8.00
x  10.00
x  12.00
x  14.00
x  16.00
x  18.00
0.00
18.0000
32.0000
42.0000
48.0000
50.0000
48.0000
42.0000
32.0000
18.0000
2.00
15.3312
28.5348
38.3465
44.3067
46.3001
44.3067
38.3465
28.5348
15.3312
4.00
13.6371
25.6867
34.9416
40.6988
42.6453
40.6988
34.9416
25.6867
13.6371
6.00
12.3012
23.2863
31.8624
37.2794
39.1273
37.2794
31.8624
23.2863
12.3012
8.00
11.1659
21.1877
29.0757
34.0984
35.8202
34.0984
29.0757
21.1877
11.1659
10.00
10.1665
19.3143
26.5439
31.1662
32.7549
31.1662
26.5439
19.3143
10.1665
Time
x  10.00
x  20.00
x  30.00
x  40.00
x  50.00
x  60.00
x  70.00
x  80.00
x  90.00
0.00
8.0000
16.0000
24.0000
32.0000
40.0000
32.0000
24.0000
16.0000
8.0000
2.00
8.0000
16.0000
23.9999
31.9918
39.4932
31.9918
23.9999
16.0000
8.0000
4.00
8.0000
16.0000
23.9993
31.9686
39.0175
31.9686
23.9993
16.0000
8.0000
6.00
8.0000
15.9999
23.9978
31.9323
38.5701
31.9323
23.9978
15.9999
8.0000
8.00
8.0000
15.9998
23.9950
31.8844
38.1483
31.8844
23.9950
15.9998
8.0000
10.00
8.0000
15.9996
23.9908
31.8265
37.7498
31.8265
23.9908
15.9996
8.0000
Time
x  2.00
x  4.00
x  6.00
x  8.00
x  10.00
x  12.00
x  14.00
x  16.00
x  18.00
0.00
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
2.00
27.6450
29.9037
29.9970
29.9999
30.0000
30.0000
29.9990
29.9679
29.2150
4.00
25.6452
29.6517
29.9805
29.9991
30.0000
29.9997
29.9935
29.8839
28.5484
6.00
23.9347
29.2922
29.9421
29.9963
29.9997
29.9988
29.9807
29.7641
27.9782
8.00
22.4612
28.8606
29.8782
29.9899
29.9991
29.9966
29.9594
29.6202
27.4870
10.00
21.1829
28.3831
29.7878
29.9783
29.9976
29.9927
29.9293
29.4610
27.0610
9. (a)
(c)
(d)
Time
x  5.00
x  10.00
x  15.00
x  20.00
x  25.00
x  30.00
x  35.00
x  40.00
x  45.00
0.00
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
2.00
29.5964
29.9973
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
29.9991
29.8655
4.00
29.2036
29.9893
29.9999
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
29.9964
29.7345
6.00
28.8212
29.9762
29.9997
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
29.9999
29.9921
29.6071
8.00
28.4490
29.9585
29.9992
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
29.9997
29.9862
29.4830
10.00
28.0864
29.9363
29.9986
30.0000
30.0000
30.0000
29.9995
29.9788
29.3621
Time
x  2.00
x  4.00
x  6.00
x  8.00
x  10.00
x  12.00
x  14.00
x  16.00
x  18.00
0.00
18.0000
32.0000
42.0000
48.0000
50.0000
48.0000
42.0000
32.0000
18.0000
2.00
15.3312
28.5350
38.3477
44.3130
46.3327
44.4671
39.0872
31.5755
24.6930
4.00
13.6381
25.6913
34.9606
40.7728
42.9127
41.5716
37.4340
31.7086
25.6986
6.00
12.3088
23.3146
31.9546
37.5566
39.8880
39.1565
35.9745
31.2134
25.7128
8.00
11.1946
21.2785
29.3217
34.7092
37.2109
36.9834
34.5032
30.4279
25.4167
10.00
10.2377
19.5150
27.0178
32.1929
34.8117
34.9710
33.0338
29.5224
25.0019
(b)
(c)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-29
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 15
Time
x  10.00
x  20.00
x  30.00
x  40.00
x  50.00
x  60.00
x  70.00
x  80.00
x  90.00
0.00
8.0000
16.0000
24.0000
32.0000
40.0000
32.0000
24.0000
16.0000
8.0000
2.00
8.0000
16.0000
23.9999
31.9918
39.4932
31.9918
24.0000
16.0102
8.6333
4.00
8.0000
16.0000
23.9993
31.9686
39.0175
31.9687
24.0002
16.0391
9.2272
6.00
8.0000
15.9999
23.9978
31.9323
38.5701
31.9324
24.0005
16.0845
9.7846
8.00
8.0000
15.9998
23.9950
31.8844
38.1483
31.8846
24.0012
16.1441
10.3084
10.00
8.0000
15.9996
23.9908
31.8265
37.7499
31.8269
24.0023
16.2160
10.8012
(d)
11. (a)
(b)
(x)  1
2x  20
Time
x  4.00
x  8.00
x  12.00
x  16.00
0.00
50.0000
50.0000
50.0000
50.0000
10.00
32.7433
44.2679
45.4228
38.2971
30.00
26.9487
32.1409
34.0874
32.9644
50.00
24.1178
27.4348
29.4296
30.1207
70.00
22.8995
25.4560
27.4554
28.8998
90.00
22.3817
24.6176
26.6175
28.3817
110.00
22.1619
24.2620
26.2620
28.1619
130.00
22.0687
24.1112
26.1112
28.0687
150.00
22.0291
24.0472
26.0472
28.0291
170.00
22.0124
24.0200
26.0200
28.0124
190.00
22.0052
24.0085
26.0085
28.0052
210.00
22.0022
24.0036
26.0036
28.0022
230.00
22.0009
24.0015
26.0015
28.0009
250.00
22.0004
24.0007
26.0007
28.0004
270.00
22.0002
24.0003
26.0003
28.0002
290.00
22.0001
24.0001
26.0001
28.0001
310.00
22.0000
24.0001
26.0001
28.0000
330.00
22.0000
24.0000
26.0000
28.0000
350.00
22.0000
24.0000
26.0000
28.0000
EXERCISES 15.3 (PAGE 548)
The tables in this section give a selection of the total number of approximations.
1. (a)
(b)
Time
x  0.25
x  0.50
x  0.75
0.00
0.1875
0.2500
0.1875
0.20
0.1491
0.2100
0.1491
0.40
0.0556
0.0938
0.0556
0.60
0.0501
0.0682
0.0501
0.80
0.1361
0.2072
0.1361
1.00
0.1802
0.2591
0.1802
Time
x  0.4
x  0.8
x  1.2
x  1.6
0.00
0.0032
0.5273
0.5273
0.0032
0.20
0.0652
0.4638
0.4638
0.0652
0.40
0.2065
0.3035
0.3035
0.2065
0.60
0.3208
0.1190
0.1190
0.3208
0.80
0.3094
0.0180
0.0180
0.3094
1.00
0.1450
0.0768
0.0768
0.1450
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANS-30
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  CHAPTER 15
Time
x  0.2
x  0.4
x  0.6
x  0.8
0.00
0.5878
0.9511
0.9511
0.5878
0.10
0.5599
0.9059
0.9059
0.5599
0.20
0.4788
0.7748
0.7748
0.4788
0.30
0.3524
0.5701
0.5701
0.3524
0.40
0.1924
0.3113
0.3113
0.1924
0.50
0.0142
0.0230
0.0230
0.0142
Time
x  0.2
x  0.4
x  0.6
x  0.8
0.00
0.5878
0.9511
0.9511
0.5878
0.05
0.5808
0.9397
0.9397
0.5808
0.10
0.5599
0.9060
0.9060
0.5599
0.15
0.5257
0.8507
0.8507
0.5257
0.20
0.4790
0.7750
0.7750
0.4790
0.25
0.4209
0.6810
0.6810
0.4209
0.30
0.3527
0.5706
0.5706
0.3527
0.35
0.2761
0.4467
0.4467
0.2761
0.40
0.1929
0.3122
0.3122
0.1929
0.45
0.1052
0.1701
0.1701
0.1052
0.50
0.0149
0.0241
0.0241
0.0149
3. (a)
(b)
(c)
Time
x  0.1
x  0.2
x  0.3
x  0.4
x  0.5
x  0.6
x  0.7
x  0.8
x  0.9
0.00
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.12
0.0000
0.0000
0.0082
0.1126
0.3411
0.1589
0.3792
0.3710
0.0462
0.24
0.0071
0.0657
0.2447
0.3159
0.1735
0.2463
0.1266
0.3056
0.0625
0.36
0.1623
0.3197
0.2458
0.1657
0.0877
0.2853
0.2843
0.2104
0.2887
0.48
0.1965
0.1410
0.1149
0.1216
0.3593
0.2381
0.1977
0.1715
0.0800
0.60
0.2194
0.2069
0.3875
0.3411
0.1901
0.1662
0.0666
0.1140
0.0446
0.72
0.3003
0.6865
0.5097
0.3230
0.1585
0.0156
0.0893
0.0874
0.0384
0.84
0.2647
0.1633
0.3546
0.3214
0.1763
0.0954
0.1249
0.0665
0.0386
0.96
0.3012
0.1081
0.1380
0.0487
0.2974
0.3407
0.1250
0.1548
0.0092
Time
x  10
x  20
x  30
x  40
x  50
0.00000
0.1000
0.2000
0.3000
0.2000
0.1000
0.60134
0.0984
0.1688
0.1406
0.1688
0.0984
1.20268
0.0226
0.0121
0.0085
0.0121
0.0226
1.80401
0.1271
0.1347
0.1566
0.1347
0.1271
2.40535
0.0920
0.2292
0.2571
0.2292
0.0920
3.00669
0.0932
0.1445
0.2018
0.1445
0.0932
3.60803
0.0284
0.0205
0.0336
0.0205
0.0284
4.20936
0.1064
0.1555
0.1265
0.1555
0.1064
4.81070
0.1273
0.2060
0.2612
0.2060
0.1273
5.41204
0.0625
0.1689
0.2038
0.1689
0.0625
6.01338
0.0436
0.0086
0.0080
0.0086
0.0436
6.61472
0.0931
0.1364
0.1578
0.1364
0.0931
7.21605
0.1436
0.2173
0.2240
0.2173
0.1436
7.81739
0.0625
0.1644
0.2247
0.1644
0.0625
8.41873
0.0287
0.0192
0.0085
0.0192
0.0287
9.02007
0.0654
0.1332
0.1755
0.1332
0.0654
9.62140
0.1540
0.2189
0.2089
0.2189
0.1540
5.
Note: Time is expressed in milliseconds.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
●
ANS-31
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  APPENDIXES
CHAPTER 15 IN REVIEW (PAGE 549)
1. u11  0.8929, u21  3.5714, u31  13.3929
x  0.20
x  0.40
x  0.60
x  0.80
0.2000
0.4000
0.6000
0.8000
0.2000
0.4000
0.6000
0.5500
0.2000
0.4000
0.5375
0.4250
0.2000
0.3844
0.4750
0.3469
0.1961
0.3609
0.4203
0.2922
0.1883
0.3346
0.3734
0.2512
x  0.20
x  0.40
x  0.60
x  0.80
0.2000
0.4000
0.6000
0.8000
0.2000
0.4000
0.6000
0.8000
0.2000
0.4000
0.6000
0.5500
0.2000
0.4000
0.5375
0.4250
0.2000
0.3844
0.4750
0.3469
0.1961
0.3609
0.4203
0.2922
3. (a)
(b)
EXERCISES FOR APPENDIX I (PAGE APP-2)
1. (a) 24
(b) 720
(c)
(d)
3. 0.297
EXERCISES FOR APPENDIX II (PAGE APP-18)
1. (a)
(b)
(c)
3. (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
5. (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
7. (a) 180
(b)
(c) 
6
12
5

4
8
10
8
16
20
10
20
25

4
8
5
10

0
0
0
0

3
6
8
16

9
3
24
8

19
3
6
22

19
30
18
31

32
4
27
1

11
17
6
22

2
12
28
12

6
14
1
19

2
2
11
1
 81
15
41
3
9. (a)
(b)
11.
13.
15. singular
17. nonsingular; 
19. nonsingular; 
21. nonsingular; 
23.
25.
27.
29. (a)
(b)
(c)
31. x  3, y  1, z  5
33. x  2  4t, y  5  t, z  t
35.
37.
41.
43.
45.
47. 1  6, 2  1, K1 
2
7, K2 
1
1
A1 
1
2
1
0
1
2
2
3
1
3
1
3
1
1
6
1
3
1
3
1
2
7
6
4
3
1
3
1
2
A1 
5
2
1
6
2
1
3
1
1
A1 
0
0
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
3
1
3
2
3
0
x1  1, x2  0, x3  2, x4  0
x  1
2, y  3
2, z  7
2

1
4e4t  1
4
t2 
(1/) sin t
t3  t 

1
4e8  1
4
4 
0
6

4e4t
2
 sin t
6t  
dX
dt  4 
1
1e2t  12 
2
1e3t
dX
dt 
5et
2et
7et
A1(t)  1
2e3t 
3e4t
4et
e4t
2et
A1   1
9 
2
13
8
2
5
1
1
7
5
A1  1
2 
0
2
4
1
2
3
1
2
5
A1  1
4 
5
3
8
4

38
2

14
1

7
10
38
75

7
10
38
75
(c) Yes; the table in part (b) is the table in part (a)
shifted downward.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

49.
51.
K1 
9
45
25, K2 
1
1
1, K3 
1
9
1
1  0, 2  4, 3  4,
1  2  4, K1 
1
4
53.
55.
K1 
1  3i
5 , K2 
1  3i
5 
1  3i, 2  3i,
K1 
2
1
0, K2 
0
0
1
1  2  3  2,
ANS-32
●
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
ANSWERS FOR SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS  •  APPENDIXES
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I-1
A
Absolute convergence of a power 
series, 232
Absolute error, 78
Acceleration due to gravity, 26, 193
Adams-Bashforth-Moulton method, 373
Adams-Bashforth predictor, 373
Adams-Moulton corrector, 373
Adaptive numerical method, 371
Addition:
of matrices, APP-4 
of power series, 234
Aging spring, 197, 261, 268
Agnew, Ralph Palmer, 33, 137
Air resistance:
proportional to square of velocity, 30,
45, 102 
proportional to velocity, 26, 45, 92
Airy, George Biddel, 243
Airy's differential equation: 
deﬁnition of, 197, 243 
numerical solution curves, 246 
power series solutions, 241-243
solution in terms of Bessel 
functions, 261, 268
Algebra of matrices, APP-3
Algebraic equations, methods for solving,
APP-10
Alternative form of second translation
theorem, 295
Ambient temperature, 22
Amperes (A), 25
Amplitude:
damped, 200
of free vibrations, 195
Analytic at a point, 233
Anharmonic overtones, 505
Annihilator approach to method of
undetermined coefﬁcients, 149
Annihilator differential operator, 149
Approaches to the study of differential
equations:
analytical, 27 
numerical, 27 
qualitative, 27
Arc, 388
Archimedes' principle, 30, 102
Arithmetic of power series, 234
Associated homogeneous differential
equation, 119
Associated homogeneous system, 
331, 348
Asymptotically stable critical point, 42
Attractor, 42, 336
Augmented matrix:
deﬁnition of, APP-10
elementary row operations on, APP-10
in reduced row-echelon form, APP-11 
in row-echelon form, APP-10
Autonomous differential equation:
ﬁrst-order, 38 
second-order, 188 
translation property of, 42
Autonomous systems of differential
equations:
deﬁnition of, 386
as mathematical models, 410
Auxiliary equation:
for Cauchy-Euler equations, 163
for linear equations with constant
coefﬁcients, 133 
roots of, 133, 163-165
Axis of symmetry, 210
B
Backward difference, 381
Banded matrix, 538
Ballistic pendulum, 226
Beams:
cantilever, 211 
deﬂection curve of, 210 
embedded, 211, 472 
free, 211
simply supported, 211 
static deﬂection of, 296
supported on an elastic foundation, 322 
vibrating, 472
Beats, 208
Bernoulli's differential equation, 73
Bessel, Friedrich Wilhelm, 257
Bessel functions:
aging spring and, 261, 268
differential equations solvable in terms
of, 259-261 
differential recurrence relations 
for, 262-263
of the ﬁrst kind, 258 
graphs of, 259, 260, 264
of half-integral order, 263-264 
modiﬁed of the ﬁrst kind, 260 
modiﬁed of the second kind, 260
numerical values of, 262
of order n, 258
of order , 264
of order 
, 264 
properties of, 262
recurrence relation for, 268
of the second kind, 258, 259 
1
2
1
2
spherical, 264
zeros of, 262
Bessel's differential equation:
general solution of, 259 
modiﬁed of order n, 260 
of order n, 257
parametric of order n, 259-260 
in self-adjoint form, 444 
solution of, 257
Bessel series, 449
Boundary conditions:
deﬁnition of, 17, 118, 464
Dirichlet, 463, 536 
homogeneous, 441
Neumann, 463 
nonhomogeneous, 441 
periodic, 217
Robin, 463 
separated, 441
Boundary-value problem:
deﬁnition of, 17
homogeneous, 441
nonhomogeneous, 441, 478-479 
numerical methods for ODEs, 381, 383 
numerical methods for PDEs, 534
for an ordinary differential equations,
17, 118 
for a partial differential equation, 464 
periodic, 443
shooting method for, 383 
singular, 443
Boundary point, 536
Branch point, 110
Buckling modes, 214
Buckling of a tapered column, 256
Buckling of a thin vertical column, 269
Buoyant force, 30
BVP, 17, 118
C
Calculation of order hn, 364
Cantilever beam, 211
Capacitance, 25
Carbon dating, 85
Carrying capacity, 95
Catenary, 221
Cauchy, Augustin-Louis, 163
Cauchy-Euler differential equation: 
auxiliary equation for, 163 
deﬁnition of, 162-163
general solution of, 163, 164, 165 
method of solution for, 163
reduction to constant coefﬁcients, 167
Center, 397
Index
INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I-2
●
INDEX
Center of a power series, 232
Central difference, 381
Central difference approximations, 381
Chain pulled up by a constant force, 223
Change of scale theorem, 281
Characteristic equation of a matrix, 334,
APP-15
Characteristic values, APP-14
Characteristic vectors, APP-14
Chebyshev, Pafnuty, 270
Chebyshev polynomials, 454
Chebyshev's differential equation, 
270, 454
Chemical reactions:
ﬁrst-order, 23
second-order, 23, 46, 98-99
Circuits, differential equations of, 25,
88-89
Circular frequency, 194
Clamped end of a beam, 211
Classiﬁcation of critical points, 398 
405-406
Classiﬁcation of ordinary differential
equations:
by linearity, 4 
by order, 3
by type, 2
Classiﬁcation of second-order PDEs, 458
Closed form solution, 9
Clepsydra, 105
Coefﬁcient matrix, 326-327
Cofactor, APP-8
Column bending under its own weight,
268-269
Column matrix, 327, APP-3
Compatibility condition, 478
Competition models, 109-110, 414
Competition term, 96
Competitive interactions, 96, 109, 414
Complementary error function:
deﬁnition of, 59, 511 
graph of, 511
properties of, 511
Complementary function:
for a homogeneous linear differential
equation, 125 
for a homogeneous linear system, 
331, 348
Complete set:
of vectors, 424
of orthogonal functions, 425
Complex form of a Fourier integral, 524
Complex form of a Fourier series, 431
Components of a vector, 423
Concentration of a nutrient in a cell, 112
Constant solution of plane autonomous
system, 388
Continuing method, 373
Continuous compound interest, 22, 90
Contour integral, 526
Convergence, conditions for: 
Fourier-Bessel series, 449
Fourier integrals, 521
Fourier series, 428
Fourier-Legendre series, 451
Convergent improper integral, 274
Convergent power series, 232
Convolution of two functions, 302
Convolution theorem, Fourier 
transform, 531
Convolution theorem, inverse form 
of, 304
Convolution theorem, Laplace 
transform, 303
Cooling/Warming, Newton's Law of,
22-23, 86-87, 91
Cosine series:
in one variable, 433
in two variables, 490
Coulomb, Charles Augustin de, 323
Coulomb friction, 230, 323
Coulombs (C), 25
Coupled pendulums, 323
Coupled springs, 315-316
Cover-up method, 288
Cramer, Gabriel, 464
Cramer's Rule, 464
Crank-Nicholson method, 543
Criterion for an exact differential, 64
Critical loads, 213-214
Critical point of an autonomous ﬁrst-order
differential equation:
asymptotically stable, 42 
deﬁnition of, 38
isolated, 45 
semi-stable, 42
stability criteria for, 403 
unstable, 42
Critical point of plane autonomous system:
asymptotically stable, 401 
deﬁnition of, 388
locally stable, 392 
stable, 401 
unstable, 392, 401
Critical speeds, 216-217
Critically damped series circuit, 203
Critically damped spring/mass 
system, 198
Curvature, 189, 210
Cycle, 388
Cycloid, 114
D
D'Alembert's solution, 473
Damped amplitude, 200
Damped motion, 197
Damped nonlinear pendulum, 225, 416
Damping constant, 197
Damping factor, 198
Daphnia, 96
DE, 2
Dead sea scrolls, 86
Dead zone, 323
Death rate due to predation, 413
Decay, radioactive, 22, 85-86, 115
Decay constant, 85
Deﬁnition, interval of, 5
Deﬂection of a beam, 210-211, 296
Deﬂection curve, 210
Degenerate nodes, 395-396
Density-dependent hypothesis, 95
Derivative notation, 3
Derivatives of a Laplace transform, 301
Determinant of a square matrix:
deﬁnition of, APP-6
expansion by cofactors, APP-6
Diagonal matrix, 357, APP-20
Difference equation:
replacement for an ordinary differential
equation, 381 
replacement for a partial differential
equation, 535, 541, 546
Difference quotients, 381
Differences, ﬁnite, 381
Differential, exact, 64
Differential equation:
autonomous, 38, 188
Bernoulli, 73
Bessel, 257
Cauchy-Euler, 162
Chebyshev, 270, 454 
deﬁnition of, 2
exact, 64
families of solutions for, 7-8 
ﬁrst order, 3,
Hermite, 270 
homogeneous linear, 119
with homogeneous coefﬁcients, 71
Laguerre, 311
Legendre, 257 
linear, 4, 54
modiﬁed Bessel, 260
nonautonomous, 38
nonhomogeneous linear, 119 
nonlinear, 4
normal form of, 4 
notation for, 3 
order of, 3 
ordinary, 2
parametric Bessel, 260 
parametric modiﬁed Bessel, 260
partial, 2, 456
Riccati, 75 
separable, 46
solution of, 5-6, 8, 456 
standard form of, 54
systems of, 9, 106, 180, 365, 
375-377, 385
type, 2
Differential equations as mathematical
models, 20-21
Differential equations solvable in terms of
Bessel functions, 259-261
Differential form of a ﬁrst-order equation,
3, 64
Differential of a function of two 
variables, 63
Differential operator, 120
INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
●
I-3
Differential recurrence relation, 262-263
Differentiation notation, 3
Differentiation of a power series, 233
Diffusion equation, 465
Dirac delta function:
deﬁnition of, 313
Laplace transform of, 313
Direction ﬁeld of a ﬁrst-order differential
equation:
for an autonomous ﬁrst-order
differential equation, 42 
deﬁnition of, 36
method of isoclines for, 38, 44 
nullclines for, 44
Dirichlet condition, 463
Dirichlet problem:
for a circle, 494 
deﬁnition of, 475, 536 
for a rectangle, 476 
for a sphere, 506, 536
superposition for, 476
Discontinuous coefﬁcients, 59
Discretization error, 364
Distributions, theory of, 314
Divergent improper integral, 274
Divergent power series, 232
Domain:
of a function, 6 
of a solution, 6
Doomsday equation, 103
Dot notation, 3
Double cosine series, 490
Double eigenvalues, 496
Double pendulum, 318
Double sine series, 490
Double spring systems, 206, 
315-316, 319
Draining of a tank, 24, 101
Driven motion, 200
Driving function, 61, 193
Drosophila, 96
Dufﬁng's differential equation, 224
Dynamical system, 28, 387
E
Effective spring constant, 206
Eigenfunctions of a boundary-value
problem, 192, 213, 439, 467
Eigenvalues of a boundary-value problem,
192, 213, 439, 467
Eigenvalues of a matrix:
complex, 342-344 
deﬁnition of, 334, APP-14 
distinct real, 334
of multiplicity m, 338
of multiplicity three, 340
of multiplicity two, 338, APP-17 
repeated, 337
Eigenvectors of a matrix, 334, APP-14
Elastic curve, 210
Electrical series circuits, analogy with
spring/mass systems, 203
Electrical networks, 110, 317
Electrical vibrations:
forced, 204 
free, 203
Elementary functions, 10
Elementary row operations: 
deﬁnition of, APP-10 
notation for, APP-11
Elimination methods:
for systems of algebraic equations, 
APP-10
for systems of ordinary differential
equations, 180
Embedded end of a beam, 211, 472
Emigration model, 98
Empirical laws of heat conduction, 461
Elliptic linear second-order PDE, 458
Environmental carrying capacity, 75
Equality of matrices, APP-3
Equation of motion, 194
Equilibrium point, 38
Equilibrium position, 193, 196
Equilibrium solution, 38, 388
Error:
absolute, 78
analysis, 363 
discretization, 364 
formula, 364
global truncation, 365
local truncation, 364, 366-367 
percentage relative, 78 
relative, 78
round off, 363-364
Error function:
deﬁnition of, 59, 511 
graph of, 511 
properties of, 511
Escape velocity, 225
Euler, Leonhard, 163
Euler formulas for the coefﬁcients of a
Fourier series, 427
Euler load, 214
Euler's constant, 262, 311
Euler's formula, 133
Euler's method:
for ﬁrst-order differential equations,
76-77, 363 
improved, 365
for second-order differential 
equations, 376 
for systems, 379
Evaporating raindrop, 93
Evaporation, 102
Even function:
deﬁnition of, 431 
properties of, 432
Exact differential:
criterion for, 64 
deﬁnition of, 64
Exact differential equation:
deﬁnition of, 64 
method of solution, 65
Excitation function, 127
Existence:
of a Fourier transform, 527
interval of, 5
of a Laplace transform, 277-278
and uniqueness of a solution, 15-16,
117, 328
Explicit ﬁnite difference method:
deﬁnition of, 541 
stability of, 542, 548
Explicit solution, 6
Exponential form of the Fourier 
integral, 524
Exponential growth and decay, 84
Exponential matrix:
computation of, 358 
deﬁnition of, 356 
derivative of, 357
Exponential order, 277
Exponents of a singularity, 251
Extreme displacement, 194
F
Factorial function, APP-1
Falling body, 25, 26, 30
Falling chain, 70, 75
Falling raindrop, 33, 93, 105
Falling string, 514-515
Family of solutions, 7
Farads (f), 25
Fick's law, 114
Finite difference approximations, 380-381
Finite difference equation, 381
Finite differences:
backward, 381 
central, 381 
deﬁnition of, 381 
forward, 381
First buckling mode, 214
First harmonic, 471
First normal mode, 471
First standing wave, 471
First translation theorem:
form of, 290
inverse form of, 290
First-order chemical reaction, 23, 84
First-order differential equations:
applications of, 22-25, 83-84, 95 
methods for solving, 46, 54, 63, 71
First-order initial-value problem, 13-14
First-order Runge-Kutta method, 368
First-order system of differential equations
deﬁnition of, 326
linear system, 326
Five-point approximation to Laplacian, 535
Flexural rigidity, 210
Flux of heat, 463
Focus, 399
Folia of Descartes, 12, 409
Forced electrical vibrations, 203-204
Forced motion of a spring/mass system,
200, 202
Forcing function, 127, 169, 193
INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I-4
●
INDEX
Forgetfulness, 32
Formula error, 364
Forward difference, 381
Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph, 427
Fourier-Bessel series:
conditions for convergence, 449 
deﬁnition of, 449
forms of, 448-449
Fourier coefﬁcients, 426-427
Fourier cosine series, 433
Fourier cosine transform: 
of derivatives, 528 
deﬁnition of, 527 
existence of, 527 
inverse of, 527
operational properties of, 527
Fourier integral:
complex form of, 524
conditions for convergence, 521 
cosine form of, 522
deﬁnition of, 521
sine form of, 522
Fourier-Legendre series:
alternative forms of, 452, 453 
conditions for convergence, 451 
deﬁnition of, 451
Fourier series:
complex form of, 431
conditions for convergence, 428 
deﬁnition of, 427
fundamental period of, 429 
generalized, 424
sequence of partial sums of, 430
Fourier sine series, 433
Fourier sine transform:
deﬁnition of, 527
of derivatives, 527-528 
existence of, 527 
inverse of, 527
operational properties of, 527
Fourier transform:
convolution theorem for, 531 
deﬁnition of, 526
of derivatives, 527 
existence of, 527 
inverse of, 526
operational properties of, 527
Fourier transform pairs, 526
Fourth-order Runge-Kutta method:
for ﬁrst-order differential equations, 
78, 369
for second-order differential 
equations, 376 
for systems of ﬁrst-order equations, 378 
truncation errors for, 370
Free electrical vibrations, 203
Free motion of a spring/mass system:
damped, 197
undamped, 193-194
Free-end conditions, 471, 485
Freely falling body, 25
Frequency:
circular, 194
of simple harmonic motion, 194
natural, 194
Frequency response curve, 209
Fresnel sine integral, 63
Frobenius, Ferdinand Georg, 249
Frobenius, method of, 250
Frobenius' theorem, 249
Fulcrum supported ends of a beam, 211
Full-wave rectiﬁcation of sine 
function, 310
Functions deﬁned by integrals, 59-60
Fundamental frequency, 471
Fundamental matrix, 351, 357-358
Fundamental mode of vibration, 471
Fundamental period, 425, 429
Fundamental set of solutions:
existence of, 123
of a linear differential equation, 123 
of a linear system, 330
G
g (acceleration due to gravity), 25, 193
Galileo Galilei, 26
Gamma function, 258, 280, APP-1
Gauss' hypergeometric function, 257
Gaussian elimination, 383, APP-10
Gauss-Jordan elimination, 337, 338, 
APP-10
Gauss-Seidel iteration, 538
General form of a differential equation, 
3, 456
General solution:
of Bessel's differential equation, 259, 260
of a Cauchy-Euler differential equation,
163-165 
of a differential equation, 10, 123, 125
of a homogeneous linear differential
equation, 123
of a nonhomogeneous linear differential
equation, 125
of a homogeneous system of linear
differential equations, 330, 334 
of a linear ﬁrst-order differential
equation, 57
of the modiﬁed Bessel's differential
equation, 260
of a nonhomogeneous system of linear
differential equations, 331, 348
Generalized factorial function, APP-1
Generalized Fourier series, 424
Generalized functions, 314
Gibbs phenomenon, 434
Global truncation error, 365
Gompertz, Benjamin, 98
Gompertz differential equation, 98
Gospel of Judas, 86
Green's function:
for a boundary-value problem, 
176-177
for an initial-value problem, 170 
relationship to Laplace transform, 
306-307 
for a second-order differential 
operator, 170
Growth and decay, 84
Growth constant, 85
H
Half-life:
of carbon-14, 86 
deﬁnition of, 85
of plutonium-239, 85 
of potassium-40, 115 
of radium-226, 85
of uranium-238, 85
Half-range expansions, 434-435
Half-wave rectiﬁcation of sine 
function, 310
Hard spring, 219, 409
Harvesting of a ﬁshery, model of, 98, 100
Heart pacemaker, model for, 63, 94
Heaviside, Oliver, 293
Heaviside function, 293
Heat equation:
difference equation replacement of, 541 
derivation of, 461
one dimensional, 460, 466, 541 
in polar coordinates, 499
two dimensional, 488, 499
Heat generated in a rod by radioactive
decay, 482
Heat loss from a boundary, 463-464
Heat loss from a lateral side of a
rod, 468
Helmholtz's partial differential 
equation, 508
Henries (h), 25
Hermite, Charles, 270
Hermite polynomials, 270
Hermite's differential equation, 270, 446
Higher-order differential equations, 118,
135, 192
Hinged ends of a beam, 211
Hole through the Earth, 31
Homogeneous boundary condition, 441
Homogeneous differential equation:
linear, 60, 119
with homogeneous coefﬁcients, 71
Homogeneous function of degree a, 71
Homogeneous systems:
of algebraic equations, APP-15
of linear ﬁrst-order differential
equations, 326
Hooke's law, 31, 193
Hyperbolic linear second-order 
PDE, 458
I
IC, 13, 463
Identity matrix, APP-6
Identity property of power series, 233
Immigration model, 98, 103
Impedance, 204
INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
●
I-5
Implicit ﬁnite difference method:
deﬁnition of, 543 
stability of, 543
Implicit solution of an ODE, 6
Improved Euler method, 365-366
Impulse response, 314
Indicial equation, 251
Indicial roots, 251
Inductance, 25
Inﬂection, points of, 45, 97
Inhibition term, 96
Initial condition(s):
for an ordinary differential equation, 
13, 117
for a system of linear ﬁrst-order
differential equations, 328 
for partial differential equations,
463-464
Initial-value problem: 
deﬁnition of, 13, 117 
ﬁrst-order, 13, 362
geometric interpretation of, 14 
for a linear system, 328
nth-order, 13, 117 
second-order, 14, 375
Inner product of functions: 
deﬁnition of, 420 
properties of, 420
Input, 61, 127, 169, 193
Insulated boundary, 463
Integral curve, 7
Integral of a differential equation, 7
Integral equation, 305
Integral, Laplace transform of an, 304
Integral transform:
deﬁnition of, 274, 526
Fourier, 526
inverse of, 281, 526 
kernel of, 274, 526
Laplace, 274, 513 
pair, 526
Integrating factor(s):
for a linear ﬁrst-order differential
equation, 55
for a nonexact ﬁrst-order differential
equation, 67-68 
Integration of a power series, 233
Integrodifferential equation, 305
Interactions, number of, 23, 414
Interest compounded continuously, 90
Interior mesh points, 381
Interior point, 536
Interpolating function, 372
Interval:
of convergence, 232 
of deﬁnition, 5
of existence, 5
of existence and uniqueness, 16 
of validity, 5
Inverse Fourier cosine transform, 527
Inverse Fourier sine transform, 527
Inverse Fourier transform, 526
Inverse integral transform, 526
Inverse Laplace transform:
deﬁnition of, 281, 526 
linearity of, 282
Inverse matrix:
deﬁnition of, APP-7
by elementary row operations, APP-13 
formula for, APP-8
Irregular singular point, 248
Isoclines, 38, 44
Isolated critical point, 45
Isotherms, 475
IVP, 13
J
Jacobian matrix, 403-404
K
Kernel of an integral transform, 274, 526
Kinetic friction, 230
Kirchhoff's ﬁrst law, 110
Kirchhoff's second law, 25, 110
L
Laguerre polynomials, 311
Laguerre's differential equation, 311, 446
Laplace, Pierre-Simon Marquis de, 274
Laplace transform:
behavior as s
, 279
change of scale theorem for, 281 
convolution theorem for, 303 
deﬁnition of, 274
of a derivative, 284, 513 
derivatives of, 301
of Dirac delta function, 313
existence, sufﬁcient conditions for,
277-278 
of a function of two variables, 513
of an integral, 304 
inverse of, 281, 526 
kernel of, 274, 526
of a linear initial-value problem,
284-285 
linearity of, 276
of a periodic function, 307
of systems of linear differential
equations, 315 
tables of, 277, APP-21
translation theorems for, 290, 294 
of unit step function, 294
Laplace's equation:
in cylindrical coordinates, 502 
difference equation replacement of, 535 
in polar coordinates, 494
in spherical coordinates, 506 
in three dimensions, 462, 491
in two dimensions, 460, 462, 473, 
494, 535
Laplacian:
in cylindrical coordinates, 502 
ﬁve point approximation to, 535 
: 
in polar coordinates, 494
in spherical coordinates, 506 
in three dimensions, 462
in two dimensions, 462
Lascaux cave paintings, dating of, 90
Lattice points, 536
Law of mass action, 98
Leaking tanks, 24, 29-30, 101, 105
Least-squares line, 103
Left-hand limit, 428
Legendre, Adrien-Marie, 257
Legendre function, 267
Legendre polynomials: 
ﬁrst six, 266 
graphs of, 266 
properties of, 266
recurrence relation for, 266
Rodrigues' formula for, 267
Legendre's differential equation:
of order n, 257
self-adjoint form of, 445 
solution of, 265-266
Leibniz notation, 3
Leibniz's formula for differentiation of an
integral, 172
Level curves, 49
Level of resolution of a mathematical
model, 21
Libby, Willard, 85
Liebman's method, 539
Lineal element, 36
Linear dependence:
of functions, 121
of solution vectors, 329
Linear differential operator, 120, 
149-151, 170
Linear independence:
of eigenvectors, APP-16 
of functions, 121
of solutions, 121
of solution vectors, 329
and the Wronskian, 122, 329-330
Linear operator, 120
Linear ordinary differential equation:
applications of, 84, 193, 210
associated homogeneous equation, 119 
auxiliary equation for, 133
boundary-value problem for, 117 
complementary function for, 125 
deﬁnition of, 4
ﬁrst order, 54
fundamental set of solutions for, 123 
general solution of, 57, 123, 125 
homogeneous, 60, 119
initial-value problem for, 117 
nonhomogeneous, 60, 119 
particular solution of, 124
solution of, 56, 112-113, 139, 149,
157-158, 162-165, 241, 249 
standard forms for, 54, 130, 157, 
158, 160
superposition principles for, 120, 126
Linear regression, 103
INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I-6
●
INDEX
Linear second-order boundary-value
problem, 381
Linear second-order partial differential
equation:
classiﬁcation of, 458 
general form of, 456 
homogeneous, 456 
nonhomogeneous, 456 
solution of, 456
Linear spring, 218
Linear system, 127, 326
Linear systems of algebraic equations,
APP-10
Linear systems of differential equations:
deﬁnition of, 106, 326 
homogeneous, 326, 333 
matrix form of, 326
method for solving, 333, 348 
nonhomogeneous, 326, 348
Linear transform, 276
Linearity property:
of differentiation, 274 
of integration, 274
of the inverse Laplace transform, 282 
of the Laplace transform, 276
Linearization:
of a differential equation, 220, 403
of a function of one variable at a point,
76, 400, 403 
of a function of two variables at a point,
400, 403
of a nonlinear system, 402-403
Lissajous curve, 320
Local truncation error, 364, 366, 370
Locally stable critical point, 392
Logistic curve, 96
Logistic differential equation, 75, 96
Logistic function, 96
Losing a solution, 48
Lotka, Arthur, 412
Lotka-Volterra, equations of:
competition model, 109, 414 
predator-prey model, 108, 412
LR-series circuit, differential equation of,
30, 88
LRC-series circuit, differential equation of,
25, 203
M
Malthus, Thomas, 21
Maple, 60, 384, 452
Mass action, law of, 98
Mathematica, 60, 136-137, 337, 360, 384,
452, 468, 524
Mathematical model(s):
absolute temperature of a cooling 
body, 114
aging spring, 197 
ballistic pendulum, 226 
bead sliding on a curve, 411
bobbing motion of a ﬂoating barrel, 30
box sliding down an inclined plane,
94-95 
buckling of a thin vertical column, 
213, 216 
cables of a suspension bridge, 26-27
carbon dating, 85
chain pulled upward by a constant 
force, 223 
chemical reactions, 23, 98, 101
competition models, 109-110, 414 
concentration of a nutrient in a cell, 114 
constant harvest, 93, 98
continuous compound interest, 90 
cooling cup of coffee, 91 
cooling/warming, 22, 86
coupled pendulums, 318, 322-323 
coupled springs, 316
deﬁnition of, 20-21
deﬂection of beams, 210-211 
doomsday for a population, 103 
double pendulum, 318
double spring, 206, 229, 230 
draining a tank, 24, 29
dropping supplies from a plane,
226-225
drug infusion, 32 
evaporating raindrop, 93 
evaporation, 102
extinction of a population, 102
falling body (with air resistance), 26
falling body (with no air resistance),
25-26 
forgetfulness, 32
ﬂuctuating population, 32, 93
ﬂuid ﬂow around a circular cylinder,
388 
growth and decay, 84
hard spring, 219 
harvesting ﬁsheries, 98 
heart pacemaker, 94
hole through the Earth, 31 
immigration, 98, 103 
leaking tanks, 101
learning theory, 32 
least time, 114
LR-series circuit, 30, 88, 92
LRC-series circuit, 25, 203, 409 
memorization, 94
mixtures, 24, 87, 107 
networks, 110, 354-355
nutrient ﬂow through a membrane, 112 
oscillating chain, 504
pendulum motion on the Earth, 220, 410 
pendulum motion on the Moon, 227 
population growth, 21
potassium-40 decay, 115 
predator-prey, 108, 412-413
pursuit curves, 225
radioactive decay, 22
radioactive decay series, 106 
raindrops, 33, 93, 105
range of a projectile, 323, 324
RC-series circuit, 30, 89, 92 
reﬂecting surface, 32 
resonance, 202
restocking ﬁsheries, 98 
rocket motion, 31, 222 
rotating ﬂuid, 32-33 
rotating pendulum, 418
rotating rod containing a sliding bead,
229-230
rotating string, 214 
skydiving, 30, 93, 104
soft spring, 219, 406, 407 
solar collector, 102
spread of a disease, 23
spring/mass systems, 193-203, 316, 319 
suspended cables, 26-27
snowplow problem, 33
steady-state temperature in a rectangular
plate, 462, 473 
swimming a river, 104, 105
temperature in an annular plate, 498 
temperature in circular cylinder, 502 
temperature in circular plate, 494 
temperature in a circular ring, 217 
temperature in an inﬁnite wedge, 497 
temperature in a quarter-circular 
plate, 497 
temperature in a semiannular plate, 498 
temperature in a semicircular plate, 496 
temperature in a sphere, 217, 506 
temperature in a thin rod, 217, 466, 482 
terminal velocity, 45, 92
time of death, 91 
tractrix, 32
transverse vibrations of a string, 
461, 468
tsunami, shape of, 102
U.S. population, 100 
variable mass, 31, 222-223
vibrations of a circular membrane, 499 
water clock, 105
wire hanging under its own weight, 221
Mathieu functions, 257
Matrices:
addition of, APP-4
associative law of, APP-6 
augmented, APP-10 
banded, 538
characteristic equation of, 334, APP-15 
column, APP-3
deﬁnition of, APP-3
derivative of, APP-9 
determinant of, APP-6 
diagonal, APP-20 
difference of, APP-4 
distributive law for, APP-6 
eigenvalue of, 334, APP-14
eigenvector of, 334, APP-14
elementary row operations on, APP-10 
entry of, APP-3
equality of, APP-3 
exponential, 356 
INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
●
I-7
fundamental, 351 
integral of, APP-9
inverse of, APP-8, APP-13
Jacobian, 403-404 
multiples of, APP-3 
multiplication of, APP-5 
multiplicative identity, APP-6 
multiplicative inverse, APP-7 
nilpotent, 360
nonsingular, APP-7 
product of, APP-5
reduced row-echelon form of,
APP-11 
row-echelon form of, APP-10 
singular, APP-7
size, APP-3 
sparse, 538 
square, APP-3 
sum of, APP-4 
symmetric, 339
transpose of, APP-7
tridiagonal, 543 
vector, APP-3 
zero, APP-6
Matrix. See Matrices. 
Matrix exponential:
computation of, 356, 358
deﬁnition of, 356 
derivative of, 357
as a fundamental matrix, 357-358
Matrix form of a linear system, 326-327
Maximum principle, 476
Meander function, 310
Memorization, mathematical model for, 32
Mesh size, 536
Mesh points, 536
Method of Frobenius, 249-250
Method of isoclines, 38
Method of separation of variables, 456-457
Method of undetermined coefﬁcients, 
140, 151
Minor, APP-8
Mixtures:
multiple tanks, 107, 111 
single tank, 24, 87-88
Modeling process, steps in, 21
Modiﬁed Bessel equation:
of order n, 260
general solution of, 260 
parametric form of, 260
Modiﬁed Bessel functions:
of the ﬁrst kind, 260 
graphs of, 260
of the second kind, 260
Movie, 320, 470, 501
Multiplication:
of matrices, APP-5
of power series, 234-235
Multiplicative identity, APP-6
Multiplicative inverse, APP-7
Multiplicity of eigenvalues, 338, 
340, APP-17
Multistep numerical method:
advantages of, 374-375 
deﬁnition of, 373 
disadvantages of, 374-375
N
Named functions, 257
Natural frequency of free undamped
motion, 194
Networks, 110
Neumann condition, 463
Neumann problem for a rectangle, 478
Newton, Isaac, 25
Newton's dot notation for differentiation, 3
Newton's ﬁrst law of motion, 25
Newton's law of cooling/warming:
with constant ambient temperature,
22-23, 86-87, 91
with variable ambient temperature, 
29, 91
Newton's second law of motion, 25, 222
Newton's second law of motion as the rate
of change of momentum, 31, 222
Newton's universal law of gravitation, 31
Nilpotent matrix, 360
Nodal line, 501
Node, 394-396, 471
Nonelementary integral, 51, 59
Nonhomogeneous boundary condition, 441
Nonhomogeneous boundary-value
problem for ODEs, 441
Nonhomogeneous boundary-value
problem for PDEs, 478-480
Nonhomogeneous linear ordinary
differential equation, 60, 119
Nonhomogeneous linear partial differential
equation, 456
Nonhomogeneous systems of linear ﬁrst-
order differential equations:
deﬁnition of, 326
general solution of, 330, 331, 
333-344 
particular solution of, 331, 348-352
Nonlinear damping, 218-219, 410, 416
Nonlinear ordinary differential equation:
deﬁnition of, 4
solvable by ﬁrst-order methods, 186
Taylor series solution of, 187
Nonlinear oscillations of a sliding 
bead, 411
Nonlinear pendulum, 220, 410
Nonlinear spring:
deﬁnition of, 218 
hard, 218-219 
soft, 218-219
Nonlinear system of differential equations,
106, 400
Nonsingular matrix, APP-7
Norm of a function:
deﬁnition of, 421 
square, 421
Normal form:
of a linear system, 326
of an ordinary differential equation, 3
of a system of ﬁrst-order 
equations, 326
Normal modes, 470
Normalization of a function, 422
Notation for derivatives, 3
n-parameter family of solutions, 7 
nth-order differential operator, 120 
nth-order initial-value problem, 13
Nullcline, 44
Numerical methods:
Adams-Bashforth-Moulton 
method, 373 
adaptive methods, 371
applied to higher-order equations, 188,
375-376 
applied to systems, 375-378
continuing, 373
Crank-Nicholson, 543 
errors in, 364
Euler's method, 76-77, 363, 379 
explicit ﬁnite difference, 541, 548
ﬁnite difference method, 381, 541, 
543, 546
implicit ﬁnite difference, 543 
improved Euler's method, 
365-366 
multistep, 373
predictor-corrector method, 
366, 373
RK4 method, 78, 369
RKF45 method, 371
shooting method, 383 
single-step, 373
stability of, 374, 542, 543, 548 
starting, 373
truncation errors in, 364, 370
Numerical solution curve, 79
Numerical solver, 78-79, 187-188
Nutrient ﬂow through a membrane, 112
O
Odd function:
deﬁnition of, 431 
properties of, 432
ODE, 2
Ohms ( ), 25
Ohm's Law, 89
One-dimensional heat equation:
deﬁnition of, 460 
derivation of, 461-462
One-dimensional phase portrait, 39
One-dimensional wave equation:
deﬁnition of, 460 
derivation of, 461
One-parameter family of solutions, 7
Order, exponential, 277
Order of a differential equation, 3
Order of a Runge-Kutta method, 368

INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I-8
●
INDEX
Ordinary differential equation, 2
Ordinary point of a linear second-order
differential equation:
deﬁnition of, 239 
solution about, 240
Orthogonal functions, deﬁnition of, 420
Orthogonal series expansion, 423-424
Orthogonal set of functions, 421
Orthogonal trajectories, 114-115
Orthogonality with respect to a weight
function, 424
Orthonormal set of functions, 420
Oscillating chain, 504
Output, 61, 127, 169, 193
Overdamped series circuit, 203
Overdamped spring/mass system, 198
Overtones, 471
P
Parabolic linear second-order PDE, 458
Parametric form of Bessel equation:
of order n, 444
of order n, 259-260
in self-adjoint form, 444
Parametric form of modiﬁed Bessel
equation of order v, 260
Partial differential equation:
classiﬁcation of linear second 
order, 458 
deﬁnition of, 2
homogeneous linear second order, 456 
linear second order, 456
nonhomogeneous linear second order,
456, 478-480 
separable, 456
solution of, 456
superposition principle for
homogeneous linear, 458
Partial fractions, 283
Partial integral, 524
Particular integral, 124
Particular solution:
deﬁnition of, 7
of a linear differential equation, 124
of a system of linear differential
equations, 331, 345
Path, 387
PDE, 2, 456
Pendulum:
ballistic, 226 
double, 318
free damped, 225, 416 
linear, 220
nonlinear, 220, 225, 410 
period of, 228
physical, 220 
rotating, 418 
simple, 220
spring-coupled, 322-323 
of varying length, 269
Pendulum motion on the Moon, 227
Percentage relative error, 78
Period of a nonlinear pendulum, 415
Period of simple harmonic motion, 194
Periodic boundary conditions, 217, 443
Periodic boundary-value problem, 443
Periodic driving force, 436
Periodic extension of a function, 429
Periodic function, fundamental period 
of, 425
Periodic function, Laplace transform 
of, 307
Periodic solution of plane autonomous
system, 388
Phase angle, 195
Phase line, 39
Phase plane, 327, 335, 393
Phase-plane method, 406-407
Phase portrait(s):
for ﬁrst-order equations, 39
for systems of two linear ﬁrst-order
differential equations, 335-336, 393
Physical pendulum, 220
Piecewise-continuous functions, 
277, 428
Pin supported ends of a beam, 211
Plane autonomous system, 387
Plucked string, 470, 473
Points of inﬂection, 45
Poisson's partial differential equation, 
483, 540
Polar coordinates, 494
Polynomial operator, 120
Population growth, 21
Population models:
birth and death, 93
doomsday, 103 
extinction, 103 
ﬂuctuating, 93
harvesting, 45, 93, 98, 100 
immigration, 98, 103 
logistic, 45, 95-97, 100
Malthusian, 21-22 
restocking, 98
Potassium-argon dating method, 115
Potassium-40 decay, 115
Power series:
absolute convergence of, 232
arithmetic of, 234 
center, 232 
convergence of, 232 
deﬁnes a function, 233 
deﬁnition of, 232 
differentiation of, 233 
divergence of, 232
identity property of, 233 
integration of, 233
interval of convergence, 232
Maclaurin, 234
radius of convergence, 232 
ratio test for, 233
represents a continuous function, 233 
represents an analytic function, 233 
review of, 232
solutions of differential equations, 236,
240, 241
Taylor, 234
Power series solutions:
existence of, 240 
method of ﬁnding, 241 
solution curves of, 245-246
Predator-prey interaction, 412
Predator-prey model, 108, 412-413
Predictor-corrector method, 366, 373
Prime notation, 3
Projectile motion, 184
Probability integral, 511
Proportional quantities, 22
Pure resonance, 202
Pursuit curve, 225
Q
Qualitative analysis:
of a ﬁrst-order differential equation,
36-42, 403
of a second-order differential equation,
386-387, 410 
of systems of differential equations,
392, 400, 410
Quasi frequency, 200
Quasi period, 200
R
Radial symmetry, 499
Radial vibrations, 499
Radioactive decay, 22, 84-85, 106, 115
Radioactive decay series, 62, 106
Radius of convergence of a power 
series, 232
Radium decay, 85
Radon, 85
Raindrop, 33, 105
Raleigh's differential equation, 408
Rate function, 36
Ratio test, 232
Rational roots of a polynomial equation, 136
RC-series circuit, differential equation 
of, 30, 89
Reactance, 204
Reactions, chemical, 23, 98
Rectangular pulse, 299
Rectiﬁed sine wave, 299
Recurrence relation, 242
Recurrence relation, differential, 262-263
Reduced row-echelon form of a matrix,
APP-11
Reduction of order, 129-131
Reduction to separation of variables, 73
Reﬂecting surface, 32
Regular singular point, 248
Regular Sturm-Liouville problem:
deﬁnition of, 441 
properties of, 441
INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
●
I-9
Regression line, 103
Relative error, 78
Relative growth rate, 95
Repeller, 42, 366
Resistance:
air, 26, 30, 45, 92-93 
electrical, 25, 88-89, 203-204
Resonance, pure, 202
Resonance curve, 209
Resonance frequency, 209
Response:
impulse, 314
as a solution of a DE, 61, 125, 169, 
193, 203 
of a system, 28, 88, 387
zero-input, 288 
zero-state, 288
Rest point, 399
Rest solution, 170
Restocking of a ﬁshery, model of, 98
Riccati's differential equation, 75
Right-hand limit, 428
RK4 method, 78, 369
RKF45 method, 371
Robin condition, 463
Robins, Benjamin, 226
Rocket motion, 31, 222, 225
Rodrigues' formula, 267
Rotating ﬂuid, shape of, 32-33
Rotating pendulum, 418
Rotating rod and bead, 229-230
Rotating string, 214, 216
Round-off error, 363-364
Row-echelon form, APP-10
Row operations:
elementary, APP-10 
symbols for, APP-11
Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method, 371
Runge-Kutta methods:
ﬁrst-order, 368 
fourth-order, 78, 369 
second-order, 368
for systems, 376, 378 
truncation errors for, 370
S
Saddle point, 395
Sawtooth function, 310
Schwartz, Laurent, 314
Second-order boundary-value problem,
380-381, 383
Second-order chemical reaction, 23,
98, 101
Second-order homogeneous linear 
system, 345
Second-order initial-value problem, 14,
375, 380, 383
Second-order ordinary differential
equation as a system, 188, 376
Second-order partial differential 
equation, 456
Second-order Runge-Kutta 
method, 368
Second translation theorem:
alternative form of, 295 
form of, 294
inverse form of, 295
Self-adjoint form of a second-order
differential equation, 443
Semi-stable critical point, 42
Separated boundary conditions, 411
Separation constant, 457
Separation of variables, method of:
for ﬁrst-order ordinary differential
equations, 46-47
for linear second-order partial
differential equations, 456
Sequence of partial sums, 439
Series:
Fourier, 427, 433
Fourier-Bessel, 449
Fourier-Legendre, 451, 452, 453 
power, 232
review of, 232-234
solutions of ordinary differential
equations, 236, 240, 249
Series circuits, differential equations of,
25, 30, 88-89, 203, 409
Shifting the summation index, 235
Shifting theorems for Laplace transforms,
290, 294
Shooting method, 383
Shroud of Turin, dating of, 90
Sifting property, 314
Signum function, 230
Simple harmonic electrical vibrations, 203
Simple harmonic motion of a spring/mass
system, 194
Simple pendulum, 220
Simply supported ends of a beam, 211, 472
Sine integral function, 63, 525
Sine series:
in one variable, 433 
in two variables, 490
Single-step numerical method:
advantages of, 374-375 
deﬁnition of, 373 
disadvantages of, 374-375
Singular matrix, APP-7
Singular point:
at , 239
irregular, 248
of a linear ﬁrst-order differential
equation, 57
of a linear second-order differential
equation, 239
regular, 248
Singular solution, 8
Singular Sturm-Liouville problem, 443
Sink, 399
SIR model, 112
Sky diving, 30, 93
Sliding bead, 400-401, 411

Sliding box on an inclined plane, 94-95
Sliding friction, 94-95, 230
Slope ﬁeld, 36
Slope function, 36
Snowplow problem, 33
Soft spring, 219
Solar collector, 102
Solution curve, 6
Solution of an ordinary differential
equation:
about an ordinary point, 238 
about a singular point, 247 
constant, 11, 38
deﬁned by an integral, 50 
deﬁnition of, 5 
equilibrium, 38
explicit, 6
general, 10, 57, 123, 125 
graph of, 6
implicit, 6 
integral, 7
interval of deﬁnition for, 5 
n-parameter family of, 7 
number of, 7
particular, 7,
piecewise deﬁned, 8 
singular, 8
trivial, 6
Solution of a partial differential 
equation, 456
Solution of a system of ordinary
differential equations:
deﬁned, 9, 180, 387
equilibrium, 388 
general, 330, 331 
particular, 331 
periodic, 388
Solution vector, 327
Source, 399
Sparse matrix, 538
Special functions, 59, 61, 257
Speciﬁc growth rate, 95
Spiral points, 397
Spherical Bessel functions:
of the ﬁrst kind, 264
of the second kind, 264
Spread of a communicable disease, 23, 
97, 112
Spring constant, 193
Spring/mass system:
dashpot damping of a, 197
Hooke's law and, 193
linear models for, 193 
nonlinear models for, 218-219
Springs, coupled, 229, 315-316, 319
Square matrix, APP-3
Square norm of a function, 421, 
447-448, 450
Square wave, 310
Stability of a plane autonomous system:
locally stable, 392 
unstable, 392
INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I-10
●
INDEX
Stability criteria:
for a ﬁrst-order autonomous differential
equation, 403 
for a plane autonomous system, 
399, 404
Stable critical point, 42, 401
Stable node, 394
Stable numerical method, 374, 542, 548
Stable spiral point, 397
Staircase function, 299
Standard form of a linear differential
equation:
ﬁrst order, 54, 157
second order, 130, 158, 160, 238, 239
Standing waves, 470, 501
Starting methods, 373
State of a system, 21, 28, 127, 387
State variables, 28, 127
Stationary point, 38, 388
Steady-state current, 89, 204
Steady-state solution, 204, 480
Steady state temperature distribution, 
462, 491
Steady state term, 89, 201
Stefan's law of radiation, 114
Step size, 76
Streamlines, 70
Sturm-Liouville problem: 
deﬁnition of, 441 
homogeneous, 441 
nonhomogeneous, 441 
periodic, 443 
properties of, 441 
regular, 441
singular, 443
Subscript notation, 3
Substitutions in an ordinary differential
equation, 71, 186
Substitutions in a partial differential
equation, 472, 479-480
Sum of two matrices, APP-4
Summation index, shifting of, 235
Superposition principle:
for a Dirichlet problem, 476
for homogeneous linear differential
equations, 120
for homogeneous linear partial
differential equations, 458 
for homogeneous linear systems, 328
for nonhomogeneous linear differential
equations, 126
Suspended cables, 26
Suspension bridge, 26, 53
Symmetric matrix, 339
Synthetic division, 136
Systematic elimination, 180
Systems, autonomous, 386
Systems of linear differential equations,
methods for solving:
by Laplace transforms, 315
by matrices, 333, 348
by systematic elimination, 180
Systems of linear ﬁrst-order differential
equations: 
complementary function for, 331, 348 
deﬁnition of, 9, 106, 326
existence of a unique solution for, 328
fundamental set of solutions for, 330 
general solution of, 330, 331, 334 
homogeneous, 326
initial-value problem for, 328 
matrix form of, 326-327 
nonhomogeneous, 326
normal form of, 326
particular solution for, 331, 348, 352
solution of, 327, 331, 33-334, 338, 342,
344, 348-352 
superposition principle for, 328
undetermined coefﬁcients for, 348-349 
variation of parameters for, 351-352
Wronskian for, 329-330
Systems of ordinary differential equations,
9, 106, 180, 187, 315, 325, 385
Systems reduced to ﬁrst-order systems, 377
T
Table of Laplace transforms, APP-21
Tangent lines, use of, 76-77
Taylor polynomial, 188, 369
Taylor series, use of, 187
Telegraph equation, 465
Telephone wires, shape of, 217
Temperature:
in an annular plate, 497-498
in a circular cylinder, 502, 504, 509 
in a circular plate, 494-495, 504, 508 
in a circular ring, 217
in a hollow sphere, 507
in a quarter-circular plate, 496 
in a semiannular plate, 498
in a semicircular plate, 496 
in a sphere, 217, 508
in a wedge-shaped plate, 497, 508
Terminal velocity of a falling body, 45, 92,
93, 102
Thermal diffusivity, 462
Theory of distributions, 314
Three-dimensional Laplace's equation, 491
Three-dimensional Laplacian:
in cylindrical coordinates, 502
in rectangular coordinates, 462 
in spherical coordinates, 506
Three-term recurrence relation, 244
Time of death, 91
Torricelli's law, 24
Trace of a matrix, 393
Tractrix, 32, 113
Trajectories:
orthogonal, 114
parametric equations of, 327, 335, 387
Transfer function, 288
Transform of a derivative, 284
Transform pairs, 526
Transient solution, 204, 480
Transient term, 59, 89, 201, 204
Translation property of an autonomous
DE, 42
Translation theorems for Laplace
transform:
ﬁrst, 290
second, 294, 295
inverse forms of, 290, 295
Transpose of a matrix, APP-7
Transverse vibrations, 462, 499
Traveling waves, 472
Triangular wave, 310
Tridiagonal matrix, 543
Trigonometric series, 426
Trivial solution, 6
Truncation error:
for Euler's method, 364 
global, 364
for Improved Euler's method, 364-365 
local, 364
for RK4 method, 370
Tsunami, model for, 102
Twisted shaft, 485
Two-dimensional heat equation:
in polar coordinates, 499
in rectangular coordinates, 488
Two-dimensional Laplace's equation: 
in cylindrical coordinates, 502 
in polar coordinates, 494
in rectangular coordinates, 460, 
462, 473
Two-dimensional Laplacian:
in cylindrical coordinates, 502 
in polar coordinates, 494
in rectangular coordinates, 462
Two-dimensional phase portrait, 335-336,
393, 407
Two-dimensional wave equation:
in polar coordinates, 499
in rectangular coordinates, 489
U
Undamped spring/mass system, 193-194
Underdamped series circuit, 203
Underdamped spring/mass system, 198
Undetermined coefﬁcients for linear DEs: 
annihilator approach, 149-155 
superposition approach, 139-146
Undetermined coefﬁcients for linear
systems, 348
Uniqueness theorems, 16, 117, 328
Unit impulse, 312
Unit step function:
deﬁnition of, 293 
graph of, 293
Laplace transform of, 294
Universal law of gravitation, 31
Unstable critical point, 42
Unstable numerical method, 374
Unsymmetrical vibrations of a spring, 219
INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
●
I-11
V
Variable mass, 222
Variable spring constant, 197
Variables, separable, 46
Variation of parameters:
for linear ﬁrst-order differential
equations, 157
for linear higher-order differential
equations, 158-159, 161
for systems of linear ﬁrst-order
differential equations, 348, 351-352
Vector ﬁeld, 387
Vectors, deﬁnition of, APP-3
Vectors, as solutions of systems of linear
differential equations, 327
Velocity of a falling raindrop, 105
Verhulst, P. F., 96
Vibrating beam, 472, 488
Vibrating elastic bar, 471
Vibrating twisted beam, 485
Vibrations, spring/mass systems, 193, 
197, 200
Virga, 33
Viscous damping, 26
Voltage drops, 25
Volterra, Vito, 412
Volterra integral equation, 305
Volterra's principle, 415
Vortex point, 399
W
Water clock, 105
Wave equation:
difference equation replacement of,
545-546 
derivation of, 462
one dimensional, 460, 468, 545
in polar coordinates, 499 
two dimensional, 489, 499
Weight, 26
Weight function:
of a linear system, 314 
orthogonality with respect to, 424
Weighted average, 368
Wire hanging under its own weight, 221
Wronskian determinant:
for a set of functions, 122
for a set of solutions of a homogeneous
linear differential equation, 122 
for a set of solution vectors of a
homogeneous linear system, 329-330
Y
Young's modulus of elasticity, 210
Z
Zero-input response, 288
Zero rna trix, APP-6
Zero-state response, 288
Zeros of Bessel functions, 262
INDEX
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TABLE OF LAPLACE TRANSFORMS
f (t)
1. 1
2. t
3. tn
n a positive integer
4. t1/2
5. t1/2
6. ta
7. sin kt
8. cos kt
9. sin2 kt
10. cos2 kt
11. eat
12. sinh kt
13. cosh kt
14. sinh2kt
15. cosh2kt
16. teat
17. tn eat
n a positive integer
18. eat sin kt
19. eat cos kt
s  a
(s  a)2  k2
k
(s  a)2  k2
n!
(s  a)n1,
1
(s  a)2
s2  2k2
s(s2  4k2)
2k2
s(s2  4k2)
s
s2  k2
k
s2  k2
1
s  a
s2  2k2
s(s2  4k2)
2k2
s(s2  4k2)
s
s2  k2
k
s2  k2
(  1)
s1
, a  1
1
2s3/2
B

s
n!
sn1,
1
s2
1
s
{ f (t)}  F(s)
f (t)
20. eat sinh kt
21. eat cosh kt
22. t sin kt
23. t cos kt
24. sin kt  kt cos kt
25. sin kt  kt cos kt
26. t sinh kt
27. t cosh kt
28.
29.
30. 1  cos kt
31. kt  sin kt
32.
33.
34. sin kt sinh kt
35. sin kt cosh kt
36. cos kt sinh kt
37. cos kt cosh kt
38. J0(kt)
1
1s2  k2
s3
s4  4k4
k(s2  2k2)
s4  4k4
k(s2  2k2)
s4  4k4
2k2s
s4  4k4
s
(s2  a2)(s2  b2)
cos bt  cos at
a2  b2
1
(s2  a2)(s2  b2)
a sin bt  b sin at
ab (a2  b2)
k3
s2(s2  k2)
k2
s(s2  k2)
s
(s  a)(s  b)
aeat  bebt
a  b
1
(s  a)(s  b)
eat  ebt
a  b
s2  k2
(s2  k2)2
2ks
(s2  k2)2
2k3
(s2  k2)2
2ks2
(s2  k2)2
s2  k2
(s2  k2)2
2ks
(s2  k2)2
s  a
(s  a)2  k2
k
(s  a)2  k2
{ f (t)}  F(s)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

f(t)
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50. eat f(t)
F(s  a)
51.
52.
easF(s)
53.
eas
54. f (n)(t)
55. tn f(t)
56.
F(s)G(s)
57. d(t)
1
58. d(t  t0)
est0

t
0
f (	)g(t  	) d	
(1)n dn
dsn F(s)
snF(s)  s(n1) f (0)  
 
 
  f (n1)(0)
{ g(t  a)}
g(t)(t  a)
f (t  a)(t  a)
eas
s
(t  a)
 erfc 
a
2 1t
bea1s
s(1s  b)
eabeb2terfc b 1t 
a
2 1t
ea1s
1s(1s  b)
eabeb2t erfc b1t 
a
2 1t
ea1s
s1s
2 B
t
 ea2/4t  a erfc 
a
21t
ea1s
s
erfc 
a
21t
ea1s
a
21t3 ea2/4t
ea 1s
1s
1
1t
 ea2/4t
1
2 arctan a  b
s
 1
2 arctan a  b
s
sin at cos bt
t
arctan 
a
s
sin at
t
ln s2  k2
s2
2(1  cosh kt)
t
ln s2  k2
s2
2(1  cos kt)
t
ln s  a
s  b
ebt  eat
t
{ f (t)}  F(s)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

