
List of Examples
Chapter 1
1.1 Determining Current Given Charge 9
1.2 Power Calculations 14
1.3 Energy Calculation 15
1.4 Kirchhoff's Current Law 18
1.5 Kirchhoff's Voltage Law 22
1.6 Resistance Calculation 29
1.7 Determining Resistance for Given Power and Voltage Ratings 31
1.8 Circuit Analysis Using Arbitrary References 33
1.9 Using KVL, KCL, and Ohm's Law to Solve a Circuit 34
Chapter 2
2.1 Combining Resistances in Series and Parallel 49
2.2 Circuit Analysis Using Series/Parallel ­Equivalents 52
2.3 Application of the Voltage-Division Principle 56
2.4 Applying the Current- and Voltage-Division Principles 57
2.5 Application of the Current-Division Principle 58
2.6 Node-Voltage Analysis 63
2.7 Node-Voltage Analysis 66
2.8 Node-Voltage Analysis 68

2.9 Node-Voltage Analysis 70
2.10 Node-Voltage Analysis with a Dependent Source 74
2.11 Node-Voltage Analysis with a Dependent Source 75
2.12 Node Voltage Analysis 76
2.13 Mesh-Current Analysis 82
2.14 Mesh-Current Analysis 83
2.15 Writing Mesh Equations Directly in Matrix Form 85
2.16 Mesh-Current Analysis with Controlled Sources 88
2.17 Mesh Current Analysis 89
2.18 Determining the Thévenin Equivalent Circuit 92
2.19 Zeroing Sources to Find Thévenin Resistance 94
2.20 Thévenin Equivalent of a Circuit with a Dependent Source 95
2.21 Norton Equivalent Circuit 97
2.22 Using Source Transformations 99
2.23 Determining Maximum Power Transfer 102
2.24 Circuit Analysis Using Superposition 106
2.25 Using a Wheatstone Bridge to Measure Resistance 108
Chapter 3
3.1 Determining Current for a Capacitance Given Voltage 130
3.2 Determining Voltage for a Capacitance Given Current 132
3.3 Current, Power, and Energy for a Capacitance 134
3.4 Capacitances in Series and Parallel 137
3.5 Calculating Capacitance Given Physical Parameters 139
3.6 What Happened to the Missing Energy? 141

3.7 Voltage, Power, and Energy for an Inductance 145
3.8 Inductor Current with Constant Applied Voltage 146
3.9 Inductances in Series and Parallel 148
3.10 Integration and Differentiation Using the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox 154
Chapter 4
4.1 Capacitance Discharging Through a Resistance 170
4.2 First-Order RC Circuit 172
4.3 Steady-State DC Analysis 174
4.4 RL Transient Analysis 176
4.5 RL Transient Analysis 178
4.6 Transient Analysis of an RC Circuit with a Sinusoidal Source 183
4.7 Analysis of a Second-Order Circuit with a DC Source 190
4.8 Computer-Aided Solution of a First-Order Circuit 199
4.9 Computer-Aided Solution of a Second-Order Circuit 201
4.10 Computer-Aided Solution of a System of Differential Equations 203
Chapter 5
5.1 Power Delivered to a Resistance by a Sinusoidal Source 219
5.2 RMS Value of a Triangular Voltage 220
5.3 Using Phasors to Add Sinusoids 225
5.4 Combining Impedances in Series and Parallel 231
5.5 Steady-State AC Analysis of a Series Circuit 233
5.6 Series and Parallel Combinations of Complex Impedances 235

5.7 Steady-State AC Node-Voltage Analysis 237
5.8 Steady-State AC Mesh-Current Analysis 238
5.9 AC Power Calculations 247
5.10 Using Power Triangles 249
5.11 Power-Factor Correction 251
5.12 Thévenin and Norton Equivalents 253
5.13 Maximum Power Transfer 256
5.14 Analysis of a Wye-Wye System 264
5.15 Analysis of a Balanced Delta-Delta System 267
5.16 Phasor Mesh-Current Analysis with MATLAB 272
Chapter 6
6.1 Using the Transfer Function to Determine the Output 291
6.2 Using the Transfer Function with Several Input Components 293
6.3 Calculation of RC Lowpass Output 299
6.4 Decibels and Logarithmic Frequency Scales 305
6.5 Determination of the Break Frequency for a Highpass Filter 312
6.6 Series Resonant Circuit 317
6.7 Parallel Resonant Circuit 320
6.8 Cascaded Ideal Filters 322
6.9 Filter Design 327
6.10 Computer-Generated Bode Plot 328
6.11 Step Response of a First-Order Digital Lowpass Filter 334
Chapter 7

7.1 Converting a Decimal Integer to Binary 360
7.2 Converting a Decimal Fraction to Binary 360
7.3 Converting Decimal Values to Binary 361
7.4 Converting Binary Numbers to Decimal 361
7.5 Adding Binary Numbers 361
7.6 Converting Octal Numbers to Decimal 362
7.7 Converting Hexadecimal Numbers to Decimal 362
7.8 Converting Octal and Hexadecimal Numbers to Binary 362
7.9 Converting Binary Numbers to Octal or Hexadecimal 363
7.10 Subtraction Using Two's-Complement Arithmetic 366
7.11 Using a Truth Table to Prove a Boolean Expression 370
7.12 Applying De Morgan's Laws 373
7.13 Combinatorial Logic Circuit Design 377
7.14 Finding the Minimum SOP Form for a Logic Function 384
7.15 Finding the Minimum POS Form for a Logic Function 385
Chapter 8
8.1 An Assembly-Language Program 431
8.2 Absolute Value Assembly Program 431
8.3 Manual Conversion of Source Code to Machine Code 432
8.4 Subroutine Source Code 433
8.5 Sensor Loading 437
8.6 Specifications for a Computer-Based Measurement System 449

Chapter 9
9.1 Load-Line Analysis 464
9.2 Load-Line Analysis 465
9.3 Load-Line Analysis of a Zener-Diode Voltage Regulator 467
9.4 Analysis of a Zener-Diode Regulator with a Load 468
9.5 Analysis by Assumed Diode States 471
9.6 Piecewise-Linear Model for a Zener Diode 473
9.7 Analysis Using a Piecewise-Linear Model 474
Chapter 10
10.1 Calculating Amplifier Performance 508
10.2 Calculating Performance of Cascaded Amplifiers 510
10.3 Simplified Model for an Amplifier Cascade 511

Electrical Engineering
Principles and Applications

Electrical Engineering
Principles and Applications
Seventh Edition
Allan R. Hambley
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Michigan Technological University
arhamble@mtu.edu
330 Hudson Street, NY NY 10013

Vice President and Editorial Director, ECS: Marcia J. Horton
Editor-in-Chief: Julian Partridge
Portfolio Manager: Julie Bai
Portfolio Manager Assistant: Michelle Bayman
Executive Marketing Manager: Tim Galligan
Director of Marketing: Christy Lesko
Field Marketing Manager: Demetrius Hall
Marketing Assistant: Jon Bryant
Managing Content Producer: Scott Disanno
Global HE Director of Vendor Sourcing and Procurement: Diane Hynes
Director of Operations: Nick Sklitsis 
Operations Specialist: Maura Zaldivar-Garcia
Creative Director: Blair Brown 
Cover Design: Black Horse Designs
Cover Image: Chesky/Shutterstock
Manager, Rights and Permissions: Ben Ferrini
Cover Printer: Phoenix Color/Hagerstown
Composition/Full-Service Project Management: SPi Global/Shylaja Gattupalli
MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. Company and product names mentioned
herein are the ­trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners.
Copyright © 2018, 2014, 2011, 2008 by Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey 07030. All
rights reserved. ­Manufactured in the United States of America. This publication is protected by
Copyright and permissions should be ­obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction,
storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or likewise. For information regarding permission(s), write to: Rights and
Permissions Department, 221 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030.
The author and publisher of this book have used their best efforts in preparing this book. These efforts
include the ­development, research, and testing of the theories and programs to determine their
effectiveness. The author and publisher make no warranty of any kind, expressed or implied, with regard
to these programs or the documentation contained in this book. The author and publisher shall not be
liable in any event for incidental or consequential damages in connection with, or arising out of, the
furnishing, performance, or use of these programs.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Hambley, Allan R., author.
Title: Electrical engineering : principles & applications / Allan R. Hambley.
Description: Seventh edition. | Hoboken : Pearson Education, 2016. | Includes
   index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016020630| ISBN 9780134484143 | ISBN 0134484142
Subjects: LCSH: Electrical engineering—Textbooks.
Classification: LCC TK146 .H22 2016 | DDC 621.3—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016020630
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ISBN-10:	0-13-448414-2
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-448414-3

To my family Judy, Tony, Pam, and Mason and to my special friend, Carol

Contents
Cover
List of Examples
Half Title
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Practical Applications of Electrical Engineering Principles vi
Preface xi
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Overview of Electrical Engineering 2
1.2 Circuits, Currents, and Voltages 6
1.3 Power and Energy 13
1.4 Kirchhoff's Current Law 16
1.5 Kirchhoff's Voltage Law 20
1.6 Introduction to Circuit Elements 23
1.7 Introduction to Circuits 31
Summary 35
Problems 36
Practice Test
2 Resistive Circuits 46
2.1 Resistances in Series and Parallel 47
2.2 Network Analysis by Using Series and Parallel Equivalents 51
2.3 Voltage-Divider and Current-Divider Circuits 55
2.4 Node-Voltage Analysis 60
2.5 Mesh-Current Analysis 80
2.6 Thévenin and Norton Equivalent ­Circuits 90
2.7 Superposition Principle 103
2.8 Wheatstone Bridge 107

Summary 110
Problems 111
Practice Test
3 Inductance and Capacitance 127
3.1 Capacitance 128
3.2 Capacitances in Series and Parallel 135
3.3 Physical Characteristics of ­Capacitors 138
3.4 Inductance 142
3.5 Inductances in Series and Parallel 147
3.6 Practical Inductors 149
3.7 Mutual Inductance 152
3.8 Symbolic Integration and Differentiation Using MATLAB 153
Summary 157
Problems 158
Practice Test
4 Transients 167
4.1 First-Order RC Circuits 168
4.2 DC Steady State 173
4.3 RL Circuits 175
4.4 RC and RL Circuits with General Sources 180
4.5 Second-Order Circuits 186
4.6 Transient Analysis Using the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox 199
Summary 205
Problems 205
Practice Test
5 Steady-State Sinusoidal Analysis 215
5.1 Sinusoidal Currents and Voltages 216
5.2 Phasors 222
5.3 Complex Impedances 228
5.4 Circuit Analysis with Phasors and ­Complex Impedances 233
5.5 Power in AC Circuits 239
5.6 Thévenin and Norton Equivalent ­Circuits 252

5.7 Balanced Three-Phase Circuits 258
5.8 AC Analysis Using MATLAB 270
Summary 274
Problems 275
Practice Test
6 Frequency Response, Bode Plots, and Resonance 287
6.1 Fourier Analysis, Filters, and Transfer Functions 288
6.2 First-Order Lowpass Filters 296
6.3 Decibels, the Cascade Connection, and Logarithmic Frequency Scales 301
6.4 Bode Plots 306
6.5 First-Order Highpass Filters 309
6.6 Series Resonance 313
6.7 Parallel Resonance 318
6.8 Ideal and Second-Order Filters 321
6.9 Bode Plots with Matlab 328
6.10 Digital Signal Processing 331
Summary 340
Problems 341
Practice Test
7 Logic Circuits 355
7.1 Basic Logic Circuit Concepts 356
7.2 Representation of Numerical Data in Binary Form 359
7.3 Combinatorial Logic Circuits 367
7.4 Synthesis of Logic Circuits 375
7.5 Minimization of Logic Circuits 381
7.6 Sequential Logic Circuits 386
Summary 397
Problems 398
Practice Test
8 Computers, Microcontrollers and Computer-Based Instrumentation Systems 408
8.1 Computer Organization 409
8.2 Memory Types 412

8.3 Digital Process Control 414
8.4 Programming Model for the HCS12/9S12 Family 417
8.5 The Instruction Set and Addressing Modes for the CPU12 421
8.6 Assembly-Language Programming 430
8.7 Measurement Concepts and ­Sensors 435
8.8 Signal Conditioning 440
8.9 Analog-to-Digital Conversion 447
Summary 450
Problems 452
Practice Test
9 Diodes 459
9.1 Basic Diode Concepts 460
9.2 Load-Line Analysis of Diode ­Circuits 463
9.3 Zener-Diode Voltage-Regulator ­Circuits 466
9.4 Ideal-Diode Model 470
9.5 Piecewise-Linear Diode Models 472
9.6 Rectifier Circuits 475
9.7 Wave-Shaping Circuits 480
9.8 Linear Small-Signal Equivalent ­Circuits 485
Summary 491
Problems 491
Practice Test
10 Amplifiers: Specifications and External ­Characteristics 503
10.1 Basic Amplifier Concepts 504
10.2 Cascaded Amplifiers 509
10.3 Power Supplies and Efficiency 512
10.4 Additional Amplifier Models 515
10.5 Importance of Amplifier Impedances in Various Applications 518
10.6 Ideal Amplifiers 521
10.7 Frequency Response 522
10.8 Linear Waveform Distortion 527
10.9 Pulse Response 531

10.10 Transfer Characteristic and Nonlinear Distortion 534
10.11 Differential Amplifiers 536
10.12 Offset Voltage, Bias Current, and Offset Current 540
Summary 545
Problems 546
Practice Test
11 Field-Effect Transistors 557
11.1 NMOS and PMOS Transistors 558
11.2 Load-Line Analysis of a Simple NMOS Amplifier 566
 11.3 Bias Circuits 568
11.4 Small-Signal Equivalent Circuits 572
11.5 Common-Source Amplifiers 576
11.6 Source Followers 580
11.7 CMOS Logic Gates 585
Summary 590
Problems 591
Practice Test
12 Bipolar Junction Transistors 599
12.1 Current and Voltage Relationships 600
12.2 Common-Emitter Characteristics 603
12.3 Load-Line Analysis of a Common-Emitter Amplifier 604
12.4 pnp Bipolar Junction Transistors 610
12.5 Large-Signal DC Circuit Models 612
12.6 Large-Signal DC Analysis of BJT ­Circuits 615
12.7 Small-Signal Equivalent Circuits 622
12.8 Common-Emitter Amplifiers 625
12.9 Emitter Followers 630
Summary 636
Problems 637
Practice Test
13 Operational Amplifiers 646
13.1 Ideal Operational Amplifiers 647

13.2 Inverting Amplifiers 648
13.3 Noninverting Amplifiers 655
13.4 Design of Simple Amplifiers 658
13.5 Op-Amp Imperfections in the Linear Range of Operation 663
13.6 Nonlinear Limitations 667
13.7 DC Imperfections 672
13.8 Differential and Instrumentation ­Amplifiers 676
13.9 Integrators and Differentiators 678
13.10 Active Filters 681
Summary 685
Problems 686
Practice Test
14 Magnetic Circuits and Transformers 698
14.1 Magnetic Fields 699
14.2 Magnetic Circuits 708
14.3 Inductance and Mutual Inductance 713
14.4 Magnetic Materials 717
14.5 Ideal Transformers 720
14.6 Real Transformers 728
Summary 733
Problems 733
Practice Test
15 DC Machines 744
15.1 Overview of Motors 745
15.2 Principles of DC Machines 754
15.3 Rotating DC Machines 759
15.4 Shunt-Connected and Separately ­Excited DC Motors 765
15.5 Series-Connected DC Motors 770
15.6 Speed Control of DC Motors 774
15.7 DC Generators 778
Summary 783
Problems 784

Practice Test
16 AC Machines 794
16.1 Three-Phase Induction Motors 795
16.2 Equivalent-Circuit and Performance Calculations for Induction Motors 803
16.3 Synchronous Machines 812
16.4 Single-Phase Motors 824
16.5 Stepper Motors and Brushless DC Motors 827
Summary 829
Problems 830
Practice Test
APPENDICES
A Complex Numbers 836
Summary 843
Problems 843
B Nominal Values and the Color Code for ­Resistors 845
C The Fundamentals of Engineering Examination 847
D Answers for the Practice Tests 848
E On-Line Student Resources 857
Index 858

Practical Applications of Electrical Engineering Principles
1.1 Using Resistance to Measure Strain 30
2.1 An Important Engineering Problem: Energy-Storage Systems for Electric Vehicles 102
3.1 Electronic Photo Flash 150
4.1 Electronics and the Art of Automotive Maintenance 198
6.1 Active Noise Cancellation 296
7.1 Biomedical Engineering Application of Electronics: Cardiac Pacemaker 394
8.1 Fresh Bread Anyone? 416
8.2 The Virtual First-Down Line 445
10.1 Electronic Stud Finder 541
11.1 Where Did Those Trout Go? 585
12.1 Soup Up Your Automobile by Changing Its Software? 610
13.1 Mechanical Application of Negative Feedback: Power Steering 657
15.1 Magnetic Flowmeters, Faraday, and The Hunt for Red October 758

Preface
As in the previous editions, my guiding philosophy in writing this book has three elements. The first
element is my belief that in the long run students are best served by learning basic concepts in a
general setting. Second, I believe that students need to be motivated by seeing how the principles apply
to specific and interesting problems in their own fields. The third element of my philosophy is to take
every opportunity to make learning free of frustration for the student.
This book covers circuit analysis, digital systems, electronics, and electromechanics at a level
appropriate for either electrical-engineering students in an introductory course or nonmajors in a survey
course. The only essential prerequisites are basic physics and single-variable calculus. Teaching a
course using this book offers opportunities to develop theoretical and experimental skills and
experiences in the following areas:
Basic circuit analysis and measurement
First- and second-order transients
Steady-state ac circuits
Resonance and frequency response
Digital logic circuits
Microcontrollers
Computer-based instrumentation
Diode circuits
Electronic amplifiers
Field-effect and bipolar junction transistors
Operational amplifiers
Transformers
Ac and dc machines
Computer-aided circuit analysis using MATLAB
While the emphasis of this book is on basic concepts, a key feature is the inclusion of short articles
scattered throughout showing how electrical-engineering concepts are applied in other fields. The
subjects of these articles include anti-knock signal processing for internal combustion engines, a cardiac
pacemaker, active noise control, and the use of RFID tags in fisheries research, among others.
I welcome comments from users of this book. Information on how the book could be improved is
especially valuable and will be taken to heart in future revisions. My e-mail address is

arhamble@mtu.edu

On-Line Student Resources
MasteringEngineering. Tutorial homework problems emulate the instructor's office-hour
environment, guiding students through engineering concepts with self-paced individualized

coaching. These in-depth tutorial homework problems are designed to coach students with feedback
specific to their errors and optional hints that break problems down into simpler steps. Video
Solutions and coaching activities also provide complete, step-by-step solution walkthroughs of
representative homework problems from each chapter. Access can be purchased bundled with the
textbook or online at www.masteringengineering.com.
Pearson eText, which is a complete on-line version of the book that includes highlighting, note-
taking, and search capabilities is also available through MasteringEngineering.
Resource Website. An open access website is available at www.pearsonhighered.com/
engineering-resources. Resources include:
A Student Solutions Manual. A PDF file for each chapter includes full solutions for the in-chapter
exercises, answers for the end-of-chapter problems that are marked with asterisks, and full
solutions for the Practice Tests.
A MATLAB folder that contains the m-files discussed in the book.
Instructor Resources
Resources for instructors include:
MasteringEngineering. This online Tutorial Homework program allows you to integrate dynamic
homework with automatic grading and personalized feedback. MasteringEngineering allows you to
easily track the performance of your entire class on an assignment-by-assignment basis, or the
detailed work of an individual student.
A complete Instructor's Solutions Manual
PowerPoint slides with all the figures from the book
Instructor Resources are available for download by adopters of this book at the Pearson Higher
Education website: www.pearsonhighered.com. If you are in need of a login and password, please
contact your local Pearson representative.
What's New in This Edition
We have continued and added items to the popular Practice Tests that students can use in
preparing for course exams at the end of each chapter. Answers for the Practice Tests appear in
Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the on-line Student Solutions Manual files.
New examples have been added in Chapters 1 through 7.
Approximately half of the end-of-chapter problems have been replaced or modified.
Coverage of computers, microcontrollers and computer-based instrumentation has been merged

from two chapters into Chapter 8 for this edition.
Appendix C has been modified to keep up with new developments in the Fundamentals of
Engineering Exam.
We have updated the coverage of MATLAB and the Symbolic Toolbox for network analysis in
Chapters 2 through 6.
Relatively minor corrections and improvements appear throughout the book.
Prerequisites
The essential prerequisites for a course from this book are basic physics and single-variable calculus. A
prior differential equations course would be helpful but is not essential. Differential equations are
encountered in Chapter 4 on transient analysis, but the skills needed are developed from basic
calculus.
Pedagogical Features
The book includes various pedagogical features designed with the goal of stimulating student interest,
eliminating frustration, and engendering an awareness of the relevance of the material to their chosen
profession. These features are:
Statements of learning objectives open each chapter.
Comments in the margins emphasize and summarize important points or indicate common pitfalls
that students need to avoid.
Short boxed articles demonstrate how electrical-engineering principles are applied in other fields of
engineering. For example, see the articles on active noise cancellation (page 296) and electronic
pacemakers (starting on page 394).
Step-by-step problem solving procedures. For example, see the step-by-step summary of node-
voltage analysis (on pages 76-80) or the summary of Thévenin equivalents (on page 252).
A Practice Test at the end of each chapter gives students a chance to test their knowledge. Answers
appear in Appendix D.
Complete solutions to the in-chapter exercises and Practice Tests, included as PDF files on-line,
build student confidence and indicate where additional study is needed.
Summaries of important points at the end of each chapter provide references for students.
Key equations are highlighted in the book to draw attention to important results.
Meeting Abet-Directed Outcomes

Courses based on this book provide excellent opportunities to meet many of the directed outcomes for
accreditation. The Criteria for Accrediting Engineering Programs require that graduates of accredited
programs have "an ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering" and "an ability
to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems." This book, in its entirety, is aimed at developing
these abilities.
Furthermore, the criteria require "an ability to function on multi-disciplinary teams" and "an ability to
communicate effectively." Courses based on this book contribute to these abilities by giving nonmajors
the knowledge and vocabulary to communicate effectively with electrical engineers. The book also helps
to inform electrical engineers about applications in other fields of engineering. To aid in communication
skills, end-of-chapter problems that ask students to explain electrical-engineering concepts in their own
words are included.
Content and Organization
Basic Circuit Analysis
Chapter 1 defines current, voltage, power, and energy. Kirchhoff's laws are introduced. Voltage
sources, current sources, and resistance are defined.
Chapter 2 treats resistive circuits. Analysis by network reduction, node voltages, and mesh currents is
covered. Thévenin equivalents, superposition, and the Wheatstone bridge are treated.
Capacitance, inductance, and mutual inductance are treated in Chapter 3.
Transients in electrical circuits are discussed in Chapter 4. First-order RL and RC circuits and time
constants are covered, followed by a discussion of second-order circuits.
Chapter 5 considers sinusoidal steady-state circuit behavior. (A review of complex arithmetic is included
in Appendix A.) Power calculations, ac Thévenin and Norton equivalents, and balanced three-phase
circuits are treated.
Chapter 6 covers frequency response, Bode plots, resonance, filters, and digital signal processing. The
basic concept of Fourier theory (that signals are composed of sinusoidal components having various
amplitudes, phases, and frequencies) is qualitatively discussed.
Digital Systems

Chapter 7 introduces logic gates and the representation of numerical data in binary form. It then
proceeds to discuss combinatorial and sequential logic. Boolean algebra, De Morgan's laws, truth
tables, Karnaugh maps, coders, decoders, flip-flops, and registers are discussed.
Chapter 8 treats microcomputers with emphasis on embedded systems using the Freescale
Semiconductor HCS12/9S12 as the primary example. Computer organization and memory types are
discussed. Digital process control using microcontrollers is described in general terms. Selected
instructions and addressing modes for the CPU12 are described. Assembly language programming is
treated very briefly. Finally, computer-based instrumentation systems including measurement concepts,
sensors, signal conditioning, and analog-to-digital conversion are discussed.
Electronic Devices and Circuits
Chapter 9 presents the diode, its various models, load-line analysis, and diode circuits, such as
rectifiers, Zener-diode regulators, and wave shapers.
In Chapter 10, the specifications and imperfections of amplifiers that need to be considered in
applications are discussed from a users perspective. These include gain, input impedance, output
impedance, loading effects, frequency response, pulse response, nonlinear distortion, common-mode
rejection, and dc offsets.
Chapter 11 covers the MOS field-effect transistor, its characteristic curves, loadline analysis, large-
signal and small-signal models, bias circuits, the common-source amplifier, and the source follower.
Chapter 12 gives a similar treatment for bipolar transistors. If desired, the order of Chapters 11 and 12
can be reversed. Another possibility is to skip most of both chapters so more time can be devoted to
other topics.
Chapter 13 treats the operational amplifier and many of its applications. Nonmajors can learn enough
from this chapter to design and use op-amp circuits for instrumentation applications in their own fields.
Electromechanics
Chapter 14 reviews basic magnetic field theory, analyzes magnetic circuits, and presents transformers.
DC machines and ac machines are treated in Chapters 15 and 16, respectively. The emphasis is on
motors rather than generators because the nonelectrical engineer applies motors much more often than
generators. In Chapter 15, an overall view of motors in general is presented before considering DC
machines, their equivalent circuits, and performance calculations. The universal motor and its
applications are discussed.

Chapter 16 deals with AC motors, starting with the three-phase induction motor. Synchronous motors
and their advantages with respect to power-factor correction are analyzed. Small motors including
single-phase induction motors are also discussed. A section on stepper motors and brushless dc motors
ends the chapter.


Chapter 1 Introduction
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Recognize interrelationships between electrical engineering and other fields of science and
engineering.
List the major subfields of electrical engineering.
List several important reasons for studying electrical engineering.
Define current, voltage, and power, including their units.
Calculate power and energy and determine whether energy is supplied or absorbed by a circuit
element.
State and apply Kirchhoff's current and voltage laws.
Recognize series and parallel connections.
Identify and describe the characteristics of voltage and current sources.
State and apply Ohm's law.
Solve for currents, voltages, and powers in simple circuits.
Introduction to this chapter:

In this chapter, we introduce electrical engineering, define circuit variables (current,
voltage, power, and energy), study the laws that these circuit variables obey, and
meet several circuit elements (current sources, voltage sources, and resistors).


1.1 Overview of Electrical Engineering
Electrical engineers design systems that have two main objectives:
1. To gather, store, process, transport, and present information.
2. To distribute, store, and convert energy between various forms.
In many electrical systems, the manipulation of energy and the manipulation of information are
interdependent.
For example, numerous aspects of electrical engineering relating to information are applied in weather
prediction. Data about cloud cover, precipitation, wind speed, and so on are gathered electronically by
weather satellites, by land-based radar stations, and by sensors at numerous weather stations.
(Sensors are devices that convert physical measurements to electrical signals.) This information is
transported by electronic communication systems and processed by computers to yield forecasts that
are disseminated and displayed electronically.
In electrical power plants, energy is converted from various sources to electrical form. Electrical
distribution systems transport the energy to virtually every factory, home, and business in the world,
where it is converted to a multitude of useful forms, such as mechanical energy, heat, and light.
No doubt you can list scores of electrical engineering applications in your daily life. Increasingly,
electrical and electronic features are integrated into new products. Automobiles and trucks provide just
one example of this trend. The electronic cont­ent of the average automobile is growing rapidly in
value. Self-driving vehicles are in rapid development and will eventually become the norm. Auto
designers realize that electronic technology is a good way to provide increased functionality at lower
cost. Table 1.1 shows some of the applications of electrical engineering in automobiles.
Table 1.1 Current and Emerging Electronic/Electrical Applications in Automobiles and Trucks
Safety
 Antiskid brakes
 Inflatable restraints
 Collision warning and avoidance

 Blind-zone vehicle detection (especially for large trucks)
 Infrared night vision systems
 Heads-up displays
 Automatic accident notification
 Rear-view cameras
Communications and entertainment
 AM/FM radio
 Digital audio broadcasting
 CD/DVD player
 Cellular phone
 Computer/e-mail
 Satellite radio
Convenience
 Electronic GPS navigation
 Personalized seat/mirror/radio settings
 Electronic door locks
Emissions, performance, and fuel economy
 Vehicle instrumentation
 Electronic ignition
 Tire inflation sensors
 Computerized performance evaluation and maintenance scheduling

 Adaptable suspension systems
Alternative propulsion systems
 Electric vehicles
 Advanced batteries
 Hybrid vehicles
As another example, we note that many common household appliances contain keypads or touch
screens for operator control, sensors, electronic displays, and computer chips, as well as more
conventional switches, heating elements, and motors. Electronics have become so intimately integrated
with mechanical systems that the name mechatronics is used for the combination.
You may find it interesting to search the web for sites related to "mechatronics."
Subdivisions of Electrical Engineering
Next, we give you an overall picture of electrical engineering by listing and briefly discussing eight of its
major areas.
Computers that are part of products such as appliances and automobiles are
called embedded computers.
1. Communication systems transport information in electrical form. Cellular phone, radio, satellite
television, and the Internet are examples of communication systems. It is possible for virtually
any two people (or computers) on the globe to communicate almost instantaneously. A climber

on a mountaintop in Nepal can call or send e-mail to friends whether they are hiking in Alaska or
sitting in a New York City office. This kind of connectivity affects the way we live, the way we
conduct business, and the design of everything we use. For example, communication systems
will change the design of highways because traffic and road-condition information collected by
roadside sensors can be transmitted to central locations and used to route traffic. When an
accident occurs, an electrical signal can be emitted automatically when the airbags deploy,
giving the exact location of the vehicle, summoning help, and notifying traffic-control computers.
2. Computer process and store information in digital form. No doubt you have already encountered
computer applications in your own field. Besides the computers of which you are aware, there
are many in unobvious places, such as household appliances and automobiles. A typical modern
automobile contains several dozen special-purpose computers. Chemical processes and railroad
switching yards are routinely controlled through computers.
3. Control systems gather information with sensors and use electrical energy to control a physical
process. A relatively simple control system is the heating/cooling system in a residence. A
sensor (thermostat) compares the temperature with the desired value. Control circuits operate
the furnace or air conditioner to achieve the desired temperature. In rolling sheet steel, an
electrical control system is used to obtain the desired sheet thickness. If the sheet is too thick
(or thin), more (or less) force is applied to the rollers. The temperatures and flow rates in
chemical processes are controlled in a similar manner. Control systems have even been
installed in tall buildings to reduce their movement due to wind.
4. Electromagnetics is the study and application of electric and magnetic fields. The device
(known as a magnetron) used to produce microwave energy in an oven is one application.
Similar devices, but with much higher power levels, are employed in manufacturing sheets of
plywood. Electromagnetic fields heat the glue between layers of wood so that it will set quickly.
Cellular phone and television antennas are also examples of electromagnetic devices.
5. Electronics is the study and application of materials, devices, and circuits used in amplifying
and switching electrical signals. The most important electronic devices are transistors of various
kinds. They are used in nearly all places where electrical information or energy is employed. For
example, the cardiac pacemaker is an electronic circuit that senses heart beats, and if a beat
does not occur when it should, applies a minute electrical stimulus to the heart, forcing a beat.
Electronic instrumentation and electrical sensors are found in every field of science and
engineering. Many of the aspects of electronic amplifiers studied later in this book have direct
application to the instrumentation used in your field of engineering.
Electronic devices are based on controlling ­electrons. Photonic devices
perform similar functions by ­controlling photons.

6. Photonics is an exciting new field of science and engineering that promises to replace
conventional computing, signal-processing, sensing, and communication devices based on
manipulating electrons with greatly improved products based on manipulating photons.
Photonics includes light generation by lasers and light-emitting diodes, transmission of light
through optical components, as well as switching, modulation, amplification, detection, and
steering light by electrical, acoustical, and photon-based devices. Current applications include
readers for DVD disks, holograms, optical signal processors, and fiber-optic communication
systems. Future applications include optical computers, holographic memories, and medical
devices. Photonics offers tremendous opportunities for nearly all scientists and engineers.
7. Power systems convert energy to and from electrical form and transmit energy over long
distances. These systems are composed of generators, transformers, distribution lines, motors,
and other elements. Mechanical engineers often utilize electrical motors to empower their
designs. The selection of a motor having the proper torque speed characteristic for a given
mechanical application is another example of how you can apply the information in this book.
8. Signal processing is concerned with information-bearing electrical signals. Often, the objective
is to extract useful information from electrical signals derived from sensors. An application is
machine vision for robots in manufacturing. Another application of signal processing is in
controlling ignition systems of internal combustion engines. The timing of the ignition spark is
critical in achieving good performance and low levels of pollutants. The optimum ignition point
relative to crankshaft rotation depends on fuel quality, air temperature, throttle setting, engine
speed, and other factors.
If the ignition point is advanced slightly beyond the point of best performance, engine knock occurs.
Knock can be heard as a sharp metallic noise that is caused by rapid pressure fluctuations during the
spontaneous release of chemical energy in the combustion chamber. A combustion-chamber pressure
pulse displaying knock is shown in Figure 1.1. At high levels, knock will destroy an engine in a very
short time. Prior to the advent of practical signal-processing electronics for this application, engine
timing needed to be adjusted for distinctly suboptimum performance to avoid knock under varying
combinations of operating conditions.

Figure 1.1 
Pressure versus time for an internal combustion engine experiencing knock. Sensors convert pressure
to an electrical signal that is processed to adjust ignition timing for minimum pollution and good
performance.
By connecting a sensor through a tube to the combustion chamber, an electrical signal proportional to
pressure is obtained. Electronic circuits process this signal to determine whether the rapid pressure
fluctuations characteristic of knock are present. Then electronic circuits continuously adjust ignition
timing for optimum performance while avoiding knock.
Why You Need to Study Electrical Engineering
As a reader of this book, you may be majoring in another field of engineering or science and taking a
required course in electrical engineering. Your immediate objective is probably to meet the course
requirements for a degree in your chosen field. However, there are several other good reasons to learn
and retain some basic knowledge of electrical engineering:
1. To pass the Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) Examination as a first step in becoming a
Registered Professional Engineer. In the United States, before performing engineering
services for the public, you will need to become registered as a Professional Engineer (PE). This
book gives you the knowledge to answer questions relating to electrical engineering on the
registration examinations. Save this book and course notes to review for the FE examination.
(See Appendix C for more on the FE exam.)

Save this book and course notes to review for the FE exam.
2. To have a broad enough knowledge base so that you can lead design projects in your
own field. Increasingly, electrical engineering is interwoven with nearly all scientific experiments
and design projects in other fields of engineering. Industry has repeatedly called for engineers
who can see the big picture and work effectively in teams. Engineers or scientists who narrow
their focus strictly to their own field are destined to be directed by others. (Electrical engineers
are somewhat fortunate in this respect because the basics of structures, mechanisms, and
chemical processes are familiar from everyday life. On the other hand, electrical engineering
concepts are somewhat more abstract and hidden from the casual observer.)
3. To be able to operate and maintain electrical systems, such as those found in control
systems for manufacturing processes. The vast majority of electrical-circuit malfunctions can
be readily solved by the application of basic electrical-engineering principles. You will be a much
more versatile and valuable engineer or scientist if you can apply electrical-engineering
principles in practical situations.
4. To be able to communicate with electrical-engineering consultants. Very likely, you will
often need to work closely with electrical engineers in your career. This book will give you the
basic knowledge needed to communicate effectively.
Content of This Book
Electrical engineering is too vast to cover in one or two courses. Our objective is to introduce the
underlying concepts that you are most likely to need. Circuit theory is the electrical engineer's
fundamental tool. That is why the first six chapters of this book are devoted to circuits.
Circuit theory is the electrical engineer's fundamental tool.
Embedded computers, sensors, and electronic circuits will be an increasingly important part of the
products you design and the instrumentation you use as an engineer or scientist. Chapters 7 and 8
treat digital systems with emphasis on embedded computers and instrumentation. Chapters 9 through
13 deal with electronic devices and circuits.

As a mechanical, chemical, civil, industrial, or other engineer, you will very likely need to employ energy-
conversion devices. The last three chapters relate to electrical energy systems treating transformers,
generators, and motors.
Because this book covers many basic concepts, it is also sometimes used in introductory courses for
electrical engineers. Just as it is important for other engineers and scientists to see how electrical
engineering can be applied to their fields, it is equally important for electrical engineers to be familiar
with these applications.

1.2 Circuits, Currents, and Voltages
Overview of an Electrical Circuit
Before we carefully define the terminology of electrical circuits, let us gain some basic understanding by
considering a simple example: the headlight circuit of an automobile. This circuit consists of a battery, a
switch, the headlamps, and wires connecting them in a closed path, as illustrated in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2 
The headlight circuit. (a) The actual physical layout of the circuit. (b) The circuit diagram.
Chemical forces in the battery cause electrical charge (electrons) to flow through the circuit. The charge
gains energy from the chemicals in the battery and delivers energy to the headlamps. The battery
voltage (nominally, 12 volts) is a measure of the energy gained by a unit of charge as it moves through
the battery.

The battery voltage is a measure of the energy gained by a unit of charge as it
moves through the battery.
The wires are made of an excellent electrical conductor (copper) and are insulated from one another
(and from the metal auto body) by electrical insulation (plastic) coating the wires. Electrons readily move
through copper but not through the plastic insulation. Thus, the charge flow (electrical current) is
confined to the wires until it reaches the headlamps. Air is also an insulator.
Electrons readily move through copper but not through plastic insulation.
The switch is used to control the flow of current. When the conducting metallic parts of the switch make
contact, we say that the switch is closed switch and current flows through the circuit. On the other hand,
when the conducting parts of the switch do not make contact, we say that the switch is open and current
does not flow.
Electrons experience collisions with the atoms of the tungsten wires, resulting in
heating of the tungsten.
The headlamps contain special tungsten wires that can withstand high temperatures. Tungsten is not as
good an electrical conductor as copper, and the electrons experience collisions with the atoms of the
tungsten wires, resulting in heating of the tungsten. We say that the tungsten wires have electrical
resistance. Thus, energy is transferred by the chemical action in the battery to the electrons and then to
the tungsten, where it appears as heat. The tungsten becomes hot enough so that copious light is
emitted. We will see that the power transferred is equal to the product of current (rate of flow of charge)
and the voltage (also called electrical potential) applied by the battery.

Energy is transferred by the chemical action in the battery to the electrons and
then to the tungsten.
(Actually, the simple description of the headlight circuit we have given is most appropriate for older cars.
In more modern automobiles, light emitting diodes (LEDs) are used in place of the tungsten filaments.
Furthermore, sensors provide information to an embedded computer about the ambient light level,
whether or not the ignition is energized, and whether the transmission is in park or drive. The dashboard
switch merely inputs a logic level to the computer, indicating the intention of the operator with regard to
the headlights. Depending on these inputs, the computer controls the state of an electronic switch in the
headlight circuit. When the ignition is turned off and if it is dark, the computer keeps the lights on for a
few minutes so the passengers can see to exit and then turns them off to conserve energy in the
battery. This is typical of the trend to use highly sophisticated electronic and computer technology to
enhance the capabilities of new designs in all fields of engineering.)
Fluid-Flow Analogy
Electrical circuits are analogous to fluid-flow systems. The battery is analogous to a pump, and charge is
analogous to the fluid. Conductors (usually copper wires) correspond to frictionless pipes through which
the fluid flows. Electrical current is the counterpart of the flow rate of the fluid. Voltage corresponds to
the pressure differential between points in the fluid circuit. Switches are analogous to valves. Finally, the
electrical resistance of a tungsten headlamp is analogous to a constriction in a fluid system that results
in turbulence and conversion of energy to heat. Notice that current is a measure of the flow of charge
through the cross section of a circuit element, whereas voltage is measured across the ends of a circuit
element or between any other two points in a circuit.
The fluid-flow analogy can be very helpful initially in understanding electrical
circuits.
Now that we have gained a basic understanding of a simple electrical circuit, we will define the concepts

and terminology more carefully.
Electrical Circuits
An electrical circuit consists of various types of circuit elements connected in closed paths by
conductors. An example is illustrated in Figure 1.3. The circuit elements can be resistances,
inductances, capacitances, and voltage sources, among others. The symbols for some of these
elements are illustrated in the figure. Eventually, we will carefully discuss the characteristics of each
type of element.
Figure 1.3 
An electrical circuit consists of circuit elements, such as voltage sources, resistances, inductances, and
capacitances, connected in closed paths by conductors.
An electrical circuit consists of various types of circuit elements connected in
closed paths by conductors.
Charge flows easily through conductors, which are represented by lines connecting circuit elements.
Conductors correspond to connecting wires in physical circuits. Voltage sources create forces that
cause charge to flow through the conductors and other circuit elements. As a result, energy is
transferred between the circuit elements, resulting in a useful function.

Charge flows easily through conductors.
Electrical Current
Electrical current is the time rate of flow of electrical charge through a conductor or circuit element.
The units are amperes (A), which are equivalent to coulombs per second (C/s). (The charge on an
electron is 
)
Current is the time rate of flow of electrical charge. Its units are amperes (A),
which are equivalent to coulombs per second (C/s).
Conceptually, to find the current for a given circuit element, we first select a cross section of the circuit
element roughly perpendicular to the flow of current. Then, we select a reference direction along the
direction of flow. Thus, the reference direction points from one side of the cross section to the other.
This is illustrated in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4 
Current is the time rate of charge flow through a cross section of a conductor or circuit element.
Next, suppose that we keep a record of the net charge flow through the cross section. Positive charge
crossing in the reference direction is counted as a positive contribution to net charge. Positive charge
crossing opposite to the reference is counted as a negative contribution. Furthermore, negative charge
crossing in the reference direction is counted as a negative contribution, and negative charge against
the reference direction is a positive contribution to charge.
−1.602×
10
−19
 C.

Thus, in concept, we obtain a record of the net charge in coulombs as a function of time in seconds
denoted as q(t). The electrical current flowing through the element in the reference direction is given by
Colored shading is used to indicate key equations throughout this book.
A constant current of one ampere means that one coulomb of charge passes through the cross section
each second.
To find charge given current, we must integrate. Thus, we have
in which 
is some initial time at which the charge is known. (Throughout this book, we assume that
time t is in seconds unless stated otherwise.)
Current flow is the same for all cross sections of a circuit element. (We reexamine this statement when
we introduce the capacitor in Chapter 3.) The current that enters one end flows through the element
and exits through the other end.
Example 1.1 Determining Current Given Charge
Suppose that charge versus time for a given circuit element is given by
and
Sketch q(t) and i(t) to scale versus time.
Solution 
i(
t
)=
dq(
t
)
dt
(1.1)
q(t)=
∫
t
0
t
i(t)
 dt+q(
t
0
)
(1.2)
t
0
q(
t
)=0  for t<0
q(
t
)=2−2
e
−100t
 C  for t>0

First we use Equation 1.1 to find an expression for the current:
Plots of q(t) and i(t) are shown in Figure 1.5. ■
Figure 1.5 
Plots of charge and current versus time for Example 1.1.
Note: The time scale is in milliseconds (ms). One millisecond is equivalent to 
seconds.
Reference Directions
In analyzing electrical circuits, we may not initially know the actual direction of current flow in a particular
circuit element. Therefore, we start by assigning current variables and arbitrarily selecting a reference
direction for each current of interest. It is customary to use the letter i for currents and subscripts to
distinguish different currents. This is illustrated by the example in Figure 1.6, in which the boxes labeled
A, B, and so on represent circuit elements. After we solve for the current values, we may find that some
currents have negative values. For example, suppose that 
 A in the circuit of Figure 1.6.
Because 
has a negative value, we know that current actually flows in the direction opposite to the
reference initially selected for 
Thus, the actual current is 2 A flowing downward through element A.
Figure 1.6 
In analyzing circuits, we frequently start by assigning current variables 
and so forth.
i(
t
)
=
dq(
t
)
dt
=0  for t<0
=200
e
−100t
 A  for t>0
10
−3
i
1
=−2
i
1
i
1
.
i
1
, 
i
2
, 
i
3
,

Direct Current and Alternating Current
Dc currents are constant with respect to time, whereas ac currents vary with time.
When a current is constant with time, we say that we have direct current, abbreviated as dc. On the
other hand, a current that varies with time, reversing direction periodically, is called alternating current,
abbreviated as ac. Figure 1.7 shows the values of a dc current and a sinusoidal ac current versus time.
When 
takes a negative value, the actual current direction is opposite to the reference direction for
The designation ac is used for other types of time-varying currents, such as the triangular and
square waveforms shown in Figure 1.8.
Figure 1.7 
Examples of dc and ac currents versus time.
Figure 1.8 
Ac currents can have various waveforms.
i
b
(
t
)
i
b
(
t
).

Double-Subscript Notation for Currents
So far we have used arrows alongside circuit elements or conductors to indicate reference directions for
currents. Another way to indicate the current and reference direction for a circuit element is to label the
ends of the element and use double subscripts to define the reference direction for the current. For
example, consider the resistance of Figure 1.9. The current denoted by 
is the current through the
element with its reference direction pointing from a to b. Similarly, 
is the current with its reference
directed from b to a. Of course, 
and 
are the same in magnitude and opposite in sign, because
they denote the same current but with opposite reference directions. Thus, we have
Figure 1.9 
Reference directions can be indicated by labeling the ends of circuit elements and using double
subscripts on current variables. The reference direction for 
points from a to b. On the other hand,
the reference direction for 
points from b to a.
Exercise 1.1 
A constant current of 2 A flows through a circuit element. In 10 seconds (s), how much net charge
passes through the element?
Answer 20 C.
Exercise 1.2 
The charge that passes through a circuit element is given by 
in which the angle
is in radians. Find the current as a function of time.
Answer 
i
ab
i
ba
i
ab
i
ba
i
ab
=−
i
ba
i
ab
i
ba
q(
t
)=0.01 sin(
200t
) C,

i(
t
)=2 cos(
200t
) A.

Exercise 1.3 
In Figure 1.6, suppose that 
and 
Assuming that the current consists of positive
charge, in which direction (upward or downward) is charge moving in element C? In element E?
Answer Downward in element C and upward in element E.
Voltages
When charge moves through circuit elements, energy can be transferred. In the case of automobile
headlights, stored chemical energy is supplied by the battery and absorbed by the headlights where it
appears as heat and light. The voltage associated with a circuit element is the energy transferred per
unit of charge that flows through the element. The units of voltage are volts (V), which are equivalent to
joules per coulomb (J/C).
Voltage is a measure of the energy transferred per unit of charge when charge
moves from one point in an electrical circuit to a second point.
For example, consider the storage battery in an automobile. The voltage across its terminals is
(nominally) 12 V. This means that 12 J are transferred to or from the battery for each coulomb that flows
through it. When charge flows in one direction, energy is supplied by the battery, appearing elsewhere in
the circuit as heat or light or perhaps as mechanical energy at the starter motor. If charge moves
through the battery in the opposite direction, energy is absorbed by the battery, where it appears as
stored chemical energy.
Notice that voltage is ­measured across the ends of a circuit element, whereas
current is a measure of charge flow through the element.
Voltages are assigned polarities that indicate the direction of energy flow. If positive charge moves from
i
2
=1 A
i
3
=−3 A.

the positive polarity through the element toward the negative polarity, the element absorbs energy that
appears as heat, mechanical energy, stored chemical energy, or as some other form. On the other
hand, if positive charge moves from the negative polarity toward the positive polarity, the element
supplies energy. This is illustrated in Figure 1.10. For negative charge, the direction of energy transfer
is reversed.
Figure 1.10 
Energy is transferred when charge flows through an element having a voltage across it.
Reference Polarities
When we begin to analyze a circuit, we often do not know the actual polarities of some of the voltages of
interest in the circuit. Then, we simply assign voltage variables choosing reference polarities arbitrarily.
(Of course, the actual polarities are not arbitrary.) This is illustrated in Figure 1.11. Next, we apply circuit
principles (discussed later), obtaining equations that are solved for the voltages. If a given voltage has
an actual polarity opposite to our arbitrary choice for the reference polarity, we obtain a negative value
for the voltage. For example, if we find that 
in Figure 1.11, we know that the voltage across
element 3 is 5 V in magnitude and its actual polarity is opposite to that shown in the figure (i.e., the
actual polarity is positive at the bottom end of element 3 and negative at the top).
Figure 1.11 
If we do not know the voltage values and polarities in a circuit, we can start by assigning voltage
variables choosing the reference polarities arbitrarily. (The boxes represent unspecified circuit
elements.)
v
3
=−5 V

In circuit analysis, we ­frequently assign reference polarities for voltages
arbitrarily. If we find at the end of the analysis that the value of a voltage is
negative, then we know that the true polarity is ­opposite of the polarity selected
initially.
We usually do not put much effort into trying to assign "correct" references for current directions or
voltage polarities. If we have doubt about them, we make arbitrary choices and use circuit analysis to
determine true directions and polarities (as well as the magnitudes of the currents and voltages).
Voltages can be constant with time or they can vary. Constant voltages are called dc voltages. On the
other hand, voltages that change in magnitude and alternate in polarity with time are said to be ac
voltages. For example,
is a dc voltage. It has the same magnitude and polarity for all time. On the other hand,
is an ac voltage that varies in magnitude and polarity. When 
assumes a negative value, the
actual polarity is opposite the reference polarity. (We study sinusoidal ac currents and voltages in
Chapter 5.)
Double-Subscript Notation for Voltages
Another way to indicate the reference polarity of a voltage is to use double subscripts on the voltage
variable. We use letters or numbers to label the terminals between which the voltage appears, as
illustrated in Figure 1.12. For the resistance shown in the figure, 
represents the voltage between
points a and b with the positive reference at point a. The two subscripts identify the points between
which the voltage appears, and the first subscript is the positive reference. Similarly, 
is the voltage
between a and b with the positive reference at point b. Thus, we can write
v
1
(
t
)=10 V
v
2
(
t
)=10 cos(
200πt
) V
v
2
(
t
)
v
ab
v
ba

Figure 1.12 
The voltage 
has a reference polarity that is positive at point a and negative at point b.
because 
has the same magnitude as 
but has opposite polarity.
Still another way to indicate a voltage and its reference polarity is to use an arrow, as shown in Figure
1.13. The positive reference corresponds to the head of the arrow.
Figure 1.13 
The positive reference for v is at the head of the arrow.
Switches
Switches control the currents in circuits. When an ideal switch is open, the current through it is zero and
the voltage across it is determined by the remainder of the circuit. When an ideal switch is closed, the
voltage across it is zero and the current through it is determined by the remainder of the circuit.
Exercise 1.4 
The voltage across a given circuit element is 
A positive charge of 2 C moves through the
circuit element from terminal b to terminal a. How much energy is transferred? Is the energy supplied by
the circuit element or absorbed by it?
Answer 40 J are supplied by the circuit element.
v
ab
v
ab
=−
v
ba
(1.3)
v
ba
v
ab
v
ab
=20 V.

1.3 Power and Energy
Consider the circuit element shown in Figure 1.14. Because the current i is the rate of flow of charge
and the voltage v is a measure of the energy transferred per unit of charge, the product of the current
and the voltage is the rate of energy transfer. In other words, the product of current and voltage is
power:
Figure 1.14 
When current flows through an element and voltage appears across the element, energy is transferred.
The rate of energy transfer is 
The physical units of the quantities on the right-hand side of this equation are
Passive Reference Configuration
Now we may ask whether the power calculated by Equation 1.4 represents energy supplied by or
absorbed by the element. Refer to Figure 1.14 and notice that the current reference enters the positive
polarity of the voltage. We call this arrangement the passive reference configuration. Provided that
the references are picked in this manner, a positive result for the power calculation implies that energy is
being absorbed by the element. On the other hand, a negative result means that the element is
supplying energy to other parts of the circuit.
If the current reference enters the negative end of the reference polarity, we compute the power as
p=vi
p=vi.
(1.4)
volts×amperes=
(
joules/coulomb
)×(
coulombs/second
)=
joules/second=
watts
(1.5)

Then, as before, a positive value for p indicates that energy is absorbed by the element, and a negative
value shows that energy is supplied by the element.
If the circuit element happens to be an electrochemical battery, positive power means that the battery is
being charged. In other words, the energy absorbed by the battery is being stored as chemical energy.
On the other hand, negative power indicates that the battery is being discharged. Then the energy
supplied by the battery is delivered to some other element in the circuit.
Sometimes currents, voltages, and powers are functions of time. To emphasize this fact, we can write
Equation 1.4 as
Example 1.2 Power Calculations
Consider the circuit elements shown in Figure 1.15. Calculate the power for each element. If each
element is a battery, is it being charged or discharged?
Figure 1.15 
Circuit elements for Example 1.2.
Solution 
In element A, the current reference enters the positive reference polarity. This is the passive
reference configuration. Thus, power is computed as
Because the power is positive, energy is absorbed by the device. If it is a battery, it is being charged.
p=−vi
p(
t
)=v(
t
)i(
t
)
(1.6)
p
a
=
v
a
i
a
=12 V×2 A=24 W

In element B, the current reference enters the negative reference polarity. (Recall that the current
that enters one end of a circuit element must exit from the other end, and vice versa.) This is
opposite to the passive reference configuration. Hence, power is computed as
Since the power is negative, energy is supplied by the device. If it is a battery, it is being discharged.
In element C, the current reference enters the positive reference polarity. This is the passive
reference configuration. Thus, we compute power as
Since the result is negative, energy is supplied by the element. If it is a battery, it is being
discharged. (Notice that since 
takes a negative value, current actually flows downward through
element C.) ■
Energy Calculations
To calculate the energy w delivered to a circuit element between time instants 
and 
we integrate
power:
Here we have explicitly indicated that power can be a function of time by using the notation p(t).
Example 1.3 Energy Calculation
Find an expression for the power for the voltage source shown in Figure 1.16. ­Compute the
energy for the interval from 
to 
Figure 1.16 Circuit element for Example 1.3.
p
b
=−
v
b
i
b
=−(
12 V
)×1 A=−12 W
p
c
=
v
c
i
c
=12 V×(
−3 A
)=−36 W
i
c
t
1

t
2
,
w=
∫
t
1
t
2
p
(t) dt
(1.7)
t
1
=0
t
2
=∞.

Solution 
The current reference enters the positive reference polarity. Thus, we ­compute power as
Subsequently, the energy transferred is given by
Because the energy is positive, it is absorbed by the source. ■
Prefixes
In electrical engineering, we encounter a tremendous range of values for currents, voltages, powers,
and other quantities. We use the prefixes shown in Table 1.2 when working with very large or small
quantities. For example, 1 milliampere (1 mA) is equivalent to 
1 kilovolt (1 kV) is equivalent to
1000 V, and so on.
Table 1.2 Prefixes Used for Large or Small Physical Quantities
Prefix
Abbreviation
Scale Factor
giga-
G
meg- or mega-
M
kilo-
k
milli-
m
micro-
nano-
pico-
p
femto-
f
p(
t
)
=v(
t
)i(
t
)
=12×2
e
−t
=24
e
−t
 W
w
=
∫
0
∞
p(t) dt
=
∫
0
∞
24
e
−t
dt
=
[ −24
e
−t
]
0
∞
=−24
e
−∞
−(
−24
e
0
)=24 J
10
−3
 A,
10
9
10
6
10
3
10
−3
μ
10
−6
10
−9
10
−12
10
−15


Exercise 1.5 
The ends of a circuit element are labeled a and b, respectively. Are the references for 
and 
related by the passive reference configuration? Explain.
Answer The reference direction for 
enters terminal a, which is also the positive reference for 
Therefore, the current reference direction enters the positive reference polarity, so we have the passive
reference configuration.
Exercise 1.6 
Compute the power as a function of time for each of the elements shown in Figure 1.17. Find the
energy transferred between 
and 
In each case is energy supplied or absorbed by the
element?
Figure 1.17 
See Exercise 1.6.
Answer 
i
ab
v
ab
i
ab
v
ab
.
t
1
=0
t
2
=10 s.
a. 
since 
is positive, energy is absorbed by element A.
b. 
since 
is negative, energy is supplied by element B.
p
a
(
t
)=20
t
2
 W, 
w
a
=6667 J;
w
a
p
b
(
t
)=20t−200 W, 
w
b
=−1000 J;
w
b

1.4 Kirchhoff's Current Law
A node in an electrical circuit is a point at which two or more circuit elements are joined together.
Examples of nodes are shown in Figure 1.18.
Figure 1.18 
Partial circuits showing one node each to illustrate Kirchhoff's current law.
Kirchhoff's current law states that the net current entering a node is zero.
An important principle of electrical circuits is Kirchhoff's current law: The net current entering a node is
zero. To compute the net current entering a node, we add the currents entering and subtract the
currents leaving. For illustration, consider the nodes of Figure 1.18. Then, we can write:
Notice that for node b, Kirchhoff's current law requires that 
In general, if only two circuit
elements are connected at a node, their currents must be equal. The current flows into the node through
one element and out through the other. Usually, we will recognize this fact and assign a single current
variable for both circuit elements.
For node c, either all of the currents are zero or some are positive while others are negative.
Node a: 
i
1
+
i
2
−
i
3
=0
Node b: 
i
3
−
i
4
=0
Node c: 
i
5
+
i
6
+
i
7
=0
i
3
=
i
4
.

We abbreviate Kirchhoff's current law as KCL. There are two other equivalent ways to state KCL. One
way is: The net current leaving a node is zero. To compute the net current leaving a node, we add the
currents leaving and subtract the currents entering. For the nodes of Figure 1.18, this yields the
following:
Of course, these equations are equivalent to those obtained earlier.
Another way to state KCL is: The sum of the currents entering a node equals the sum of the currents
leaving a node. Applying this statement to Figure 1.18, we obtain the following set of equations:
An alternative way to state Kirchhoff's current law is that the sum of the currents
entering a node is equal to the sum of the currents ­leaving a node.
Again, these equations are equivalent to those obtained earlier.
Physical Basis for Kirchhoff's Current Law
An appreciation of why KCL is true can be obtained by considering what would happen if it were
violated. Suppose that we could have the situation shown in Figure 1.18(a), with 
and
Then, the net current entering the node would be
In this case, 1 C of charge would accumulate at the node during each second. After 1 s, we would have
of charge at the node, and 
of charge somewhere else in the circuit.
Suppose that these charges are separated by a distance of one meter (m). Recall that unlike charges
experience a force of attraction. The resulting force turns out to be approximately 
(N) (equivalent to 
). Very large forces are generated when charges of this magnitude
are separated by moderate distances. In effect, KCL states that such forces prevent charge from
Node a: 
−
i
1
−
i
2
+
i
3
=0
Node b: 
−
i
3
+
i
4
=0
Node c: 
−
i
5
−
i
6
−
i
7
=0
Node a: 
i
1
+
i
2
=
i
3
Node b: 
i
3
=
i
4
Node c: 
i
5
+
i
6
+
i
7
=0
i
1
=3 A, 
i
2
=2 A,
i
3
=4 A.
i
1
+
i
2
−
i
3
=1 A=1 C/s
+1 C
−1 C
8.99×
10
9
 newtons
2.02×
10
9
 pounds

accumulating at the nodes of a circuit.
All points in a circuit that are connected directly by conductors can be considered to be a single node.
For example, in Figure 1.19, elements A, B, C, and D are connected to a common node. Applying KCL,
we can write
Figure 1.19 
Elements A, B, C, and D can be considered to be connected to a common node, because all points in a
circuit that are connected directly by conductors are electrically equivalent to a single point.
All points in a circuit that are connected directly by ­conductors can be
considered to be a single node.
Series Circuits
We make frequent use of KCL in analyzing circuits. For example, consider the elements A, B, and C
shown in Figure 1.20. When elements are connected end to end, we say that they are connected in
series. In order for elements A and B to be in series, no other path for current can be connected to the
node joining A and B. Thus, all elements in a series circuit have identical currents. For example, writing
Kirchhoff's current law at node 1 for the circuit of Figure 1.20, we have
i
a
+
i
c
=
i
b
+
i
d

Figure 1.20 
Elements A, B, and C are connected in series.
At node 2, we have
Thus, we have
The current that enters a series circuit must flow through each element in the circuit.
Example 1.4 Kirchhoff's Current Law
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 1.21.
Figure 1.21 
Circuit for Example 1.4.
a. Which elements are in series?
b. What is the relationship between 
and 
i
a
=
i
b
i
b
=
i
c
i
a
=
i
b
=
i
c
i
d
i
c
?

c. Given that 
and 
determine the values of 
and 
Solution 
a. Elements A and E are in series, and elements C and D are in series.
b. Because elements C and D are in series, the currents are equal in magnitude. However,
because the reference directions are opposite, the algebraic signs of the current values are
opposite. Thus, we have 
c. At the node joining elements A, B, and C, we can write the KCL equation 
Also, we found earlier that 
 
Exercise 1.7 
Use KCL to determine the values of the unknown currents shown in Figure 1.22.
Figure 1.22 
See Exercise 1.7.
Answer 
Exercise 1.8 
Consider the circuit of Figure 1.23. Identify the groups of circuit elements that are connected in series.
Figure 1.23 
Circuit for Exercise 1.8.
i
a
=6 A
i
c
=−2 A,
i
b
i
d
.
i
c
=−
i
d
.
i
b
=
i
a
+
i
c
=6−2=4 A.
i
d
=−
i
c
=2 A.

i
a
=4 A, 
i
b
=−2 A, 
i
c
=−8 A.

Answer Elements A and B are in series; elements E, F, and G form another series combination.


1.5 Kirchhoff's Voltage Law
Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL) states that the algebraic sum of the voltages equals
zero for any closed path (loop) in an electrical circuit.
A loop in an electrical circuit is a closed path starting at a node and proceeding through circuit
elements, eventually returning to the starting node. Frequently, several loops can be identified for a
given circuit. For example, in Figure 1.23, one loop consists of the path starting at the top end of
element A and proceeding clockwise through elements B and C, returning through A to the starting
point. Another loop starts at the top of element D and proceeds clockwise through E, F, and G, returning
to the start through D. Still another loop exists through elements A, B, E, F, and G around the periphery
of the circuit.
Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL) states: The algebraic sum of the voltages equals zero for any closed
path (loop) in an electrical circuit. In traveling around a loop, we encounter various voltages, some of
which carry a positive sign while others carry a negative sign in the algebraic sum. A convenient
convention is to use the first polarity mark encountered for each voltage to decide if it should be added
or subtracted in the algebraic sum. If we go through the voltage from the positive polarity reference to
the negative reference, it carries a plus sign. If the polarity marks are encountered in the opposite
direction (minus to plus), the voltage carries a negative sign. This is illustrated in Figure 1.24.
Figure 1.24 
In applying KVL to a loop, voltages are added or subtracted depending on their reference polarities
relative to the direction of travel around the loop.

For the circuit of Figure 1.25, we obtain the following equations:
Figure 1.25 
Circuit used for illustration of Kirchhoff's voltage law.
Notice that 
is subtracted for loop 1, but it is added for loop 3, because the direction of travel is
different for the two loops. Similarly, 
is added for loop 1 and subtracted for loop 2.
Kirchhoff's Voltage Law Related to Conservation of Energy
KVL is a consequence of the law of energy conservation. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 1.26.
This circuit consists of three elements connected in series. Thus, the same current i flows through all
three elements. The power for each of the elements is given by
Figure 1.26 
In this circuit, conservation of energy requires that 
Loop 1: 
−
v
a
+
v
b
+
v
c
=0
Loop 2: 
−
v
c
−
v
d
+
v
e
=0
Loop 3: 
v
a
−
v
b
+
v
d
−
v
e
=0
v
a
v
c
v
b
=
v
a
+
v
c
.
Element A: 
p
a
=
v
a
i
Element B: 
p
b
=−
v
b
i
Element C: 
p
c
=
v
c
i

Notice that the current and voltage references have the passive configuration (the current reference
enters the plus polarity mark) for elements A and C. For element B, the relationship is opposite to the
passive reference configuration. That is why we have a negative sign in the calculation of 
At a given instant, the sum of the powers for all of the elements in a circuit must be zero. Otherwise, for
an increment of time taken at that instant, more energy would be absorbed than is supplied by the circuit
elements (or vice versa):
Substituting for the powers, we have
Canceling the current i, we obtain
This is exactly the same equation that is obtained by adding the voltages around the loop and setting
the sum to zero for a clockwise loop in the circuit of Figure 1.26.
One way to check our results after solving for the currents and voltages in a circuit is the check to see
that the power adds to zero for all of the elements.
Parallel Circuits
We say that two circuit elements are connected in parallel if both ends of one element are connected
directly (i.e., by conductors) to corresponding ends of the other. For example, in Figure 1.27, elements
A and B are in parallel. Similarly, we say that the three circuit elements D, E, and F are in parallel.
Element B is not in parallel with D because the top end of B is not directly connected to the top end of D.
Figure 1.27 
In this circuit, elements A and B are in parallel. Elements D, E, and F form another parallel combination.
p
b
.
p
a
+
p
b
+
p
c
=0
v
a
i−
v
b
i+
v
c
i=0
v
a
−
v
b
+
v
c
=0

Two circuit elements are connected in parallel if both ends of one element are
connected directly (i.e., by conductors) to corresponding ends of the other.
The voltages across parallel elements are equal in magnitude and have the same polarity. For
illustration, consider the partial circuit shown in Figure 1.28. Here elements A, B, and C are connected
in parallel. Consider a loop from the bottom end of A upward and then down through element B back to
the bottom of A. For this clockwise loop, we have 
Thus, KVL requires that
Figure 1.28 
For this circuit, we can show that 
Thus, the magnitudes and actual polarities of all three
voltages are the same.
Next, consider a clockwise loop through elements A and C. For this loop, KVL requires that
This implies that 
In other words, 
and 
have opposite algebraic signs. Furthermore, one
or the other of the two voltages must be negative (unless both are zero). Therefore, one of the voltages
has an actual polarity opposite to the reference polarity shown in the figure. Thus, the actual polarities of
the voltages are the same (either both are positive at the top of the circuit or both are positive at the
bottom).
Usually, when we have a parallel circuit, we simply use the same voltage variable for all of the elements
as illustrated in Figure 1.29.
−
v
a
+
v
b
=0.
v
a
=
v
b
=−
v
c
.
v
a
=
v
b
−
v
a
−
v
c
=0
v
a
=−
v
c
.
v
a
v
c

Figure 1.29 
Analysis is simplified by using the same voltage variable and reference polarity for elements that are in
parallel.
Example 1.5 Kirchhoff's Voltage Law
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 1.30.
Figure 1.30 
Circuit for Example 1.5.
a. Which elements are in parallel?
b. Which elements are in series?
c. What is the relationship between 
and 
d. Given that 
and 
determine the values of 
and 
Solution
a. Elements D and F are in parallel.
b. Elements A and E are in series.
c. Because elements D and F are in parallel, 
and 
are equal in magnitude. However,
because the reference directions are opposite, the algebraic signs of their values are
opposite. Thus, we have 
d. Applying KVL to the loop formed by elements A, B, and E, we have:
Solving for 
and substituting values, we find that 
v
d
v
f
?
v
a
=10 V, 
v
c
=15 V
v
e
=20 V,
v
b
v
f
.
v
d
v
f
v
d
=−
v
f
.
v
a
+
v
b
−
v
e
=0
v
b
v
b
=10 V.

Applying KVL to the loop around the outer perimeter of the circuit, we have:
Solving for 
and substituting values, we find that 
■
Exercise 1.9 
Use repeated application of KVL to find the values of 
and 
for the circuit of Figure 1.31.
Figure 1.31 Circuit for Exercises 1.9 and 1.10.
Answer 
Exercise 1.10 
Identify elements that are in parallel in Figure 1.31. Identify elements in series.
Answer Elements E and F are in parallel; elements A and B are in series.
v
a
−
v
c
+
v
f
=0
v
b
v
b
 = 10 V.
v
f
=5 V.
v
c
v
e

v
c
=8 V, 
v
e
=−2 V.


1.6 Introduction to Circuit Elements
In this section, we carefully define several types of ideal circuit elements:
Conductors
Voltage sources
Current sources
Resistors
Later in the book, we will encounter additional elements, including inductors and capacitors. Eventually,
we will be able to use these idealized circuit elements to describe (model) complex real-world electrical
devices.
Conductors
We have already encountered conductors. Ideal conductors are represented in circuit diagrams by
unbroken lines between the ends of other circuit elements. We define ideal circuit elements in terms of
the relationship between the voltage across the element and the current through it.
The voltage between the ends of an ideal conductor is zero regardless of the
current flowing through the conductor.
The voltage between the ends of an ideal conductor is zero regardless of the current flowing through the
conductor. When two points in a circuit are connected together by an ideal conductor, we say that the
points are shorted together. Another term for an ideal conductor is short circuit. All points in a circuit
that are connected by ideal conductors can be considered as a single node.

All points in a circuit that are connected by ideal ­conductors can be
considered as a single node.
If no conductors or other circuit elements are connected between two parts of a circuit, we say that an
open circuit exists between the two parts of the circuit. No current can flow through an ideal open
circuit.
Independent Voltage Sources
An ideal independent voltage source maintains a specified voltage across its terminals. The voltage
across the source is independent of other elements that are connected to it and of the current flowing
through it. We use a circle enclosing the reference polarity marks to represent independent voltage
sources. The value of the voltage is indicated alongside the symbol. The voltage can be constant or it
can be a function of time. Several voltage sources are shown in Figure 1.32.
Figure 1.32 
Independent voltage sources.
An ideal independent voltage source maintains a specified voltage across its
terminals.
In Figure 1.32(a), the voltage across the source is constant. Thus, we have a dc voltage source. On the

other hand, the source shown in Figure 1.32(b) is an ac voltage source having a sinusoidal variation
with time. We say that these are independent sources because the voltages across their terminals are
independent of all other voltages and currents in the circuit.
Ideal Circuit Elements versus Reality
Here we are giving definitions of ideal circuit elements. It is possible to draw ideal circuits in which the
definitions of various circuit elements conflict. For example, Figure 1.33 shows a 12-V voltage source
with a conductor connected across its terminals. In this case, the definition of the voltage source
requires that 
On the other hand, the definition of an ideal conductor requires that 
In
our study of ideal circuits, we avoid such conflicts.
Figure 1.33 
We avoid self-contradictory circuit diagrams such as this one.
In the real world, an automobile battery is nearly an ideal 12-V voltage source, and a short piece of
heavy-gauge copper wire is nearly an ideal conductor. If we place the wire across the terminals of the
battery, a very large current flows through the wire, stored chemical energy is converted to heat in the
wire at a very high rate, and the wire will probably melt or the battery be destroyed.
When we encounter a contradictory idealized circuit model, we often have an undesirable situation
(such as a fire or destroyed components) in the real-world counterpart to the model. In any case, a
contradictory circuit model implies that we have not been sufficiently careful in choosing circuit models
for the real circuit elements. For example, an automobile battery is not exactly modeled as an ideal
voltage source. We will see that a better model (particularly if the currents are very large) is an ideal
voltage source in series with a resistance. (We will discuss resistance very soon.) A short piece of
copper wire is not modeled well as an ideal conductor, in this case. Instead, we will see that it is
modeled better as a small resistance. If we have done a good job at picking circuit models for real-world
circuits, we will not encounter contradictory circuits, and the results we calculate using the model will
match reality very well.
Dependent Voltage Sources
v
x
=12 V.
v
x
=0.

A dependent or controlled voltage source is similar to an independent source except that the voltage
across the source terminals is a function of other voltages or currents in the circuit. Instead of a circle, it
is customary to use a diamond to represent controlled sources in circuit diagrams. Two examples of
dependent sources are shown in Figure 1.34.
Figure 1.34 
Dependent voltage sources (also known as controlled voltage sources) are represented by diamond-
shaped symbols. The voltage across a controlled voltage source depends on a current or voltage that
appears elsewhere in the circuit.
A voltage-controlled voltage source maintains a voltage across its terminals
equal to a constant times a voltage elsewhere in the circuit.
A voltage-controlled voltage source is a voltage source having a voltage equal to a constant times
the voltage across a pair of terminals elsewhere in the network. An example is shown in Figure 1.34(a).
The dependent voltage source is the diamond symbol. The reference polarity of the source is indicated
by the marks inside the diamond. The voltage 
determines the value of the voltage produced by the
source. For example, if it should turn out that 
the source voltage is 
If 
 should
equal 
the source produces 
(in which case, the actual positive polarity of the source is
at the bottom end).
A current-controlled voltage source maintains a voltage across its terminals equal
to a constant times a current flowing through some other element in the circuit.
v
x
v
x
=3 V,
2
v
x
=6 V.

v
x
−7 V,
2
v
x
=−14 V

A current-controlled voltage source is a voltage source having a voltage equal to a constant times the
current through some other element in the circuit. An example is shown in Figure 1.34(b). In this case,
the source voltage is three times the value of the current 
The factor multiplying the current is called
the gain parameter. We assume that the voltage has units of volts and the current is in amperes. Thus,
the gain parameter [which is 3 in Figure 1.34(b)] has units of volts per ampere (V/A). (Shortly, we will
see that the units V/A are the units of resistance and are called ohms.)
Returning our attention to the voltage-controlled voltage source in Figure 1.34(a), we note that the gain
parameter is 2 and is unitless (or we could say that the units are V/V).
Later in the book, we will see that controlled sources are very useful in modeling transistors, amplifiers,
and electrical generators, among other things.
Independent Current Sources
An ideal independent current source forces a specified current to flow through itself. The symbol for
an independent current source is a circle enclosing an arrow that gives the reference direction for the
current. The current through an independent current source is independent of the elements connected
to it and of the voltage across it. Figure 1.35 shows the symbols for a dc current source and for an ac
current source.
Figure 1.35 
Independent current sources.
An ideal independent ­current source forces a ­specified current to flow through
i
x
.

itself.
If an open circuit exists across the terminals of a current source, we have a contradictory circuit. For
example, consider the 2-A dc current source shown in Figure 1.35(a). This current source is shown with
an open circuit across its terminals. By definition, the current flowing into the top node of the source is 2
A. Also by definition, no current can flow through the open circuit. Thus, KCL is not satisfied at this node.
In good models for actual circuits, this situation does not occur. Thus, we will avoid current sources with
open-circuited terminals in our discussion of ideal networks.
A battery is a good example of a voltage source, but an equally familiar example does not exist for a
current source. However, current sources are useful in constructing theoretical models. Later, we will
see that a good approximation to an ideal current source can be achieved with electronic amplifiers.
Dependent Current Sources
The current flowing through a dependent current source is determined by a current or voltage
elsewhere in the circuit. The symbol is a diamond enclosing an arrow that indicates the reference
direction. Two types of controlled current sources are shown in Figure 1.36.
Figure 1.36 
Dependent current sources. The current through a dependent current source depends on a current or
voltage that appears elsewhere in the circuit.
The current flowing through a dependent current source is determined by a
current or voltage elsewhere in the circuit.

In Figure 1.36(a), we have a voltage-controlled current source. The current through the source is
three times the voltage 
The gain parameter of the source (3 in this case) has units of A/V (which we
will soon see are equivalent to siemens or inverse ohms). If it turns out that 
has a value of 5 V, the
current through the controlled current source is 
Figure 1.36(b) illustrates a current-controlled current source. In this case, the current through the
source is twice the value of 
The gain parameter, which has a value of 2 in this case, has units of A/A
(i.e., it is unitless).
Like controlled voltage sources, controlled current sources are useful in constructing circuit models for
many types of real-world devices, such as electronic amplifiers, transistors, transformers, and electrical
machines. If a controlled source is needed for some application, it can be implemented by using
electronic amplifiers. In sum, these are the four kinds of controlled sources:
1. Voltage-controlled voltage sources
2. Current-controlled voltage sources
3. Voltage-controlled current sources
4. Current-controlled current sources
Resistors and Ohm's Law
The voltage v across an ideal resistor is proportional to the current i through the resistor. The constant
of proportionality is the resistance R. The symbol used for a resistor is shown in Figure 1.37(a). Notice
that the current reference and voltage polarity reference conform to the passive reference configuration.
In other words, the reference direction for the current is into the positive polarity mark and out of the
negative polarity mark. In equation form, the voltage and current are related by Ohm's law:
v
x
.
v
x
3
v
x
=15 A.
i
y
.

Figure 1.37 
Voltage is proportional to current in an ideal resistor. Notice that the references for v and i conform to
the passive reference configuration.
The units of resistance are V/A, which are called ohms. The uppercase Greek letter omega 
represents ohms. In practical circuits, we encounter resistances ranging from milliohms 
to
megohms 
Except for rather unusual situations, the resistance R assumes positive values. (In certain types of
electronic circuits, we can encounter negative resistance, but for now we assume that R is positive.) In
situations for which the current reference direction enters the negative reference of the voltage, Ohm's
law becomes
This is illustrated in Figure 1.38.
Figure 1.38 
If the references for v and i are opposite to the passive configuration, we have 
The relationship between current direction and voltage polarity can be neatly included in the equation for
Ohm's law if double-subscript notation is used. (Recall that to use double subscripts, we label the ends
of the element under consideration, which is a resistance in this case.) If the order of the subscripts is
the same for the current as for the voltage (
and 
for example), the current reference direction
enters the first terminal and the positive voltage reference is at the first terminal. Thus, we can write
On the other hand, if the order of the subscripts is not the same, we have
v=iR
(
Ω
)
(
mΩ
)
(
MΩ
).
v=−iR
v=−Ri.

i
ab
v
ab
,
v
ab
=
i
ab
R
v
ab
=−
i
ba
R

Conductance
Solving Ohm's law for current, we have
We call the quantity 1/R a conductance. It is customary to denote conductances with the letter G:
Conductances have the units of inverse ohms 
which are called siemens (abbreviated S). Thus,
we can write Ohm's law as
Resistors
It turns out that we can construct nearly ideal resistors by attaching terminals to many types of
conductive materials. This is illustrated in Figure 1.39. Conductive materials that can be used to
construct resistors include most metals, their alloys, and carbon.
Figure 1.39 
We construct resistors by attaching terminals to a piece of conductive material.
On a microscopic level, current in metals consists of electrons moving through the material. (On the
other hand, in solutions of ionic compounds, current is carried partly by positive ions.) The applied
voltage creates an electric field that accelerates the electrons. The electrons repeatedly collide with the
atoms of the material and lose their forward momentum. Then they are accelerated again. The net effect
is a constant average velocity for the electrons. At the macroscopic level, we observe a current that is
proportional to the applied voltage.
i=
1
R
 v
G=
1
R
(1.8)
(
Ω
−1
),
i=Gv
(1.9)

Resistance Related to Physical Parameters
The dimensions and geometry of the resistor as well as the particular material used to construct a
resistor influence its resistance. We consider only resistors that take the form of a long cylinder or bar
with terminals attached at the ends, as illustrated in Figure 1.40. The cross-sectional area A is constant
along the length of the cylinder or bar. If the length L of the resistor is much greater than the dimensions
of its cross section, the resistance is approximately given by
Figure 1.40 
Resistors often take the form of a long cylinder (or bar) in which current enters one end and flows along
the length.
in which 
is the resistivity of the material used to construct the resistor. The units of resistivity are ohm
meters 
Materials can be classified as conductors, semiconductors, or insulators, depending on their resistivity.
Conductors have the lowest resistivity and easily conduct electrical current. Insulators have very high
resistivity and conduct very little current (at least for moderate voltages). Semiconductors fall between
conductors and insulators. We will see in Chapters 9, 11, and 12 that certain semiconductors are very
useful in constructing electronic devices Table 1.3 gives approximate values of resistivity for several
materials.
Table 1.3 Resistivity Values 
for Selected Materials at 300 K
Conductors
 Aluminum
 Carbon (amorphous)
 Copper
R=
ρL
A
(1.10)
ρ
(
Ωm
).
(
Ωm
)
2.73×
10
−8
3.5×
10
−5
1.72×
10
−8

 Gold
 Nichrome
 Silver
 Tungsten
Semiconductors
 Silicon (device grade) depends on impurity concentration
to 1
Insulators
 Fused quartz
 Glass (typical)
 Teflon

Example 1.6 Resistance Calculation
Compute the resistance of a copper wire having a diameter of 2.05 mm and a length of 10 m.
Solution
First, we compute the cross-sectional area of the wire:
Then, the resistance is given by
These are the approximate dimensions of a piece of 12-gauge copper wire that we might find
connecting an electrical outlet to the distribution box in a residence. Of course, two wires are needed
for a complete circuit. ■
2.27×
10
−8
1.12×
10
−6
1.63×
10
−8
5.44×
10
−8
10
−5
> 
10
21
1×
10
12
1×
10
19
A=
π
d
2
4
=
π
(
2.05×
10
−3
)
2
4
=3.3×
10
−6
 m
2
R=
ρL
A
=
1.72×
10
−8
×10
3.3×
10
−6
=0.052 Ω

Power Calculations for Resistances
Recall that we compute power for a circuit element as the product of the current and voltage:
If v and i have the passive reference configuration, a positive sign for power means that energy is being
absorbed by the device. Furthermore, a negative sign means that energy is being supplied by the
device.
If we use Ohm's law to substitute for v in Equation 1.11, we obtain
On the other hand, if we solve Ohm's law for i and substitute into Equation 1.11, we obtain
Notice that power for a resistance is positive regardless of the sign of v or i (assuming that R is positive,
which is ordinarily the case). Thus, power is absorbed by resistances. If the resistance results from
collisions of electrons with the atoms of the material composing a resistor, this power shows up as heat.
Some applications for conversion of electrical power into heat are heating elements for ovens, water
heaters, cooktops, and space heaters. In a typical space heater, the heating element consists of a
nichrome wire that becomes red hot in operation. (Nichrome is an alloy of nickel, chromium, and iron.)
To fit the required length of wire in a small space, it is coiled rather like a spring.
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
 1.1
Using Resistance to Measure Strain
Civil and mechanical engineers routinely employ the dependence of resistance on physical
dimensions of a conductor to measure strain. These measurements are important in
experimental stress strain analysis of mechanisms and structures. (Strain is defined as fractional
change in length, given by 
)
p=vi
(1.11)
p=R
i
2
(1.12)
p=
v
2
R
(1.13)
∈=ΔL/L.

A typical resistive strain gauge consists of nickel-copper alloy foil that is photoetched to obtain
multiple conductors aligned with the direction of the strain to be measured. This is illustrated in
Figure PA1.1. Typically, the conductors are bonded to a thin polyimide (a tough flexible plastic)
backing, which in turn is attached to the structure under test by a suitable adhesive, such as
cyanoacrylate cement.
FIGURE
PA1.1 
The resistance of a conductor is given by
As strain is applied, the length and area change, resulting in changes in resistance. The strain
and the change in resistance are related by the gauge factor:
in which 
is the resistance of the gauge before strain. A typical gauge has 
and
Thus, for a strain of 1%, the change in resistance is 
Usually, a Wheatstone
bridge (discussed in Chapter 2) is used to measure the small changes in resistance associated
with accurate strain determination.
Sensors for force, torque, and pressure are constructed by using resistive strain gauges.
Resistors versus Resistances
As an aside, we mention that resistance is often useful in modeling devices in which electrical power is
converted into forms other than heat. For example, a loudspeaker appears to have a resistance of 
R=
ρL
A
G=
ΔR/
R
0
P
R
0
R
0
=350 Ω
G=2.0.
ΔR=7 Ω.
8 Ω.

Part of the power delivered to the loudspeaker is converted to acoustic power. Another example is a
transmitting antenna having a resistance of 
The power delivered to an antenna is radiated,
traveling away as an electromagnetic wave.
There is a slight distinction between the terms resistor and resistance. A resistor is a two-terminal device
composed of a conductive material. Resistance is a circuit property for which voltage is proportional to
current. Thus, resistors have the property of resistance. However, resistance is also useful in modeling
antennas and loudspeakers, which are quite different from resistors. Often, we are not careful about this
distinction in using these terms.
Example 1.7 Determining Resistance for Given Power and Voltage Ratings
A certain electrical heater is rated for 1500 W when operated from 120 V. Find the resistance of the
heater element and the operating current. (Resistance depends on temperature, and we will find the
resistance at the operating temperature of the heater.)
Solution
Solving Equation 1.13 for resistance, we obtain
Then, we use Ohm's law to find the current:
Exercise 1.11
The 
resistance of Example 1.7 is in the form of a nichrome wire having a diameter of 1.6 mm.
Find the length of the wire. (Hint: The resistivity of nichrome is given in Table 1.3.)
Answer 
Exercise 1.12
Suppose we have a typical incandescent electric light bulb that is rated for 100 W and 120 V. Find its
resistance (at operating temperature) and operating current.
Answer 
Exercise 1.13
50 Ω.
R=
v
2
p
=
120
2
1500
=9.6 Ω
i=
v
R
=
120
9.6
=12.5 A
9.6-Ω

L=17.2 m.

R=144 Ω, i=0.833 A.

A 
resistor used in a television receiver is rated for a maximum power of 1/4 W. Find the current
and voltage when the resistor is operated at maximum power.
Answer 
1-kΩ

v
max
=15.8 V, 
i
max
=15.8 mA.

1.7 Introduction to Circuits
In this chapter, we have defined electrical current and voltage, discussed Kirchhoff's laws, and
introduced several ideal circuit elements: voltage sources, current sources, and resistances. Now we
illustrate these concepts by considering a few relatively simple circuits. In the next chapter, we consider
more complex circuits and analysis techniques.
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 1.41(a). Suppose that we want to know the current, voltage, and
power for each element. To obtain these results, we apply the basic principles introduced in this chapter.
At first, we proceed in small, methodical steps. Furthermore, for ease of understanding, we initially
select reference polarities and directions that agree with the actual polarities and current directions.
Figure 1.41 
A circuit consisting of a voltage source and a resistance.
KVL requires that the sum of the voltages around the circuit shown in Figure 1.41 must equal zero.
Thus, traveling around the circuit clockwise, we have 
Consequently, 
and the
voltage across the resistor 
must have an actual polarity that is positive at the top end and a
magnitude of 10 V.
An alternative way of looking at the voltages in this circuit is to notice that the voltage source and the
resistance are in parallel. (The top ends of the voltage source and the resistance are connected, and the
bottom ends are also connected.) Recall that when elements are in parallel, the voltage magnitude and
polarity are the same for all elements.
v
R
−
v
s
=0.
v
R
=
v
s
,
v
R

Now consider Ohm's law. Because 10 V appears across the 
resistance, the current is 
This current flows through the resistance from the positive polarity to the negative polarity.
Thus, 
flows downward through the resistance, as shown in Figure 1.41(c).
According to KCL, the sum of the currents entering a given node must equal the sum of the currents
leaving. There are two nodes for the circuit of Figure 1.41: one at the top and one at the bottom. The
current 
leaves the top node through the resistance. Thus, an equal current must enter the top node
through the voltage source. The actual direction of current flow is upward through the voltage source, as
shown in Figure 1.41(d).
Another way to see that the currents 
and 
are equal is to notice that the voltage source and the
resistance are in series. In a series circuit, the current that flows in one element must continue through
the other element. (Notice that for this circuit the voltage source and the resistance are in parallel and
they are also in series. A two-element circuit is the only case for which this occurs. If more than two
elements are interconnected, a pair of elements that are in parallel cannot also be in series, and vice
versa.)
Notice that in Figure 1.41, the current in the voltage source flows from the negative polarity toward the
positive polarity. It is only for resistances that the current is required to flow from plus to minus. For a
voltage source, the current can flow in either direction, depending on the circuit to which the source is
connected.
It is only for resistances that the current is required to flow from plus to minus.
Current may flow in either direction for a voltage source depending on the other
elements in the circuit.
Now let us calculate the power for each element. For the resistance, we have several ways to compute
power:
Of course, all the calculations yield the same result. Energy is delivered to the resistance at the rate of
20 J/s.
5-Ω
i
R
=10/5=2 A.
i
R
=2 A
i
R
i
s
i
R
p
R
=
v
R
i
R
=10×2=20 W
p
R
=
i
R
2
R=
2
2
×5=20 W
p
R
=
v
R
2
R
=
10
2
5
=20 W

To find the power for the voltage source, we have
where the minus sign is used because the reference direction for the current enters the negative voltage
reference (opposite to the passive reference configuration). Substituting values, we obtain
Because 
is negative, we understand that energy is being delivered by the voltage source.
As a check, if we add the powers for all the elements in the circuit, the result should be zero, because
energy is neither created nor destroyed in an electrical circuit. Instead, it is transported and changed in
form. Thus, we can write
Using Arbitrary References
In the previous discussion, we selected references that agree with actual polarities and current
directions. This is not always possible at the start of the analysis of more complex circuits. Fortunately, it
is not necessary. We can pick the references in an arbitrary manner. Application of circuit laws will tell
us not only the magnitudes of the currents and voltages but the true polarities and current directions as
well.
Example 1.8 Circuit Analysis Using Arbitrary References
Analyze the circuit of Figure 1.41 using the current and voltage references shown in Figure 1.42.
Verify that the results are in agreement with those found earlier.
Figure 1.42 Circuit for Example 1.8.
Solution
Traveling clockwise and applying KVL, we have
p
s
=−
v
s
i
s
p
s
=−
v
s
i
s
=−10×2=−20 W
p
s
p
s
+
p
R
=−20+20=0

This yields 
Since 
assumes a negative value, the actual polarity is opposite to
the reference. Thus, as before, we conclude that the voltage across the resistance is actually
positive at the top end.
According to Ohm's law,
where the minus sign appears because 
and 
have references opposite to the ­passive
reference configuration. Substituting values, we get
Since 
assumes a positive value, the actual current direction is downward through the resistance.
Next, applying KCL at the bottom node of the circuit, we have
Thus, 
and we conclude that a current of 2 A actually flows upward through the
voltage source.
The power for the voltage source is
Finally, the power for the resistance is given by
where the minus sign appears because the references for 
and 
are opposite to the ­passive
reference configuration. Substituting, we find that 
Because 
has a
positive value, we conclude that energy is delivered to the resistance. ■
Sometimes circuits can be solved by repeated application of Kirchhoff's laws and Ohm's law. We
illustrate with an example.
−
v
s
−
v
x
=0
v
x
=−
v
s
=−10 V.
v
x
i
x
=−
v
x
R
v
x
i
x
i
x
=−
−10
5
=2 A
i
x
total current entering=total current leaving 
i
y
+
i
x
=0
i
y
=−
i
x
=−2 A,
p
s
=
v
s
i
y
=10×(
−2
)=−20 W
p
R
=−
v
x
i
x
v
x
i
x
p
R
=−(
−10
)×(
2
)=
20 W.
p
R

Example 1.9 Using KVL, KCL, and Ohm's Law to Solve a Circuit
Solve for the source voltage in the circuit of Figure 1.43 in which we have a ­current-controlled
current source and we are given that the voltage across the 
resistance is 15 V.
Figure 1.43 
Circuit for Example 1.9.
Solution
First, we use Ohm's Law to determine the value of 
Next, we apply KCL at the top end of the controlled source:
Substituting the value found for 
and solving, we determine that 
Then Ohm's law yields 
Applying KCL around the periphery of the circuit gives
Finally, substituting the value found for 
yields 
■
Exercise 1.14
Analyze the circuit shown in Figure 1.44 to find the values of 
and 
Use the values found to
compute the power for each element.
5-Ω
i
y
:
i
y
=
15 V
5 Ω
=3 A
i
x
+0.5
i
x
=
i
y
i
y
i
x
=2 A.
v
x
=10
i
x
=20 V.
V
s
=
v
x
+15
v
x
V
s
=35 V.
i
1
, 
i
2
,
v
2
.

Figure 1.44 
Circuit for Exercise 1.14.
Answer 
Exercise 1.15
Figure 1.45 shows an independent current source connected across a resistance. Analyze to find the
values of 
and the power for each element.
Figure 1.45 
Circuit for Exercise 1.15.
Answer 

i
1
=
i
2
=−1 A, 
v
2
=−25 V, 
p
R
=25 W, 
p
s
=−25 W.
i
R
, 
v
R
, 
v
s
,

i
R
=2 A, 
v
s
=
v
R
=80 V, 
p
s
=−160 W, 
p
R
=160 W.

Summary
1. Electrical and electronic features are increa­singly integrated into the products and sys­tems
designed by engineers in other fields. Furthermore, instrumentation in all fields of engineering
and science is based on the use of electrical sensors, electronics, and computers.
2. Some of the main areas of electrical engineering are communication systems, computer
systems, control systems, electromagnetics, photonics, electronics, power systems, and signal
processing.
3. Some important reasons to learn basic electrical engineering principles are to pass the
Fundamentals of Engineering Examination, to have a broad enough knowledge base to lead
design projects in your own field, to be able to identify and correct simple malfunctions in
electrical systems, and to be able to communicate efficiently with electrical engineering
consultants.
4. Current is the time rate of flow of electrical charge. Its units are amperes (A), which are
equivalent to coulombs per second (C/s)
5. The voltage associated with a circuit element is the energy transferred per unit of charge that
flows through the element. The units of voltages are volts (V), which are equivalent to joules per
coulomb (J/C). If positive charge moves from the positive reference to the negative reference,
energy is absorbed by the circuit element. If the charge moves in the opposite direction, energy
is delivered by the element.
6. In the passive reference configuration, the current reference direction enters the positive
reference polarity.
7. If the references have the passive configuration, power for a circuit element is computed as the
product of the current through the element and the voltage across it:
If the references are opposite to the passive configuration, we have
In either case, if p is positive, energy is being absorbed by the element.
8. A node in an electrical circuit is a point at which two or more circuit elements are joined together.
All points joined by ideal conductors are electrically equivalent and constitute a single node.
9. Kirchhoff's current law (KCL) states that the sum of the currents entering a node equals the sum
of the currents leaving.
10. Elements connected end to end are said to be in series. For two elements to be in series, no
other current path can be connected to their common node. The current is identical for all
elements in a series connection.
p=vi
p=−vi

11. A loop in an electrical circuit is a closed path starting at a node and proceeding through circuit
elements eventually returning to the starting point.
12. Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL) states that the algebraic sum of the voltages in a loop must equal
zero. If the positive polarity of a voltage is encountered first in going around the loop, the voltage
carries a plus sign in the sum. On the other hand, if the negative polarity is encountered first, the
voltage carries a minus sign.
13. Two elements are in parallel if both ends of one element are directly connected to corresponding
ends of the other element. The voltages of parallel elements are identical.
14. The voltage between the ends of an ideal conductor is zero regardless of the current flowing
through the conductor. All points in a circuit that are connected by ideal conductors can be
considered as a single point.
15. An ideal independent voltage source maintains a specified voltage across its terminals
independent of other elements that are connected to it and of the current flowing through it.
16. For a controlled voltage source, the voltage across the source terminals depends on other
voltages or currents in the circuit. A voltage-controlled voltage source is a voltage source having
a voltage equal to a constant times the voltage across a pair of terminals elsewhere in the
network. A current-controlled voltage source is a voltage source having a voltage equal to a
constant times the current through some other element in the circuit.
17. An ideal independent current source forces a specified current to flow through itself, independent
of other elements that are connected to it and of the voltage across it.
18. For a controlled current source, the current depends on other voltages or currents in the circuit.
A voltage-controlled current source produces a current equal to a constant times the voltage
across a pair of terminals elsewhere in the network. A current-controlled current source
produces a current equal to a constant times the current through some other element in the
circuit.
19. For constant resistances, voltage is proportional to current. If the current and voltage references
have the passive configuration, Ohm's law states that 
For references opposite to the
passive configuration, 
v=Ri.
v=−Ri.

Problems
Section 1.1: Overview of Electrical Engineering
Section 1.2: Circuits, Currents, and Voltages
P1.1. Broadly speaking, what are the two main objectives of electrical systems?
P1.2. List four reasons why other engineering students need to learn the fundamentals of
electrical engineering.
P1.3. List eight subdivisions of electrical engineering.
P1.4. Write a few paragraphs describing an interesting application of electrical engineer­ing in
your field. Consult engineering journals and trade magazines such as the IEEE Spectrum,
Automotive Engineering, Chemical Engineering, or Civil Engineering for ideas.
P1.5. Carefully define or explain the following terms in your own words (give units where
appropriate):
a. Electrical current.
b. Voltage.
c. An open switch.
d. A closed switch.
e. Direct current.
f. Alternating current.
P1.6. In the fluid-flow analogy for electrical circuits, what is analogous to
a. a conductor;
b. an open switch;
c. a resistance;
d. a battery?

P1.7. The charge of an electron is 
A current of 1 A flows in a wire carried by
electrons. How many electrons pass through a cross section of the wire each second?
*P1.8. The ends of a length of wire are labeled a and b. If the current in the wire is 
are electrons moving toward a or b? How much charge passes through a cross section of the
wire in 3 seconds?
−1.60×
10
−19
 C.
i
ab
=−5 A,

* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
P1.9. The circuit element shown in Figure P1.9 has 
and 
What is the value of
Be sure to give the correct algebraic sign. What is the value of i? Is energy delivered to
the element or taken from it?
Figure P1.9 
P1.10. To stop current from flowing through the headlight circuit of Figure 1.2 on page 7, should
the switch be open or closed? In the fluid-flow analogy for the circuit, would the valve
corresponding to the switch be open or closed? What state for a valve, open or closed, is
analogous to an open switch?
*P1.11. The net charge through a cross section of a circuit element is given by 
Find the current through the element.
P1.12. The current through a particular circuit element is given by 
in
which the angle is in radians.
a. Sketch i(t) to scale versus time.
b. Determine the net charge that passes through the element between 
and 
c. Repeat for the interval from 
to 
*P1.13. The current through a given circuit element is given by
Find the net charge that passes through the element in the interval from 
to 
[Hint:
Current is the rate of flow of charge. Thus, to find charge, we must integrate current with respect
to time.]
P1.14. The net charge through a cross section of a certain circuit element is given by
Determine the current through the element.
P1.15. A copper wire has a diameter of 2.05 mm and carries a current of 15 A due solely to
electrons. (These values are common in residential wiring.) Each electron has a charge of
v=12 V
i
ba
=−2 A.
v
ba
?
q(
t
)=2+3t C.
i(
t
)=10 sin(
200πt
) A
t=0
t=5 ms.
t=0
t=10 ms.
i(
t
)=2
e
−t
 A
t=0
t=∞.
q(
t
)=3−3
e
−2t
 C

Section 1.3: Power and Energy
Assume that the free-electron (these are the electrons capable of moving
through the copper) concentration in copper is 
Find the average velocity of
the electrons in the wire.
*P1.16. A certain lead acid storage battery has a mass of 30 kg. Starting from a fully charged
state, it can supply 5 amperes for 24 hours with a terminal voltage of 12 V before it is totally
discharged.
a. If the energy stored in the fully charged battery is used to lift the battery with 100-percent
efficiency, what height is attained? Assume that the acceleration due to gravity is 
and is constant with height.
b. If the energy stored is used to accelerate the battery with 100-percent efficiency, what
velocity is attained?
c. Gasoline contains about 
Compare this with the energy content per unit
mass for the fully charged battery.
P1.17. A circuit element having terminals a and b has 
and 
Over a period of
20 seconds, how much charge moves through the element? If electrons carry the charge, which
terminal do they enter? How much energy is transferred? Is it delivered to the element or taken
from it?
P1.18. An electron moves through a voltage of 9 V from the positive polarity to the negative
polarity. How much energy is transferred? Does the electron gain or lose energy? Each electron
has a change of 
*P1.19. A typical "deep-cycle" battery (used for electric trolling motors for fishing boats) is
capable of delivering 12 V and 5 A for a period of 10 hours. How much charge flows through the
battery in this interval? How much energy is delivered by the battery?
−1.60×
10
−19
 C.
10
29
 electrons/m
3
.
9.8
 m/s
2
4.5×
10
7
 J/kg.
v
ab
=10 V
i
ba
=2 A.
−1.60×
10
−19
 C.
P1.20. Define the term passive reference configuration. When do we have this configuration
when using double subscript notation?
*P1.21. Compute the power for each element shown in Figure P1.21. For each element, state
whether energy is being absorbed by the element or supplied by it.

Figure P1.21 
P1.22. The terminals of an electrical device are labeled a and b. If 
how much
energy is exchanged when a charge of 3 C moves through the device from a to b? Is the energy
delivered to the device or taken from the device?
*P1.23. The terminals of a certain battery are labeled a and b. The battery voltage is 
To increase the chemical energy stored in the battery by 600 J, how much charge must move
through the battery? Should electrons move from a to b or from b to a?
P1.24. The element shown in Figure P1.24 has 
and 
Compute the
power for the circuit element. Find the energy transferred between 
and 
Is this energy
absorbed by the element or supplied by it?
Figure P1.24 
P1.25. The current and voltage of an electrical device are 
and 
in which the angle is in radians.
a. Find the power delivered to the device and sketch it to scale versus time.
b. Determine the energy delivered to the device for the interval from 
to 
c. Repeat for the interval from 
to 
*P1.26. Suppose that the cost of electrical energy is $0.12 per kilowatt hour and that your
electrical bill for 30 days is $60. Assume that the power delivered is constant over the entire 30
days. What is the power in watts? If this power is supplied by a voltage of 120 V, what current
flows? Part of your electrical load is a 60 W light that is on continuously. By what percentage can
your energy consumption be reduced by turning this light off?
P1.27. Figure P1.27 shows an ammeter (AM) and voltmeter (VM) connected to measure the
current and voltage, respectively, for circuit element A. When current actually enters
of the ammeter, the reading is positive, and when current leaves 
the
reading is negative. If the actual voltage polarity is positive at 
of the VM, the
reading is positive; otherwise, it is negative. (Actually, for the connection shown, the ammeter
reads the sum of the current in element A and the very small current taken by the voltmeter. For
purposes of this problem, assume that the current taken by the voltmeter is negligible.) Find the
power for element A and state whether energy is being delivered to element A or taken from it if
v
ab
=−10 V,
v
ab
=12 V.
v(
t
)=10 V
i(
t
)=2
e
−t
 A.
t=0
t=∞.
i
ab
(
t
)=5 A
v
ab
(
t
)=10 sin(
200πt
) V
t=0
t=5 ms.
t=0
t=10 ms.
the+terminal
the+terminal,
the+terminal

Section 1.4: Kirchhoff's Current Law
Figure P1.27 
a. the ammeter reading is 
and the voltmeter reading is 
b. the ammeter reading is 
and the voltmeter reading is 
c. the ammeter reading is 
and the voltmeter reading is 

*P1.28. Repeat Problem P1.27 with the meters connected as shown in Figure P1.28.
Figure P1.28 
P1.29. A certain type of D-cell battery that costs $0.50 is capable of producing 1.2 V and a
current of 0.1 A for a period of 75 hours. Determine the cost of the energy delivered by this
battery per kilowatt hour. (For comparison, the approximate cost of energy purchased from
electric utilities in the United States is $0.12 per kilowatt hour.)
P1.30. The electronics aboard a certain sailboat consume 50 W when operated from a 12.6-V
source. If a certain fully charged deep-cycle lead acid storage battery is rated for 12.6 V and 100
ampere hours, for how many hours can the electronics be operated from the battery without
recharging? (The ampere-hour rating of the battery is the operating time to discharge the battery
multiplied by the current.) How much energy in kilowatt hours is initially stored in the battery? If
the battery costs $75 and has a life of 300 charge-discharge cycles, what is the cost of the
energy in dollars per kilowatt hour? Neglect the cost of recharging the battery.
+2 A
+30 V;
−2 A
−30 V.
−2 A
+30 V;
P1.31. What is a node in an electrical circuit? Identify the nodes in the circuit of Figure P1.31.
Keep in mind that all points connected by ideal conductors are considered to be a single node in

electrical circuits.
Figure P1.31 
P1.32. State Kirchhoff's current law.
P1.33. Two electrical elements are connected in series. What can you say about the currents
through the elements?
P1.34. Suppose that in the fluid-flow analogy for an electrical circuit the analog of electrical
current is volumetric flow rate with units of 
For a proper analogy to electrical circuits,
must the fluid be compressible or incompressible? Must the walls of the pipes be elastic or
inelastic? Explain your answers.
*P1.35. Identify elements that are in series in the circuit of Figure P1.31.
P1.36. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P1.36.
a. Which elements are in series?
b. What is the relationship between 
and 
c. Given that 
and 
determine the values of 
and 
Figure P1.36 
*P1.37. Use KCL to find the values of 
and 
for the circuit of Figure P1.37. Which
elements are connected in series in this circuit?
cm
3
/s.
i
d
i
c
?
i
a
=3 A
i
c
=1 A,
i
b
i
d
.
i
a
, 
i
c
,
i
d

Section 1.5: Kirchhoff's Voltage Law
Figure P1.37 
*P1.38. Find the values of the other currents in Figure P1.38 if 
and
Figure P1.38 

P1.39. Find the values of the other currents in Figure P1.38 if 
and
i
a
=2 A, 
i
b
=3 A, 
i
d
=−5 A,
i
h
=4 A.
i
a
=−1 A, 
i
c
=3 A, 
i
g
=5 A,
i
h
=1 A.
P1.40. State Kirchhoff's voltage law.
P1.41. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P1.36.
a. Which elements are in parallel?
b. What is the relationship between 
and 
c. Given that 
and 
determine the values of 
and 
*P1.42. Use KVL to solve for the voltages 
and 
in Figure P1.42.
v
a
v
b
?
v
a
=2 V
v
d
=−5 V,
v
b
v
c
.
v
a
, 
v
b
,
v
c

Figure P1.42 
P1.43. Solve for the other voltages shown in Figure P1.43 given that 
and 
Figure P1.43 
*P1.44. Use KVL and KCL to solve for the labeled currents and voltages in Figure P1.44.
Compute the power for each element and show that power is conserved (i.e., the algebraic sum
of the powers is zero).
Figure P1.44 
P1.45. Identify elements that are in parallel
a. in Fig­ure P1.37,
v
a
=5 V, 
v
b
=7 V,
v
f
=−10 V,
v
h
=6 V.

Section 1.6: Introduction to Circuit Elements
b. in Figure P1.43,
c. in Figure P1.44.
P1.46. Points a, b, c, and d appear in a certain circuit. We know that 
and
Determine the values of 
and 
v
ab
=5 V, 
v
cb
=15 V,
v
da
=−10 V.
v
ac
v
cd
.
P1.47. In your own words, define
a. an ideal conductor;
b. an ideal voltage source;
c. an ideal current source.
P1.48. Name four types of dependent sources and give the units for the gain parameter for each
type.
P1.49. State Ohm's law, including references.

*P1.50. Draw a circuit that contains a 
resistance, a 10-V independent voltage source, and a
2-A independent current source. Connect all three elements in series. Because the polarity of
the voltage source and reference direction for the current source are not specified, several
correct answers are possible.
P1.51. Repeat Problem P1.50, placing all three elements in parallel.
P1.52. The resistance of a certain copper wire is 
Determine the resistance of a tungsten
wire having the same dimensions as the copper wire.
P1.53. Draw a circuit that contains a 
resistor, a 10-V voltage source, and a voltage-
controlled voltage source having a gain constant of 0.5. Assume that the voltage across the
resistor is the control voltage for the controlled source. Place all three elements in series.
P1.54. Draw a circuit that contains a 
resistor, a 10-V voltage source, and a current-
controlled voltage source having a gain constant of 
Assume that the current through the
resistor is the control current for the controlled source. Place all three elements in series.
*P1.55. A power of 100 W is delivered to a certain resistor when the applied voltage is 100 V.
Find the resistance. Suppose that the voltage is reduced by 10 percent (to 90 V). By what
percentage is the power reduced? Assume that the resistance remains constant.
P1.56. The voltage across a 
resistor is given by 
Determine the energy
delivered to the resistor between 
and 
P1.57. The voltage across a 
resistor is given by 
Determine the energy
delivered to the resistor between 
and 
P1.58. A certain wire has a resistance of 
Find the new resistance
a. if the length of the wire is doubled,
b. if the diameter of the wire is doubled.
5-Ω
0.5 Ω.
5-Ω
5-Ω
2 Ω.
10-Ω
v(
t
)=5
e
−2t
 V.
t=0
t=∞.
10-Ω
v(
t
)=5 sin(
2πt
) V.
t=0
t=10 s.
0.5 Ω.

Section 1.7: Introduction to Circuits
P1.59. Plot i versus v to scale for each of the parts of Figure P1.59.
Figure P1.59 
*P1.60. Which of the following are self-contradictory combinations of circuit elements?
a. A 12-V voltage source in parallel with a 2-A current source.
b. A 2-A current source in series with a 3-A current source.
c. A 2-A current source in parallel with a short circuit.
d. A 2-A current source in series with an open circuit.
e. A 5-V voltage source in parallel with a short circuit.
P1.61. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P1.61. Find the power for the voltage source and for
the current source. Which source is absorbing power?
Figure P1.61 
*P1.62. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P1.62. Find the current 
flowing through the
i
R

resistor. Find the power for each element in the circuit. Which elements are absorbing power?
Figure P1.62 
P1.63. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P1.63. Find the current 
flowing through the
resistor. Find the power for each element in the circuit. Which elements are receiving power?
Figure P1.63 
*P1.64. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P1.64. Use Ohm's law, KVL, and KCL to find 
Figure P1.64 
P1.65. Determine the value of 
in the circuit shown in Figure P1.65.
Figure P1.65 
P1.66. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P1.66.
i
R
V
x
.
I
x

Figure P1.66 
a. Which elements are in series?
b. Which elements are in parallel?
c. Apply Ohm's and Kirchhoff's laws to solve for 
P1.67. The circuit shown in Figure P1.67 is the electrical model for an electronic megaphone, in
which the 
resistance models a loudspeaker, the source 
and the 
resistance
represent a microphone, and the remaining elements model an amplifier. Given that the power
delivered to the 
resistance is 8 W, determine the current circulating in the right-hand loop of
the circuit. Also, determine the value of the microphone voltage 
Figure P1.67 
P1.68. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P1.68.
Figure P1.68 
a. Which elements are in series?
b. Which elements are in parallel?
V
x
.
8-Ω
V
x
5-kΩ
8-Ω
V
x
.

c. Apply Ohm's and Kirchhoff's laws to solve for 
P1.69. Solve for the currents shown in Figure P1.69.
Figure P1.69 

*P1.70. The circuit shown in Figure P1.70 contains a voltage-controlled voltage source.
Figure P1.70 
a. Use KVL to write an equation relating the voltages and solve for 
b. Use Ohm's law to find the current 
c. Find the power for each element in the circuit and verify that power is conserved.
P1.71. Determine the value of 
and 
in the circuit shown in Figure P1.71.
Figure P1.71 
P1.72. A 10-V independent voltage source is in series with a 2-A independent current source.
What single source is equivalent to this series combination? Give the type and value of the
equivalent source.
P1.73. A 10-V independent voltage source is in parallel with a 2-A independent current source.
What single source is equivalent to this parallel combination? Give the type and value of the
R
x
.
v
x
.
i
x
.
v
x
i
y

equivalent source.
P1.74. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P1.74.
Figure P1.74 
a. Use KVL to write an equation relating the voltages.
b. Use Ohm's law to write equations relating 
and 
to the current i.
c. Substitute the equations from part (b) into the equation from part (a) and solve for i.
d. Find the power for each element in the circuit and verify that power is conserved.
*P1.75. The circuit shown in Figure P1.75 contains a voltage-controlled current source. Solve for
Figure P1.75 
P1.76. For the circuit shown in Figure P1.76, solve for 
What types of sources are present in
this circuit?
Figure P1.76 
P1.77. For the circuit shown in Figure P1.77, solve for the current 
What types of sources are
present in this circuit?
v
1
v
2
v
s
.
i
s
.
i
x
.

Figure P1.77 


Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter.Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T1.1. Match each entry in Table T1.1(a) with the best choice from the list given in Table T1.1(b).
[Items in Table T1.1(b) may be used more than once or not at all.]
Table T1.1
Item
Best Match
(a)
a. Node
b. Loop
c. KVL
d. KCL
e. Ohm's law
f. Passive reference configuration
g. Ideal conductor
h. Open circuit
i. Current source
j. Parallel connected elements
k. Controlled source
l. Units for voltage
m. Units for current
n. Units for resistance
o. Series connected elements
(b)
A. 
B. The current reference for an element enters the positive voltage reference
C. A path through which no current can flow
D. Points connected by ideal conductors
E. An element that carries a specified current
v
ab
=R
i
ab

F. An element whose current or voltage depends on a current or voltage elsewhere in the
circuit
G. A path starting at a node and proceeding from node to node back to the starting node
H. An element for which the voltage is zero
I. A/V
J. V/A
K. J/C
L. C/V
M. C/s
N. Elements connected so their currents must be equal
O. Elements connected so their voltages must be equal
P. The algebraic sum of voltages for a closed loop is zero
Q. The algebraic sum of the voltages for elements connected to a node is zero
R. The sum of the currents entering a node equals the sum of those leaving
T1.2. Consider the circuit of Figure T1.2 with 
and 
Figure T1.2 
a. Determine the value of 
b. Determine the magnitude of the power for the voltage source and state whether the
voltage source is absorbing energy or delivering it.
c. How many nodes does this circuit have?
d. Determine the magnitude of the power for the current source and state whether the
current source is absorbing energy or delivering it.
T1.3. The circuit of Figure T1.3 has 
and 
Figure T1.3 
I
s
=
3 A, R=2 Ω,
V
s
=10 V.
v
R
.
I
1
=3 A,
I
2
=
1 A,
R
1
=12 Ω,
R
2
=6 Ω.

a. Determine the value of 
b. Determine the power for each current source and state whether it is absorbing energy or
delivering it.
c. Compute the power absorbed by 
and by 
T1.4. The circuit shown in Figure T1.4 has 
and 
Figure T1.4 
a. Find the values of:
a. 
b. i;
c. 
T1.5. We are given 
and 
for the circuit of Figure T1.5. Find the
value of the current 
flowing through the short circuit.
Figure T1.5 
T1.6. We are given 
A for the circuit of Figure Tl.6. Use Ohm's law, KCL, and KVL to find
the values of 
and 
v
ab
.
R
1
R
2
.
V
s
=
12 V, 
v
2
=4 V,
R
1
=4 Ω.
v
1
;
R
2
.
V
s
=15 V, R=10 Ω,
a=
0.3 S
i
sc
i
4
=2
i
1
, 
i
2
, 
i
3
vs

Figure T1.6 

Chapter 2 Resistive Circuits
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Solve circuits (i.e., find currents and voltages of interest) by combining resistances in series and
parallel.
Apply the voltage-division and current-division principles.
Solve circuits by the node-voltage technique.
Solve circuits by the mesh-current technique.
Find Thévenin and Norton equivalents and apply source transformations.
Use MATLAB  to solve circuit equations numerically and symbolically.
Understand and apply the superposition principle.
Draw the circuit diagram and state the principles of operation for the Wheatstone bridge.
Introduction to this chapter:
In applications of electrical engineering, we often face circuit-analysis problems for
®

which the structure of a circuit, including element values, is known and the currents,
voltages, and powers need to be found. In this chapter, we examine techniques for
analyzing circuits composed of resistances, voltage sources, and current sources.
Later, we extend many of these concepts to circuits containing inductance and
capacitance.
Over the years, you will meet many applications of electrical engineering in your
field of engineering or science. This chapter will give you the skills needed to work
effectively with the electronic instrumentation and other circuits that you will
encounter. The material in this book will help you to answer questions on the
Fundamentals of Engineering Examination and become a Registered Professional
Engineer.

2.1 Resistances in Series and Parallel
In this section, we show how to replace series or parallel combinations of resistances by equivalent
resistances. Then, we demonstrate how to use this knowledge in solving circuits.
Series Resistances
Consider the series combination of three resistances shown in Figure 2.1(a). Recall that in a series
circuit the elements are connected end to end and that the same current flows through all of the
elements. By Ohm's law, we can write
Figure 2.1 
Series resistances can be combined into an equivalent resistance.
and
Using KVL, we can write
Substituting Equations 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 into Equation 2.4, we obtain
v1=R1i
(2.1)
v2=R2i
(2.2)
v3=R3i
(2.3)
v=v1+v2+v3
(2.4)

Factoring out the current i, we have
Now, we define the equivalent resistance 
 to be the sum of the resistances in series:
Using this to substitute into Equation 2.6, we have
Thus, we conclude that the three resistances in series can be replaced by the equivalent resistance 
shown in Figure 2.1(b) with no change in the relationship between the voltage v and current i. If the
three resistances are part of a larger circuit, replacing them by a single equivalent resistance would
make no changes in the currents or voltages in other parts of the circuit.
A series combination of resistances has an equivalent resistance equal to the
sum of the original resistances.
This analysis can be applied to any number of resistances. For example, two resistances in series can
be replaced by a single resistance equal to the sum of the original two. To summarize, a series
combination of resistances has an equivalent resistance equal to the sum of the original resistances.
Parallel Resistances
Figure 2.2(a) shows three resistances in parallel. In a parallel circuit, the voltage across each element is
the same. Applying Ohm's law in Figure 2.2(a), we can write
v=R1i+R2i+R3i
(2.5)
v=(R1+R2+R3)i
(2.6)
Req
Req=R1+R2+R3
(2.7)
v=Reqi
(2.8)
Req

Figure 2.2 
Parallel resistances can be combined into an equivalent resistance.
The top ends of the resistors in Figure 2.2(a) are connected to a single node. (Recall that all points in a
circuit that are connected by conductors constitute a node.) Thus, we can apply KCL to the top node of
the circuit and obtain
Now using Equations 2.9, 2.10, and 2.11 to substitute into Equation 2.12, we have
Factoring out the voltage, we obtain
Now, we define the equivalent resistance as
In terms of the equivalent resistance, Equation 2.14 becomes
Comparing Equations 2.14 and 2.16, we see that i and v are related in the same way by both equations
provided that 
 is given by Equation 2.15. Therefore, a parallel combination of resistances can be
replaced by its equivalent resistance without changing the currents and voltages in other parts of the
i1=vR1
(2.9)
i2=vR2
(2.10)
i3=vR3
(2.11)
i=i1+i2+i3
(2.12)
i=vR1+vR2+vR3
(2.13)
i=(1R1+1R2+1R3)v
(2.14)
Req=11/R1+1/R2+1/R3
(2.15)
i=1Req v
(2.16)
Req

circuit. The equivalence is illustrated in Figure 2.2(b).
A parallel combination of resistances can be replaced by its equivalent resistance
without changing the currents and voltages in other parts of the circuit.
This analysis can be applied to any number of resistances in parallel. For example, if four resistances
are in parallel, the equivalent resistance is
Similarly, for two resistances, we have
This can be put into the form
(Notice that Equation 2.19 applies only for two resistances. The product over the sum does not apply
for more than two resistances.)
The product over the sum does not apply for more than two resistances.
Sometimes, resistive circuits can be reduced to a single equivalent resistance by repeatedly combining
resistances that are in series or parallel.
Example 2.1 Combining Resistances in Series and Parallel
Find a single equivalent resistance for the network shown in Figure 2.3(a).
Req=11/R1+1/R2+1/R3+1/R4
(2.17)
Req=11/R1+1/R2
(2.18)
Req=R1R2R1+R2
(2.19)

Figure 2.3 
Resistive network for Example 2.1.
Solution 
First, we look for a combination of resistances that is in series or in parallel. In Figure 2.3(a), 
 and
 are in series. (In fact, as it stands, no other two resistances in this network are either in series or
in parallel.) Thus, our first step is to combine 
 and 
 replacing them by their equivalent
resistance. Recall that for a series combination, the equivalent resistance is the sum of the
resistances in series:
1. Find a series or parallel combination of resistances.
2. Combine them.
3. Repeat until the network is reduced to a single resistance (if possible).
Figure 2.3(b) shows the network after replacing 
 and 
 by their equivalent resistance. Now we
see that 
 and 
 are in parallel. The equivalent resistance for this combination is
R3
R4
R3
R4,
Req1=R3+R4=5+15=20 Ω
R3
R4
R2
Req1

Making this replacement gives the equivalent network shown in Figure 2.3(c).
Finally, we see that 
 and 
 are in series. Thus, the equivalent resistance for the entire network
is
Exercise 2.1 
Find the equivalent resistance for each of the networks shown in Figure 2.4. [Hint for part (b): 
 and
 are in parallel.]
Figure 2.4 
Resistive networks for Exercise 2.1.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Conductances in Series and Parallel
Req2=11/Req1+1/R2=11/20+1/20=10 Ω
R1
Req2
Req=R1+Req2=10+10=20 Ω
R3
R4
3 Ω;
5 Ω;
52.1 Ω;
1.5 kΩ.

Recall that conductance is the reciprocal of resistance. Using this fact to change resistances to
conductances for a series combination of n elements, we readily obtain:
Combine conductances in series as you would resistances in parallel. Combine
conductances in parallel as you would resistances in series.
Thus, we see that conductances in series combine as do resistances in parallel. For two conductances
in series, we have:
For n conductances in parallel, we can show that
Conductances in parallel combine as do resistances in series.
Series versus Parallel Circuits
An element such as a toaster or light bulb that absorbs power is called a load. When we want to
distribute power from a single voltage source to various loads, we usually place the loads in parallel. A
switch in series with each load can break the flow of current to that load without affecting the voltage
supplied to the other loads.
When we want to distribute power from a single voltage source to various loads,
we usually place the loads in parallel.
Geq=11/G1+1/G2+...+1/Gn
(2.20)
Geq=G1G2G1+G2
Geq=G1+G2+...+Gn
(2.21)

Sometimes, to save wire, strings of Christmas lights consist of bulbs connected in series. The bulbs tend
to fail or "burn out" by becoming open circuits. Then the entire string is dark and the defective bulb can
be found only by trying each in turn. If several bulbs are burned out, it can be very tedious to locate the
failed units. In a parallel connection, only the failed bulbs are dark.

2.2 Network Analysis by Using Series and Parallel Equivalents
An electrical network (or electrical circuit) consists of circuit elements, such as resistances, voltage
sources, and current sources, connected together to form closed paths. Network analysis is the
process of determining the current, voltage, and power for each element, given the circuit diagram and
the element values. In this and the sections that follow, we study several useful techniques for network
analysis.
An electrical network consists of circuit elements such as resistances, voltage
sources, and current sources, connected together to form closed paths.
Sometimes, we can determine the currents and voltages for each element in a resistive circuit by
repeatedly replacing series and parallel combinations of resistances by their equivalent resistances.
Eventually, this may reduce the circuit sufficiently that the equivalent circuit can be solved easily. The
information gained from the simplified circuit is transferred to the previous steps in the chain of
equivalent circuits. In the end, we gain enough information about the original circuit to determine all the
currents and voltages.
Circuit Analysis Using Series/Parallel Equivalents
Here are the steps in solving circuits using series/parallel equivalents:
1. Begin by locating a combination of resistances that are in series or parallel. Often the place to
start is farthest from the source.
2. Redraw the circuit with the equivalent resistance for the combination found in step 1.
3. Repeat steps 1 and 2 until the circuit is reduced as far as possible. Often (but not always) we
end up with a single source and a single resistance.
4. Solve for the currents and voltages in the final equivalent circuit. Then, transfer results back one
step and solve for additional unknown currents and voltages. Again transfer the results back one
step and solve. Repeat until all of the currents and voltages are known in the original circuit.

5. Check your results to make sure that KCL is satisfied at each node, KVL is satisfied for each
loop, and the powers add to zero.
Some good advice for beginners: Don't try to combine steps. Be very methodical
and do one step at a time. Take the time to redraw each equivalent carefully and
label unknown currents and voltages consistently in the various circuits. The slow
methodical approach will be faster and more accurate when you are learning.
Walk now—later you will be able to run.
Example 2.2 Circuit Analysis Using Series/Parallel Equivalents
Find the current, voltage, and power for each element of the circuit shown in Figure 2.5(a).
Figure 2.5 
A circuit and its simplified versions. See Example 2.2.
Steps 1, 2, and 3.

Solution 
First, we combine resistances in series and parallel. For example, in the original circuit, 
 and 
are in parallel. Replacing 
 and 
 by their parallel equivalent, we obtain the circuit shown in
Figure 2.5(b). Next, we see that 
 and 
 are in series. Replacing these resistances by their
sum, we obtain the circuit shown in Figure 2.5(c).
After we have reduced a network to an equivalent resistance connected across the source, we solve
the simplified network. Then, we transfer results back through the chain of equivalent circuits. We
illustrate this process in Figure 2.6. (Figure 2.6 is identical to Figure 2.5, except for the currents and
voltages shown in Figure 2.6. Usually, in solving a network by this technique, we first draw the chain
of equivalent networks and then write results on the same drawings. However, this might be
confusing in our first example.)
Figure 2.6 
After reducing the circuit to a source and an equivalent resistance, we solve the simplified circuit.
Then, we transfer results back to the original circuit. Notice that the logical flow in solving for currents
and voltages starts from the simplified circuit in (c).
Step 4.
R2
R3
R2
R3
R1
Req1

First, we solve the simplified network shown in Figure 2.6(c). Because 
 is in parallel with the 90-
V voltage source, the voltage across 
 must be 90 V, with its positive polarity at the top end.
Thus, the current flowing through 
 is given by
We know that this current flows downward (from plus to minus) through 
 Since 
 and 
 are
in series in Figure 2.6(c), the current must also flow upward through 
 Thus, 
 flows
clockwise around the circuit, as shown in Figure 2.6(c).
Because 
 is the equivalent resistance seen by the source in all three parts of Figure 2.6, the
current through 
 must be 
 flowing upward in all three equivalent circuits. In Figure 2.6(b),
we see that  flows clockwise through 
 and 
 The voltage across 
 is given by
Because 
 is the equivalent resistance for the parallel combination of 
 and 
 the voltage 
also appears across 
 and 
 in the original network.
At this point, we have found that the current through 
 and 
 is 
 ­Furthermore, the voltage
across 
 and 
 is 60 V. This information is shown in Figure 2.6(a). Now, we can compute the
remaining values desired:
(As a check, we can use KCL to verify that 
)
Next, we can use Ohm's law to compute the value of 
(As a check, we use KVL to verify that 
)
Step 5.
Req
Req
Req
i1=vsReq=90 V30 Ω=3 A
Req.
vs
Req
vs.
i1=3 A
Req
vs
i1=3 A,
i1
vs, R1,
Req1.
Req1
v2=Req1i1=20Ω×3 A=60 V
Req1
R2
R3,
v2
R2
R3
vs
R1
i1=3 A.
R2
R3
i2=v2R2=60 V30 Ω=2 A
i3=v2R3=60 V60 Ω=1 A
i1=i2+i3.
v1:
v1=R1i1=10 Ω×3 A=30 V
vs=v1+v2.

Now, we compute the power for each element. For the voltage source, we have
We have included the minus sign because the references for 
 and  are opposite to the passive
configuration. Substituting values, we have
Because the power for the source is negative, we know that the source is supplying energy to the
other elements in the circuit.
The powers for the resistances are
(As a check, we verify that 
 showing that power is conserved.) ■
Power Control by Using Heating Elements in Series or Parallel
Resistances are commonly used as heating elements for the reaction chamber of chemical processes.
For example, the catalytic converter of an automobile is not effective until its operating temperature is
achieved. Thus, during engine warm-up, large amounts of pollutants are emitted. Automotive engineers
have proposed and studied the use of electrical heating elements to heat the converter more quickly,
thereby reducing pollution. By using several heating elements that can be operated individually, in
series, or in parallel, several power levels can be achieved. This is useful in controlling the temperature
of a chemical process.
Exercise 2.2 
Find the currents labeled in Figure 2.7 by combining resistances in series and parallel.
ps=−vsi1
vs
i1
ps=−(90 V)×3 A=−270 W
p1=R1i12=10 Ω×(3 A)2=90 Wp2=v22R2=(60 V)230 Ω=120 Wp3=v22R3=(60 V)260 Ω=60 W
ps+p1+p2+p3=0,

Figure 2.7 
Circuits for Exercise 2.2.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
c. 
i1=1.04 A, i2=0.480 A, i3=0.320 A, i4=0.240 A;
i1=1 A,i2=1 A;
i1=1 A, i2=0.5 A, i3=0.5 A.

2.3 Voltage-Divider and Current-Divider Circuits
Voltage Division
When a voltage is applied to a series combination of resistances, a fraction of the voltage appears
across each of the resistances. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 2.8. The equivalent resistance
seen by the voltage source is
Figure 2.8 
Circuit used to derive the voltage-division principle.
The current is the total voltage divided by the equivalent resistance:
Furthermore, the voltage across 
 is
Similarly, we have
and
Req=R1+R2+R3
(2.22)
i=vtotalReq=vtotalR1+R2+R3
(2.23)
R1
v1=R1i=R1R1+R2+R3 vtotal
(2.24)
v2=R2i=R2R1+R2+R3 vtotal
(2.25)
v3=R3i=R3R1+R2+R3 vtotal
(2.26)

We can summarize these results by the statement: Of the total voltage, the fraction that appears across
a given resistance in a series circuit is the ratio of the given resistance to the total series resistance. This
is known as the voltage-division principle.
Of the total voltage, the fraction that appears across a given resistance in a
series circuit is the ratio of the given resistance to the total series resistance.
We have derived the voltage-division principle for three resistances in series, but it applies for any
number of resistances as long as they are connected in series.
Example 2.3 Application of the Voltage-Division Principle
Find the voltages 
 and 
 in Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9 
Circuit for Example 2.3.
Solution 
Using the voltage-division principle, we find that 
 is the total voltage times the ratio of 
 to the
total resistance:
Similarly,
v1
v4
v1
R1
v1=R1R1+R2+R3+R4 vtotal=10001000+1000+2000+6000×15=1.5 V
v4=R4R1+R2+R3+R4 vtotal=60001000+1000+2000+6000×15=9 V

Notice that the largest voltage appears across the largest resistance in a series circuit.■
Current Division
The total current flowing into a parallel combination of resistances divides, and a fraction of the total
current flows through each resistance. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 2.10. The equivalent
resistance is given by
Figure 2.10 
Circuit used to derive the current-division principle.
The voltage across the resistances is given by
Now, we can find the current in each resistance:
and
We can summarize these results by stating the current-division principle: For two resistances in
parallel, the fraction of the total current flowing in a resistance is the ratio of the other resistance to the
sum of the two resistances. Notice that this principle applies only for two resistances. If we have more
than two resistances in parallel, we should combine resistances so we only have two before applying
the current-division principle.
For two resistances in parallel, the fraction of the total current flowing in a
Req=R1R2R1+R2
(2.27)
v=Reqitotal=R1R2R1+R2 itotal
(2.28)
i1=vR1=R2R1+R2 itotal
(2.29)
i2=vR2=R1R1+R2 itotal
(2.30)

resistance is the ratio of the other resistance to the sum of the two resistances.
An alternative approach is to work with conductances. For n conductances in parallel, it can be shown
that
and so forth. In other words, current division using conductances uses a formula with the same form as
the formula for voltage division using resistances.
Current division using conductances uses a formula with the same form as the
formula for voltage division using resistances.
Example 2.4 Applying the Current- and Voltage-Division Principles
Use the voltage-division principle to find the voltage 
 in Figure 2.11(a). Then find the source
current  and use the current-division principle to compute the current 
Figure 2.11 
Circuit for Example 2.4.
Solution 
i1=G1G1+G2+...+Gn itotal
i2=G2G1+G2+...+Gn itotal
vx
is
i3.

The voltage-division principle applies only for resistances in series. Therefore, we first must combine
 and 
 The equivalent resistance for the parallel combination of 
 and 
 is
The equivalent network is shown in Figure 2.11(b).
Now, we can apply the voltage-division principle to find 
 The voltage 
 is equal to the total
voltage times 
 divided by the total series resistance:
The source current  is given by
Now, we can use the current-division principle to find 
 The fraction of the source current  that
flows through 
 is 
 Thus, we have
As a check, we can also compute  another way:
Example 2.5 Application of the Current-Division Principle
Use the current-division principle to find the current  in Figure 2.12(a).
Figure 2.12 
Circuit for Example 2.5.
R2
R3.
R2
R3
Rx=R2R3R2+R3=30×6030+60=20 Ω
vx.
vx
Rx
vx=RxR1+Rx vs=2060+20×100=25 V
is
is=vsR1+Rx=10060+20=1.25 A
i3.
is
R3
R2/(R2+R3).
i3=R2R2+R3 is=3030+60×1.25=0.417 A
i3
i3=vxR3=2560=0.417 A
i1

The current-division principle applies for two resistances in parallel.
Therefore, our first step is to combine 
 and 
Solution 
The current-division principle applies for two resistances in parallel. Therefore, our first step is to
combine 
 and 
The resulting equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 2.12(b). Applying the current-division principle, we
have
Reworking the calculations using conductances, we have
Then, we compute the current
which is the same value that we obtained working with resistances. ■
Position Transducers Based on the Voltage-Division Principle
Transducers are used to produce a voltage (or sometimes a current) that is proportional to a physical
quantity of interest, such as distance, pressure, or temperature. For example, Figure 2.13 shows how a
voltage that is proportional to the rudder angle of a boat or aircraft can be obtained. As the rudder turns,
a sliding contact moves along a resistance such that 
 is proportional to the rudder angle 
 The total
resistance 
 is fixed. Thus, the output voltage is
R2
R3
R2
R3:
Req=R2R3R2+R3=30×6030+60=20 Ω
i1=ReqR1+Req is=2010+20 15=10 A
G1=1R1=100 mS, G2=1R2=33.33 mS, and G3=1R3=16.67 mS
i1=G1G1+G2+G3 is=100100+33.33+16.67 15=10 A
R2
θ.
R1+R2
vo=vs R2R1+R2=Kθ

Figure 2.13 
The voltage-division principle forms the basis for some position sensors. This figure shows a transducer
that produces an output voltage 
 proportional to the rudder angle 
where K is a constant of proportionality that depends on the source voltage 
 and the construction
details of the transducer. Many examples of transducers such as this are employed in all areas of
science and engineering.
Exercise 2.3 
Use the voltage-division principle to find the voltages labeled in Figure 2.14.
Figure 2.14 
Circuits for Exercise 2.3.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
Exercise 2.4 
Use the current-division principle to find the currents labeled in Figure 2.15
vo
θ.
vs
v1=10 V, v2=20 V, v3=30 V, v4=60 V;
v1=6.05 V,v2=  5.88 V,v4=8.07 V.

Figure 2.15 
Circuits for Exercise 2.4.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
i1=1 A, i3=2 A;
i1=i2=i3=1 A.

2.4 Node-Voltage Analysis
Although they are very important concepts, series/parallel equivalents and the current/voltage
division principles are not sufficient to solve all circuits.
The network analysis methods that we have studied so far are useful, but they do not apply to all networks. For
example, consider the circuit shown in Figure 2.16. We cannot solve this circuit by combining resistances in series
and parallel because no series or parallel combination of resistances exists in the circuit. Furthermore, the voltage-
division and current-division principles cannot be applied to this circuit. In this section, we learn node-voltage
analysis, which is a general technique that can be applied to any circuit.
Figure 2.16 
The first step in node analysis is to select a reference node and label the voltages at each of the other nodes.
Selecting the Reference Node
A node is a point at which two or more circuit elements are joined together. In node-voltage analysis, we first select
one of the nodes as the reference node. In principle, any node can be picked to be the reference node. However,
the solution is usually facilitated by selecting one end of a voltage source as the reference node. We will see why this
is true as we proceed.

For example, the circuit shown in Figure 2.16 has four nodes. Let us select the bottom node as the reference node.
We mark the reference node by the ground symbol, as shown in the figure.
Assigning Node Voltages
Next, we label the voltages at each of the other nodes. For example, the voltages at the three nodes are labeled
 and 
 in Figure 2.16. The voltage 
 is the voltage between node 1 and the reference node. The reference
polarity for 
 is positive at node 1 and negative at the reference node. Similarly, 
 is the voltage between node 2
and the reference node. The reference polarity for 
 is positive at node 2 and negative at the reference node. In fact,
the negative reference polarity for each of the node voltages is at the reference node. We say that 
 is the voltage at
node 1 with respect to the reference node.
The negative reference polarity for each of the node voltages is at the reference node.
Finding Element Voltages in Terms of the Node Voltages
In node-voltage analysis, we write equations and eventually solve for the node voltages. Once the node voltages
have been found, it is relatively easy to find the current, voltage, and power for each element in the circuit.
Once the node voltages have been determined, it is relatively easy to determine other
voltages and currents in the circuit.
For example, suppose that we know the values of the node voltages and we want to find the voltage across 
 with
its positive reference on the left-hand side. To avoid additional labels in Figure 2.16, we have made a second
drawing of the circuit, which is shown in Figure 2.17.  The node voltages and the voltage 
 across 
 are shown in
Figure 2.17. Notice that 
 and 
 are the voltages encountered in traveling around the closed path through
 and 
 Thus, these voltages must obey Kirchhoff's voltage law. Traveling around the loop clockwise and
summing voltages, we have
v1, v2,
v3
v1
v1
v2
v2
v1
R3
vx
R3
v2, vx,
v3
R4, R3,
R5.

Figure 2.17 
Assuming that we can determine the node voltages 
 and 
 we can use KVL to determine 
 and 
Then using Ohm's law, we can find the current in each of the resistances. Thus, the key problem is in determining the
node voltages.
This is the same circuit shown in Figure 2.16. We have redrawn it simply to avoid cluttering
the original diagram with the voltages 
 and 
 that are not involved in the final node
equations.
Solving for 
 we obtain
Thus, we can find the voltage across any element in the network as the difference between node voltages. (If one
end of an element is connected to the reference node, the voltage across the element is a node voltage.)
After the voltages are found, Ohm's law and KCL can be used to find the current in each element. Then, power can
be computed by taking the product of the voltage and current for each element.
Exercise 2.5 
In the circuit of Figure 2.17, find expressions for 
 and 
 in terms of the node voltages 
 and 
Answer 
v1, v2,
v3,
vx, vy,
vz.
vx, vy,
vz
−v2+vx+v3=0
vx,
vx=v2−v3
vy
vz
v1, v2,
v3.
vy=v2−v1, vz=v3−v1.

Writing KCL Equations in Terms of the Node Voltages
After choosing the reference node and assigning the voltage variables, we write equations that can be solved for the
node voltages. We demonstrate by continuing with the circuit of Figure 2.16.
After choosing the reference node and assigning the voltage variables, we write equations that
can be solved for the node voltages.
In Figure 2.16, the voltage 
 is the same as the source voltage 
(In this case, one of the node voltages is known without any effort. This is the advantage in selecting the reference
node at one end of an independent voltage source.)
Therefore, we need to determine the values of 
 and 
 and we must write two independent equations. We usually
start by trying to write current equations at each of the nodes corresponding to an unknown node voltage. For
example, at node 2 in Figure 2.16, the current leaving through 
 is given by
This is true because 
 is the voltage across 
 with its positive reference at node 2. Thus, the current 
 flows
from node 2 toward the reference node, which is away from node 2.
Next, referring to Figure 2.17, we see that the current flowing out of node 2 through 
 is given by 
 However,
we found earlier that 
 Thus, the current flowing out of node 2 through 
 is given by
To find the current flowing out of node n through a resistance toward node k, we subtract the
v1
vs:
v1=vs
v2
v3,
R4
v2R4
v2
R4
v2/R4
R3
vx/R3.
vx=v2−v3.
R3
v2−v3R3

voltage at node k from the voltage at node n and divide the difference by the resistance.
At this point, we pause in our analysis to make a useful observation. To find the current flowing out of node n through
a resistance toward node k, we subtract the voltage at node k from the voltage at node n and divide the difference by
the resistance. Thus, if 
 and 
 are the node voltages and R is the resistance connected between the nodes, the
current flowing from node n toward node k is given by
Applying this observation in Figure 2.16 to find the current flowing out of node 2 through 
 we have
[In Exercise 2.5, we found that 
 (see Figure 2.17). The current flowing to the left through 
 is 
Substitution yields the aforementioned expression.]
Of course, if the resistance is connected between node n and the reference node, the current away from node n
toward the reference node is simply the node voltage 
 divided by the resistance. For example, as we noted
previously, the current leaving node 2 through 
 is given by 
Now we apply KCL, adding all of the expressions for the currents leaving node 2 and setting the sum to zero. Thus,
we obtain
Writing the current equation at node 3 is similar. We try to follow the same pattern in writing each equation. Then, the
equations take a familiar form, and mistakes are less frequent. We usually write expressions for the currents leaving
the node under consideration and set the sum to zero. Applying this approach at node 3 of Figure 2.16, we have
In many networks, we can obtain all of the equations needed to solve for the node voltages by applying KCL to the
nodes at which the unknown voltages appear.
Example 2.6 Node-Voltage Analysis
Write equations that can be solved for the node voltages 
 and 
 shown in Figure 2.18.
vn
vk
vn−vkR
R2,
v2−v1R2
vy=v2−v1
R2
vy/R2.
vn
R4
v2/R4.
v2−v1R2+v2R4+v2−v3R3=0
v3−v1R1+v3R5+v3−v2R3=0
v1, v2,
v3

Figure 2.18 
Circuit for Example 2.6.
Solution 
We use KCL to write an equation at node 1:
Each term on the left-hand side of this equation represents a current leaving node 1. Summing the currents
leaving node 2, we have
Similarly, at node 3, we get
Here, the currents leaving node 3 are on the left-hand side and the current entering is on the right-hand side. ■
Exercise 2.6 
Use KCL to write equations at each node (except the reference node) for the circuit shown in Figure 2.19.
v1R1+v1−v2R2+is=0
v2−v1R2+v2R3+v2−v3R4=0
v3R5+v3−v2R4=is

Figure 2.19 
Circuit for Exercise 2.6.
Answer 
Circuit Equations in Standard Form
Once we have written the equations needed to solve for the node voltages, we put the equations into standard form.
We group the node-voltage variables on the left-hand sides of the equations and place terms that do not involve the
node voltages on the right-hand sides. For two node voltages, this eventually puts the node-voltage equations into
the following form:
If we have three unknown node voltages, the equations can be put into the form
We have chosen the letter g for the node-voltage coefficients because they are often (but not always) conductances
with units of siemens. Similarly, we have used i for the terms on the right-hand sides of the equations because they
are often currents.
In matrix form, the equations can be written as
in which we have
Node 1: v1−v3R1+v1−v2R2=iaNode 2: v2−v1R2+v2R3+v2−v3R4=0Node 3: v3R5+v3−v2R4+v3−v1R1+ib=0
g11v1+g12v2=i1
(2.31)
g21v1+g22v2=i2
(2.32)
g11v1+g12v2+g13v3=i1
(2.33)
g21v1+g22v2+g23v3=i2
(2.34)
g31v1+g32v2+g33v3=i3
(2.35)
GV=I
G=[g11g12g21g22] or G=[g11g12g13g21g22g23g31g32g33]

depending on whether we have two or three unknown node voltages. Also, V and I are column vectors:
As the number of nodes and node voltages increases, the dimensions of the matrices increase.
One way to solve for the node voltages is to find the inverse of G and then compute the solution vector as:
A Shortcut to Writing the Matrix Equations
If we put the node equations for the circuit of Exercise 2.6 (Figure 2.19) into matrix form, we obtain
Let us take a moment to compare the circuit in Figure 2.19 with the elements in this equation. First, look at the
elements on the diagonal of the G matrix, which are
We see that the diagonal elements of G are equal to the sums of the conductances connected to the corresponding
nodes. Next, notice the off diagonal terms:
In each case, 
 is equal to the negative of the conductance connected between node j and k. The terms in the I
matrix are the currents pushed into the corresponding nodes by the current sources.  These observations hold
whenever the network consists of resistances and independent current sources, assuming that we follow our usual
pattern in writing the equations.
Thus, if a circuit consists of resistances and independent current sources, we can use the following steps to rapidly
write the node equations directly in matrix form.
1. Make sure that the circuit contains only resistances and independent current sources.
2. The diagonal terms of G are the sums of the conductances connected to the corresponding nodes.
3. The off diagonal terms of G are the negatives of the conductances connected between the corresponding
nodes.
4. The elements of I are the currents pushed into the corresponding nodes by the current sources.
V=[v1v2] or V=[v1v2v3] and I=[i1i2] or I=[i1i2i3]
V=G−1 I
[1R1+1R2−1R2−1R1−1R21R2+1R3+1R4−1R4−1R1−1R41R1+1R4+1R5][v1v2v3]=[ia0−ib]
g11=1R1+1R2 g22=1R2+1R3+1R4 and g33=1R1+1R4+1R5
g12=−1R2 g13=−1R1 g21=−1R2 g23=−1R4 g31=−1R1 g32=−1R4
gjk

This is a shortcut way to write the node equations in matrix form, provided that the circuit
contains only resistances and independent current sources.
Keep in mind that if the network contains voltage sources or controlled sources this pattern does not hold.
Exercise 2.7 
Working directly from Figure 2.18 on page 63, write its node-voltage equations in matrix form
Answer 
Example 2.7 Node-Voltage Analysis
Write the node-voltage equations in matrix form for the circuit of Figure 2.20.
Figure 2.20 
Circuit for Example 2.7.
Solution 
Writing KCL at each node, we have
Manipulating the equations into standard form, we have
[1R1+1R2−1R20−1R21R2+1R3+1R4−1R40−1R41R4+1R5][v1v2v3]=[−is0is]
v15+v1−v24+3.5=0v2−v14+v22.5+v2−v35=3.5v3−v25+v310=2

Then, in matrix form, we obtain
Because the circuit contains no voltage sources or controlled sources, we could have used the shortcut method
to write the matrix form directly. For example, 
 is the sum of the conductances connected to node 1,
 is the negative of the conductance connected between nodes 1 and 2, 
 is the current pushed into
node 3 by the 2-A current source, and so forth. ■
Solving the Network Equations
After we have obtained the equations in standard form, we can solve them by a variety of methods, including
substitution, Gaussian elimination, and determinants. As an engineering student, you may own a powerful calculator
such as the TI-84 or TI-89 that has the ability to solve systems of linear equations. You should learn to do this by
practicing on the exercises and the problems at the end of this chapter.
In some situations, you may not be allowed to use one of the more advanced calculators or a notebook computer.
For example, only fairly simple scientific calculators are allowed on the Fundamentals of Engineering (FE)
Examination, which is the first step in becoming a registered professional engineer in the United States. The
calculator policy for the professional engineering examinations can be found at http://ncees.org/ . Thus, even if
you own an advanced calculator, you may wish to practice with one of those allowed in the FE Examination.
Exercise 2.8 
Use your calculator to solve Equation 2.36.
Answer 
Using MATLAB to Solve Network Equations
When you have access to a computer and MATLAB software, you have a very powerful system for engineering and
scientific calculations. This software is available to students at many engineering schools and is very likely to be
encountered in some of your other courses.
In this and the next several chapters, we illustrate the application of MATLAB to various aspects of circuit analysis,
0.45v1−0.25v2=−3.5−0.25v1+0.85v2−0.2v3=3.5−0.2v2+0.35v3=2
[   0.45−0.250−0.25   0.85−0.200−0.20   0.30][v1v2v3]=[−3.5   3.52]
(2.36)
g11=0.45
g12=−0.25
i3=2
v1=−5 V, v2=5 V, v3=10 V.

but we cannot possibly cover all of its many useful features in this book. If you are new to MATLAB, you can gain
access to a variety of online interactive tutorials at http://www.mathworks.com/academia/
student_center/tutorials/ . If you have already used the program, the MATLAB commands we present may
be familiar to you. In either case, you should be able to easily modify the examples we present to work out similar
circuit problems.
Next, we illustrate the solution for Equation 2.36 using MATLAB. Instead of using 
 to compute node
voltages, MATLAB documentation recommends using the command 
 which invokes a more accurate algorithm
for computing solutions to systems of linear equations.
The comments following the % sign are ignored by MATLAB. For improved clarity, we use a bold font for the input
commands, a regular font for comments, and a color font for the responses from MATLAB, otherwise the following
has the appearance of the MATLAB command screen for this problem. (>> is the MATLAB command prompt.)
>> clear % First we clear the work space.
>> % Then, we enter the coefficient matrix of Equation 2.36 with
>> % spaces between elements in each row and semicolons between rows.
>> G = [0.45 −0.25 0; −0.25 0.85 −0.2; 0 −0.2 0.30] 
G = 
  0.4500 −0.2500       0 
 −0.2500  0.8500 −0.2000 
 0 −0.2000  0.3000 
>> % Next, we enter the column vector for the right-hand side.
>> I = [−3.5; 3.5; 2]
I = 
 −3.5000 
 3.5000 
 2.0000 
>> % The MATLAB documentation recommends computing the node
>> % voltages using V = G\I instead of using V = inv(G)* I.
>> V = G\I
V = 
 −5.0000
 5.0000
 10.0000
Thus, we have 
 and 
 as you found when working Exercise 2.8 with your calculator.
V=G−1 I
V=G\I
v1=−5 V, v2=5 V,
v3=10 V,

Note: You can download m-files for some of the exercises and examples in this book that use MATLAB. See
Appendix E for information on how to do this.
Example 2.8 Node-Voltage Analysis
Solve for the node voltages shown in Figure 2.21 and determine the value of the current 
Figure 2.21 
Circuit for Example 2.8.
Solution 
Our first step in solving a circuit is to select the reference node and assign the node voltages. This has already
been done, as shown in Figure 2.21.
Next, we write equations. In this case, we can write a current equation at each node. This yields
Next, we place these equations into standard form:
In matrix form, the equations are
or 
 in which G represents the coefficient matrix of conductances, V is the column vector of node voltages,
and I is the column vector of currents on the right-hand side.
Here again, we could write the equations directly in standard or matrix form using the short cut method because
the circuit contains only resistances and independent current sources.
ix.
Node 1: v110+v1−v25+v1−v320=0
Node 2:  v2−v15+v2−v310=10
Node 3: v35+v3−v210+v3−v120=0
0.35v1−0.2v2−0.05v3=0
−0.2v1+0.3v2−0.10v3=10
−0.05v1−0.10v2+0.35v3=0
[0.35−0.2−0.05−0.20.3−0.1−0.05−0.10.35][v1v2v3]=[0100]
GV=I

The MATLAB solution is:
>> clear 
>> G = [0.35 −0.2 −0.05; −0.2 0.3 −0.1; −0.05 −0.1 0.35]; 
>> % A semicolon at the end of a command suppresses the
>> % MATLAB response.
>> I = [0; 10; 0]; 
>> V = G\I 
V = 
   45.4545 
   72.7273 
   27.2727 
>> % Finally, we calculate the current.
>> Ix = (V(1) − V(3))/20 
Ix = 
    0.9091■ 
Exercise 2.9 
Repeat the analysis of the circuit of Example 2.8, using the reference node and node voltages shown in Figure 2.22.
Figure 2.22 
Circuit of Example 2.8 with a different choice for the reference node. See Exercise 2.9.
a. First write the network equations.
b. Put the network equations into standard form.
c. Solve for 
 and 
 (The values will be different than those we found in Example 2.8 because 
 and
 are not the same voltages in the two figures.)
v1, v2,
v3.
v1, v2,
v3

d. Find 
 (Of course,  is the same in both figures, so it should have the same value.)
Answer 
c. 
d. 
Circuits with Voltage Sources
When a circuit contains a single voltage source, we can often pick the reference node at one end of the source, and
then we have one less unknown node voltage for which to solve.
Example 2.9 Node-Voltage Analysis
Write the equations for the network shown in Figure 2.23 and put them into standard form.
Figure 2.23 
Circuit for Example 2.9.
Solution 
Notice that we have selected the reference node at the bottom end of the voltage source. Thus, the voltage at
node 3 is known to be 10 V, and we do not need to assign a variable for that node.
Writing current equations at nodes 1 and 2, we obtain
ix.
ix
a. v1−v320+v15+v1−v210=0
v2−v110+10+v2−v35=0
v3−v120+v310+v3−v25=0
b. 0.35v1−0.10v2−0.05v3=0−0.10v1+0.30v2−0.20v3=−10−0.05v1−0.20v2+0.35v3=0
v1=−27.27, v2=−72.73, v3=−45.45
ix=0.909 A

Now if we group terms and place the constants on the right-hand sides of the equations, we have
Thus, we have obtained the equations needed to solve for 
 and 
 in standard form. ■
Exercise 2.10 
Solve the equations of Example 2.9 for 
 and 
Answer 
Exercise 2.11 
Solve for the node voltages 
 and 
 in the circuit of Figure 2.24.
Figure 2.24 
Circuit for Exercise 2.11.
Answer 
Sometimes, the pattern for writing node-voltage equations that we have illustrated so far must be modified. For
example, consider the network and node voltages shown in Figure 2.25. Notice that 
 because of the 15-V
source connected between node 3 and the reference node. Therefore, we need two equations relating the unknowns
 and 
v1−v25+v1−102=1v25+v2−1010+v2−v15=0
0.7v1−0.2v2=6−0.2v1+0.5v2=1
v1
v2
v1
v2.
v1=10.32 V, v2=6.129 V.
v1
v2
v1=6.77 V, v2=4.19 V.
v3=−15 V
v1
v2.

Figure 2.25 
A supernode is formed by drawing a dashed line enclosing several nodes and any elements connected between
them.
If we try to write a current equation at node 1, we must include a term for the current through the 10-V source. We
could assign an unknown for this current, but then we would have a higher-order system of equations to solve.
Especially if we are solving the equations manually, we want to minimize the number of unknowns. For this circuit, it
is not possible to write a current equation in terms of the node voltages for any single node (even the reference node)
because a voltage source is connected to each node.
Another way to obtain a current equation is to form a supernode. This is done by drawing a dashed line around
several nodes, including the elements connected between them. This is shown in Figure 2.25. Two supernodes are
indicated, one enclosing each of the voltage sources.
Another way to state Kirchhoff's current law is that the net current flowing through any closed
surface must equal zero.
We can state Kirchhoff's current law in a slightly more general form than we have previously: The net current flowing
through any closed surface must equal zero. Thus, we can apply KCL to a supernode. For example, for the
supernode enclosing the 10-V source, we sum currents leaving and obtain
Each term on the left-hand side of this equation represents a current leaving the supernode through one of the
resistors. Thus, by enclosing the 10-V source within the supernode, we have obtained a current equation without
introducing a new variable for the current in the source.
v1R2+v1−(−15)R1+v2R4+v2−(−15)R3=0
(2.37)

Next, we might be tempted to write another current equation for the other supernode. However, we would find that
the equation is equivalent to the one already written. In general, we obtain dependent equations if we use all of the
nodes in writing current equations. Nodes 1 and 2 were part of the first supernode, while node 3 and the reference
node are part of the second supernode. Thus, in writing equations for both supernodes, we would have used all four
nodes in the network.
We obtain dependent equations if we use all of the nodes in a network to write KCL equations.
If we tried to solve for the node voltages by using substitution, at some point all of the terms would drop out of the
equations and we would not be able to solve for those voltages. In MATLAB, you will receive a warning that the G
matrix is singular, in other words, its determinant is zero. If this happens, we know that we should return to writing
equations and find another equation to use in the solution. This will not happen if we avoid using all of the nodes in
writing current equations.
There is a way to obtain an independent equation for the network under consideration. We can use KVL because 
the 10-V source, and 
 form a closed loop. This is illustrated in Figure 2.26, where we have used arrows to indicate
the polarities of 
 and 
 Traveling clockwise and summing the voltages around the loop, we obtain
Figure 2.26 
Node voltages 
 and 
 and the 10-V source form a closed loop to which KVL can be applied. (This is the same
circuit as that of Figure 2.25.)
Equations 2.37 and 2.38 form an independent set that can be used to solve for 
 and 
 (assuming that the
resistance values are known).
v1,
v2
v1
v2.
v1
v2
−v1−10+v2=0
(2.38)
v1
v2

When a voltage source is connected between nodes so that current equations cannot be
written at the individual nodes, first write a KVL equation, including the voltage source, and
then enclose the voltage source in a supernode and write a KCL equation for the supernode.
Exercise 2.12 
Write the current equation for the supernode that encloses the 15-V source in Figure 2.25. Show that your equation
is equivalent to Equation 2.37.
Exercise 2.13 
Write a set of independent equations for the node voltages shown in Figure 2.27.
Figure 2.27 
Circuit for Exercise 2.13.
Answer 
KVL:
KCL for the supernode enclosing the 10-V source:
KCL for node 3:
−v1+10+v2=0
v1R1+v1−v3R2+v2−v3R3=1
v3−v1R2+v3−v2R3+v3R4=0

KCL at the reference node:
For independence, the set must include the KVL equation. Any two of the three KCL equations can be used to
complete the three-equation set. (The three KCL equations use all of the network nodes and, therefore, do not form
an independent set.)
Circuits with Controlled Sources
Controlled sources present a slight additional complication of the node-voltage technique. (Recall that the value of a
controlled source depends on a current or voltage elsewhere in the network.) In applying node-voltage analysis, first
we write equations exactly as we have done for networks with independent sources. Then, we express the controlling
variable in terms of the node-voltage variables and substitute into the network equations. We illustrate with two
examples.
Example 2.10 Node-Voltage Analysis with a Dependent Source
Write an independent set of equations for the node voltages shown in Figure 2.28.
Figure 2.28 
Circuit containing a current-controlled current source. See Example 2.10.
Solution 
First, we write KCL equations at each node, including the current of the controlled source just as if it were an
ordinary current source:
v1R1+v3R4=1
v1−v2R1=is+2ix
(2.39)
(2.40)

Next, we find an expression for the controlling variable  in terms of the node voltages. Notice that  is the
current flowing away from node 3 through 
 Thus, we can write
Finally, we use Equation 2.42 to substitute into Equations 2.39, 2.40, and 2.41. Thus, we obtain the required
equation set:
Assuming that the value of  and the resistances are known, we could put this set of equations into standard
form and solve for 
 and 
■
Example 2.11 Node-Voltage Analysis with a Dependent Source
Write an independent set of equations for the node voltages shown in Figure 2.29.
Figure 2.29 
Circuit containing a voltage-controlled voltage source. See Example 2.11.
Solution 
First, we ignore the fact that the voltage source is a dependent source and write equations just as we would for a
circuit with independent sources. We cannot write a current equation at either node 1 or node 2, because of the
v2−v1R1+v2R2+v2−v3R3=0
v3−v2R3+v3R4+2ix=0
(2.41)
ix
ix
R3.
ix=v3−v2R3
(2.42)
v1−v2R1=is+2 v3−v2R3
(2.43)
v2−v1R1+v2R2+v2−v3R3=0
(2.44)
v3−v2R3+v3R4+2 v3−v2R3=0
(2.45)
is
v1, v2,
v3.

voltage source connected between them. However, we can write a KVL equation:
Then, we use KCL to write current equations. For a supernode enclosing the controlled voltage source,
For node 3,
For the reference node,
Of course, these current equations are dependent because we have used all four nodes in writing them. We must
use Equation 2.46 and two of the KCL equations to form an independent set. However, Equation 2.46 contains
the controlling variable 
 which must be eliminated before we have equations in terms of the node voltages.
Thus, our next step is to write an expression for the controlling variable 
 in terms of the node voltages. Notice
that 
 and 
 form a closed loop. Traveling clockwise and summing voltages, we have
Solving for 
 we obtain
Now if we substitute into Equation 2.46, we get
Equation 2.49 along with any two of the KCL equations forms an independent set that can be solved for the node
voltages. ■
Using the principles we have discussed in this section, we can write node-voltage equations for any network
consisting of sources and resistances. Thus, given a computer or calculator to help in solving the equations, we can
compute the currents and voltages for any network.
−v1+0.5vx+v2=0
(2.46)
v1R2+v1−v3R1+v2−v3R3=is
v3R4+v3−v2R3+v3−v1R1=0
(2.47)
v1R2+v3R4=is
(2.48)
vx,
vx
v1, vx,
v3
−v1−vx+v3=0
vx,
vx=v3−v1
v1=0.5(v3−v1)+v2
(2.49)

Step-by-Step Node-Voltage Analysis
Next, we summarize the steps in analyzing circuits by the node-voltage technique:
1. First, combine any series resistances to reduce the number of nodes. Then, select a reference node and
assign variables for the unknown node voltages. If the reference node is chosen at one end of an
independent voltage source, one node voltage is known at the start, and fewer need to be computed.
2. Write network equations. First, use KCL to write current equations for nodes and supernodes. Write as many
current equations as you can without using all of the nodes, including those within supernodes. Then if you do
not have enough equations because of voltage sources connected between nodes, use KVL to write
additional equations.
3. If the circuit contains dependent sources, find expressions for the controlling variables in terms of the node
voltages. Substitute into the network equations, and obtain equations having only the node voltages as
unknowns.
4. Put the equations into standard form and solve for the node voltages.
5. Use the values found for the node voltages to calculate any other currents or voltages of interest.
Example 2.12 Node Voltage Analysis
Use node voltages to solve for the value of  in the circuit of Figure 2.30(a). (This rather complex circuit has
been contrived mainly to display all of the steps listed above.)
Figure 2.30 
Circuit of Example 2.12.
Step 1
ix

Solution 
First, we combine the 
 and 
 resistances in series to eliminate nodes A and G. Then, we select node
C at one end of the 20-V source as the reference node. Thus, we know that the voltage at node F is 20 V. (Of
course, any node could be chosen for the reference node, but if we chose node B, for example, we would have
one more variable in the equations.) The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 2.30(b).
Step 2
We cannot write KCL equations at any single node, except node B, because each of the other nodes has a
voltage source connected. The KCL equation at node B is
Multiplying all terms by 30 and rearranging, we have
Next, we form a super node enclosing the controlled voltage source as indicated in Figure 2.30(b). This results in
(Another option would have been a super node enclosing the 20 V source.)
Multiplying all terms by 60 and rearranging, we have
No options for another KCL equation exist without using all of the circuit nodes and producing dependent
equations.
Thus, we write a KVL equation starting from the reference node to one end of the controlled voltage source,
1 Ω, 2 Ω,
3 Ω
vB−206+vB10+vB−vD15=0
10vB−2vD=100
vE−2010+vD20+vD−vB15=0
−4vB+7vD+6vE=120

through the source, and back to the reference node. This results in 
Step 3
Next, we note that  is the current through and 
 is the voltage across the 
 resistance. The current
reference enters the negative end of the voltage, so we have 
 Combining these two equations
eventually results in
Step 4
Thus, we have these three equations to solve for the node voltages:
Solving these three equations results in 
Then, we have 
■
Exercise 2.14 
Use the node-voltage technique to solve for the currents labeled in the circuits shown in Figure 2.31.
vE=10ix+vD.
ix
vD
20-Ω
vD=−20 ix.
vD−2vE=0
10vB−2vD=100
−4vB+7vD+6vE=120
vD−2vE=0
vD=17.3913 V.
ix=−vD/20=−0.8696 A.

Figure 2.31 
Circuits for Exercise 2.14.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
Exercise 2.15 
Use the node-voltage technique to solve for the values of  and  in Figure 2.32.
Figure 2.32 
Circuits for Exercise 2.15.
Answer 
Using the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox to Obtain Symbolic Solutions
If the Symbolic Toolbox is included with your version of MATLAB, you can use it to solve node voltage and other
equations symbolically. We illustrate by solving Equations 2.43, 2.44, and 2.45 from Example 2.10 on page 74.
ia=1.33 A;
ib=−0.259 A.
ix
iy
ix=0.5 A, iy=2.31 A.

>> % First we clear the work space.
>> clear all 
>> % Next, we identify the symbols used in the
>> % equations to be solved.
>> syms V1 V2 V3 R1 R2 R3 R4 Is 
>> % Then, we enter the equations into the solve command
>> % followed by the variables for which we wish to solve.
>> [V1, V2, V3] = solve((V1 − V2)/R1 == Is + 2*(V3 − V2)/R3, ...
                  (V2 − V1)/R1 + V2/R2 + (V2 − V3)/R3 == 0, ...
                  (V3 − V2)/R3 + V3/R4 + 2*(V3 − V2)/R3 == 0, ...
                  V1, V2, V3) 
V1 = 
(Is*(R1*R2 + R1*R3 + 3*R1*R4 + R2*R3 + 3*R2*R4))/(3*R2 + R3 + 3*R4) 
V2 = 
(Is*R2*(R3 + 3*R4))/(3*R2 + R3 + 3*R4) 
V3 = (3*Is*R2*R4)/(3*R2 + R3 +3*R4) 
>> % The solve command gives the answers, but in a form that is
>> % somewhat difficult to read.
>> % A more readable version of the answers is obtained using the
>> % pretty command. We combine the three commands on one line
>> % by placing commas between them.
>> pretty(V1), pretty(V2), pretty(V3)
   
   
   
(Here we have shown the results obtained using a particular version of MATLAB; other versions may give results
different in appearance but equivalent mathematically.) In more standard mathematical format, the results are:
Checking Answers
As usual, it is a good idea to apply some checks to the answers. First of all, make sure that the answers have proper
units, which are volts in this case. If the units don't check, look to see if any of the numerical values entered in the
equations have units. Referring to the circuit (Figure 2.28 on page 74), we see that the only numerical parameter
entered into the equations was the gain of the current-controlled current source, which has no units.
Is R1 R2+ Is R1 R3+3 Is R1 R4+ Is R2 R3+3 Is R2 R43 R2 + R3 + 3 R4
 Is R2 R3+3 Is R2 R43 R2 + R3 + 3 R4
3 Is R2 R43 R2 + R3 + 3 R4
v1=isR1R2+isR1R3+3isR1R4+isR2R3+3isR2R43R2+R3+3R4v2=isR2R3+3isR2R43R2+R3+3R4and v3=3isR2R43R2+R3+3R4

Again referring to the circuit diagram, we can see that we should have 
 for 
 and we check the results to
see that this is the case. Another check is obtained by observing that we should have 
 for 
 Still another
check of the results comes from observing that, in the limit as 
 approaches infinity, we should have 
 (so the
controlled current source becomes an open circuit), 
 and 
 Various other checks of a
similar nature can be applied. This type of checking may not guarantee correct results, but it can find a lot of errors.
Exercise 2.16 
Use the symbolic math features of MATLAB to solve Equations 2.47, 2.48, and 2.49 for the node voltages in
symbolic form.
Answer 
Depending on the version of MATLAB and the Symbolic Toolbox that you use, your answers may have a different
appearance but should be algebraically equivalent to these.
v2=v3
R3=0,
v3=0
R4=0.
R3
ix=0,
v3=0, v1=is(R1+R2),
v2=isR2.
v1=2isR1 R2R3+3isR1 R2R4+2isR2 R3R43 R1 R2+2 R1 R3+3 R1 R4+2 R2 R3+2 R3 R4
v2=3isR1 R2R3+3isR1 R2R4+2isR2 R3R43 R1 R2+2 R1 R3+3 R1 R4+2 R2 R3+2 R3 R4
v3=3isR1 R2R4+2isR2 R3R43 R1 R2+2 R1 R3+3 R1 R4+2 R2 R3+2 R3 R4

2.5 Mesh-Current Analysis
In this section, we show how to analyze networks by using another general technique, known as mesh-
current analysis. Networks that can be drawn on a plane without having one element (or conductor)
crossing over another are called planar networks. On the other hand, circuits that must be drawn with
one or more elements crossing others are said to be nonplanar. We consider only planar networks.
Let us start by considering the planar network shown in Figure 2.33(a). Suppose that the source voltages
and resistances are known and that we wish to solve for the currents. We first write equations for the
currents shown in Figure 2.33(a), which are called branch currents because a separate current is defined
in each branch of the network. However, we will eventually see that using the mesh currents illustrated in
Figure 2.33(b) makes the solution easier.
Figure 2.33 
Circuit for illustrating the mesh-current method of circuit analysis.
Three independent equations are needed to solve for the three branch currents shown in Figure 2.33(a).
In general, the number of independent KVL equations that can be written for a planar network is equal to
the number of open areas defined by the network layout. For example, the circuit of Figure 2.33(a) has
two open areas: one defined by 
 and 
 while the other is defined by 
 and 
 Thus, for
this network, we can write only two independent KVL equations. We must employ KCL to obtain the third
equation.
Application of KVL to the loop consisting of 
 and 
 yields
Similarly, for the loop consisting of 
 and 
 we get
vA, R1,
R3,
R3, R2,
vB.
vA, R1,
R3
R1i1+R3i3=vA
(2.50)
R3, R2,
vB,
−R3i3+R2i2=−vB
(2.51)

Applying KCL to the node at the top end of 
 we have
Next, we solve Equation 2.52 for  and substitute into Equations 2.50 and 2.51. This yields the following
two equations:
Thus, we have used the KCL equation to reduce the KVL equations to two equations in two unknowns.
Now, consider the mesh currents  and  shown in Figure 2.33(b). As indicated in the figure, mesh
currents are considered to flow around closed paths. Hence, mesh currents automatically satisfy KCL.
When several mesh currents flow through one element, we consider the current in that element to be the
algebraic sum of the mesh currents. Thus, assuming a reference direction pointing downward, the current
in 
 is 
 Thus, 
 Now if we follow  around its loop and apply KVL, we get Equation
2.53 directly. Similarly, following 
 we obtain Equation 2.54 directly.
When several mesh currents flow through one element, we consider the current in
that element to be the algebraic sum of the mesh currents.
Because mesh currents automatically satisfy KCL, some work is saved in writing and solving the network
equations. The circuit of Figure 2.33 is fairly simple, and the advantage of mesh currents is not great.
However, for more complex networks, the advantage can be quite significant.
Choosing the Mesh Currents
For a planar circuit, we can choose the current variables to flow through the elements around the periphery
of each of the open areas of the circuit diagram. For consistency, we usually define the mesh currents to
flow clockwise.
R3,
i1=i2+i3
(2.52)
i3
R1i1+R3(i1−i2)=vA
(2.53)
−R3(i1−i2)+R2i2=−vB
(2.54)
i1
i2
R3
(i1−i2).
v3=R3(i1−i2).
i1
i2,

Two networks and suitable choices for the mesh currents are shown in Figure 2.34. When a network is
drawn with no crossing elements, it resembles a window, with each open area corresponding to a pane of
glass. Sometimes it is said that the mesh currents are defined by "soaping the window panes."
Figure 2.34 
Two circuits and their mesh-current variables.
Keep in mind that, if two mesh currents flow through a circuit element, we consider the current in that
element to be the algebraic sum of the mesh currents. For example, in Figure 2.34(a), the current in 
referenced to the left is 
 Furthermore, the current referenced upward in 
 is 
We usually choose the ­current variables to flow clockwise around the periphery of
each of the open areas of the circuit diagram.
Exercise 2.17 
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 2.34(b). In terms of the mesh currents, find the current in
a. 
 referenced upward;
b. 
 referenced to the right;
c. 
 referenced downward;
d. 
 referenced upward.
R2
i3−i1.
R3
i2−i1.
R2
R4
R8
R8

Answer 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
 [Notice that the answer for part (d) is the negative of the answer for part (c).]
Writing Equations to Solve for Mesh Currents
If a network contains only resistances and independent voltage sources, we can write the required
equations by following each current around its mesh and applying KVL. (We do not need to apply KCL
because the mesh currents flow out of each node that they flow into.)
Example 2.13 Mesh-Current Analysis
Write the equations needed to solve for the mesh currents in Figure 2.34(a).
Solution 
Using a pattern in solving networks by the mesh-current method helps to avoid errors. Part of the
pattern that we use is to select the mesh currents to flow clockwise. Then, we write a KVL equation for
each mesh, going around the meshes clockwise. As usual, we add a voltage if its positive reference is
encountered first in traveling around the mesh, and we subtract the voltage if the negative reference is
encountered first. Our pattern is always to take the first end of each resistor encountered as the
positive reference for its voltage. Thus, we are always adding the resistor voltages.
If a network contains only resistances and independent voltage sources, we can
write the required equations by following each current around its mesh and
applying KVL.
For example, in mesh 1 of Figure 2.34(a), we first encounter the left-hand end of 
 The voltage
across 
 referenced positive on its left-hand end is 
 Similarly, we encounter the top end of
i4−i1;
i2−i1;
i3−i4;
i4−i3.
R2.
R2
R2(i1−i3).

 first, and the voltage across 
 referenced positive at the top end is 
 By using this
pattern, we add a term for each resistor in the KVL equation, consisting of the resistance times the
current in the mesh under consideration minus the current in the adjacent mesh (if any). Using this
pattern for mesh 1 of Figure 2.34(a), we have
Similarly, for mesh 2, we obtain
Finally, for mesh 3, we have
Notice that we have taken the positive reference for the voltage across 
 at the top in writing the
equation for mesh 1 and at the bottom for mesh 3. This is not an error because the terms for 
 in the
two equations are opposite in sign.
In standard form, the equations become:
In matrix form, we have
Often, we use R to represent the coefficient matrix, I to represent the column vector of mesh currents,
and V to represent the column vector of the terms on the right-hand sides of the equations in standard
form. Then, the mesh-current equations are represented as:
We refer to the element of the ith row and jth column of R as 
Exercise 2.18 
Write the equations for the mesh currents in Figure 2.34(b) and put them into matrix form.
Answer Following each mesh current in turn, we obtain
R3
R3
R3(i1−i2).
R2(i1−i3)+R3(i1−i2)−vA=0
R3(i2−i1)+R4i2+vB=0
R2(i3−i1)+R1i3−vB=0
R3
R3
(R2+R3)i1−R3i2−R2i3=vA            −R3i1+(R3+R4)i2=−vB        −R2i1+(R1+R2)i3=vB
[(R2+R3)−R3−R2−R3(R3+R4)0−R20(R1+R2)][i1i2i3]=[vA−vBvB]
RI=V
rij.

Solving Mesh Equations
After we write the mesh-current equations, we can solve them by using the methods that we discussed in
Section 2.4 for the node-voltage approach. We illustrate with a simple example.
Example 2.14 Mesh-Current Analysis
Solve for the current in each element of the circuit shown in Figure 2.35.
Figure 2.35 
Circuit of Example 2.14.
Solution 
First, we select the mesh currents. Following our standard pattern, we define the mesh currents to flow
clockwise around each mesh of the circuit. Then, we write a KVL equation around mesh 1:
For meshes 2 and 3, we have:
Putting the equations into standard form, we have:
R1i1+R2(i1−i4)+R4(i1−i2)−vA=0R5i2+R4(i2−i1)+R6(i2−i3)=0R7i3+R6(i3−i2)+R8(i3−i4)=0R3i4+R2(i4−i1)+R8(i4−i3)=0
[(R1+R2+R4)−R40−R2−R4(R4+R5+R6)−R600−R6(R6+R7+R8)−R8−R20−R8(R2+R3+R8)][i1i2i3i4]=[vA000]
(2.55)
20(i1−i3)+10(i1−i2)−70=0
(2.56)
10(i2−i1)+12(i2−i3)+42=0
(2.57)
20(i3−i1)+14i3+12(i3−i2)=0
(2.58)

In matrix form, the equations become:
These equations can be solved in a variety of ways. We will demonstrate using MATLAB. We use R for
the coefficient matrix, because the coefficients often are resistances. Similarly, we use V for the
column vector for the right-hand side of the equations and I for the column vector of the mesh currents.
The commands and results are:
>> R = [30 −10 −20; −10 22 −12; −20 −12 46]; 
>> V = [70; −42; 0]; 
>> I = R\V % Try to avoid using i, which represents the square root of
>> % −1 in MATLAB.
I = 
 4.0000
 1.0000 
 2.0000 
Thus, the values of the mesh currents are 
 and 
 Next, we can find the current in
any element. For example, the current flowing downward in the 
 resistance is 
 ■
Exercise 2.19 
Use mesh currents to solve for the current flowing through the 
 resistance in Figure 2.36. Check your
answer by combining resistances in series and parallel to solve the circuit. Check a second time by using
node voltages.
Figure 2.36 
30i1−10i2−20i3=70
(2.59)
−10i1+22i2−12i3=−42
(2.60)
−20i1−12i2+46i3=0
(2.61)
[30−10−20−1022−12−20−1246][i1i2i3]=[70−420]
i1=4 A, i2=1 A,
i3=2 A.
10-Ω
i1−i2=3 A.
10-Ω

Circuit of Exercise 2.19.
Answer The current through the 
 resistance is 5 A.
Exercise 2.20 
Use mesh currents to solve for the current flowing through the 
 resistance in Figure 2.24 on page 72.
Answer The current is 1.613 A directed toward the right.
Writing Mesh Equations Directly in Matrix Form
This is a shortcut way to write the mesh equations in matrix form, provided that the
circuit contains only resistances and independent voltage sources.
If a circuit contains only resistances and independent voltage sources, and if we select the mesh currents
flowing clockwise, the mesh equations can be obtained directly in matrix form using these steps:
1. Make sure that the circuit contains only resistances and independent voltage sources. Select all of
the mesh currents to flow in the clockwise direction.
2. Write the sum of the resistances contained in each mesh as the corresponding element on the
main diagonal of R. In other words,  equals the sum of the resistances encountered in going
around mesh j.
3. Insert the negatives of the resistances common to the corresponding meshes as the off diagonal
terms of R. Thus, for 
 the elements  and  are the same and are equal to negative of the sum
of the resistances common to meshes i and j.
4. For each element of the V matrix, go around the corresponding mesh clockwise, subtracting the
values of voltage sources for which we encounter the positive reference first and adding the values
of voltage sources for which we encounter the negative reference first. (We have reversed the
rules for adding or subtracting the voltage source values from what we used when writing KVL
equations because the elements of V correspond to terms on the opposite side of the KVL
equations.)
10-Ω
2-Ω
rjj
i≠j,
rij
rji

Keep in mind that this procedure does not apply to circuits having current sources or controlled sources.
Example 2.15 Writing Mesh Equations Directly in Matrix Form
Write the mesh equations directly in matrix form for the circuit of Figure 2.37.
Figure 2.37 
Circuit of Example 2.15.
Solution 
The matrix equation is:
Notice that mesh 1 includes 
 and 
 so the 
 element of R is the sum of these resistances.
Similarly, mesh 2 contains 
 and 
 so 
 is the sum of these resistances. Because 
 is
common to meshes 1 and 2, we have 
 Similar observations can be made for the other
elements of R.
As we go around mesh 1 clockwise, we encounter the positive reference for 
 first and the negative
reference for 
 first, so we have 
 and so forth.■
Exercise 2.21 
Examine the circuit of Figure 2.34(a) on page 82, and write its mesh equations directly in matrix form.
Answer 
Mesh Currents in Circuits Containing Current Sources
[(R2+R4+R5)−R2−R5−R2(R1+R2+R3)−R3−R5−R3(R3+R5+R6)][i1i2i3]=[−vA+vBvA−vB]
R2, R4,
R5,
r11
R1, R2,
R3,
r22
R2
r12=r21=−R2.
vA
vB
v1=−vA+vB,
[(R2+R3)−R3−R2−R3(R3+R4)0−R20(R1+R2)][i1i2i3]=[vA−vBvB]

Recall that a current source forces a specified current to flow through its terminals, but the voltage across
its terminals is not predetermined. Instead, the voltage across a current source depends on the circuit to
which the source is connected. Often, it is not easy to write an expression for the voltage across a current
source. A common mistake made by beginning students is to assume that the voltages across current
sources are zero.
A common mistake made by beginning students is to assume that the voltages
across current sources are zero.
Consequently, when a circuit contains a current source, we must depart from the pattern that we use for
circuits consisting of voltage sources and resistances. First, consider the circuit of Figure 2.38. As usual,
we have defined the mesh currents flowing clockwise. If we were to try to write a KVL equation for mesh 1,
we would need to include an unknown for the voltage across the current source. Because we do not wish
to increase the number of unknowns in our equations, we avoid writing KVL equations for loops that
include current sources. In the circuit in Figure 2.38, we have defined the current in the current source as
 However, we know that this current is 2 A. Thus, we can write
Figure 2.38 
In this circuit, we have 
The second equation needed can be obtained by applying KVL to mesh 2, which yields
Equations 2.62 and 2.63 can readily be solved for 
 Notice that in this case the presence of a current
source facilitates the solution.
i1.
i1=2 A.
i1=2 A
(2.62)
10(i2−i1)+5i2+10=0
(2.63)
i2.

Now let us consider the somewhat more complex situation shown in Figure 2.39. As usual, we have
defined the mesh currents flowing clockwise. We cannot write a KVL equation around mesh 1 because the
voltage across the 5-A current source is unknown (and we do not want to increase the number of
unknowns in our equations). A solution is to combine meshes 1 and 2 into a supermesh. In other words,
we write a KVL equation around the periphery of meshes 1 and 2 combined. This yields
Figure 2.39 
A circuit with a current source common to two meshes.
Next, we can write a KVL equation for mesh 3:
Finally, we recognize that we have defined the current in the current source referenced upward as 
However, we know that the current flowing upward through the current source is 5 A. Thus, we have
It is important to realize that Equation 2.66 is not a KCL equation. Instead, it simply states that we have
defined the current referenced upward through the current source in terms of the mesh currents as 
but this current is known to be 5 A. Equations 2.64, 2.65, and 2.66 can be solved for the mesh currents.
It is important to realize that Equation 2.66 is not a KCL equation.
i1+2(i1−i3)+4(i2−i3)+10=0
(2.64)
3i3+4(i3−i2)+2(i3−i1)=0
(2.65)
i2−i1.
i2−i1=5
(2.66)
i2−i1,

Exercise 2.22 
Write the equations needed to solve for the mesh currents in Figure 2.40.
Figure 2.40 
The circuit for Exercise 2.22.
Answer 
Exercise 2.23 
Write the equations needed to solve for the mesh currents in Figure 2.41. Then solve for the currents.
Figure 2.41 
The circuit for Exercise 2.23.
Answer The equations are 
 and 
 Solving, we have 
 and 
Circuits with Controlled Sources
Controlled sources present a slight additional complication to the mesh-current technique. First, we write
equations exactly as we have done for networks with independent sources. Then, we express the
i1=−5 A10(i2−i1)+5i2−100=0
i2−i1=1
5i1+10i2+20−10=0.
i1=−4/3 A
i2=−1/3 A.

controlling variables in terms of the mesh-current variables and substitute into the network equations. We
illustrate with an example.
Example 2.16 Mesh-Current Analysis with Controlled Sources
Solve for the currents in the circuit of Figure 2.42(a), which contains a voltage-­controlled current
source common to the two meshes.
Figure 2.42 
A circuit with a voltage-controlled current source. See Example 2.16.
Solution 
First, we write equations for the mesh currents as we have done for independent sources. Since there
is a current source common to mesh 1 and mesh 2, we start by combining the meshes to form a
supermesh and write a voltage equation:
Then, we write an expression for the source current in terms of the mesh currents:
Next, we see that the controlling voltage is
Using Equation 2.58 to substitute for 
 in Equation 2.57, we have
Finally, we put Equations 2.67 and 2.70 into standard form, resulting in
−20+4i1+6i2+2i2=0
(2.67)
avx=0.25vx=i2−i1
(2.68)
vx=2i2
(2.69)
vx
i22=i2−i1
(2.70)
4i1+8i2=20
(2.71)

Solving these equations yields 
 and 
 ■
Using the principles we have discussed in this section, we can write mesh-current equations for any planar
network consisting of sources and resistances.
Step-by-Step Mesh-Current Analysis
Next, we summarize the steps in analyzing planar circuits by the mesh-current technique:
Here is a convenient step-by-step guide to mesh-current analysis.
1. If necessary, redraw the network without crossing conductors or elements. Consider combining
resistances in parallel to reduce circuit complexity. Then, define the mesh currents flowing around
each of the open areas defined by the network. For consistency, we usually select a clockwise
direction for each of the mesh currents, but this is not a requirement.
2. Write network equations, stopping after the number of equations is equal to the number of mesh
currents. First, use KVL to write voltage equations for meshes that do not contain current sources.
Next, if any current sources are present, write expressions for their currents in terms of the mesh
currents. Finally, if a current source is common to two meshes, write a KVL equation for the
supermesh.
3. If the circuit contains dependent sources, find expressions for the controlling variables in terms of
the mesh currents. Substitute into the network equations, and obtain equations having only the
mesh currents as unknowns.
4. Put the equations into standard form. Solve for the mesh currents by use of determinants or other
means.
5. Use the values found for the mesh currents to calculate any other currents or voltages of interest.
Example 2.17 Mesh Current Analysis
Use mesh currents to solve for the value of 
 in the circuit of Figure 2.43(a). (This rather complex
circuit has been contrived mainly to illustrate the steps listed above.)
i1−i22=0
(2.72)
i1=1 A
i2=2 A.
vx

Figure 2.43 
Circuit of Example 2.17.
Solution 
Step 1
First, we combine the 
 resistances in parallel to eliminate two meshes. The resulting circuit is
shown in Figure 2.30(b). As usual, we select the mesh currents flowing clockwise around the open
areas.
Step 2
We cannot write KVL equations for meshes 1 or 2 because we do not know the voltage across the 22-
A current source, and we do not want to introduce another unknown. Thus, we write a KVL equation for
mesh 3:
Next, in terms of the mesh currents the current flowing upward through the current source is 
15-Ω
10i3+2vx+6(i3−i1)=0
i2−i1.

However, we know that this current is 22 A. Thus, we have:
Next, we write a KVL equation for the super mesh formed by combining meshes 1 and 2:
Next, Ohm's law gives
Substituting this into the previous equations and putting them into a standard form produces:
Solving these equations produces 
 and 
 Then, we have 
 ■
Exercise 2.24 
Use the mesh-current technique to solve for the currents labeled in the circuits shown in Figure 2.31 on
page 78.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
Exercise 2.25 
Use the mesh-current technique to solve for the values of  and  in Figure 2.32 on page 78.
Answer 
 
i2−i1=22
5i1+6(i1−i3)−2vx+8i2=0
vx=10i3
−6i1+36i3=0−i1+i2=2211i1+8i2−26i3=0
i1=−12 A, i2=10 A,
i3=−2 A.
vx=10i3=−20 V.
ia=1.33 A;
ib=−0.259 A.
ix
iy
ix=0.5 A, iy=2.31 A.

2.6 Thévenin and Norton Equivalent Circuits
In this section, we learn how to replace two-terminal circuits containing resistances and sources by
simple equivalent circuits. By a two-terminal circuit, we mean that the original circuit has only two points
that can be connected to other circuits. The original circuit can be any complex interconnection of
resistances and sources. However, a restriction is that the controlling variables for any controlled
sources must appear inside the original circuit.
Thévenin Equivalent Circuits
One type of equivalent circuit is the Thévenin equivalent, which consists of an independent voltage
source in series with a resistance. This is illustrated in Figure 2.44.
Figure 2.44 
A two-terminal circuit consisting of resistances and sources can be replaced by a Thévenin equivalent
circuit.
The Thévenin equivalent circuit consists of an independent voltage source in
series with a resistance.
Consider the Thévenin equivalent with open-circuited terminals as shown in Figure 2.45. By definition,
no current can flow through an open circuit. Therefore, no current flows through the Thévenin
resistance, and the voltage across the resistance is zero. Applying KVL, we conclude that

Figure 2.45 
Thévenin equivalent circuit with open-circuited terminals. The open-circuit voltage 
is equal to the
Thévenin voltage 
Both the original circuit and the equivalent circuit are required to have the same open-circuit voltage.
Thus, the Thévenin source voltage 
 is equal to the open-circuit voltage of the original network.
Now, consider the Thévenin equivalent with a short circuit connected across its terminals as shown in
Figure 2.46. The current flowing in this circuit is
Figure 2.46 
Thévenin equivalent circuit with short-circuited terminals. The short-circuit current is 
The Thévenin voltage  is equal to the open-circuit voltage of the original
network.
The short-circuit current 
 is the same for the original circuit as for the Thévenin equivalent. Solving for
the Thévenin resistance, we have
voc
Vt.
Vt=voc
Vt
isc=VtRt
isc=Vt/Rt.
vt
isc

Using the fact that the Thévenin voltage is equal to the open-circuit voltage of the network, we have
Thus, to determine the Thévenin equivalent circuit, we can start by analyzing the original network for its
open-circuit voltage and its short-circuit current. The Thévenin voltage equals the open-circuit voltage,
and the Thévenin resistance is given by Equation 2.74.
The Thévenin resistance is equal to the open-circuit voltage divided by the short-
circuit current.
Example 2.18 Determining the Thévenin Equivalent Circuit
Find the Thévenin equivalent for the circuit shown in Figure 2.47(a).
Figure 2.47 
Circuit for Example 2.18.
Solution 
Rt=Vtisc
(2.73)
Rt=vocisc
(2.74)

First, we analyze the circuit with open-circuited terminals. This is shown in Figure 2.47(b). The
resistances 
 and 
 are in series and have an equivalent resistance of 
 Therefore, the
current circulating is
The open-circuit voltage is the voltage across 
Thus, the Thévenin voltage is 
Now, we consider the circuit with a short circuit connected across its terminals as shown in Figure
2.47(c). By definition, the voltage across a short circuit is zero. Hence, the voltage across 
 is zero,
and the current through it is zero, as shown in the figure. Therefore, the short-circuit current 
 flows
through 
 The source voltage 
 appears across 
 so we can write
Now, we can use Equation 2.74 to determine the Thévenin resistance:
The Thévenin equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 2.47(d). ■
Exercise 2.26 
Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit for the circuit shown in Figure 2.48.
Figure 2.48 
Circuit for Exercise 2.26.
Answer 
R1
R2
R1+R2.
i1=vsR1+R2=15100+50=0.10 A
R2:
voc=R2i1=50×0.10=5 V
Vt=5 V.
R2
isc
R1.
vs
R1,
isc=vsR1=15100=0.15 A
Rt=vocisc=5 V0.15 A=33.3 Ω
Vt=50 V, Rt=50 Ω.

Finding the Thévenin Resistance Directly. 
If a network contains no dependent sources, there is an alternative way to find the Thévenin resistance.
First, we zero the sources in the network. In zeroing a voltage source, we reduce its voltage to zero. A
voltage source with zero voltage is equivalent to a short circuit.
When zeroing a current source, it becomes an open circuit. When zeroing a
voltage source, it becomes a short circuit.
In zeroing a current source, we reduce its current to zero. By definition, an element that always carries
zero current is an open circuit. Thus, to zero the independent sources, we replace voltage sources with
short circuits and replace current sources with open circuits.
We can find the Thévenin resistance by zeroing the sources in the original
network and then computing the resistance between the terminals.
Figure 2.49 shows a Thévenin equivalent before and after zeroing its voltage source. Looking back into
the terminals after the source is zeroed, we see the Thévenin resistance. Thus, we can find the
Thévenin resistance by zeroing the sources in the original network and then computing the resistance
between the terminals.
Figure 2.49 
When the source is zeroed, the resistance seen from the circuit terminals is equal to the Thévenin
resistance.

 Example 2.19 Zeroing Sources to Find Thévenin Resistance
Find the Thévenin resistance for the circuit shown in Figure 2.50(a) by zeroing the sources. Then,
find the short-circuit current and the Thévenin equivalent circuit.
Figure 2.50 
Circuit for Example 2.19.
Solution 
To zero the sources, we replace the voltage source by a short circuit and replace the current source
by an open circuit. The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 2.50(b).
The Thévenin resistance is the equivalent resistance between the terminals. This is the parallel
combination of 
 and 
 which is given by
Next, we find the short-circuit current for the circuit. The circuit is shown in Figure 2.50(c). In this
circuit, the voltage across 
 is zero because of the short circuit. Thus, the current through 
 is
zero:
Furthermore, the voltage across 
 is equal to 20 V.  Thus, the current is
R1
R2,
Rt=Req=11/R1+1/R2=11/5+1/20=4 Ω
R2
R2
i2=0
R1

Finally, we write a current equation for the node joining the top ends of 
 and the 2-A source.
Setting the sum of the currents entering equal to the sum of the currents leaving, we have
This yields 
Now, the Thévenin voltage can be found. Applying Equation 2.74, we get
The Thévenin equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 2.50(d). ■
Exercise 2.27 
Use node-voltage analysis of the circuit shown in Figure 2.50(a) to show that the open-circuit voltage is
equal to the Thévenin voltage found in Example 2.19.
Exercise 2.28 
Find the Thévenin resistance for each of the circuits shown in Figure 2.51 by zeroing the sources.
Figure 2.51 
Circuits for Exercise 2.28.
Answer 
i1=vsR1=205=4 A
R2
i1+2=i2+isc
isc=6 A.
Vt=Rtisc=4×6=24 V

a. 
b. 
c. 
We complete our discussion of Thévenin equivalent circuits with one more example.
Example 2.20 Thévenin Equivalent of a Circuit with a Dependent Source
Find the Thévenin equivalent for the circuit shown in Figure 2.52(a).
Figure 2.52 
Circuit for Example 2.20.
Solution 
Because this circuit contains a dependent source, we cannot find the Thévenin resistance by zeroing
the sources and combining resistances in series and parallel. Thus, we must analyze the circuit to
find the open-circuit voltage and the short-circuit current.
If a circuit contains a dependent source, we cannot find the Thévenin
resistance by zeroing the sources and combining resistances in series and
parallel.
Rt=14 Ω;
Rt=30 Ω;
Rt=5 Ω.

We start with the open-circuit voltage. Consider Figure 2.52(b). We use node-­voltage analysis,
picking the reference node at the bottom of the circuit. Then, 
 is the unknown node-voltage
variable. First, we write a current equation at node 1.
Next, we write an expression for the controlling variable  in terms of the node voltage 
Substituting this into Equation 2.75, we have
Solving, we find that 
Now, we consider short-circuit conditions as shown in Figure 2.52(c). In this case, the current
through the 
 resistance is zero. Furthermore, we get
and
Next, we use Equation 2.74 to compute the Thévenin resistance:
Finally, the Thévenin equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 2.52(d). ■
Norton Equivalent Circuit
Another type of equivalent, known as the Norton equivalent circuit, is shown in Figure 2.53. It
consists of an independent current source 
 in parallel with the Thévenin resistance. Notice that if we
zero the Norton current source, replacing it by an open circuit, the Norton equivalent becomes a
resistance of 
 This also happens if we zero the voltage source in the Thévenin equivalent by
voc
ix+2ix=voc10
(2.75)
ix
voc:
ix=10−voc5
3 10−voc5=voc10
voc=8.57 V.
10-Ω
ix=10 V5 Ω=2 A
isc=3ix=6 A
Rt=vocisc=8.57 V6 A=1.43 Ω
In
Rt.

replacing the voltage source by a short circuit. Thus, the resistance in the Norton equivalent is the same
as the Thévenin resistance.
Figure 2.53 
The Norton equivalent circuit consists of an independent current source 
 in parallel with the Thévenin
resistance 
Consider placing a short circuit across the Norton equivalent as shown in Figure 2.54. In this case, the
current through 
 is zero. Therefore, the Norton current is equal to the short-circuit current:
Figure 2.54 
The Norton equivalent circuit with a short circuit across its terminals.
We can find the Norton equivalent by using the same techniques as we used for the Thévenin
equivalent.
Step-by-Step Thévenin/Norton-Equivalent-Circuit Analysis
1. Perform two of these:
a. Determine the open-circuit voltage 
b. Determine the short-circuit current 
c. Zero the independent sources and find the Thévenin resistance 
 looking back into the
terminals. Do not zero dependent sources.
2. Use the equation 
 to compute the remaining value.
3. The Thévenin equivalent consists of a voltage source 
 in series with 
In
Rt.
Rt
In=isc
Vt=voc.
In=isc.
Rt
Vt=RtIn
Vt
Rt.

4. The Norton equivalent consists of a current source 
 in parallel with 
Example 2.21 Norton Equivalent Circuit
Find the Norton equivalent for the circuit shown in Figure 2.55(a).
Figure 2.55 
Circuit of Example 2.21.
Solution 
Because the circuit contains a controlled source, we cannot zero the sources and combine
resistances to find the Thévenin resistance. First, we consider the circuit with an open circuit as
shown in Figure 2.53(a). We treat 
 as a node-­voltage variable. Writing a current equation at the
top of the circuit, we have
Next, we use the voltage-divider principle to write an expression for 
 in terms of resistances and
Substituting into Equation 2.76, we find that
In
Rt.
voc
vx4+voc−15R1+vocR2+R3=0
(2.76)
vx
voc:
vx=R3R2+R3 voc=0.25voc

Substituting resistance values and solving, we observe that 
Next, we consider short-circuit conditions as shown in Figure 2.55(b). In this case, the current
through 
 and 
 is zero. Thus, 
 and the controlled current source appears as an open
circuit. The short-circuit current is given by
Now, we can find the Thévenin resistance:
The Norton equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 2.55(c). ■
Exercise 2.29 
Find the Norton equivalent for each of the circuits shown in Figure 2.56.
Figure 2.56 
Circuits for Exercise 2.29.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
Source Transformations
We can replace a voltage source in series with a resistance by a Norton equivalent circuit, which
consists of a current source in parallel with the resistance.  This is called a source transformation and
is illustrated in Figure 2.57.  The two circuits are identical in terms of their external behavior. In other
0.25voc4+voc−15R1+vocR2+R3=0
voc=4.62 V.
R2
R3
vx=0,
isc=vsR1=15 V20 Ω=0.75 A
Rt=vocisc=4.620.75=6.15 Ω
In=1.67 A, Rt=9.375 Ω;
In=2A, Rt=15 Ω.

words, the voltages and currents at terminals a and b remain the same after the transformation is made.
However, in general, the current flowing through 
 is different for the two circuits. For example,
suppose that the two circuits shown in Figure 2.57 are open circuited. Then no current flows through the
resistor in series with the voltage source, but the current 
 flows through the resistance in parallel with
the current source.
Figure 2.57 
A voltage source in series with a resistance is externally equivalent to a current source in parallel with
the resistance, provided that 
Here is a "trick" question that you might have some fun with: Suppose that the
circuits of Figure 2.57 are placed in identical black boxes with the terminals
accessible from outside the box. How could you determine which box contains
the Norton equivalent? An answer can be found at the end of the chapter
summary on the top of page 111.
In making source transformations, it is very important to maintain the proper relationship between the
reference direction for the current source and the polarity of the voltage source. If the positive polarity is
closest to terminal a, the current reference must point toward terminal a, as shown in Figure 2.57.
Sometimes, we can simplify the solution of a circuit by source transformations. This is similar to solving
circuits by combining resistances in series or parallel. We illustrate with an example.
Example 2.22 Using Source Transformations
Use source transformations to aid in solving for the currents  and  shown in Figure 2.58(a).
Rt
In
In=Vt/Rt.
i1
i2

Figure 2.58 
Circuit for Example 2.22.
Solution 
Several approaches are possible. One is to transform the 1-A current source and 
 into a voltage
source in series with 
 This is shown in Figure 2.58(b). Notice that the positive polarity of the 10-V
source is at the top, because the 1-A source reference points upward. The single-loop circuit of
Figure 2.58(b) can be solved by writing a KVL equation. Traveling clockwise and summing voltages,
we have
Solving and substituting values, we get
Then in the original circuit, we can write a current equation at the top node and solve for 
Another approach is to transform the voltage source and 
 into a current source in parallel with 
Making this change to the original circuit yields the circuit shown in Figure 2.58(c). Notice that we
have labeled the current through 
 as  rather than 
 This is because the current in the
resistance of the transformed source is not the same as in the original circuit. Now, in Figure
2.58(c), we see that a total current of 5 A flows into the parallel combination of 
 and 
 Using the
current-division principle, we find the current through 
R2
R2.
R1i1+R2i1+10−20=0
i1=10R1+R2=0.667 A
i2:
i2=i1+1=1.667 A
R1
R1.
R1
i3
i1.
R1
R2.
R2:

This agrees with our previous result. ■
Exercise 2.30 
Use two different approaches employing source transformations to solve for the values of  and  in
Figure 2.59.
Figure 2.59 
Circuit for Exercise 2.30.
In the first approach, transform the current source and 
 into a voltage source in series with 
 (Make
sure in making the transformation that the polarity of the voltage source bears the correct relationship to
the current reference direction.) Then solve the transformed circuit and determine the values of  and
In the second approach, starting with the original circuit, transform the 10-V source and 
 into a current
source in parallel with 
 Then solve the transformed circuit and determine the values of  and . Of
course, the answers should be the same for both approaches.
Answer 
Maximum Power Transfer
Suppose that we have a two-terminal circuit and we want to connect a load resistance 
 such that the
maximum possible power is delivered to the load. This is illustrated in Figure 2.60(a). To analyze this
problem, we replace the original circuit by its Thévenin equivalent as shown in Figure 2.60(b). The
current flowing through the load resistance is given by
i2=R1R1+R2 itotal=55+10 (5)=1.667 A
i1
i2
R1
R1.
i1
i2.
R2
R2.
i1
i2
i1=−0.667 A, i2=1.333 A.
RL

Figure 2.60 
Circuits for analysis of maximum power transfer.
The power delivered to the load is
Substituting for the current, we have
To find the value of the load resistance that maximizes the power delivered to the load, we set the
derivative of 
 with respect to 
 equal to zero:
Solving for the load resistance, we have
The load resistance that absorbs the maximum power from a two-­terminal
circuit is equal to the Thévenin resistance.
Thus, the load resistance that absorbs the maximum power from a two-terminal circuit is equal to the
Thévenin resistance. The maximum power is found by substituting 
 into Equation 2.77.  The
result is
iL=VtRt+RL
pL=iL2RL
pL=Vt2RL(Rt+RL)2
(2.77)
pL
RL
dpLdRL=Vt2(Rt+RL)2−2Vt2RL(Rt+RL)(Rt+RL)4=0
RL=Rt
RL=Rt

An All-Too-Common Example. 
You may have had difficulty in starting your car on a frigid morning. The battery in your car can be
represented by a Thévenin equivalent circuit. It turns out that the Thévenin voltage of the battery does
not change greatly with temperature. However, when the battery is very cold, the chemical reactions
occur much more slowly and its Thévenin resistance is much higher. Thus, the power that the battery
can deliver to the starter motor is greatly reduced.
Example 2.23 Determining Maximum Power Transfer
Find the load resistance for maximum power transfer from the circuit shown in Figure 2.61. Also,
find the maximum power.
Figure 2.61 
Circuit for Example 2.23.
Solution 
First, we must find the Thévenin equivalent circuit. Zeroing the voltage source, we find that the
resistances 
 and 
 are in parallel. Thus, the Thévenin resistance is
The Thévenin voltage is equal to the open-circuit voltage. Using the voltage-division principle, we
find that
Hence, the load resistance that receives maximum power is
PL max=Vt24Rt
(2.78)
R1
R2
Rt=11/R1+1/R2=11/20+1/5=4 Ω
Vt=voc=R2R1+R2 (50)=55+20 (50)=10 V
RL=Rt=4 Ω

and the maximum power is given by Equation 2.78:
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
 2.1
An Important Engineering Problem: Energy-Storage Systems for Electric Vehicles
Imagine pollution-free electric vehicles with exciting performance and 500-mile range. They do
not exist, but they are the target of an ongoing large-scale engineering effort to which you may
contribute. Such electric vehicles (EVs) are a worthwhile goal because they can be very efficient
in their use of energy, particularly in stop-and-go traffic. Kinetic energy can be recovered during
braking and saved for later use during acceleration. Furthermore, EVs emit little pollution into
crowded urban environments.
So far, EV range and performance remains less than ideal. The availability of suitable energy-
storage devices is the key stumbling block in achieving better EVs (and a multitude of other
highly desirable devices, such as smart phones that do not need recharging for a week).
In Chapter 3, we will see that capacitors and inductors are capable of storing electrical energy.
However, it turns out that their energy content per unit volume is too small to make them a
practical solution for EVs. The energy content of modern rechargeable batteries is better but still
not on a par with the energy content of gasoline, which is approximately 10,000 watt-hours/liter
(Wh/L). In contrast, the energy content of nickel-metal hydride batteries used in current EVs is
about 175 Wh/L. Lithium-ion batteries under current development are expected to increase this
to about 300 Wh/L. Thus, even allowing for the relative inefficiency of the internal combustion
engine in converting chemical energy to mechanical energy, much more usable energy can be
obtained from gasoline than from current batteries of comparable volume.
Although EVs do not emit pollutants at the point of use, the mining, refining, and disposal of
metals pose grave environmental dangers. We must always consider the entire environmental
(as well as economic) impact of the systems we design. As an engineer, you can do a great
service to humanity by accepting the challenge to develop safe, clean systems for storing energy
in forms that are readily converted to and from electrical form.
Naturally, one possibility currently under intense development is improved electrochemical
PL max=Vt24Rt=1024×4=6.25 W

batteries based on nontoxic chemicals. Another option is a mechanical flywheel system that
would be coupled through an electrical generator to electric drive motors. Still another solution is
a hybrid vehicle that uses a small internal combustion engine, an electrical generator, an energy-
storage system, and electrical drive motors. The engine achieves low pollution levels by being
optimized to run at a constant load while charging a relatively small energy-storage system.
When the storage capacity becomes full, the engine shuts down automatically and the vehicle
runs on stored energy. The engine is just large enough to keep up with energy demands under
high-speed highway conditions.
Whatever form the ultimate solution to vehicle pollution may take, we can anticipate that it will
include elements from mechanical, chemical, manufacturing, and civil engineering in close
combination with electrical-engineering principles.
Application of Maximum Power Transfer. 
When a load resistance equals the internal Thévenin resistance of the source, half of the power is
dissipated in the source resistance and half is delivered to the load. In higher power applications for
which efficiency is important, we do not usually design for maximum power transfer. For example, in
designing an electric vehicle, we would want to deliver the energy stored in the batteries mainly to the
drive motors and minimize the power loss in the resistance of the battery and wiring. This system would
approach maximum power transfer rarely when maximum acceleration is needed.
On the other hand, when small amounts of power are involved, we would design for maximum power
transfer. For example, we would design a radio receiver to extract the maximum signal power from the
receiving antenna. In this application, the power is very small, typically much less than one microwatt,
and efficiency is not a consideration.

2.7 Superposition Principle
Suppose that we have a circuit composed of resistances, linear dependent sources, and n independent
sources. (We will explain the term linear dependent source shortly.) The current flowing through a given
element (or the voltage across it) is called a response, because the currents and voltages appear in
response to the independent sources.
Recall that we zeroed the independent sources as a method for finding the Thévenin resistance of a
two-terminal circuit. To zero a source, we reduce its value to zero. Then, current sources become open
circuits, and voltage sources become short circuits.
Now, consider zeroing all of the independent sources except the first, observe a particular response (a
current or voltage), and denote the value of that response as 
 (We use the symbol r rather than i or v
because the response could be either a current or a voltage.) Similarly, with only source 2 activated, the
response is denoted as 
 and so on. The response with all the sources activated is called the total
response, denoted as 
 The superposition principle states that the total response is the sum of the
responses to each of the independent sources acting individually. In equation form, this is
The superposition principle states that any response in a linear circuit is the sum
of the responses for each independent source acting alone with the other
independent sources zeroed. When zeroed, current sources become open
circuits and voltage sources become short circuits.
Next, we illustrate the validity of superposition for the example circuit shown in Figure 2.62. In this
circuit, there are two independent sources: the first is the voltage source 
 and the second is the
current source 
 Suppose that the response of interest is the voltage across the resistance 
r1.
r2,
rT.
rT=r1+r2+...+rn
(2.79)
vs1,
is2.
R2.

Figure 2.62 
Circuit used to illustrate the superposition principle.
First, we solve for the total response 
 by solving the circuit with both sources in place. Writing a
current equation at the top node, we obtain
The control variable  is given by
Substituting Equation 2.81 into Equation 2.80 and solving for the total response, we get
If we set 
 to zero, we obtain the response to 
 acting alone:
Similarly, if we set 
 equal to zero in Equation 2.82, the response due to 
 is given by
Comparing Equations 2.82, 2.83, and 2.84, we see that
Thus, as expected from the superposition principle, the total response is equal to the sum of the
responses for each of the independent sources acting individually.
Notice that if we zero both of the independent sources (
 and 
), the response becomes zero.
Hence, the dependent source does not contribute to the total response. However, the dependent source
affects the contributions of the two independent sources. This is evident because the gain parameter K
vT
vT−vs1R1+vTR2+Kix=is2
(2.80)
ix
ix=vTR2
(2.81)
vT=R2R1+R2+KR1 vs1+R1R2R1+R2+KR1 is2
(2.82)
is2
vs1
v1=R2R1+R2+KR1 vs1
(2.83)
vs1
is2
v2=R1R2R1+R2+KR1 is2
(2.84)
vT=v1+v2
vs1=0
is2=0

of the dependent source appears in the expressions for both 
 and 
 In general, dependent sources
do not contribute a separate term to the total response, and we must not zero dependent sources in
applying superposition.
Dependent sources do not contribute a separate term to the total response, and
we must not zero ­dependent sources in ­applying superposition.
Linearity
If we plot voltage versus current for a resistance, we have a straight line. This is illustrated in Figure
2.63. Thus, we say that Ohm's law is a linear equation. Similarly, the current in the controlled source
shown in Figure 2.62 is given by 
 which is also a linear equation. In this book, the term linear
controlled source means a source whose value is a constant times a control variable that is a current
or a voltage appearing in the network.
Figure 2.63 
A resistance that obeys Ohm's law is linear.
Some examples of nonlinear equations are
and
The superposition principle does not apply to any circuit that has element(s) described by nonlinear
v1
v2.
ics=Kix,
v=10i2ics=K cos(ix)
i=ev

equation(s). We will encounter nonlinear elements later in our study of electronic circuits.
The superposition ­principle does not apply to any ­circuit that has element(s)
described by nonlinear equation(s).
Furthermore, superposition does not apply for power in resistances, because 
 and 
 are
nonlinear equations.
Using Superposition to Solve Circuits
We can apply superposition in circuit analysis by analyzing the circuit for each source separately. Then,
we add the individual responses to find the total response. Sometimes, the analysis of a circuit is
simplified by considering each independent source separately. We illustrate with an example.
 Example 2.24 Circuit Analysis Using Superposition
Use superposition in solving the circuit shown in Figure 2.64(a) for the voltage 
Figure 2.64 
Circuit for Example 2.24 and Exercise 2.31.
P=v2/R
P=i2R
vT.

Solution 
We analyze the circuit with only one source activated at a time and add the responses. Figure
2.64(b) shows the circuit with only the voltage source active. The response can be found by applying
the voltage-division principle:
Next, we analyze the circuit with only the current source active. The circuit is shown in Figure
2.64(c). In this case, the resistances 
 and 
 are in parallel, and the equivalent resistance is
The voltage due to the current source is given by
Finally, we obtain the total response by adding the individual responses:
Exercise 2.31 
Find the responses 
 and 
 for the circuit of Figure 2.64.
Answer 
Exercise 2.32 
Use superposition to find the responses 
 and 
 for the circuit shown in Figure 2.65.
Figure 2.65 
Circuit for Exercise 2.32.
Answer 
v1=R2R1+R2 vs=55+10(15)=5 V
R1
R2
Req=11/R1+1/R2=11/10+1/5=3.33 Ω
v2=isReq=2×3.33=6.66 V
vT=v1+v2=5+6.66=11.66 V
i1, i2,
iT
i1=1 A, i2=−0.667 A, iT=0.333 A.
vT
iT
v1=5.45 V, v2=1.82 V, vT=7.27 V, i1=1.45 A, i2=−0.181 A,iT=1.27 A.


2.8 Wheatstone Bridge
The Wheatstone bridge is a circuit used to measure unknown resistances. For example, it is used by
mechanical and civil engineers to measure the resistances of strain gauges in experimental stress
studies of machines and buildings. The circuit is shown in Figure 2.66. The circuit consists of a dc
voltage source 
 a detector, the unknown resistance to be measured 
 and three precision resistors,
 and 
 Usually, 
 and 
 are adjustable resistances, which is indicated in the figure by the
arrow drawn through the resistance symbols.
Figure 2.66 
The Wheatstone bridge. When the Wheatstone bridge is balanced, 
 and 
The Wheatstone bridge is used by mechanical and civil engineers to measure the
resistances of strain gauges in experimental stress studies of machines and
buildings.
The detector is capable of responding to very small currents (less than one microampere). However, it is
not necessary for the detector to be calibrated. It is only necessary for the detector to indicate whether
or not current is flowing through it. Often, the detector has a pointer that deflects one way or the other,
depending on the direction of the current through it.
In operation, the resistors 
 and 
 are adjusted in value until the detector indicates zero current. In
this condition, we say that the bridge is balanced. Then, the current  and the voltage across the
detector 
 are zero.
vs,
Rx,
R1, R2,
R3.
R2
R3
ig=0
vab=0.
R2
R3
ig
vab

Applying KCL at node a (Figure 2.66) and using the fact that 
 we have
Similarly, at node b, we get
Writing a KVL equation around the loop formed by 
 and the detector, we obtain
However, when the bridge is balanced, 
 so that
Similarly, for the loop consisting of 
 and the detector, we have
Using Equations 2.85 and 2.86 to substitute into Equation 2.89, we obtain
Dividing each side of Equation 2.90 by the respective side of Equation 2.88, we find that
Finally, solving for the unknown resistance, we have
Often, in commercial bridges, a multiposition switch selects an order-of-magnitude scale factor 
 by
changing the value of 
 Then, 
 is adjusted by means of calibrated switches until balance is
achieved. Finally, the unknown resistance 
 is the scale factor times the value of 
Example 2.25 Using a Wheatstone Bridge to Measure Resistance
In a certain commercial Wheatstone bridge, 
 is a fixed 
 resistor, 
 can be adjusted in 
steps from 0 to 
 and 
 can be selected to be 
 or 
ig=0,
i1=i3
(2.85)
i2=i4
(2.86)
R1, R2,
R1i1+vab=R2i2
(2.87)
vab=0,
R1i1=R2i2
(2.88)
R3, R4,
R3i3=Rxi4
(2.89)
R3i1=Rxi2
(2.90)
R3R1=RxR2
Rx=R2R1 R3
(2.91)
R2/R1
R2.
R3
Rx
R3.
R1
1-kΩ
R3
1-Ω
1100 Ω,
R2
1 kΩ, 10 kΩ, 100 kΩ,
1 MΩ.

a. Suppose that the bridge is balanced with 
 and 
 What is the value of 
b. What is the largest value of 
 for which the bridge can be balanced?
c. Suppose that 
 What is the increment between values of 
 for which the bridge
can be precisely balanced?
Solution 
a. From Equation 2.91, we have
Notice that 
 is a scale factor that can be set at 1, 10, 100, or 1000, depending on the
value selected for 
 The unknown resistance is the scale factor times the value of 
needed to balance the bridge.
b. The maximum resistance for which the bridge can be balanced is determined by the largest
values available for 
 and 
 Thus,
c. The increment between values of 
 for which the bridge can be precisely balanced is the
scale factor times the increment in 
Strain Measurements
The Wheatstone bridge circuit configuration is often employed with strain gauges in measuring strains of
beams and other mechanical structures. (See the Practical Application on page 30 for more information
about strain gauges.)
For example, consider the cantilevered beam subject to a downward load force at its outer end as
shown in Figure 2.67(a). Two strain gauges are attached to the top of the beam where they are
stretched, increasing their resistance by 
 when the load is applied. The change in resistance is given
by
R3=732 Ω
R2=10 kΩ.
Rx?
Rx
R2=1 MΩ.
Rx
Rx=R2R1 R3=10 kΩ1 kΩ×732 Ω=7320 Ω
R2/R1
R2.
R3
R2
R3.
Rx max=R2 maxR1 R3 max=1 MΩ1 kΩ×1100 Ω=1.1 MΩ
Rx
R3:
Rxinc=R2R1 R3inc=1 MΩ1 kΩ×1 Ω=1 kΩ
ΔR


Figure 2.67 
Strain measurements using the Wheatstone bridge.
in which 
 is the strain for the surface of the beam to which the gauge is attached, 
 is the gauge
resistance before strain is applied, and G is the gauge factor which is typically about 2. Similarly, two
gauges on the bottom of the beam are compressed, reducing their resistance by 
 with load. (For
simplicity, we have assumed that the strain magnitude is the same for all four gauges.)
The four gauges are connected in a Wheatstone bridge as shown in Figure 2.67(b). The resistances
labeled 
 are the gauges on the top of the beam and are being stretched, and those labeled
 are those on the bottom and are being compressed. Before the load is applied, all four
resistances have a value of 
 the Wheatstone bridge is balanced, and the output voltage 
 is zero.
It can be shown that the output voltage 
 from the bridge is given by
Thus, the output voltage is proportional to the strain of the beam.
In principle, the resistance of one of the gauges could be measured and the strain determined from the
resistance measurements. However, the changes in resistance are very small, and the measurements
would need to be very precise. Furthermore, gauge resistance changes slightly with temperature. In the
bridge arrangement with the gauges attached to the beam, the temperature changes tend to track very
closely and have very little effect on 
Usually, 
 is amplified by an instrumentation-quality differential amplifier such as that discussed in
Section 13.8 which starts on page 676. The amplified voltage can be converted to digital form and input
to a computer or relayed wirelessly to a remote location for monitoring.
ΔR=R0G ΔLL
(2.92)
ΔL/L
R0
ΔR
R0+ΔR
R0−ΔR
R0,
vo
vo
vo=Vs ΔRR0=VsG ΔLL
(2.93)
vo.
vo

Summary
1. Series resistances have an equivalent resistance equal to their sum. For n resistances in series,
we have
2. Parallel resistances have an equivalent resistance equal to the reciprocal of the sum of their
reciprocals. For n resistances in parallel, we get
3. Some resistive networks can be solved by repeatedly combining resistances in series or parallel.
The simplified network is solved, and results are transferred back through the chain of equivalent
circuits. Eventually, the currents and voltages of interest in the original circuit are found.
4. The voltage-division principle applies when a voltage is applied to several resistances in series.
A fraction of the total voltage appears across each resistance. The fraction that appears across a
given resistance is the ratio of the given resistance to the total series resistance.
5. The current-division principle applies when current flows through two resistances in parallel. A
fraction of the total current flows through each resistance. The fraction of the total current flowing
through 
 is equal to 
6. The node-voltage method can be used to solve for the voltages in any resistive network. A step-
by-step summary of the method is given starting on page 76.
7. A step-by-step procedure to write the node-voltage equations directly in matrix form for circuits
consisting of resistances and independent current sources appears on page 66.
8. The mesh-current method can be used to solve for the currents in any planar resistive network.
A step-by-step summary of the method is given on page 89.
9. A step-by-step procedure to write the mesh-current equations directly in matrix form for circuits
consisting of resistances and independent voltage sources appears on page 85. For this method
to apply, all of the mesh currents must flow in the clockwise direction.
10. A two-terminal network of resistances and sources has a Thévenin equivalent that consists of a
voltage source in series with a resistance. The Thévenin voltage is equal to the open-circuit
voltage of the original network. The Thévenin resistance is the open-circuit voltage divided by
the short-circuit current of the original network. Sometimes, the Thévenin resistance can be
found by zeroing the independent sources in the original network and combining resistances in
series and parallel. When independent voltage sources are zeroed, they are replaced by short
circuits. Independent current sources are replaced by open circuits. Dependent sources must not
be zeroed.
Req=R1+R2+...+Rn
Req=11/R1+1/R2+...+1/Rn
R1
R2/(R1+R2).

11. A two-terminal network of resistances and sources has a Norton equivalent that consists of a
current source in parallel with a resistance. The Norton current is equal to the short-circuit
current of the original network. The Norton resistance is the same as the Thévenin resistance. A
step-by-step procedure for determining Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits is given on page
97.
12. Sometimes source transformations (i.e., replacing a Thévenin equivalent with a Norton
equivalent or vice versa) are useful in solving networks.
13. For maximum power from a two-terminal network, the load resistance should equal the Thévenin
resistance.
14. The superposition principle states that the total response in a resistive circuit is the sum of the
responses to each of the independent sources acting individually. The superposition principle
does not apply to any circuit that has element(s) described by nonlinear equation(s).
15. The Wheatstone bridge is a circuit used to measure unknown resistances. The circuit consists of
a voltage source, a detector, three precision calibrated resistors, of which two are adjustable,
and the unknown resistance. The resistors are adjusted until the bridge is balanced, and then
the unknown resistance is given in terms of the three known resistances.
Here's the answer to the trick question on page 97: Suppose that we open circuit
the terminals. Then, no current flows through the Thévenin equivalent, but a
current 
 circulates in the Norton equivalent. Thus, the box containing the Norton
equivalent will become warm because of power dissipation in the resistance. The
point of this question is that the circuits are equivalent in terms of their terminal
voltage and current, not in terms of their internal behavior.
In

Problems
Section 2.1: Resistances in Series and Parallel
*P2.1. Reduce each of the networks shown in Figure P2.1 to a single equivalent resistance by
combining resistances in series and parallel.
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
Figure P2.1 
*P2.2. A 
 resistance is in series with the parallel combination of a 
 resistance and an
unknown resistance 
 The equivalent resistance for the network is 
 Determine the value of
*P2.3. Find the equivalent resistance looking into terminals a and b in Figure P2.3.
4-Ω
20-Ω
Rx.
8 Ω.
Rx.

Figure P2.3 
*P2.4. Suppose that we need a resistance of 
 and you have a box of 
 resistors.
Devise a network of 
 resistors so the equivalent resistance is 
 Repeat for an
equivalent resistance of 
*P2.5. Find the equivalent resistance between terminals a and b in Figure P2.5.
Figure P2.5 
P2.6. Find the equivalent resistance between terminals a and b for each of the networks shown
in Figure P2.6.
1.5 kΩ
1-kΩ
1-kΩ
1.5 kΩ.
2.2 kΩ.

Figure P2.6 
 P2.7. What resistance in parallel with 
 results in an equivalent resistance of 
P2.8.
a. Determine the resistance between terminals a and b for the network shown in
FigureP2.8 .
Figure P2.8 
b. Repeat after connecting c and d with a short circuit.
P2.9. Two resistances having values of R and 2R are in parallel. R and the equivalent resistance
are both positive integers. What are the possible values for R?
P2.10. A network connected between terminals a and b consists of two parallel combinations
that are in series. The first parallel combination is composed of a 
 resistor and a 
120 Ω
48 Ω?
16-Ω
48-Ω

resistor. The second parallel combination is composed of a 
 resistor and a 
 resistor.
Draw the network and determine its equivalent resistance.
P2.11. Two resistances 
 and 
 are connected in parallel. We know that 
 and that
the current through 
 is three times the value of the current through 
 Determine the value of
P2.12. Find the equivalent resistance for the infinite network shown in Figure P2.12(a). Because
of its form, this network is called a semi-infinite ladder. [Hint: If another section is added to the
ladder as shown in Figure P2.12(b), the equivalent resistance is the same. Thus, working from
Figure P2.12(b), we can write an expression for 
 in terms of 
 Then, we can solve for
]
Figure P2.12 
P2.13. If we connect n 
 resistances in parallel, what value is the equivalent resistance?
P2.14. The heating element of an electric cook top has two resistive elements, 
 and
 that can be operated separately, in series, or in parallel from voltages of either 120
V or 240 V. For the lowest power, 
 is in series with 
 and the combination is operated from
120 V. What is the lowest power? For the highest power, how should the elements be operated?
What power results? List three more modes of operation and the resulting power for each.
P2.15. We are designing an electric space heater to operate from 120 V. Two heating elements
with resistances 
 and 
 are to be used that can be operated in parallel, separately, or in
series. The highest power is to be 1280 W, and the lowest power is to be 240 W. What values
are needed for 
 and 
 What intermediate power settings are available?
P2.16. Sometimes, we can use symmetry considerations to find the resistance of a circuit that
cannot be reduced by series or parallel combinations. A classic problem of this type is illustrated
in Figure P2.16. Twelve 
 resistors are arranged on the edges of a cube, and terminals a and
b are connected to diagonally opposite corners of the cube. The problem is to find the resistance
between the terminals. Approach the problem this way: Assume that 1 A of current enters
12-Ω
24-Ω
R1
R2
R1=90 Ω
R2
R1.
R2.
Req
Req.
Req.
1000-Ω
R1=57.6 Ω
R2=115.2 Ω,
R1
R2,
R1
R2
R1
R2?
1-Ω

terminal a and exits through terminal b. Then, the voltage between terminals a and b is equal to
the unknown resistance. By symmetry considerations, we can find the current in each resistor.
Then, using KVL, we can find the voltage between a and b.
Figure P2.16 
Each resistor has a value of 
P2.17. The equivalent resistance between terminals a and b in Figure P2.17 is 
Determine the value of R.
Figure P2.17 
P2.18.
a. Three conductances 
 and 
 are in series. Write an expression for the equivalent
conductance 
 in terms of 
 and 
b. Repeat part (a) with the conductances in parallel.
P2.19. Most sources of electrical power behave as (approximately) ideal voltage sources. In this
case, if we have several loads that we want to operate independently, we place the loads in
parallel with a switch in series with each load. Thereupon, we can switch each load on or off
without affecting the power delivered to the other loads.
How would we connect the loads and switches if the source is an ideal independent current
1 Ω.
Rab=23 Ω.
G1, G2,
G3
Geq=1/Req
G1, G2,
G3.

Section 2.2: Network Analysis by Using Series and Parallel Equivalents
source? Draw the diagram of the current source and three loads with on-off switches such that
each load can be switched on or off without affecting the power supplied to the other loads. To
turn a load off, should the corresponding switch be opened or closed? Explain.
P2.20. The resistance for the network shown in Figure P2.20 between terminals a and b with c
open circuited is 
 Similarly, the resistance between terminals b and c with a open is
 and between c and a with b open is 
 Now, suppose that a short circuit is
connected from terminal b to terminal c, and determine the resistance between terminal a and
the shorted terminals b-c.
Figure P2.20 
 P2.21. Often, we encounter delta-connected loads, such as that illustrated in Figure P2.21, in
three-phase power distribution systems (which are treated in Section 5.7). If we only have
access to the three terminals, a method for determining the resistances is to repeatedly short
two terminals together and measure the resistance between the shorted terminals and the third
terminal. Then, the resistances can be calculated from the three measurements. Suppose that
the measurements are 
 and 
 Where 
 is the resistance
between terminal a and the short between b and c, etc. Determine the values of 
 and 
(Hint: You may find the equations easier to deal with if you work in terms of conductances rather
than resistances. Once the conductances are known, you can easily invert their values to find
the resistances.)
Figure P2.21 
Rab=50 Ω.
Rbc=100 Ω,
Rca=70 Ω.
Ras=12 Ω, Rbs=20 Ω,
Rcs=15 Ω.
Ras
Ra, Rb,
Rc.

P2.22. What are the steps in solving a circuit by network reduction (series/parallel
combinations)? Does this method always provide the solution? Explain.
*P2.23. Find the values of  and  in Figure P2.23.
Figure P2.23 
*P2.24. Find the voltages 
 and 
 for the circuit shown in Figure P2.24 by combining
resistances in series and parallel.
Figure P2.24 
*P2.25. Find the values of v and i in Figure P2.25.
Figure P2.25 
P2.26. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P2.24. Suppose that the value of 
 is adjusted until
 Determine the new value of 
 [Hint: Start at the right-hand side of the circuit and
compute currents and voltages, moving to the left until you reach the source.]
P2.27. Find the voltage v and the currents  and  for the circuit shown in Figure P2.27.
i1
i2
v1
v2
vs
v2=5 V.
vs.
i1
i2

Figure P2.27 
 P2.28. Find the values of 
 and  in Figure P2.28.
Figure P2.28 
P2.29. Find the values of  and  in Figure P2.29.
Figure P2.29 
P2.30. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P2.30. Find the values of 
 and 
Figure P2.30 
P2.31. Solve for the values of 
 and the powers for the sources in Figure P2.31. Is the
vs, v1,
i2
i1
i2
v1, v2,
vab.
i1, i2,

current source absorbing energy or delivering ene­rgy? Is the voltage source absorbing energy
or delivering it?
Figure P2.31 
P2.32. The 12-V source in Figure P2.32 is delivering 36 mW of power. All four resistors have the
same value R. Find the value of R.
Figure P2.32 
P2.33. Refer to the circuit shown in Figure P2.33. With the switch open, we have 
 On the
other hand, with the switch closed, we have 
 Determine the values of 
 and 
Figure P2.33 
*P2.34. Find the values of  and  in Figure P2.34. Find the power for each element in the
circuit, and state whether each is absorbing or delivering energy. Verify that the total power
absorbed equals the total power delivered.
v2=8 V.
v2=6 V.
R2
RL.
i1
i2

Section 2.3: Voltage-Divider and Current-Divider Circuits
Figure P2.34 
*P2.35. Find the values of  and  in Figure P2.35.
Figure P2.35 
i1
i2
*P2.36. Use the voltage-division principle to calculate 
 and 
 in Figure P2.36.
Figure P2.36 
*P2.37. Use the current-division principle to calculate  and  in Figure P2.37.
Figure P2.37 
*P2.38. Use the voltage-division principle to calculate v in Figure P2.38.
v1, v2,
v3
i1
i2

Figure P2.38 
P2.39. Use the current-division principle to calculate the value of  in Figure P2.39.
Figure P2.39 
P2.40. Suppose we need to design a voltage-divider circuit to provide an output voltage 
from a 15-V source as shown in Figure P2.40. The current taken from the 15-V source is to be
200 mA.
a. Find the values of 
 and 
b. Now suppose that a load resistance of 
 is connected across the output terminals
(i.e., in parallel with 
). Find the value of 
Figure P2.40 
P2.41. A source supplies 120 V to the series combination of a 
 resistance, a 
 resistance,
and an unknown resistance 
 The voltage across the 
 resistance is 20 V. Determine the
value of the unknown resistance.
P2.42. We have a 
 resistance, a 
 resistance, and an unknown resistance 
 in parallel
with a 15 mA current source. The current through the unknown resistance is 10 mA. Determine
the value of 
*P2.43. A worker is standing on a wet concrete floor, holding an electric drill having a metallic
i3
vo=5 V
R1
R2.
200 Ω
R2
vo.
10-Ω
5-Ω
Rx.
5-Ω
60-Ω
20-Ω
Rx
Rx.

Section 2.4: Node-Voltage Analysis
case. The metallic case is connected through the ground wire of a three-terminal power outlet to
power-system ground. The resistance of the ground wire is 
 The resistance of the worker's
body is 
 Due to faulty insulation in the drill, a current of 2 A flows into its metallic
case. The circuit diagram for this situation is shown in Figure P2.43. Find the maximum value of
 so that the current through the worker does not exceed 0.1 mA.
Figure P2.43 
P2.44. Suppose we have a load that absorbs power and requires a current varying between 0
and 50 mA. The voltage across the load must remain between 4.7 and 5.0 V.  A 15-V source is
available. Design a voltage-divider network to supply the load. You may assume that resistors of
any value desired are available. Also, determine the maximum power for each resistor.
P2.45. We have a load resistance of 
 that we wish to supply with 5 V. A 12.6-V voltage
source and resistors of any value needed are available. Draw a suitable circuit consisting of the
voltage source, the load, and one additional resistor. Specify the value of the resistor.
P2.46. We have a load resistance of 
 that we wish to supply with 25 mW. A 20-mA current
source and resistors of any value needed are available. Draw a suitable circuit consisting of the
current source, the load, and one additional resistor. Specify the value of the resistor.
P2.47. The circuit of Figure P2.47 is similar to networks used in digital-to-analog converters. For
this problem, assume that the circuit continues indefinitely to the right. Find the values of
 and 
 How is 
 related to 
 What is the value of 
 (Hint: See Problem P2.12.)
Figure P2.47 
Rg.
Rw=500 Ω.
Rg
50 Ω
1 kΩ
i1, i2, i3,
i4.
in+2
in?
i18?

*P2.48. Write equations and solve for the node voltages shown in Figure P2.48. Then, find the
value of 
Figure P2.48 
*P2.49. Solve for the node voltages shown in Figure P2.49. Then, find the value of 
Figure P2.49 
P2.50. Solve for the node voltages shown in Figure P2.50. What are the new values of the node
voltages after the direction of the current source is reversed? How are the values related?
Figure P2.50 
P2.51. Given 
 and 
 solve for the node voltages
shown in Figure P2.51.
i1.
is.
R1=4 Ω,R2=5 Ω,R3=8 Ω,R4=10 Ω,R5=2 Ω,
Is=2 A,

Figure P2.51 
P2.52. Determine the value of  in Figure P2.52 using node voltages to solve the circuit. Select
the location of the reference node to minimize the number of unknown node voltages. What
effect does the 
 resistance have on the answer? Explain.
Figure P2.52 
P2.53. Given 
 and 
 solve for the
node voltages shown in Figure P2.53.
Figure P2.53 
P2.54. In solving a network, what rule must you observe when writing KCL equations? Why?
i1
20-Ω
R1=15 Ω,R2=5 Ω,R3=20 Ω,R4=10 Ω,R5=8 Ω,R6=4 Ω,
Is=5 A,

P2.55. Use the symbolic features of MATLAB to find an expression for the equivalent resistance
for the network shown in Figure P2.55. [Hint: First, connect a 1-A current source across
terminals a and b. Then, solve the network by the node-voltage technique. The voltage across
the current source is equal in value to the equivalent resistance.] Finally, use the subs command
to evaluate for 
 and 
Figure P2.55 
*P2.56. Solve for the values of the node voltages shown in Figure P2.56. Then, find the value of
Figure P2.56 
*P2.57. Solve for the node voltages shown in Figure P2.57.
Figure P2.57 
P2.58 Solve for the power delivered to the 
 resistance and for the node voltages shown in
R1=15 Ω, R2=5 Ω, R3=20 Ω, R4=10 Ω,
R5=8 Ω.
ix.
8-Ω

Figure P2.58.
Figure P2.58 
 P2.59. Solve for the node voltages shown in Figure P2.59.
Figure P2.59 
P2.60. Find the equivalent resistance looking into terminals for the network shown in Figure
P2.60. [Hint: First, connect a 1-A current source across terminals a and b. Then, solve the
network by the node-voltage technique. The voltage across the current source is equal in value
to the equivalent resistance.]
Figure P2.60 
P2.61. Find the equivalent resistance looking into terminals for the network shown in Figure
P2.61. [Hint: First, connect a 1-A current source across terminals a and b. Then, solve the
network by the node-voltage technique. The voltage across the current source is equal in value

to the equivalent resistance.]
Figure P2.61 
P2.62. Figure P2.62 shows an unusual voltage-divider circuit. Use node-voltage analysis and
the symbolic math commands in MATLAB to solve for the voltage division ratio 
 in terms
of the resistances. Notice that the node-voltage variables are 
 and 
Figure P2.62 
P2.63. Solve for the node voltages in the circuit of Figure P2.63. Disregard the mesh currents,
 and  when working with the node voltages.
Figure P2.63 
Vout/Vin
V1, V2,
Vout.
i1, i2, i3,
i4

Section 2.5: Mesh-Current Analysis
 P2.64. We have a cube with 
 resistances along each edge as illustrated in Figure P2.64 in
which we are looking into the front face which has corners at nodes 1, 2, 7, and the reference
node. Nodes 3, 4, 5, and 6 are the corners on the rear face of the cube. (Alternatively, you can
consider it to be a planar network.) We want to find the resistance between adjacent nodes, such
as node 1 and the reference node. We do this by connecting a 1-A current source as shown and
solving for 
 which is equal in value to the resistance between any two adjacent nodes.
a. Use MATLAB to solve the matrix equation 
 for the node voltages and determine the
resistance.
b. Modify your work to determine the resistance between nodes at the ends of a diagonal
across a face, such as node 2 and the reference node.
c. Finally, find the resistance between opposite corners of the cube. [Comment: Part (c) is
the same as Problem 2.16 in which we suggested using symmetry to solve for the
resistance. Parts (a) and (b) can also be solved by use of symmetry and the fact that
nodes having the same value of voltage can be connected by short circuits without
changing the currents and voltages. With the shorts in place, the resistances can be
combined in series and parallel to obtain the answers. Of course, if the resistors have
arbitrary values, the MATLAB approach will still work, but considerations of symmetry will
not.]
Figure P2.64 
1-Ω
v1,
GV=I
*P2.65. Solve for the power delivered to the 
 resistor and for the mesh currents shown in
Figure P2.65.
15-Ω

Figure P2.65 
*P2.66. Determine the value of 
 and the power delivered by the source in the circuit of Figure
P2.24 by using mesh-current analysis.
*P2.67. Use mesh-current analysis to find the value of  in the circuit of Figure P2.48.
P2.68. Solve for the power delivered by the voltage source in Figure P2.68, using the mesh-
current method.
Figure P2.68 
P2.69. Use mesh-current analysis to find the value of v in the circuit of Figure P2.38.
P2.70. Use mesh-current analysis to find the value of  in the circuit of Figure P2.39.
P2.71. Use mesh-current analysis to find the values of  and  in Figure P2.27. Select 
clockwise around the left-hand mesh,  clockwise around the right-hand mesh, and  clockwise
around the center mesh.
P2.72. Find the power delivered by the source and the values of  and  in the circuit of Figure
P2.23, using mesh-current analysis.
P2.73. Use mesh-current analysis to find the values of  and  in Figure P2.29. First, select 
clockwise around the left-hand mesh and 
 clockwise around the right-hand mesh. After solving
for the mesh currents, 
 and 
 determine the values of  and 
P2.74. Use mesh-current analysis to find the values of  and  in Figure P2.28. First, select 
clockwise around the left-hand mesh and 
 clockwise around the right-hand mesh. After solving
for the mesh currents, 
 and 
 determine the values of  and 
P2.75. The circuit shown in Figure P2.75 is the dc equivalent of a simple residential power
v2
i1
i3
i1
i2
i1
i2
i3
i1
i2
i1
i2
iA
iB
iA
iB,
i1
i2.
i1
i2
iA
iB
iA
iB,
i1
i2.

Section 2.6: Thévenin and Norton Equivalent Circuits
distribution system. Each of the resistances labeled 
 and 
 represents various parallel-
connected loads, such as lights or devices plugged into outlets that nominally operate at 120 V,
while 
 represents a load, such as the heating element in an oven that nominally operates at
240 V. The resistances labeled 
 represent the resistances of wires. 
 represents the
"neutral" wire.
a. Use mesh-current analysis to determine the voltage magnitude for each load.
b. Now suppose that due to a fault in the wiring at the distribution panel, the neutral wire
becomes an open circuit. Again compute the voltages across the loads and comment on
the probable outcome for a sensitive device such as a computer or plasma television that
is part of the 
 load
Figure P2.75 
P2.76. Use MATLAB and mesh-current analysis to determine the value of 
 in the circuit of
Figure P2.51. The component values are 
 and
P2.77. Connect a 1-V voltage source across terminals a and b of the network shown in Figure
P2.55. Then, solve the network by the mesh-current technique to find the current through the
source. Finally, divide the source voltage by the current to determine the equivalent resistance
looking into terminals a and b. The resistance values are 
 and
P2.78. Connect a 1-V voltage source across the terminals of the network shown in Figure
P2.1(a). Then, solve the network by the mesh-current technique to find the current through the
source. Finally, divide the source voltage by the current to determine the equivalent resistance
looking into the terminals. Check your answer by combining resistances in series and parallel.
P2.79. Use MATLAB to solve for the mesh currents in Figure P2.63.
R1
R2
R3
Rw
Rn
15-Ω
v3
R1=4 Ω,R2=5 Ω,R3=8 Ω,R4=10 Ω,R5=2 Ω,
Is=2 A.
R1=6 Ω,R2=5 Ω,R3=4 Ω,R4=8 Ω,
R5=2 Ω.

*P2.80. Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for the two-terminal circuit shown in
Figure P2.80.
Figure P2.80 
*P2.81. We can model a certain battery as a voltage source in series with a resistance. The
open-circuit voltage of the battery is 9 V. When a 
 resistor is placed across the terminals of
the battery, the voltage drops to 6 V. Determine the internal resistance (Thévenin resistance) of
the battery.
P2.82. Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for the circuit shown in Figure P2.82.
Figure P2.82 
 P2.83. Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for the two-terminal circuit shown in
Figure P2.83.
Figure P2.83 
P2.84. Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for the circuit shown in Figure P2.84.
Take care that you orient the polarity of the voltage source and the direction of the current
source correctly relative to terminals a and b. What effect does the 
 resistor have on the
equivalent circuits? Explain your answer.
100-Ω
7-Ω

Figure P2.84 
P2.85. An automotive battery has an open-circuit voltage of 12.6 V and supplies 100 A when a
 resistance is connected across the battery terminals. Draw the Thévenin and Norton
equivalent circuits, including values for the circuit parameters. What current can this battery
deliver to a short circuit? Considering that the energy stored in the battery remains constant
under open-circuit conditions, which of these equivalent circuits seems more realistic? Explain.
P2.86. A certain two-terminal circuit has an open-circuit voltage of 15 V. When a 
 load is
attached, the voltage across the load is 10 V. Determine the Thévenin resistance for the circuit.
P2.87. If we measure the voltage at the terminals of a two-terminal network with two known (and
different) resistive loads attached, we can determine the Thévenin and Norton equivalent
circuits.
When a 
 load is attached to a two-terminal circuit, the load voltage is 4.4 V. When the load
is increased to 
 the load voltage becomes 5 V. Find the Thévenin voltage and resistance
for this circuit.
P2.88. Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for the circuit shown in Figure P2.88.
Figure P2.88 
P2.89. Find the maximum power that can be delivered to a resistive load by the circuit shown in
Figure P2.80. For what value of load resistance is the power maximum?
P2.90. Find the maximum power that can be delivered to a resistive load by the circuit shown in
Figure P2.82. For what value of load resistance is the power maximum?
*P2.91. Figure P2.91 shows a resistive load 
 connected to a Thévenin equivalent circuit. For
what value of Thévenin resistance is the power delivered to the load maximized? Find the
maximum power delivered to the load. [Hint: Be careful; this is a trick question if you don't stop to
0.1-Ω
2-kΩ
2.2-kΩ
10 kΩ,
RL

Section 2.7: Superposition Principle
think about it.]
Figure P2.91 
 P2.92. Starting from the Norton equivalent circuit with a resistive load 
 attached, find an
expression for the power delivered to the load in terms of 
 and 
 Assuming that 
 and
 are fixed values and that 
 is variable, show that maximum power is delivered for 
Find an expression for maximum power delivered to the load in terms of 
 and 
P2.93. A battery can be modeled by a voltage source 
 in series with a resistance 
 Assuming
that the load resistance is selected to maximize the power delivered, what percentage of the
power taken from the voltage source 
 is actually delivered to the load? Suppose that 
what percentage of the power taken from 
 is delivered to the load? Usually, we want to design
battery-operated systems so that nearly all of the energy stored in the battery is delivered to the
load. Should we design for maximum power transfer?
RL
In, Rt,
RL.
In
Rt
RL
RL=Rt.
In
Rt.
Vt
Rt.
Vt
RL=9Rt;
Vt
*P2.94. Use superposition to find the current i in Figure P2.94. First, zero the current source and
find the value  caused by the voltage source alone. Then, zero the voltage source and find the
value  caused by the current source alone. Finally, add the results algebraically.
Figure P2.94 
*P2.95. Solve for  in Figure P2.49 by using superposition.
P2.96. Solve the circuit shown in Figure P2.48 by using superposition. First, zero the 1-A source
and find the value of  with only the 2-A source activated. Then, zero the 2-A source and find
the value of  with only the 1-A source activated. Finally, find the total value of  with both
sources activated by algebraically adding the previous results.
iv
ic
is
i1
i1
i1

Section 2.8: Wheatstone Bridge
P2.97. Solve for  in Figure P2.34 by using superposition.
P2.98. Another method of solving the circuit of Figure P2.24 is to start by assuming that 
Accordingly, we work backward toward the source, using Ohm's law, KCL, and KVL to find the
value of 
 Since we know that 
 is proportional to the value of 
 and since we have found
the value of 
 that produces 
 we can calculate the value of 
 that results when
 Solve for 
 by using this method.
P2.99. Use the method of Problem P2.98 for the circuit of Figure P2.23, starting with the
assumption that 
P2.100. Solve for the actual value of  for the circuit of Figure P2.100, starting with the
assumption that 
 Work back through the circuit to find the value of  that results in
 Then, use proportionality to determine the value of  that results for 
Figure P2.100 
P2.101. Device A shown in Figure P2.101 has 
 for 
 and 
 for 
Figure P2.101 
a. Solve for v with the 2-A source active and the 1-A source zeroed.
b. Solve for v with the 1-A source active and the 2-A source zeroed.
c. Solve for v with both sources active. Why doesn't superposition apply?
i1
v2=1 V.
vs.
v2
vs,
vs
v2=1 V,
v2
vs=12 V.
v2
i2=1 A.
i6
i6=1 A.
Is
i6=1 A.
i6
Is=10 A.
v=3i2
i≥0
v=0
i<0.
P2.102.
a. The Wheatstone bridge shown in Figure 2.66 is balanced with 
and 
 Find 
R1=10 kΩ, R3=3419 Ω,
R2=1 kΩ.
Rx.
R2
100 kΩ

b. Repeat if 
 is 
 and the other values are unchanged.
*P2.103. The Wheatstone bridge shown in Figure 2.66 has 
 and
 The detector can be modeled as a 
 resistance.
a. What value of 
 is required to balance the bridge?
b. Suppose that 
 is 
 higher than the value found in part (a). Find the current through
the detector. [Hint: Find the Thévenin equivalent for the circuit with the detector removed.
Then, place the detector across the Thévenin equivalent and solve for the current.]
Comment.
P2.104. In theory, any values can be used for 
 and 
 in the Wheatstone bridge of Figure
2.66. For the bridge to balance, it is only the ratio 
 that is important. What practical
problems might occur if the values are very small? What practical problems might occur if the
values are very large?
P2.105. Derive expressions for the Thévenin voltage and resistance "seen" by the detector in the
Wheatstone bridge in Figure 2.66. (In other words, remove the detector from the circuit and
determine the Thévenin resistance for the remaining two-terminal circuit.) What is the value of
the Thévenin voltage when the bridge is balanced?
P2.106. Derive Equation 2.93 for the bridge circuit of Figure 2.67 on page 109.
P2.107. Consider a strain gauge in the form of a long thin wire having a length L and a cross-
sectional area A before strain is applied. After the strain is applied, the length increases slightly
to 
 and the area is reduced so the volume occupied by the wire is constant. Assume that
 and that the resistivity  of the wire material is constant. Determine the gauge factor
[Hint: Make use of Equation 1.10 on page 28.]
P2.108. Explain what would happen if, in wiring the bridge circuit of Figure 2.67 on page
109Explain what would happen if, in wiring the bridge circuit of , the gauges in tension (i.e.,
those labeled 
) were both placed on the top of the bridge circuit diagram, shown in part (b)
of the figure, and those in compression were both placed at the bottom of the bridge circuit
diagram.
vs=10 V,R1=10 kΩ,R2=10 kΩ,
Rx=5932 Ω.
5-kΩ
R3
R3
1 Ω
R1
R3
R3/R1
L+ΔL
ΔL/L≪1
ρ
G=ΔR/R0ΔL/L
R+ΔR

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T2.1. Match each entry in Table T2.1(a) with the best choice from the list given in Table T2.1(b)
for circuits composed of sources and resistances. [Items in Table T2.1(b) may be used more
than once or not at all.]
Table T2.1 
Item
Best Match
(a)
a. The equivalent resistance of parallel-connected resistances...
b. Resistances in parallel combine as do...
c. Loads in power distribution systems are most often connected...
d. Solving a circuit by series/parallel combinations applies to...
e. The voltage-division principle applies to...
f. The current-division principle applies to...
g. The superposition principle applies to...
h. Node-voltage analysis can be applied to...
i. In this book, mesh-current analysis is applied to...
j. The Thévenin resistance of a two-terminal circuit equals...
k. The Norton current source value of a two-terminal circuit equals...
l. A voltage source in parallel with a resistance is equivalent to...
(b)
conductances in parallel
in parallel
all circuits
resistances or conductances in parallel
is obtained by summing the resistances
is the reciprocal of the sum of the reciprocals of the resistances
some circuits
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

T2.2. Consider the circuit of Figure T2.2 with 
 and
 Determine the values of  and 
Figure T2.2 
T2.3. Write MATLAB code to solve for the node voltages for the circuit of Figure T2.3.
Figure T2.3 
T2.4. Write a set of equations that can be used to solve for the mesh currents of Figure T2.4. Be
sure to indicate which of the equations you write form the set.
planar circuits
a current source in series with a resistance
conductances in series
circuits composed of linear elements
in series
resistances or conductances in series
a voltage source
the open-circuit voltage divided by the short-circuit current
a current source
the short-circuit current
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
vs=96 V, R1=6 Ω, R2=48 Ω, R3=16 Ω,
R4=60 Ω.
is
i4.

Figure T2.4 
 T2.5. Determine the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for the circuit of Figure T2.5. Draw
the equivalent circuits labeling the terminals to correspond with the original circuit.
Figure T2.5 
T2.6. According to the superposition principle, what percentage of the total current flowing
through the 
 resistance in the circuit of Figure T2.6 results from the 5-V source? What
percentage of the power supplied to the 
 resistance is supplied by the 5-V source? Assume
that both sources are active when answering both questions.
Figure T2.6 
T2.7. Determine the equivalent resistance between terminals a and b in Figure T2.7.
5-Ω
5-Ω

Figure T2.7
T2.8. Transform the 2-A current source and 
 resistance in Figure T2.8 into an equivalent
series combination. Then, combine the series voltage sources and resistances. Draw the circuit
after each step.
Figure T2.8 
6-Ω

Chapter 3 Inductance and Capacitance
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Find the current (voltage) for a capacitance or inductance given the voltage (current) as a function of
time.
Compute the capacitances of parallel-plate capacitors.
Compute the energies stored in capacitances or inductances.
Describe typical physical construction of capacitors and inductors and identify parasitic effects.
Find the voltages across mutually coupled inductances in terms of the currents.
Apply the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox to the current-voltage relationships for capacitances and
inductances.
Introduction to this chapter:
Previously, we studied circuits composed of resistances and sources. In this
chapter, we discuss two additional circuit elements: inductors and capacitors.
Whereas resistors convert electrical energy into heat, inductors and capacitors are

energy-storage elements. They can store energy and later return it to the circuit.
Capacitors and inductors do not generate energy—only the energy that has been
put into these elements can be extracted. Thus, like resistors, they are said to be
passive elements.
Electromagnetic field theory is the basic approach to the study of the effects of
electrical charge. However, circuit theory is a simplification of field theory that is
much easier to apply. Capacitance is the circuit property that accounts for energy
stored in electric fields. Inductance accounts for energy stored in magnetic fields.
We will learn that the voltage across an ideal inductor is proportional to the time
derivative of the current. On the other hand, the voltage across an ideal capacitor is
proportional to the time integral of the current.
We will also study mutual inductance, a circuit property that accounts for ­magnetic
fields that are mutual to several inductors. In Chapter 14, we will see that mutual
inductance forms the basis for transformers, which are critical to the transmission of
electrical power over long distances.
Several types of transducers are based on inductance and capacitance. For
example, one type of microphone is basically a capacitor in which the capacitance
changes with sound pressure. An application of mutual inductance is the linear
variable differential transformer in which position of a moving iron core is converted
into a voltage.
Sometimes an electrical signal that represents a physical variable such as
displacement is noisy. For example, in an active (electronically controlled)
suspension for an automobile, the position sensors are affected by road roughness
as well as by the loading of the vehicle. To obtain an electrical signal representing
the displacement of each wheel, the rapid fluctuations due to road roughness must
be eliminated. Later, we will see that this can be accomplished using inductance and
capacitance in circuits known as filters.
After studying this chapter, we will be ready to extend the basic circuit-analysis
techniques learned in Chapter 2 to circuits having inductance and capacitance.

3.1 Capacitance
Capacitors are constructed by separating two sheets of conductor, which is usually metallic, by a thin
layer of insulating material. In a parallel-plate capacitor, the sheets are flat and parallel as shown in
Figure 3.1. The insulating material between the plates, called a dielectric, can be air, Mylar®,
polyester, polypropylene, mica, or a variety of other materials.
Figure 3.1 
A parallel-plate capacitor consists of two conductive plates separated by a dielectric layer.
Capacitors are ­constructed by separating two ­conducting plates, which are
usually metallic, by a thin layer of insulating material.
Let us consider what happens as current flows through a capacitor. Suppose that current flows
downward, as shown in Figure 3.2(a). In most metals, current consists of electrons moving, and
conventional current flowing downward represents electrons actually moving upward. As electrons move
upward, they collect on the lower plate of the capacitor. Thus, the lower plate accumulates a net
negative charge that produces an electric field in the dielectric. This electric field forces electrons to
leave the upper plate at the same rate that they accumulate on the lower plate. Therefore, current
appears to flow through the capacitor. As the charge builds up, voltage appears across the capacitor.

Figure 3.2 
A capacitor and its fluid-flow analogy.
We say that the charge accumulated on one plate is stored in the capacitor. However, the total charge
on both plates is always zero, because positive charge on one plate is balanced by negative charge of
equal magnitude on the other plate.
Positive charge on one plate is balanced by negative charge of equal magnitude
on the other plate.
Fluid-Flow Analogy
In terms of the fluid-flow analogy, a capacitor represents a reservoir with an elastic membrane
separating the inlet and outlet as shown in Figure 3.2(b). As the fluid flows into the inlet, the membrane
is stretched, creating a force (analogous to capacitor voltage) that opposes further flow. The displaced
fluid volume starting from the unstretched membrane position is analogous to the charge stored on one
plate of the capacitor.
In terms of the fluid-flow analogy, a capacitor ­represents a reservoir with an
elastic membrane separating the inlet and outlet.

Stored Charge in Terms of Voltage
In an ideal capacitor, the stored charge q is proportional to the voltage between the plates:
The constant of proportionality is the capacitance C, which has units of farads (F). Farads are equivalent
to coulombs per volt.
In an ideal capacitor, the stored charge q is ­proportional to the voltage between
the plates.
To be more precise, the charge q is the net charge on the plate corresponding to the positive reference
for v. Thus, if v is positive, there is positive charge on the plate corresponding to the positive reference
for v. On the other hand, if v is negative, there is negative charge on the plate corresponding to the
positive reference.
A farad is a very large amount of capacitance. In most applications, we deal with capacitances in the
range from a few picofarads 
up to perhaps 0.01 F. Capacitances in the femtofarad 
range are responsible for limiting the performance of computer chips.
In most applications, we deal with capacitances in the range from a few
picofarads up to perhaps 0.01 F.
Current in Terms of Voltage
q=Cv
(3.1)
(
1 pF=
10
−12
 F
)
(
1 fF=
10
−15
 F
)

Recall that current is the time rate of flow of charge. Taking the derivative of each side of Equation 3.1
with respect to time, we have
Ordinarily, capacitance is not a function of time. (An exception is the capacitor microphone mentioned
earlier.) Thus, the relationship between current and voltage becomes
Equations 3.1 and 3.3 show that as voltage increases, current flows through the capacitance and
charge accumulates on each plate. If the voltage remains constant, the charge is constant and the
current is zero. Thus, a capacitor appears to be an open circuit for a steady dc voltage.
Capacitors act as open ­circuits for steady dc voltages.
The circuit symbol for capacitance and the references for v and i are shown in Figure 3.3. Notice that
the references for the voltage and current have the passive configuration. In other words, the current
reference direction points into the positive reference polarity. If the references were opposite to the
passive configuration, Equation 3.3 would have a minus sign:
Figure 3.3 
The circuit symbol for capacitance, including references for the current i(t) and voltage v(t).
Sometimes, we emphasize the fact that in general the voltage and current are functions of time by
denoting them as v(t) and i(t).
Example 3.1 Determining Current for a Capacitance Given Voltage
i=
dq
dt
=
d
dt
(
Cv
)
(3.2)
i=C 
dv
dt
(3.3)
i=−C 
dv
dt
(3.4)

Suppose that the voltage v(t) shown in Figure 3.4(b) is applied to a 
capacitance. Plot the
stored charge and the current through the capacitance versus time.
Figure 3.4 
Circuit and waveforms for Example 3.1.
Solution 
The charge stored on the top plate of the capacitor is given by Equation 3.1. [We know that q(t)
represents the charge on the top plate because that is the plate corresponding to the positive
reference for v(t).] Thus,
This is shown in Figure 3.4(c).
The current flowing through the capacitor is given by Equation 3.3:
Of course, the derivative of the voltage is the slope of the voltage versus time plot. Hence, for t
between 0 and 
we have
1−μF
q(
t
)=Cv(
t
)=
10
−6
v(
t
)
i(
t
)=C 
dv(
t
)
dt
=
10
−6
 
dv(
t
)
dt
2 μs,
dv(
t
)
dt
=
10 V
2×
10
−6
 s
=5×
10
6
 V/s

and
Between 
and 
the voltage is constant 
and the current is zero. Finally, between
and 
we get
and
A plot of i(t) is shown in Figure 3.4(d).
Notice that as the voltage increases, current flows through the capacitor and charges accumulate on
the plates. For constant voltage, the current is zero and the charge is constant. When the voltage
decreases, the direction of the current reverses, and the stored charge is removed from the
capacitor.
Exercise 3.1 
The charge on a 
capacitor is given by
Find expressions for the voltage and for the current. (The angle is in radians.)
Answer 
Voltage in Terms of Current
Suppose that we know the current i(t) flowing through a capacitance C and we want to compute the
charge and voltage. Since current is the time rate of charge flow, we must integrate the current to
compute charge. Often in circuit analysis problems, action starts at some initial time 
and the initial
charge 
is known. Then, charge as a function of time is given by
i(
t
)=C 
dv(
t
)
dt
=
10
−6
×5×
10
6
=5 A
t=2
4 μs,
(
dv/dt=0
)
t=4
5 μs,
dv(
t
)
dt
=
−10 V
10
−6
 s
=−
10
7
 V/s
i(
t
)=C 
dv(
t
)
dt
=
10
−6
×(
−
10
7
)=−10 A
2-μF
q(
t
)=
10
−6
 sin(
10
5
t
) C

v(
t
)=0.5 sin(
10
5
t
) V, i(
t
)=0.1 cos(
10
5
t
) A.
t
0
,
q(
t
0
)
q(
t
)=
∫
t
0
t
i(
t
) dt+q(
t
0
)
(3.5)

Setting the right-hand sides of Equations 3.1 and 3.5 equal to each other and solving for the voltage
v(t), we have
However, the initial voltage across the capacitance is given by
Substituting this into Equation 3.6, we have
Usually, we take the initial time to be 
Example 3.2 Determining Voltage for a Capacitance Given Current
After 
the current in a 
capacitor is given by
(The argument of the sin function is in radians.) The initial charge on the capacitor is 
Plot
i(t), q(t), and v(t) to scale versus time.
Solution 
First, we use Equation 3.5 to find an expression for the charge:
Solving Equation 3.1 for voltage, we have
Plots of i(t), q(t), and v(t) are shown in Figure 3.5. Immediately after 
the current is positive and
q(t) increases. After the first half-cycle, i(t) becomes negative and q(t) decreases. At the completion
of one cycle, the charge and voltage have returned to zero.
v(
t
)=
1
C
∫
t
0
t
i(
t
) dt+
q(
t
0
)
C
(3.6)
v(
t
0
)=
q(
t
0
)
C
(3.7)
v(
t
)=
1
C
∫
t
0
t
i(
t
) dt+v(
t
0
)
(3.8)
t
0
=0.
t
0
=0,
0.1-μF
i(
t
)=0.5 sin(
10
4
t
) A
q(
0
)=0.
q(t)
=
∫
0
t
i(
t
)dt+q(
0
)
=
∫
0
t
0.5sin(
10
4
t
)dt
=−0.5×
10
−4
cos(
10
4
t
)
|
0
t
=0.5×
10
−4
[1−cos(
10
4
t
)]C
v(
t
)
=
q(
t
)
C
=
q(
t
)
10
−7
=500[ 1− cos(
10
4
t
) ] V
t=0,

Figure 3.5 
Waveforms for Example 3.2.
Stored Energy
The power delivered to a circuit element is the product of the current and the voltage (provided that the
references have the passive configuration):
Using Equation 3.3 to substitute for the current, we have
Suppose we have a capacitor that initially has 
Then the initial stored electrical energy is zero,
and we say that the capacitor is uncharged. Furthermore, suppose that between time 
and some later
time t the voltage changes from 0 to v(t) volts. As the voltage magnitude increases, energy is delivered
to the capacitor, where it is stored in the electric field between the plates.
If we integrate the power delivered from 
to t, we find the energy delivered:
p(
t
)=v(
t
)i(
t
)
(3.9)
p(
t
)=Cv 
dv
dt
(3.10)
v(
t
0
)=0.
t
0
t
0
w(
t
)=
∫
t
0
t
p(
t
)dt
(3.11)

Using Equation 3.10 to substitute for power, we find that
Canceling differential time and changing the limits to the corresponding voltages, we have
Integrating and evaluating, we get
This represents energy stored in the capacitance that can be returned to the circuit.
Solving Equation 3.1 for v(t) and substituting into Equation 3.14, we can obtain two alternative
expressions for the stored energy:
Example 3.3 Current, Power, and Energy for a Capacitance
Suppose that the voltage waveform shown in Figure 3.6(a) is applied to a 
capacitance. Find
and plot the current, the power delivered, and the energy stored for time between 0 and 5 s.
w(
t
)=
∫
​
t
0
t
Cv
dv
dt
dt
(3.12)
w(
t
)=
∫
0
v(
t
)
Cv dv
(3.13)
w(
t
)=
1
2
 C
v
2
(
t
)
(3.14)
w(
t
)=
1
2
 v(
t
)q(
t
)
(3.15)
w(
t
)=
q
2
(
t
)
2C
(3.16)
10-μF

Figure 3.6 
Waveforms for Example 3.3.
Solution 
First, we write expressions for the voltage as a function of time:
Using Equation 3.3, we obtain expressions for the current:
The plot of i(t) is shown in Figure 3.6(b).
Next, we find expressions for power by multiplying the voltage by the current:
The plot of p(t) is shown in Figure 3.6(c). Notice that between 
and 
power is positive,
showing that energy is being delivered to the capacitance. Between 
and 
energy flows out of
the capacitance back into the rest of the circuit.
Next, we use Equation 3.14 to find expressions for the stored energy:
The plot of w(t) is shown in Figure 3.6(d).
Exercise 3.2 
The current through a 
capacitor is shown in Figure 3.7. At 
the voltage across the
capacitor is zero. Find the charge, voltage, power, and stored energy as functions of time and plot them
to scale versus time.
v(
t
)={ 1000t V
for 0<t<1
1000 V
for 1<t<3
500(
5−t
) V
for 3<t<5
i(
t
)
=
C 
dv(
t
)
dt
i(
t
)
=
{
10×
10
−3
 A
for 0<t<1
0 A
for 1<t<3
−5×
10
−3
 A
for 3<t<5
p(
t
)
=
v(
t
)i(
t
)
p(
t
)
=
{
10t W
for 0<t<1
0 W
for 1<t<3
2.5(
t−5
) W
for 3<t<5
t=0
t=1
t=3
t=5,
w(
t
)=
1
2
C
v
2
(
t
)
w(
t
)={ 5
t
2
 J
for 0<t<1
5 J
for 1<t<3
1.25
(
5−t
)
2
 J
for 3<t<5
0.1-μF

t
0
=0,

Figure 3.7 
Square-wave current for Exercise 3.2.
Answer The plots are shown in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8 
Answers for Exercise 3.2.
\??\

3.2 Capacitances in Series and Parallel
Capacitances in Parallel
Suppose that we have three capacitances in parallel as shown in Figure 3.9. Of course, the same
voltage appears across each of the elements in a parallel circuit. The currents are related to the voltage
by Equation 3.3. Thus, we can write
Figure 3.9 
Three capacitances in parallel.
Applying KCL at the top node of the circuit, we have
Using Equations 3.17, 3.18, and 3.19 to substitute into Equation 3.20, we obtain
This can be written as
i
1
=
C
1
dv
dt
(3.17)
i
2
=
C
2
dv
dt
(3.18)
i
3
=
C
3
dv
dt
(3.19)
i=
i
1
+
i
2
+
i
3
(3.20)
i=
C
1
dv
dt
+
C
2
dv
dt
+
C
3
dv
dt
(3.21)
i=(
C
1
+
C
2
+
C
3
) 
dv
dt
(3.22)

Now, we define the equivalent capacitance as the sum of the capacitances in parallel:
We add parallel ­capacitances to find the equivalent capacitance.
Using this definition in Equation 3.22, we find that
Thus, the current in the equivalent capacitance is the same as the total current flowing through the
parallel circuit.
In sum, we add parallel capacitances to find the equivalent capacitance. Recall that for resistances, the
resistances are added if they are in series rather than parallel. Thus, we say that capacitances in
parallel are combined like resistances in series.
Capacitances in parallel are combined like resistances in series.
Capacitances in Series
By a similar development, it can be shown that the equivalent capacitance for three series capacitances
is
We conclude that capacitances in series are combined like resistances in parallel.
C
eq
=
C
1
+
C
2
+
C
3
(3.23)
i=
C
eq
 
dv
dt
(3.24)
C
eq
=
1
1/
C
1
+1/
C
2
+1/
C
3
(3.25)

Capacitances in series are combined like resistances in parallel.
A technique for obtaining high voltages from low-voltage sources is to charge n capacitors in parallel
with the source, and then to switch them to a series combination. The resulting voltage across the series
combination is n times the source voltage. For example, in some cardiac pacemakers, a 2.5-V battery is
used, but 5 V need to be applied to the heart muscle to initiate a beat. This is accomplished by charging
two capacitors from the 2.5-V battery. The capacitors are then connected in series to deliver a brief 5-V
pulse to the heart.
Example 3.4 Capacitances in Series and Parallel
Determine the equivalent capacitance between terminals a and b in Figure 3.10(a).

Figure 3.10 
Circuit of Example 3.4.
Solution 
First, notice that the 
and 
capacitances are in series.
Thus, their equivalent capacitance is:
The resulting equivalent is shown in Figure 3.10(b).
Then, the 
and 
capacitances are in parallel. Their equivalent is 
as shown in Figure
3.10(c).
Finally we combine the 
and 
capacitances in series resulting in 
as shown in Figure
3.10(d).
Exercise 3.3 
Derive Equation 3.25 for the three capacitances shown in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11 
Three capacitances in series.
Exercise 3.4 
a. Two capacitances of 
and 
are in series. Find the equivalent capacitance.
b. Repeat if the capacitances are in parallel.
12-μF
24-μF
1
1/12+1/24
=8 μF
8-μF
4-μF
12-μF
6-μF
12-μF
4-μF
2 μF
1 μF

Answer 
a. 
b. 
2/3 μF;
3 μF.

3.3 Physical Characteristics of Capacitors
Capacitance of the Parallel-Plate Capacitor
A parallel-plate capacitor is shown in Figure 3.12, including dimensions. The area of each plate is
denoted as A. (Actually, A is the area of one side of the plate.) The rectangular plate shown has a width
W, length L, and area 
The plates are parallel, and the distance between them is denoted as d.
Figure 3.12 
A parallel-plate capacitor, including dimensions.
If the distance d between the plates is much smaller than both the width and the length of the plates, the
capacitance is approximately given by
in which 
is the dielectric constant of the material between the plates. For vacuum, the dielectric
constant is
Dielectric constant of vacuum.
A=W×L.
C=
∈A
d
(3.26)
∈
∈=
∈
0
≅8.85×
10
−12
 F/m

For other materials, the dielectric constant is
where 
is the relative dielectric constant which has no physical units. Values of the relative
dielectric constant for selected materials are given in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1 Relative Dielectric Constants for Selected Materials
Air
1.0
Diamond
5.5
Mica
7.0
Polyester
3.4
Quartz
4.3
Silicon dioxide
3.9
Water
78.5
Example 3.5 Calculating Capacitance Given Physical Parameters
Compute the capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor having rectangular plates 10 cm by 20 cm
separated by a distance of 0.1 mm. The dielectric is air. Repeat if the dielectric is mica.
Solution 
First, we compute the area of a plate:
From Table 3.1, we see that the relative dielectric constant of air is 1.00. Thus, the dielectric
constant is
Then, the capacitance is
∈=
∈
r
∈
0
(3.27)
∈
r
A=L×W=(
10×
10
−2
)×(
20×
10
−2
)=0.02
 m
2
 ∈=
∈
r
∈
0
=1.00×8.85×
10
−12
 F/m

For a mica dielectric, the relative dielectric constant is 7.0. Thus, the capacitance is seven times
larger than for air or vacuum:
Exercise 3.5 
We want to design a 
capacitor. Compute the length required for rectangular plates of 2-cm width if
the dielectric is polyester of 
thickness.
Answer 
Practical Capacitors
To achieve capacitances on the order of a microfarad, the dimensions of parallel-plate capacitors are
too large for compact electronic circuits such as portable computers or cellular telephones. Frequently,
capacitors are constructed by alternating the plates with two layers of dielectric, which are then rolled to
fit in a smaller area. By staggering the plates before rolling, electrical contact can be made with the
plates from the ends of the roll. This type of construction is illustrated in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13 
Practical capacitors can be constructed by interleaving the plates with two dielectric layers and rolling
them up. By staggering the plates, connection can be made to one plate at each end of the roll.
To achieve small-volume capacitors, a very thin dielectric having a high dielectric constant is desirable.
However, dielectric materials break down and become conductors when the electric field intensity (volts
per meter) is too high. Thus, real capacitors have maximum voltage ratings. For a given voltage, the
electric field intensity becomes higher as the dielectric layer becomes thinner. Clearly, an engineering
trade-off exists between compact size and voltage rating.
C=
∈A
d
=
8.85×
10
−12
×0.02
10
−4
=1770×
10
−12
 F
C=12,390×
10
−12
 F
1-μF
15-μm

L=24.93 m.

Real capacitors have ­maximum voltage ratings.
An engineering trade-off exists between compact size and high voltage rating.
Electrolytic Capacitors
In electrolytic capacitors, one of the plates is metallic aluminum or tantalum, the dielectric is an oxide
layer on the surface of the metal, and the other "plate" is an electrolytic solution. The oxide-coated
metallic plate is immersed in the electrolytic solution.
This type of construction results in high capacitance per unit volume. However, only one polarity of
voltage should be applied to electrolytic capacitors. For the opposite polarity, the dielectric layer is
chemically attacked, and a conductive path appears between the plates. (Usually, the allowed polarity is
marked on the outer case.) On the other hand, capacitors constructed with polyethylene, Mylar®, and so
on can be used in applications where the voltage polarity reverses. When the application results in
voltages of only one polarity and a large-value capacitance is required, designers frequently use
electrolytic capacitors.
Only voltages of the proper polarity should be applied to electrolytic capacitors.
Parasitic Effects
Real capacitors are not always well modeled simply as a capacitance. A more complete circuit model for
a capacitor is shown in Figure 3.14. In addition to the capacitance C, series resistance 
appears
because of the resistivity of the material composing the plates. A series inductance 
(we discuss
R
s
L
s

inductance later in this chapter) occurs because the current flowing through the capacitor creates a
magnetic field. Finally, no practical material is a perfect insulator, and the resistance 
represents
conduction through the dielectric.
Figure 3.14 
The circuit model for a capacitor, including the parasitic elements 
and 
We call 
and 
parasitic elements. We design capacitors to minimize the effects of
parasitic circuit elements consistent with other requirements such as physical size and voltage rating.
However, parasitics are always present to some degree. In designing circuits, care must be used to
select components for which the parasitic effects do not prevent proper operation of the circuit.
Example 3.6 What Happened to the Missing Energy?
Consider the situation shown in Figure 3.15. Prior to 
the capacitor 
is charged to a voltage of
and the other capacitor has no charge (i.e., 
). At 
the switch closes. Compute
the total energy stored by both capacitors before and after the switch closes.
Figure 3.15 
See Example 3.6.
Solution 
The initial stored energy for each capacitor is
R
p
R
s
, 
L
s
,
R
p
.
R
s
, 
L
s
,
R
p
t=0,
C
1
v
1
=100 V
v
2
=0
t=0,

and the total energy is
To find the voltage and stored energy after the switch closes, we make use of the fact that the total
charge on the top plates cannot change when the switch closes. This is true because there is no
path for electrons to enter or leave the upper part of the circuit.
The charge stored on the top plate of 
prior to 
is given by
Furthermore, the initial charge on 
is zero:
Thus, after the switch closes, the charge on the equivalent capacitance is
Also, notice that after the switch is closed, the capacitors are in parallel and have an equivalent
capacitance of
The voltage across the equivalent capacitance is
Of course, after the switch is closed, 
Now, we compute the stored energy with the switch closed:
The total stored energy with the switch closed is
w
1
=
1
2
 
C
1
v
1
2
=
1
2
 (
10
−6
)
(
100
)
2
=5 mJ
w
2
=0
w
total
=
w
1
+
w
2
=5 mJ
C
1
t=0
q
1
=
C
1
v
1
=1×
10
−6
×100=100 μC
C
2
q
2
=0
q
eq
=
q
1
+
q
2
=100 μC
C
eq
=
C
1
+
C
2
=2 μF
v
eq
=
q
eq
C
eq
=
100 μC
2 μF
=50 V
v
1
=
v
2
=
v
eq
.
w
1
=
1
2
 
C
1
v
2
eq
=
1
2
 (
10
−6
)
(
50
)
2
=1.25 mJ
w
2
=
1
2
 
C
2
v
2
eq
=
1
2
 (
10
−6
)
(
50
)
2
=1.25 mJ

Thus, we see that the stored energy after the switch is closed is half of the value before the switch is
closed. What happened to the missing energy?
Usually, the answer to this question is that it is absorbed in the parasitic resistances. It is impossible
to construct capacitors that do not have some parasitic effects. Even if we use superconductors for
the wires and capacitor plates, there would be parasitic inductance. If we included the parasitic
inductance in the circuit model, we would not have missing energy. (We study circuits with time-
varying voltages and currents in Chapter 4.)
Usually, the missing energy is absorbed in the parasitic resistances.
To put it another way, a physical circuit that is modeled exactly by Figure 3.15 does not exist.
Invariably, if we use a realistic model for an actual circuit, we can account for all of the energy.
A physical circuit that is modeled exactly by Figure 3.15 does not exist.
w
total
=
w
1
+
w
2
=2.5 mJ

3.4 Inductance
Inductors are usually ­constructed by coiling wire around a form.
An inductor is usually constructed by coiling a wire around some type of form. Several examples of
practical construction are illustrated in Figure 3.16. Current flowing through the coil creates a magnetic
field or flux that links the coil. Frequently, the coil form is composed of a magnetic material such as iron
or iron oxides that increases the magnetic flux for a given current. (Iron cores are often composed of thin
sheets called laminations. We discuss the reason for this construction technique in Chapter 14.)
Figure 3.16 
An inductor is constructed by coiling a wire around some type of form.
When the current changes in value, the resulting magnetic flux changes. According to Faraday's law of
electromagnetic induction, time-varying magnetic flux linking a coil induces voltage across the coil. For
an ideal inductor, the voltage is proportional to the time rate of change of the current. Furthermore, the
polarity of the voltage is such as to oppose the change in current. The constant of proportionality is
called inductance, usually denoted by the letter L.
The circuit symbol for inductance is shown in Figure 3.17. In equation form, the voltage and current are
related by

Figure 3.17 
Circuit symbol and the 
relationship for inductance.
As usual, we have assumed the passive reference configuration. In case the references are opposite to
the passive configuration, Equation 3.28 becomes
Inductance has units of henries (H), which are equivalent to volt seconds per ampere. Typically, we deal
with inductances ranging from a fraction of a microhenry 
to several tens of henries.
Inductance has units of ­henries (H), which are equivalent to volt seconds per
ampere.
Fluid-Flow Analogy
The fluid-flow analogy for inductance is the inertia of the fluid flowing through a frictionless pipe of
constant diameter. The pressure differential between the ends of the pipe is analogous to voltage, and
the flow rate or velocity is analogous to current. Thus, the acceleration of the fluid is analogous to rate of
change of current. A pressure differential exists between the ends of the pipe only when the flow rate is
increasing or decreasing.
The fluid-flow analogy for inductance is the inertia of the fluid flowing through a
v−i
v(
t
)=L 
di
dt
(3.28)
v(
t
)=−L 
di
dt
(3.29)
(
μH
)

frictionless pipe of constant diameter.
One place where the inertia of flowing fluid is encountered is when a valve (typically operated by an
electrical solenoid) closes suddenly, cutting off the flow. For example, in a washing machine, the sudden
change in velocity of the water flow can cause high pressure, resulting in a bang and vibration of the
plumbing. This is similar to electrical effects that occur when current in an inductor is suddenly
interrupted. An application for the high voltage that appears when current is suddenly interrupted is in
the ignition system for a gasoline-powered internal combustion engine.
Current in Terms of Voltage
Suppose that we know the initial current 
and the voltage v(t) across an inductance. Furthermore,
suppose that we need to compute the current for 
Rearranging Equation 3.28, we have
Integrating both sides, we find that
Notice that the integral on the right-hand side of Equation 3.31 is with respect to time. Furthermore, the
limits are the initial time 
and the time variable t. The integral on the left-hand side is with respect to
current with limits that correspond to the time limits on the right-hand side. Integrating, evaluating, and
rearranging, we have
Notice that as long as v(t) is finite, i(t) can change only by an incremental amount in a time increment.
Thus, i(t) must be continuous with no instantaneous jumps in value (i.e., discontinuities). (Later, we
encounter idealized circuits in which infinite voltages appear briefly, and then the current in an
inductance can change instantaneously.)
Stored Energy
i(
t
0
)
t>
t
0
.
di=
1
L
 v(
t
) dt
(3.30)
∫
i(
t
0
)
i(
t
)
di=
1
L
∫
t
0
t
v(
t
)dt
(3.31)
t
0
i(
t
)=
1
L
∫
t
0
t
v(
t
) dt+i(
t
0
)
(3.32)

Assuming that the references have the passive configuration, we compute the power delivered to a
circuit element by taking the product of the current and the voltage:
Using Equation 3.28 to substitute for the voltage, we obtain
Consider an inductor having an initial current 
Then, the initial electrical energy stored is zero.
Furthermore, assume that between time 
and some later time t, the current changes from 0 to i(t). As
the current magnitude increases, energy is delivered to the inductor, where it is stored in the magnetic
field.
Integrating the power from 
to t, we find the energy delivered:
Using Equation 3.34 to substitute for power, we have
Canceling differential time and changing the limits to the corresponding currents, we get
Integrating and evaluating, we obtain
This represents energy stored in the inductance that is returned to the circuit if the current changes back
to zero.
Example 3.7 Voltage, Power, and Energy for an Inductance
The current through a 5-H inductance is shown in Figure 3.18(a). Plot the voltage, power, and
stored energy to scale versus time for t between 0 and 5 s.
p(
t
)=v(
t
)i(
t
)
(3.33)
p(
t
)=Li(
t
) 
di
dt
(3.34)
i(
t
0
)=0.
t
0
t
0
w(
t
)=
∫
t
0
t
p(
t
) dt
(3.35)
w(
t
)=
∫
t
0
t
Li 
d
i
d
t
 dt
(3.36)
w(
t
)=
∫
0
i(
t
)
Li di
(3.37)
w(
t
)=
1
2
 L
i
2
(
t
)
(3.38)

Figure 3.18 
Waveforms for Example 3.7.
Solution 
We use Equation 3.28 to compute voltages:
The time derivative of the current is the slope (rise over run) of the current versus time plot. For t
between 0 and 2 s, we have 
and thus, 
For t between 2 and 4 s, 
and
therefore, 
Finally, between 4 and 5 s, 
and 
A plot of the voltage versus
time is shown in Figure 3.18(b).
Next, we obtain power by taking the product of current and voltage at each point in time. The
resulting plot is shown in Figure 3.18(c).
Finally, we use Equation 3.38 to compute the stored energy as a function of time:
The resulting plot is shown in Figure 3.18(d).
Notice in Figure 3.18 that as current magnitude increases, power is positive and stored energy
v(
t
)=L 
di
dt
di/dt=1.5 A/s
v=7.5 V.
di/dt=0,
v=0.
di/dt=−3 A/s
v=−15 V.
w(
t
)=
1
2
 L
i
2
(
t
)

accumulates. When the current is constant, the voltage is zero, the power is zero, and the stored
energy is constant. When the current magnitude falls toward zero, the power is negative, showing
that energy is being returned to the other parts of the circuit.
Example 3.8 Inductor Current with Constant Applied Voltage
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 3.19(a). In this circuit, we have a switch that closes at 
connecting a 10-V source to a 2-H inductance. Find the current as a function of time.
Figure 3.19 
Circuit and waveforms for Example 3.8.
Solution 
Notice that because the voltage applied to the inductance is finite, the current must be continuous.
Prior to 
the current must be zero. (Current cannot flow through an open switch.) Thus, the
current must also be zero immediately after 
The voltage across the inductance is shown in Figure 3.19(b). To find the current, we employ
Equation 3.32:
In this case, we take 
and we have 
Substituting values, we get
t=0,
t=0,
t=0.
i(
t
)=
1
L
∫
t
0
t
v(
t
) dt+i(
t
0
)
t
0
=0,
i(
t
0
)=i(
0
)=0.
i(
t
)=
1
2
∫
0
t
10 dt

where we have assumed that t is greater than zero. Integrating and evaluating, we obtain
A plot of the current is shown in Figure 3.19(c).
Notice that the current in the inductor gradually increases after the switch is closed. Because a
constant voltage is applied after 
the current increases at a steady rate as predicted by Equation
3.28, which is repeated here for convenience:
If v(t) is constant, the rate of change of the current di/dt is constant.
Suppose that at 
we open the switch in the circuit of Figure 3.19. Ideally, current cannot flow
through an open switch. Hence, we expect the current to fall abruptly to zero at 
However, the
voltage across the inductor is proportional to the time rate of change of the current. For an abrupt
change in current, this principle predicts infinite voltage across the inductor. This infinite voltage would
last for only the instant at which the current falls. Later, we introduce the concept of an impulse function
to describe this situation (and similar ones). For now, we simply point out that very large voltages can
appear when we switch circuits that contain inductances.
If we set up a real circuit corresponding to Figure 3.19(a) and open the switch at 
we will probably
find that the high voltage causes an arc across the switch contacts. The arc persists until the energy in
the inductor is used up. If this is repeated, the switch will soon be destroyed.
Exercise 3.6 
The current through a 10-mH inductance is 
Find the voltage and stored energy
as functions of time. Assume that the references for v(t) and i(t) have the passive configuration. (The
angle is in radians.)
Answer 
Exercise 3.7 
The voltage across a 
inductance is shown in Figure 3.20(a). The initial current is 
Find
and plot the current i(t) to scale versus time. Assume that the references for v(t) and i(t) have the
passive configuration.
i(
t
)=5t A  for t>0
t=0,
v(
t
)=L 
di
dt
t=1 s,
t=1 s.
t=1 s,
i(
t
)=0.1 cos(
10
4
t
) A.

v(
t
)=−10 sin(
10
4
t
) V, w(
t
)=50
 cos
2
(
10
4
t
) μJ.
150-μH
i(
0
)=0.

Figure 3.20 
See Exercise 3.7.
Answer The current is shown in Figure 3.20(b).

3.5 Inductances In Series and Parallel
It can be shown that the equivalent inductance for a series circuit is equal to the sum of the inductances
connected in series. On the other hand, for inductances in parallel, we find the equivalent inductance by
taking the reciprocal of the sum of the reciprocals of the parallel inductances. Series and parallel
equivalents for inductances are illustrated in Figure 3.21. Notice that inductances are combined in
exactly the same way as are resistances. These facts can be proven by following the pattern used
earlier in this chapter to derive the equivalents for series capacitances.
Figure 3.21 
Inductances in series and parallel are combined in the same manner as resistances.
Inductances in series and ­parallel are combined by using the same rules as for
resistances: series ­inductances are added; parallel inductances are combined
by taking the reciprocal of the sum of the reciprocals of the individual
inductances.
Example 3.9 Inductances in Series and Parallel

Determine the equivalent inductance between terminals a and b in Figure 3.22(a).
Figure 3.22 
Circuit of Example 3.9.
Solution 
First, notice that the 3-H, 6-H, and 2-H inductances are in parallel.
Thus, their equivalent inductance is:
The resulting equivalent is shown in Figure 3.22(b).
Finally, we combine the 4-H and 1-H inductances in series resulting in 5 H as shown in Figure
3.22(c).
Exercise 3.8 
Prove that inductances in series are added to find the equivalent inductance.
1
1/3+1/6+1/2
=1 H

Exercise 3.9 
Prove that inductances in parallel are combined according to the formula given in Figure 3.21(b).
Exercise 3.10 
Find the equivalent inductance for each of the circuits shown in Figure 3.23.
Figure 3.23 
See Exercise 3.10.
Answer 
a. 3.5 H;
b. 8.54 H.

3.6 Practical Inductors
Real inductors take a variety of appearances, depending on their inductance and the application. (Some
examples were shown earlier in Figure 3.16.) For example, a 
inductor could consist of 25 turns of
fine (say, number 28) wire wound on an iron oxide toroidal (doughnut-shaped) core having an outside
diameter of 1/2 cm. On the other hand, a typical 5-H inductor consists of several hundred turns of
number 18 wire on an iron form having a mass of 1 kg.
Usually, metallic iron forms, also called cores, are made of thin sheets called laminations. [See Figure
3.16(c) for an example.] This is necessary because voltages are induced in the core by the changing
magnetic field. These voltages cause eddy currents to flow in the core, dissipating energy. Usually, this
core loss is undesirable. Using laminations that are insulated from one another helps to reduce eddy-
current loss. The laminations are arranged perpendicular to the expected current direction.
Another way to defeat eddy currents is to use a core composed of ferrites, which are oxides of iron that
are electrical insulators. Still another approach is to combine powdered iron with an insulating binder.
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
 3.1
Electronic Photo Flash
Figure PA3.1 shows the electrical circuit of an electronic photo flash such as you may have
seen on a camera. The objective of the unit is to produce a bright flash of light by passing a high
current through the flash tube while the camera shutter is open. As much as 1000 W is supplied
to the flash tube during the flash, which lasts for less than a millisecond. Although the power
level is quite high, the total energy delivered is not great because of the short duration of the
flash. (The energy is on the order of a joule.)
1-μH

FIGURE
PA3.1 
It is not possible to deliver the power directly from the battery to the flash tube for several
reasons. First, practical batteries supply a few tens of volts at most, while several hundred volts
are needed to operate the flash tube. Second, applying the principle of maximum power transfer,
the maximum power available from the battery is limited to 1 W by its internal Thévenin
resistance. (See Equation 2.78 and the related discussion.) This does not nearly meet the
needs of the flash tube. Instead, energy is delivered by the battery over a period of several
seconds and stored in the capacitor. The stored energy can be quickly extracted from the
capacitor because the parasitic resistance in series with the capacitor is very low.
The electronic switch alternates between open and closed approximately 10,000 times per
second. (In some units, you can hear a high-pitched whistle resulting from incidental conversion
of some of the energy to acoustic form.) While the electronic switch is closed, the battery causes
the current in the inductor to build up. Then when the switch opens, the inductor forces current to
flow through the diode, charging the capacitor. (Recall that the current in an inductor cannot
change instantaneously.) Current can flow through the diode only in the direction of the arrow.
Thus, the diode allows charge to flow into the capacitor when the electronic switch is open and
prevents charge from flowing off the capacitor when the electronic switch is closed. Thus, the
charge stored on the capacitor increases each time the electronic switch opens. Eventually, the
voltage on the capacitor reaches several hundred volts. When the camera shutter is opened,
another switch is closed, allowing the capacitor to discharge through the flash tube.
A friend of the author has a remote cabin on the north shore of Lake Superior that has an
unusual water system (illustrated in Figure PA3.2) analogous to the electronic flash circuit.
Water flows through a large pipe immersed in the river. Periodically, a valve on the bottom end
of the pipe suddenly closes, stopping the flow. The inertia of the flowing water creates a pulse of
high pressure when the valve closes. This high pressure forces water through a one-way ball
valve into a storage tank. Air trapped in the storage tank is compressed and forces water to flow
to the cabin as needed.

FIGURE
PA3.2 
Can you identify the features in Figure PA3.2 that are analogous to each of the circuit elements
in Figure PA3.1?
Parasitic Effects for Real Inductors
Real inductors have parasitic effects in addition to the desired inductance. A circuit model for a real
inductor is shown in Figure 3.24. The series resistance 
is caused by the resistivity of the material
composing the wire. (This parasitic effect can be avoided by using wire composed of a superconducting
material, which has zero resistivity.) The parallel capacitance is associated with the electric field in the
dielectric (insulation) between the coils of wire. It is called interwinding capacitance. The parallel
resistance 
represents core loss due, in part, to eddy currents in the core.
R
s
R
p

Figure 3.24 
Circuit model for real inductors including several parasitic elements.
Actually, the circuit model for a real inductor shown in Figure 3.24 is an approximation. The series
resistance is distributed along the length of the wire, as is the interwinding capacitance. A more accurate
model for a real inductor would break each of the parasitic effects into many segments (possibly, an
infinite number). Ultimately, we could abandon circuit models altogether and use electromagnetic field
theory directly.
Rarely is this degree of detail necessary. Usually, modeling a real inductor as an inductance, including
at most a few parasitic effects, is sufficiently accurate. Of course, computer-aided circuit analysis allows
us to use more complex models and achieve more accurate results than traditional mathematical
analysis.

3.7 Mutual Inductance
Sometimes, several coils are wound on the same form so that magnetic flux produced by one coil links
the others. Then a time-varying current flowing through one coil induces voltages in the other coils. The
circuit symbols for two mutually coupled inductances are shown in Figure 3.25. The self inductances
of the two coils are denoted as 
and 
respectively. The mutual inductance is denoted as M,
which also has units of henries. Notice that we have selected the passive reference configuration for
each coil in Figure 3.25.
Figure 3.25 
Circuit symbols and 
relationships for mutually coupled inductances.
The equations relating the voltages to the currents are also shown in Figure 3.25. The mutual terms,
and 
appear because of the mutual coupling of the coils. The self terms, 
and 
are the voltages induced in each coil due to its own current.
The magnetic flux produced by one coil can either aid or oppose the flux produced by the other coil. The
dots on the ends of the coils indicate whether the fields are aiding or opposing. If one current enters a
dotted terminal and the other leaves, the fields oppose one another. For example, if both 
and 
have
positive values in Figure 3.25(b), the fields are opposing. If both currents enter the respective dots (or if
both leave), the fields aid. Thus, if both 
and 
have positive values in Figure 3.25(a), the fields are
aiding.
The magnetic flux produced by one coil can either aid or oppose the flux
produced by the other coil.
L
1
L
2
,
v−i
M d
i
1
/dt
M d
i
2
/dt,
L
1
 d
i
1
/dt
L
2
 d
i
2
/dt,
i
1
i
2
i
1
i
2

The signs of the mutual terms in the equations for the voltages depend on how the currents are
referenced with respect to the dots. If both currents are referenced into (or if both are referenced out of)
the dotted terminals, as in Figure 3.25(a), the mutual term is positive. If one current is referenced into a
dot and the other out, as in Figure 3.25(b), the mutual term carries a negative sign.
Linear Variable Differential Transformer
An application of mutual inductance can be found in a position transducer known as the linear variable
differential transformer (LVDT), illustrated in Figure 3.26. An ac source connected to the center coil sets
up a magnetic field that links both halves of the secondary coil. When the iron core is centered in the
coils, the voltages induced in the two halves of the secondary cancel so that 
(Notice that the
two halves of the secondary winding are wound in opposite directions.) As the core moves up or down,
the couplings between the primary and the halves of the secondary change. The voltage across one half
of the coil becomes smaller, and the voltage across the other half becomes greater. Ideally, the output
voltage is given by
Figure 3.26 
A linear variable differential transformer used as a position transducer.
where x is the displacement of the core. LVDTs are used in applications such as automated
manufacturing operations to measure displacements.
v
o
(
t
)=0.
v
o
(
t
)=Kx cos(
ωt
)

3.8 Symbolic Integration and Differentiation Using MATLAB
As we have seen, finding the current given the voltage (or vice versa) for an energy storage element
involves integration or differentiation. Thus, we may sometimes need to find symbolic answers for
integrals or derivatives of complex functions, which can be very difficult by traditional methods. Then, we
can resort to using symbolic mathematics software. Several programs are available including Maple™
from Maplesoft Corporation, Mathematica™ from Wolfram Research, and the Symbolic Toolbox which is
an optional part of MATLAB from Mathsoft. Each of these programs has its strengths and weaknesses,
and when a difficult problem warrants the effort, all of them should be tried. Because MATLAB is widely
used in Electrical Engineering, we confine our brief discussion to the Symbolic Toolbox.
One note of caution: We have checked the examples, exercises, and problems using MATLAB version
R2015b. Keep in mind that if you use versions other than R2015b, you may not be able to reproduce our
results. Try running our example m-files before sinking a lot of time into solving the problems. Hopefully,
your instructor can give you some guidance on what to expect with the MATLAB versions available to
you.
In the following, we assume that you have some familiarity with MATLAB. A variety of online interactive
tutorials are available at https://www.mathworks.com/ . However, you may find it easier to write
MATLAB instructions for the exercises and problems in this chapter by modeling your solutions after the
code in our examples.
 Example 3.10 Integration and Differentiation Using the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox
Use MATLAB to find expressions for the three voltages shown in Figure 3.27 given 
and
Figure 3.27 
Circuit of Example 3.10.
v
C
(
0
)=0
i
x
(
t
)
=k
t
2
 exp(
−at
) sin(
ωt
) for t≥0
=0 for t<0
(3.39)

Also, plot the current and the voltages for 
and 
(These values
have been chosen mainly to facilitate the demonstration of MATLAB capabilities.) The currents are
in amperes, voltages are in volts, 
is in radians, and time t is in seconds.
Solution 
At first, we use symbols to represent the various parameters (k, a, 
L, and C), denoting the current
and the voltages as ix, vx, vL, and vC. Then, we substitute the numerical values for the symbols and
denote the results as ixn, vxn, vLn, and vCn. (The letter "n" is selected to suggest that the
"numerical" values of the parameters have been substituted into the expressions.)
We show the commands in boldface, comments in regular font, and MATLAB responses in color.
Comments (starting with the % sign) are ignored by MATLAB. We present the work as if we were
entering the commands and comments one at a time in the MATLAB command window, however, it
is usually more convenient to place all of the commands in an m-file and execute them as a group.
To start, we define the various symbols as symbolic objects in MATLAB, define the current ix, and
substitute the numerical values of the parameters to obtain ixn.
>> clear all % Clear work area of previous work.
>> syms vx ix vC vL vxn ixn vCn vLn k a w t L C
>> % Names for symbolic objects must start with a letter and
>> % contain only alpha-numeric characters.
>> % Next, we define ix.
>> ix=k*tˆ2*exp(-a*t)*sin(w*t)
 ix =
 (k*tˆ2*sin(w*t))/exp(a*t)
>> % Next, we substitute k=3, a=2, and w=1
>> % into ix and denote the result as ixn.
>> ixn = subs(ix,[k a w],[3 2 1])
 ixn =
 (3*tˆ2*sin(t))/exp(2*t)
Next, we want to plot the current versus time. We need to consider what range of t should be used
for the plot. In standard mathematical typesetting, the expression we need to plot is
k=3, a=2, ω=1, L=0.5 H, C=1 F,
t≥0.
ωt
ω,
i
x
(
t
)
=3
t
2
 exp(
−2t
) sin(
t
) for t≥0
=0 for t<0

Thoughtful examination of this expression (perhaps supplemented with a little work with a calculator)
reveals that the current is zero at 
builds up quickly after 
because of the 
term, and decays
to relatively small values after about 
because of the exponential term. Thus, we select the
range from 
to 
for the plot. Continuing in MATLAB, we have
>> % Next, we plot ixn for t ranging from 0 to 10 s.
>> ezplot(ixn,[0,10]) 
This opens a window with a plot of the current versus time as shown in Figure 3.28. As expected,
the current increases rapidly after 
and decays to insignificant values by 
(We have used
various Edit menu commands to improve the appearance of the plot for inclusion in this book.)
Figure 3.28 
Plot of 
produced by MATLAB.
Reprinted with permission of The MathWorks, Inc.
Next, we determine the inductance voltage, which is given by
in which the parameters, a, k, and 
are treated as constants. The corresponding MATLAB
command and the result are:
t=0,
t=0
t
2
t=10 s
t=0
t=10 s
t=0
t=10 s.
i
x
(
t
)
v
L
(
t
)=L 
d
i
x
(
t
)
dt
ω

>> vL=L*diff(ix,t)  % L × the derivative of ix with respect to t.
 vL =
 L*((2*k*t*sin(t*w))/exp(a*t) − (a*k*tˆ2*sin(t*w))/exp(a*t) +
  (k*tˆ2*w*cos(t*w))/exp(a*t))
>> % A nicer display for vL is produced with the command:
>> pretty(vL)
 L k t (2 sin(t w) − a t sin(t w) + t w cos(t w))
 ------------------------------------------------
  exp(a t) 
In more standard mathematical typesetting, this becomes
which we can verify by manually differentiating the right-hand side of Equation 3.39 and multiplying
by L. Next, we determine the voltage across the capacitance.
Substituting the expressions for the current and initial voltage we obtain,
This is not a simple integration to perform by hand, but we can accomplish it easily with MATLAB:
>> % Integrate ix with respect to t with limits from 0 to t.
>> vC=(1/C)*int(ix,t,0,t);
>> % We included the semicolon to suppress the output, which is
>> % much too complex for easy interpretation.
>> % Next, we find the total voltage vx.
>> vx = vC + vL;
>> % Now we substitute numerical values for the parameters.
>> vLn=subs(vL,[k a w L C],[3 2 1 0.5 1]);
>> vCn=subs(vC,[k a w L C],[3 2 1 0.5 1]);
>> vxn=subs(vx,[k a w L C],[3 2 1 0.5 1]);
>> % Finally, we plot all three voltages in the same window.
v
L
(
t
)=Lkt exp(
−at
)[2 sin(
ωt
)−at sin(
ωt
)+ωt cos(
ωt
)]
v
C
(
t
)=
1
C
∫
0
t
i
x
(
t
)dt+
v
C
(
0
)for t≥0
v
C
(
t
)=
1
C
∫
0
t
k
t
2
exp(
−at
)sin(
ωt
)dt for t≥0

>> figure % Open a new figure for this plot.
>> ezplot(vLn,[0,10])
>> hold on % Hold so the following two plots are on the same axes.
>> ezplot(vCn,[0,10])
>> ezplot(vxn,[0,10])
The resulting plot is shown in Figure 3.29. (Here again, we have used various items on the Edit
menu to change the scale of the vertical axis and dress up the plot for inclusion in this book.)
Figure 3.29 
Plots of the voltages for Example 3.10.
Reprinted with permission of The MathWorks, Inc.
The commands for this example are included as an m-file named Example_3_10 in the MATLAB
files. (See Appendix E for information about accessing these MATLAB files.) If you copy the file and
place it in a folder in the MATLAB path for your computer, you can run the file and experiment with it.
For example, after running the m-file, if you enter the command
>> vC
you will see the rather complicated symbolic mathematical expression for the voltage across the
capacitance.

Exercise 3.11 
Use MATLAB to work Example 3.2 on page 132 resulting in plots like those in Figure 3.5.
Answer The MATLAB commands including some explanatory comments are:
clear  % Clear the work area.
% We avoid using i alone as a symbol for current because
% we reserve i for the square root of −1 in MATLAB. Thus, we
% will use iC for the capacitor current.
syms t iC qC vC % Define t, iC, qC and vC as symbolic objects.
iC = 0.5*sin((1e4)*t);
ezplot(iC, [0 3*pi*1e-4])
qC=int(iC,t,0,t);  % qC equals the integral of iC.
figure  % Plot the charge in a new window.
ezplot(qC, [0 3*pi*1e-4])
vC = 1e7*qC;
figure % Plot the voltage in a new window.
ezplot(vC, [0 3*pi*1e-4])
The plots are very similar to those of Figure 3.5 on page 133. An m-file (named Exercise_3_11) can be
found in the MATLAB folder.n

Summary
1. Capacitance is the circuit property that accounts for electric-field effects. The units of
capacitance are farads (F), which are equivalent to coulombs per volt.
2. The charge stored by a capacitance is given by 
3. The relationships between current and voltage for a capacitance are
and
4. The energy stored by a capacitance is given by
5. Capacitances in series are combined in the same manner as resistances in parallel.
6. Capacitances in parallel are combined in the same manner as resistances in series.
7. The capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor is given by
For vacuum, the dielectric constant is 
For other materials, the
dielectric constant is 
where 
is the relative dielectric constant.
8. Real capacitors have several parasitic effects.
9. Inductance accounts for magnetic-field effects. The units of inductance are henries (H).
10. The relationships between current and voltage for an inductance are
and
11. The energy stored in an inductance is given by
12. Inductances in series or parallel are combined in the same manner as resistances.
13. Real inductors have several parasitic effects.
14. Mutual inductance accounts for mutual coupling of magnetic fields between coils.
15. MATLAB is a powerful tool for symbolic integration, differentiation, and plotting of functions.
q=Cv.
i=C 
dv
dt
v(
t
)=
1
C
∫
t
0
t
i(
t
) dt+v(
t
0
)
w(
t
)=
1
2
 C
v
2
(
t
)
C=
∈A
d
∈=
∈
0
≅
8.85×
10
−12
 F/m.
∈=
∈
r
∈
0
,
∈
r
v(
t
)=L 
di
dt
i(
t
)=
1
L
∫
t
0
t
v(
t
) dt+i(
t
0
)
w(
t
)=
1
2
 L
i
2
(
t
)


Problems
Section 3.1: Capacitance
P3.1. What is a dielectric material? Give two examples.
P3.2. Briefly discuss how current can flow "through" a capacitor even though a nonconducting
layer separates the metallic parts.
P3.3. What current flows through an ideal capacitor if the voltage across the capacitor is
constant with time? To what circuit element is an ideal capacitor equivalent in circuits for which
the currents and voltages are constant with time?
P3.4. Describe the internal construction of capacitors.
P3.5. A voltage of 50 V appears across a 
capacitor. Determine the magnitude of the net
charge stored on each plate and the total net charge on both plates.
*P3.6. A 
capacitor, initially charged to 100 V, is discharged by a steady current of
How long does it take to discharge the capacitor to 0 V?
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files.See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
P3.7. A 
capacitor is charged to 1000 V. Determine the initial stored charge and energy. If
this capacitor is discharged to 0 V in a time interval of 
find the average power delivered by
the capacitor during the discharge interval.
*P3.8. The voltage across a 
capacitor is given by 
Find expressions
for the current, power, and stored energy. Sketch the waveforms to scale versus time.
P3.9. The voltage across a 
capacitor is given by 
Find expressions for
the current, power, and stored energy. Sketch the waveforms to scale versus time.
P3.10. Prior to 
a 
capacitance is uncharged. Starting at 
the voltage across the
capacitor is increased linearly with time to 100 V in 2 s. Then, the voltage remains constant at
100 V. Sketch the voltage, current, power, and stored energy to scale versus time.
P3.11. The current through a 
capacitor is shown in Figure P3.11. At 
the voltage is
zero. Sketch the voltage, power, and stored energy to scale versus time.
10-μF
2000-μF
100 μA.
5-μF
1 μs,
10-μF
v(
t
)=100 sin(
1000t
).
1-μF
v(
t
)=100
e
−100t
.
t=0,
100-μF
t=0,
0.5-μF
t=0,

Figure P3.11 
P3.12. Determine the capacitor voltage, power, and stored energy at 
in the circuit of
Figure P3.12.
Figure P3.12 
P3.13. A current given by 
flows through a capacitance C. The voltage is zero
at 
Suppose that 
is very large, ideally, approaching infinity. For this current does the
capacitance approximate either an open or a short circuit? Explain.
P3.14. The current through a 
capacitor is shown in Figure P3.14. At 
the voltage is 
Sketch the voltage, power, and stored energy to scale versus time.
Figure P3.14 
*P3.15. A constant (dc) current 
flows into a 
capacitor. The voltage at 
is 
The references for v(t) and i(t) have the passive configuration. Find the power at 
and state whether the power flow is into or out of the capacitor. Repeat for 
P3.16. The energy stored in a 
capacitor is 200 J and is increasing at 500 J/s at 
t=20 ms
i(
t
)=
I
m
 cos(
ωt
)
t=0.
ω
3-μF
t=0,
v(
0
)=10 V.
i(
t
)=3 mA
50-μF
t=0
v(
0
)=−20 V.
t=0
t=1 s.
20-μF
t=3 s.

Section 3.2: Capacitances in Series and Parallel
Determine the voltage magnitude and current magnitude at 
Does the current enter or
leave the positive terminal of the capacitor?
P3.17. At 
the voltage across a certain capacitance is zero. A pulse of current flows through
the capacitance between 
and 
and the voltage across the capacitance increases to 
What can you say about the peak amplitude 
and area under the pulse waveform (i.e.,
current versus time)? What are the units and physical significance of the area under the pulse?
What must happen to the peak amplitude and area under the pulse as 
approaches zero,
assuming that 
remains the same?
P3.18. An unusual capacitor has a capacitance that is a function of time given by
in which the argument of the cosine function is in radians. A constant voltage of 50 V is applied
to this capacitor. Determine the current as a function of time.
P3.19. For a resistor, what resistance corresponds to a short circuit? For an uncharged
capacitor, what value of capacitance corresponds to a short circuit? Explain your answers.
Repeat for an open circuit.
P3.20. Suppose we have a very large capacitance (ideally, infinite) charged to 10 V. What other
circuit element has the same current-voltage relationship? Explain your answer.
*P3.21. We want to store sufficient energy in a 0.01-F capacitor to supply 5 horsepower (hp) for
1 hour. To what voltage must the capacitor be charged? (Note: One horsepower is equivalent to
745.7 watts.) Does this seem to be a practical method for storing this amount of energy? Do you
think that an electric automobile design based on capacitive energy storage is feasible?
P3.22. A 
capacitor has a voltage given by 
Find the power at
and state whether the power flow is into or out of the capacitor. Repeat for 
t=3 s.
t=
t
0
t
0
t
0
+Δt,
V
f
.
I
m
Δt
V
f
C=2+cos(
2000t
) μF
100-μF
v(
t
)=10−10 exp(
−2t
) V.
t=0
t
2
=0.5 s.
P3.23. How are capacitances combined in series and in parallel? Compare with how resistances
are combined.
*P3.24. Find the equivalent capacitance for each of the circuits shown in Figure P3.24.

Figure P3.24 
P3.25. Find the equivalent capacitance between terminals x and y for each of the circuits shown
in Figure P3.25.
Figure P3.25 
P3.26. A network has a 
capacitance in series with the parallel combination of a 
capacitance and an 
capacitance. Sketch the circuit diagram and determine the equivalent
capacitance of the combination.
P3.27. What are the minimum and maximum values of capacitance that can be obtained by
connecting four 
capacitors in series and/or parallel? How should the capacitors be
connected?
5-μF
12-μF
8-μF
2-μF

Section 3.3: Physical Characteristics of Capacitors
P3.28. Two initially uncharged capacitors 
and 
are connected in series.
Then, a 10-V source is connected to the series combination, as shown in Figure P3.28. Find the
voltages 
and 
after the source is applied. [Hint: The charges stored on the two capacitors
must be equal, because the current is the same for both capacitors.]
Figure P3.28 
*P3.29. Suppose that we are designing a cardiac pacemaker circuit. The circuit is required to
deliver pulses of 1-ms duration to the heart, which can be modeled as a 
resistance. The
peak amplitude of the pulses is required to be 5 V. However, the battery delivers only 2.5 V.
Therefore, we decide to charge two equal-value capacitors in parallel from the 2.5-V battery and
then switch the capacitors in series with the heart during the 1-ms pulse. What is the minimum
value of the capacitances required so the output pulse amplitude remains between 4.9 V and 5.0
V throughout its 1-ms duration? If the pulses occur once every second, what is the average
current drain from the battery? Use approximate calculations, assuming constant current during
the output pulse. Find the ampere-hour rating of the battery so it lasts for five years.
P3.30. Suppose that we have two 
capacitors. One is charged to an initial voltage of 50
V, and the other is charged to 100 V. If they are placed in series with the positive terminal of the
first connected to the negative terminal of the second, determine the equivalent capacitance and
its initial voltage. Now compute the total energy stored in the two capacitors. Compute the
energy stored in the equivalent capacitance. Why is it less than the total energy stored in the
original capacitors?
C
1
=
15 μF
C
2
=10 μF
v
1
v
2
500-Ω
100-μF
*P3.31. Determine the capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor having plates 10 cm by 30 cm
separated by 0.01 mm. The dielectric has 
P3.32. A 100-pF capacitor is constructed of parallel plates of metal, each having a width W and
a length L. The plates are separated by air with a distance d. Assume that L and W are both
much larger than d. What is the new capacitance if
a. both L and W are doubled and the other parameters are unchanged?
b. the separation d is doubled and the other parameters are unchanged from their initial
values?
∈
r
=15.

c. the air dielectric is replaced with oil having a relative dielectric constant of 25 and the
other parameters are unchanged from their initial values?
P3.33. We have a parallel-plate capacitor with plates of metal each having a width W and a
length L. The plates are separated by the distance d. Assume that L and W are both much larger
than d. The maximum voltage that can be applied is limited to 
in which K is called
the breakdown strength of the dielectric. Derive an expression for the maximum energy that can
be stored in the capacitor in terms of K and the volume of the dielectric. If we want to store the
maximum energy per unit volume, does it matter what values are chosen for L, W, and d? What
parameters are important?
*P3.34. Suppose that we have a 1000-pF parallel-plate capacitor with air dielectric charged to
1000 V. The capacitor terminals are open circuited. Find the stored energy. If the plates are
moved farther apart so that d is doubled, determine the new voltage on the capacitor and the
new stored energy. Where did the extra energy come from?
P3.35. Two 
capacitors have an initial voltage of 100 V (before the switch is closed), as
shown in Figure P3.35. Find the total stored energy before the switch is closed. Find the voltage
across each capacitor and the total stored energy after the switch is closed. What could have
happened to the energy?
Figure P3.35 
P3.36. A liquid-level transducer consists of two parallel plates of conductor immersed in an
insulating liquid, as illustrated in Figure P3.36. When the tank is empty (i.e., 
), the
capacitance of the plates is 200 pF. The relative dielectric constant of the liquid is 25. Determine
an expression for the capacitance C as a function of the height x of the liquid.
V
max
=K d,
1-μF
x=0

Figure P3.36 
P3.37. A parallel-plate capacitor like that shown in Figure P3.36 has a capacitance of 2000 pF
when the tank is full so the plates are totally immersed in the insulating liquid. (The dielectric
constant of the fluid is different for this problem than for Problem P3.36.) The capacitance is 200
pF when the tank is empty and the space between the plates is filled with air. Suppose that the
tank is full and the capacitance is charged to 1000 V. Then, the capacitance is open circuited so
the charge on the plates cannot change, and the tank is drained. Compute the electrical energy
stored in the capacitor before and after the tank is drained. With the plates open circuited, there
is no electrical source for the extra energy. Where could it have come from?
P3.38. A parallel-plate capacitor is used as a vibration sensor. The plates have an area of 
the dielectric is air, and the distance between the plates is a function of time given by
A constant voltage of 200 V is applied to the sensor. Determine the current through the sensor
as a function of time by using the approximation 
for 
(The argument of the
sinusoid is in radians.)
P3.39. A 
capacitor has a parasitic series resistance of 
as shown in Figure P3.39.
Suppose that the voltage across the capacitance is 
find the voltage
across the resistance. In this situation, to find the total voltage 
to within 1
percent accuracy, is it necessary to include the parasitic resistance? Repeat if 
100
 cm
2
,
d(
t
)=1+0.01 sin(
200t
) mm
1/(
1+x
)≅1−x
x<<1.
0.1-μF
10 Ω,
v
c
(
t
)=10 cos(
100t
);
v(
t
)=
v
r
(
t
)+
v
c
(
t
)
v
c
(
t
)=0.1 cos(
10
7
t
).

Section 3.4: Inductance
Figure P3.39 
*P3.40. Suppose that a parallel-plate capacitor has a dielectric that breaks down if the electric
field exceeds K V/m. Thus, the maximum voltage rating of the capacitor is 
where d
is the separation between the plates. In working Problem P3.33, we find that the maximum
energy that can be stored is 
(Vol) in which Vol is the volume of the
dielectric. Given that 
and that 
(the approximate values for air), find the
dimensions of a parallel-plate capacitor having square plates if it is desired to store 1 mJ at a
voltage of 1000 V in the least possible volume.
V
max
=K d,
w
max
=
1
2
∈
r
∈
0
K
2
K=32×
10
5
 V/m
∈
r
=1
P3.41. Briefly discuss how inductors are constructed.
P3.42. The current flowing through an inductor is increasing in magnitude. Is energy flowing into
or out of the inductor?
P3.43. If the current through an ideal inductor is constant with time, what is the value of the
voltage across the inductor? Comment. To what circuit element is an ideal inductor equivalent
for circuits with constant currents and voltages?
P3.44. Briefly discuss the fluid-flow analogy for an inductor.
*P3.45. The current flowing through a 2-H inductance is shown in Figure P3.45. Sketch the
voltage, power, and stored energy versus time.
Figure P3.45 

P3.46. The current flowing through a 100-mH inductance is given by 0.5 sin (1000t) A, in which
the angle is in radians. Find expressions and sketch the waveforms to scale for the voltage,
power, and stored energy.
P3.47. The current flowing through a 2-H inductance is given by 
Find
expressions for the voltage, power, and stored energy. Sketch the waveforms to scale for 
P3.48. The voltage across a 2-H inductance is shown in Figure P3.48. The initial current in the
inductance is 
Sketch the current, power, and stored energy to scale versus time.
Figure P3.48 
P3.49. The voltage across a 
inductance is given by 
The initial
current is 
Find expressions for the current, power, and stored energy for 
Sketch the waveforms to scale versus time.
P3.50. A 2-H inductance has 
and 
for 
Find an expression for i(t).
Then, using the computer program of your choice, plot v(t) and i(t) for 
*P3.51. A constant voltage of 10 V is applied to a 
inductance, as shown in Figure P3.51.
Figure P3.51 
The current in the inductance at 
is 
At what time 
does the current reach
*P3.52. At 
the current flowing in a 0.5-H inductance is 4 A. What constant voltage must be
applied to reduce the current to 0 at 
P3.53. The current through a 100-mH inductance is given by 
in which the
angle is in radians. Determine the voltage across the inductance. Then, use the computer
program of your choice to plot both the current and the voltage for 
P3.54. Prior to 
the current in a 2-H inductance is zero. Starting at 
the current is
5 exp(
−20t
) A.
0<t
< 100 ms.
i(
0
)=0.
10-μ H
v(
t
)=5 sin(
10
6
t
) V.
i(
0
)=−0.5 A.
t>0.
i(
0
)=0
v(
t
)=
t exp(
−t
)
0≤t.
0≤t≤10 s.
50-μH
t=0
−100 mA.
t
x
+100 mA?
t=0,
t=0.2 s?
i(
t
)=exp(
−t
) sin(
10t
)
0≤t≤3 s.
t=0,
t=0,

Section 3.5: Inductances in Series and Parallel
increased linearly with time to 10 A in 5 s. Then, the current remains constant at 10 A. Sketch
the voltage, current, power, and stored energy to scale versus time.
P3.55. At 
a constant 5-V voltage source is applied to a 3-H inductor. Assume an initial
current of zero for the inductor. Determine the current, power, and stored energy at 
P3.56. At 
the current through a certain inductance is zero. A voltage pulse is applied to the
inductance between 
and 
and the current through the inductance increases to 
What can you say about the peak amplitude 
and area under the pulse waveform (i.e.,
voltage versus time)? What are the units of the area under the pulse? What must happen to the
peak amplitude and area under the pulse as 
approaches zero, assuming that 
remains the
same?
P3.57. At 
the energy stored in a 2-H inductor is 200 J and is increasing at 100 J/s.
Determine the voltage magnitude and current magnitude at 
Does the current enter or
leave the positive terminal of the inductor?
P3.58. What value of inductance (having zero initial current) corresponds to an open circuit?
Explain your answer. Repeat for a short circuit.
P3.59. To what circuit element does a very large (ideally, infinite) inductance having an initial
current of 10 A correspond? Explain your answer.
P3.60. The voltage across an inductance L is given by 
The current is zero
at 
Suppose that 
is very large ideally, approaching infinity. For this voltage, does the
inductance approximate either an open or a short circuit? Explain.
t=0,
t=2 s.
t=
t
0
t
0
t
0
+Δt,
I
f
.
V
m
Δt
I
f
t=5 s,
t=5 s.
v(
t
)=
V
m
 cos(
ωt
).
t=0.
ω
P3.61. Discuss how inductances are combined in series and in parallel. Compare with how
resistances are combined.
*P3.62. Determine the equivalent inductance for each of the series and parallel combinations
shown in Figure P3.62.

Figure P3.62 
 P3.63. Find the equivalent inductance for each of the series and parallel combinations shown in
Figure P3.63.
Figure P3.63 
P3.64. What is the maximum inductance that can be obtained by connecting four 2-H inductors
in series and/or parallel? What is the minimum inductance?
P3.65. Suppose we want to combine (in series or in parallel) an inductance L with a 6-H
inductance to attain an equivalent inductance of 2 H. Should L be placed in series or in parallel
with the original inductance? What value is required for L?
P3.66. Repeat Problem P3.65 for an equivalent inductance of 8 H.
*P3.67. Two inductances 
and 
are connected in parallel, as shown in Figure
P3.67. The initial currents are 
and 
Find an expression for 
in terms of
i(t), 
and 
Repeat for 
Comment.
Figure P3.67 
L
1
=1 H
L
2
=2 H
i
1
(
0
)=0
i
2
(
0
)=0.
i
1
(
t
)
L
1
,
L
2
.
i
2
(
t
).

Section 3.6: Practical Inductors
P3.68. A 10-mH inductor has a parasitic series resistance of 
as shown in Figure
P3.68.
a. The current is given by 
Find 
and v(t). In this
case, for 1-percent accuracy in computing v(t), could the resistance be neglected?
b. Repeat if 
Figure P3.68 
P3.69. Draw the equivalent circuit for a real inductor, including three parasitic effects.
P3.70. Suppose that the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 3.24 accurately represents a real
inductor. A constant current of 100 mA flows through the inductor, and the voltage across its
external terminals is 500 mV. Which of the circuit parameters can be deduced from this
information and what is its value?
P3.71. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P3.71, in which 
with the
argument of the sine function in radians. Find i(t), 
v(t), the energy stored in the
capacitance, the energy stored in the inductance, and the total stored energy. Show that the total
stored energy is constant with time. Comment on the results.
Figure P3.71 
P3.72. The circuit shown in Figure P3.72 has 
in which the argument
of the cos function is in radians. Find v(t), 
i(t), the energy stored in the capacitance, the
energy stored in the inductance, and the total stored energy. Show that the total stored energy is
R
s
=1 Ω,
i(
t
)=0.1 cos(
10
5
t
).
v
R
(
t
), 
v
L
(
t
),
i(
t
)=0.1 cos(
10t
).
v
C
(
t
)=10 sin(
1000t
) V,
v
L
(
t
),
i
L
(
t
)=
0.1 cos(
5000t
) A
i
C
(
t
),

Section 3.7: Mutual Inductance
constant with time. Comment on the results.
Figure P3.72 
P3.73. Describe briefly the physical basis for mutual inductance.
P3.74. The mutually coupled inductances in Figure P3.74 have 
and 
Furthermore, 
and 
Find expressions for 
and 
The arguments of the sine functions are in radians.
Figure P3.74 
*P3.75. Repeat Problem P3.74 with the dot placed at the bottom of 
*P3.76.
a. Derive an expression for the equivalent inductance for the circuit shown in Figure P3.76.
b. Repeat if the dot for 
is moved to the bottom end.
Figure P3.76 
P3.77. Consider the parallel inductors shown in Figure P3.67, with mutual coupling and the dots
L
1
=1 H, 
L
2
=2 H,
M=
1 H.
i
1
(
t
)=sin(
10t
)
i
2
(
t
)=
0.5 sin(
10t
).
v
1
(
t
)
v
2
(
t
).
L
2
.
L
2

Section 3.8: Symbolic Integration and Differentiation Using MATLAB
at the top ends of 
and 
Derive an expression for the equivalent inductance seen by the
source in terms of 
and M. [Hint: Write the circuit equations and manipulate them to
obtain an expression of the form 
in which 
is a function of 
and
M.]
P3.78. Consider the mutually coupled inductors shown in Figure 3.25(a), with a short connected
across the terminals of 
Derive an expression for the equivalent inductance seen looking into
the terminals of 
P3.79. Mutually coupled inductances have
Find 
and the magnitude of the mutual inductance. The angles are in radians.
L
1
L
2
.
L
1
, 
L
2
,
v(
t
)=
L
eq
di(
t
)/dt
L
eq
L
1
, 
L
2
,
L
2
.
L
1
.
L
1
=2 H
L
2
=1H
i
1
=10 cos(
1000t
)
i
2
=0
v
2
=
10
4
sin(
1000t
)
v
1
(
t
)
P3.80. The current through a 200-mH inductance is given by 
in
which the angle is in radians. Using your knowledge of calculus, find an expression for the
voltage across the inductance. Then, use MATLAB to verify your answer for the voltage and to
plot both the current and the voltage for 
 P3.81. A 1-H inductance has 
and 
for 
Using your calculus skills,
find and an expression for 
Then, use MATLAB to verify your answer for 
and to
plot 
and 
for 
i
L
(
t
)=exp(
−2t
) sin(
4πt
) A
0≤t≤2 s.
i
L
(
0
)=0
v
L
(
t
)=
texp(
−t
)
0≤t.
i
L
(
t
).
i
L
(
t
)
v
L
(
t
)
i
L
(
t
)
0≤t≤10 s.

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T3.1. The current flowing through a 
capacitor having terminals labeled a and b is 
for 
Given that 
find an expression for 
for 
Then,
find the energy stored in the capacitor for 
T3.2. Determine the equivalent capacitance 
for Figure T3.2.
Figure T3.2 
T3.3. A certain parallel-plate capacitor has plate length of 2 cm and width of 3 cm. The dielectric
has a thickness of 0.1 mm and a relative dielectric constant of 80. Determine the capacitance.
T3.4. A 2-mH inductance has 
Find an expression for 
Then, find
the peak energy stored in the inductance.
T3.5. Determine the equivalent inductance 
between terminals a and b in Figure T3.5.
Figure T3.5 
T3.6. Given that 
find 
in the circuit of Figure T3.6. The
argument of the sine function is in radians.
10-μF
i
ab
=0.3 exp(
−2000t
) A
t≥0.
v
ab
(
0
)=0,
v
ab
(t)
t≥0.
t=∞.
C
eq
i
ab
=0.3 sin(
2000t
)
A.
v
ab
(
t
).
L
eq
v
c
(
t
)=10 sin(
1000t
) V,
v
s
(
t
)

Figure T3.6 
T3.7. Figure T3.7 has 
and 
Find expressions for 
and
Figure T3.7 
T3.8. The current flowing through a 
capacitor having terminals labeled a and b is 
for 
Given that 
write a sequence of MATLAB
commands to find the expression for 
for 
and to produce plots of the current and
voltage for 
L
1
=40 mH, M=20 mH,
L
2
=30 mH.
v
1
(
t
)
v
2
(
t
).
20-μF
i
ab
=3×
10
5
t
2
 exp(
−2000t
) A
t≥0.
v
ab
(
0
)=5 V,
v
ab
(
t
)
t≥0
0≤t≤5 ms.

 Chapter 4 Transients
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Solve first-order RC or RL circuits.
Understand the concepts of transient response and steady-state response.
Relate the transient response of first-order circuits to the time constant.
Solve RLC circuits in dc steady-state conditions.
Solve second-order circuits.
Relate the step response of a second-order system to its natural frequency and damping ratio.
Use the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox to solve differential equations.
Introduction to this chapter:
In this chapter, we study circuits that contain sources, switches, resistances,
inductances, and capacitances. The time-varying currents and voltages resulting
from the sudden application of sources, usually due to switching, are called

transients.
In transient analysis, we start by writing circuit equations using concepts developed
in Chapter 2, such as KCL, KVL, node-voltage analysis, and mesh-current analysis.
Because the current-voltage relationships for inductances and capacitances involve
integrals and derivatives, we obtain integrodifferential equations. These equations
can be converted to pure differential equations by differentiating with respect to time.
Thus, the study of transients requires us to solve differential equations.

4.1 First-Order RC Circuits
In this section, we consider transients in circuits that contain independent dc sources, resistances, and a
single capacitance.
Discharge of a Capacitance through a Resistance
As a first example, consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.1(a). Prior to 
the capacitor is charged to
an initial voltage 
Then, at 
the switch closes and current flows through the resistor, discharging
the capacitor.
Figure 4.1 
A capacitance discharging through a resistance and its fluid-flow analogy. The capacitor is charged to 
prior to 
(by circuitry that is not shown). At 
the switch closes and the capacitor discharges
through the resistor.
Writing a current equation at the top node of the circuit after the switch is closed yields
Multiplying by the resistance gives
As expected, we have obtained a differential equation.
t=0,
V
i
.
t=0,
V
i
t=0
t=0,
C 
d
v
C
(
t
)
dt
+
v
C
(
t
)
R
=0
RC 
d
v
C
(
t
)
dt
+
v
C
(
t
)=0
(4.1)

Equation 4.1 indicates that the solution for 
must be a function that has the same form as its first
derivative. Of course, a function with this property is an exponential. Thus, we anticipate that the
solution is of the form
Equation 4.1 indicates that the solution for 
must be a function that has
the same form as its first derivative. The function with this property is an
exponential.
in which K and s are constants to be determined.
Using Equation 4.2 to substitute for 
in Equation 4.1, we have
Solving for s, we obtain
Substituting this into Equation 4.2, we see that the solution is
Referring to Figure 4.1(a), we reason that the voltage across the capacitor cannot change
instantaneously when the switch closes. This is because the current through the capacitance is 
In order for the voltage to change instantaneously, the current would have to be infinite.
Since the voltage is finite, the current in the resistance must be finite, and we conclude that the voltage
across the capacitor must be continuous. Thus, we write
Because the current is finite, the voltage across the capacitor cannot change
instantaneously when the switch closes.
v
C
(
t
)
v
c
(
t
)
v
C
(
t
)=K
e
st
(4.2)
v
C
(
t
)
RCKs
e
st
+K
e
st
=0
(4.3)
s=
−1
RC
(4.4)
v
C
(
t
)=K
e
−t/RC
(4.5)
i
C
(
t
)=C d
v
C
/dt.

in which 
represents the voltage immediately after the switch closes. Substituting into Equation
4.5, we have
Hence, we conclude that the constant K equals the initial voltage across the capacitor. Finally, the
solution for the voltage is
A plot of the voltage is shown in Figure 4.2. Notice that the capacitor voltage decays exponentially to
zero.
Figure 4.2 
Voltage versus time for the circuit of Figure 4.1(a). When the switch is closed, the voltage across the
capacitor decays exponentially to zero. At one time constant, the voltage is equal to 36.8 percent of its
initial value.
The time interval 
is called the time constant of the circuit.
The time interval
v
C
(
0+
)=
V
i
(4.6)
v
C
(
0+
)
v
C
(
0+
)=
V
i
=K
e
0
=K
(4.7)
v
C
(
t
)=
V
i
e
−t/RC
(4.8)
τ=RC
τ=RC
(4.9)

is called the time constant of the circuit. In one time constant, the voltage decays by the factor 
After about five time constants, the voltage remaining on the capacitor is negligible compared
with the initial value.
At one time constant, the voltage across a capacitance discharging through a
resistance is 
times its initial value. After about three to five time
constants, the capacitance is almost totally discharged.
An analogous fluid-flow system is shown in Figure 4.1(b). The tank initially filled with water is analogous
to the charged capacitor. Furthermore, the small pipe is analogous to the resistor. At first, when the tank
is full, the flow is large and the water level drops fast. As the tank empties, the flow decreases.
In the past, engineers have frequently applied RC circuits in timing applications. For example, suppose
that when a garage door opens or closes, a light is to be turned on and is to remain on for 30 s. To
achieve this objective, we could design a circuit consisting of (1) a capacitor that is charged to an initial
voltage 
while the door opener is energized, (2) a resistor through which the capacitor discharges,
and (3) a sensing circuit that keeps the light on as long as the capacitor voltage is larger than 
If we choose the time constant 
to be 30 s, the desired operation is achieved.
(In modern designs, a typical garage door opener contains a small computer, known as a
microcontroller, and software that counts seconds for timing purposes. We discuss microcontrollers in
Chapter 8.)
Example 4.1 Capacitance Discharging Through a Resistance
The circuit of Figure 4.1(a) has 
and 
Determine the value of time 
for
which 
Solution 
The voltage is given by Equation 4.8:
e
−1
>0.368.
e
−1
≅0.368
V
i
0.368 
V
i
.
τ=RC
R=2 MΩ, C=3 μF,
V
i
=100 V.
t
x
v
C
(
t
)=25 V.
v
C
(
t
)=
V
i
e
−t/RC
 for t>0

in which the time constant is 
Substituting values, we have
Dividing both sides by 100, we have
Then, taking the natural logarithm of both sides, we obtain:
Charging a Capacitance from a DC Source through a Resistance
Next, consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.3. The source voltage 
is constant-in other words, we
have a dc source. The source is connected to the RC circuit by a switch that closes at 
We assume
that the initial voltage across the capacitor just before the switch closes is 
Let us solve for
the voltage across the capacitor as a function of time.
Figure 4.3 
Capacitance charging through a resistance. The switch closes at 
connecting the dc source 
to
the circuit.
We start by writing a current equation at the node that joins the resistor and the capacitor. This yields
The first term on the left-hand side is the current referenced downward through the capacitor. The
second term is the current referenced toward the left through the resistor. KCL requires that the currents
leaving the node sum to zero.
τ=RC=(
2 MΩ
)×(
3 μF
)=6 s.
v
C
(
t
x
)=25=100
e
−
t
x
/6
0.25=
e
−
t
x
/6
ln(
0.25
)
=
−
t
x
/6
t
x
=
−6 ln(
0.25
)
t
x
=
8.3178 s
V
s
t=0.
v
C
(
0−
)=0.
t=0,
V
s
C 
d
v
C
(
t
)
dt
+
v
C
(
t
)−
V
s
R
=0
(4.10)

is the voltage across the capacitor the instant before the switch closes
(at 
). Similarly, 
is the voltage across the capacitor the instant after
the switch closes.
Rearranging Equation 4.10, we obtain
As expected, we have obtained a linear first-order differential equation with constant coefficients. As in
the previous circuit, the voltage across the capacitance cannot change instantaneously because the
voltages are finite, and thus, the current through the resistance (and therefore through the capacitance)
is finite. Infinite current is required to change the voltage across a capacitance in an instant. Thus, we
have
Now, we need to find a solution for 
that (1) satisfies Equation 4.11 and (2) matches the initial
conditions of the circuit stated in Equation 4.12. Notice that Equation 4.11 is the same as Equation
4.1, except for the constant on the right-hand side. Thus, we expect the solution to be the same as for
Equation 4.1, except for an added constant term. Thus, we are led to try the solution
in which 
and s are constants to be determined.
If we use Equation 4.13 to substitute for 
in Equation 4.11, we obtain
For equality, the coefficient of 
must be zero. This leads to
From Equation 4.14, we also have
v
c
(
0−
)
t=0
v
c
(
0+
)
RC 
d
v
C
(
t
)
dt
+
v
C
(
t
)=
V
s
(4.11)
v
C
(
0+
)=
v
C
(
0−
)=0
(4.12)
v
C
(
t
)
v
C
(
t
)=
K
1
+
K
2
e
st
(4.13)
K
1
, 
K
2
,
v
C
(
t
)
(
1+RCs
)
K
2
e
st
+
K
1
=
V
s
(4.14)
e
st
s=
−1
RC
(4.15)
K
1
=
V
s
(4.16)

Using Equations 4.15 and 4.16 to substitute into Equation 4.13, we obtain
in which 
remains to be determined.
Now, we use the initial condition (Equation 4.12) to find 
We have
from which we find 
Finally, substituting into Equation 4.17, we obtain the solution
The second term on the right-hand side is called the transient response, which eventually decays to
negligible values. The first term on the right-hand side is the steady-state response, also called the
forced response, which persists after the transient has decayed.
When a dc source is contained in the circuit, the total response contains two
parts: forced (or steady-state) and transient.
Here again, the product of the resistance and capacitance has units of seconds and is called the time
constant 
Thus, the solution can be written as
A plot of 
is shown in Figure 4.4. Notice that 
starts at 0 and approaches the final value 
asymptotically as t becomes large. After one time constant, 
has reached 63.2 percent of its
final value. For practical purposes, 
is equal to its final value 
after about five time constants.
Then, we say that the circuit has reached steady state.
v
C
(
t
)=
V
s
+
K
2
e
−t/RC
(4.17)
K
2
K
2
.
v
C
(
0+
)=0=
V
s
+
K
2
e
0
=
V
s
+
K
2
(4.18)
K
2
=−
V
s
.
v
C
(
t
)=
V
s
−
V
s
e
−t/RC
(4.19)
τ=RC.
v
C
(
t
)=
V
s
−
V
s
e
−t/τ
(4.20)
v
C
(
t
)
v
C
(
t
)
V
s
v
C
(
t
)
v
C
(
t
)
V
s

Figure 4.4 
The charging transient for the RC circuit of Figure 4.3.
In the case of a capacitance charging from a dc source through a resistance, a
straight line tangent to the start of the transient reaches the final value at one
time constant.
It can be shown that if the initial slope of 
is extended, it intersects the final value at one time
constant as shown in Figure 4.4.
We have seen in this section that several time constants are needed to charge or discharge a
capacitance. This is the main limitation on the speed at which digital computers can process data. In a
typical computer, information is represented by voltages that nominally assume values of either 
or
0 V, depending on the data represented. When the data change, the voltages must change. It is
impossible to build circuits that do not have some capacitance that is charged or discharged when
voltages change in value. Furthermore, the circuits always have nonzero resistances that limit the
currents available for charging or discharging the capacitances. Therefore, a nonzero time constant is
associated with each circuit in the computer, limiting its speed. We will learn more about digital
computer circuits in later chapters.
RC transients are the main limitation on the speed at which computer chips can
operate.
v
C
+1.8

Example 4.2 First-Order RC Circuit
The switch in the circuit of Figure 4.5(a) has been open for a very long time prior to 
and closes
at 
Find an expression for 
for 
Figure 4.5 
Circuit of Example 4.2.
Solution 
While the switch is open, the capacitance discharges through 
Because the switch has been
open for a very long time, we conclude that 
­Furthermore, infinite current is not
possible in this circuit, so the 
cannot change instantly. Thus, we conclude that 
We can find the Thévenin equivalent circuit for the portion of the circuit on the left hand side of the
dotted line shown in Figure 4.5(a). This is the circuit of Example 2.18 on page 92. The resulting
Thévenin equivalent, with some changes in notation, is shown in Figure 4.5(b).
The circuit in Figure 4.5(b) is the same as the circuit of Figure 4.3, and the voltage is given by
Equation 4.20:
in which the time constant is 
Substituting these values, we have
t=0
t=0.
v
C
(
t
)
t>0.
R
2
.
v
C
(
0−
)=0.
v
C
(
t
)
v
C
(
0+
)=0.
v
C
(
t
)=
V
s
−
V
s
e
(
−t/RC
)
  for t>0
τ=RC=(
33.3 Ω
)×(
3 μF
)=100 μs.
v
C
(
t
)=5−5
e
(
−10000t
)
 V for t>0

Exercise 4.1 
Suppose that 
and 
in the circuit of Figure 4.1(a). Find the time at which the voltage
across the capacitor reaches 1 percent of its initial value.
Answer 
Exercise 4.2 
Show that if the initial slope of 
is extended, it intersects the final value at one time constant, as
shown in Figure 4.4. [The expression for 
is given in Equation 4.20.]
R=5000 Ω
C=1 μF

t=−5 ln(
0.01
) ms≅23 ms.
v
C
(
t
)
v
C
(
t
)

4.2 DC Steady State
The transient terms in the expressions for currents and voltages in RLC circuits
decay to zero with time.
The transient terms in the expressions for currents and voltages in RLC circuits decay to zero with time.
(An exception is LC circuits having no resistance.) For dc sources, the steady-state currents and
voltages are also constant.
Consider the equation for current through a capacitance:
If the voltage 
is constant, the current is zero. In other words, the capacitance behaves as an
open circuit. Thus, we conclude that for steady-state conditions with dc sources, capacitances behave
as open circuits.
Similarly, for an inductance, we have
When the current is constant, the voltage is zero. Thus, we conclude that for steady-state conditions
with dc sources, inductances behave as short circuits.
The steps in determining the forced response for RLC circuits with dc sources
are
1. Replace capacitances with open circuits.
2. Replace inductances with short circuits.
i
C
(
t
)=C 
d
v
C
(
t
)
dt
v
C
(
t
)
v
L
(
t
)=L 
d
i
L
(
t
)
dt

3. Solve the remaining circuit.
These observations give us another approach to finding the steady-state solutions to circuit equations
for RLC circuits with constant sources. First, we replace the capacitors by open circuits and the
inductors by short circuits. The circuit then consists of dc sources and resistances. Finally, we solve the
equivalent circuit for the steady-state currents and voltages.
Example 4.3 Steady-State DC Analysis
Find 
and 
for the circuit shown in Figure 4.6(a) for 
Figure 4.6 
The circuit and its dc steady-state equivalent for Example 4.3.
Solution 
After the switch has been closed a long time, we expect the transient response to have decayed to
zero. Then the circuit is operating in dc steady-state conditions. We start our analysis by replacing
the inductor by a short circuit and the capacitor by an open circuit. The equivalent circuit is shown in
Figure 4.6(b).
Steps 1 and 2.
Step 3.
v
x
i
x
t>>0.

This resistive circuit is readily solved. The resistances 
and 
are in series. Thus, we have
and
Sometimes, we are only interested in the steady-state operation of circuits with dc sources. For
example, in analyzing the headlight circuits in an automobile, we are concerned primarily with steady
state. On the other hand, we must consider transients in analyzing the operation of the ignition system.
In other applications, we are interested in steady-state conditions with sinusoidal ac sources. For
sinusoidal sources, the steady-state currents and voltages are also sinusoidal. In Chapter 5, we study a
method for solving sinusoidal steady-state circuits that is similar to the method we have presented here
for dc steady state. Instead of short and open circuits, we will replace inductances and capacitances by
impedances, which are like resistances, except that impedances can have imaginary values.
Exercise 4.3 
Solve for the steady-state values of the labeled currents and voltages for the circuits shown in Figure
4.7.
R
1
R
2
i
x
=
10
R
1
+
R
2
=1 A
v
x
=
R
2
i
x
=5 V

Figure 4.7 
Circuits for Exercise 4.3.
Answer
a. 
b. 
v
a
=50 V, 
i
a
=2 A;
i
1
=2 A, 
i
2
=1 A, 
i
3
=1 A.

4.3 RL Circuits
In this section, we consider circuits consisting of dc sources, resistances, and a single inductance. The
methods and solutions are very similar to those we studied for RC circuits in Section 4.1.
The steps involved in solving simple circuits containing dc sources, resistances, and one energy-storage
element (inductance or capacitance) are as follows:
1. Apply Kirchhoff's current and voltage laws to write the circuit equation.
2. If the equation contains integrals, differentiate each term in the equation to produce a pure
differential equation.
3. Assume a solution of the form 
4. Substitute the solution into the differential equation to determine the values of 
and s.
(Alternatively, we can determine 
by solving the circuit in steady state as discussed in
Section 4.2.)
5. Use the initial conditions to determine the value of 
6. Write the final solution.
Example 4.4 RL Transient Analysis
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.8. Find the current i(t) and the voltage v(t).
Figure 4.8 
The circuit analyzed in Example 4.4.
Solution 
First, we find the current i(t). Of course, prior to 
the switch is open and the current is zero:
K
1
+
K
2
e
st
.
K
1
K
1
K
2
.
t=0,
i(
t
)=0  for t<0
(4.21)

After the switch is closed, the current increases in value eventually reaching a steady-state value.
Step 1.
Step 2 is not needed in this case.
Step 3.
Writing a KVL equation around the loop, we have
This is very similar to Equation 4.11, and we are, therefore, led to try a solution of the same form as
that given by Equation 4.13. Thus, our trial solution is
in which 
and s are constants that need to be determined. Following the procedure used in
Section 4.1, we substitute the trial solution into the differential equation, resulting in
Step 4.
Ri(
t
)+L 
di
dt
=
V
s
(4.22)
i(
t
)=
K
1
+
K
2
e
st
(4.23)
K
1
, 
K
2
,

from which we obtain
and
Substituting these values into Equation 4.23 results in
Step 5.
Next, we use the initial conditions to determine the value of 
The current in the inductor is zero
prior to 
because the switch is open. The applied voltage is finite, and the inductor current must
be continuous (because 
). Thus, immediately after the switch is closed, the current must
be zero. Hence, we have
Solving, we find that 
Substituting into Equation 4.27, we find that the solution for the current is
Step 6.
R
K
1
+(
R
K
2
+sL
K
2
)
e
st
=
V
s
(4.24)
K
1
=
V
s
R
=2
(4.25)
s=
−R
L
(4.26)
i(
t
)=2+
K
2
e
−tR/L
(4.27)
K
2
.
t=0
v
L
=L di/dt
i(
0+
)=0=2+
K
2
e
0
=2+
K
2
(4.28)
K
2
=−2.
i(
t
)=2−2
e
−t/τ
  for t>0
(4.29)

in which the time constant is given by
A plot of the current versus time is shown in Figure 4.9(a). Notice that the current increases from
zero to the steady-state value of 2 A. After five time constants, the current is within 99 percent of the
final value. As a check, we verify that the steady-state current is 2 A. (As we saw in Section 4.2, this
value can be obtained directly by treating the inductor as a short circuit.)
Figure 4.9 
Current and voltage versus time for the circuit of Figure 4.8.
Now, we consider the voltage v(t). Prior to 
with the switch open, the voltage is zero.
After 
v(t) is equal to the source voltage minus the drop across R. Thus, we have
Substituting the expression found earlier for i(t), we obtain
A plot of v(t) is shown in Figure 4.9(b).
At 
the voltage across the inductor jumps from 0 to 100 V. As the current gradually increases, the
drop across the resistor increases, and the voltage across the inductor falls. In steady state, we have
because the inductor behaves as a short circuit.
After solving several circuits with a single energy-storage element, we can use our experience to skip
τ=
L
R
(4.30)
t=0,
v(
t
)=0 for t<0
(4.31)
t=0,
v(
t
)=100−50i(
t
)  for t>0
(4.32)
v(
t
)=100
e
−t/τ
(4.33)
t=0,
v(
t
)=0

some of the steps listed earlier in the section. We illustrate this in the next example.
Example 4.5 RL Transient Analysis
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.10 in which 
is a dc source. Assume that the circuit is in
steady state with the switch closed prior to 
Find expressions for the current i(t) and the voltage
v(t).
Figure 4.10 
The circuit analyzed in Example 4.5.
First, we use dc steady-state analysis to determine the current before the
switch opens.
Solution 
Prior to 
the inductor behaves as a short circuit. Thus, we have
and
Before the switch opens, current circulates clockwise through 
and the inductance. When
the switch opens, current continues to flow through the inductance, but the return path is through 
Then, a voltage appears across 
and the inductance, causing the current to decay.
V
s
t=0.
t=0,
v(
t
)=0  for t<0
i(
t
)=
V
s
R
1
  for t<0
V
s
, 
R
1
,
R
2
.
R
2

After the switch opens, the source is disconnected from the circuit, so the
steady-state solution for 
is zero.
Since there are no sources driving the circuit after the switch opens, the steady-state solution is zero
for 
Hence, the solution for i(t) is given by
in which the time constant is
Unless an infinite voltage appears across the inductance, the current must be continuous. Recall
that prior to 
Consequently, just after the switch opens, we have
Substituting the value of K into Equation 4.34, we find that the current is
The voltage is given by
Plots of the voltage and current are shown in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11 
The current and voltage for the circuit of Figure 4.10.
t>0
t>0.
i(
t
)=K
e
−t/τ
  for t>0
(4.34)
τ=
L
R
2
(4.35)
t=0, i(
t
)=
V
s
/
R
1
.
i(
0+
)=
V
s
R
1
=K
e
−0
=K
i(
t
)=
V
s
R
1
 
e
−t/τ
  for t>0
(4.36)
v(
t
)
=L 
di(
t
)
dt
=0  for t<0
=−
L
V
s
R
1
τ
 
e
−t/τ
  for t>0

Exercise 4.4 
For the circuit of Example 4.5 (Figure 4.10), assume that 
and
a. What is the value of the time constant (after the switch opens)?
b. What is the maximum magnitude of v(t)?
c. How does the maximum magnitude of v(t) compare to the source voltage?
d. Find the time t at which v(t) is one-half of its value immediately after the switch opens.
Answer
a. 
b. 
c. the maximum magnitude of v(t) is 10 times the value of 
d. 
Exercise 4.5 
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.12, in which the switch opens at 
Find expressions for v(t), 
and 
for 
Assume that 
is zero before the switch opens.
Figure 4.12 
The circuit for Exercise 4.5.
Answer 
Exercise 4.6 
V
s
=15 V, 
R
1
=10 Ω, 
R
2
=100 Ω,
L=0.1 H.
τ=1 ms;
qv(
t
)​
q
max
=150 V;
V
s
;
t=τ ln(
2
)=0.693 ms.
t=0.
i
R
(
t
),
i
L
(
t
)
t>0.
i
L
(
t
)
 
v(
t
)=20
e
−t/0.2
, 
i
R
(
t
)=2
e
−t/0.2
, 
i
L
(
t
)=2−2
e
−t/0.2
.

Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.13. Assume that the switch has been closed for a very long time
prior to 
Find expressions for i(t) and v(t).
Figure 4.13 
The circuit for Exercise 4.6.
Answer
where the time constant is 
t=0.
i(t)=1.0 for t<0=0.5+0.5e−t/τ for t>0v(t)=0 for t<0=−100e−t/τ for t>0
τ=5 ms.

4.4 RC and RL Circuits with General Sources
Now that we have gained some familiarity with RL and RC circuits, we discuss their solution in general.
In this section, we treat circuits that contain one energy-storage element, either an inductance or a
capacitance.
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.14(a). The circuit inside the box can be any combination of
resistances and sources. The single inductance L is shown explicitly. Recall that we can find a Thévenin
equivalent for circuits consisting of sources and resistances. The Thévenin equivalent is an independent
voltage source 
in series with the Thévenin resistance R. Thus, any circuit composed of sources,
resistances, and one inductance has the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 4.14(b). (Of course, we
could reduce any circuit containing sources, resistances, and a single capacitance in a similar fashion.)
Figure 4.14 
A circuit consisting of sources, resistances, and one inductance has an equivalent circuit consisting of a
voltage source and a resistance in series with the inductance.
Writing a KVL equation for Figure 4.14(b), we obtain
If we divide through by the resistance R, we have
In general, the equation for any circuit containing one inductance or one capacitance can be put into the
form
v
t
(
t
)
L 
di(
t
)
dt
+Ri(
t
)=
v
t
(
t
)
(4.37)
L
R
 
di(
t
)
dt
+i(
t
)=
v
t
(
t
)
R
(4.38)
τ 
dx(
t
)
dt
+x(
t
)=f(
t
),
(4.39)

in which x(t) represents the current or voltage for which we are solving. Then, we need to find solutions
to Equation 4.39 that are consistent with the initial conditions (such as the initial current in the
inductance).
The constant (which turns out to be the time constant) is a function of only the resistances and the
inductance (or capacitance). The sources result in the term f(t), which is called the forcing function. If
we have a circuit without sources (such as Figure 4.1), the forcing function is zero. For dc sources, the
forcing function is constant.
Equation 4.39 is called a first-order differential equation because the highest-order derivative is first
order. It is a linear equation because it does not involve powers or other nonlinear functions of x(t) or its
derivatives. Thus, to solve an RL (or RC) circuit, we must find the general solution of a linear first-order
differential equation with constant coefficients.
Solution of the Differential Equation
An important result in differential equations states that the general solution to Equation 4.39 consists of
two parts. The first part is called the particular solution 
and is any expression that satisfies
Equation 4.39. Thus,
The particular solution is also called the forced response because it depends on the forcing function
(which in turn is due to the independent sources).
The general solution to Equation 4.39 consists of two parts.
The particular solution (also called the forced response) is any expression that
satisfies the equation.
τ
x
p
(
t
)
τ 
d
x
p
(
t
)
dt
+
x
p
(
t
)=f(
t
)
(4.40)

In order to have a solution that satisfies the initial conditions, we must add the
complementary solution to the particular solution.
Even though the particular solution satisfies the differential equation, it may not be consistent with the
initial conditions, such as the initial voltage on a capacitance or current through an inductance. By
adding another term, known as the complementary solution, we obtain a general solution that satisfies
both the differential equation and meets the initial conditions.
For the forcing functions that we will encounter, we can often select the form of the particular solution by
inspection. Usually, the particular solution includes terms with the same functional forms as the terms
found in the forcing function and its derivatives.
Sinusoidal functions of time are one of the most important types of forcing functions in electrical
engineering. For example, consider the forcing function
Because the derivatives of sine and cosine functions are also sine and cosine functions, we would try a
particular solution of the form
where A and B are constants that must be determined. We find these constants by substituting the
proposed solution into the differential equation and requiring the two sides of the equation to be
identical. This leads to equations that can be solved for A and B. (In Chapter 5, we study shortcut
methods for solving for the forced response of circuits with sinusoidal sources.)
The second part of the general solution is called the complementary solution 
and is the
solution of the homogeneous equation
The homogeneous equation is obtained by setting the forcing function to zero.
f(
t
)=10 cos(
200t
)
x
p
(
t
)=A cos(
200t
)+B sin(
200t
)
x
c
(
t
)
τ 
d
x
c
(
t
)
dt
+
x
c
(
t
)=0
(4.41)

We obtain the homogeneous equation by setting the forcing function to zero. Thus, the form of the
complementary solution does not depend on the sources. It is also called the natural response
because it depends on the passive circuit elements. The complementary solution must be added to the
particular solution in order to obtain a general solution that matches the initial values of the currents and
voltages.
The complementary solution (also called the natural response) is obtained by
solving the homogeneous equation.
We can rearrange the homogeneous equation into this form:
Integrating both sides of Equation 4.42, we have
in which c is the constant of integration. Equation 4.43 is equivalent to
Then, if we define 
we have the complementary solution
Step-by-Step Solution
Next, we summarize an approach to solving circuits containing a resistance, a source, and an
inductance (or a capacitance):
d
x
c
(
t
)/dt
x
c
(
t
)
=
−1
τ
(4.42)
ln[ x
c
(
t
)
]=
−t
τ
+c
(4.43)
x
c
(
t
)=
e
(
−t/τ+c
)
=
e
c
e
−t/τ
K=
e
c
,
x
c
(
t
)=K
e
−t/τ
(4.44)

1. Write the circuit equation and reduce it to a first-order differential equation.
2. Find a particular solution. The details of this step depend on the form of the forcing function. We
illustrate several types of forcing functions in examples, exercises, and problems.
3. Obtain the complete solution by adding the particular solution to the complementary solution
given by Equation 4.44, which contains the arbitrary constant K.
4. Use initial conditions to find the value of K.
We illustrate this procedure with an example.
Example 4.6 Transient Analysis of an RC Circuit with a Sinusoidal Source
Solve for the current in the circuit shown in Figure 4.15. The capacitor is initially charged so that 
Figure 4.15 
A first-order RC circuit with a sinusoidal source. See Example 4.6.
Step 1: Write the circuit equation and reduce it to a first-order differential
equation.
Solution 
First, we write a voltage equation for 
Traveling clockwise and ­summing voltages, we obtain
We convert this to a differential equation by taking the derivative of each term. Of course, the
derivative of the integral is simply the integrand. Because 
is a constant, its derivative is
zero. Thus, we have
v
C
(
0+
)=1 V.
t>0.
Ri(
t
)+
1
C
∫
0
t
i(
t
) dt+
v
C
(
0
)−2 sin(
200t
)=0
v
C
(
0
)

Multiplying by C, we get
Substituting values for R and C, we obtain
Step 2: Find a particular solution.
The particular solution for a sinusoidal forcing function always has the form
given by Equation 4.48.
The second step is to find a particular solution 
Often, we start by guessing at the form of 
possibly including some unknown constants. Then, we sub­stitute our guess into the differential
equation and solve for the constants. In the present case, since the derivatives of sin(200t) and
cos(200t) are 200 cos(200t) and 
respectively, we try a particular solution of the
form
where A and B are constants to be determined so that 
is indeed a solution to Equation 4.47.
We substitute Equation 4.48 into the differential equation, and solve for A
and B.
R 
di(
t
)
dt
+
1
C
 i(
t
)=400 cos(
200t
)
(4.45)
RC 
di(
t
)
dt
+i(
t
)=400 C cos(
200t
)
(4.46)
5×
10
−3
di(
t
)
dt
+i(
t
)=400×
10
−6
 cos(
200t
)
(4.47)
i
p
(
t
).
i
p
(
t
),
−200 sin(
200t
),
i
p
(
t
)=A cos(
200t
)+B sin(
200t
)
(4.48)
i
p

Substituting the proposed solution into Equation 4.47, we obtain
However, the left-hand side of this equation is required to be identical to the right-hand side.
Equating the coefficients of the sine functions, we have
Equating the coefficients of the cosine functions, we get
These equations can be readily solved, yielding
and
Substituting these values into Equation 4.48, we obtain the particular solution
which can also be written as
(In Chapter 5, we will learn shortcut methods for combining sine and cosine functions.)
We obtain the homogeneous equation by substituting 0 for the forcing function in Equation 4.46.
Thus, we have
The complementary solution is
−A sin(
200t
)+B cos(
200t
)+A cos(
200t
)+B sin(
200t
)
  =400×
10
−6
 cos(
200t
)
−A+B=0
(4.49)
B+A=400×
10
−6
(4.50)
A=200×
10
−6
=200 μA
B=200×
10
−6
=200 μA
i
p
(
t
)=200 cos(
200t
)+200 sin(
200t
) μA
(4.51)
i
p
(
t
)=200
2
 cos(
200t−45°
)
RC 
di(
t
)
dt
+i(
t
)=0
(4.52)

Adding the particular solution and the complementary solution, we obtain the general solution
Step 3: Obtain the complete solution by adding the particular solution to the
complementary solution.
Step 4: Use initial conditions to find the value of K.
Finally, we determine the value of the constant K by using the initial conditions. The voltages and
currents immediately after the switch closes are shown in Figure 4.16. The source voltage is 0 V
and the voltage across the capacitor is 
Consequently, the voltage across the resistor
must be 
Thus, we get
Figure 4.16 
The voltages and currents for the circuit of Figure 4.15 immediately after the switch closes.
Substituting 
into Equation 4.54, we obtain
i
c
(
t
)=K
e
−t/RC
=K
e
−t/τ
(4.53)
i(
t
)=200 cos(
200t
)+200 sin(
200t
)+K
e
−t/RC
 μA
(4.54)
v
C
(
0+
)=1.
v
R
(
0+
)=−1 V.
i(
0+
)=
v
R
(
0+
)
R
=
−1
5000
=−200 μA
t=0
i(
0+
)=−200=200+K μA
(4.55)

Solving, we find that 
Substituting this into Equation 4.54, we have the solution
Plots of the particular solution and of the complementary solution are shown in Figure 4.17.  The
time constant for this circuit is 
Notice that the natural response decays to negligible
values in about 25 ms. As expected, the natural response has decayed in about five time constants.
Furthermore, notice that for a sinusoidal forcing function, the forced response is also sinusoidal and
persists after the natural response has decayed.
Figure 4.17 
The complementary solution and the particular solution for Example 4.6.
Notice that the forced response is sinusoidal for a sinusoidal forcing function.
A plot of the complete solution is shown in Figure 4.18.
K=−400 μA.
i(
t
)=200 cos(
200t
)+200 sin(
200t
)−400
e
−t/RC
 μA
(4.56)
τ=RC=5 ms.

Figure 4.18 
The complete solution for Example 4.6.
Exercise 4.7 
Repeat Example 4.6 if the source voltage is changed to 
and the initial voltage on the
capacitor is 
The circuit with these changes is shown in Figure 4.19.
Figure 4.19 
The circuit for Exercise 4.7.
Answer 
in which 
Exercise 4.8 
Solve for the current in the circuit shown in Figure 4.20 after the switch closes. [Hint: Try a particular
solution of the form 
]
2 cos(
200t
)
v
C
(
0
)=0.

i(
t
)=−200 sin(
200t
)+200 cos(
200t
)+200
e
−t/RC
 μA,
τ=RC=
5 ms.
i
p
(
t
)=A
e
−t
.

Figure 4.20 
The circuit for Exercise 4.8.
Answer 
i(
t
)=20
e
−t
−15
e
−t/2
 μA.

4.5 Second-Order Circuits
In this section, we consider circuits that contain two energy-storage elements. In particular, we look at
circuits that have one inductance and one capacitance, either in series or in parallel.
Differential Equation
To derive the general form of the equations that we encounter in circuits with two energy-storage
elements, consider the series circuit shown in Figure 4.21(a). Writing a KVL equation, we have
Figure 4.21 
The series RLC circuit and its mechanical analog.
Taking the derivative with respect to time, we get
We convert the integrodifferential equation to a pure differential equation by
differentiating with respect to time.
L 
di(
t
)
dt
+Ri(
t
)+
1
C
∫
0
t
i(
t
)dt+
v
C
(
0
)=
v
s
(
t
)
(4.57)
L 
d
2
i(
t
)
d
t
2
+R 
di(
t
)
dt
+
1
C
 i(
t
)=
d
v
s
(
t
)
dt
(4.58)

Dividing through by L, we obtain
Now, we define the damping coefficient as
and the undamped resonant frequency as
The forcing function is
Using these definitions, we find that Equation 4.59 can be written as
This is a linear second-order differential equation with constant coefficients. Thus, we refer to circuits
having two energy-storage elements as second-order circuits. (An exception occurs if we can combine
the energy-storage elements in series or parallel. For example, if we have two capacitors in parallel, we
can combine them into a single equivalent capacitance, and then we would have a first-order circuit.)
If a circuit contains two energy-storage elements (after substituting all possible
series or parallel equivalents), the circuit equations can always be reduced to the
form given by Equation 4.63.
Mechanical Analog
The mechanical analog of the series RLC circuit is shown in Figure 4.21(b). The displacement x of the
mass is analogous to electrical charge, the velocity dx/dt is analogous to current, and force is analogous
to voltage. The mass plays the role of the inductance, the spring plays the role of the capacitance, and
d
2
i(
t
)
d
t
2
+
R
L
 
di(
t
)
dt
+
1
LC
 i(
t
)=
1
L
 
d
v
s
(
t
)
dt
(4.59)
α=
R
2L
(4.60)
ω
0
=
1
LC
(4.61)
f(
t
)=
1
L
 
d
v
s
(
t
)
dt
(4.62)
d
2
i(
t
)
d
t
2
+2α 
di(
t
)
dt
+
ω
0
2
i(
t
)=f(
t
)
(4.63)

the damper plays the role of the resistance. The equation of motion for the mechanical system can be
put into the form of Equation 4.63.
Based on an intuitive consideration of Figure 4.21, we can anticipate that the sudden application of a
constant force (dc voltage) can result in a displacement (current) that either approaches steady-state
conditions asymptotically or oscillates before settling to the steady-state value. The type of behavior
depends on the relative values of the mass, spring constant, and damping coefficient.
Solution of the Second-Order Equation
We will see that the circuit equations for currents and voltages in circuits having two energy-storage
elements can always be put into the form of Equation 4.63. Thus, let us consider the solution of
where we have used x(t) for the variable, which could represent either a current or a voltage.
Here again, the general solution x(t) to this equation consists of two parts: a particular solution 
plus the complementary solution 
and is expressed as
Particular Solution. 
The particular solution is any expression 
that satisfies the differential equation
The particular solution is also called the forced response. (Usually, we eliminate any terms from 
that produce a zero net result when substituted into the left-hand side of Equation 4.66. In other
words, we eliminate any terms that have the same form as the homogeneous solution.)
For dc sources, we can find the particular solution by performing a dc steady-
state analysis as discussed in Section 4.2.
d
2
x(
t
)
d
t
2
+2α 
dx(
t
)
dt
+
ω
0
2
x(
t
)=f(
t
)
(4.64)
x
p
(
t
)
x
c
(
t
)
x(
t
)=
x
p
(
t
)+
x
c
(
t
)
(4.65)
x
p
(
t
)
d
2
x
p
(
t
)
d
t
2
+2α 
d
x
p
(
t
)
dt
+
ω
0
2
x
p
(
t
)=f(
t
)
(4.66)
x
p
(
t
)

We will be concerned primarily with either constant (dc) or sinusoidal (ac) forcing functions. For dc
sources, we can find the particular solution directly from the circuit by replacing the inductances by short
circuits, replacing the capacitances by open circuits, and solving. This technique was discussed in
Section 4.2. In Chapter 5, we will learn efficient methods for finding the forced response due to
sinusoidal sources.
Complementary Solution. 
The complementary solution 
is found by solving the homogeneous equation, which is obtained
by substituting 0 for the forcing function f(t). Thus, the homogeneous equation is
In finding the solution to the homogeneous equation, we start by substituting the trial solution 
This yields
Factoring, we obtain
Since we want to find a solution 
that is nonzero, we must have
This is called the characteristic equation.
The damping ratio is defined as
The form of the complementary solution depends on the value of the damping ratio. The roots of the
characteristic equation are given by
The form of the complementary solution depends on the value of the damping
ratio.
x
c
(
t
)
d
2
x
c
(
t
)
d
t
2
+2α
d
x
c
(
t
)
dt
+
ω
0
2
x
c
(
t
)=0
(4.67)
x
c
(
t
)=K
e
st
.
s
2
K
e
st
+2αsK
e
st
+
ω
0
2
K
e
st
=0
(4.68)
(
s
2
+2αs+
ω
0
2
)K
e
st
=0
(4.69)
K
e
st
s
2
+2αs+
ω
0
2
=0
(4.70)
ζ=
α
ω
0
(4.71)

and
We have three cases depending on the value of the damping ratio compared with unity.
1. Overdamped case 
If 
(or equivalently, if 
), the roots of the characteristic
equation are real and distinct. Then the complementary solution is
In this case, we say that the circuit is overdamped.
If the damping ratio is greater than unity, we say that the circuit is
overdamped, the roots of the characteristic equation are real, and the
complementary solution has the form given in Equation 4.74.
2. Critically damped case 
If 
(or equivalently, if 
), the roots are real and equal.
Then, the complementary solution is
If the damping ratio equals unity, the circuit is critically damped, the roots
of the characteristic equation are real and equal, and the complementary
solution has the form given in Equation 4.75.
s
1
=−α+
α
2
−
ω
0
2
(4.72)
s
2
=−α−
α
2
−
ω
0
2
(4.73)
ζ
(
ζ>1
).
ζ>1
α>
ω
0
x
c
(
t
)=
K
1
e
s
1
t
+
K
2
e
s
2
t
(4.74)
(
ζ=1
).
ζ=1
α=
ω
0
x
c
(
t
)=
K
1
e
s
1
t
+
K
2
t
e
s
1
t
(4.75)

In this case, we say that the circuit is critically damped.
3. Underdamped case 
Finally, if 
(or equivalently, if 
), the roots are complex. (By
the term complex, we mean that the roots involve the imaginary number 
) In other words,
the roots are of the form
in which 
and the natural frequency is given by
(In electrical engineering, we use j rather than i to stand for the imaginary number 
because
we use i for current.)
If the damping ratio is less than unity, the roots of the characteristic equation are
complex conjugates, and the complementary solution has the form given in
Equation 4.77.
For complex roots, the complementary solution is of the form
In this case, we say that the circuit is underdamped.
Example 4.7 Analysis of a Second-Order Circuit with a DC Source
A dc source is connected to a series RLC circuit by a switch that closes at 
as shown in Figure
4.22. The initial conditions are 
and 
Write the differential equation for 
Solve for 
if 
200, and 
Figure 4.22 
(
ζ<1
).
ζ<1
α<
ω
0
−1
.
s
1
=−α+j
ω
n
 and 
s
2
=−α−j
ω
n
j=
−1
ω
n
=
ω
0
2
−
α
2
(4.76)
−1
x
c
(
t
)=
K
1
e
−αt
 cos(
ω
n
t
)+
K
2
e
−αt
 sin(
ω
n
t
)
(4.77)
t=0
i(
0
)=0
v
C
(
0
)=0.
v
C
(
t
).
v
C
(
t
)
 R=300,
100 Ω.

The circuit for Example 4.7.
Solution 
First, we can write an expression for the current in terms of the voltage across the capacitance:
First, we write the circuit equations and reduce them to the form given in
Equation 4.63.
Then, we write a KVL equation for the circuit:
Using Equation 4.78 to substitute for i(t), we get
Dividing through by LC, we have
As expected, the differential equation for 
has the same form as Equation 4.63.
Next, we find the particular solution by solving the circuit for dc steady-state
conditions.
Next, we find the particular solution. Since we have a dc source, we can find this part of the solution
by replacing the inductance by a short circuit and the capacitance by an open circuit. This is shown
i(
t
)=C 
d
v
C
(
t
)
dt
(4.78)
L 
di(
t
)
dt
+Ri(
t
)+
v
C
(
t
)=
V
s
(4.79)
LC 
d
2
v
C
(
t
)
d
t
2
+RC 
d
v
C
(
t
)
dt
+
v
C
(
t
)=
V
s
(4.80)
d
2
v
C
(
t
)
d
t
2
+
R
L
 
d
v
C
(
t
)
dt
+
1
LC
 
v
C
(
t
)=
V
s
LC
(4.81)
v
C
(
t
)

in Figure 4.23. Then the current is zero, the drop across the resistance is zero, and the voltage
across the capacitance (open circuit) is equal to the dc source voltage. Therefore, the particular
solution is
Figure 4.23 
The equivalent circuit for Figure 4.22 under steady-state conditions. The inductor has been replaced
by a short circuit and the capacitor by an open circuit.
(It can be verified that this is a particular solution by substituting it into Equation 4.81.) Notice that in
this circuit the particular solution for 
is the same for all three values of resistance.
Next, we find the complementary solution for each value of R. For each
resistance value, we
1. Determine the damping ratio and roots of the characteristic equation.
2. Select the appropriate form for the homogeneous solution, depending
on the value of the damping ratio.
3. Add the homogeneous solution to the particular solution and
determine the values of the coefficients (
and 
), based on the
initial conditions.
Next, we find the homogeneous solution and general solution for each value of R. For all three
cases, we have
Case I
v
Cp
(
t
)=
V
s
=10 V
(4.82)
v
C
(
t
)

K
1
K
2
ω
0
=
1
LC
=
10
4
(4.83)

In this case, we get
The damping ratio is 
Because we have 
this is the overdamped case. The roots of
the characteristic equation are given by Equations 4.72 and 4.73. Substituting values, we find that
and
The homogeneous solution has the form of Equation 4.74. Adding the particular solution given by
Equation 4.82 to the homogeneous solution, we obtain the general solution
Now, we must find values of 
and 
so the solution matches the known initial conditions in the
circuit. It was given that the initial voltage on the capacitance is zero. Hence,
Evaluating Equation 4.85 at 
we obtain
Furthermore, the initial current was given as 
Since the current through the capacitance is given
by
we conclude that
Taking the derivative of Equation 4.85 and evaluating at 
we have
(
R=300 Ω
)
α=
R
2L
=1.5×
10
4
(4.84)
ζ=α/
ω
0
=1.5.
ζ>1,
s
1
=
−α+
α
2
−
ω
0
2
=
−1.5×
10
4
+
(
1.5×
10
4
)
2
−
(
10
4
)
2
=
−0.3820×
10
4
s
2
=−α−
α
2
−
ω
0
2
=−2.618×
10
4
v
C
(
t
)=10+
K
1
e
s
1
t
+
K
2
e
s
2
t
(4.85)
K
1
K
2
v
C
(
0
)=0
t=0,
10+
K
1
+
K
2
=0
(4.86)
i(
0
)=0.
i(
t
)=C 
d
v
C
(
t
)
dt
d
v
C
(
0
)
dt
=0
t=0,

Now, we can solve Equations 4.86 and 4.87 for the values of 
and 
The results are 
and 
Substituting these values into Equation 4.85, we have the solution
Plots of each of the terms of this equation and the complete solution are shown in Figure 4.24.
Figure 4.24 
Solution for 
Case II
In this case, we get
Now, we repeat the steps for 
Because 
this is the critically damped case. The roots of the characteristic equation are
given by Equations 4.72 and 4.73. Substituting values, we have
s
1
K
1
+
s
2
K
2
=0
(4.87)
K
1
K
2
.
K
1
=−11.708
K
2
=1.708.
v
C
(
t
)=10−11.708
e
s
1
t
+1.708
e
s
2
t
R=300 Ω.
(
R=200 Ω
)
α=
R
2L
=
10
4
(4.88)
R=200 Ω
ζ=α/
ω
0
=1,

The homogeneous solution has the form of Equation 4.75. Adding the particular solution (Equation
4.82) to the homogeneous solution, we find that
As in case I, the initial conditions require 
and 
Thus, substituting 
into
Equation 4.89, we get
Differentiating Equation 4.89 and substituting 
yields
Solving Equations 4.90 and 4.91 yields 
and 
 Thus, the solution is
Plots of each of the terms of this equation and the complete solution are shown in Figure 4.25.
Figure 4.25 
Solution for 
Case III
s
1
=
s
2
=−α+
α
2
−
ω
0
2
=−α=−
10
4
v
C
(
t
)=10+
K
1
e
s
1
t
+
K
2
t
e
s
1
t
(4.89)
v
C
(
0
)=0
d
v
C
(
0
)/dt=0.
t=0
10+
K
1
=0
(4.90)
t=0
s
1
K
1
+
K
2
=0
(4.91)
K
1
=−10
K
2
=−
10
5
.
v
C
(
t
)=10−10
e
s
1
t
−
10
5
t
e
s
1
t
(4.92)
R=200 Ω.
(
R=100 Ω
)

For this value of resistance, we have
Finally, we repeat the solution for 
Because 
this is the underdamped case. Using Equation 4.76, we compute the natural
frequency:
The homogeneous solution has the form of Equation 4.77. Adding the particular solution found earlier
to the homogeneous solution, we obtain the general solution:
As in the previous cases, the initial conditions are 
and 
Evaluating Equation
4.95 at 
we obtain
Differentiating Equation 4.95 and evaluating at 
we have
Solving Equations 4.96 and 4.97, we obtain 
and 
Thus, the complete solution is
Plots of each of the terms of this equation and the complete solution are shown in Figure 4.26.
α=
R
2L
=5000
(4.93)
R=100 Ω.
ζ=α/
ω
0
=0.5,
ω
n
=
ω
0
2
−
α
2
=8660
(4.94)
v
C
(
t
)=10+
K
1
e
−αt
 cos(
ω
n
t
)+
K
2
e
−αt
 sin(
ω
n
t
)
(4.95)
v
C
(
0
)=0
d
v
C
(
0
)/dt=0.
t=0,
10+
K
1
=0
(4.96)
t=0,
−α
K
1
+
ω
n
K
2
=0
(4.97)
K
1
=−10
K
2
=−5.774.
v
C
(
t
)=10−10
e
−αt
 cos(
ω
n
t
)−5.774
e
−αt
 sin(
ω
n
t
)
(4.98)

Figure 4.26 
Solution for 
Figure 4.27 shows the complete response for all three values of resistance.
Figure 4.27 
Solutions for all three resistances.
Normalized Step Response of Second-Order Systems
When we suddenly apply a constant source to a circuit, we say that the forcing function is a step
function. A unit step function, denoted by u(t), is shown in Figure 4.28. By definition, we have
R=100 Ω.

Figure 4.28 
A unit step function u(t). For 
For 
For example, if we apply a dc voltage of A volts to a circuit by closing a switch, the applied voltage is a
step function, given by
This is illustrated in Figure 4.29.
Figure 4.29 
Applying a dc voltage by closing a switch results in a forcing function that is a step function.
We often encounter situations, such as Example 4.7, in which step forcing functions are applied to
second-order systems described by a differential equation of the form
The differential equation is characterized by its undamped resonant frequency 
and damping ratio
[Of course, the solution for x(t) also depends on the initial conditions.] Normalized solutions
are shown in Figure 4.30 for the initial conditions 
and 
t<0, u(
t
)=0.
t≥0, u(
t
)=1.
u(
t
)
=0
t<0
=1
t≥0
v(
t
)=Au(
t
)
d
2
x(
t
)
d
t
2
+2α 
dx(
t
)
dt
+
ω
0
2
x(
t
)=Au(
t
)
(4.99)
ω
0
ζ=α/
ω
0
.
x(
0
)=0
x′(
0
)=0.

Figure 4.30 
Normalized step responses for second-order systems described by Equation 4.99 with damping ratios
of 
and 3. The initial conditions are assumed to be 
and 
The system response for small values of the damping ratio displays overshoot and ringing before
settling to the steady-state value. On the other hand, if the damping ratio is large (compared to unity),
the response takes a relatively long time to closely approach the final value.
Sometimes, we want to design a second-order system that quickly settles to steady state. Then we try to
design for a damping ratio close to unity. For example, the control system for a robot arm could be a
second-order system. When a step signal calls for the arm to move, we probably want it to achieve the
final position in the minimum time without excessive overshoot and ringing.
Frequently, electrical control systems and mechanical systems are best designed
with a damping ratio close to unity. For example, when the suspension system on
your automobile becomes severely underdamped, it is time for new shock
absorbers.
Circuits with Parallel L and C
The solution of circuits having an inductance and capacitance in parallel is very similar to the series
case. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.31(a). The circuit inside the box is assumed to consist of
sources and resistances. As we saw in Section 2.6, we can find a Norton equivalent circuit for any two-
ζ=0.1, 0.5, 1, 2,
x(
0
)=0
x′(
0
)=0.
ζ

terminal circuit composed of resistances and sources. The equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 4.31(b).
Figure 4.31 
Any circuit consisting of sources, resistances, and a parallel LC combination can be reduced to the
equivalent circuit shown in (b).
We can analyze this circuit by writing a KCL equation at the top node of Figure 4.31(b) which results in
This can be converted into a pure differential equation by taking the derivative with respect to time:
Dividing through by the capacitance, we have
Now, if we define the damping coefficient
the undamped resonant frequency
and the forcing function
the differential equation can be written as
C 
dv(
t
)
dt
+
1
R
 v(
t
)+
1
L
∫
0
t
v(
t
) dt+
i
L
(
0
)=
i
n
(
t
)
(4.100)
C 
d
2
v(
t
)
d
t
2
+
1
R
 
dv(
t
)
dt
+
1
L
 v(
t
)=
d
i
n
(
t
)
dt
(4.101)
d
2
v(
t
)
d
t
2
+
1
RC
 
dv(
t
)
dt
+
1
LC
 v(
t
)=
1
C
 
d
i
n
(
t
)
dt
(4.102)
α=
1
2RC
(4.103)
ω
0
=
1
LC
(4.104)
f(
t
)=
1
C
 
d
i
n
(
t
)
dt
(4.105)
(4.106)

This equation has exactly the same form as Equation 4.64. Therefore, transient analysis of circuits with
parallel LC elements is very similar to that of series LC circuits. However, notice that the equation for the
damping coefficient 
is different for the parallel circuit (in which 
) than for the series circuit (in
which 
).
Notice that the equation for the damping coefficient of the parallel RLC circuit is
different from that for the series circuit.
Exercise 4.9 
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.32 with 
a. Compute the undamped resonant frequency, the damping coefficient, and the damping ratio.
b. The initial conditions are 
and 
Show that this requires that 
c. Find the particular solution for v(t).
d. Find the general solution for v(t), including the numerical values of all parameters.
Figure 4.32 
Circuit for Exercises 4.9, 4.10, and 4.11.
and 
are the voltage and current values immediately before the
switch opens.
d
2
v(
t
)
d
t
2
+2α 
dv(
t
)
dt
+
ω
0
2
v(
t
)=f(
t
)
α
α=1/2RC
α=R/2L
R=25 Ω.
v(
0−
)=0
i
L
(
0−
)=0.
v′(
0+
)=
10
6
 V/s.
v(
0−
)
i
L
(
0−
)

Answer
a. 
and 
b. KCL requires that 
thus 
c. 
d. 
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
 4.1
Electronics and the Art of Automotive Maintenance
Throughout the early history of the automobile, ignition systems were designed as a
straightforward application of electrical transients. The basic ignition system used for many years
is shown in Figure PA4.1. The coil is a pair of mutually coupled inductors known as the primary
and the secondary. The points form a switch that opens and closes as the engine rotates,
opening at the instant that an ignition spark is needed by one of the cylinders. While the points
are closed, current builds up relatively slowly in the primary winding of the coil. Then, when the
points open, the current is rapidly interrupted. The resulting high rate of change of current
induces a large voltage across the secondary winding, which is connected to the appropriate
spark plug by the distributor. The resistance is needed to limit the current in case the engine
stops with the points closed.
FIGURE
ω
0
=
10
5
, α=2×
10
5
,
ζ=2;
i
C
(
0
)=0.1
 A=  Cv′(
0
),
v′(
0
)=
10
6
;
v
p
(
t
)=0;
v(
t
)=2.89(
e
−0.268×
10
5
t
−
e
−3.73×
10
5
t
).

PA4.1 
Classic ignition for an internal-combustion engine.
The capacitor prevents the voltage across the points from rising too rapidly when they open.
(Recall that the voltage across a capacitance cannot change instantaneously.) Otherwise, arcing
would occur across the points, causing them to become burned and pitted. By slowing the rise of
voltage, the capacitor gives the gap between the points time to become wide enough to
withstand the voltage across them. (Even so, the peak voltage across the points is many times
the battery voltage.)
The primary inductance, current-limiting resistance, and capacitance form an underdamped
series RLC circuit. Thus, an oscillatory current flows through the primary when the points open,
inducing the requisite voltage in the secondary.
In its early forms, the ignition system had mechanical or vacuum systems to make adjustments
to the timing, depending on engine speed and throttle setting. In more recent years, the
availability of complex electronics at reasonable costs plus the desire to adjust the ignition to
obtain good performance and low pollution levels with varying air temperature, fuel quality, air
pressure, engine temperature, and other factors have greatly affected the design of ignition
systems. The basic principles remain the same as in the days of the classic automobile, but a
complex network of electrical sensors, a digital computer, and an electronic switch have
replaced the points and simple vacuum advance.
The complexity of modern engineering designs has become somewhat intimidating, even to
practicing engineers. In the 1960s, as a new engineering graduate, one could study the design
of an ignition system, a radio, or a home appliance, readily spotting and repairing malfunctions
with the aid of a few tools and standard parts. Nowadays, if my car should fail to start due to
ignition malfunction, at the end of a fishing trip into the backwoods of northern Michigan, I might
very well have to walk back to civilization. Nevertheless, the improvements in performance
provided by modern electronics make up for its difficulty of repair.
Exercise 4.10 
Repeat Exercise 4.9 for 
Answer
a. 
and 
b. KCL requires that 
thus 
R=50 Ω.
ω
0
=
10
5
, α=
10
5
,
ζ=1;
i
C
(
0
)=0.1
 A=  Cv′(
0
),
v′(
0
)=
10
6
;

c. 
d. 
Exercise 4.11 
Repeat Exercise 4.9 for 
Answer
a. 
and 
b. KCL requires that 
thus 
c. 
d. 
v
p
(
t
)=0;
v(
t
)=
10
6
t
e
−
10
5
t
.
R=250 Ω.
ω
0
=
10
5
, α=0.2×
10
5
,
ζ=0.2;
i
C
(
0
)=0.1 A=Cv′(
0
),
v′(
0
)=
10
6
;
v
p
(
t
)=0;
v(
t
)=
10.21
e
−2×
10
4
t
 sin(
97.98×
10
3
t
).

4.6 Transient Analysis Using the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox
The MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox greatly facilitates the solution of transients in electrical circuits. It makes
the solution of systems of differential equations almost as easy as arithmetic using a calculator. A step-
by-step process for solving a circuit in this manner is
1. Write the differential-integral equations for the mesh currents, node voltages, or other circuit
variables of interest.
2. If necessary, differentiate the equations to eliminate integrals.
3. Analyze the circuit at 
(i.e., immediately after switches operate) to determine initial
conditions for the circuit variables and their derivatives. For a first-order equation, we need the
initial value of the circuit variable. For a second-order equation we need the initial values of the
circuit variable and its first derivative.
4. Enter the equations and initial values into the dsolve command in MATLAB.
We illustrate with a few examples.
Example 4.8 Computer-Aided Solution of a First-Order Circuit
Solve for 
in the circuit of Figure 4.33(a). (Note: The argument of the cosine function is in
radians.)
Figure 4.33 
t=0+
v
L
(
t
)
t=0+.

(a) Circuit of Example 4.8. (b) Circuit conditions at 
Solution 
First, we write a KCL equation at the node joining the resistance and inductance.
Taking the derivative of the equation to eliminate the integral, multiplying each term by R, and
substituting values, we eventually obtain
Next, we need to determine the initial value of 
Because the switch is open prior to 
the initial
current in the inductance is zero prior to 
Furthermore, the current cannot change
instantaneously in this circuit. Thus, we have 
Immediately after the switch closes, the
voltage source has a value of 20 V, and the current flowing in the circuit is zero, resulting in zero
volts across the resistor. Then KVL yields 
This is illustrated in Figure 4.33(b).
Now, we can write the MATLAB commands. As usual, we show the commands in boldface,
comments in regular font, and MATLAB responses in color.
>> clear all
>> syms VL t
>> % Enter the equation and initial value in the dsolve command.
>> % DVL represents the derivative of VL with respect to time.
>> VL = dsolve('DVL + 100*VL = −2000*sin(100*t)', 'VL(0) = 20');
>> % Print answer with 4 decimal place accuracy for the constants:
>> vpa(VL,4)
 ans = 
 10.0*cos(100.0*t)−10.0*sin(100.0*t)+10.0*exp(−100.0*t) 
In standard mathematical notation, the result becomes
This can be shown to be equivalent to
v
L
(
t
)−20 cos(
100t
)
R
+
1
L
∫
0
t
v
L
(
t
) dt+
i
L
(
0
)=0
d
v
L
(
t
)
dt
+100
v
L
(
t
)=−2000 sin(
100t
)
v
L
.
t=0,
t=0.
i
L
(
0+
)=0.
v
L
(
0+
)=20 V.
v
L
(
t
)=10 cos(
100t
)−10 sin(
100t
)+10 exp(
−100t
)

in which the argument of the cosine function is in radians. Some versions of MATLAB may give this
result. Keep in mind that different versions of the software may give results with different
appearances that are mathematically equivalent.
An m-file named Example_4_8 containing the commands for this example can be found in the
MATLAB folder. (See Appendix E for information about access to this folder.)
 Example 4.9 Computer-Aided Solution of a Second-Order Circuit
The switch in the circuit of Figure 4.34(a) is closed for a long time prior to 
Assume that 
Use MATLAB to solve for 
and plot the result for 
Figure 4.34 
(a) Circuit of Example 4.9. (b) Circuit conditions at 
Solution 
Because this circuit contains two nodes and three meshes, node-voltage analysis is simpler than
mesh analysis. We will solve for v(t) and then take 1/L times the integral of the voltage to obtain the
current through the inductance.
We start the node-voltage analysis by writing the KCL equation at the top node of the circuit (with the
switch open).
v
L
(
t
)=14.14 cos(
100t+0.7854
)+10 exp(
−100t
)
t=0.
i
L
(
0+
)=0.
i
L
(
t
)
0≤t≤2 ms.
t=0+.
C 
dv(
t
)
dt
+
v(
t
)
R
+
1
L
∫
0
t
v(
t
) dt+
i
L
(
0+
)=0.2 exp(
−1000t
)

Taking the derivative of the equation to eliminate the integral and substituting values, we eventually
obtain
Because this is a second-order equation, we need the initial value for both v(t) and its first derivative.
The circuit conditions at 
are shown in Figure 4.34(b). The problem states that the initial current
in the inductance is zero. The initial voltage 
is zero, because, with the switch closed, the
capacitor is shorted. When the switch opens, the voltage remains zero, because an infinite current
would be required to change the capacitor voltage instantaneously. Furthermore, the current flowing
through the resistor is zero because the voltage across it is zero. Thus, the 0.2 A from the source
must flow through the capacitor, and we have
We have established that 
and 
After the voltage is found, the current is given by
We use the following MATLAB commands to obtain the solution:
>> clear all
>> syms IL V t
>> % Enter the equation and initial values in the dsolve command.
>> % D2V represents the second derivative of V.
>> V = dsolve('(1e−6)*D2V + (4e−3)*DV + 250*V = 
−200*exp(−1000*t)', . . . 
 'DV(0)=0.2e6', 'V(0)=0');
>> % Calculate the inductor current by integrating V with respect to t
>> % from 0 to t and multiplying by 1/L:
>> IL = (250)*int(V,t,0,t);
>> % Display the expression for current to 4 decimal place accuracy:
>> vpa(IL,4)
 ans =
 −(0.0008229*(246.0*cos(15688.0*t) − 246.0*exp(1000.0*t) + 
 15.68*sin(15688.0*t)))/exp(2000.0*t)
10
−6
 
d
2
v(
t
)
d
t
2
+4×
10
−3
dv(
t
)
dt
+250v(
t
)=−200 exp(
−1000t
)
t=0+
v(
0+
)
C 
dv(
0+
)
dt
=0.2
v(
0+
)=0
v′(
0+
)=dv(
0+
)/dt=0.2×
10
6
 V/s.
i
L
(
t
)=
1
L
∫
0
t
v(
t
) dt=250
∫
0
t
v(
t
) dt

>> ezplot(IL,[0 2e-3])
In standard mathematical notation, the result is
The plot (after some editing to dress it up) is shown in Figure 4.35. An m-file named Example_4_9
containing the commands for this example can be found in the ­MATLAB folder. (See Appendix E
for information about accessing this folder.)
Figure 4.35 
Plot of 
versus t.
Reprinted with permission of The MathWorks, Inc.
Solving Systems of Linear Differential Equations
So far in this chapter, each of our examples has involved a single differential equation. Circuits that
require two or more circuit variables (such as node voltages or mesh currents) result in systems of
differential equations. While these systems can be rather formidable to solve by traditional methods, the
MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox can solve them with relative ease.
i
L
(
t
)
=
−0.2024 exp(
−2000t
) cos(
15680t
)−
0.01290 exp(
−2000t
) sin(
15680t
)+0.2024 exp(
−1000t
)
i
L
(
t
)

Example 4.10 Computer-Aided Solution of a System of Differential Equations
Use MATLAB to solve for the node voltages in the circuit of Figure 4.36.  The circuit has been
connected for a long time prior to 
with the switch open, so the initial values of the node voltages
are zero.
Figure 4.36 
Circuit of Example 4.10.
Solution 
First, we write the KCL equations at nodes 1 and 2.
Now substituting values, multiplying each term by 
and rearranging terms, we have
The MATLAB commands and results are:
>> clear all
>> syms v1 v2 t
>> [v1 v2] = dsolve('Dv1 + 2*v1 − v2 = 10','Dv2 + 2*v2 −v1 = 
0', . . . 
 'v1(0) = 0','v2(0)= 0');
>> v1
 v1 =
 exp(−t)*(5*exp(t) − 5) + exp(−3*t)*((5*exp(3*t))/3 − 5/3)
>> v2
 v2 =
 exp(−t)*(5*exp(t) − 5) − exp(−3*t)*((5*exp(3*t))/3 − 5/3)
t=0
C1dv1(t)dt+v1(t)−VsR1+v1(t)−v2(t)R2=0
C2dv2(t)dt+v2(t)−v1(t)R2+v2(t)R3=0
10
6
,
d
v
1
(
t
)
dt
+2
v
1
(
t
)−
v
2
(
t
)=10
d
v
2
(
t
)
dt
+2
v
2
(
t
)−
v
1
(
t
)=0

As usual, keep in mind that different versions of the software can give results ­different in
appearance but mathematically equivalent to that shown here. In standard mathematical notation,
the results can be put into the form:
It is always a good idea to perform a few checks on our answers. First, we can verify that the
MATLAB results are both zero at 
as required by the initial conditions. Furthermore, at 
the
capacitors act as open circuits, and the voltage division principle yields 
and 
The expressions delivered by MATLAB also yield these values.
Exercise 4.12 
Use the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox to solve Example 4.6, obtaining the result given in Equation 4.56
and a plot similar to Figure 4.18 on page 186.
Answer  A sequence of commands that produces the solution and the plot is:
clear all
syms ix t R C vCinitial w
ix = dsolve('(R*C)*Dix + ix = (w*C)*2*cos(w*t)', 'ix(0)=−vCinitial/R');
ians = subs(ix,[R C vCinitial w],[5000 1e-6 1 200]);
vpa(ians, 4)
ezplot(ians,[0 80e-3]) 
An m-file named Exercise_4_12 containing these commands can be found in the MATLAB folder. (See
Appendix E for information about accessing this folder.)
Exercise 4.13 
Use the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox to solve Example 4.7 obtaining the results given in the example for
and a plot similar to Figure 4.27 on page 195.
Answer  A list of commands that produces the solution and the plot is:
clear all
syms vc t
 
v
1
(
t
)=20/3−5 exp(
−t
)−(
5/3
) exp(
−3t
)
v
2
(
t
)=10/3−5 exp(
−t
)+(
5/3
) exp(
−3t
)
t=0
t=∞,
v
1
(
∞
)=20/3 V
v
2
(
∞
)=10/3.
v
C
(
t
)

% Case I, R = 300:
vc = dsolve('(1e-8)*D2vc + (1e-6)*300*Dvc+ vc =10', 'vc(0) = 
0','Dvc(0)=0');
vpa(vc,4)
ezplot(vc, [0 1e-3])
hold on % Turn hold on so all plots are on the same axes
% Case II, R = 200:
vc = dsolve('(1e-8)*D2vc + (1e-6)*200*Dvc+ vc =10', 'vc(0) = 
0','Dvc(0)=0');
vpa(vc,4)
ezplot(vc, [0 1e-3])
% Case III, R = 100:
vc = dsolve('(1e-8)*D2vc + (1e-6)*100*Dvc+ vc =10', 'vc(0) = 
0','Dvc(0)=0'); vpa(vc,4)
ezplot(vc, [0 1e-3]) 
An m-file named Exercise_4_13 containing these commands resides in the MATLAB folder. (See
Appendix E for information about accessing this folder.)

Summary
1. The transient part of the response for a circuit containing sources, resistances, and a single
energy-storage element (L or C) is of the form 
The time constant is given by 
or
by 
where R is the Thévenin resistance seen looking back into the circuit from the
terminals of the energy-storage element.
2. In dc steady-state conditions, inductors behave as short circuits and capacitors behave as open
circuits. We can find the steady-state (forced) response for dc sources by analyzing the dc
equivalent circuit.
3. To find the transient currents and voltages, we must solve linear differential equations with
constant coefficients. The solutions are the sum of two parts. The particular solution, also called
the forced response, depends on the sources, as well as the other circuit elements. The
homogeneous solution, also called the natural response, depends on the passive elements (R,
L, and C), but not on the sources. In circuits that contain resistances, the natural response
eventually decays to zero.
4. The natural response of a second-order circuit containing a series or parallel combination of
inductance and capacitance depends on the damping ratio and undamped resonant frequency.
If the damping ratio is greater than unity, the circuit is overdamped, and the natural response is
of the form
If the damping ratio equals unity, the circuit is critically damped, and the natural response is of
the form
If the damping ratio is less than unity, the circuit is underdamped, and the natural response is of
the form
The normalized step response for second-order systems is shown in Figure 4.30 on page 196
for several values of the damping ratio.
5. The MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox is a powerful tool for solving the equations for transient circuits.
A step-by-step procedure is given on page 199.
K
e
−t/τ
.
τ=RC
τ=L/R,
x
c
(
t
)=
K
1
e
s
1
t
+
K
2
e
s
2
t
x
c
(
t
)=
K
1
e
s
1
t
+
K
2
t
e
s
1
t
x
c
(
t
)=
K
1
e
−αt
 cos(
ω
n
t
)+
K
2
e
−αt
 sin(
ω
n
t
)

Problems
Section 4.1: First-Order RC Circuits 
P4.1. Suppose we have a capacitance C discharging through a resistance R. Define and give an
expression for the time constant. To attain a long time constant, do we need large or small
values for R? For C?
*P4.2. The dielectric materials used in real capacitors are not perfect insulators. A resistance
called a leakage resistance in parallel with the capacitance can model this imperfection. A
 capacitor is initially charged to 100 V. We want 90 percent of the initial energy to remain
after one minute. What is the limit on the leakage resistance for this capacitor?
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
*P4.3. The initial voltage across the capacitor shown in Figure P4.3 is 
V. Find an
expression for the voltage across the capacitor as a function of time. Also, determine the time 
at which the voltage crosses zero.
Figure P4.3 
 *P4.4. A 
capacitance is initially charged to 1000 V. At 
it is connected to a 
resistance. At what time 
has 50 percent of the initial energy stored in the capacitance been
dissipated in the resistance?
*P4.5. At 
a charged 
capacitance is connected to a voltmeter, as shown in Figure
P4.5. The meter can be modeled as a resistance. At 
the meter reads 50 V. At 
the
reading is 25 V. Find the resistance of the voltmeter.
100-μF
v
C
(
0+
)=−10
t
0
100{μF
t=0,
1-kΩ
t
2
t=0,
10{μF
t=0,
t=30 s,

Figure P4.5 
*P4.6. At time 
a capacitance C is charged to a voltage of 
Then, the capacitance
discharges through a resistance R. Write an expression for the voltage across the capacitance
as a function of time for 
in terms of R, C, 
and 
P4.7. Given an initially charged capacitance that begins to discharge through a resistance at 
what percentage of the initial voltage remains at two time constants? What percentage of the
initial stored energy remains?
P4.8. The initial voltage across the capacitor shown in Figure P4.3 is 
Find an
expression for the voltage across the capacitor as a function of time, and sketch to scale versus
time.
P4.9. In physics, the half-life is often used to characterize exponential decay of physical
quantities such as radioactive substances. The half-life is the time required for the quantity to
decay to half of its initial value. The time constant for the voltage on a capacitance discharging
through a resistance is 
Find an expression for the half-life of the voltage in terms of R and
C.
P4.10. We know that a 
capacitance is charged to an unknown voltage 
at 
The
capacitance is in parallel with a 
resis­tance. At 
the voltage across the
capacitance is 5 V. Determine the value of 
P4.11. We know that the capacitor shown in Figure P4.11 is charged to a voltage of 10 V prior
to 
a. Find expressions for the voltage across the capacitor 
and the voltage across the
resistor 
for all time.
b. Find an expression for the power delivered to the resistor.
c. Integrate the power from 
to 
to find the energy delivered.
d. Show that the energy delivered to the resistor is equal to the energy stored in the
capacitor prior to 
t
1
,
V
1
.
t>
t
1
V
1
,
t
1
.
t=0,
v
C
(
0+
)=0.
τ=RC.
50-μF
V
i
t=0.
3{kΩ
t=100 ms,
V
i
.
t=0.
v
C
(
t
)
v
R
(
t
)
t=0
t=∞
t=0.

Figure P4.11 
P4.12. The purchasing power P of a certain unit of currency declines by 3 percent per year.
Determine the time constant associated with the purchasing power of this currency.
P4.13. Derive an expression for 
in the circuit of Figure P4.13 and sketch 
to
scale versus time.
Figure P4.13 
P4.14. Suppose that at 
we connect an uncharged 
capacitor to a charging circuit
consisting of a 2500-V voltage source in series with a 
resistance. At 
the capacitor
is disconnected from the charging circuit and connected in parallel with a 
resistor.
Determine the voltage across the capacitor at 
and at 
(Hint: You may find it
convenient to redefine the time variable to be 
for the discharge interval so that the
discharge starts at 
)
P4.15. Suppose we have a capacitance C that is charged to an initial voltage 
Then at 
a
resistance R is connected across the capacitance. Write an expression for the current. Then,
integrate the current from 
to 
and show that the result is equal to the initial charge stored
on the capacitance.
 P4.16. A person shuffling across a dry carpet can be approximately modeled as a charged 100-
pF capacitance with one end grounded. If the person touches a grounded metallic object such as
a water faucet, the capacitance is discharged and the person experiences a brief shock.
Typically, the capacitance may be charged to 20,000 V and the resistance (mainly of one's
finger) is 
Determine the peak current during discharge and the time constant of the
shock.
P4.17. Consider the circuit of Figure P4.17, in which the switch instantaneously moves back and
forth between contacts A and B, spending 2 seconds in each position. Thus, the capacitor
repeatedly charges for 2 seconds and then discharges for 2 seconds. Assume that 
and that the switch moves to position A at 
Determine 
and 
v
C
(
t
)
v
C
(
t
)
t=0,
10{μF
2{MΩ
t=40 s,
5{MΩ
t=40 s
t=100 s.
t′=t−40
t′=0.
V
i
.
t=0,
t=0
t=∞,
100 Ω.
v
C
(
0
)=0
t=0.
v
C
(
2
), 
v
C
(
4
), 
v
C
(
6
),
v
C
(
8
).

Section 4.2: DC Steady State
Figure P4.17 
P4.18. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.18. Prior to 
and 
a. Immediately after the switch is closed, what is the value of the current [i.e., what is the
value of 
]?
b. Write the KVL equation for the circuit in terms of the current and initial voltages. Take the
derivative to obtain a differential equation.
c. What is the value of the time constant in this circuit?
d. Find an expression for the current as a function of time.
e. Find the value that 
approaches as t becomes very large.
Figure P4.18 
t=0, 
v
1
=100 V,
v
2
=0.
i(
0+
)
v
2
P4.19. List the steps for dc steady-state analysis of RLC circuits.
P4.20. Explain why we replace capacitances with open circuits and inductances with short
circuits in dc steady-state analysis.
*P4.21. Solve for the steady-state values of 
and 
for the circuit shown in Figure
P4.21.
Figure P4.21 
i
1
, 
i
2
,
i
3

*P4.22. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.22. What is the steady-state value of 
after
the switch opens? Determine how long it takes after the switch opens before 
is within 1
percent of its steady-state value.
Figure P4.22 
*P4.23. In the circuit of Figure P4.23, the switch is in position A for a long time prior to 
Find
expressions for 
and sketch it to scale for 
Figure P4.23 
P4.24. The circuit shown in Figure P4.24 has been set up for a long time prior to 
with the
switch closed. Find the value of 
prior to 
Find the steady-state value of 
after the
switch has been opened for a long time.
Figure P4.24 
 P4.25. Solve for the steady-state values of 
and 
for the circuit shown in
Figure P4.25, assuming that the switch has been closed for a long time.
v
C
v
C
t=0.
v
R
(
t
)
−2≤t≤10 s.
t=0
v
C
t=0.
v
C
i
1
, 
i
2
, 
i
3
, 
i
4
,
v
C

Figure P4.25 
P4.26. The circuit shown in Figure P4.26 is operating in steady state. Determine the values of 
and 
Figure P4.26 
P4.27. The circuit of Figure P4.27 has been connected for a very long time. Determine the
values of 
and 
Figure P4.27 
P4.28. Consider the circuit of Figure P4.28 in which the switch has been closed for a long time
prior to 
Determine the values of 
before 
and a long time after 
Also,
determine the time constant after the switch opens and expressions for 
Sketch 
to scale versus time for 
i
L
, 
v
x
,
v
C
.
v
C
i
R
.
t=0.
v
C
(
t
)
t=0
t=0.
v
C
(
t
).
v
C
(
t
)
−0.2≤t≤0.5 s.

Section 4.3: RL Circuits
Figure P4.28 
P4.29. For the circuit shown in Figure P4.29, the switch is closed for a long time prior to 
Find expressions for 
and sketch it to scale for 
Figure P4.29 
P4.30. Consider the circuit of Figure P4.30 in which the switch has been closed for a long time
prior to 
Determine the values of 
before 
and a long time after 
Also,
determine the time constant after the switch opens and expressions for 
Sketch 
to scale versus time for 
Figure P4.30 
t=0.
v
C
(
t
)
−80≤t≤160 ms.
t=0.
v
C
(
t
)
t=0
t=0.
v
C
(
t
).
v
C
(
t
)
−4≤t≤16 s.
P4.31. Give the expression for the time constant of a circuit consisting of an inductance with an
initial current in series with a resistance R. To attain a long time constant, do we need large or
small values for R? For L?
t=0,

P4.32. A circuit consists of switches that open or close at 
resistances, dc sources, and a
single energy storage element, either an inductance or a capacitance. We wish to solve for a
current or a voltage x(t) as a function of time for 
Write the general form for the solution. How
is each unknown in the solution determined?
*P4.33. The circuit shown in Figure P4.33 is operating in steady state with the switch closed
prior to 
Find i(t) for 
and for 
Figure P4.33 
*P4.34. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.34. The initial current in the inductor is 
Find expressions for 
and v(t) for 
and sketch to scale versus time.
Figure P4.34 
P4.35. Repeat Problem P4.34 given 
*P4.36. Real inductors have series resistance associated with the wire used to wind the coil.
Suppose that we want to store energy in a 10-H inductor. Determine the limit on the series
resistance so the energy remaining after one hour is at least 75 percent of the initial energy.
P4.37. Determine expressions for and sketch 
to scale versus time for 
for the
circuit of Figure P4.37.
Figure P4.37 
t≥0.
t=0.
t<0
t≥0.
i
L
(
0−
)=
−0.2 A.
i
L
(
t
)
t≥0
i
L
(
0−
)=0 A.
i
s
(
t
)
−0.2≤t≤1.0 s

P4.38. For the circuit shown in Figure P4.38, find an expression for the current 
and
sketch it to scale versus time. Also, find an expression for 
and sketch it to scale versus
time.
Figure P4.38 
P4.39. The circuit shown in Figure P4.39 is operating in steady state with the switch closed prior
to 
Find expressions for 
for 
and for 
Sketch 
to scale versus time.
Figure P4.39 
P4.40. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.40. A voltmeter (VM) is connected across the
inductance. The switch has been closed for a long time. When the switch is opened, an arc
appears across the switch contacts. Explain why. Assuming an ideal switch and inductor, what
voltage appears across the inductor when the switch is opened? What could happen to the
voltmeter when the switch opens?
Figure P4.40 
i
L
(
t
)
v
L
(
t
)
t=0.
i
L
(
t
)
t<0
t≥0.
i
L
(
t
)

Section 4.4: RC and RL Circuits with General Sources
P4.41. Due to components not shown in the figure, the circuit of Figure P4.41 has 
a. Write an expression for 
for 
b. Find an expression for the power delivered to the resistance as a function of time.
c. Integrate the power delivered to the resistance from 
to 
and show that the result
is equal to the initial energy stored in the inductance.
Figure P4.41 
P4.42. The switch shown in Figure P4.42 has been closed for a long time prior to 
then it
opens at 
and closes again at 
Find 
for all t.
Figure P4.42 
P4.43. Determine expressions for and sketch 
to scale versus time for the circuit of
Figure P4.43. The circuit is operating in steady state with the switch closed prior to 
Consider the time interval 
Figure P4.43 
i
L
(
0
)=
I
i
.
i
L
(
t
)
t≥0.
t=0
t=∞,
t=0,
t=0
t=1 s.
i
L
(
t
)
v
R
(
t
)
t=0.
−1≤t≤5 ms.

P4.44. What are the steps in solving a circuit having a resistance, a source, and an inductance
(or capacitance)?
*P4.45. Write the differential equation for 
and find the complete solution for the circuit of
Figure P4.45. [Hint: Try a particular solution of the form 
]
Figure P4.45 
*P4.46. Solve for 
for 
in the circuit of Figure P4.46. [Hint: Try a particular solution of
the form 
]
Figure P4.46 
*P4.47. Solve for v(t) for 
in the circuit of Figure P4.47, given that the inductor current is zero
prior to 
[Hint: Try a particular solution of the form 
]
Figure P4.47 
 P4.48. Solve for 
for 
in the circuit of Figure P4.48. You will need to make an educated
guess as to the form of the particular solution. [Hint: The particular solution includes terms with
the same functional forms as the terms found in the forcing function and its derivatives.]
i
L
(
t
)
i
Lp
(
t
)=A
e
−t
.
v
C
(
t
)
t>0
v
Cp
(
t
)=A
e
−3t
.
t>0
t=0.
v
p
=A cos(
10t
)+B sin(
10t
).
i
L
(
t
)
t>0

Figure P4.48 
P4.49. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.49. The voltage source is known as a ramp
function, which is defined by
Figure P4.49 
Assume that 
Derive an expression for 
for 
Sketch 
to scale versus
time. [Hint: Write the differential equation for 
and assume a particular solution of the form
]
P4.50. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.50.  The initial current in the inductor is 
Write the differential equation for 
and solve. [Hint: Try a particular solution of the form
]
v(
t
)={
0
for t<0
t
for t≥0
v
C
(
0
)=0.
v
C
(
t
)
t≥0.
v
C
(
t
)
v
C
(
t
)
v
Cp
(
t
)=A+Bt.
i
s
(
0+
)=0.
i
s
(
t
)
i
sp
(
t
)=A cos(
300t
)+B sin(
300t
).

Figure P4.50 
P4.51. The voltage source shown in Figure P4.51 is called a ramp function. Assume that 
Write the differential equation for 
and find the complete solution. [Hint: Try a
particular solution of the form 
]
Figure P4.51 
P4.52. Determine the form of the particular solution for the differential equation
Then, find the particular solution. [Hint: The particular solution includes terms with the same
functional forms as the terms found in the forcing function and its derivatives.]
P4.53. Determine the form of the particular solution for the differential equation
Then, find the particular solution. [Hint: The particular solution includes terms with the same
functional forms as the terms found in the forcing function and its derivatives.]
 P4.54. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.54.
Figure P4.54 
i
L
(
0
)=0.
i
L
(
t
),
i
p
(
t
)=A+Bt.
2 
dv(
t
)
dt
+v(
t
)=5t sin(
t
)
dv(
t
)
dt
+3v(
t
)=
t
2
 exp(
−t
)

Section 4.5: Second-Order Circuits
a. Write the differential equation for i(t).
b. Find the time constant and the form of the complementary solution.
c. Usually, for an exponential forcing function like this, we would try a particular solution of
the form 
Why doesn't that work in this case?
d. Find the particular solution. [Hint: Try a particular solution of the form 
]
e. Find the complete solution for i(t).
P4.55. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.55.
Figure P4.55 
a. Write the differential equation for v(t).
b. Find the time constant and the form of the complementary solution.
c. Usually, for an exponential forcing function like this, we would try a particular solution of
the form 
Why doesn't that work in this case?
d. Find the particular solution. [Hint: Try a particular solution of the form 
]
e. Find the complete solution for v(t).
i
p
(
t
)=Kexp(
−3t
).
i
p
(
t
)=
Ktexp
(
−3t
).
v
p
(
t
)=Kexp(
−10t
).
v
p
(
t
)=
Ktexp(
−10t
).
P4.56. How can first- or second-order circuits be identified by inspecting the circuit diagrams?
P4.57. How can an underdamped second-order system be identified? What form does its
complementary solution take? Repeat for a critically damped system and for an overdamped
system.
P4.58. What is a unit step function?
P4.59. Discuss two methods that can be used to determine the particular solution of a circuit with
constant dc sources.
P4.60. Sketch a step response for a second-order system that displays considerable overshoot
and ringing. In what types of circuits do we find pronounced overshoot and ringing?

*P4.61. A dc source is connected to a series RLC circuit by a switch that closes at 
as shown
in Figure P4.61. The initial conditions are 
and 
Write the differential
equation for 
Solve for 
if 
Figure P4.61 
*P4.62. Repeat Problem P4.61 for 
*P4.63. Repeat Problem P4.61 for 
P4.64. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.64 in which the switch has been open for a long
time prior to 
and we are given 
a. Compute the undamped resonant frequency, the damping coefficient, and the damping
ratio of the circuit after the switch closes.
b. Assume that the capacitor is initially charged by a 25-V dc source not shown in the
figure, so we have 
Determine the values of 
and 
c. Find the particular solution for v(t).
d. Find the general solution for v(t), including the numerical values of all parameters.
Figure P4.64 
 P4.65. Repeat Problem P4.64 for 
P4.66. Repeat Problem P4.64 for 
P4.67. Solve for i(t) for 
in the circuit of Figure P4.67, with 
given that 
and 
[Hint: Try a particular solution of the form 
]
t=0,
i(
0+
)=0
v
C
(
0+
)=0.
v
C
(
t
).
v
C
(
t
),
 R=80 Ω.
R=40 Ω.
R=20 Ω.
t=0
R=25 Ω.
v(
0+
)=25 V.
i
L
(
0+
)
v′(
0+
).
R=50 Ω.
R=500 Ω.
t>0
R=50 Ω,
i(
0+
)=0
v
C
(
0+
)=20 V.
i
p
(
t
)=
A cos(
100t
)+B sin(
100t
).

Section 4.6: Transient Analysis Using the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox
Figure P4.67 
P4.68. Repeat Problem P4.67 with 
P4.69. Repeat Problem P4.67 with 
P4.70. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.70.
Figure P4.70 
a. Write the differential equation for v(t).
b. Find the damping coefficient, the natural frequency, and the form of the complementary
solution.
c. Usually, for a sinusoidal forcing function, we try a particular solution of the form 
Why doesn't that work in this case?
d. Find the particular solution. [Hint: Try a particular solution of the form 
]
e. Find the complete solution for v(t).
R=200 Ω.
R=400 Ω.
v
p
(
t
)=A cos(
10
4
t
)+B sin(
10
4
t
).
v
p
(
t
)=At cos(
10
4
t
)+B t sin(
10
4
t
).
P4.71. Use MATLAB to derive an expression for 
in the circuit of Figure P4.13 and plot 
versus time for 
P4.72. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.49. The voltage source is known as a ramp
function, which is defined by
v
C
(
t
)
v
C
(
t
)
0<t<100 ms.
v(
t
)=b
0
for t<0
t
for t≥0

Use MATLAB to derive an expression for 
in terms of R, C, and t. Next, substitute
and 
Then, plot 
and v(t) on the same axes for 
P4.73. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.50 in which the switch is open for a long time
prior to 
The initial current is 
Write the differential equation for 
and use
MATLAB to plot 
for t ranging from 0 to 80 ms. [Hint: Avoid using lowercase "i" as the first
letter of the dependent variable, instead use "Is" for the current in MATLAB.]
P4.74. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.64 in which the switch has been open for a long
time prior to 
and we are given 
a. Write the differential equation for v(t).
b. Assume that the capacitor is initially charged by a 50-V dc source not shown in the
figure, so we have 
Determine the values of 
and 
c. Use MATLAB to find the general solution for v(t).
P4.75. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P4.70.
a. Write the differential equation for v(t).
b. Determine the values for 
and 
c. Use MATLAB to find the complete solution for v(t). Then plot v(t) for 
P4.76. Use MATLAB to solve for the mesh currents in the circuit of Figure P4.76. The circuit has
been connected for a long time prior to 
with the switch open, so the initial values of the
inductor currents are zero.
Figure P4.76 
v
C
(
t
)
R=1 MΩ
C=1 μF.
v
C
(
t
)
0<t<5 s.
t=0.
i
s
(
0+
)=0.
i
s
(
t
)
i
s
(
t
)
t=0
R=25 Ω.
v(
0+
)=50 V.
i
L
(
0+
)
v′(
0+
).
v(
0+
)
v′(
0+
).
0≤t≤10 ms.
t=0

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T4.1. The switch in the circuit shown in Figure T4.1 is closed prior to 
The switch opens at
Determine the time 
at which 
reaches 15 V.
Figure T4.1 
T4.2. Consider the circuit shown in Figure T4.2. The circuit has been operating for a long time
with the switch closed prior to 
Figure T4.2 
a. Determine the values of 
and 
just before the switch opens.
b. Determine the values of 
and 
immediately after the switch opens.
c. Find 
for 
d. Find 
for 
T4.3. Consider the circuit shown in Figure T4.3.
t=0.
t=0.
t
x
v
C
(
t
)
t=0.
i
L
, 
i
1
, 
i
2
, 
i
3
,
v
C
i
L
, 
i
1
, 
i
2
, 
i
3
,
v
C
i
L
(
t
)
t>0.
v
C
(
t
)
t>0.

Figure T4.3 
a. Write the differential equation for i(t).
b. Find the time constant and the form of the complementary solution.
c. Find the particular solution.
d. Find the complete solution for i(t).
T4.4. Consider the circuit shown in Figure T4.4 in which the initial inductor current and capacitor
voltage are both zero.
Figure T4.4 
a. Write the differential equation for 
b. Find the particular solution.
c. Is this circuit overdamped, critically damped, or underdamped? Find the form of the
complementary solution.
d. Find the complete solution for 
T4.5. Write the MATLAB commands to obtain the solution for the differential equation of
question T4.4 with four decimal place accuracy for the constants.
v
C
(
t
).
v
C
(
t
).

Chapter 5 Steady-State Sinusoidal Analysis
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Identify the frequency, angular frequency, peak value, rms value, and phase of a sinusoidal signal.
Determine the root-mean-square (rms) value of any periodic current or voltage.
Solve steady-state ac circuits, using phasors and complex impedances.
Compute power for steady-state ac circuits.
Find Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits.
Determine load impedances for maximum power transfer.
Discuss the advantages of three-phase power distribution.
Solve balanced three-phase circuits.
Use MATLAB to facilitate ac circuit calculations.
Introduction to this chapter:
Circuits with sinusoidal sources have many important applications. For example,
electric power is distributed to residences and businesses by sinusoidal currents

and voltages. Furthermore, sinusoidal signals have many uses in radio
communication. Finally, a branch of mathematics known as Fourier analysis shows
that all signals of practical interest are composed of sinusoidal components. Thus,
the study of circuits with sinusoidal sources is a central theme in electrical
engineering.
In Chapter 4, we saw that the response of a network has two parts: the forced
response and the natural response. In most circuits, the natural response decays
rapidly to zero. The forced response for sinusoidal sources persists indefinitely and,
therefore, is called the steady-state response. Because the natural response quickly
decays, the steady-state response is often of highest interest. In this chapter, we
learn efficient methods for finding the steady-state responses for sinusoidal sources.
We also study three-phase circuits, which are used in electric power-distribution
systems. Most engineers who work in industrial settings need to understand three-
phase power distribution.

5.1 Sinusoidal Currents and Voltages
A sinusoidal voltage is shown in Figure 5.1 and is given by
Figure 5.1 
A sinusoidal voltage waveform given by 
 Note: Assuming that  is in degrees, we
have 
 For the waveform shown, 
is 
where 
 is the peak value of the voltage,  is the angular frequency in radians per second, and  is
the phase angle.
Sinusoidal signals are periodic, repeating the same pattern of values in each period T. Because the
cosine (or sine) function completes one cycle when the angle increases by 
 radians, we get
The frequency of a periodic signal is the number of cycles completed in one second. Thus, we obtain
We refer to  as angular ­frequency with units of ­radians per second and f
simply as frequency with units of hertz (Hz).
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt+θ)
(5.1)
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt+θ).
θ
tmax=−θ360×T.
θ
−45°.
Vm
ω
θ
2π
ωT=2π
(5.2)
f=1T
(5.3)
ω

The units of frequency are hertz (Hz). (Actually, the physical units of hertz are equivalent to inverse
seconds.) Solving Equation 5.2 for the angular frequency, we have
Using Equation 5.3 to substitute for T, we find that
Throughout our discussion, the argument of the cosine (or sine) function is of the form
Electrical engineers often write the argument of a sinusoid in mixed units: 
 is in
radians and the phase angle  is in degrees.
We assume that the angular frequency  has units of radians per second (rad/s). However, we
sometimes give the phase angle  in degrees. Then, the argument has mixed units. If we wanted to
evaluate 
 for a particular value of time, we would have to convert  to radians before adding
the terms in the argument. Usually, we find it easier to visualize an angle expressed in degrees, and
mixed units are not a problem.
For uniformity, we express sinusoidal functions by using the cosine function rather than the sine
function. The functions are related by the identity
For example, when we want to find the phase angle of
we first write it as
ω=2πT
(5.4)
ω=2πf
(5.5)
ωt+θ
ωt
θ
ω
θ
cos(ωt+θ)
θ
sin(z)=cos(z−90°)
(5.6)
vx(t)=10 sin(200t+30°)

Thus, we state that the phase angle of 
 is 
Root-Mean-Square Values
Consider applying a periodic voltage v(t) with period T to a resistance R. The power delivered to the
resistance is given by
Furthermore, the energy delivered in one period is given by
The average power 
 delivered to the resistance is the energy delivered in one cycle divided by the
period. Thus,
Using Equation 5.7 to substitute into Equation 5.9, we obtain
This can be rearranged as
Now, we define the root-mean-square (rms) value of the periodic voltage v(t) as
Using this equation to substitute into Equation 5.11, we get
Thus, if the rms value of a periodic voltage is known, it is relatively easy to compute the average power
that the voltage can deliver to a resistance. The rms value is also called the effective value.
vx(t)=10cos(200t+30°−90°)=10cos(200t−60°)
vx(t)
−60°.
p(t)=v2(t)R
(5.7)
ET=∫0T p(t) dt
(5.8)
Pavg
Pavg=ETT=1T ∫0T p(t) dt
(5.9)
Pavg=1T ∫0T v2(t)R dt
(5.10)
Pavg=[ 1T∫0T v2(t) dt ]2R
(5.11)
Vrms=1T ∫0T v2(t) dt
(5.12)
Pavg=Vrms2R
(5.13)

Power calculations are facilitated by using rms values for voltage or current.
Similarly for a periodic current i(t), we define the rms value as
and the average power delivered if i(t) flows through a resistance is given by
RMS Value of a Sinusoid
Consider a sinusoidal voltage given by
To find the rms value, we substitute into Equation 5.12, which yields
Next, we use the trigonometric identity
to write Equation 5.17 as
Integrating, we get
Evaluating, we have
Irms=1T ∫0T i2(t) dt
(5.14)
Pavg=Irms2R
(5.15)
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt+θ)
(5.16)
Vrms=1T ∫0T Vm2 cos2(ωt+θ) dt
(5.17)
cos2(z)=12+12 cos(2z)
(5.18)
Vrms=Vm22T ∫0T [ 1+cos(2ωt+2θ) ] dt
(5.19)
Vrms=Vm22T [t+12ω sin(2ωt+2θ)]0T
(5.20)

Referring to Equation 5.2, we see that 
 Thus, we obtain
Therefore, Equation 5.21 reduces to
This is a useful result that we will use many times in dealing with sinusoids.
Usually in discussing sinusoids, the rms or effective value is given rather than the peak value. For
example, ac power in residential wiring is distributed as a 60-Hz 115-V rms sinusoid (in the United
States). Most people are aware of this, but probably few know that 115 V is the rms value and that the
peak value is 
 (Actually, 115 V is the nominal residential distribution voltage.
It can vary from approximately 105 to 130 V.)
The rms value for a sinusoid is the peak value divided by the square root of two.
This is not true for other periodic waveforms such as square waves or triangular
waves.
Keep in mind that 
 applies to sinusoids. To find the rms value of other periodic waveforms,
we would need to employ the definition given by Equation 5.12.
Example 5.1 Power Delivered to a Resistance by a Sinusoidal Source
Suppose that a voltage given by 
 V is applied to a 
 resistance. Sketch v(t) to
scale versus time. Find the rms value of the voltage and the average power delivered to the
resistance. Find the power as a function of time and sketch to scale.
Solution 
By comparison of the expression given for v(t) with Equation 5.1, we see that 
 Using
Equation 5.5, we find that the frequency is 
 Then, the period is 
 A plot
Vrms=Vm22T [T+12ω sin(2ωT+2θ)−12ω sin(2θ)]
(5.21)
ωT=2π.
12ω sin(2ωT+2θ)−12ω sin(2θ)=12ω sin(4π+2θ)−12ω sin(2θ)=12ω sin(2θ)−12ω sin(2θ)=0
Vrms=Vm2
(5.22)
Vm=Vrms×2=115×2≅163 V.
Vrms=Vm/2
v(t)=100 cos(100πt)
50-Ω
ω=100π.
f=ω/2π=50 Hz.
T=1/f=20 ms.

of v(t) versus time is shown in Figure 5.2(a).
Figure 5.2 
Voltage and power versus time for Example 5.1.
The peak value of the voltage is 
 Thus, the rms value is 
 Then, the
average power is
The power as a function of time is given by
A plot of p(t) versus time is shown in Figure 5.2(b). Notice that the power fluctuates from 0 to 200
W. However, the average power is 100 W, as we found by using the rms value.
For a sinusoidal current flowing in a resistance, power fluctuates periodically from
zero to twice the average value.
Vm=100 V.
Vrms=Vm/2=70.71 V.
Pavg=Vrms2R=(70.71)250=100 W
p(t)=v2(t)R=1002 cos2(100πt)50=200 cos2(100πt) W

RMS Values of Nonsinusoidal Voltages or Currents
Sometimes we need to determine the rms values of periodic currents or voltages that are not sinusoidal.
We can accomplish this by applying the definition given by Equation 5.12 or 5.14 directly.
Example 5.2 RMS Value of a Triangular Voltage
The voltage shown in Figure 5.3(a) is known as a triangular waveform. Determine its rms value.
Figure 5.3 
Triangular voltage waveform of Example 5.2.
Solution 
First, we need to determine the equations describing the waveform between 
 and 
 As
illustrated in Figure 5.3(b), the equations for the first period of the triangular wave are
Equation 5.12 gives the rms value of the voltage.
t=0
t=T=2 s.
v(t)={3tfor0≤t≤16−3tfor1≤t≤2

Dividing the interval into two parts and substituting for v(t), we have
Evaluating, we find
The integrals in this example are easy to carry out manually. However, when the integrals are more
difficult, we can sometimes obtain answers using the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox. Here are the MATLAB
commands needed to perform the integrals in this example:
>> syms Vrms t
>> Vrms = sqrt((1/2)*(int(9*tˆ2,t,0,1) + int((6−3*t)ˆ2,t,1,2)))
Vrms = 
3ˆ(1/2) 
Exercise 5.1 
Suppose that a sinusoidal voltage is given by
a. Find the angular frequency, the frequency in hertz, the period, the peak value, and the rms value.
Also, find the first value of time 
 after 
 such that v(t) attains its positive peak.
b. If this voltage is applied to a 
 resistance, compute the average power delivered.
c. Sketch v(t) to scale versus time.
Answer 
a. 
 
b. 
c. a plot of v(t) versus time is shown in Figure 5.4.
Vrms=1T ∫0T v2(t)dt
Vrms=12 [∫01 9t2dt+∫12 (6−3t)2dt]Vrms=12 [3t3|t=0t=1+(36t−18t2+3t3)|t=0t=1]
Vrms=12 [ 3+(72−36−72+18+24−3) ]=3 V
v(t)=150 cos(200πt−30°) V
tmax
t=0
50-Ω
ω=200π, f=100 Hz,T=10 ms,Vm=150 V,Vrms=106.1 V, tmax=30°360°×T=0.833 ms;
Pavg=225 W;

Figure 5.4 
Answer for Exercise 5.1(c).
Exercise 5.2 
Express 
 as a cosine function.
Answer 
Exercise 5.3 
Suppose that the ac line voltage powering a computer has an rms value of 110 V and a frequency of 60
Hz, and the peak voltage is attained at 
 Write an expression for this ac voltage as a function of
time.
Answer 
v(t)=100 sin(300πt+60°) V
v(t)=100 cos(300πt−30°) V.
t=5 ms.
v(t)=155.6 cos(377t−108°) V.

5.2 Phasors
In the next several sections, we will see that sinusoidal steady-state analysis is greatly facilitated if the
currents and voltages are represented as vectors (called phasors) in the complex-number plane. In
preparation for this material, you may wish to study the review of complex-number arithmetic in
Appendix A.
We start with a study of convenient methods for adding (or subtracting) sinusoidal waveforms. We often
need to do this in applying Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL) or Kirchhoff's current law (KCL) to ac circuits.
For example, in applying KVL to a network with sinusoidal voltages, we might obtain the expression
To obtain the peak value of v(t) and its phase angle, we need to put Equation 5.23 into the form
This could be accomplished by repeated substitution, using standard trigonometric identities. However,
that method is too tedious for routine work. Instead, we will see that we can represent each term on the
right-hand side of Equation 5.23 by a vector in the complex-number plane known as a phasor. Then,
we can add the phasors with relative ease and convert the sum into the desired form.
Phasor Definition
For a sinusoidal voltage of the form
we define the phasor as
Thus, the phasor for a sinusoid is a complex number having a magnitude equal to the peak value and
having the same phase angle as the sinusoid. We use boldface letters for phasors. (Actually, engineers
are not consistent in choosing the magnitudes of phasors. In this chapter and in Chapter 6, we take the
v(t)=10 cos(ωt)+5 sin(ωt+60°)+5 cos(ωt+90°)
(5.23)
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt+θ)
(5.24)
v1(t)=V1 cos(ωt+θ1)
V1=V1 ∠θ1_

peak values for the magnitudes of phasors, which is the prevailing custom in circuit-analysis courses for
electrical engineers. However, later in Chapters 14 and 15, we will take the rms values for the phasor
magnitudes as power-system engineers customarily do. We will take care to label rms phasors as such
when we encounter them. In this book, if phasors are not labeled as rms, you can assume that they are
peak values.)
Phasors are complex numbers that represent sinusoidal voltages or currents.
The magnitude of a phasor equals the peak value and the angle equals the
phase of the sinusoid (written as a cosine).
If the sinusoid is of the form
we first convert to a cosine function by using the trigonometric identity
Thus, we have
and the phasor is
Phasors are obtained for sinusoidal currents in a similar fashion. Thus, for the currents
and
the phasors are
v2(t)=V2 sin(ωt+θ2)
sin(z)= cos(z−90°)
(5.25)
v2(t)=V2 cos(ωt+θ2−90°)
V2=V2 ∠θ2−90°_
i1(t)=I1 cos(ωt+θ1)
i2(t)=I2 sin(ωt+θ2)

and
respectively.
Adding Sinusoids Using Phasors
Now, we illustrate how we can use phasors to combine the terms of the right-hand side of Equation
5.23. In this discussion, we proceed in small logical steps to illustrate clearly why sinusoids can be
added by adding their phasors. Later, we streamline the procedure for routine work.
Our first step in combining the terms in Equation 5.23 is to write all the sinusoids as cosine functions by
using Equation 5.25. Thus, Equation 5.23 can be written as
Referring to Euler's formula (Equation A.8) in Appendix A, we see that we can write
where the notation Re() means that we retain only the real part of the quantity inside the parentheses.
Thus, we can rewrite Equation 5.27 as
When we multiply a complex number Z by a real number A, both the real and imaginary parts of Z are
multiplied by A. Thus, Equation 5.29 becomes
Next, we can write
I1=I1 ∠θ1_
I2=I2 ∠θ2−90°_
v(t)=10 cos(ωt)+5 cos(ωt+60°−90°)+5 cos(ωt+90°)
(5.26)
v(t)=10 cos(ωt)+5 cos(ωt−30°)+5 cos(ωt+90°)
(5.27)
cos(θ)=Re(ejθ)=Re[ cos(θ)+j sin(θ) ]
(5.28)
v(t)=10 Re [ ejωt ]+5 Re [ ej(ωt−30°) ]+5 Re [ ej(ωt+90°) ]
(5.29)
v(t)=Re [ 10ejωt ]+Re [ 5ej(ωt−30°) ]+Re [ 5ej(ωt+90°) ]
(5.30)
v(t)=Re [ 10ejωt+5ej(ωt−30°)+5ej(ωt+90°) ]
(5.31)

because the real part of the sum of several complex quantities is equal to the sum of the real parts. If we
factor out the common term 
 Equation 5.31 becomes
Putting the complex numbers into polar form, we have
Now, we can combine the complex numbers as
Using this result in Equation 5.33, we have
which can be written as
Now, using Equation 5.28, we can write this as
Thus, we have put the original expression for v(t) into the desired form. The terms on the left-hand side
of Equation 5.34 are the phasors for the terms on the right-hand side of the original expression for v(t).
Notice that the essential part of the work needed to combine the sinusoids is to add the phasors.
Streamlined Procedure for Adding Sinusoids
From now on, to add sinusoids, we will first write the phasor for each term in the sum, add the phasors
by using complex-number arithmetic, and then write the simplified expression for the sum.
To add sinusoids, we find the phasor for each term, add the phasors by using
complex-number arithmetic, express the sum in polar form, and then write the
ejωt,
v(t)=Re [ (10+5e−j30°+5j90°) ejωt ]
(5.32)
v(t)=Re [ (10 ∠0°_+5 ∠−30°_+5 ∠90°_)ejωt ]
(5.33)
10 ∠0°¯+5 ∠−30°¯+5 ∠90°¯=10+4.33−j2.50+j5=14.33+j2.5=14.54 ∠9.90°¯=14.54ej9.90°
(5.34)
v(t)=Re [ (14.54ej9.90°) ejωt ]
v(t)=Re [ 14.54ej(ωt+9.90°) ]
(5.35)
v(t)=14.54 cos(ωt+9.90°)
(5.36)

corresponding sinusoidal time function.
Example 5.3 Using Phasors to Add Sinusoids
Suppose that
Reduce the sum 
 to a single term.
In using phasors to add sinusoids, all of the terms must have the same
frequency.
Solution 
The phasors are
Step 1: Determine the phasor for each term.
Notice that we have subtracted 90° to find the phase angle for 
 because 
 is a sine function
rather than a cosine function.
Next, we use complex-number arithmetic to add the phasors and convert the sum to polar form:
v1(t)=20 cos(ωt−45°)v2(t)=10 sin(ωt+60°)
vs(t)=v1(t)+v2(t)
V1=20 ∠−45°_V2=10 ∠−30°_
V2
v2(t)
Vs=V1+V2=20 ∠−45°¯+10 ∠−30°¯=14.14−j14.14+8.660−j5=22.80−j19.14=29.77 ∠−40.01°¯

Step 2: Use complex arithmetic to add the phasors.
Now, we write the time function corresponding to the phasor 
Step 3: Convert the sum to polar form.
Step 4: Write the result as a time function.
Exercise 5.4 
Reduce the following expressions by using phasors:
Answer 
Phasors as Rotating Vectors
Consider a sinusoidal voltage given by
Vs.
vs(t)=29.77 cos(ωt−40.01°)
v1(t)=10 cos(ωt)+10 sin(ωt)i1(t)=10 cos(ωt+30°)+5 sin(ωt+30°)i2(t)=20 sin(ωt+90°)+15 cos(ωt−60°)
v1(t)=14.14 cos(ωt−45°)i1(t)=11.18 cos(ωt+3.44°)i2(t)=30.4 cos(ωt−25.3°)
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt+θ)

In developing the phasor concept, we write
The complex quantity inside the brackets is
This can be visualized as a vector of length 
 that rotates counterclockwise in the complex plane with
an angular velocity of  rad/s. Furthermore, the voltage v(t) is the real part of the vector, which is
illustrated in Figure 5.5. As the vector rotates, its projection on the real axis traces out the voltage as a
function of time. The phasor is simply a "snapshot" of this rotating vector at 
Figure 5.5 
A sinusoid can be represented as the real part of a vector rotating counterclockwise in the complex
plane.
Sinusoids can be visualized as the real-axis projection of vectors rotating in the
complex plane. The phasor for a sinusoid is a snapshot of the corresponding
rotating vector at 
v(t)=Re [ Vmej(ωt+θ) ]
Vmej(ωt+θ)=Vm ∠ωt+θ_
Vm
ω
t=0.
t=0.

Phase Relationships
We will see that the phase relationships between currents and voltages are often important. Consider
the voltages
and
To determine phase relationships from a phasor diagram, consider that the
phasors rotate counterclockwise. Then, when standing at a fixed point, if 
arrives first followed by 
 after a rotation of 
 we say that 
 leads 
 by 
Alternatively, we could say that 
 lags 
 by 
 (Usually, we take  as the
smaller angle between the two phasors.)
The corresponding phasors are
and
The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 5.6. Notice that the angle between 
 and 
 is 60°. Because
the complex vectors rotate counterclockwise, we say that 
 leads 
 by 60°. (An alternative way to
state the phase relationship is to state that 
 lags 
 by 60°.)
v1(t)=3 cos(ωt+40°)
V1
V2
θ,
V1
V2
θ.
V2
V1
θ.
θ
v2(t)=4 cos(ωt−20°)
V1=3 ∠40°_
V2=4 ∠−20°_
V1
V2
V1
V2
V2
V1

Figure 5.6 
Because the vectors rotate counterclockwise, 
 leads 
 by 60° (or, equivalently, 
 lags 
 by
60°).
We have seen that the voltages versus time can be obtained by tracing the real part of the rotating
vectors. The plots of 
 and 
 versus 
 are shown in Figure 5.7. Notice that 
 reaches its
peak 60° earlier than 
 This is the meaning of the statement that 
 leads 
 by 60°.
Figure 5.7 
The peaks of 
 occur 60° before the peaks of 
 In other words, 
 leads 
 by 60°.
To determine phase relationships between sinusoids from their plots versus time,
find the shortest time interval 
 between positive peaks of the two waveforms.
Then, the phase angle is 
 If the peak of 
 occurs first, we say
that 
 leads 
 or that 
 lags 
Exercise 5.5 
 V1
 V2
 V2
 V1
v1(t)
v2(t)
ωt
v1(t)
v2(t).
v1(t)
v2(t)
v1(t)
v2(t).
v1(t)
v2(t).
tp
θ=(tp/T)×360°.
v1(t)
v1(t)
v2(t)
v2(t)
v1(t).

Consider the voltages given by
State the phase relationship between each pair of the voltages. (Hint: Find the phasor for each voltage
and draw the phasor diagram.)
Answer 
 lags 
 by 60° (or 
 leads 
 by 60°)
 leads 
 by 15° (or 
 lags 
 by 15°)
 leads 
 by 75° (or 
 lags 
 by 75°)
v1(t)=10 cos(ωt−30°)v2(t)=10 cos(ωt+30°)v3(t)=10 sin(ωt+45°)
v1
v2
v2
v1
v1
v3
v3
v1
v2
v3
v3
v2

5.3 Complex Impedances
In this section, we learn that by using phasors to represent sinusoidal voltages and currents, we can
solve sinusoidal steady-state circuit problems with relative ease compared with the methods of Chapter
4. Except for the fact that we use complex arithmetic, sinusoidal steady-state analysis is virtually the
same as the analysis of resistive circuits, which we studied in Chapter 2.
Inductance
Consider an inductance in which the current is a sinusoid given by
Recall that the voltage across an inductance is
Substituting Equation 5.37 into Equation 5.38 and reducing, we obtain
Now, the phasors for the current and voltage are
and
The phasor diagram of the current and voltage is shown in Figure 5.8(a). The corresponding waveforms
of current and voltage are shown in Figure 5.8(b). Notice that the current lags the voltage by 90° for a
pure inductance.
iL(t)=Im sin(ωt+θ)
(5.37)
vL(t)=L diL(t)dt
(5.38)
vL(t)=ωLIm cos(ωt+θ)
(5.39)
IL=Im ∠θ−90°_
(5.40)
VL=ωLIm ∠θ_=Vm ∠θ_
(5.41)

Figure 5.8 
Current lags voltage by 90° in a pure inductance.
Current lags voltage by 90° for a pure inductance.
Equation 5.41 can be written in the form
Using Equation 5.40 to substitute into Equation 5.42, we find that
which can also be written as
We refer to the term 
 as the impedance of the inductance and denote it as 
 Thus, we
have
and
VL=(ωL ∠90°_)×Im ∠θ−90°_
(5.42)
VL=(ωL ∠90°_)×IL
(5.43)
VL=jωL×IL
(5.44)
jωL=ωL ∠90°_
ZL.
ZL=jωL=ωL ∠90°_
(5.45)
VL=ZLIL
(5.46)

Thus, the phasor voltage is equal to the impedance times the phasor current. This is Ohm's law in
phasor form. However, for an inductance, the impedance is an imaginary number, whereas resistance is
a real number. (Impedances that are pure imaginary are also called reactances.)
Equation 5.46 shows that phasor voltage and phasor current for an inductance
are related in a manner analogous to Ohm's law.
Capacitance
In a similar fashion for a capacitance, we can show that if the current and voltage are sinusoidal, the
phasors are related by
in which the impedance of the capacitance is
Notice that the impedance of a capacitance is also a pure imaginary number.
Suppose that the phasor voltage is
Then, the phasor current is
where 
 The phasor diagram for current and voltage in a pure capacitance is shown in Figure
5.9(a). The corresponding plots of current and voltage versus time are shown in Figure 5.9(b). Notice
that the current leads the voltage by 90°. (On the other hand, current lags voltage for an inductance.
This is easy to remember if you know ELI the ICE man. The letter E is sometimes used to stand for
electromotive force, which is another term for voltage, L and C are used for inductance and capacitance,
respectively, and I is used for current.)
VC=ZCIC
(5.47)
ZC=−j 1ωC=1jωC=1ωC ∠−90°_
(5.48)
VC=Vm ∠θ_
IC=VCZC=Vm ∠θ¯(1/ωC)−∠90°¯=ωCVm ∠θ+90°¯IC=Im ∠θ+90°¯
Im=ωCVm.

Figure 5.9 
Current leads voltage by 90° in a pure capacitance.
Current leads voltage by 90° for a pure capacitance.
Resistance
For a resistance, the phasors are related by
Because resistance is a real number, the current and voltage are in phase, as illustrated in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10 
For a pure resistance, current and voltage are in phase.
VR=RIR
(5.49)

Current and voltage are in phase for a resistance.
Complex Impedances in Series and Parallel
Impedances of inductances, capacitances, and resistances are combined in series and parallel in the
same manner as resistances. (Recall that we combine capacitances in series as we do resistances in
parallel. However, the impedances of capacitances are combined in the same manner as resistances.)
Example 5.4 Combining Impedances in Series and Parallel
Determine the complex impedance between terminals shown in Figure 5.11(a) for ω=1000 rad/s.

Figure 5.11 
Circuit of Example 5.4.
Solution 
First, the impedance of the inductance is 
 and the impedance of the capacitance is
 These values are shown in Figure 5.11(b).
Next, we observe that the 
 resistance is in parallel with the series impedance 
 The
impedance of this parallel combination is
The resulting equivalent is shown in Figure 5.11(c). (We use rectangular boxes to represent the
combined impedances of dissimilar types of components.)
Then, notice that the impedances in Figure 5.1(c) are in series, and they are combined by adding
them resulting in:
This is shown in Figure 5.11(d).
Exercise 5.6 
A voltage 
 is applied to a 0.25-H inductance. (Notice that 
)
a. Find the impedance of the inductance, the phasor current, and the phasor voltage.
b. Draw the phasor diagram.
Answer 
a. 
b. the phasor diagram is shown in Figure 5.12(a).
jωL=j100 Ω,
−j/(ωC)=−j80 Ω.
200-Ω
100+j100 Ω.
11/100+1/(100+j100)=80+j40 Ω
−j80+80+j40=80−j40=89.44−26.57 Ω
vL(t)=100 cos(200t)
ω=200.
ZL=j50=50 ∠90°_, IL=2 ∠−90°_, VL=100 ∠0°_;

Figure 5.12 
Answers for Exercises 5.6, 5.7, and 5.8. The scale has been expanded for the currents compared
with the voltages so the current phasors can be easily seen.
Exercise 5.7 
A voltage 
 is applied to a 
 capacitance.
a. Find the impedance of the capacitance, the phasor current, and the phasor voltage.
b. Draw the phasor diagram.
Answer 
a. 
b. the phasor diagram is shown in Figure 5.12(b).n
Exercise 5.8 
A voltage 
 is applied to a 
 resistance.
a. Find the phasor for the current and the phasor voltage.
b. Draw the phasor diagram.
Answer 
a. 
b. the phasor diagram is shown in Figure 5.12(c).n
vC(t)=100 cos(200t)
100-μF
ZC=−j50=50 ∠−90°_, IC=2 ∠90°_, VC=100 ∠0°_;
vR(t)=100 cos(200t)
50-Ω
IR=2 ∠0°_, VR=100 ∠0°_;

5.4 Circuit Analysis with Phasors and Complex Impedances
Kirchhoff's Laws in Phasor Form
Recall that KVL requires that the voltages sum to zero for any closed path in an electrical network. A typical KVL equation is
If the voltages are sinusoidal, they can be represented by phasors. Then, Equation 5.50 becomes
Thus, we can apply KVL directly to the phasors. The sum of the phasor voltages equals zero for any closed path.
Similarly, KCL can be applied to currents in phasor form. The sum of the phasor currents entering a node must equal the sum of the phasor currents leaving.
Circuit Analysis Using Phasors and Impedances
We have seen that phasor currents and voltages are related by complex impedances, and Kirchhoff's laws apply in phasor form. Except for the fact that the voltages, currents, and impedances can
be complex, the equations are exactly like those of resistive circuits.
A step-by-step procedure for steady-state analysis of circuits with sinusoidal sources is
1. Replace the time descriptions of the voltage and current sources with the corresponding phasors. (All of the sources must have the same frequency.)
2. Replace inductances by their complex impedances 
 Replace capacitances by their complex impedances 
 Resistances have impedances
equal to their resistances.
3. Analyze the circuit by using any of the techniques studied in Chapter 2, and perform the calculations with complex arithmetic.
Example 5.5 Steady-State AC Analysis of a Series Circuit
Find the steady-state current for the circuit shown in Figure 5.13(a). Also, find the phasor voltage across each element and construct a phasor diagram.
v1(t)+v2(t)−v3(t)=0
(5.50)
V1+V2−V3=0
(5.51)
ZL=jωL=ωL ∠90°_.
ZC=1/(jωC)=(1/ωC) ∠−90°_.

Figure 5.13 
Circuit for Example 5.5.
Solution  
From the expression given for the source voltage 
 we see that the peak voltage is 100 V, the angular frequency is 
 and the phase angle is 30°. The phasor for the voltage source is
Step 1: Replace the time description of the voltage source with the corresponding phasor.
The complex impedances of the inductance and capacitance are
Step 2: Replace inductances and capacitances with their complex impedances.
and
vs(t),
ω=500,
Vs=100 ∠30°_
ZL=jωL=j500×0.3=j150 Ω
ZC=−j 1ωC=−j 1500×40×10−6=−j50 Ω

The transformed circuit is shown in Figure 5.13(b). All three elements are in series. Thus, we find the equivalent impedance of the circuit by adding the impedances of all three elements:
Step 3: Use complex arithmetic to analyze the circuit.
Substituting values, we have
Converting to polar form, we obtain
Now, we can find the phasor current by dividing the phasor voltage by the equivalent impedance, resulting in
As a function of time, the current is
Next, we can find the phasor voltage across each element by multiplying the phasor current by the respective impedance:
The phasor diagram for the current and voltages is shown in Figure 5.14. Notice that the current I lags the source voltage 
 by 45°. As expected, the voltage 
 and current I are in phase for
the resistance. For the inductance, the voltage 
 leads the current I by 90°. For the capacitance, the voltage 
 lags the current by 90°.
Zeq=R+ZL+ZC
Zeq=100+j150−j50=100+j100
Zeq=141.4 ∠45°_
I=VsZ=100 ∠30°_141.4 ∠45°_=0.707 ∠−15°_
i(t)=0.707 cos(500t−15°)
VR=R×I=100×0.707 ∠−15°¯=70.7 ∠−15°¯VL=jωL×I=ωL ∠90°¯×I=150 ∠90°¯×0.707 ∠−15°¯=106.1 ∠75°¯VC=−j 1ωC×I=1ωC ∠−90°¯×I=50 ∠−90°¯×0.707 ∠−15°¯=35.4 ∠−105°¯
Vs
VR
VL
VC

Figure 5.14 
Phasor diagram for Example 5.5.
Example 5.6 Series and Parallel Combinations of Complex Impedances
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 5.15(a). Find the voltage 
 in steady state. Find the phasor current through each element, and construct a phasor diagram showing the currents and the
source voltage.
Figure 5.15 
Circuit for Example 5.6.
Solution
 The phasor for the voltage source is 
 [Notice that 
 is a sine function rather than a cosine function, and it is necessary to subtract 90° from the phase.] The angular
frequency of the source is 
 The impedances of the inductance and capacitance are
vC(t)
Vs=10 ∠−90°_.
vs(t)
ω=1000.

Step 1: Replace the time description of the voltage source with the corresponding phasor.
and
Step 2: Replace inductances and capacitances with their complex impedances.
The transformed network is shown in Figure 5.15(b).
Step 3: Use complex arithmetic to analyze the circuit.
To find 
 we will first combine the resistance and the impedance of the capacitor in parallel. Then, we will use the voltage-division principle to compute the voltage across the RC combination.
The impedance of the parallel RC circuit is
Converting to rectangular form, we have
The equivalent network is shown in Figure 5.15(c).
ZL=jωL=j1000×0.1=j100 Ω
ZC=−j 1ωC=−j 11000×10×10−6=−j100 Ω
VC,
ZRC=11/R+1/ZC=11/100+1/(−j100)=10.01+j0.01=1 ∠0°¯0.01414 ∠45°¯=70.71 ∠−45°¯
ZRC=50−j50

Now, we use the voltage-division principle to obtain
Converting the phasor to a time function, we have
Next, we compute the current in each element yielding
The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16 
Phasor diagram for Example 5.6.
Node-Voltage Analysis
We can perform node-voltage analysis by using phasors in a manner parallel to that of Chapter 2. We illustrate with an example.
Example 5.7 Steady-State AC Node-Voltage Analysis
Use the node-voltage technique to find 
 in steady state for the circuit shown in Figure 5.17(a).
VC=Vs ZRCZL+ZRC=10 ∠−90°¯ 70.71 ∠−45°¯j100+50−j50=10 ∠−90°¯ 70.71 ∠−45°¯50+j50=10 ∠−90°¯ 70.71 ∠−45°¯70.71 ∠45°¯=10 ∠−180°¯
vC(t)=10 cos(1000t−180°)=−10 cos(1000t)
I=VsZL+ZRC=10 ∠−90°¯j100+50−j50=10 ∠−90°¯50+j50=10 ∠−90°¯70.71∠45°¯=0.1414 ∠−135°¯IR=VCR=10 ∠−180°¯100=0.1 ∠−180°¯IC=VCZC=10 ∠−180°¯−j100=10 ∠−180°¯100 ∠−90°¯=0.1 ∠−90°¯
v1(t)

Figure 5.17 
Circuit for Example 5.7.
Solution 
The transformed network is shown in Figure 5.17(b). We obtain two equations by applying KCL at node 1 and at node 2. This yields
These equations can be put into the standard form
Now, we solve for 
 yielding
Then, we convert the phasor to a time function and obtain
Mesh-Current Analysis
In a similar fashion, you can use phasors to carry out mesh-current analysis in ac circuits.
 Example 5.8 Steady-State AC Mesh-Current Analysis
Use the mesh-current technique to find 
 in steady state for the circuit shown in Figure 5.18(a).
V110+V1−V2−j5=2 ∠−90°_V2j10+V2−V1−j5=1.5 ∠0°_
(0.1+j0.2)V1−j0.2V2=−j2−j0.2V1+j0.1V2=1.5
V1
V1=16.1 ∠29.7°_
v1(t)=16.1 cos(100t+29.7°)
i1(t)

Figure 5.18 
Circuit of Example 5.8.
Solution 
First, we note that 
 for both of the sources in this circuit. The impedance of the inductance is 
 and the impedance of the capacitance is 
 The transformed
network is shown in Figure 5.18(b).
Next, we write KVL equations. We cannot write equations around either mesh 1 or mesh 2 because we do not know the voltage across the current source. The only option is to write a KVL
equation around the outside of the network, which yields:
The current flowing upward through the current source is
In standard form, these equations become:
Solving these equations results in:
Exercise 5.9 
ω=1000 rad/s
jωL=j50 Ω,
−j/(ωC)=−j100 Ω.
j100+50I1+100I2−j100 I2+j50 I2=0
I2−I1=1
50I1+(100−j50) I2=−j100−I1+I2=1
I1=0.7071 ∠−135°_ or i1(t)=0.7071 cos(1000t−135°) V

Consider the circuit shown in Figure 5.19(a).
a. Find i(t).
b. Construct a phasor diagram showing all three voltages and the current.
c. What is the phase relationship between 
 and 
Figure 5.19 
Circuit and phasor diagram for Exercise 5.9.
Answer 
a. a. 
b. the phasor diagram is shown in Figure 5.19(b);
c. i(t) lags 
 by 45°.
Exercise 5.10 
Find the phasor voltage and the phasor current through each element in the circuit of Figure 5.20.
Figure 5.20 
Circuit for Exercise 5.10.
Answer 
vs(t)
i(t)?
i(t)=0.0283 cos(500t−135°);
vs(t)
V=277 ∠−56.3°_, IC=5.55 ∠33.7°_, IL=1.39 ∠−146.3°_, IR=2.77∠−56.3°_.

Exercise 5.11 
Solve for the mesh currents shown in Figure 5.21.
Figure 5.21 
Circuit for Exercise 5.11.
Answer 
i1(t)=1.414 cos(1000t−45°), i2(t)= cos(1000t).

5.5 Power in AC Circuits
Consider the situation shown in Figure 5.22. A voltage 
 is applied to a network
composed of resistances, inductances, and capacitances (i.e., an RLC network). The phasor for the
voltage source is 
 and the equivalent impedance of the network is 
 The
phasor current is
Figure 5.22
 A voltage source delivering power to a load impedance 
where we have defined
Before we consider the power delivered by the source to a general load, it is instructive to consider a
pure resistive load, a pure inductive load, and a pure capacitive load.
Current, Voltage, and Power for a Resistive Load
First, consider the case in which the network is a pure resistance. Then, 
 and we have
Plots of these quantities are shown in Figure 5.23. Notice that the current is in phase with the voltage
(i.e., they both reach their peak values at the same time). Because p(t) is positive at all times, we
conclude that energy flows continually in the direction from the source to the load (where it is converted
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt)
V=Vm ∠0°_,
Z=|Z| ∠θ_=R+jX.
Z=R+jX.
I=VZ=Vm ∠0°_|Z| ∠θ_=Im ∠−θ_
(5.52)
Im=Vm|Z|
(5.53)
θ=0,
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt)i(t)=Im cos(ωt)p(t)=v(t)i(t)=VmIm cos2(ωt)

to heat). Of course, the value of the power rises and falls with the voltage (and current) magnitude.
Figure 5.23
 Current, voltage, and power versus time for a purely resistive load.
Average power is absorbed by resistances in ac circuits.
Current, Voltage, and Power for an Inductive Load
Next, consider the case in which the load is a pure inductance for which 
 Thus, 
 and
we get
Using the trigonometric identity 
 we find that the expression for the power
becomes
Z=ωL ∠90°_.
θ=90°,
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt)i(t)=Im cos(ωt−90°)=Im sin(ωt)p(t)=v(t)i(t)=VmIm cos(ωt) sin(ωt)
cos(x) sin(x)=(1/2) sin(2x),
p(t)=VmIm2 sin(2ωt)

Power surges into and out of inductances in ac circuits. The average power
absorbed by inductances is zero.
Plots of the current, voltage, and power are shown in Figure 5.24(a). Notice that the current lags the
voltage by 90°. Half of the time the power is positive, showing that energy is delivered to the inductance,
where it is stored in the magnetic field. For the other half of the time, power is negative, showing that the
inductance returns energy to the source. Notice that the average power is zero. In this case, we say that
reactive power flows from the source to the load.
Figure 5.24
 Current, voltage, and power versus time for pure energy-storage elements.
Current, Voltage, and Power for a Capacitive Load
Next, consider the case in which the load is a pure capacitance for which 
 Then,
 and we have
Z=(1/ωC) ∠−90°_.
θ=−90°,

Power surges into and out of capacitances in ac circuits. The average power
absorbed by capacitances is zero.
Plots of the current, voltage, and power are shown in Figure 5.24(b). Here again, the average power is
zero, and we say that reactive power flows. Notice, however, that the power for the capacitance carries
the opposite sign as that for the inductance. Thus, we say that reactive power is positive for an
inductance and is negative for a capacitance. If a load contains both inductance and capacitance with
reactive powers of equal magnitude, the reactive powers cancel.
Importance of Reactive Power
Even though no average power is consumed by a pure energy-storage element (inductance or
capacitance), reactive power is still of concern to power-system engineers because transmission lines,
transformers, fuses, and other elements must be capable of withstanding the current associated with
reactive power. It is possible to have loads composed of energy-storage elements that draw large
currents requiring heavy-duty wiring, even though little average power is consumed. Therefore, electric-
power companies charge their industrial customers for reactive power (but at a lower rate) as well as for
total energy delivered.
The power flow back and forth to inductances and capacitances is called reactive
power. Reactive power flow is important because it causes power dissipation in
the lines and transformers of a power distribution system.
Power Calculations for a General Load
Now, let us consider the voltage, current, and power for a general RLC load for which the phase  can
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt)i(t)=Im cos(ωt+90°)=−Im sin(ωt)p(t)=v(t)i(t)=−VmIm cos(ωt) sin(ωt)=−VmIm2sin(2ωt)
θ

be any value from 
 to 
 We have
Using the trigonometric identity
we can put Equation 5.56 into the form
Using the identities
and
we find that Equation 5.57 can be written as
Notice that the terms involving 
 and 
 have average values of zero. Thus, the average
power P is given by
Using the fact that 
 and 
 we can write the expression for average power as
As usual, the units of power are watts (W).
−90°
+90°.
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt)
(5.54)
i(t)=Im cos(ωt−θ)
(5.55)
p(t)=VmIm cos(ωt) cos(ωt−θ)
(5.56)
cos(ωt−θ)= cos(θ) cos(ωt)+sin(θ) sin(ωt)
p(t)=VmIm cos(θ) cos2(ωt)+VmIm sin(θ) cos(ωt) sin(ωt)
(5.57)
cos2(ωt)=12+12 cos(2ωt)
cos(ωt) sin(ωt)=12 sin(2ωt)
p(t)=VmIm2 cos(θ)[ 1+cos(2ωt) ]+VmIm2 sin(θ) sin(2ωt)
(5.58)
cos(2ωt)
sin(2ωt)
P=VmIm2 cos(θ)
(5.59)
Vrms=Vm/2
Irms=Im/2,
P=VrmsIrms cos(θ)
(5.60)

Power Factor
The term 
 is called the power factor:
To simplify our discussion, we assumed a voltage having zero phase. In general, the phase of the
voltage may have a value other than zero. Then,  should be taken as the phase of the voltage 
minus the phase of the current 
 or
Power factor is the cosine of the angle  by which the current lags the voltage. (If
the current leads the voltage, the angle is negative.)
Sometimes,  is called the power angle.
Often, power factor is stated as a percentage. Also, it is common to state whether the current leads
(capacitive load) or lags (inductive load) the voltage. A typical power factor would be stated to be 90
percent lagging, which means that 
 and that the current lags the voltage.
Often, power factor is expressed as a percentage.
If the current lags the voltage, the power factor is said to be inductive or lagging.
If the current leads the voltage, the power factor is said to be capacitive or
leading.
cos(θ)
PF= cos(θ)
(5.61)
θ
θv
θi,
θ
θ=θv−θi
(5.62)
θ
cos(θ)=0.9

Reactive Power
In ac circuits, energy flows into and out of energy storage elements (inductances and capacitances). For
example, when the voltage magnitude across a capacitance is increasing, energy flows into it, and when
the voltage magnitude decreases, energy flows out. Similarly, energy flows into an inductance when the
current flowing through it increases in magnitude. Although instantaneous power can be very large, the
net energy transferred per cycle is zero for either an ideal capacitance or inductance.
When a capacitance and an inductance are in parallel (or series) energy flows into one, while it flows out
of the other. Thus, the power flow of a capacitance tends to cancel that of an inductance at each instant
in time.
The peak instantaneous power associated with the energy storage elements contained in a general load
is called reactive power and is given by
where  is the power angle given by Equation 5.62, 
 is the effective (or rms) voltage across the
load, and 
 is the effective current through the load. (Notice that if we had a purely resistive load, we
would have 
 and 
)
The physical units of reactive power are watts. However, to emphasize the fact that Q does not
represent the flow of net energy, its units are usually given as Volt Amperes Reactive (VARs).
The units of reactive power Q are VARs.
Apparent Power
Another quantity of interest is the apparent power, which is defined as the product of the effective
voltage and the effective current, or
Q=VrmsIrms sin(θ)
(5.63)
θ
Vrms
Irms
θ=0
Q=0.

Apparent power equals the product of rms current and rms voltage. The units for
apparent power are stated as volt-amperes (VA).
Its units are volt-amperes (VA).
Using Equations 5.60 and 5.63, we can write
However, 
 so we have
Units
Often, the units given for a quantity indicate whether the quantity is power (W), reactive power (VAR), or
apparent power (VA). For example, if we say that we have a 5-kW load, this means that 
 On the
other hand, if we have a 5-kVA load, 
 If we say that a load absorbs 5 kVAR, then
Power Triangle
The relationships between real power P, reactive power Q, apparent power 
 and the power
angle  can be represented by the power triangle. The power triangle is shown in Figure 5.25(a) for an
inductive load, in which case  and Q are positive. The power triangle for a capacitive load is shown in
Figure 5.25(b), in which case  and Q are negative.
apparent power=VrmsIrms
P2+Q2=(VrmsIrms)2 cos2(θ)+(VrmsIrms)2 sin2(θ)
cos2(θ)+sin2(θ)=1,
P2+Q2=(VrmsIrms)2
(5.64)
P=5 kW.
VrmsIrms=5 kVA.
Q=5 kVAR.
VrmsIrms,
θ
θ
θ

Figure 5.25
 Power triangles for inductive and capacitive loads.
The power triangle is a compact way to represent ac power relationships.
Additional Power Relationships
The impedance Z is
in which R is the resistance of the load and X is the reactance. This is illustrated in Figure 5.26. We can
write
Figure 5.26
 The load impedance in the complex plane.
and
Z=|Z| ∠θ_=R+jX
cos(θ)=R|Z|
(5.65)
sin(θ)=X|Z|
(5.66)

Substituting Equation 5.65 into Equation 5.59, we find that
However, Equation 5.53 states that 
 so we have
In Equation 5.69, R is the real part of the impedance through which the current
flows.
Using the fact that 
 we get
In Equation 5.70, X is the imaginary part (including the algebraic sign) of the
impedance through which the current flows.
In a similar fashion, we can show that
Reactive power Q is positive for inductive loads and negative for capacitive
loads.
P=VmIm2×R|Z|
(5.67)
Im=Vm/|Z|,
P=Im22 R
(5.68)
Irms=Im/2,
P=
I
rms
2
R
(5.69)
Q=
I
rms
2
X
(5.70)

In applying Equation 5.70, we retain the algebraic sign of X. For an inductive load, X is positive,
whereas for a capacitive load, X is negative. This is not hard to remember if we keep in mind that Q is
positive for inductive loads and negative for capacitive loads.
In Equation 5.71, 
 is the rms voltage across the resistance.
Furthermore, in Section 5.1, we showed that the average power delivered to a resistance is
where 
 is the rms value of the voltage across the resistance. (Notice in Figure 5.22 that the
source voltage does not appear across the resistance, because the reactance is in series with the
resistance.)
In Equation 5.72, 
 is the rms voltage across the reactance.
Similarly, we have
where 
 is the rms value of the voltage across the reactance. Here again, X is positive for an
inductance and negative for a capacitance.
Complex Power
Consider the portion of a circuit shown in Figure 5.27.  The complex power, denoted as S, delivered to
this circuit is defined as one half the product of the phasor voltage V and the complex conjugate of the
VRrms
P=
V
Rrms
2
R
(5.71)
VRrms
VXrms
Q=
V
X rms
2
X
(5.72)
VX rms

phasor current 
Figure 5.27
 The complex power delivered to this circuit element is 
The phasor voltage is 
 in which 
 is the peak value of the voltage and 
 is the phase
angle of the voltage. Furthermore, the phasor current is 
 where 
 is the peak value and  is
the phase angle of the current. Substituting into Equation 5.73, we have
where, as before, 
 is the power angle. Expanding the right-hand term of Equation 5.74 into
real and imaginary parts, we have
However, the first term on the right-hand side is the average power P delivered to the circuit and the
second term is j times the reactive power. Thus, we can write:
If we know the complex power S, then we can find the power, reactive power, and apparent power:
where Re(S) denotes the real part of S and Im(S) denotes the imaginary part of S.
Example 5.9 AC Power Calculations
IU.
S=12 VI∗.
S=12VI∗
(5.73)
V=Vm ∠θv_
Vm
θv
I=Im ∠θi_
Im
θi
S=12 VI∗=12 (Vm ∠θv_)×(Im ∠−θi_)=VmIm2 ∠θv−θi_=VmIm2 ∠θ_
(5.74)
θ=θv − θi
S=VmIm2 cos(θ)+j VmIm2 sin(θ)
S=12 VI∗=P+jQ
(5.75)
P=Re(S)=Re (12 VI∗)
(5.76)
Q=Im(S)=Im (12 VI∗)
(5.77)
apparent power=|S|=|12VI∗|
(5.78)

Compute the power and reactive power taken from the source for the circuit of Example 5.6. Also,
compute the power and reactive power delivered to each element in the circuit. For convenience, the
circuit and the currents that were computed in Example 5.6 are shown in Figure 5.28.
Figure 5.28 
Circuit and currents for Example 5.9.
The circuit has two loops:
Solution 
To find the power and reactive power for the source, we must first find the power angle which is
given by Equation 5.62:
The angle of the source voltage is 
 and the angle of the current delivered by the source is
 Therefore, we have
The rms source voltage and current are
Now, we use Equations 5.60 and 5.63 to compute the power and reactive power delivered by the
source:
An alternative and more compact method for computing P and Q is to first find the complex power
and then take the real and imaginary parts:
θ=θv−θi
θv=−90°,
θi=−135°.
θ=−90°−(−135°)=45°
Vsrms=|Vs|2=102=7.071 VIrms=|I|2=0.14142=0.1 A
P=VsrmsIrms cos(θ)=7.071×0.1 cos(45°)=0.5 WQ=VsrmsIrms sin(θ)=7.071×0.1 sin(45°)=0.5 VAR
S=12 VsI∗=12 (10 ∠−90°_)(0.1414 ∠135°_)=0.707 ∠45°_=0.5+j0.5P=Re(S)=0.5 WQ=Im(S)=0.5 VAR

We can use Equation 5.70 to compute the reactive power delivered to the inductor, yielding
For the capacitor, we have
Notice that we have used the rms value of the current through the capacitor in this calculation.
Furthermore, notice that the reactance 
 of the capacitance is negative. As expected, the reactive
power is negative for a capacitance. The reactive power for the resistance is zero. As a check, we
can verify that the reactive power delivered by the source is equal to the sum of the reactive powers
absorbed by the inductance and capacitance. This is demonstrated by
The power delivered to the resistance is
The power absorbed by the capacitance and inductance is given by
Thus, all of the power delivered by the source is absorbed by the resistance.
In power distribution systems, we typically encounter much larger values of power, reactive power, and
apparent power than the small values of the preceding example. For example, a large power plant may
generate 1000 MW. A 100-hp motor used in an industrial application absorbs approximately 85 kW of
electrical power under full load.
A typical residence absorbs a peak power in the range of 10 to 40 kW. The average power for my home
(which is of average size, has two residents, and does not use electrical heating) is approximately 600
W. It is interesting to keep your average power consumption and the power used by various appliances
in mind because it gives you a clear picture of the economic and environmental impact of turning off
lights, computers, and so on, that are not being used.
 Example 5.10 Using Power Triangles
QL=Irms2XL=(0.1)2(100)=1.0 VAR
QC=ICrms2XC=(0.12)2 (−100)=−0.5 VAR
XC
Q=QL+QC
PR=IR2rmsR=(|IR|2)2 R=(0.12)2 100=0.5 W
PL=0PC=0

Consider the situation shown in Figure 5.29. Here, a voltage source delivers power to two loads
connected in parallel. Find the power, reactive power, and power factor for the source. Also, find the
phasor current I.
Figure 5.29 
Circuit for Example 5.10.
Solution 
By the units given in the figure, we see that load A has an apparent power of 10 kVA. On the other
hand, the power for load B is specified as 5 kW.
Furthermore, load A has a power factor of 0.5 leading, which means that the current leads the
voltage in load A. Another way to say this is that load A is capacitive. Similarly, load B has a power
factor of 0.7 lagging (or inductive).
Our approach is to find the power and reactive power for each load. Then, we add these values to
find the power and reactive power for the source. Finally, we compute the power factor for the
source and then find the current.
Calculations for load A
Because load A has a leading (capacitive) power factor, we know that the reactive power 
 and
power angle 
 are negative. The power triangle for load A is shown in Figure 5.30(a). The power
factor is
QA
θA

Figure 5.30 
Power triangles for loads A and B of Example 5.10.
The power is
Solving Equation 5.64 for reactive power, we have
Notice that we have selected the negative value for 
 because we know that reactive power is
negative for a capacitive (leading) load.
Calculations for load B
cos(θA)=0.5
PA=VrmsIArms cos(θA)=104(0.5)=5 kW
QA=(VrmsIArms)2−PA2=(104)2−(5000)2=−8.660 kVAR
QA,

The power triangle for load B is shown in Figure 5.30(b). Since load B has a lagging (inductive)
power factor, we know that the reactive power 
 and power angle 
 are positive. Thus,
Applying trigonometry, we can write
At this point, as shown here we can find the power and reactive power delivered by the source:
Total power is obtained by adding the powers for the various loads. Similarly,
the reactive powers are added.
Power calculations for the source.
Because Q is negative, we know that the power angle is negative. Thus, we have
The power factor is
Power-system engineers frequently express power factors as percentages and would state this
power factor as 94.21 percent leading.
The complex power delivered by the source is
QB
θB
θB=arccos(0.7)=45.57°
QB=PB tan(θB)=5000tan(45.57°)QB=5.101 kVAR
P=PA+PB=5+5=10 kWQ=QA+QB=−8.660+5.101=−3.559 kVAR
θ=arctan (QP)=arctan (−3.55910)=−19.59°
cos(θ)=0.9421

Thus, we have
Solving for the phasor current, we obtain:
The phasor diagram for the current and voltage is shown in Figure 5.31. Notice that the current is
leading the voltage.
Figure 5.31 
Phasor diagram for Example 5.10.
Power-Factor Correction
We have seen that large currents can flow in energy-storage devices (inductance and capacitance)
without average power being delivered. In heavy industry, many loads are partly inductive, and large
amounts of reactive power flow. This reactive power causes higher currents in the power distribution
system. Consequently, the lines and transformers must have higher ratings than would be necessary to
deliver the same average power to a resistive (100 percent power factor) load.
Power-factor correction can provide a significant economic advantage for
consumers of large amounts of electrical energy.
S=P+jQ=10−j3.559=10.61 ∠−19.59°_ kVA
S=12 VsI∗=12 (1414 ∠30°_)I∗=10.61×103 ∠−19.59°_ kVA
I=15.0 ∠49.59°_ A

Energy rates charged to industry depend on the power factor, with higher charges for energy delivered
at lower power factors. (Power factor is not taken into account for residential customers.) Therefore, it is
advantageous to choose loads that operate at near unity power factor. A common approach is to place
capacitors in parallel with an inductive load to increase the power factor.
Example 5.11 Power-Factor Correction
A 50-kW load operates from a 60-Hz 10-kV-rms line with a power factor of 60 percent lagging.
Compute the capacitance that must be placed in parallel with the load to achieve a 90 percent
lagging power factor.
Solution 
First, we find the load power angle:
Then, we use the power-triangle concept to find the reactive power of the load. Hence,
After adding the capacitor, the power will still be 50 kW and the power angle will become
The new value of the reactive power will be
Thus, the reactive power of the capacitance must be
Now, we find that the reactance of the capacitor is
Finally, the angular frequency is
θL=arccos(0.6)=53.13°
QL=PL tan(θL)=66.67 kVAR
θnew=arccos(0.9)=25.84°
Qnew=PL tan(θnew)=24.22 kVAR
QC=Qnew−QL=−42.45 kVAR
XC=− Vrms2QC=(104)242,450=−2356 Ω
ω=2π60=377.0

and the required capacitance is
Exercise 5.12 
a. a. A voltage source 
 delivers 5 kW to a load with a power factor of 100 percent. Find
the reactive power and the phasor current.
b. Repeat if the power factor is 20 percent lagging.
c. For which power factor would the current ratings of the conductors connecting the source to the
load be higher? In which case could the wiring be a lower cost?
Answer 
a. a. 
b. 
c. The current ratings for the conductors would need to be five times higher for part (b) than for part
(a). Clearly, the wiring could be a lower cost for 100 percent power factor.n
Exercise 5.13 
A 1-kV-rms 60-Hz voltage source delivers power to two loads in parallel. The first load is a 
capacitor, and the second load absorbs an apparent power of 10 kVA with an 80 percent lagging power
factor. Find the total power, the total reactive power, the power factor for the source, and the rms source
current.
Answer 
a. 
 percent lagging, 
C=1ω|XC|=1377×2356=1.126 μF
V=707.1 ∠40°_
Q=0, I=14.14 ∠40°_;
Q=24.49 kVAR, I=70.7 ∠−38.46°_;
10-μF
P=8 kW, Q=2.23 kVAR, PF=96.33
Irms=8.305 A.

5.6 Thévenin and Norton Equivalent Circuits
Thévenin Equivalent Circuits
In Chapter 2, we saw that a two-terminal network composed of sources and resistances has a Thévenin
equivalent circuit consisting of a voltage source in series with a resistance. We can apply this concept to
circuits composed of sinusoidal sources (all having a common frequency), resistances, inductances, and
capacitances. Here, the Thévenin equivalent consists of a phasor voltage source in series with a
complex impedance as shown in Figure 5.32. Recall that phasors and complex impedances apply only
for steady-state operation; therefore, these Thévenin equivalents are valid for only steady-state
operation of the circuit.
Figure 5.32 
The Thévenin equivalent for an ac circuit consists of a phasor voltage source 
 in series with a complex
impedance 
As in resistive circuits, the Thévenin voltage is equal to the open-circuit voltage of the two-terminal
circuit. In ac circuits, we use phasors, so we can write
The Thévenin voltage is equal to the open-circuit phasor voltage of the original
circuit.
The Thévenin impedance 
 can be found by zeroing the independent sources and looking back into the
Vt
Zt.
Vt=Voc
(5.79)
Zt

terminals to find the equivalent impedance. (Recall that in zeroing a voltage source, we reduce its
voltage to zero, and it becomes a short circuit. On the other hand, in zeroing a current source, we
reduce its current to zero, and it becomes an open circuit.) Also, keep in mind that we must not zero the
dependent sources.
We can find the Thévenin impedance by zeroing the independent sources and
determining the impedance looking into the circuit terminals.
Another approach to determining the Thévenin impedance is first to find the short-circuit phasor current
 and the open-circuit voltage 
 Then, the Thévenin impedance is given by
Thus, except for the use of phasors and complex impedances, the concepts and procedures for
Thévenin equivalents of steady-state ac circuits are the same as for resistive circuits.
The Thévenin impedance equals the open-circuit voltage divided by the short-
circuit current.
Norton Equivalent Circuits
Another equivalent for a two-terminal steady-state ac circuit is the Norton equivalent, which consists of a
phasor current source 
 in parallel with the Thévenin impedance. This is shown in Figure 5.33. The
Norton current is equal to the short-circuit current of the original circuit:
Isc
Voc.
Zt=VocIsc=VtIsc
(5.80)
In
In=Isc
(5.81)

Figure 5.33 
The Norton equivalent circuit consists of a phasor current source 
 in parallel with the complex
impedance 
Example 5.12 Thévenin and Norton Equivalents
Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for the circuit shown in Figure 5.34(a).
Figure 5.34 
Circuit of Example 5.12.
First, look to see which two of the three quantities 
or 
are easiest
to determine.
Solution 
In
Zt.
Voc, Isc,
Zt.

We must find two of the three quantities: 
 or 
 Often, it pays to look for the two that can be
found with the least amount of work. In this case, we elect to start by zeroing the sources to find 
After that part of the problem is ­finished, we will find the short-circuit current.
If we zero the sources, we obtain the circuit shown in Figure 5.34(b). The Thévenin impedance is
the impedance seen looking back into terminals a—b. This is the parallel combination of the
resistance and the impedance of the capacitance. Thus, we have
Now, we apply a short circuit to terminals a-b and find the current, which is shown in Figure 5.34(c).
With a short circuit, the voltage across the capacitance is zero.  Therefore, 
 Furthermore, the
source voltage 
 appears across the resistance, so we have
Then applying KCL, we can write
Next, we can solve Equation 5.80 for the Thévenin voltage:
Finally, we can draw the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits, which are shown in Figure 5.35.
Figure 5.35 
Thévenin and Norton equivalents for the circuit of Figure 5.34(a).
Maximum Average Power Transfer
Sometimes we are faced with the problem of adjusting a load impedance to extract the maximum
Voc, Isc,
Zt.
Zt.
Zt=11/100+1/(−j100)=10.01+j0.01=10.01414 ∠45°_=70.71 ∠−45°_=50−j50 Ω
IC=0.
Vs
IR=Vs100=100100=1 ∠0°_ A
Isc=IR−Is=1−1 ∠90°_=1−j=1.414 ∠−45°_ A
Vt=IscZt=1.414 ∠−45°_×70.71 ∠−45°_=100 ∠−90°_ V

average power from a two-terminal circuit. This situation is shown in Figure 5.36, in which we have
represented the two-terminal circuit by its Thévenin equivalent. Of course, the power delivered to the
load depends on the load impedance. A short-circuit load receives no power because the voltage across
it is zero. Similarly, an open-circuit load receives no power because the current through it is zero.
Furthermore, a pure reactive load (inductance or capacitance) receives no power because the load
power factor is zero.
Figure 5.36 
The Thévenin equivalent of a two-terminal circuit delivering power to a load impedance.
Two situations are of interest. First, suppose that the load impedance can take any complex value.
Then, it turns out that the load impedance for maximum-power transfer is the complex conjugate of the
Thévenin impedance:
Let us consider why this is true. Suppose that the Thévenin impedance is
If the load can take on any complex value, maximum-power transfer is attained
for a load impedance equal to the complex conjugate of the Thévenin
impedance.
Then, the load impedance for maximum-power transfer is
Of course, the total impedance seen by the Thévenin source is the sum of the Thévenin impedance and
Zload=Zt∗
Zt=Rt+jXt
Zload=Zt∗=Rt−jXt

the load impedance:
Thus, the reactance of the load cancels the internal reactance of the two-terminal circuit. Maximum
power is transferred to a given load resistance by maximizing the current. For given resistances,
maximum current is achieved by choosing the reactance to minimize the total impedance magnitude. Of
course, for fixed resistances, the minimum impedance magnitude occurs for zero total reactance.
Having established the fact that the total reactance should be zero, we have a resistive circuit. We
considered this resistive circuit in Chapter 2, where we showed that maximum power is transferred for.
If the load is required to be a pure resistance, maximum-power transfer is
attained for a load resistance equal to the magnitude of the Thévenin impedance.
The second case of interest is a load that is constrained to be a pure resistance. In this case, it can be
shown that the load resistance for maximum-power transfer is equal to the magnitude of the Thévenin
impedance:
Example 5.13 Maximum Power Transfer
Determine the maximum power that can be delivered to a load by the two-terminal circuit of Figure
5.34(a) if
a. the load can have any complex value and
b. the load must be a pure resistance.
Solution 
In Example 5.12, we found that the circuit has the Thévenin equivalent shown in Figure 5.35(a).
The Thévenin impedance is
Ztotal=Zt+Zload=Rt+jXt+Rt−jXt=2Rt
Rload=Rt.
Zload=Rload=|Zt|

a. The complex load impedance that maximizes power transfer is
The Thévenin equivalent with this load attached is shown in Figure 5.37(a). The current is
Figure 5.37 
Thévenin equivalent circuit and loads of Example 5.13.
The rms load current is 
 Finally, the power delivered to the load is
b. The purely resistive load for maximum power transfer is
The Thévenin equivalent with this load attached is shown in Figure 5.37(b). The current is
The power delivered to this load is
Notice that the power available to a purely resistive load is less than that for a complex load.
Exercise 5.14 
Find the Thévenin impedance, the Thévenin voltage, and the Norton current for the circuit shown in
Figure 5.38.
Zt=50−j50 Ω
Zload=Zt∗=50+j50
Ia=VtZt+Zload=100 ∠−90°_50−j50+50+j50=1 ∠−90°_ A
Iarms=1/2.
P=Iarms2Rload=(12)2 (50)=25 W
Rload=|Zt|=|50−j50|=502+(−50)2=70.71 Ω
Ib=VtZt+Zload=100 ∠−90°_50−j50+70.71`=100 ∠−90°_130.66 ∠−22.50°_=0.7654 ∠−67.50°_ A
P=Ibrms2Rload=(0.76532)2 70.71=20.71 W

Figure 5.38 
Circuit of Exercises 5.14 and 5.15.
Answer 
Exercise 5.15 
Determine the maximum power that can be delivered to a load by the two-terminal circuit of Figure 5.38
if
a. the load can have any complex value and
b. the load must be a pure resistance.
Answer 
a. 6.25 W;
b. 6.16 W.
Zt=100+j25 Ω, Vt=70.71 ∠−45°_, In=0.686 ∠−59.0°_.

5.7 Balanced Three-Phase Circuits
We will see that there are important advantages in generating and distributing power with multiple ac voltages having
different phases. We consider the most common case: three equal-amplitude ac voltages having phases that are 120°
apart. This is known as a balanced three-phase source, an example of which is illustrated in Figure 5.39. [Recall
that in double-subscript notation for voltages the first subscript is the positive reference. Thus, 
 is the voltage
between nodes a and n with the positive reference at node a.] In Chapter 16, we will learn how three-phase voltages
are generated.
Figure 5.39 
A balanced three-phase voltage source.
Much of the power used by business and industry is supplied by three-phase distribution
van(t)

systems. Plant engineers need to be familiar with three-phase power.
The source shown in Figure 5.39(a) is said to be wye connected (Y connected). Later in this chapter, we consider
another configuration, known as the delta 
 connection.
The three voltages shown in Figure 5.39(b) are given by
where 
 is the magnitude of each source in the wye-connected configuration. The corresponding phasors are
The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 5.39(c).
Phase Sequence
This set of voltages is said to have a positive phase sequence because the voltages reach their peak values in the
order abc. Refer to Figure 5.39(c) and notice that 
 leads 
 which in turn leads 
 (Recall that we think of the
phasors as rotating counterclockwise in determining phase relationships.) If we interchanged b and c, we would have
a negative phase sequence, in which the order is acb.
Three-phase sources can have either a positive or negative phase sequence.
(Δ)
van(t)=VY cos(ωt)
(5.82)
vbn(t)=VY cos(ωt−120°)
(5.83)
vcn(t)=VY cos(ωt+120°)
(5.84)
VY
Van=VY ∠0°_
(5.85)
Vbn=VY ∠−120°_
(5.86)
Vcn=VY ∠120°_
(5.87)
van
vbn,
vcn.

Phase sequence can be important. For example, if we have a three-phase induction motor, the direction of rotation is
opposite for the two phase sequences. To reverse the direction of rotation of such a motor, we would interchange the
b and c connections. (You may find this piece of information useful if you ever work with three-phase motors, which
are very common in industry.) Because circuit analysis is very similar for both phase sequences, we consider only the
positive phase sequence in most of the discussion that follows.
We will see later in the book that the direction of rotation of certain three-phase motors can be
reversed by changing the phase sequence.
Wye-Wye Connection
Consider the three-phase source connected to a balanced three-phase load shown in Figure 5.40. The wires
 and 
 are called lines, and the wire n-N is called the neutral. This configuration is called a wye-wye
(Y-Y) connection with neutral. By the term balanced load, we mean that the three load impedances are equal. (In this
book, we consider only balanced loads.)
Figure 5.40 
A three-phase wye-wye connection with neutral.
Three-phase sources and loads can be connected either in a wye configuration or in a delta
configuration.
a−A, b−B,
c−C

Later, we will see that other configurations are useful. For example, the neutral wire 
 can be omitted. Furthermore,
the source and load can be connected in the form of a delta. We will see that currents, voltages, and power can be
computed for these other configurations by finding an equivalent wye-wye circuit. Thus, the key to understanding
three-phase circuits is a careful examination of the wye-wye circuit.
The key to understanding the various three-phase configurations is a careful examination of
the wye-wye circuit.
In Chapters 5 and 6, we take the magnitude of a phasor to be the peak value. Power-systems
engineers often use the rms value as the magnitude for phasors, which we do in Chapters
14 and 15. We will label rms phasors as rms.
Often, we use the term phase to refer to part of the source or the load. Thus, phase A of the source is 
 and
phase A of the load is the impedance connected between A and N. We refer to 
 as the phase voltage or as the
line-to-neutral voltage of the wye-connected source. (Power-systems engineers usually specify rms values rather
than peak magnitudes. Unless stated otherwise, we use phasors having magnitudes equal to the peak values rather
than the rms values.) Furthermore, 
 and 
 are called line currents. (Recall that in the double-subscript
notation for currents, the reference direction is from the first subscript to the second. Thus, 
 is the current
referenced from node a to node A, as illustrated in Figure 5.38.)
The current in phase A of the load is given by
where 
 is the magnitude of the line current. Because the load impedances are equal, all of the line currents
are the same, except for phase. Thus, the currents are given by
n−N
van(t),
VY
IaA, IbB,
IcC
IaA
IaA=VanZ ∠θ_=VY ∠0°_Z ∠θ_=IL ∠−θ_
IL=VY/Z
iaA(t)=IL cos(ωt−θ)
(5.88)

The neutral current in Figure 5.40 is given by
In terms of phasors, this is
Thus, the sum of three phasors with equal magnitudes and 120° (We make use of this fact again later in this section.)
The sum of three equal magnitude phasors 120° apart in phase is zero.
We have shown that the neutral current is zero in a balanced three-phase system. Consequently, the neutral wire can
be eliminated without changing any of the voltages or currents. Then, the three source voltages are delivered to the
three load impedances with three wires.
The neutral current is zero in a balanced wye-wye system. Thus in theory, the neutral wire can
be inserted or removed without affecting load currents or voltages. This is not true if the load is
unbalanced, which is often the case in real power distribution systems.
An important advantage of three-phase systems compared with single phase is that the wiring for connecting the
sources to the loads is less expensive. As shown in Figure 5.41, it would take six wires to connect three single-phase
sources to three loads separately, whereas only three wires (four if the neutral wire is used) are needed for the three-
phase connection to achieve the same power transfer.
ibB(t)=IL cos(ωt−120°−θ)
(5.89)
icC(t)=IL cos(ωt+120°−θ)
(5.90)
iNn(t)=iaA(t)+ibB(t)+icC(t)
INn=IaA+IbB+IcC=IL ∠−θ_+IL∠−120°−θ_+IL ∠120°−θ_=IL ∠−θ_×(1+1 ∠−120°_+1 ∠120°_)=IL ∠−θ_×(1−0.5−j0.866−0.5+j0.866)
=0

Figure 5.41 
Six wires are needed to connect three single-phase sources to three loads. In a three-phase system, the same power
transfer can be accomplished with three wires.
Power
Another advantage of balanced three-phase systems, compared with single-phase systems, is that the total power is
constant (as a function of time) rather than pulsating. (Refer to Figure 5.2 on page 220 to see that power pulsates in
the single-phase case.) To show that the power is constant for the balanced wye-wye connection shown in Figure
5.40, we write an expression for the total power. The power delivered to phase A of the load is 
 Similarly,
the power for each of the other phases of the load is the product of the voltage and the current. Thus, the total power
is
Using Equations 5.82, 5.83, and 5.84 to substitute for the voltages and Equations 5.88, 5.89, and 5.90 to substitute
for the currents, we obtain
Using the trigonometric identity
we find that Equation 5.92 can be written as
However, the term in brackets is
(Here, we have used the fact, established earlier, that the sum is zero for three sine waves of equal amplitude and
van(t)iaA(t).
p(t)=van(t)iaA(t)+vbn(t)ibB(t)+vcn(t)icC(t)
(5.91)
p(t)=VY cos(ωt)IL cos(ωt−θ)+VY cos(ωt−120°)IL cos(ωt−θ−120°)+VY cos(ωt+120°)IL cos(ωt−θ+120°)
(5.92)
cos(x) cos(y)=12 cos(x−y)+12 cos(x+y)
p(t)=3 VYIL2 cos(θ)+VYIL2 [cos(2ωt−θ)+cos(2ωt−θ−240°)+cos(2ωt−θ+480°)]
(5.93)
cos(2ωt−θ)+cos(2ωt−θ−240°)+cos(2ωt−θ+480°)=cos(2ωt−θ)+cos(2ωt−θ+120°)+cos(2ωt−θ−120°)=0

120° apart in phase.) Thus, the expression for power becomes
Notice that the total power is constant with respect to time. A consequence of this fact is that the torque required to
drive a three-phase generator connected to a balanced load is constant, and vibration is lessened. Similarly, the
torque produced by a three-phase motor is constant rather than pulsating as it is for a single-phase motor.
In balanced three-phase systems, total power flow is constant with respect to time.
The rms voltage from each line to neutral is
Similarly, the rms value of the line current is
Using Equations 5.95 and 5.96 to substitute into Equation 5.94, we find that
In Equations 5.97 and 5.98, 
 is the rms line-to-neutral voltage, 
 is the rms line
current, and  is the angle of the load impedances.
Reactive Power
As in single-phase circuits, power flows back and forth between the sources and energy-storage elements contained
p(t)=3 VYIL2 cos(θ)
(5.94)
VYrms=VY2
(5.95)
ILrms=IL2
(5.96)
VYrms
lLrms
θ
Pavg=p(t)=3VYrmsILrms cos(θ)
(5.97)

in a three-phase load. This power is called reactive power. The higher currents that result because of the presence of
reactive power require wiring and other power-distribution components having higher ratings. The reactive power
delivered to a balanced three-phase load is given by
Line-to-Line Voltages
As we have mentioned earlier, the voltages between terminals a, b, or c and the neutral point n are called line-to-
neutral voltages. On the other hand, voltages between a and b, b and c, or a and c are called line-to-line voltages
or, more simply, line voltages. Thus 
 and 
 are line-to-neutral voltages, whereas 
 and 
 are
line-to-line voltages. (For consistency, we choose the subscripts cyclically in the order abcabc.) Let us consider the
relationships between line-to-line voltages and line-to-neutral voltages.
We can obtain the following relationship by applying KVL to Figure 5.40:
Using Equations 5.85 and 5.86 to substitute for 
 and 
 we obtain
which is equivalent to
This relationship is illustrated in Figure 5.42. It can be shown that Equation 5.100 reduces to
Figure 5.42 
Phasor diagram showing the relationship between the line-to-line voltage 
 and the line-to-neutral voltages 
and 
Q=3 VYIY2 sin(θ)=3VY rmsILrms sin(θ)
(5.98)
Van, Vbn,
Vcn
Vab, Vbc,
Vca
Vab=Van−Vbn
Van
Vbn,
Vab=VY ∠0°_−VY ∠−120°_
(5.99)
Vab=VY ∠0°_+VY ∠60°_
(5.100)
Vab
Van
Vbn.

We denote the magnitude of the line-to-line voltage as 
 The magnitude of the line-to-line voltage is  times the
magnitude of the line-to-neutral voltage:
Thus, the relationship between the line-to-line voltage 
 and the line-to-neutral voltage 
 is
Similarly, it can be shown that
and
These voltages are shown in Figure 5.43.
Figure 5.43 
Phasor diagram showing line-to-line voltages and line-to-neutral voltages
Figure 5.43(b) provides a convenient way to remember the phase relationships between line-
Vab=3VY ∠30°_
(5.101)
VL.
3
VL=3VY
(5.102)
Vab
Van
Vab=Van×3 ∠30°_
(5.103)
Vbc=Vbn×3 ∠30°_
(5.104)
Vca=Vcn×3 ∠30°_
(5.105)

to-line and line-to-neutral voltages.
 Example 5.14 Analysis of a Wye-Wye System
A balanced positive-sequence wye-connected 60-Hz three-phase source has line-to-neutral voltages of
 This source is connected to a balanced wye-connected load. Each phase of the load consists of a
0.1-H inductance in series with a 
 resistance. Find the line currents, the line-to-line voltages, the power, and
the reactive power delivered to the load. Draw a phasor diagram showing the line-to-neutral voltages, the line-to-
line voltages, and the line currents. Assume that the phase angle of 
 is zero.
Solution 
First, by computing the complex impedance of each phase of the load, we find that
Next, we draw the circuit as shown in Figure 5.44(a). In balanced wye-wye calculations, we can assume that n
and N are connected. (The currents and voltages are the same whether or not the neutral connection actually
exists.) Thus, 
 appears across phase A of the load, and we can write
Similarly,
Figure 5.44 
Circuit and phasor diagram for Example 5.14.
VY=1000 V.
50-Ω
Van
Z=R+jωL=50+j2π(60)(0.1)=50+j37.70=62.62 ∠37.02°_
Van
IaA=VanZ=1000 ∠0°_62.62 ∠37.02°_=15.97 ∠−37.02°_
IbB=VbnZ=1000 ∠−120°_62.62 ∠37.02°_=15.97 ∠−157.02°_IcC=VcnZ=1000 ∠120°_62.62 ∠37.02°_=15.97 ∠82.98°_

We use Equations 5.103, 5.104, and 5.105 to find the line-to-line phasors:
The power delivered to the load is given by Equation 5.94:
The reactive power is given by Equation 5.98:
The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 5.44(b). As usual, we have chosen a different scale for the currents than
for the voltages.
Exercise 5.16 
A balanced positive-sequence wye-connected 60-Hz three-phase source has line-to-line voltages of 
 This
source is connected to a balanced wye-connected load. Each phase of the load consists of a 0.2-H inductance in
series with a 
 resistance. Find the line-to-neutral voltages, the line currents, the power, and the reactive power
delivered to the load. Assume that the phase of 
 is zero.
Answer 
Delta-Connected Sources
A set of balanced three-phase voltage sources can be connected in the form of a delta, as shown in Figure 5.45.
Ordinarily, we avoid connecting voltage sources in closed loops. However, in this case, it turns out that the sum of the
voltages is zero:
Vab=Van×3 ∠30°_=1732 ∠30°_Vbc=Vbn×3 ∠30°_=1732 ∠−90°_Vca=Vcn×3 ∠30°_=1732 ∠150°_
P=3 VYIL2 cos(θ)=3(1000×15.972) cos(37.02°)=19.13 kW
Q=3 VYIL2 sin(θ)=3(1000×15.972) sin(37.02°)=14.42 kVAR
VL=1000 V.
100-Ω
Van
Van=577.4 ∠0°_,Vbn=577.4 ∠−120°_,Vcn=577.4 ∠120°_;
IaA=4.61 ∠−37°_,IbB=4.61 ∠−157°_,IcC=4.61 ∠83°_; P=3.19 kW;Q=2.40 kVAR.

Figure 5.45 
Delta-connected three-phase source.
Thus, the current circulating in the delta is zero. (Actually, this is a first approximation. There are many subtleties of
power distribution systems that are beyond the scope of our discussion. For example, the voltages in actual power
distribution systems are not exactly sinusoidal; instead, they are the sum of several harmonic components. The
behavior of harmonic components is an important factor in making a choice between wye- and delta-connected
sources or loads.)
For a given delta-connected source, we can find an equivalent wye-connected source (or vice versa) by using
Equations 5.103 through 5.105. Clearly, a delta-connected source has no neutral point, so a four-wire connection is
possible for only a wye-connected source.
Wye- and Delta-Connected Loads
Load impedances can be either wye connected or delta connected, as shown in Figure 5.46. It can be shown that the
two loads are equivalent if
Thus, we can convert a delta-connected load to an equivalent wye-connected load, or vice versa.
Figure 5.46 
Loads can be either wye connected or delta connected.
Delta-Delta Connection
Vab+Vbc+Vca=0
ZΔ=3ZY
(5.106)

Figure 5.47 shows a delta-connected source delivering power to a delta-connected load. We assume that the source
voltages are given by
Figure 5.47 
A delta-connected source delivering power to a delta-connected load.
These phasors are shown in Figure 5.43. (We have chosen the phase angles of the delta-connected source to be
consistent with our earlier discussion.)
If the impedances of the connecting wires are zero, the line-to-line voltages at the load are equal to those at the
source. Thus 
 and 
 We assume that the impedance of each phase of the load is
 Then, the load current for phase AB is
We define the magnitude of the current as
Hence,
Similarly,
Vab=VL ∠30°_
(5.107)
Vbc=VL ∠−90°_
(5.108)
Vca=VL ∠−150°_
(5.109)
VAB=Vab, VBC=Vbc,
VCA=Vca.
ZΔ ∠θ_.
IAB=VABZΔ ∠θ_=VabZΔ ∠θ_=VL ∠30°_ZΔ ∠θ_=VLZΔ ∠30°−θ_
IΔ=VLZΔ
(5.110)
IAB=IΔ ∠30°−θ_
(5.111)

The current in line 
 is
The magnitude of the line current is
For a balanced delta-connected load, the line-current magnitude is equal to the square root of
three times the current magnitude in any arm of the delta.
Example 5.15 Analysis of a Balanced Delta-Delta System
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 5.48(a). A delta-connected source supplies power to a delta-connected load
through wires having impedances of 
 The load impedances are 
 The source voltages
are
IBC=IΔ ∠−90°−θ_
(5.112)
ICA=IΔ ∠150°−θ_
(5.113)
a−A
IaA=IAB−ICA=IΔ ∠30°−θ_−IΔ ∠150°−θ_=(IΔ ∠30°−θ_)×(1−1 ∠120°_)=(IΔ ∠30°−θ_)×(1.5−j0.8660)=(IΔ ∠30°−θ_)×(3 ∠−30°_)
=IAB×3 ∠−30°_
IL=3IΔ
(5.114)
Zline=0.3+j0.4 Ω.
ZΔ=30+j6.
Vab=1000 ∠30°_Vbc=1000 ∠−90°_Vca=1000 ∠150°_

Figure 5.48 
Circuit of Example 5.15.
Find the line current, the line-to-line voltage at the load, the current in each phase of the load, the power delivered
to the load, and the power dissipated in the line.
Solution 
First, we find the wye-connected equivalents for the source and the load. (Actually, we only need to work with one
third of the circuit because the other two thirds are the same except for phase angles.) We choose to work with
the A phase of the wye-equivalent circuit. Solving Equation 5.103 for 
 we find that
Often, it is convenient to start an analysis by finding the wye-wye equivalent of a system.
Van,
Van=Vab3 ∠30°_=1000 ∠30°_3 ∠30°_=577.4 ∠0°_

Using Equation 5.106, we have
Now, we can draw the wye-equivalent circuit, which is shown in Figure 5.48(b).
In a balanced wye-wye system, we can consider the neutral points to be connected together as shown by the
dashed line in Figure 5.48(b). This reduces the three-phase circuit to three single-phase circuits. For phase A of
Figure 5.48(b), we can write
Therefore,
To find the line-to-neutral voltage at the load, we write
Now, we compute the line-to-line voltage at the load:
The current through phase AB of the load is
The power delivered to phase AB of the load is the rms current squared times the resistance:
The powers delivered to the other two phases of the load are the same, so the total power is
The power lost in line A is
ZY=ZΔ3=30+j63=10+j2
Van=(Zline+ZY)IaA
IaA=VanZline+ZY=577.4 ∠0°_0.3+j0.4+10+j2=577.4 ∠0°_10.3+j2.4=577.4 ∠0°_10.58 ∠13.12°_=54.60 ∠−13.12°_
VAn=IAaZY=54.60 ∠−13.12°_×(10+j2)=54.60 ∠−13.12°_×10.20 ∠11.31°_=556.9 ∠−1.81°_
VAB=VAn×3 ∠30°_=556.9 ∠−1.81°_×3 ∠30°_=964.6 ∠28.19°_
IAB=VABZΔ=964.6 ∠28.19°_30+j6=964.6 ∠28.19°_30.59 ∠11.31°_=31.53 ∠16.88°_
PAB=IABrms2R=(31.532)2 (30)=14.91 kW
P=3PAB=44.73 kW
PlineA=IaArms2Rline=(54.602)2 (0.3)=0.447 kW

The power lost in the other two lines is the same, so the total line loss is
Exercise 5.17 
A delta-connected source has voltages given by
This source is connected to a delta-connected load consisting of 
 resistances. Find the line currents and the
power delivered to the load.
Answer 
Pline=3×PlineA=1.341 kW
Vab=1000 ∠30°_Vbc=1000 ∠−90°_Vca=1000 ∠150°_
50-Ω
IaA=34.6 ∠0°_, IbB=34.6 ∠−120°_, IcC=34.6 ∠120°_; P=30 kW.

5.8 AC Analysis Using MATLAB
In this section, we will illustrate how MATLAB can greatly facilitate the analysis of complicated ac
circuits. In fact, a practicing engineer working at a computer might have little use for a calculator, as it is
easy to keep a MATLAB window open for all sorts of engineering calculations. Of course, you will
probably need to use calculators for course exams and when you take the Professional Engineer (PE)
exams. The PE exams allow only fairly simple scientific calculators, and you should practice with one of
those allowed before attempting the exams.
Complex Data in MATLAB
By default, MATLAB assumes that 
 However, I have encountered at least one bug in the software
attributable to using j instead of i, and therefore I recommend using i in MATLAB and the Symbolic
Toolbox. We need to be careful to avoid using i for other purposes when using MATLAB to analyze ac
circuits. For example, if we were to use i as the name of a current or other variable, we would later
experience errors if we also used i for the imaginary unit without reassigning its value.
Complex numbers are represented in rectangular form (such as 
 or alternatively 
) in MATLAB.
We can use the fact that 
 to enter polar data. In MATLAB, angles are assumed to be in
radians, so we need to multiply angles that are expressed in degrees by 
 to convert to radians
before entering them. For example, we use the following command to enter the voltage 
>> Vs = 5*sqrt(2)*exp(i*45*pi/180)
Vs = 
5.0000 + 5.0000i 
We can readily verify that MATLAB has correctly computed the rectangular form of 
Alternatively, we could use Euler's formula
to enter polar data, again with angles in radians. For example, 
 can be entered as:
i=j=−1.
3+4i
3+i∗4
M ∠θ_=M exp(jθ)
π/180
Vs=52 ∠45°_:
52 ∠45°_.
M ∠θ_=M exp(jθ)=M cos(θ)+jM sin(θ)
Vs=52 ∠45°_

>> Vs = 5*sqrt(2)*cos(45*pi/180) + i*5*sqrt(2)*sin(45*pi/180) 
Vs = 
5.0000 + 5.0000i 
Values that are already in rectangular form can be entered directly. For example, to enter 
 we
use the command:
>> Z = 3 + i*4 
Z = 
3.0000 + 4.0000i 
Then, if we enter
>> Ix = Vs/Z 
Ix = 
1.4000 − 0.2000i 
MATLAB performs the complex arithmetic and gives the answer in rectangular form.
Finding the Polar Form of MATLAB Results
Frequently, we need the polar form of a complex value calculated by MATLAB. We can find the
magnitude using the abs command and the angle in radians using the angle command. To obtain the
angle in degrees, we must convert the angle from radians by multiplying by 
 Thus, to obtain the
magnitude and angle in degrees for Vs, we would enter the following commands:
>> abs(Vs) % Find the magnitude of Vs.
ans = 
7.0711 
>> (180/pi)*angle(Vs) % Find the angle of Vs in degrees.
ans = 
Z=3+j4,
180/π.

45.0000 
Adding New Functions to MATLAB
Because we often want to enter values or see results in polar form with the angles in degrees, it is
convenient to add two new functions to MATLAB. Thus, we write an m-file, named pin.m, containing the
commands to convert from polar to rectangular form, and store it in our working MATLAB folder. The
commands in the m-file are:
function z = pin(magnitude, angleindegrees) 
z = magnitude*exp(i*angleindegrees*pi/180) 
Then, we can enter 
 simply by typing the command:
>> Vs = pin(5*sqrt(2),45) 
Vs = 
5.0000 + 5.0000i 
We have chosen pin as the name of this new function to suggest "polar input." This file is included in the
MATLAB folder. (See Appendix E for information about accessing this folder.)
Similarly, to obtain the polar form of an answer, we create a new function, named pout (to suggest "polar
out"), with the commands:
function [y] = pout(x); 
magnitude = abs(x); 
angleindegrees = (180/pi)*angle(x); 
y = [magnitude angleindegrees]; 
which are stored in the m-file named pout.m. Then, to find the polar form of a result, we can use the new
function. For example,
Vs=52 ∠45°_

>> pout(Vs) 
ans = 
7.0711    45.0000 
Here is another simple example:
>> pout(i*200) 
ans = 
200 90 
Solving Network Equations with MATLAB
We can readily solve node voltage or mesh equations and perform other calculations for ac circuits in
MATLAB. The steps are:
1. Write the mesh current or node voltage equations.
2. Put the equations into matrix form, which is 
 for mesh currents, in which Z is the coefficient
matrix, I is the column vector of mesh current variables to be found, and V is the column vector
of constant terms. For node voltages, the matrix equations take the form 
 in which Y is the
coefficient matrix, V is the column vector of node voltage variables to be determined, and I is the
column vector of constants.
3. Enter the matrices into MATLAB and compute the mesh currents or node voltages using the
inverse matrix approach. 
 for mesh currents or 
 for node voltages, where
inv denotes the matrix inverse.
4. Use the results to compute any other quantities of interest.
Example 5.16 Phasor Mesh-Current Analysis with MATLAB
Determine the values for the mesh currents, the real power supplied by 
 and the reactive power
supplied by 
 in the circuit of Figure 5.49.
Figure 5.49 
ZI=V
YV=I
I=inv(Z)×V
V=inv(Y)×I
V1,
V1

Circuit for Example 5.16.
Solution 
First, we apply KVL to each loop obtaining the mesh-current equations:
In matrix form, these equations become
We will solve these equations for 
 and 
 Then, we will compute the complex power delivered by
Finally, the power is the real part of 
 and the reactive power is the imaginary part.
We enter the coefficient matrix Z and the voltage matrix V into MATLAB, making use of our new pin
function to enter polar values. Then, we calculate the current matrix.
>> Z = [(5 + i*3 + pin(50,−10)) (−pin(50,−10));... 
(−pin(50,−10)) (4 + i + pin(50,−10))]; 
>> V = [2200*sqrt(2); −pin(2000*sqrt(2),−10)]; 
>> I = inv(Z)*V 
I = 
74.1634 + 29.0852i 
17.1906 + 26.5112i 
This has given us the values of the mesh currents in rectangular form. Next, we obtain the polar form
for the mesh currents, making use of our new pout function:
>> pout(I(1)) 
ans = 
79.6628   21.4140 
>> 
 
(5+j3)I1+(50 ∠−10°_)(I1−I2)=22002(50 ∠−10°_)(I2−I1)+(4+j)I2+20002 ∠30_=0
[(5+j3+50 ∠−10°_)−50 ∠−10°_−50 ∠−10°_(4+j+50 ∠−10°_)] [I1I2]=[22002−20002 ∠−10°_]
I1
I2.
V1
S1=12 V1I1∗
S1

pout(I(2))
ans = 
31.5968   57.0394 
Thus, the currents are 
 and 
 rounded to two decimal
places. Next, we compute the complex power, real power, and reactive power for the first source.
>> S1 = (1/2)*(2200*sqrt(2))*conj(I(1)); 
>> P1 = real(S1) 
P1 = 
1.1537e + 005 
>> Q1 = imag(S1) 
Q1 = 
−4.5246e + 004 
Thus, the power supplied by 
 is 115.37 kW and the reactive power is 
 The
commands for this example appear in the m-file named Example_5_16.
Exercise 5.18 
Use MATLAB to solve for the phasor node voltages in polar form for the circuit of Figure 5.50.
Figure 5.50 
Circuit for Exercise 5.18.
Answer The MATLAB commands are:
 
I1=79.66 ∠21.41°_ A
I2=31.60 ∠57.04°_ A,
S
1
=
1
2
V
1
I
1
*
V1
−45.25 kVAR.

clear all
Y = [(1/(100+i*30)+1/(50−i*80)) (−1/(50−i*80));... 
(−1/(50−i*80)) (1/(i*50)+1/(50−i*80))]; 
I = [pin(1,60); pin(2,30)]; 
V = inv(Y)*I; 
pout(V(1)) 
pout(V(2)) 
and the results are 
 and 
V1=79.98 ∠106.21°_
V2=124.13 ∠116.30°_.

Summary
1. A sinusoidal voltage is given by 
 where 
 is the peak value of the voltage,
 is the angular frequency in radians per second, and  is the phase angle. The frequency in
hertz is 
 where T is the period. Furthermore, 
2. For uniformity, we express sinusoidal voltages in terms of the cosine function. A sine function
can be converted to a cosine function by use of the identity 
3. The root-mean-square (rms) value (or effective value) of a periodic voltage v(t) is
The average power delivered to a resistance by v(t) is
Similarly, for a current i(t), we have
and the average power delivered if i(t) flows through a resistance is
For a sinusoid, the rms value is the peak value divided by 
4. We can represent sinusoids with phasors. The magnitude of the phasor is the peak value of the
sinusoid. The phase angle of the phasor is the phase angle of the sinusoid (assuming that we
have written the sinusoid in terms of a cosine function).
5. We can add (or subtract) sinusoids by adding (or subtracting) their phasors.
6. The phasor voltage for a passive circuit is the phasor current times the complex impedance of
the circuit. For a resistance, 
 and the voltage is in phase with the current. For an
inductance, 
 and the voltage leads the current by 90°. For a capacitance,
 and the voltage lags the current by 90°.
7. Many techniques learned in Chapter 2 for resistive circuits can be applied directly to sinusoidal
circuits if the currents and voltages are replaced by phasors and the passive circuit elements are
replaced by their complex impedances. For example, complex impedances can be combined in
series or parallel in the same way as resistances (except that complex arithmetic must be used).
Node voltages, the current-division principle, and the voltage-division principle also apply to ac
circuits.
8. When a sinusoidal current flows through a sinusoidal voltage, the average power delivered is
 where  is the power angle, which is found by subtracting the phase angle
of the current from the phase angle of the voltage (i.e., 
). The power factor is 
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt+θ),
Vm
ω
θ
f=1/T,
ω=2πf.
sin(z)= cos(z−90°).
Vrms=1T ∫0T v2(t) dt
P
avg
=
V
2
rms
R
Irms=1T ∫0T i2(t) dt
P
avg
=
I
2
rms
R
2.
VR=RIR,
VL=jωLIL,
VC=−j(1/ωC)IC,
P=VrmsIrms cos(θ),
θ
θ=θv−θi
cos(θ).

9. Reactive power is the flow of energy back and forth between the source and energy-storage
elements (L and C). We define reactive power to be positive for an inductance and negative for a
capacitance. The net energy transferred per cycle by reactive power flow is zero. Reactive
power is important because a power distribution system must have higher current ratings if
reactive power flows than would be required for zero reactive power.
10. Apparent power is the product of rms voltage and rms current. Many useful relationships
between power, reactive power, apparent power, and the power angle can be obtained from the
power triangles shown in Figure 5.25 on page 244.
11. In steady state, a network composed of resistances, inductances, capacitances, and sinusoidal
sources (all of the same frequency) has a Thévenin equivalent consisting of a phasor voltage
source in series with a complex impedance. The Norton equivalent consists of a phasor current
source in parallel with the Thévenin impedance.
12. For maximum-power transfer from a two-terminal ac circuit to a load, the load impedance is
selected to be the complex conjugate of the Thévenin impedance. If the load is constrained to be
a pure resistance, the value for maximum power transfer is equal to the magnitude of the
Thévenin impedance.
13. Because of savings in wiring, three-phase power distribution is more economical than single
phase. The power flow in balanced three-phase systems is smooth, whereas power pulsates in
single-phase systems. Thus, three-phase motors generally have the advantage of producing
less vibration than single-phase motors.

Problems
Section 5.1: Sinusoidal Currents and Voltages
P5.1. Consider the plot of the sinusoidal voltage 
 shown in Figure 5.1 on page
216 and the following statements:
A. Stretches the sinusoidal curve vertically.
B. Compresses the sinusoidal curve vertically.
C. Stretches the sinusoidal curve horizontally.
D. Compresses the sinusoidal curve horizontally.
E. Translates the sinusoidal curve to the right.
F. Translates the sinusoidal curve to the left.
Which statement best describes
a. Increasing the peak amplitude 
b. Increasing the frequency f?
c. Decreasing 
d. Decreasing the angular frequency 
e. Increasing the period?
P5.2. What are the units for angular frequency 
 For frequency f? What is the relationship
between them?
*P5.3. A voltage is given by 
First, use a cosine function to express
v(t). Then, find the angular frequency, the frequency in hertz, the phase angle, the period, and
the rms value. Find the power that this voltage delivers to a 
 resistance. Find the first value
of time after 
 that v(t) reaches its peak value. Sketch v(t) to scale versus time.
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See See Appendix E for more
information about accessing the Student Solutions.
P5.4. Repeat Problem P5.3 for 
*P5.5. A sinusoidal voltage v(t) has an rms value of 20 V, has a period of 
 and reaches a
positive peak at 
 Write an expression for v(t).
P5.6. A sinusoidal voltage has a peak value of 15 V, has a frequency of 125 Hz, and crosses
zero with positive slope at 
 Write an expression for the voltage.
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt+θ)
Vm?
θ?
ω?
ω?
v(
t
)=10 sin(1000πt+30°).
50-Ω
t=0
v(t)=50 sin(500πt+120°).
100 μs,
t=20 μs.
t=1 ms.

P5.7. A current 
 flows through a 
 resistance. Sketch i(t) and p(t) to
scale versus time. Find the average power delivered to the resistance.
P5.8. We have a voltage 
 across a 
 resistance. Sketch v(t) and p(t) to
scale versus time. Find the average power delivered to the resistance.
P5.9. Suppose we have a sinusoidal current i(t) that has an rms value of 5 A, has a period of 10
ms, and reaches a positive peak at 
 Write an expression for i(t).
P5.10. A Lissajous figure results if one sinusoid is plotted versus another. Consider
 and 
 Use a computer program of your choice to generate values of
x and y for 20 seconds at 100 points per second and obtain a plot of y versus x for
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
c. 
 and 
d. 
 and 
*P5.11. Find the rms value of the voltage waveform shown in Figure P5.11.
Figure P5.11 
*P5.12. Calculate the rms value of the half-wave rectified sine wave shown in Figure P5.12.
Figure P5.12 
*P5.13. Find the rms value of the current waveform shown in Figure P5.13.
i(t)=10 cos(2000πt)
100-Ω
v(t)=1000 sin(500πt)
500-Ω
t=3 ms.
x(t)=cos(ωxt)
y(t)=cos(ωyt+θ).
ωx=ωy=2π
θ=90°;
ωx=ωy=2π
θ=45°;
ωx=ωy=2π
θ=0°;
ωx=2π, ωy=4π,
θ=0°.

Section 5.2: Phasors
Figure P5.13 
P5.14. Determine the rms value of 
P5.15. Determine the rms value of 
P5.16. Compute the rms value of the periodic waveform shown in Figure P5.16.
Figure P5.16 
P5.17. Find the rms value of the voltage waveform shown in Figure P5.17.
Figure P5.17 
P5.18. Is the rms value of a periodic waveform always equal to the peak value divided by the
square root of two? When is it?
v(t)=Acos(2πt)+B sin(2πt).
v(t)=5+10 cos(20πt).
P5.19. What steps do we follow in adding sinusoidal currents or voltages? What must be true of

the sinusoids?
P5.20. Describe two methods to determine the phase relationship between two sinusoids of the
same frequency.
*P5.21. Suppose that 
 and 
 Use phasors to reduce the sum
 to a single term of the form 
 Draw a phasor diagram, showing
 and 
 State the phase relationships between each pair of these phasors.
*P5.22. Consider the phasors shown in Figure P5.22. The frequency of each signal is 
Write a time-domain expression for each voltage in the form 
 State the phase
relationships between pairs of these phasors.
Figure P5.22 
*P5.23. Reduce 
 to the form 
P5.24. Two sinusoidal voltages of the same frequency have rms values of 8 V and 3 V. What is
the smallest rms value that the sum of these voltages could have? The largest? Justify your
answers.
P5.25. Suppose that 
 and 
 Use phasors to reduce
the sum 
 to a single term of the form 
 Draw a phasor diagram
showing 
 and 
 State the phase relationships between each pair of these phasors.
P5.26. Write an expression for the sinusoid shown in Figure P5.26 of the form
 giving the numerical values of 
 and 
 Also, determine the phasor and
the rms value of v(t).
v1(t)=100 cos(ωt)
v2(t)=100 sin(ωt).
vs(t)=v1(t)+v2(t)
Vm cos(ωt+θ).
V1, V2,
Vs.
f=200 Hz.
Vm cos(ωt+θ).
5 cos(ωt+75°)−3 cos(ωt−75°)+4 sin(ωt)
Vm cos(ωt+θ).
v1(t)=100 cos(ωt+45°)
v2(t)=150 sin(ωt+60°).
vs(t)=v1(t)+v2(t)
Vm cos(ωt+θ).
V1, V2,
Vs.
v(t)=Vm cos(ωt+θ),
Vm, ω,
θ.

Section 5.3: Complex Impedances
Figure P5.26 
P5.27. We have 
 The current 
 has an rms value of 5 A and leads 
by 20°. (The current and the voltage have the same frequency.) Draw a phasor diagram showing
the phasors. Write an expression for 
 of the form 
P5.28. Reduce 
 to the form 
P5.29. Using a computer program of your choice, obt­ain a plot of 
 for
t ranging from 0 to 2 s in 0.01-s increments. (Notice that because the terms have different
frequencies, they cannot be combined by using phasors.) Then, considering that the two terms
can be represented as the real projection of the sum of two vectors rotating (at different speeds)
in the complex plane, comment on the plot.
P5.30. A sinusoidal current 
 has a phase angle of 30°. Furthermore, 
 attains its positive
peak 2 ms earlier than current 
 does. Both currents have a frequency of 200 Hz. Determine
the phase angle of 
v1(t)=10 cos(ωt+30°).
i1(t)
v1(t)
i1(t)
Im cos(ωt+θ).
5 sin(ωt)+5 cos(ωt+30°)+5 cos(ωt+150°)
Vm cos(ωt+θ).
v(t)= cos(19πt)+cos(21πt)
i1(t)
i1(t)
i2(t)
i2(t).
P5.31. Write the relationship between the phasor voltage and phasor current for an inductance.
Repeat for capacitance.
P5.32. State the phase relationship between current and voltage for a resistance, for an
inductance, and for a capacitance.
*P5.33. A voltage 
 is applied to a 100-mH inductance. Find the complex
impedance of the inductance. Find the phasor voltage and current, and construct a phasor
diagram. Write the current as a function of time. Sketch the voltage and current to scale versus
time. State the phase relationship between the current and voltage.
*P5.34. A voltage 
 is applied to a 
 capacitance. Find the complex
impedance of the capacitance. Find the phasor voltage and current, and construct a phasor
diagram. Write the current as a function of time. Sketch the voltage and current to scale versus
time. State the phase relationship between the current and voltage.
 P5.35. A certain circuit element is known to be a resistance, an inductance, or a capacitance.
Determine the type and value (in ohms, henrys, or farads) of the element if the voltage and
current for the element are given by
a. 
b. 
c. 
P5.36. Sketch plots of the magnitudes of the impedances of a 10-mH inductance, a 
capacitance, and a 
 resistance to scale versus frequency for the range from zero to 1000
vL(t)=10 cos(2000πt)
vC(t)=10 cos(2000πt)
10-μF
v(t)=100 sin(200t+30°) V,i(t)= cos(200t+30°) A;
v(t)=500 cos(100t+50°) V,i(t)=2 cos(100t+50°) A;
v(t)=100 cos(400t+30°) V,i(t)= sin(400t+30°) A.
10-μF
50-Ω

Hz.
P5.37.
a. A certain element has a phasor voltage of 
 and current of 
 The
angular frequency is 500 rad/s. Determine the nature and value of the element.
b. Repeat for 
 and current of 
c. Repeat for 
 and current of 
P5.38.
a. The current and voltage for a certain circuit element are shown in Figure P5.38(a).
Determine the nature and value of the element.
Figure P5.38 
b. Repeat for Figure P5.38(b).
V=100∠30° V
I=5∠120° A.
V=20∠−45° V
I=5∠−135° A.
V=5∠45° V
I=5∠45° A.

Section 5.4: Circuit Analysis with Phasors and Complex Impedances
P5.39. Give a step-by-step procedure for steady-state analysis of circuits with sinusoidal
sources. What condition must be true of the sources?
*P5.40. Find the complex impedance in polar form of the network shown in Figure P5.40 for
 Repeat for 
 and 
Figure P5.40 
*P5.41. Find the phasors for the current and for the voltages of the circuit shown in Figure
P5.41. Construct a phasor diagram showing 
 and 
 What is the phase relationship
between 
 and I?
Figure P5.41 
P5.42. Change the inductance to 0.1 H, and repeat Problem P5.41.
P5.43. Find the complex impedance of the network shown in Figure P5.43 for 
 Repeat
for 
 and 
Figure P5.43 
ω=500.
ω=1000
ω=2000.
Vs, I, VR,
VL.
Vs
ω=500.
ω=1000
ω=2000.

 P5.44. A 10-mH inductance, a 
 resistance, and a 
 capacitance are connected in
parallel. Calculate the impedance of the combination for angular frequencies of 500, 1000, and
2000 radians per second. For each frequency, state whether the impedance is inductive, purely
resistive, or capacitive.
P5.45. Find the phasors for the current and the voltages for the circuit shown in Figure P5.45.
Construct a phasor diagram showing 
 and 
 What is the phase relationship between
 and I?
Figure P5.45 
*P5.46. Repeat Problem P5.45, changing the capacitance value to 
P5.47. Find the phasors for the voltage and the currents of the circuit shown in Figure P5.47.
Construct a phasor diagram showing 
 and 
 What is the phase relationship between V
and 
Figure P5.47 
*P5.48. Find the phasors for the voltage and the currents for the circuit shown in Figure P5.48.
Construct a phasor diagram showing 
 and 
 What is the phase relationship between V
and 
Figure P5.48 
*P5.49. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P5.49. Find the phasors 
 and 
100-Ω
100-μF
Vs, I, VR,
VC.
Vs
1 μF.
Is, V, IR,
IL.
Is?
Is, V, IR,
IC.
Is?
Is, V, IR, IL,
IC.

Compare the peak value of 
 with the peak value of 
 Do you find the answer surprising?
Explain.
Figure P5.49 
P5.50. Consider the circuit shown in P5.50Figure . Find the phasors 
 and 
Compare the peak value of 
 with the peak value of 
 Do you find the answer surprising?
Explain.
Figure P5.50 
P5.51. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P5.51. Find the phasors 
 and I.
Draw the phasor diagram to scale. What is the phase relationship between I and 
 Between I
and 
Figure P5.51 
 P5.52. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P5.52. Find the phasors I, 
 and 
 Construct the
phasor diagram.
iL(t)
is(t).
Vs, I, VL, VR,
VC.
vL(t)
vs(t).
V1, V2, VR, VL,
V1?
VL?
IR,
IC.

Figure P5.52 
*P5.53. Solve for the node voltages shown in Figure P5.53.
Figure P5.53 
P5.54. Solve for the node voltage shown in Figure P5.54.
Figure P5.54 
P5.55. Solve for the node voltage shown in Figure P5.55.

Section 5.5: Power in AC Circuits
Figure P5.55 
P5.56. Solve for the node voltages shown in Figure P5.56.
Figure P5.56 
*P5.57. Solve for the mesh currents shown in Figure P5.54.
P5.58. Solve for the mesh currents shown in Figure P5.55.
P5.59. Solve for the mesh currents shown in Figure P5.53.
P5.60.
a. A 20-mH inductance is in series with a 
 capacitance. Sketch or use the computer
program of your choice to produce a plot of the impedance magnitude versus angular
frequency. Allow  to range from zero to 2000 rad/s and the vertical axis to range from 0
to 
b. Repeat with the inductance and capacitance in parallel.
P5.61.
a. A 20-mH inductance is in series with a 
 resistance. Sketch or use the computer
program of your choice to produce a plot of the impedance magnitude versus angular
frequency. Allow  to range from zero to 5000 rad/s.
b. Repeat with the inductance and resistance in parallel.
50-μF
ω
100 Ω.
50-Ω
ω
P5.62. What are the customary units for real power? For reactive power? For apparent power?
P5.63. How are power factor and power angle related?
P5.64. Assuming that a nonzero ac source is applied, state whether the power and reactive
power are positive, negative, or zero for
a. a pure resistance;
b. a pure inductance;
c. a pure capacitance.

P5.65. A load is said to have a leading power factor. Is it capacitive or inductive? Is the reactive
power positive or negative? Repeat for a load with lagging power factor.
P5.66.
a. Sketch a power triangle for an inductive load, label the sides, and show the power angle.
b. Repeat for a capacitive load.
P5.67. Discuss why power plant and distribution system engineers are concerned
a. with the real power absorbed by a load;
b. with the reactive power.
P5.68. Define what we mean by "power-factor correction." For power-factor correction of an
inductive load, what type of element should we place in parallel with the load?
*P5.69. Consider a load that has an impedance given by 
 The current flowing
through this load is 
 Is the load inductive or capacitive? Determine the power
factor, power, reactive power, and apparent power delivered to the load.
P5.70. We have a load with an impedance given by 
 The voltage across this load is
 Is the load inductive or capacitive? Determine the power factor, power,
reactive power, and apparent power delivered to the load.
P5.71. The phasor voltage across a certain load is 
 and the phasor current
through it is 
 Determine the power factor, power, reactive power, apparent power,
and impedance. Is the power factor leading or lagging?
P5.72. The voltage across a load is 
 and the current through the load is
 The reference direction for the current points into the positive reference
for the voltage. Determine the power factor, the power, the reactive power, and the apparent
power for the load. Is this load inductive or capacitive?
P5.73. Assuming that a nonzero ac voltage source is applied, state whether the power and
reactive power are positive, negative, or zero for
a. a resistance in series with an inductance;
b. a resistance in series with a capacitance. (Assume that the resistances, inductance, and
capacitance are nonzero and finite in value.)
P5.74. Assuming that a nonzero ac voltage source is applied, what can you say about whether
the power and reactive power are positive, negative, or zero for a pure capacitance in series with
a pure inductance? Consider cases in which the impedance magnitude of the capacitance is
greater than, equal to, or less than the impedance magnitude of the inductance.
P5.75. Repeat Problem P5.74 for the inductance and capacitance in parallel.
P5.76. Determine the power for each source shown in Figure P5.76. Also, state whether each
source is delivering or absorbing energy.
Z=100−j50 Ω.
I=152 ∠30° A.
Z=30+j40 Ω.
V=15002 ∠30° V.
V=10002 ∠30° V,
I=152 ∠60° A.
v(t)=1042 cos(ωt+10°) V,
i(t)=202 cos(ωt−20°) A.

Figure P5.76 
P5.77. Determine the power for each source shown in Figure P5.77. Also, state whether each
source is delivering or absorbing energy.
Figure P5.77 
P5.78. A 60-Hz 220-V-rms source supplies power to a load consisting of a resistance in series
with an inductance. The real power is 1500 W, and the apparent power is 2500 VAR. Determine
the value of the resistance and the value of the inductance.
 P5.79. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P5.79. Find the phasor current I. Find the power,
reactive power, and apparent power delivered by the source. Find the power factor and state
whether it is lagging or leading.
Figure P5.79 
*P5.80. Repeat Problem P5.79, replacing the inductance by a 
 capacitance.
*P5.81. Two loads, A and B, are connected in parallel across a 1-kV-rms 60-Hz line, as shown in
Figure P5.81. Load A consumes 10 kW with a 90 percent lagging power factor. Load B has an
apparent power of 15 kVA with an 80 percent lagging power factor. Find the power, reactive
power, and apparent power delivered by the source. What is the power factor seen by the
source?
10-μF

Figure P5.81 
P5.82. Repeat Problem P5.81 if load A consumes 5 kW with a 90 percent lagging power factor
and load B consumes 10 kW with an 80 percent leading power factor.
P5.83. Find the power, reactive power, and apparent power delivered by the source in Figure
P5.83. Find the power factor and state whether it is leading or lagging.
Figure P5.83 
P5.84. Repeat Problem P5.83 with the resistance, inductance, and capacitance connected in
series rather than in parallel.
*P5.85. Consider the situation shown in Figure P5.85. A 1000-V-rms source delivers power to a
load. The load consumes 100 kW with a power factor of 25 percent lagging.
a. Find the phasor I, assuming that the capacitor is not connected to the circuit.
b. Find the value of the capacitance that must be connected in parallel with the load to
achieve a power factor of 100 percent. Usually, power-systems engineers rate
capacitances used for power-factor correction in terms of their reactive power rating.
What is the rating of this capacitance in kVAR? Assuming that this capacitance is
connected, find the new value for the phasor I.
c. Suppose that the source is connected to the load by a long distance. What are the
potential advantages and disadvantages of connecting the capacitance across the load?

Section 5.6: Thévenin and Norton Equivalent Circuits
Figure P5.85 
P5.86. Of what does an ac steady-state Thévenin equivalent circuit consist? A Norton equivalent
circuit? How are the values of the parameters of these circuits determined?
P5.87. To attain maximum power delivered to a load, what value of load impedance is required if
a. the load can have any complex value;
b. the load must be pure resistance?
P5.88. For an ac circuit consisting of a load connected to a Thévenin circuit, is it possible for the
load voltage to exceed the Thévenin voltage in magnitude? If not, why not? If so, under what
conditions is it possible? Explain.
*P5.89.
a. Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for the circuit shown in Figure P5.89.
Figure P5.89 
b. Find the maximum power that this circuit can deliver to a load if the load can have any
complex impedance.
c. Repeat if the load is purely resistive.
 P5.90.
a. Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for the circuit shown in Figure P5.90.
Figure P5.90 

b. Find the maximum power that this circuit can deliver to a load if the load can have any
complex impedance.
c. Repeat if the load must be purely resistive.
P5.91. Draw the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for Figure P5.91, labeling the elements
and terminals.
Figure P5.91 
P5.92. Draw the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits for Figure P5.92, labeling the elements
and terminals.
Figure P5.92 
P5.93. The Thévenin equivalent of a two-terminal network is shown in Figure P5.93. The
frequency is 
 We wish to connect a load across terminals 
 that consists of a
resistance and a capacitance in series such that the power delivered to the resistance is
maximized. Find the value of the resistance and the value of the capacitance.
f=60 Hz.
a−b

Section 5.7: Balanced Three-Phase Circuits
Figure P5.93 
*P5.94. Repeat Problem P5.93 with the load required to consist of a resistance and a
capacitance in parallel.
P5.95. A balanced positive-sequence three-phase source has
a. Find the frequency of this source in Hz.
b. Give expressions for 
 and 
c. Repeat part (b) for a negative-sequence source.
P5.96. A three-phase source has
Is this a positive-sequence or a negative-­sequence source? Find time-domain expressions for
 and 
 *P5.97. A balanced wye-connected three-phase source has line-to-neutral voltages of 440 V
rms. Find the rms line-to-line voltage magnitude. If this source is applied to a wye-connected
load composed of three 
 resistances, find the rms line-current magnitude and the total
power delivered.
*P5.98. Each phase of a wye-connected load consists of a 
 resistance in parallel with a
 capacitance. Find the impedance of each phase of an equivalent delta-connected load.
The frequency of operation is 60 Hz.
P5.99. What can you say about the flow of power as a function of time between a balanced
three-phase source and a balanced load? Is this true of a single-phase source and a load? How
is this a potential advantage for the three-phase system? What is another advantage of three-
phase power distribution compared with single-phase?
P5.100. A delta-connected source delivers power to a delta-connected load, as shown in Figure
P5.100. The rms line-to-line voltage at the source is 
 The load impedance is
 Find 
 the total power delivered to the load, and the power lost in the
line.
van(t)=100 cos(377t+90°) V
vbn(t)
vcn(t).
v
an
(t)
=100 cos(ωt−60°)
v
bn
(t)
=100 cos(ωt+60°)
v
cn
(t)
=−100 cos(ωt)
vab(t), vbc(t),
vca(t).
30-Ω
50-Ω
100-μF
Vabrms=440 V.
ZΔ=10−j2.
IaA, VAB, IAB,

Figure P5.100 
*P5.101. Repeat Problem P5.100, with 
P5.102. A negative-sequence wye-connected source has line-to-neutral voltages
 and 
 Find the line-to-line voltages 
 and
 Construct a phasor diagram showing both sets of voltages and compare with Figure 5.41
on page 261.
P5.103. A balanced positive-sequence wye-connected 60-Hz three-phase source has line-to-line
voltages of 
 This source is connected to a balanced wye-connected load. Each
phase of the load consists of a 0.3-H inductance in series with a 
 resistance. Find the line-
to-neutral voltage phasors, the line-to-line voltage phasors, the line-current phasors, the power,
and the reactive power delivered to the load. Assume that the phase of 
 is zero.
P5.104. A balanced wye-connected three-phase source has line-to-neutral voltages of 240 V
rms. Find the rms line-to-line voltage. This source is applied to a delta-connected load, each arm
of which consists of a 
 resistance in parallel with a 
 reactance. Determine the rms line
current magnitude, the power factor, and the total power delivered.
P5.105. In this chapter, we have considered balanced loads only. However, it is possible to
determine an equivalent wye for an unbalanced delta, and vice versa. Consider the equivalent
circuits shown in Figure P5.105. Derive formulas for the impedances of the wye in terms of the
impedances of the delta. [Hint: Equate the impedances between corresponding pairs of
terminals of the two circuits with the third terminal open. Then, solve the equations for 
and 
 in terms of 
 and 
 Take care in distinguishing between upper- and lowercase
subscripts.]
ZΔ=5−j2.
Van=VY ∠0°, Vbn=VY ∠120°,
Vcn=VY ∠−120°.
Vab, Vbc,
Vca.
VL=440 V rms.
50-Ω
Van
10-Ω
+j5-Ω
Za, Zb,
Zc
ZA, ZB,
ZC.

Section 5.8: AC Analysis Using MATLAB
Figure P5.105 
 P5.106. Repeat Problem P5.105, but solve for the impedances of the delta in terms of those of
the wye. [Hint: Start by working in terms of the admittances of the delta (
 and 
) and
the impedances of the wye (
 and 
). Short terminals b and c for each circuit. Then
equate the admittances between terminal a and the shorted terminals for the two circuits. Repeat
this twice more with shorts between the remaining two pairs of terminals. Solve the equations to
determine 
 and 
 in terms of 
 and 
 Finally, invert the equations for 
and 
 to obtain equations relating the impedances. Take care in distinguishing between upper-
and lowercase subscripts.]
YA, YB,
YC
Za, Zb,
Zc
YA, YB,
YC
Za, Zb,
Zc.
YA, YB,
YC
*P5.107 Use MATLAB to solve for the node voltages shown in Figure P5.107.
Figure P5.107 
P5.108 Use MATLAB to solve for the mesh currents shown in Figure P5.107.
*P5.109 Use MATLAB to solve for the mesh currents shown in Figure P5.109.
Figure P5.109 
P5.110 Use MATLAB to solve for the mesh currents shown in Figure P5.110.

Figure P5.110 
P5.111 Use MATLAB to solve for the node voltages shown in Figure P5.111.
Figure P5.111 
P5.112 Use the MATLAB Symbolic Toolbox to determine the rms value of v(t) which has a
period of 1 s and is given by 
 for 
v(t)=10 exp(−5t) sin(20πt) V
0≤t≤1 s.

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T5.1. Determine the rms value of the current shown in Figure T5.1 and the average power
delivered to the 
 resistance.
Figure T5.1 
 T5.2. Reduce the expression
to the form 
T5.3. We have two voltages 
 and 
Determine (including units):
a. the rms value of 
b. the frequency of the voltages;
c. the angular frequency of the voltages;
d. the period of the voltages;
e. the phase relationship between 
 and 
T5.4. Find the phasor values of 
 and 
 in polar form for the circuit of Figure T5.4.
50-Ω
v(t)=5 sin(ωt+45°)+5 cos(ωt−30°)
Vm cos(ωt+θ).
v
1
(t)=15 sin(400πt+
45°) V
v2(t)=5 cos(400πt−30°) V.
v1(t);
v1(t)
v2(t).
VR, VL,
VC

Figure T5.4 
T5.5. Use the node-voltage approach to solve for 
 under steady-state conditions in the
circuit of Figure T5.5.
Figure T5.5 
T5.6. Determine the complex power, power, reactive power, and apparent power absorbed by
the load in Figure T5.6. Also, determine the power factor for the load.
Figure T5.6 
T5.7. Determine the line current 
 in polar form for the circuit of Figure T5.7.  This is a
positive-sequence, balanced, three-phase system with 
 and 
Figure T5.7 
v1(t)
IaA
Van=208 ∠30°_V
ZΔ=6+j8 Ω.

T5.8. Write the MATLAB commands to obtain the values of the mesh currents of Figure T5.8 in
polar form. You may use the pin and pout functions defined in this chapter if you wish.
Figure T5.8 

Chapter 6 Frequency Response, Bode Plots, and Resonance
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
State the fundamental concepts of Fourier analysis.
Use a filter's transfer function to determine its output for a given input consisting of sinusoidal
components.
Use circuit analysis to determine the transfer functions of simple circuits.
Draw first-order lowpass or highpass filter circuits and sketch their transfer functions.
Understand decibels, logarithmic frequency scales, and Bode plots.
Draw the Bode plots for transfer functions of first-order filters.
Calculate parameters for series- and parallel-resonant circuits.
Select and design simple filter circuits.
Use MATLAB to derive and plot network functions.
Design simple digital signal-processing systems.
Introduction to this chapter:

Much of electrical engineering is concerned with information-bearing currents and
voltages that we call signals. For example, transducers on an internal combustion
engine provide electrical signals that represent temperature, speed, throttle position,
and the rotational position of the crankshaft. These signals are processed (by
electrical circuits) to determine the optimum firing instant for each cylinder. Finally,
electrical pulses are generated for each spark plug.
Surveyors can measure distances by using an instrument that emits a pulse of light
that is reflected by a mirror at the point of interest. The return light pulse is converted
to an electrical signal that is processed by circuits to determine the round-trip time
delay between the instrument and the mirror. Finally, the delay is converted to
distance and displayed.
Another example of signal processing is the electrocardiogram, which is a plot of the
electrical signal generated by the human heart. In a cardiac-care unit, ­circuits and
computers are employed to extract information concerning the behavior of a
patient's heart. A physician or nurse is alerted when the patient needs attention.
In general, signal processing is concerned with manipulating signals to extract
information and using that information to generate other useful electrical signals. It is
an important and far-reaching subject. In this chapter, we consider several simple
but, nevertheless, useful circuits from a signal-processing point of view.
Recall that in Chapter 5 we learned how to analyze circuits containing sinusoidal
sources, all of which have a common frequency. An important application is
electrical power systems. However, most real-world information-bearing electrical
signals are not sinusoidal. Nevertheless, we will see that phasor concepts can be
very useful in understanding how circuits respond to nonsinusoidal signals. This is
true because nonsinusoidal signals can be considered to be the sum of sinusoidal
components having various frequencies, amplitudes, and phases.

6.1 Fourier Analysis, Filters, and Transfer Functions
Fourier Analysis
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, most information-bearing signals are not sinusoidal. For
example, the waveform produced by a microphone for speech or music is a complex nonsinusoidal
waveform that is not predictable in advance. Figure 6.1(a) shows a (very) short segment of a music
signal.
Figure 6.1 
The short segment of a music waveform shown in (a) is the sum of the sinusoidal components shown in
(b).
Even though many interesting signals are not sinusoidal, it turns out that we can construct any
waveform by adding sinusoids that have the proper amplitudes, frequencies, and phases. For
illustration, the waveform shown in Figure 6.1(a) is the sum of the sinusoids shown in Figure 6.1(b).
The waveform shown in Figure 6.1 is relatively simple because it is composed of only three
components. Most natural signals contain thousands of components. (In theory, the number is infinite in
many cases.)
When we listen to music, our ears respond differently to the various frequency components. Some
combinations of amplitudes and frequencies are pleasing, whereas other combinations are not. Thus, in
the design of signal-processing circuits (such as amplifiers) for audio signals, we must consider how the
circuits respond to components having different frequencies.

Fourier analysis is a mathematical technique for finding the amplitudes, frequencies, and phases of the
components of a given waveform. Aside from mentioning some of the results of Fourier analysis, we will
not develop the theory in detail. The important point is that all real-world signals are sums of sinusoidal
components.
All real-world signals are sums of sinusoidal components having various
frequencies, amplitudes, and phases.
The range of the frequencies of the components depends on the type of signal under consideration. The
frequency ranges for several types of signals are given in Table 6.1. Thus, electrocardiograms are
composed of numerous sinusoidal components with frequencies ranging from 0.05 Hz to 100 Hz.
Table 6.1 Frequency Ranges of Selected Signals
Electrocardiogram
0.05 to 100 Hz
Audible sounds
20 Hz to 15 kHz
AM radio broadcasting
540 to 1600 kHz
HD component video signals
Dc to 25 MHz
FM radio broadcasting
88 to 108 MHz
Cellular phone
824 to 894 MHz and 1850 to 1990 MHz
Satellite television downlinks (C-band)
3.7 to 4.2 GHz
Digital satellite television
12.2 to 12.7 GHz
Fourier Series of a Square Wave 
As another example, consider the signal shown in Figure 6.2(a), which is called a square wave. Fourier
analysis shows that the square wave can be written as an infinite series of sinusoidal components,

Figure 6.2 
A square wave and some of its components.
in which 
is the called the fundamental angular frequency of the square wave.
Figure 6.2(b) shows several of the terms in this series and the result of summing the first five terms.
Clearly, even the sum of the first five terms is a fairly good approximation to the square wave, and the
approximation becomes better as more components are added. Thus, the square wave is composed of
an infinite number of sinusoidal components. The frequencies of the components are odd integer
multiples of the fundamental frequency, the amplitudes decline with increasing frequency, and the
phases of all components are 
Unlike the square wave, the components of real-world signals are
confined to finite ranges of frequency, and their amplitudes are not given by simple mathematical
expressions.
v
sq
(
t
)=
4A
π
 sin(
ω
0
t
)+
4A
3π
 sin(
3
ω
0
t
)+
4A
5π
 sin(
5
ω
0
t
)+...
(6.1)
ω
0
=2π/T
−90°.

The components of real-world signals are confined to finite ranges of frequency.
Zero frequency corresponds to dc.
Sometimes a signal contains a component that has a frequency of zero. For zero frequency, a general
sinusoid of the form 
becomes simply 
which is constant for all time. Recall that
we refer to constant voltages as dc, so zero frequency corresponds to dc.
In sum, the fact that all signals are composed of sinusoidal components is a fundamental idea in
electrical engineering. The frequencies of the components, as well as their amplitudes and phases, for a
given signal can be determined by theoretical analysis or by laboratory measurements (using an
instrument called a spectrum analyzer). Very often, the design of a system for processing information-
bearing signals is based on considerations of how the system should respond to components of various
frequencies.
 . . . the fact that all signals are composed of sinusoidal components is a
fundamental idea in electrical engineering.
Filters
There are many applications in which we want to retain components in a given range of frequencies and
discard the components in another range. This can be accomplished by the use of electrical circuits
called filters. (Actually, filters can take many forms, but we limit our discussion to a few relatively simple
RLC circuits.)
A cos(
ωt+θ
)
A cos(
θ
),

Usually, filter circuits are two-port networks, an example of which is illustrated in Figure 6.3.  The
signal to be filtered is applied to the input port and (ideally) only the components in the frequency range
of interest appear at the output port. For example, an FM radio antenna produces a voltage composed
of signals from many transmitters. By using a filter that retains the components in the frequency range
from 88 to 108 MHz and discards everything else, we can select the FM radio signals and reject other
signals that could interfere with the process of extracting audio information.
Figure 6.3 
When an input signal 
is applied to the input port of a filter, some components are passed to the
output port while others are not, depending on their frequencies. Thus, 
contains some of the
components of 
but not others. Usually, the amplitudes and phases of the components are
altered in passing through the filter.
Filters process the sinusoid components of an input signal differently depending
on the frequency of each component. Often, the goal of the filter is to retain the
components in certain frequency ranges and to reject components in other
ranges.
As we learned in Chapter 5, the impedances of inductances and capacitances change with frequency.
For example, the impedance of an inductance is 
Thus, the high-
frequency components of a voltage signal applied to an inductance experience a higher impedance
magnitude than do the low-frequency components. Consequently, electrical circuits can respond
selectively to signal components, depending on their frequencies. Thus, RLC circuits provide one way to
realize electrical filters. We consider several specific examples later in this chapter.
v
in
(
t
)
v
out
(
t
)
v
in
(
t
),
Z
L
=ωL∠
90°
_
=2πfL∠
90°
_
.

RLC circuits provide one way to realize filters.
Transfer Functions
Consider the two-port network shown in Figure 6.3. Suppose that we apply a sinusoidal input signal
having a frequency denoted as f and having a phasor 
In steady state, the output signal is
sinusoidal and has the same frequency as the input. The output phasor is denoted as 
The transfer function H(f) of the two-port filter is defined to be the ratio of the phasor output voltage to
the phasor input voltage as a function of frequency:
Because phasors are complex, the transfer function is a complex quantity having both magnitude and
phase. Furthermore, both the magnitude and the phase can be functions of frequency.
The transfer function H(f ) of the two-port filter is defined to be the ratio of the
phasor output voltage to the phasor input voltage as a function of frequency.
The transfer-function magnitude is the ratio of the output amplitude to the input amplitude. The phase of
the transfer function is the output phase minus the input phase. Thus, the magnitude of the transfer
function shows how the amplitude of each frequency component is affected by the filter. Similarly, the
phase of the transfer function shows how the phase of each frequency component is affected by the
filter.
The magnitude of the transfer function shows how the amplitude of each
frequency component is affected by the filter. Similarly, the phase of the transfer
function shows how the phase of each frequency component is affected by the
filter.
V
in
.
V
out
.
H(
f
)=
V
out
V
in
(6.2)

Example 6.1 Using the Transfer Function to Determine the Output
The transfer function H(f) of a filter is shown in Figure 6.4. [Notice that the magnitude 
and
phase 
are shown separately in the figure.] If the input signal is given by
find an expression (as a function of time) for the output of the filter.
Solution 
By inspection, the frequency of the input signal is 
Referring to Figure 6.4, we see that
the magnitude and phase of the transfer function are 
and 
respectively. Thus, we have
Figure 6.4 
The transfer function of a filter. See Examples 6.1 and 6.2
The phasor for the input signal is 
and we get
Thus, the output signal is
In this case, the amplitude of the input is tripled by the filter. Furthermore, the signal is phase shifted
|H(
f
)|
∠
H(
f
)
_
v
in
(
t
)=2 cos(
2000πt+40°
)
f=1000 Hz.
|H(
1000
)|=3
∠
H(
1000
)
_
=30°,
H(
1000
)=3∠
30°
_
=
V
out
V
in
V
in
=2∠
40°
_
,
V
out
=H(
1000
)×
V
in
=3∠
30°
_
×2∠
40°
_
=6∠
70°
_
v
out
(
t
)=6 cos(
2000πt+70°
)

by 30°. Of course, this is evident from the values shown in the plots of the transfer function at
Exercise 6.1 
Repeat Example 6.1 if the input signal is given by:
a. 
; and
b. 
Answer 
a. 
b. b. 
Notice that the effect of the filter on the magnitude and phase of the signal depends on signal frequency.
Example: Graphic Equalizer 
You may own a stereo audio system that has a graphic equalizer, which is a filter that has an adjustable
transfer function. Usually, the controls of the equalizer are arranged so their positions give an
approximate representation of the transfer-function magnitude versus frequency. (Actually, the equalizer
in a stereo system contains two filters one for the left channel and one for the right channel-and the
controls are ganged together.) Users can adjust the transfer function to achieve the mix of amplitudes
versus frequency that is most pleasing to them.
Input Signals with Multiple Components 
If the input signal to a filter contains several frequency components, we can find the output for each
input component separately and then add the output components. This is an application of the
superposition principle first introduced in Section 2.7.
A step-by-step procedure for determining the output of a filter for an input with multiple components is as
follows:
1. Determine the frequency and phasor representation for each input component.
2. Determine the (complex) value of the transfer function for each component.
3. Obtain the phasor for each output component by multiplying the phasor for each input
component by the corresponding transfer-function value.
4. Convert the phasors for the output components into time functions of various frequencies. Add
f=1000.
v
in
(
t
)=
2 cos(
4000πt
)
v
in
(
t
)=1 cos(
6000πt−20°
).
v
out
(
t
)=4 cos(
4000πt+60°
);
v
out
(
t
)=0.

these time functions to produce the output.
Example 6.2 Using the Transfer Function with Several Input Components
Suppose that the input signal for the filter of Figure 6.4 is given by
Find an expression for the output signal.
Step 1.
Solution 
We start by breaking the input signal into its components. The first ­component is
the second component is
and the third component is
Step 2.
By inspection, we see that the frequencies of the components are 0, 1000, and 2000 Hz,
respectively. Referring to the transfer function shown in Figure 6.4, we find that
v
in
(
t
)=3+2 cos(
2000πt
)+cos(
4000πt−70°
)
v
in1
(
t
)=3
v
in2
(
t
)=2 cos(
2000πt
)
v
in3
(
t
)=cos(
4000πt−70°
)

and
The constant (dc) output term is simply H(0) times the dc input:
Step 3.
The phasor outputs for the two input sinusoids are
Next, we can write the output components as functions of time:
Step 4.
and
Finally, we add the output components to find the output voltage:
H(
0
)=4
H(
1000
)=3∠
30°
_
H(
2000
)=2∠
60°
_
v
out1
=H(
0
)
v
in1
=4×3=12
V
out2
=H(
1000
)×
V
in2
=3∠
30°
_
×2∠
0°
_
=6∠
30°
_
V
out3
=H(
2000
)×
V
in3
=2∠
60°
_
×1∠
−70°
_
=2∠
−10°
_
v
out1
(
t
)
=12
v
out2
(
t
)
=6 cos(
2000πt+30°
)
v
out3
(
t
)=2 cos(
4000πt−10°
)

and
Notice that we did not add the phasors 
and 
in Example 6.2. The phasor concept was
developed for sinusoids, all of which have the same frequency. Hence, convert the phasors back into
time-dependent signals before adding the components.
We must convert the phasors back into time-dependent signals before adding the
components.
Real-world information-bearing signals contain thousands of components. In principle, the output of a
given filter for any input signal could be found by using the procedure of Example 6.2. However, it would
usually be much too tedious to carry out. Fortunately, we will not need to do this. It is the principle that is
most important. In summary, we can say that linear circuits (or any other systems for which the
relationship between input and output can be described by linear time-invariant differential equations)
behave as if they
1. Separate the input signal into components having various frequencies.
2. Alter the amplitude and phase of each component depending on its frequency.
3. Add the altered components to produce the output signal.
This process is illustrated in Figure 6.5.
v
out
(
t
)=
v
out1
(
t
)+
v
out2
(
t
)+
v
out3
(
t
)
v
out
(
t
)=12+6 cos(
2000πt+30°
)+2 cos(
4000πt−10°
)
V
out2
V
out3

Figure 6.5 
Filters behave as if they separate the input into components, modify the amplitudes and phases of the
components, and add the altered components to produce the output.
The transfer function of a filter is important because it shows how the components are altered in
amplitude and phase.
Experimental Determination of the Transfer Function
To determine the transfer function of a filter experimentally, we connect a sinusoidal source to the input
port, measure the amplitudes and phases of both the input signal and the resulting output signal, and
divide the output phasor by the input phasor. This is repeated for each frequency of interest. The
experimental setup is illustrated in Figure 6.6. Various instruments, such as voltmeters and
oscilloscopes, can be employed to measure the amplitudes and phases.

Figure 6.6 
To measure the transfer function we apply a sinusoidal input signal, measure the amplitudes and
phases of input and output in steady state, and then divide the phasor output by the phasor input. The
procedure is repeated for each frequency of interest.
In the next few sections of this chapter, we use mathematical analysis to investigate the transfer
functions of several relatively simple electrical circuits.
Exercise 6.2 
Consider the transfer function shown in Figure 6.4. The input signal is given by
Find an expression for the output signal.
Answer 
Exercise 6.3 
Consider the transfer function shown in Figure 6.4. The input signal is given by
Find an expression for the output signal.
Answer 
Notice that the 3 kHz component is totally eliminated (rejected) by the
filter.
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
 6.1
 Active Noise Cancellation
Noise and vibration are annoying to passengers in helicopters and other aircraft. Traditional
sound-absorbing materials can be very effective in reducing noise levels, but are too bulky and
massive for application in aircraft. An alternative approach is an electronic system that cancels
noise. The diagram of such a system is shown in Figure PA6.1. A microphone near the sources
v
in
(
t
)=2 cos(
1000πt+20°
)+3 cos(
3000πt
)
v
out
(
t
)=7 cos(
1000πt+35°
)+7.5 cos(
3000πt+45°
).
v
in
(
t
)=1+2 cos(
2000πt
)+3 cos(
6000πt
)
v
out
(
t
)=4+6 cos(
2000πt+30°
).

of the noise, such as the engines, samples the noise before it enters the passenger area. The
resulting electrical signal passes through a filter whose transfer function is continuously adjusted
by a special-purpose computer to match the transfer function of the sound path. Finally, an
inverted version of the signal is applied to loudspeakers. The sound waves from the speaker are
out of phase with those from the noise source, resulting in partial cancellation. Another set of
microphones on the headrest monitors the sound experienced by the passenger so that the
computer can determine the filter adjustments needed to best cancel the sound.
FIGURE
PA6.1 
Recently, noise-canceling systems based on these principles have appeared that contain all of
the system elements in a lightweight headset. Many passengers on commercial aircraft wear
these headsets to provide themselves with a quieter, more restful trip.
Active noise cancellation systems can effectively replace sound absorbing materials weighing a
great deal more. As a result, active noise cancellation is very attractive for use in aircraft and
automobiles. You can find many research reports and popular articles on this topic with an
Internet search.

6.2 First-Order Lowpass Filters
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 6.7. We will see that this circuit tends to pass low-frequency
components and reject high-frequency components. (In other words, for low frequencies, the output
amplitude is nearly the same as the input. For high frequencies, the output amplitude is much less than
the input.) In Chapter 4, we saw that a first-order differential equation describes this circuit. Because of
these facts, the circuit is called a first-order lowpass filter.
Figure 6.7 
A first-order lowpass filter.
To determine the transfer function, we apply a sinusoidal input signal having a phasor 
and then we
analyze the behavior of the circuit as a function of the source frequency f.
We can determine the transfer functions of RLC circuits by using steady-state
analysis with complex impedances as a function of frequency.
The phasor current is the input voltage divided by the complex impedance of the circuit. This is given by
The phasor for the output voltage is the product of the phasor current and the impedance of the
capacitance, illustrated by
V
in
,
I=
V
in
R+1/j2πfC
(6.3)
V
out
=
1
j2πfC
 I
(6.4)

Using Equation 6.3 to substitute for I, we have
Recall that the transfer function H(f ) is defined to be the ratio of the output phasor to the input phasor:
Rearranging Equation 6.5, we have
Next, we define the parameter:
Then, the transfer function can be written as
Magnitude and Phase Plots of the Transfer Function
As expected, the transfer function H(f ) is a complex quantity having a magnitude and phase angle.
Referring to the expression on the right-hand side of Equation 6.9, the magnitude of H(f ) is the
magnitude of the numerator (which is unity) over the magnitude of the denominator. Recall that the
magnitude of a complex quantity is the square root of the sum of the real part squared and the
imaginary part squared.
Thus, the magnitude is given by
Referring to the expression on the right-hand side of Equation 6.9, the phase angle of the transfer
function is the phase of the numerator (which is zero) minus the phase of the denominator. This is given
by
Plots of the magnitude and phase of the transfer function are shown in ­Figure 6.8. For low frequencies
V
out
=
1
j2πfC
×
V
in
R+1/j2πfC
(6.5)
H(
f
)=
V
out
V
in
(6.6)
H(
f
)=
V
out
V
in
=
1
1+j2πfRC
(6.7)
f
B
=
1
2πRC
(6.8)
H(
f
)=
1
1+j(
f/
f
B
)
(6.9)
|H(
f
)|=
1
1+
(
f/
f
B
)
2
(6.10)
∠
H(
f
)
_
=−arctan (
f
f
B
)
(6.11)

(f approaching zero), the magnitude is approximately unity and the phase is nearly zero, which means
that the amplitudes and phases of low-frequency components are affected very little by this filter. The
low-­frequency components are passed to the output almost unchanged in amplitude or phase.
Figure 6.8 
Magnitude and phase of the first-order lowpass transfer function versus frequency.
On the other hand, for high frequencies 
the magnitude of the transfer function approaches
zero. Thus, the amplitude of the output is much smaller than the amplitude of the input for the high-
frequency components. We say that the high-frequency components are rejected by the filter.
Furthermore, at high frequencies, the phase of the transfer function approaches 
Thus, as well as
being reduced in amplitude, the high-frequency components are phase shifted.
Notice that for 
the magnitude of the output is 
times the magnitude of the input signal.
When the amplitude of a voltage is multiplied by a factor of 
the power that the voltage can deliver
to a given resistance is multiplied by a factor of one-half (because power is proportional to voltage
squared). Thus, 
is called the half-power frequency.
At the half-power frequency, the transfer-function magnitude is 
times
its maximum value.
Applying the Transfer Function
As we saw in Section 6.1, if an input signal to a filter consists of several components of different
frequencies, we can use the transfer function to compute the output for each component separately.
Then, we can find the complete output by adding the separate components.
(
f>>
f
B
),
−90°.
f=
f
B
,
1/
2
≅0.707
1/
2
,
f
B
1/
2
≅0.707

 Example 6.3 Calculation of RC Lowpass Output
Suppose that an input signal given by
is applied to the lowpass RC filter shown in Figure 6.9. Find an expression for the output signal.
Figure 6.9 
Circuit of Example 6.3. The resistance has been picked so the break frequency turns out to be a
convenient value.
Solution 
The filter has the form of the lowpass filter analyzed in this section. The half-power frequency is
given by
The first component of the input signal is
For this component, the phasor is 
and the angular frequency is 
Therefore,
The transfer function of the circuit is given by ­Equation 6.9, which is repeated here for
convenience:
Evaluating the transfer function for the frequency of the first component 
we have
The output phasor for the 
component is simply the input phasor times the transfer function.
v
in
(
t
)=5 cos(
20πt
)+5 cos(
200πt
)+5 cos(
2000πt
)
f
B
=
1
2πRC
=
1
2π×(
1000/2π
)×10×
10
−6
=100 Hz
v
in1
(
t
)=5 cos(
20πt
)
V
in1
=5∠
0°
_
,
ω=20π.
f=ω/2π=10.
H(
f
)=
1
1+j(
f/
f
B
)
(
f=10
),
H(
10
)=
1
1+j(
10/100
)
=0.9950∠
−5.71°
_
f=10

Thus, we obtain
Hence, the output for the first component of the input signal is
Similarly, the second component of the input signal is
and we have
The frequency of the second component is 
Therefore, the output for the second component of the input signal is
Finally, for the third and last component, we have
Consequently, the output for the third component of the input signal is
Now, we can write an expression for the output signal by adding the output components:
Notice that each component of the input signal 
is treated differently by this filter. The 
component is nearly unaffected in amplitude and phase. The 
component is reduced in
V
out1
=H(
10
)×
V
in1
=(
0.9950∠
−5.71°
_
)×(
5∠
0°
_
)=4.975∠
−5.71°
_
v
out1
(
t
)=4.975 cos(
20πt−5.71°
)
v
in2
(
t
)=5 cos(
200πt
)
V
in2
=5∠
0°
_
f=100:
H(
100
)
=
1
1+j(
100/100
)
=0.7071∠
−45°
_
V
out2
=H(
100
)×
V
in2
=(
0.7071∠
−45°
_
)×(
5∠
0°
_
)=3.535∠
−45°
_
v
out2
(
t
)=3.535 cos(
200πt−45°
)
v
in3
(
t
)
=5 cos(
2000πt
)
V
in3
=5∠
0°
_
H(
1000
)
=
1
1+j(
1000/100
)
=0.0995∠
−84.29°
_
V
out3
=H(
1000
)×
V
in3
=(
0.0995∠
−84.29°
_
)×(
5∠
0°
_
)=0.4975∠
−84.29°
_
v
out3
(
t
)=0.4975 cos(
2000πt−84.29°
)
v
out
(
t
)=4.975 cos(
20πt−5.71°
)+3.535 cos(
200πt−45°
)
+0.4975 cos(
2000πt−84.29°
)
v
in
(
t
)
f=10
f=100

amplitude by a factor of 0.7071 and phase shifted by 
The amplitude of the 
component
is reduced by approximately an order of magnitude. Thus, the filter discriminates against the high-
frequency components.
Application of the First-Order Lowpass Filter
A simple application of the first-order lowpass filter is the tone control on an old-fashion AM radio. The
tone control adjusts the resistance and, therefore, the break frequency of the filter. Suppose that we are
listening to an interesting news item from a distant radio station with an AM radio and lightning storms
are causing electrical noise. It turns out that the components of voice signals are concentrated in the low
end of the audible-frequency range. On the other hand, the noise caused by lightning has roughly equal-
amplitude components at all frequencies. In this situation, we could adjust the tone control to lower the
break frequency. Then, the high-frequency noise components would be rejected, while most of the voice
components would be passed. In this way, we can improve the ratio of desired signal power to noise
power produced by the loudspeaker and make the news more intelligible.
Using Phasors with Components of Different Frequencies
Recall that phasors can be combined only for sinusoids with the same frequency. It is important to
understand that we should not add the phasors for components with different frequencies. Thus, in the
preceding example, we used phasors to find the output components as functions of time, which we then
added.
We should not add the phasors for components with different frequencies.
Exercise 6.4 
Derive an expression for the transfer function 
of the filter shown in Figure 6.10. Show
that H(f ) takes the same form as Equation 6.9 if we define 
−45°.
f=1000
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
f
B
=R/2πL.

Figure 6.10 
Another first-order lowpass filter; see Exercise 6.4.
Exercise 6.5 
Suppose that the input signal for the circuit shown in Figure 6.11 is given by
Figure 6.11 
Circuit for Exercise 6.5.
Find an expression for the output signal 
Answer 
v
in
(
t
)=10 cos(
40πt
)+5 cos(
1000πt
)+5 cos(
2π
10
4
t
)
v
out
(
t
).
v
out
(
t
)=9.95 cos(
40πt−5.71°
)+1.86 cos(
1000πt−68.2°
)
+0.100 cos(
2π
10
4
t−88.9°
)

6.3 Decibels, the Cascade Connection, and Logarithmic
Frequency Scales
In comparing the performance of various filters, it is helpful to express the magnitudes of the transfer
functions in decibels. To convert a transfer-function magnitude to decibels, we multiply the common
logarithm (base 10) of the transfer-function magnitude by 20:
(A transfer function is a ratio of voltages and is converted to decibels as 20 times the logarithm of the
ratio. On the other hand, ratios of powers are converted to decibels by taking 10 times the logarithm of
the ratio.)
Table 6.2 shows the decibel equivalents for selected values of transfer-function magnitude. Notice that
the decibel equivalents are positive for magnitudes greater than unity, whereas the decibel equivalents
are negative for magnitudes less than unity.
Table 6.2 Transfer-Function Magnitudes and Their Decibel Equivalents
100
40
10
20
2
6
3
1
0
1/2
0.1
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=20log|H(
f
)|
(6.12)
|H(
f
)|
|H(
f
)
|
dB
2
1/
2
−3
−6
−20

0.01
In many applications, the ability of a filter to strongly reject signals in a given frequency band is of
primary importance. For example, a common problem associated with audio signals is that a small
amount of the ac power line voltage can inadvertently be added to the signal. When applied to a
loudspeaker, this 60-Hz component produces a disagreeable hum. (Actually, this problem is rapidly
becoming a thing of the past as digital technologies replace analog.)
Usually, we approach this problem by trying to eliminate the electrical path by which the power line
voltage is added to the desired audio signal. However, this is sometimes not possible. Then, we could
try to design a filter that rejects the 60-Hz component and passes components at other frequencies. The
magnitude of a filter transfer function to accomplish this is shown in Figure 6.12(a). A filter such as this,
designed to eliminate components in a narrow range of frequencies, is called a notch filter.
Figure 6.12 
Transfer-function magnitude of a notch filter used to reduce hum in audio signals.
It turns out that to reduce a loud hum (as loud as a heated conversation) to be barely audible, the
transfer function must be 
or less for the 60-Hz component, which corresponds to 
or smaller. On the other hand, the transfer-function magnitude should be close to unity for the
components to be passed by the filter. We refer to the range of frequencies to be passed as the
passband.
When we plot 
without converting to decibels, it is difficult to show both values clearly on the same
plot. If we choose a scale that shows the passband magnitude, we cannot see whether the magnitude is
sufficiently small at 60 Hz. This is the case for the plot shown in Figure 6.12(a). On the other hand, if we
choose a linear scale that clearly shows the magnitude at 60 Hz, the magnitude would be way off scale
at other frequencies of interest.
However, when the magnitude is converted to decibels, both parts of the magnitude are readily seen.
−40
−80 dB
|H(
f
)|=
10
−4
|H(
f
)|

For example, Figure 6.12(b) shows the decibel equivalent for the magnitude plot shown in Figure
6.12(a). On this plot, we can see that the passband magnitude is approximately unity (0 dB) and that at
60 Hz, the magnitude is sufficiently small (less than 
).
Thus, one of the advantages of converting transfer-function magnitudes to decibels before plotting is
that very small and very large magnitudes can be displayed clearly on a single plot. We will see that
another advantage is that decibel plots for many filter circuits can be approximated by straight lines
(provided that a logarithmic scale is used for frequency). Furthermore, to understand some of the jargon
used by electrical engineers, we must be familiar with decibels.
One of the advantages of converting transfer-function magnitudes to decibels
before plotting is that very small and very large magnitudes can be displayed
clearly on a single plot.
Cascaded Two-Port Networks
When we connect the output terminals of one two-port circuit to the input terminals of another two-port
circuit, we say that we have a cascade connection. This is illustrated in Figure 6.13. Notice that the
output voltage of the first two-port network is the input voltage of the second two-port. The overall
transfer function is
Figure 6.13 
Cascade connection of two two-port circuits.
In the cascade connection, the output of one filter is connected to the input of a
second filter.
−80 dB

However, the output voltage of the cascade is the output of the second two-port (i.e., 
).
Furthermore, the input to the cascade is the input to the first two-port (i.e., 
). Thus,
Multiplying and dividing by 
we have
Now, the output voltage of the first two-port is the input to the second two-port (i.e., 
).
Hence,
Finally, we can write
Thus, the transfer function of the cascade connection is the product of the transfer functions of the
individual two-port networks. This fact can be extended to three or more two-ports connected in
cascade.
A potential source of difficulty in applying Equation 6.13 is that the transfer function of a two-port usually
depends on what is attached to its output terminals. Thus, in applying Equation 6.13, we must find 
with the second two-port attached.
In applying Equation 6.13, we must find 
with the second two-port
attached.
Taking the magnitudes of the terms on both sides of Equation 6.13 and expressing in decibels, we have
H(
f
)=
V
out
V
in
V
out
=
V
out2
V
in
=
V
in1
H(
f
)=
V
out2
V
in1
V
out1
,
H(
f
)=
V
out1
V
in1
×
V
out2
V
out1
V
out1
=
V
in2
H(
f
)=
V
out1
V
in1
×
V
out2
V
in2
H(
f
)=
H
1
(
f
)×
H
2
(
f
)
(6.13)
H
1
(
f
)
H
1
(
f
)

Using the fact that the logarithm of a product is equal to the sum of the logarithms of the terms in the
product, we have
which can be written as
Thus, in decibels, the individual transfer-function magnitudes are added to find the overall transfer-
function magnitude for a cascade connection.
In decibels, the individual transfer-function magnitudes are added to find the
overall transfer-function magnitude for a cascade connection.
Logarithmic Frequency Scales
We often use a logarithmic scale for frequency when plotting transfer functions. On a logarithmic scale,
the variable is multiplied by a given factor for equal increments of length along the axis. (On a linear
scale, equal lengths on the scale correspond to adding a given amount to the variable.) For example, a
logarithmic frequency scale is shown in Figure 6.14.
Figure 6.14 
Logarithmic frequency scale.
On a logarithmic scale, the variable is multiplied by a given factor for equal
20 log|H(
f
)|=20 log[ |
H
1
(
f
)|×|
H
2
(
f
)|
]
(6.14)
20 log|H(
f
)|=20 log|
H
1
(
f
)|+20 log|
H
2
(
f
)|
(6.15)
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=|
H
1
(
f
)
|
dB
+|
H
2
(
f
)
|
dB
(6.16)

increments of length along the axis.
A decade is a range of frequencies for which the ratio of the highest frequency to the lowest is 10. The
frequency range from 2 to 20 Hz is one decade. Similarly, the range from 50 to 5000 Hz is two decades.
(50 to 500 Hz is one decade, and 500 to 5000 Hz is another decade.)
An octave is a two-to-one change in frequency. For example, the range 10 to 20 Hz is one octave. The
range 2 to 16 kHz is three octaves.
Suppose that we have two frequencies 
and 
for which 
The number of decades between 
and 
is given by
in which we assume that the logarithm is base 10. The number of octaves between the two frequencies
is
The advantage of a logarithmic frequency scale compared with a linear scale is that the variations in the
magnitude or phase of a transfer function for a low range of frequency such as 10 to 20 Hz, as well as
the variations in a high range such as 10 to 20 MHz, can be clearly shown on a single plot. With a linear
scale, either the low range would be severely compressed or the high range would be off scale.
Example 6.4 Decibels and Logarithmic Frequency Scales
The transfer function magnitude of a certain filter is given by
a. What is the value of the transfer function magnitude in decibels for very low frequencies?
b. At what frequency 
is the transfer function magnitude 3 dB less than the value at very
low frequencies?
c. At what frequency 
is the transfer function magnitude 60 dB less than the value at very
low frequencies?
d. How many decades are between 
and 
How many octaves?
f
1
f
2
f
2
>
f
1
.
f
1
f
2
number of decades=log (
f
2
f
1
)
(6.17)
number of octaves=
log
2
 (
f
2
f
1
)=
log(
f
2
/
f
1
)
log(
2
)
(6.18)
|H(
f
)|=
10
1+
(
f/5000
)
6
f
3dB
f
60dB
f
3dB
f
60dB
?

Solution 
a. Very low frequencies are those approaching zero. For 
we have 
Then, we
have 
b. Because 
dB corresponds to 
we have
from which we find that 
c. Also, because 
corresponds to 1/1000, we have
from which we find that 
d. Clearly, 
is one decade higher than 
Using Equation 6.18, we
find that the number of octaves between the two frequencies is
Exercise 6.6 
Suppose that 
Find the decibel equivalent.
Answer 
Exercise 6.7 
a. Suppose that 
Find 
b. Repeat for 
Answer 
a. 
;
b. 
Exercise 6.8 
a. What frequency is two octaves higher than 1000 Hz?
b. Three octaves lower?
c. Two decades higher?
f=0,
|H(
0
)|=10.
|H(
0
)
|
dB
=20 log(
10
)=20 dB.
−3
1/
2
,
|H(
f
3dB
)|=
10
2
=
10
1+
(
f
3dB
/5000
)
6
f
3dB
=5000 Hz.
−60 dB
|H(
f
60dB
)|=
10
1000
=
10
1+
(
f
60dB
/5000
)
6
f
60dB
=50 kHz.
f
60dB
=50 kHz
f
3dB
=5 kHz.
log(
50/5
)
log(
2
)
=
1
log(
2
)
=3.32
|H(
f
)|=50.
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=34 dB.
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=15 dB.
|H(
f
)|.
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=30 dB.
|H(
f
)|=5.62
|H(
f
)|=31.6.

d. One decade lower?
Answer 
a. 4000 Hz is two octaves higher than 1000 Hz;
b. 125 Hz is three octaves lower than 1000 Hz;
c. 100 kHz is two decades higher than 1000 Hz;
d. 100 Hz is one decade lower than 1000 Hz.
Exercise 6.9 
a. What frequency is halfway between 100 and 1000 Hz on a logarithmic frequency scale?
b. On a linear frequency scale?
Answer 
a. 316.2 Hz is halfway between 100 and 1000 Hz on a logarithmic scale;
b. 550 Hz is halfway between 100 and 1000 Hz on a linear frequency scale.
Exercise 6.10 
a. How many decades are between 
and 
(This is the approximate range of
audible frequencies.)
b. How many octaves?
Answer 
a. Number of 
b. Number of 
f
1
=20 Hz
f
2
=15 kHz?
decades=log (
15 kHz
20 Hz
)=2.87
octaves=
log(
15000/20
)
log(
2
)
=9.55

6.4 Bode Plots
A Bode plot is a plot of the decibel magnitude of a network function versus frequency using a
logarithmic scale for frequency. Because it can clearly illustrate very large and very small magnitudes for
a wide range of frequencies on one plot, the Bode plot is particularly useful for displaying transfer
functions. Furthermore, it turns out that Bode plots of network functions can often be closely
approximated by straight-line segments, so they are relatively easy to draw. (Actually, we now use
computers to plot functions, so this advantage is not as important as it once was.) Terminology related
to these plots is frequently encountered in signal-processing literature. Finally, an understanding of
Bode plots enables us to make estimates quickly when dealing with transfer functions.
A Bode plot is a plot of the decibel magnitude of a network function versus
frequency using a logarithmic scale for frequency.
To illustrate Bode plot concepts, we consider the first-order lowpass transfer function of Equation 6.9,
repeated here for convenience:
The magnitude of this transfer function is given by Equation 6.10, which is
To convert the magnitude to decibels, we take 20 times the logarithm of the magnitude:
Substituting the expression for the transfer-function magnitude, we get
H(
f
)=
1
1+j(
f/
f
B
)
|H(
f
)|=
1
1+
(
f/
f
B
)
2
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=20 log|H(
f
)|
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=20 log 
1
1+
(
f/
f
B
)
2

Using the properties of the logarithm, we obtain
Of course, the logarithm of unity is zero. Therefore,
Finally, since 
we have
Notice that the value given by Equation 6.19 is approximately 0 dB for 
Thus, for low
frequencies, the transfer-function magnitude is approximated by the horizontal straight line shown in
Figure 6.15, labeled as the low-frequency asymptote.
Figure 6.15 
Magnitude Bode plot for the first-order lowpass filter.
The low-frequency asymptote is constant at 0 dB.
On the other hand, for 
Equation 6.19 is approximately
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=20 log(
1
)−20 log
1+
(
f
f
B
)
2
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=−20 log
1+
(
f
f
B
)
2
log(
x
)=
1
2
 log(
x
),
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=−10 log[1+
(
f
f
B
)
2
]
(6.19)
f≪
f
B
.
f>>
f
B
,
|H(
f
)
|
dB
≌−20 log (
f
f
B
)
(6.20)

Evaluating for various values of f, we obtain the results shown in Table 6.3. Plotting these values results
in the straight line shown sloping downward on the right-hand side of Figure 6.15, labeled as the high-
frequency asymptote. Notice that the two straight-line asymptotes intersect at the half-power
frequency 
For this reason, 
is also known as the corner frequency or as the break frequency.
Table 6.3 Values of the Approximate Expression (Equation 6.20) for Selected Frequencies
f
0
The high-frequency asymptote slopes downward at 20 dB/decade, starting from 0
dB at 
Notice that the two straight-line asymptotes intersect at the half-power frequency
Also, notice that the slope of the high-frequency asymptote is 
per decade of frequency. (This
slope can also be stated as 
per octave.)
If we evaluate Equation 6.19 at 
we find that
f
B
.
f
B
|H(
f
)
|
dB
f
B
2
f
B
−6
10
f
B
−20
100
f
B
−40
1000
f
B
−60
f
B
.
f
B
.
−20 dB
−6 dB
f=
f
B
,

Thus, the asymptotes are in error by only 3 dB at the corner frequency. The actual curve for 
is also shown in Figure 6.15.
The asymptotes are in error by only 3 dB at the corner frequency 
Phase Plot
The phase of the first-order lowpass transfer function is given by Equation 6.11, which is repeated here
for convenience:
Evaluating, we find that the phase approaches zero at very low frequencies, equals 
at the break
frequency, and approaches 
at high frequencies.
Figure 6.16 shows a plot of phase versus frequency. Notice that the curve can be approximated by the
following straight-line segments:
Figure 6.16 
Phase Bode plot for the first-order lowpass filter.
1. A horizontal line at zero for 
2. A sloping line from zero phase at 
to 
at 
|H(
f
B
)
|
dB
=−3 dB
|H(
f
)
|
dB
f
B
.
∠
H(
f
)
_
=−arctan (
f
f
B
)
−45°
−90°
f<
f
B
/10.
f
B
/10
−90°
10
f
B
.

3. A horizontal line at 
for 
The actual phase curve departs from these straight-line approximations by less than 6°. Hence, working
by hand, we could easily construct an approximate plot of phase.
Many circuit functions can be plotted by the methods we have demonstrated for the simple lowpass RC
circuit; however, we will not try to develop your skill at this to a high degree. Bode plots of amplitude and
phase for RLC circuits are easily produced by computer programs. We have shown the manual
approach to analyzing and drawing the Bode plot for the RC lowpass filter mainly to present the
concepts and terminology.
Exercise 6.11 
Sketch the approximate straight-line Bode magnitude and phase plots to scale for the circuit shown in
Figure 6.17.
Figure 6.17 
Circuit for Exercise 6.11.
Answer 
See Figure 6.18.
Figure 6.18 
Answers for Exercise 6.11.
−90°
f>10
f
B
.


6.5 First-Order Highpass Filters
The circuit shown in Figure 6.19 is called a first-order highpass filter. It can be analyzed in much the
same manner as the lowpass circuit considered earlier in this chapter. The resulting transfer function is
given by
Figure 6.19 
First-order highpass filter.
in which
Exercise 6.12 
Use circuit analysis to derive the transfer function for the circuit of Figure 6.19, and show that it can be
put into the form of Equations 6.21 and 6.22.
Magnitude and Phase of the Transfer Function
The magnitude of the transfer function is given by
This is plotted in Figure 6.20(a). Notice that the transfer-function magnitude goes to zero for dc 
H(
f
)=
V
out
V
in
=
j(
f/
f
B
)
1+j(
f/
f
B
)
(6.21)
f
B
=
1
2πRC
(6.22)
|H(
f
)|=
f/
f
B
1+
(
f/
f
B
)
2
(6.23)
(
f=0
).

For high frequencies 
the transfer-function magnitude approaches unity. Thus, this filter
passes high-frequency components and tends to reject low-frequency components. That is why the
circuit is called a highpass filter.
Figure 6.20 
Magnitude and phase for the first-order highpass transfer function.
Highpass filters are useful whenever we want to retain high-frequency
components and reject low-frequency components.
Highpass filters are useful whenever we want to retain high-frequency components and reject low-
frequency components. For example, suppose that we want to record warbler songs in a noisy
environment. It turns out that bird calls fall in the high-frequency portion of the audible range. The
audible range of frequencies is from 20 Hz to 15 kHz (approximately), and the calls of warblers fall
(mainly) in the range above 2 kHz. On the other hand, the noise may be concentrated at lower
frequencies. For example, heavy trucks rumbling down a bumpy road would produce strong noise
components lower in frequency than 2 kHz. To record singing warblers in the vicinity of such a noise
source, a highpass filter would be helpful. We would select R and C to achieve a half-power frequency 
of approximately 2 kHz. Then, the filter would pass the songs and reject some of the noise.
Recall that if the amplitude of a component is multiplied by a factor of 
the power that the
component can deliver to a resistance is multiplied by a factor of 1/2. For 
so
that, as in the case of the lowpass filter, 
is called the half-power frequency. (Here again, several
alternative names are corner frequency, 3-dB frequency, and break frequency.)
The phase of the highpass transfer function (Equation 6.21) is given by
(
f>>
f
B
),
f
B
1/
2
,
f=
f
B
, |H(
f
)|=1/
2
≌0.707,
f
B

A plot of the phase shift of the highpass filter is shown in Figure 6.20(b).
Bode Plots for the First-Order Highpass Filter
As we have seen, a convenient way to plot transfer functions is to use the Bode plot, in which the
magnitude is converted to decibels and a logarithmic frequency scale is used. In decibels, the
magnitude of the highpass transfer function is
This can be written as
For 
the second term on the right-hand side of Equation 6.25 is approximately zero. Thus, for 
we have
Evaluating this for selected values of f, we find the values given in Table 6.4. Plotting these values, we
obtain the low-frequency asymptote shown on the left-hand side of Figure 6.21(a). Notice that the low-
frequency asymptote slopes downward to the left at a rate of 20 dB per decade.
Table 6.4 Values of the Approximate Expression Given in Equation 6.26 for Selected
Frequencies
f
0
∠
H(
f
)
_
=90°−arctan (
f
f
B
)
(6.24)
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=20 log 
f/
f
B
1+
(
f/
f
B
)
2
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=20 log (
f
f
B
)−10 log [1+
(
f
f
B
)
2
]
(6.25)
f≪
f
B
,
f≪
f
B
,
|H(
f
)
|
dB
≌20 log (
f
f
B
)  for f≪
f
B
(6.26)
|H(
f
)
|
dB
f
B
f
B
/2
−6
f
B
/10
−20
f
B
/100
−40

Figure 6.21 
Bode plots for the first-order highpass filter.
For 
the magnitude given by Equation 6.25 is approximately 0 dB. Hence,
This is plotted as the high-frequency asymptote in Figure 6.21(a). Notice that the high-frequency
asymptote and the low-frequency asymptote meet at 
(That is why 
is sometimes called the
break frequency.)
The actual values of 
are also plotted in Figure 6.21(a). Notice that the actual value at 
is
Thus, the actual curve is only 3 dB from the asymptotes at 
For other
frequencies, the actual curve is closer to the asymptotes. The Bode phase plot is shown in Figure
6.21(b) along with straight-line approximations.
Example 6.5 Determination of the Break Frequency for a Highpass Filter
Suppose that we want a first-order highpass filter that has a transfer-function magnitude of 
at
Find the break frequency for this filter.
Solution 
Recall that the low-frequency asymptote slopes at a rate of 20 dB/decade. Thus, we must select 
to be
higher than 60 Hz. Employing Equation 6.17, we have
f>>
f
B
|H(
f
)
|
dB
≅0  for f>>
f
B
(6.27)
f=
f
B
.
f
B
|H(
f
)
|
dB
f=
f
B
|H(
f
B
)
|
dB
=−3 dB.
f=
f
B
.
−30 dB
f=60 Hz.
f
B
30 dB
20 dB/decade
=1.5 decades

This is equivalent to
which yields
We often need a filter that greatly reduces the amplitude of a component at a given frequency, but has a
negligible effect on components at nearby frequencies. The preceding example shows that to reduce the
amplitude of a given component by a large factor by using a first-order filter, we must place the break
frequency far from the component to be rejected. Then, components at other frequencies are also
affected. This is a problem that can only be solved by using more complex (higher order) filter circuits.
We consider second-order filters later in the chapter.
Exercise 6.13 
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 6.22. Show that the transfer function of this filter is given by
Equation 6.21 if the half-power frequency is defined to be 
Figure 6.22 
Circuit for Exercise 6.13.
Exercise 6.14 
Suppose that we need a first-order RC highpass filter that reduces the amplitude of a component at a
frequency of 1 kHz by 50 dB. The resistance is to be 
Find the half-power frequency and the
capacitance.
Answer 
log (
f
B
60
)=1.5
f
B
60
=
10
1.5
=31.6
f
B
≌1900 Hz
f
B
=R/2πL.
1 kΩ.
f
B
=316 kHz, C=503 pF.


6.6 Series Resonance
In this section and the next, we consider resonant circuits. These circuits form the basis for filters that
have better performance (in passing desired signals and rejecting undesired signals that are relatively
close in frequency) than first-order filters. Such filters are useful in radio receivers, for example. Another
application is a notch filter to remove 60-Hz interference from audio signals. Resonance is a
phenomenon that can be observed in mechanical systems as well as in electrical circuits. For example,
a guitar string is a resonant mechanical system.
Resonance is a phenomenon that can be observed in mechanical systems and
electrical circuits.
We will see that when a sinusoidal source of the proper frequency is applied to a resonant circuit,
voltages much larger than the source voltage can appear in the circuit. The familiar story of opera
singers using their voices to break wine goblets is an example of a mechanically resonant structure (the
goblet) driven by an approximately sinusoidal source (the sound), resulting in vibrations in the glass of
sufficient magnitude to cause fracture. Another example is the Tacoma Narrows Bridge collapse in
1940. Driven by wind forces, a resonance of the bridge structure resulted in oscillations that tore the
bridge apart. Some other examples of mechanical resonant systems are the strings of musical
instruments, bells, the air column in an organ pipe, and a mass suspended by a spring.
You can find a short video clip of the bridge in motion on the internet.
Consider the series circuit shown in Figure 6.23. The impedance seen by the source in this circuit is
given by

Figure 6.23 
The series resonant circuit.
The resonant frequency 
is defined to be the frequency at which the
impedance is purely resistive (i.e., the total reactance is zero).
The resonant frequency 
is defined to be the frequency at which the impedance is purely resistive
(i.e., the total reactance is zero). For the reactance to equal zero, the impedance of the inductance must
equal the impedance of the capacitance in magnitude. Thus, we have
Solving for the resonant frequency, we get
The quality factor 
is defined to be the ratio of the reactance of the inductance at the resonant
frequency to the resistance:
The quality factor 
of a series circuit is defined to be the ratio of the reactance
of the inductance at the resonant frequency to the resistance.
Z
s
(
f
)=j2πfL+R−j 
1
2πfC
(6.28)
f
0
f
0
2π
f
0
L=
1
2π
f
0
C
(6.29)
f
0
=
1
2π
LC
(6.30)
Q
s
Q
s

Solving Equation 6.29 for L and substituting into Equation 6.31, we obtain
Using Equations 6.30 and 6.31 to substitute into Equation 6.28, we can eventually reduce the equation
for the impedance to
Thus, the series resonant circuit is characterized by its quality factor 
and resonant frequency 
Plots of the normalized magnitude and the phase of the impedance versus normalized frequency 
are shown in Figure 6.24. Notice that the impedance magnitude is minimum at the resonant frequency.
As the quality factor becomes larger, the minimum becomes sharper.
Figure 6.24 
Plots of normalized magnitude and phase for the impedance of the series resonant circuit versus
frequency.
Series Resonant Circuit as a Bandpass Filter
Referring to Figure 6.23, the current is given by
Q
s
=
2π
f
0
L
R
(6.31)
Q
s
=
1
2π
f
0
CR
(6.32)
Z
s
(
f
)=R [1+j
Q
s
 (
f
f
0
−
f
0
f
)]
(6.33)
Q
s
f
0
.
f/
f
0
I=
V
s
Z
s
(
f
)

Using Equation 6.33 to substitute for the impedance, we have
The voltage across the resistance is
Dividing by 
we obtain the transfer function
Plots of the magnitude of 
versus f are shown in Figure 6.25 for various values of 
Figure 6.25 
Plots of the transfer-function magnitude 
for the series resonant bandpass-filter circuit.
Consider a (sinusoidal) source of constant amplitude and variable frequency. At low frequencies, the
impedance magnitude of the capacitance is large, the current I is small in magnitude, and 
is small in
magnitude (compared with 
). At resonance, the total impedance magnitude reaches a minimum
(because the reactances of the inductance and the capacitance cancel), the current magnitude is
maximum, and 
At high frequencies, the impedance of the inductance is large, the current
magnitude is small, and 
is small in magnitude.
Now, suppose that we apply a source signal having components ranging in frequency about the
resonant frequency. The components of the source that are close to the resonant frequency appear
across the resistance with little change in amplitude. However, components that are higher or lower in
I=
V
s
/R
1+j
Q
s
(
f/
f
0
−
f
0
/f
)
V
R
=RI=
V
s
1+j
Q
s
(
f/
f
0
−
f
0
/f
)
V
s
,
V
R
V
s
=
1
1+j
Q
s
(
f/
f
0
−
f
0
/f
)
V
R
/
V
s
Q
s
.
| 
V
R
/
V
S
|
V
R
V
s
V
R
=
V
s
.
V
R

frequency are significantly reduced in amplitude. Thus, a band of components centered at the resonant
frequency is passed while components farther from the resonant frequency are (partly) rejected. We say
that the resonant circuit behaves as a bandpass filter.
The resonant circuit behaves as a bandpass filter.
Recall that the half-power frequencies of a filter are the frequencies for which the transfer-function
magnitude has fallen from its maximum by a factor of 
For the series resonant circuit, there
are two half-power frequencies 
and 
This is illustrated in Figure 6.26.
Figure 6.26 
The bandwidth B is equal to the difference between the half-power frequencies.
The bandwidth B of this filter is the difference between the half-power frequencies:
For the series resonant circuit, it can be shown that
Furthermore, for 
the half-power frequencies are given by the approximate expressions
and
1/
2
≅0.707.
f
L
f
H
.
B=
f
H
−
f
L
(6.34)
B=
f
0
Q
s
(6.35)
Q
s
>>1,
f
H
≅
f
0
+
B
2
(6.36)

 Example 6.6 Series Resonant Circuit
Consider the series resonant circuit shown in Figure 6.27. Compute the resonant frequency, the
bandwidth, and the half-power frequencies. Assuming that the frequency of the source is the same
as the resonant frequency, find the phasor voltages across the elements and draw a phasor
diagram.
Figure 6.27 
Series resonant circuit of Example 6.6. (The component values have been selected so the resonant
frequency and 
turn out to be round numbers.)
Solution 
First, we use Equation 6.30 to compute the resonant frequency:
The quality factor is given by Equation 6.31
The bandwidth is given by Equation 6.35
Next, we use Equations 6.36 and 6.37 to find the approximate half-power frequencies:
At resonance, the impedance of the inductance and capacitance are
f
L
≅
f
0
−
B
2
(6.37)
Q
s
f
0
=
1
2π
LC
=
1
2π
0.1592×0.1592×
10
−6
=1000 Hz
Q
s
=
2π
f
0
L
R
=
2π×1000×0.1592
100
=10
B=
f
0
Q
s
=
1000
10
=100 Hz
f
H
≅
f
0
+
B
2
=1000+
100
2
=1050 Hz
f
L
≅
f
0
−
B
2
=1000−
100
2
=950 Hz

As expected, the reactances are equal in magnitude at the resonant frequency. The total impedance
of the circuit is
The phasor current is given by
The voltages across the elements are
The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 6.28. Notice that the voltages across the inductance and
capacitance are much larger than the source voltage in magnitude. Nevertheless, Kirchhoff's voltage
law is satisfied because 
and 
are out of phase and cancel.
Figure 6.28 
Phasor diagram for Example 6.6.
In Example 6.6, we found that the voltage magnitudes across the inductance and capacitance are 
times higher than the source voltage. Thus, a higher quality factor leads to higher voltage magnification.
This is similar to the large vibrations that can be caused in a wine goblet by an opera singer's voice.
Exercise 6.15 
Z
L
=j2π
f
0
L=j2π×1000×0.1592=j1000 Ω
Z
C
=−j 
1
2π
f
0
C
=−j 
1
2π×1000×0.1592×
10
−6
=−j1000 Ω
Z
s
=R+
Z
L
+
Z
C
=100+j1000−j1000=100 Ω
I=
V
s
Z
s
=
1∠
0°
_
100
=0.01∠
0°
_
V
R
=RI=100×0.01∠
0°
_
=1∠
0°
_
V
L
=
Z
L
I=j1000×0.01∠
0°
_
=10∠
90°
_
V
C
=
Z
C
I=−j1000×0.01∠
0°
_
=10∠
−90°
_
V
L
V
C
Q
s

Determine the R and C values for a series resonant circuit that has 
and 
Find the bandwidth and approximate half-power frequencies of the circuit.
Answer 
Exercise 6.16 
Suppose that a voltage 
at a frequency of 1 MHz is applied to the circuit of Exercise 6.15.
Find the phasor voltages across the resistance, capacitance, and inductance.
Answer 
Exercise 6.17 
Find the R and L values for a series resonant circuit that has 
a resonant frequency of 5 MHz,
and a bandwidth of 200 kHz.
Answer 
L=10 μH, 
f
0
=1 MHz,
Q
s
=50.
C=2533 pF, R=1.257 Ω, B=20 kHz, 
f
L
≅990 kHz, 
f
H
≅1010 kHz.
V
s
=1∠
0°
_
V
R
=1∠
0°
_
, 
V
C
=50∠
−90°
_
, 
V
L
=50∠
90°
_
.
C=470 pF,
R=2.709 Ω, L=2.156 μH.

6.7 Parallel Resonance
Another type of resonant circuit known as a parallel resonant circuit is shown in Figure 6.29. The
impedance of this circuit is given by
Figure 6.29 
The parallel resonant circuit.
As in the series resonant circuit, the resonant frequency 
is the frequency for which the impedance
is purely resistive. This occurs when the imaginary parts of the denominator of Equation 6.38 cancel.
Thus, we have
Solving for the resonant frequency, we get
which is exactly the same as the expression for the resonant frequency of the series circuit discussed in
Section 6.6.
For the parallel circuit, we define the quality factor 
as the ratio of the resistance to the reactance of
the inductance at resonance, given by
Notice that this is the reciprocal of the expression for the quality factor 
of the series resonant circuit.
Solving Equation 6.40 for L and substituting into Equation 6.41, we obtain another expression for the
quality factor:
Z
p
=
1
1/R+j2πfC−j(
1/2πfL
)
(6.38)
f
0
2π
f
0
C=
1
2π
f
0
L
(6.39)
f
0
=
1
2π
LC
(6.40)
Q
p
Q
p
=
R
2π
f
0
L
(6.41)
Q
s

Notice that the formula for 
of a parallel circuit in terms of the circuit elements
is the reciprocal of the formula for 
of a series circuit.
If we solve Equations 6.41 and 6.42 for L and C, respectively, and then substitute into Equation 6.38,
we eventually obtain
The voltage across the parallel resonant circuit is the product of the phasor current and the impedance:
Suppose that we hold the current constant in magnitude and change the frequency. Then, the
magnitude of the voltage is a function of frequency. A plot of voltage magnitude for the parallel resonant
circuit is shown in Figure 6.30. Notice that the voltage magnitude reaches its maximum 
at
the resonant frequency. These curves have the same shape as the curves shown in Figures 6.25 and
6.26 for the voltage transfer function of the series resonant circuit.
Figure 6.30 
Voltage across the parallel resonant circuit for a constant-amplitude variable-frequency current source.
Q
p
=2π
f
0
CR
(6.42)
Q
p
Q
s
Z
p
=
R
1+j
Q
p
(
f/
f
0
−
f
0
/f
)
(6.43)
V
out
=
IR
1+j
Q
p
(
f/
f
0
−
f
0
/f
)
(6.44)
V
omax
=RI

The half-power frequencies 
and 
are defined to be the frequencies at which the voltage magnitude
reaches the maximum value times 
The bandwidth of the circuit is given by
It can be shown that the bandwidth is related to the resonant frequency and quality factor by the
expression
Example 6.7 Parallel Resonant Circuit
Find the L and C values for a parallel resonant circuit that has 
and
If 
draw the phasor diagram showing the currents through each of the
elements in the circuit at resonance.
Solution 
First, we compute the quality factor of the circuit. Rearranging ­Equation 6.46 and substituting
values, we have
Solving Equation 6.41 for the inductance and substituting values, we get
Similarly, using Equation 6.42, we find that
At resonance, the voltage is given by
and the currents are given by
f
L
f
H
1/
2
.
B=
f
H
−
f
L
(6.45)
B=
f
0
Q
p
(6.46)
R=10 kΩ, 
f
0
=1 MHz,
B=100 kHz.
I=
10
−3
∠
0°
_
 A,
Q
p
=
f
0
B
=
10
6
10
5
=10
L=
R
2π
f
0
Q
p
=
10
4
2π×
10
6
×10
=159.2 μH
C=
Q
p
2π
f
0
R
=
10
2π×
10
6
×
10
4
=159.2 pF
V
out
=IR=(
10
−3
∠
0°
_
)×
10
4
=10∠
0°
_
 V
I
R
=
V
out
R
=
10∠
0°
_
10
4
=
10
−3
∠
0°
_
 A
I
L
=
V
out
j2π
f
0
L
=
10∠
0°
_
j
10
3
=
10
−2
∠
−90°
_
 A
I
C
=
V
out
−j/2π
f
0
C
=
10∠
0°
_
−j
10
3
=
10
−2
∠
90°
_
 A

The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 6.31. Notice that the currents through the inductance and
capacitance are larger in magnitude than the applied source current. However, since 
and 
are
out of phase, they cancel.
Figure 6.31 
Phasor diagram for Example 6.7.
Exercise 6.18 
A parallel resonant circuit has 
and 
Find the resonant frequency, quality
factor, and bandwidth.
Answer 
Exercise 6.19 
A parallel resonant circuit has 
and 
Find L and C.
Answer 
I
C
I
L
R=10 kΩ, L=100 μH,
C=500 pF.
f
0
=711.8 kHz, 
Q
p
=22.36, B=31.83 kHz.
f
0
=10 MHz, B=200 kHz,
R=1 kΩ.
L=0.3183 μH, C=795.8 pF.

6.8 Ideal and Second-Order Filters
Ideal Filters
In discussing filter performance, it is helpful to consider ideal filters. An ideal filter passes components in
the desired frequency range with no change in amplitude or phase and totally rejects the components in
the undesired frequency range. Depending on the locations of the frequencies to be passed and
rejected, we have different types of filters: lowpass, highpass, bandpass, and band reject. The transfer
functions 
of the four types of ideal filters are shown in Figure 6.32.
Figure 6.32 
Transfer functions of ideal filters.
An ideal lowpass filter [Figure 6.32(a)] passes components below its cutoff frequency 
and
rejects components higher in frequency than 
An ideal highpass filter [Figure 6.32(b)] passes components above its cutoff frequency 
and
rejects components lower in frequency than 
An ideal bandpass filter [Figure 6.32(c)] passes components that lie between its cutoff frequencies
(
and 
) and rejects components outside that range.
An ideal band-reject filter [Figure 6.32(d)], which is also called a notch filter, rejects components
that lie between its cutoff frequencies (
and 
) and passes components outside that range.
As we have seen earlier in this chapter, filters are useful whenever a signal contains desired
components in one range of frequency and undesired components in another range of frequency. For
example, Figure 6.33(a) shows a 1-kHz sine wave that has been corrupted by high-frequency noise. By
passing this noisy signal through a lowpass filter, the noise is eliminated.
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
f
H
f
H
.
f
L
f
L
.

f
L
f
H

f
L
f
H

Figure 6.33 
The input signal 
consists of a 1-kHz sine wave plus high-frequency noise. By passing 
through
an ideal lowpass filter with the proper cutoff frequency, the sine wave is passed and the noise is
rejected, resulting in a clean output signal.
Example 6.8 Cascaded Ideal Filters
Electrocardiographic (ECG) signals are voltages between electrodes placed on the torso, arms, or
legs of a medical patent. ECG signals are used by cardiologists to help diagnose various types of
heart disease.
Unfortunately, the voltages between the electrodes can contain undesirable noises (called "artifacts"
in medical jargon). The undesirable components are dc and frequency components below 0.5 Hz
known as "baseline wander", a large 60-Hz sinewave due to power-line interference, and "muscle
noise" with components above about 100 Hz caused by muscle movement, such as when the
patient is on a treadmill. The part of the ECG signal of interest to cardiologists lies between about
0.5 Hz and 100 Hz.
v
in
v
in

We wish to design a cascade connection of ideal filters to eliminate the noise and preserve the ECG
signal components of interest.
Solution 
First, we can use an ideal highpass filter having a transfer function magnitude 
as shown in
Figure 6.34(a) to eliminate the dc and baseline wander with components below 0.5 Hz. Notice that
we have used logarithmic frequency scales in Figure 6.34 to show low and high frequencies more
clearly than could be accomplished with a linear frequency scale.
Figure 6.34 
Cascaded filters of Example 6.8.
|
H
1
(
f
)|

Next, we can use an ideal lowpass filter having a transfer function magnitude 
as shown in
Figure 6.34(b) to eliminate the muscle noise components above 100 Hz.
Finally, we employ a band-reject filter having a transfer function magnitude 
as shown in
Figure 6.34(c) with cutoff frequencies slightly above 60 Hz and slightly below 60 Hz to eliminate the
power line interference. We should strive to keep the cutoff frequencies of the band-reject filter very
close to 60 Hz to avoid removing too many components of the ECG.
The overall transfer function magnitude 
is shown in Figure
6.34(d) and the cascaded filters are shown in Figure 6.34(e).
Unfortunately, it is not possible to construct ideal filters—they can only be approximated by real circuits.
As the circuits are allowed to increase in complexity, it is possible to design filters that do a better job of
rejecting unwanted components and retaining the desired components. Thus, we will see that second-
order circuits perform better (i.e., closer to ideal) than the first-order circuits considered earlier in this
chapter.
Second-Order Lowpass Filter
Figure 6.35(a) shows a second-order lowpass filter based on the series resonant circuit of Section 6.6.
The filter is characterized by its resonant frequency 
and quality factor 
which are given by
Equations 6.30 and 6.31. It can be shown that the transfer function for this circuit is given by
|
H
2
(
f
)|
|
H
3
(
f
)|
|H(
f
)|=|
H
1
(
f
)|×|
H
2
(
f
)|×|
H
3
(
f
)|
f
0
Q
s
,

Figure 6.35 
Lowpass filter circuits and their transfer-function magnitudes versus frequency.
Bode plots of the transfer-function magnitude are shown in Figure 6.35(c). Notice that for 
the
transfer-function magnitude reaches a high peak in the vicinity of the resonant frequency. Usually, in
designing a filter, we want the gain to be approximately constant in the passband, and we select 
(Actually, 
is the highest value for which the transfer-function magnitude does not display an
increase before rolling off. The transfer function for this value of 
is said to be maximally flat, is also
known as a Butterworth function, and is often used for lowpass filters.)
Comparison of First- and Second-Order Filters
For comparison, a first-order lowpass filter is shown in Figure 6.35(b), and the Bode plot of its transfer
function is shown in Figure 6.35(c). The first-order circuit is characterized by its half-power frequency 
(We have selected 
in making the comparison.) Notice that above 
the
magnitude of the transfer function falls more rapidly for the second-order filter than for the first-order
filter (
versus 
).
H(
f
)=
V
out
V
in
=
−j
Q
s
(
f
0
/f
)
1+j
Q
s
(
f/
f
0
−
f
0
/f
)
(6.47)
Q
s
>>1,
Q
s
≅1.
Q
s
=0.707
Q
s
f
B
=1/(
2πRC
).
f
B
=
f
0
f
0

−40 dB/decade
−20 dB/decade

The transfer-function magnitude of a second-order lowpass filter declines 40 dB
per decade well above the break frequency, whereas the transfer-function
magnitude for the first-order filter declines at only 20 dB per decade. Thus, the
second-order filter is a better approximation to an ideal lowpass filter.
Second-Order Highpass Filter
A second-order highpass filter is shown in Figure 6.36(a), and its magnitude Bode plot is shown in
Figure 6.36(b). Here again, we usually want the magnitude to be as nearly constant as possible in the
passband, so we select 
(In other words, we usually want to design the filter to approximate an
ideal filter as closely as possible.)
Figure 6.36 
Second-order highpass filter and its transfer-function magnitude versus frequency for several values of
Second-Order Bandpass Filter
A second-order bandpass filter is shown in Figure 6.37(a), and its magnitude Bode plot is shown in
Figure 6.37(b). The half-power bandwidth B is given by Equations 6.34 and 6.35, which state that
Q
s
≅1.
Q
s
.

Figure 6.37 
Second-order bandpass filter and its transfer-function magnitude versus frequency for several values of
and
Second-Order Band-Reject (Notch) Filter
A second-order band-reject filter is shown in Figure 6.38(a) and its magnitude Bode plot is shown in
Figure 6.38(b). In theory, the magnitude of the transfer function is zero for 
[In decibels, this
corresponds to 
] However, real inductors contain series resistance, so rejection of the 
component is not perfect for actual circuits.
Q
s
.
B=
f
H
−
f
L
B=
f
0
Q
s
f=
f
0
.
|H(
f
0
)|=−∞ dB.
f
0

Figure 6.38 
Second-order band-reject filter and its transfer-function magnitude versus frequency for several values
of 
Example 6.9 Filter Design
Suppose that we need a filter that passes components higher in frequency than 1 kHz and rejects
components lower than 1 kHz. Select a suitable second-order circuit configuration, choose
and specify the values required for the other components.
Solution 
We need to pass high-frequency components and reject low-frequency components. Therefore, we
need a highpass filter. The circuit diagram for a second-order highpass filter is shown in Figure
6.36(a), and the corresponding transfer-function magnitude plots are shown in Figure 6.36(b).
Usually, we want the transfer function to be approximately constant in the passband. Thus, we
choose 
We select 
so the components above 1 kHz are passed, while lower-
frequency components are (at least partly) rejected. Solving Equation 6.30, for the capacitance and
substituting values, we have
Solving Equation 6.31 for the resistance and substituting values, we get
The circuit and values are shown in Figure 6.39.
Q
s
.
L=50 mH,
Q
s
≅1.
f
0
≅1 kHz,
C
=
1
(
2π
)
2
f
0
2
L
=
1
(
2π
)
2
×
10
6
×50×
10
−3
=0.507 μF
R=
2π
f
0
L
Q
s
=
2π×1000×50×
10
−3
1
=314.1 Ω

Figure 6.39 
Filter designed in Example 6.9.
There are several reasons why we might not use the exact values that we calculated for the
components in the last example. First, fixed-value capacitors and resistors are readily available only in
certain standard values. Furthermore, the design called for a filter to reject components lower than 1
kHz and pass components higher than 1 kHz. We arbitrarily selected 
Depending on whether
it is more important to reject the low frequencies or to pass the high frequencies without change in
amplitude, a slightly higher or lower value for 
could be better. Finally, our choice of 
was
somewhat arbitrary. In practice, we could choose variable components by using the calculations as a
starting point. Then, we would adjust the filter experimentally for the most satisfactory performance.
Exercise 6.20 
Suppose that we need a filter that passes components lower in frequency than 5 kHz and rejects
components higher than 5 kHz. Select a suitable second-order circuit configuration, choose 
and specify the values required for the other components.
Answer 
See Figure 6.40.
Figure 6.40 
Answer for Exercise 6.20.
Exercise 6.21 
Suppose that we want a filter that passes components between 
and 
Higher
and lower frequencies are to be rejected. Design a circuit using a 1-mH inductance.
f
0
=1 kHz.
f
0
Q
s
L=5 mH,
f
L
=45 kHz
f
H
=55 kHz.

Answer 
We need a bandpass filter with 
and 
The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 6.41.
Figure 6.41 
Answer for Exercise 6.21.
f
0
≅50 kHz
Q
s
=5.

6.9 Bode Plots with MATLAB
So far in this chapter, we have used manual methods to illustrate Bode-plot concepts for simple filters.
While manual methods can be extended to more complex circuits, it is often quicker and more accurate
to use computer software to produce Bode plots.
Because subtle programming errors can result in grossly erroneous results, it is good practice to employ
independent checks on computer-generated Bode plots. For example, a complex circuit can often be
readily analyzed manually at very high and at very low frequencies. At very low frequencies, the
inductances behave as short circuits and the capacitances behave as open circuits, as we discussed in
Section 4.2. Thus, we can replace the inductances by shorts and the capacitances by opens and
analyze the simplified circuit to determine the value of the transfer function at low frequencies, providing
an independent check on the plots produced by a computer.
Manual analysis at dc and very high frequencies often provides some easy
checks on computer-aided Bode plots.
Similarly, at very high frequencies, the inductances become open circuits, and the capacitances become
shorts. Next, we illustrate this approach with an example.
Example 6.10 Computer-Generated Bode Plot
The circuit of Figure 6.42 is a notch filter. Use MATLAB to generate a magnitude Bode plot of the
transfer function 
with frequency ranging from 10 Hz to 100 kHz. Then, analyze the
circuit manually at very high and very low frequencies to provide checks on the plot. Use the plot to
determine the frequency of maximum attenuation and the value of the transfer function at that
frequency.
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in

Figure 6.42 
Filter of Example 6.10.
Solution 
Using the voltage-divider principle, we can write the transfer function for the filter as
A MATLAB m-file that produces the Bode plot is:
clear
% Enter the component values:
R1 = 90; R2 = 10; R3 = 100;
L = 0.1; C = 1e-7;
% The following command generates 1000 frequency values
% per decade, evenly spaced from 10ˆ1 to 10ˆ5 Hz
% on a logarithmic scale:
f = logspace(1,5,4000);
w = 2*pi*f;
% Evaluate the transfer function for each frequency.
% As usual, we are using i in place of j:
H = R3./(R1+R3+1./(i*w*C + 1./(R2 + i*w*L)));
% Convert the magnitude values to decibels and plot:
semilogx(f,20*log10(abs(H))) 
The resulting plot is shown in Figure 6.43. This circuit is called a notch filter because it strongly
rejects components in the vicinity of 1591 Hz while passing higher and lower frequencies. The
H(
f
)=
V
out
V
in
=
R
3
R
1
+
R
3
+1/[ jωC+1/(
R
2
+jωL
)
]

maximum attenuation is 60 dB.
The m-file is named Example_6_10 and appears in the MATLAB folder, and if you have access to
MATLAB, you can run it to see the result. (See Appendix E for information on how to access the
MATLAB folder.) Then, you can use the toolbar on the figure screen to magnify a portion of the plot
and obtain the notch frequency and maximum attenuation with excellent accuracy.
The command
f = logspace(1,5,4000)
generates an array of 4000 frequency values, starting at 
and ending at 
evenly
spaced on a logarithmic scale with 1000 points per decade. (Typically, we might start with 100 points
per decade, but this transfer function changes very rapidly in the vicinity of 1590 Hz, so we
increased the number of points to more accurately determine the location and depth of the notch.)
As a partial check on our analysis and program, we analyze the circuit at 
(dc) to determine the
transfer function at very low frequencies. To do so, we replace the inductance by a short and the
capacitance by an open circuit. Then, the circuit becomes a simple resistive voltage divider
consisting of 
and 
Therefore, we have
In decibels, this becomes
which agrees very well with the plotted value at 10 Hz.
For a second check, we replace the capacitance by a short circuit and the inductance by an open
circuit to determine the value of the transfer function at very high frequencies. Then, the circuit again
becomes a simple resistive voltage divider consisting of 
and 
Thus, we have
In decibels, this becomes
10
1
 Hz
10
5
 Hz,
f=0
R
1
, 
R
2
,
R
3
.
H(
0
)=
V
out
V
in
=
R
3
R
1
+
R
2
+
R
3
=0.5
H
dB
(
0
)=20 log(
0.5
)=−6 dB
R
1
R
3
.
H(
∞
)=
R
3
R
1
+
R
3
=0.5263
H
dB
(
∞
)=20 log(
0.5263
)=−5.575 dB

which agrees very closely with the value plotted at 100 kHz.
Exercise 6.22 
If you have access to MATLAB, run the m-file Example_6_10 that is contained in the MATLAB folder.
Answer 
The resulting plot should be very similar to Figure 6.43.
Figure 6.43 
Bode plot for Example 6.10 produced using MATLAB.

6.10 Digital Signal Processing
So far, we have introduced the concepts related to filters in the context of RLC circuits. However, many
modern systems make use of a more sophisticated technology called digital signal processing (DSP).
In using DSP to filter a signal, the analog input signal x(t) is converted to digital form (a sequence of
numbers) by an analog-to-digital converter (ADC). A digital computer then uses the digitized input
signal to compute a sequence of values for the output signal. Finally, if desired, the computed values
are converted to analog form by a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) to produce the output signal y(t).
The generic block diagram of a DSP system is shown in Figure 6.44.
Figure 6.44 
Generic block diagram of a digital signal-processing (DSP) system.
Besides filtering, many other operations, such as speech recognition, can be performed by DSP
systems. DSP was used in the early days of the Space Telescope to focus blurry images resulting from
an error in the telescope's design. High-definition televisions, digital cell phones, and MP3 music players
are examples of products that have been made possible by DSP technology.
DSP is a large and rapidly evolving field that will continue to produce novel products. We discuss digital
filters very briefly to give you a glimpse of this exciting field.
Conversion of Signals from Analog to Digital Form
Analog signals are converted to digital form by a DAC in a two-step process. First, the analog signal is
sampled (i.e., measured) at periodic points in time. Then, a code word is assigned to represent the
approximate value of each sample. Usually, the code words consist of binary symbols. This process is
illustrated in Figure 6.45, in which each sample value is represented by a three-bit code word
corresponding to the amplitude zone into which the sample falls. Thus, each sample value is converted
into a code word, which in turn can be represented by a digital waveform as shown in the figure.

Figure 6.45 
An analog signal is converted to an approximate digital equivalent by sampling. Each sample value is
represented by a three-bit code word. (Practical converters use longer code words, and the width 
of
each amplitude zone is much smaller.)
The rate 
at which a signal must be sampled depends on the frequencies of the signal components.
We have seen that all real signals can be considered to consist of sinusoidal components having
various frequencies, amplitudes, and phases. If a signal contains no components with frequencies
higher than 
the signal can (in theory) be exactly reconstructed from its samples, provided that the
sampling frequency 
is selected to be more than twice 
If a signal contains no components with frequencies higher than 
the signal
can be exactly reconstructed from its samples, provided that the sampling rate 
is selected to be more than twice 
For example, high-fidelity audio signals have a highest frequency of about 15 kHz. Therefore, the
Δ
f
s
f
H
,
f
s
f
H
 :
f
s
>2
f
H
(6.48)
f
H
, 
f
s
f
H
.

minimum sampling rate that should be used for audio signals is 30 kHz. Practical considerations dictate
a sampling frequency somewhat higher than the theoretical minimum. For instance, audio compact-disc
technology converts audio signals to digital form with a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz. Naturally, it is
desirable to use the lowest practical sampling rate to minimize the amount of data (in the form of code
words) that must be stored or manipulated by the DSP system.
Of course, the interval between samples T is the reciprocal of the sampling rate:
A second consideration important in converting analog signals to digital form is the number of amplitude
zones to be used. Exact signal amplitudes cannot be represented, because all amplitudes falling into a
given zone have the same code word. Thus, when a DAC converts the code words to recreate the
original analog waveform, it is possible to reconstruct only an approximation to the original signal with
the reconstructed voltage in the middle of each zone, which is illustrated in Figure 6.46. Thus, some
quantization error exists between the original signal and the reconstruction. This error can be reduced
by using a larger number of zones, which requires longer code words. The number N of amplitude
zones is related to the number of bits k in a code word by
Figure 6.46 
Quantization error occurs when an analog signal is reconstructed from its digital form.
Hence, if we are using an 8-bit 
ADC, there are 
amplitude zones. In compact-disc
technology, 16-bit words are used to represent sample values. With this number of bits, it is very difficult
for a listener to detect the effects of quantization error on the reconstructed audio signal.
T=
1
f
s
(6.49)
N=
2
k
(6.50)
(
k=8
)
N=
2
8
=256

Often, in engineering instrumentation, we need to determine the DAC specifications needed for
converting sensor signals to digital form. For example, suppose that we need to digitize a signal that
ranges from 
to 
V with a resolution of at most 
(
is illustrated in the upper right-hand
corner of Figure 6.45.) Then, the minimum number of zones is the total signal range (2 V) divided by 
which yields 
However, N must be an integer power of two. Thus, we require 
(In other
words, a 12-bit ADC is needed.)
In the remainder of this section, we will ignore quantization error and assume that the exact sample
values are available to the digital computer.
Digital Filters
We have seen that ADCs convert analog signals into sequences of code words that can accurately
represent the amplitudes of the signals at the sampling instants. Although the computer actually
manipulates code words that represent signal amplitudes, it is convenient to focus on the numbers that
the code words represent. Conceptually, the signal x(t) is converted into a list of values x(nT) in which T
is the interval between samples and n is a variable that takes on integer values. Often, we omit the
sampling period from our notation and write the input and output samples simply as x(n) and y(n),
respectively.
Digital Lowpass Filter
Digital filters can be designed to mimic the RLC filters that we discussed earlier in this chapter. For
example, consider the first-order RC lowpass filter shown in Figure 6.47, in which we have denoted the
input voltage as x(t) and the output voltage as y(t). Writing a Kirchhoff's current equation at the top node
of the capacitance, we have
Figure 6.47 
First-order RC lowpass filter.
−1
+1
Δ=0.5 mV.
 
Δ
Δ,
N=4000.
k=12.
y(
t
)−x(
t
)
R
+C 
dy(
t
)
dt
=0
(6.51)

Multiplying each term by R and using the fact that the time constant is 
we find that
We can approximate the derivative as
and write the approximate equivalent to the differential equation
This type of equation is sometimes called a difference equation because it involves differences
between successive samples. Solving for the nth output value, we have
in which we have defined the parameter
Equation 6.55 defines the calculations that need to be carried out to perform lowpass filtering of the
input x(n). For each sample point, the output is a times the previous output value plus 
times the
present input value. Usually, we have 
and a is slightly less than unity.
Example 6.11 Step Response of a First-Order Digital Lowpass Filter
Compute and plot the input and output samples for 
to 20, given 
The input is a step
function defined by
Assume that 
for 
Solution 
We have
τ=RC,
y(
t
)−x(
t
)+τ 
dy(
t
)
dt
=0
(6.52)
dy(
t
)
dt
≅
Δy
Δt
=
y(
n
)−y(
n−1
)
T
(6.53)
y(
n
)−x(
n
)+τ 
y(
n
)−y(
n−1
)
T
=0
(6.54)
y(
n
)=ay(
n−1
)+(
1−a
)x(
n
)
(6.55)
a=
τ/T
1+τ/T
(6.56)
(
1−a
)
τ>>T
n=0
a=0.9.
x(
n
)
=0 for n<0
=1 for n≥0
y(
n
)=0
n<0.
y(
0
)
=ay(
−1
)+(
1−a
)x(
0
)=0.9×0+0.1×1=0.1
y(
1
)
=ay(
0
)+(
1−a
)x(
1
)=0.19
y(
2
)
=ay(
1
)+(
1−a
)x(
2
)=0.271
...
y(
20
)
=0.8906

Plots of x(n) and y(n) are shown in Figure 6.48. Notice that the response of the digital filter to a step
input is very similar to that of the RC filter shown in Figure 4.4 on page 172.
Figure 6.48 
Step input and corresponding output of a first-order digital lowpass filter.
Exercise 6.23 
a. Determine the value of the time constant 
in terms of the sampling interval T corresponding to
b. b. Recall that the time constant is the time required for the step response to reach 
times its final value. Estimate the value of the time constant for the response shown in
Figure 6.48.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
Other Digital Filters
We could develop digital bandpass, notch, or highpass filters that mimic the behavior of the RLC filters
discussed earlier in this chapter. Furthermore, high-order digital filters are possible. In general, the
equations defining such filters are of the form
The type of filter and its performance depend on the values selected for the coefficients 
and 
For
τ,
a=0.9.
1−exp(
−1
)=0.632
τ=9T;
τ≅9T.
y(
n
)=[ C ]
∑
ℓ=1
N
a
ℓ
y(
n−ℓ
)+
∑
k=0
M
b
k
x(
n−k
)
(6.57)
a
ℓ
b
k
.

the first-order lowpass filter considered in Example 6.11, the coefficients are 
and all
of the other coefficients are zero.
Exercise 6.24 
Consider the RC highpass filter shown in Figure 6.49. Apply the method that we used for the lowpass
filter to find an equation having the form of Equation 6.57 for the highpass filter. Give expressions for
the coefficients in terms of the time constant 
and the sampling interval T.
Figure 6.49 
RC highpass filter. See Exercise 6.24.
Answer 
in which
A Simple Notch Filter
A simple way to obtain a notch filter is to select 
for all 
and to set the
remaining 
coefficients to zero. Then, the output of the digital filter is given by
Thus, each input sample is delayed in time by Td and added to the current sample. Finally, the sum of
the input and its delayed version is multiplied by 0.5. To see that this results in a notch filter, consider a
sinewave delayed by an interval Td. We can write
Hence, a time delay of Td amounts to a phase shift of 
radians or 
(Keep in mind that, in
this discussion, T represents the interval between samples, not the period of the sinewave.) For low
frequencies, the phase shift is small, so the low-frequency components of x(n) add nearly in phase with
a
1
=0.9, 
b
0
=0.1,
τ=RC
y(
n
)=
a
1
y(
n−1
)+
b
0
x(
n
)+
b
1
x(
n−1
)
a
1
=
b
0
=−
b
1
=
τ/T
1+τ/T
a
ℓ
=0
ℓ, 
b
0
=0.5, 
b
d
=0.5,
b
k
y(
n
)=0.5x(
n
)+0.5x(
n−d
)=0.5[ x(
n
)+x(
n−d
)
]
A cos[ ω(
t−Td
)
]=A cos(
ωt−ωTd
)=A cos(
ωt−θ
)
ωTd
fTd×360°.

those of 
On the other hand, for the frequency
the phase shift is 180°. Of course, when we phase shift a sinewave by 180° and add it to the original,
the sum is zero. Thus, any input component having the frequency 
does not appear in the output.
The first-order lowpass filter and this simple notch filter are just two of many possible digital filters that
can be realized by selection of the coefficient values in Equation 6.57.
Exercise 6.25 
Suppose that the sampling frequency is 
and we want to eliminate the 500-Hz component
with a simple notch filter.
a. Determine the value needed for d.
b. What difficulty would be encountered if we wanted to eliminate the 300-Hz component?
Answer 
a. 
b. Equation 6.58 yields 
but d is required to be an integer value.
Digital Filter Demonstration
Next, we will use MATLAB to demonstrate the operation of a digital filter. First, we will create samples of
a virtual signal including noise and interference. The signal of interest consists of a 1-Hz sinewave and
is representative of many types of real world signals such as delta waves contained in the
electroencephalogram (EEG) of an individual in deep sleep, or the output of a pressure sensor
submerged in the ocean with waves passing over. Part of the interference consists of a 60-Hz sinewave,
which is a common real-world problem due to coupling between the ac power line and the signal sensor.
The other part of the interference is random noise, which is also common in real-world data.
The MATLAB code that we use to create our simulated data is
t = 0:1/6000:2;
signal = cos(2*pi*t);
interference = cos(120*pi*t);
white_noise = randn(size(t));
x(
n−d
).
f
notch
=
1
2Td
=
f
s
2d
(6.58)
f
notch
f
s
=10 kHz,
d=10;
d=16.67,

noise = zeros(size(t));
for n = 2:12001
noise(n) = 0.25*(white_noise(n) − white_noise(n − 1));
end
x = signal + interference + noise; % This is the simulated data.
The first command generates a 12,001-element row vector containing the sample times for a two-
second interval with a sampling frequency of 
The second and third commands set up row
matrices containing samples of the signal and the 60-Hz interference. In the next line, the random-
number generator feature of MATLAB generates "white noise" that contains components of equal
amplitudes (on average) at all frequencies up to half of the sampling frequency. The white noise is then
manipulated by the commands in the for-end  loop, producing noise with components from dc to 3000
Hz peaking around 1500 Hz. Then, the signal, interference and noise are added to produce the
simulated data x(n). (Of course, in a real-world application, the data are obtained by applying the
outputs of sensors, such as EEG electrodes, to analog-to-digital converters.)
Next, we use MATLAB to plot the signal, interference, noise, and the simulated data.
subplot(2,2,1)
plot(t, signal)
axis([0 2 −2 2])
subplot(2,2,2)
plot(t, interference)
axis([0 2 −2 2])
subplot(2,2,3)
plot(t,noise)
axis([0 2 −2 2])
subplot(2,2,4)
plot(t,x)
axis([0 2 −3 3]) 
The resulting plots are shown in Figure 6.50. The simulated data is typical of what is often obtained
from sensors in real-world experiments. In a biomedical setting, for example, an electrocardiograph
produces data that is the sum of the heart signal, 60-Hz power-line interference, and noise from muscle
contractions, especially when the subject is moving, as in a stress test.
f
s
=6000 Hz.

Figure 6.50 
Simulated pressure-sensor output and its components.
Actually, the plot of the 60-Hz interference appears a little uneven in Figure 6.50(b) because of finite
screen resolution for the display. This is a form of distortion called aliasing that occurs when the
sampling rate is too low. If you run the commands on your own computer and use the zoom tool to
expand the display horizontally, you will see a smooth plot of the 60-Hz sinewave interference. An m-file
named DSPdemo that contains the commands used in this demonstration of a digital filter appears in
the MATLAB folder.
What we need is a digital filter that processes the data x(n) of Figure 6.50(d) and produces an output
closely matching the signal in Figure 6.50(a). This filter should pass the signal (1-Hz sinewave), reject
the 60-Hz interference, and reject the noise, which has its largest components in the vicinity of 1500 Hz.
To achieve this, we will use a digital notch filter to remove the 60-Hz sinewave interference cascaded
with a lowpass filter to remove most of the noise. The conceptual diagram of the digital filter is shown in
Figure 6.51.
Figure 6.51 

Digital filter.
Equation 6.58 reveals that by using 
and 
we can realize a notch filter with zero gain
at precisely 60 Hz. (If 60-Hz interference is a problem, it is a good idea to pick the sampling frequency to
be an even integer multiple of 60 Hz, which is one reason we picked the sampling frequency to be 6000
Hz.) The output z(n) of the notch filter is given in terms of the input data x(n) as
Also, we need a lowpass filter to eliminate the noise. We decide to use the first-order lowpass filter
discussed earlier in this section. Because we do not want the lowpass filter to disturb the signal, we
choose its break frequency to much higher than 1 Hz, say 
For an RC lowpass filter, the
break frequency is
Solving for the time constant and substituting values, we have
The gain constant for the (approximately) equivalent digital filter is given by Equation 6.56 in which 
is the sampling interval. We then have
Substituting this value into Equation 6.55 yields the equation for the present y(n) output of the lowpass
filter in terms of its input z(n) and previous output 
The MATLAB commands to filter the simulated data x(n) and plot the output y(n) are:
for n = 51:12001
z(n) = (x(n) + x(n − 50))/2; % This is the notch filter.
end
y = zeros(size(z));
for n = 2:12001
y(n) = 0.9503*y(n-1) + 0.0497*z(n); % This is the lowpass filter.
d=50
f
s
=6000 Hz,
z(
n
)=
1
2
 [ x(
n
)+x(
n−50
)
]
f
B
=50 Hz.
f
B
=
1
2πRC
τ=RC=
1
2π
f
B
=
1
2π(
50
)
=3.183 ms
T=1/
f
s
=1/6000 s
a=
τ/T
1+τ/T
=0.9503
y(
n−1
).
y(
n
)=0.9503y(
n−1
)+0.0497z(
n
)

end
figure
plot(t,y) 
The resulting plot is shown in Figure 6.52. As desired, the output is nearly identical to the 1-Hz
sinewave signal. This relatively simple digital filter has done a very good job of eliminating the noise and
interference because most of the noise and the interference have frequencies much higher than does
the signal. When the frequencies of the signal are nearer to those of the noise and interference, we
would need to resort to higher-order filters.
Figure 6.52 
Output signal.
Comparison of Filter Technologies
We have discussed two ways to filter signals: RLC circuits and digital filters. There are a number of
other filter types, such as active filters that are composed of resistances, capacitances and
operational amplifiers, or op amps (which we discuss in Chapter 14). Other filters are based on
mechanical resonances in piezoelectric crystals, surface acoustic waves, the propagation of electric
fields in wave guides, switched capacitor networks, and transmission lines.
In all cases, the objective of a filter is to separate a desired signal from noise and interference. Radio
amateurs operating in the frequency band between 28 and 29.7 MHz often need to place a band reject
filter between the transmitter and antenna to eliminate second-harmonic frequency components from
reaching the antenna. If they are not removed, second-harmonic components can cause some very
annoying interference on their neighbor's television screens. In this application, an RLC filter would be
the technology of choice because of the large currents and voltages involved.

The objective of a filter is to separate a desired signal from noise and
interference.
On the other hand, a sleep researcher may wish to filter brain waves to separate delta waves that
appear at frequencies of 4 Hz or less from higher frequency brain waves. In this case, a digital filter is
appropriate.
In summary, there are many applications for filters and many technologies for implementing filters. Most
of the principles we have introduced in our discussion of RLC circuits and digital filters apply to filters
based on other technologies.

Summary
1. The fundamental concept of Fourier theory is that we can construct any signal by adding
sinusoids with the proper amplitudes, frequencies, and phases.
2. In effect, a filter decomposes the input signal into its sinusoidal components, adjusts the
amplitude and phase of each component, depending on its frequency, and sums the adjusted
components to produce the output signal. Often, we need a filter that passes components in a
given frequency range to the output, without change in amplitude or phase, and that rejects
components at other frequencies.
3. The transfer function of a filter circuit is the phasor output divided by the phasor input as a
function of frequency. The transfer function is a complex quantity that shows how the amplitudes
and phases of input components are affected when passing through the filter.
4. We can use circuit analysis with phasors and complex impedances to determine the transfer
function of a given circuit.
5. A first-order filter is characterized by its half-power frequency 
6. A transfer-function magnitude is converted to decibels by taking 20 times the common logarithm
of the magnitude.
7. Two-port filters are cascaded by connecting the output of the first to the input of the second. The
overall transfer function of the cascade is the product of the transfer functions of the individual
filters. If the transfer functions are converted to decibels, they are added for a cascade
connection.
8. On a logarithmic frequency scale, frequency is multiplied by a given factor for equal increments
of length along the axis. A decade is a range of frequencies for which the ratio of the highest
frequency to the lowest is 10. An octave is a two-to-one change in frequency.
9. A Bode plot shows the magnitude of a network function in decibels versus frequency, using a
logarithmic scale for frequency.
10. The Bode plots for first-order filters can be closely approximated by straight-line asymptotes. In
the case of a first-order lowpass filter, the transfer-function magnitude slopes downward at 20
dB/decade for frequencies that are higher than the half-power frequency. For a first-order
highpass filter, the transfer-function magnitude slopes at 20 dB/decade below the break
frequency.
11. At low frequencies, inductances behave as short circuits, and capacitances behave as open
circuits. At high frequencies, inductances behave as open circuits, and capacitances behave as
short circuits. Often, RLC filters can be readily analyzed at low- or high-frequencies, providing
checks on computer-generated Bode plots.
12. The key parameters of series and parallel resonant circuits are the resonant frequency and
quality factor. The impedance of either type of circuit is purely resistive at the resonant
f
B
.

frequency. High-quality-factor circuits can have responses that are much larger in magnitude
than the driving source.
13. Filters may be classified as lowpass, highpass, bandpass, and band-reject filters. Ideal filters
have constant (nonzero) gain (transfer-function magnitude) in the passband and zero gain in the
stopband.
14. The series resonant circuit can be used to form any of the four filter types.
15. A second-order filter is characterized by its resonant frequency and quality factor.
16. MATLAB is useful in deriving and plotting network functions of complex RLC filters.
17. In using DSP to filter a signal, the analog input signal x(t) is converted to digital form (a
sequence of numbers) by an ADC. A digital computer uses the digitized input signal to compute
a sequence of values for the output signal, and, finally, (if desired) the computed values are
converted to analog form by a DAC to produce the output signal y(t).
18. If a signal contains no components with frequencies higher than 
the signal can be exactly
reconstructed from its samples, provided that the sampling rate 
is selected to be more than
twice 
19. Approximately equivalent digital filters can be found for RLC filters.
f
H
,
f
s
f
H
.

Problems
Section 6.1: Fourier Analysis, Filters, and Transfer Functions
P6.1. What is the fundamental concept of Fourier theory?
P6.2. The triangular waveform shown in Figure P6.2 can be written as the infinite sum
Figure P6.2 
in which n takes odd integer values only. Use MATLAB to compute and plot the sum through
for 
Compare your plot with the waveform shown in Figure P6.2.
P6.3. The full-wave rectified cosine wave shown in Figure P6.3 can be written as
Figure P6.3 
in which n assumes even integer values. Use MATLAB to compute and plot the sum through
for 
Compare your plot with the waveform shown in FigureP6.3 .
v
t
(
t
)
=1
+
8
π
2
 cos(
2000πt
)
+
8
(
3π
)
2
 cos(
6000πt
)+ ⋯
+
8
(
nπ
)
2
 cos(
2000nπt
)+ ⋯
n=19
0≤t≤2 ms.
v
fw
=
2
π
+
4
π(
1
)(
3
)
 cos(
4000πt
)
−
4
π(
3
)(
5
)
 cos(
8000πt
)+⋯
+
4
(
 −1
)
(
n/2+1
)
π(
n−1
)(
n+1
)
 cos(
2000nπt
)+⋯
n=60
0≤t≤2 ms.

P6.4. The Fourier series for the half-wave rectified cosine shown in Figure P6.4 is
Figure P6.4 
in which 
etc. Use MATLAB to compute and plot the sum through 
for 
Then plot the sum through 
Compare your plots with the waveform in Figure P6.4.
P6.5. Fourier analysis shows that the sawtooth waveform of Figure P6.5 can be written as
Figure P6.5 
Use MATLAB to compute and plot the sum through 
for 
Repeat for the sum
through 
P6.6. What is the transfer function of a filter? Describe how the transfer function of a filter can be
determined using laboratory methods.
P6.7. How does a filter process an input signal to produce the output signal in terms of
sinusoidal components?
*P6.8. The transfer function 
of a filter is shown in Figure P6.8. The input
signal is given by
v
hw
(
t
)=
1
π
+
1
2
 cos(
2πt
)+
2
π(
1
)(
3
)
 cos(
4πt
)
−
2
π(3)(5)
cos(8πt)+⋯
+
2(−1)(n/2+1)
π(n−1)(n+1)
cos(2nπt)+⋯
n=2, 4, 6,
n=4
−0.5≤t≤1.5 s.
n=50.
v
st
(
t
)=1−
2
π
 sin(
2000πt
)
−
2
2π
sin(4000πt)−
2
3π
sin(6000πt)
−⋯−
2
nπ
sin(2000nπt)−⋯
n=3
0≤t≤2 ms.
n=50.
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in

Figure P6.8 
Find an expression (as a function of time) for the steady-state output of the filter.
P6.9. Repeat Problem P6.8 for the input voltage given by
P6.10. Repeat Problem P6.8 for the input voltage given by
*P6.11. The input to a certain filter is given by
and the steady-state output is given by
Determine the (complex) value of the transfer function of the filter for 
 *P6.12. The input and output voltages of a filter operating under sinusoidal steady-state
conditions are observed on an oscilloscope. The peak amplitude of the input is 5 V and the
output is 15 V. The period of both signals is 4 ms. The input reaches a positive peak at 
and the output reaches its positive peak at 
Determine the frequency and the
corresponding value of the transfer function.
*P6.13. The triangular waveform of Problem P6.2 is the input for a filter with the transfer function
shown in Figure P6.13. Assume that the phase of the transfer function is zero for all
frequencies. Determine the steady-state output of the filter.
Figure P6.13 
*P6.14. Consider a circuit for which the output voltage is the running-time integral of the input
voltage, as illustrated in Fig­ure P6.14. If the input voltage is given by 
find an expression for the output voltage as a function of time. Then, find an expression
v
in
(
t
)
=5+2 cos(
5000πt+30°
)
+2 cos(15000πt)
v
in
(
t
)
=4+5 cos(
10
4
πt−30°
)
+2 sin(
24000πt
)
v
in
(
t
)=6+2 cos(
6000πt
)−4 cos(
12000πt
)
v
in
(
t
)=2 cos(
10
4
πt−25°
)
v
out
(
t
)=2 cos(
10
4
πt+20°
)
f=5000 Hz.
t=1 ms,
t=1.5 ms.
v
in
(
t
)=
V
max
 cos(
2πft
),

for the transfer function of the integrator. Plot the magnitude and phase of the transfer function
versus frequency.
Figure P6.14 
P6.15. The sawtooth waveform of Problem P6.5 is applied as the input to a filter with the
transfer function shown in Figure P6.15. Assume that the phase of the transfer function is zero
for all frequencies. Determine the steady-state output of the filter.
Figure P6.15 
P6.16. Figure P6.16 shows the input and output voltages of a certain filter operating in steady
state with a sinusoidal input. Determine the frequency and the corresponding value of the
transfer function.
Figure P6.16 

Section 6.2: First-Order Lowpass Filters
 P6.17. List the frequencies in hertz for which the transfer function of a filter can be determined
given that the input to the filter is
and the output is
Compute the transfer function for each of these frequencies.
P6.18. Consider a system for which the output voltage is 
(In
other words, the output equals the input plus the input delayed by 1 ms.) Given that the input
voltage is 
find an expression for the output voltage as a function of
time. Then, find an expression for the transfer function of the system. Use MATLAB to plot the
magnitude of the transfer function versus frequency for the range from 0 to 2000 Hz. Comment
on the result.
P6.19. Suppose we have a system for which the output voltage is
Given the input voltage 
find an expression for the output voltage as
a function of time. Then, find an expression for the transfer function of the system. Use MATLAB
to plot the magnitude of the transfer function versus frequency for the range from 0 to 2000 Hz.
Comment on the result.
P6.20. Suppose we have a circuit for which the output voltage is the time derivative of the input
voltage, as illustrated in Figure P6.20. For an input voltage given by 
find an expression for the output voltage as a function of time. Then, find an expression for the
transfer function of the differentiator. Plot the magnitude and phase of the transfer function
versus frequency.
Figure P6.20 
v
in
(
t
)
=2+3 cos(
1000πt
)+3 sin(
2000πt
)
+cos(3000πt)V
v
out
(
t
)
=3+2 cos(
1000πt+30°
)
+3cos(3000πt)V
v
o
(
t
)=
v
in
(
t
)+
v
in
(
t−
10
−3
).
v
in
(
t
)=
V
max
 cos(
2πft
),
v
o
(
t
)=1000
∫
t−
10
−3
t
 
v
in
(
t
)dt
v
in
(
t
)=
V
max
 cos(
2πft
),
v
in
(
t
)=
V
max
 cos(
2πft
),
P6.21. Draw the circuit diagram of a first-order RC lowpass filter and give the expression for the
half-power frequency in terms of the circuit components. Sketch the magnitude and phase of the

transfer function versus frequency.
P6.22. Repeat Problem P6.21 for a first-order RL filter.
*P6.23. Consider a first-order RC lowpass filter. At what frequency (in terms of 
) is the phase
shift equal to 
P6.24. In Chapter 4, we used the time constant to characterize first-order RC circuits. Find the
relationship between the half-power frequency and the time constant.
*P6.25. An input signal given by
is applied to the lowpass RC filter shown in Figure P6.25. Find an expression for the output
signal.
Figure P6.25 
P6.26. The input signal of a first-order lowpass filter with the transfer function given by Equation
6.9 on page 297 and a half-power frequency of 200 Hz is
Find an expression for the output voltage.
 P6.27. Suppose that we need a first-order RC lowpass filter with a half-power frequency of 1
kHz. Determine the value of the capacitance, given that the resistance is 
P6.28. The input signal to a filter contains components that range in frequency from 100 Hz to 50
kHz. We wish to reduce the amplitude of the 50-kHz component by a factor of 200 by passing
the signal through a first-order lowpass filter. What half-power frequency is required for the filter?
By what factor is a component at 2 kHz changed in amplitude in passing through this filter?
P6.29. Suppose we have a first-order lowpass filter that is operating in sinusoidal steady-state
conditions at a frequency of 5 kHz. Using an oscilloscope, we observe that the positive-going
zero crossing of the output is delayed by 
compared with that of the input. Determine the
break frequency of the filter.
*P6.30. Sketch the magnitude of the transfer function 
to scale versus
frequency for the circuit shown in Figure P6.30. What is the value of the half-power frequency?
[Hint: Start by finding the Thévenin equivalent circuit seen by the capacitance.]
f
B
−1°?−10°?−89°?
v
in
(
t
)
=5 cos(
500πt
)+5 cos(
1000πt
)
+5 cos(
2000πt
)
v
in
(
t
)
=3+2 sin(
800πt+30°
)
+5 cos(
20×
10
3
πt
)
5 kΩ.
30 μs
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in

Figure P6.30 
P6.31. In steady-state operation, a first-order RC lowpass filter has the input signal 
and the output signal 
Determine the
break frequency of the filter and the value of 
P6.32. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P6.32(a). This circuit consists of a source having an
internal resistance of 
an RC lowpass filter, and a load resistance 
Figure P6.32 
a. Show that the transfer function of this circuit is given by
in which the half-power frequency 
is given by
Notice that 
is the parallel combination of 
and 
[Hint: One way to make
this problem easier is to rearrange the circuit as shown in Figure P6.32(b) and then to
find the Thévenin equivalent for the source and resistances.]
v
in
(
t
)=
5 cos(
20×
10
3
πt
)
v
out
(
t
)=0.2 cos(
20×
10
3
πt−θ
).
θ.
R
s
,
R
L
.
H(
f
)=
V
out
V
s
=
R
L
R
s
+R+
R
L
×
1
1+j(
f/
f
B
)
f
B
f
B
=
1
2π
R
t
C
 where 
R
t
=
R
L
 (
R
s
+R
)
R
L
+
R
s
+R
R
t
R
L
(
R
s
+R
).

Section 6.3: Decibels, the Cascade Connection, and Logarithmic Frequency Scales
b. Given that 
and 
sketch (or use MATLAB to
plot) the magnitude of H(f) to scale versus 
from 0 to 3.
P6.33.
a. Derive an expression for the transfer function 
for the circuit shown in
Figure P6.33. Find an expression for the half-power frequency.
Figure P6.33 
b. Given 
and 
sketch (or use MATLAB to plot) the
magnitude of the transfer function versus frequency.
 P6.34. We apply a 5-V-rms 20-kHz sinusoid to the input of a first-order RC lowpass filter, and
the output voltage in steady state is 0.5 V rms. Predict the steady-state rms output voltage after
the frequency of the input signal is raised to 150 kHz and the amplitude remains constant.
P6.35. Perhaps surprisingly, we can apply the transfer-function concept to mechanical systems.
Suppose we have a mass m moving through a liquid with an applied force f and velocity v. The
motion of the mass is described by the first-order differential equation
in which k is the coefficient of viscous friction. Find an expression for the transfer function
Also, find the half-power frequency (defined as the frequency at which the transfer function
magnitude is 
times its dc value) in terms of k and m. [Hint: To determine the transfer
function, assume a steady-state sinusoidal velocity 
solve for the force, and
take the ratio of their phasors.]
C=0.2 μF,
 
R
s
=2 kΩ, R=47 kΩ,
R
L
=1 kΩ,
f/
f
B
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
R
1
=50 Ω, 
R
2
=50 Ω,
L=15 μH,
f=m 
dv
dt
+kv
H(
f
)=
V
F
1/
2
v=
V
m
 cos(
2πft
),
P6.36. What is a logarithmic frequency scale? A linear frequency scale?
P6.37. What is a notch filter? What is one application?
P6.38. What is the main advantage of converting transfer function magnitudes to decibels before

plotting?
P6.39. What is the passband of a filter?
*P6.40.
a. Given 
find 
b. Repeat for 
*P6.41.
a. What frequency is halfway between 100 and 3000 Hz on a logarithmic frequency scale?
b. On a linear frequency scale?
P6.42. Find the decibel equivalent for 
Repeat for 
and 
P6.43. Find the frequency that is
a. one octave higher than 800 Hz;
b. two octaves lower;
c. two decades lower;
d. one decade higher.
P6.44. Explain what we mean when we say that two filters are cascaded.
P6.45. We have a list of successive frequencies 2, 
50 Hz. Determine the values of
and 
so that the frequencies are evenly spaced on:
a. a linear frequency scale, and
b. a logarithmic frequency scale.
*P6.46. Two first-order lowpass filters are in cascade as shown in Figure P6.46. The transfer
functions are
Figure P6.46 
a. Write an expression for the overall transfer function.
b. Find an expression for the half-power frequency for the overall transfer function in terms
of 
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=−10 dB,
|H(
f
)|.
|H(
f
)
|
dB
=10 dB.

|H(
f
)|=0.5.
|H(
f
)|=2, |H(
f
)|=1/
2
≅
0.7071,
|H(
f
)|=
2
.
f
1
, 
f
2
, 
f
3
,
f
1
, 
f
2
,
f
3
H
1
(
f
)=
H
2
(
f
)=
1
1+j(
f/
f
B
)
f
B
.

Section 6.4: Bode Plots
[Comment: This filter cannot be implemented by cascading two simple RC lowpass filters like the
one shown in Fig­ure 6.7 on page 296 because the transfer function of the first circuit is
changed when the second is connected. Instead, a buffer amplifier, such as the voltage follower
discussed in Section 14.3, must be inserted between the RC filters.]
P6.47. How many decades are between 
and 
a. How many octaves?
P6.48. We have two filters with transfer functions 
and 
cascaded in the order 1-
2. Give the expression for the overall transfer function of the cascade. Repeat if the transfer
function magnitudes are expressed in decibels denoted as 
and 
What caution concerning 
must be considered?
P6.49. Two filters are in cascade. At a given frequency 
the transfer function values are 
and 
Find the magnitude of the overall transfer function in
decibels at 
f
1
=20 Hz
f
2
=4.5 kHz?
H
1
(
f
)
H
2
(
f
)
|
H
1
(
f
)
|
dB
|
H
2
(
f
)
|
dB
.
H
1
(
f
)
f
1
,
|
H
1
(
f
1
)
|
dB
=−30
|
H
2
(
f
1
)
|
dB
=+10.
f=
f
1
.
P6.50. What is a Bode plot?
P6.51. What is the slope of the high-frequency asymptote for the Bode magnitude plot for a first-
order lowpass filter? The low-frequency asymptote? At what frequency do the asymptotes meet?
*P6.52. A transfer function is given by
Sketch the asymptotic magnitude and phase Bode plots to scale.
P6.53. Suppose that three filters, having identical first-order lowpass transfer functions, are
cascaded, what will be the rate at which the overall transfer function magnitude declines above
the break frequency? Explain.
P6.54. Solve for the transfer function 
and sketch the asymptotic Bode
magnitude and phase plots to scale for the circuit shown in Figure P6.54.
Figure P6.54 
P6.55. A transfer function is given by
H(
f
)=
100
1+j(
f/1000
)
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in

Sketch the asymptotic magnitude and phase Bode plots to scale. What is the value of the half-
power frequency?
P6.56. Consider a circuit for which
a. Assume that 
and find an expression for 
b. Use the results of part (a) to find an expression for the transfer function 
for the system.
c. Draw the asymptotic Bode plot for the transfer function magnitude.
P6.57. Solve for the transfer function 
and draw the asymptotic Bode
magnitude and phase plots for the circuit shown in Figure P6.57.
Figure P6.57 
P6.58. Sketch the asymptotic magnitude and phase Bode plots to scale for the transfer function
P6.59. Solve for the transfer function 
and draw the Bode magnitude and
phase plots for the circuit shown in Figure P6.59.
Figure P6.59 
*P6.60. In solving Problem P6.14, we find that the transfer function of an integrator circuit is
given by 
Sketch the Bode magnitude and phase plots to scale. What is the slope
of the magnitude plot?
P6.61. In solving Problem P6.20, we find that the transfer function of a differentiator circuit is
H(
f
)=
10
1−j(
f/500
)
v
out
(
t
)=
v
in
(
t
)−200π
∫
0
t
 
v
out
(
t
)dt
v
out
(
t
)=A cos(
2πft
),
v
in
(
t
).
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
H(
f
)=
1−j(
f/100
)
1+j(
f/100
)
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
H(
f
)=1/(
j2πf
).

Section 6.5: First-Order Highpass Filters
given by 
Sketch the Bode magnitude and phase plots to scale. What is the slope of
the magnitude plot?
H(
f
)=j2πf.
P6.62. Draw the circuit diagram of a first-order RC highpass filter and give the expression for the
half-power frequency in terms of the circuit components.
P6.63. What is the slope of the high-frequency asymptote for the Bode magnitude plot for a first-
order highpass filter? The low-frequency asymptote? At what frequency do the asymptotes
meet?
*P6.64. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P6.64. Sketch the asymptotic Bode magnitude and
phase plots to scale for the transfer function 
Figure P6.64 
*P6.65. Consider the first-order highpass filter shown in Figure P6.65. The input signal is given
by
Figure P6.65 
Find an expression for the output 
in steady-state conditions.
P6.66. Repeat Problem P6.65 for the input signal given by
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
.
v
in
(
t
)=5+5 cos(
2000πt
)
v
out
(
t
)
v
in
(
t
)=10 cos(
400πt
)+20 cos(
4000πt
)

Section 6.6: Series Resonance
P6.67. Suppose we need a first-order highpass filter (such as Figure 6.19 on page 309) to
attenuate a 60-Hz input component by 60 dB. What value is required for the break frequency of
the filter? By how many dB is the 600-Hz component attenuated by this filter? If 
what is
the value of C?
P6.68. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P6.68. Sketch the Bode magnitude and phase plots
to scale for the transfer function 
Figure P6.68 
P6.69. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P6.69. Sketch the Bode magnitude and phase plots
to scale for the transfer function 
Figure P6.69 
R=5 kΩ,
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
.
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
.
P6.70. What can you say about the impedance of a series RLC circuit at the resonant
frequency? How are the resonant frequency and the quality factor defined?
P6.71. What is a bandpass filter? How is its bandwidth defined?
*P6.72. Consider the series resonant circuit shown in Figure P6.72, with 
and 
Compute the resonant frequency, the bandwidth, and the half-power
frequencies. Assuming that the frequency of the source is the same as the resonant frequency,
find the phasor voltages across the elements and sketch a phasor diagram.
L=20 μH, R=14.14 Ω,
C=1000 pF.

Section 6.7: Parallel Resonance
Figure P6.72 
 P6.73. Work Problem P6.72 for 
and 
P6.74. Suppose we have a series resonant circuit for which 
and
Determine the values of L and C.
*P6.75. At the resonant frequency 
a series resonant circuit with 
has 
and 
Determine the values of L and C. What is the value of 
P6.76. Suppose we have a series resonant circuit for which 
and 
Furthermore, the minimum value of the impedance magnitude is 
Determine the values of
R, L, and C.
P6.77. Derive an expression for the resonant frequency of the circuit shown in Figure P6.77.
(Recall that we have defined the resonant frequency to be the frequency for which the
impedance is purely resistive.)
Figure P6.77 
L=80 μH,
 R=14.14 Ω,
C=1000 pF.
B=30 kHz,
f
0
=300 kHz,
R=40 Ω.
f
0
=1 MHz,
R=50 Ω
|
V
R
|=2 V
|
V
L
|=20 V.
|
V
C
|?
f
0
=12 MHz
B=600 kHz.
20 Ω.
P6.78. What can you say about the impedance of a parallel RLC circuit at the resonant
frequency? How is the resonant frequency defined? Compare the definition of quality factor for
the parallel resonant circuit with that for the series resonant circuit.
*P6.79. A parallel resonant circuit has 
and 
Determine the resonant
frequency, quality factor, and bandwidth.
P6.80. A parallel resonant circuit has 
and 
The maximum value of 
is 
Determine the values of R, L, and C.
R=5 kΩ,
L=50 μH,
C=200 pF.
f
0
=20 MHz
B=200 kHz.
|
Z
p
|
5 kΩ.

Section 6.8: Ideal and Second-Order Filters
Section 6.9: Transfer Functions and Bode Plots with MATLAB
P6.81. Consider the parallel resonant circuit shown in Figure 6.29 on page 319. Determine the L
and C values, given 
and 
If 
draw a phasor
diagram showing the currents through each of the elements in the circuit at resonance.
P6.82. A parallel resonant circuit has 
and 
Determine the
values of L and C.
R=1 kΩ, 
f
0
=10 MHz,
B=500 kHz.
I=
10
−3
∠0°,
f
0
=100 MHz,
B=5 MHz,
R=2 kΩ.
P6.83. Name four types of ideal filters and sketch their transfer functions.
*P6.84. An ideal bandpass filter has cutoff frequencies of 9 and 11 kHz and a gain magnitude of
two in the passband. Sketch the transfer-function magnitude to scale versus frequency. Repeat
for an ideal band-reject filter.
P6.85. An ideal lowpass filter has a cutoff frequency of 10 kHz and a gain magnitude of two in
the passband. Sketch the transfer-function magnitude to scale versus frequency. Repeat for an
ideal highpass filter.
P6.86. Each AM radio signal has components ranging from 10 kHz below its carrier frequency to
10 kHz above its carrier frequency. Various radio stations in a given geographical region are
assigned different carrier frequencies so that the frequency ranges of the signals do not overlap.
Suppose that a certain AM radio transmitter has a carrier frequency of 980 kHz. What type of
filter should be used if we want the filter to pass the components from this transmitter and reject
the components of all other transmitters? What are the best values for the cutoff frequencies?
P6.87. In an electrocardiograph, the heart signals contain components with frequencies ranging
from dc to 100 Hz. During exercise on a treadmill, the signal obtained from the electrodes also
contains noise generated by muscle contractions. Most of the noise components have
frequencies exceeding 100 Hz. What type of filter should be used to reduce the noise? What
cutoff frequency is appropriate?
 *P6.88. Draw the circuit diagram of a second-order highpass filter. Suppose that 
and 
Determine the values of L and C.
P6.89. Draw the circuit diagram of a second-order highpass filter. Given that 
and 
determine the values of L and C.
P6.90. Suppose that sinewave interference has been inadvertently added to an audio signal that
has frequency components ranging from 20 Hz to 15 kHz. The frequency of the interference
slowly varies in the range 950 to 1050 Hz. A filter that attenuates the interference by at least 20
dB and passes most of the audio components is desired. What type of filter is needed? Sketch
the magnitude Bode plot of a suitable filter, labeling its specifications.
R=1 kΩ, 
Q
s
=
1,
f
0
=100 kHz.
R=50 Ω, 
Q
s
=
0.5,
f
0
=30 MHz,

P6.91. Consider the filter shown in Figure P6.91.
Figure P6.91 
a. Derive an expression for the transfer function 
b. Use MATLAB to obtain a Bode plot of the transfer-function magnitude for 
and 
Allow frequency to range from 10 Hz to 1 MHz.
c. At very low frequencies, the capacitance becomes an open circuit. In this case,
determine an expression for the transfer function and evaluate for the circuit parameters
of part (b). Does the result agree with the value plotted in part (b)?
d. At very high frequencies, the capacitance becomes a short circuit. In this case, determine
an expression for the transfer function and evaluate for the circuit parameters of part (b).
Does the result agree with the value plotted in part (b)?
P6.92. Repeat Problem P6.91 for the circuit of Figure P6.92.
Figure P6.92 
P6.93. Suppose that we need a filter with the Bode plot shown in Figure P6.93(a). We decide to
cascade a highpass circuit and a lowpass circuit as shown in Figure P6.93(b). So that the
second (i.e., right-hand) circuit looks like an approximate open circuit across the output of the
first (i.e., left-hand) circuit, we choose 
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
.
R
1
=9 kΩ, 
R
2
=1 kΩ,
C=0.01 μF.
R
2
=100
R
1
.

Figure P6.93 
a. Which of the components form the lowpass filter? Which form the highpass filter?
b. Compute the capacitances needed to achieve the desired break frequencies, making the
approximation that the left-hand circuit has an open-circuit load.
c. Write expressions that can be used to compute the exact transfer function 
and use MATLAB to produce a Bode magnitude plot for f ranging from 1 Hz to 1
MHz. The result should be a close approximation to the desired plot shown in Figure
P6.93(a).
P6.94. Suppose that we need a filter with the Bode plot shown in Figure P6.93(a). We decide to
cascade a highpass circuit and a lowpass circuit, as shown in Figure P6.94. So that the second
(i.e., right-hand) circuit looks like an approximate open circuit across the output of the first (i.e.,
left-hand) circuit, we choose 
Figure P6.94 
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
C
2
=
C
1
/100.

a. Which of the components form the lowpass filter? Which form the highpass filter?
b. Compute the resistances needed to achieve the desired break frequencies, making the
approximation that the left-hand circuit has an open-circuit load.
c. Write expressions that can be used to compute the exact transfer function 
and use MATLAB to produce a Bode magnitude plot for f ranging from 1 Hz to 1
MHz. The result should be a close approximation to the desired plot shown in Figure
P6.93(a).
P6.95. Other combinations of R, L, and C have behaviors similar to that of the series resonant
circuit. For example, consider the circuit shown in Figure P6.95.
Figure P6.95 
a. Derive an expression for the resonant frequency of this circuit. (We have defined the
resonant frequency to be the frequency for which the impedance is purely resistive.)
b. Compute the resonant frequency, given 
and 
c. Use MATLAB to obtain a plot of the impedance magnitude of this circuit for f ranging
from 95 to 105 percent of the resonant frequency. Compare the result with that of a
series RLC circuit.
P6.96. Consider the circuit of Figure P6.77 with 
and 
a. Using MATLAB, obtain a plot of the impedance magnitude of this circuit for f ranging from
9 to 11 kHz.
b. From the plot, determine the minimum impedance, the frequency at which the impedance
is minimum, and the bandwidth (i.e., the band of frequencies for which the impedance is
less than 
times the minimum value).
c. Determine the component values for a series RLC circuit having the same parameters as
those found in part (b).
d. Plot the impedance magnitude of the series circuit on the same axes as the plot for part
(a).
P6.97. Other combinations of R, L, and C have behaviors similiar to that of the parallel circuit.
For example, consider the circuit shown in Figure P6.97.
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
L=1 mH,
R=1000 Ω,
C=0.25 μF.
R=1 kΩ, L=1 mH,
C=0.25 μF.
2

Figure P6.97 
a. Derive an expression for the resonant frequency of this circuit. (We have defined the
resonant frequency to be the frequency for which the impedance is purely resistive.
However, in this case you may find the algebra easier if you work with admittances.)
b. Compute the resonant frequency, given 
and 
c. Use MATLAB to obtain a plot of the impedance magnitude of this circuit for f ranging
from 95 to 105 percent of the resonant frequency. Compare the result with that of a
parallel RLC circuit.
P6.98. Consider the filter shown in Figure P6.98.
Figure P6.98 
a. Derive an expression for the transfer function 
b. Use MATLAB to obtain a Bode plot of the transfer function magnitude for
and 
Allow frequency to range from 1 kHz to 100 kHz.
c. At very low frequencies, the capacitance becomes an open circuit and the inductance
becomes a short circuit. In this case, determine an expression for the transfer function
and evaluate for the circuit parameters of part (b). Does the result agree with the value
plotted in part (b)?
d. At very high frequencies, the capacitance becomes a short circuit and the inductance
becomes an open circuit. In this case, determine an expression for the transfer function
and evaluate for the circuit parameters of part (b). Does the result agree with the value
plotted in part (b)?
P6.99. Repeat Problem P6.98 for the circuit of Figure P6.99.
L=1 mH,
R=1 Ω,
C=0.25 μF.
H(
f
)=
V
out
/
V
in
.
R=10 Ω, L=10 mH,
C=0.02533 μF.

Section 6.10: Digital Signal Processing
Figure P6.99 
P6.100. Develop a digital filter that mimics the action of the RL filter shown in Figure P6.100.
Determine expressions for the coefficients in terms of the time constant and sampling interval T.
[Hint: If your circuit equation contains an integral, differentiate with respect to time to obtain a
pure differential equation.]
Figure P6.100 
a. Given 
and 
sketch the step response of the circuit to scale.
b. Use MATLAB to determine and plot the step response of the digital filter for several time
constants. Use the time constant of part (b) and 
Compare the results of
parts (b) and (c).
P6.101. Repeat Problem P6.100 for the filter shown in Figure P6.101.
Figure P6.101 
*P6.102. Consider the second-order bandpass filter shown in Figure P6.102.
R=10 Ω
L=200 mH,
f
s
=500 Hz.

Figure P6.102 
a. Derive expressions for L and C in terms of the resonant frequency 
and quality factor
b. Write the KVL equation for the circuit and use it to develop a digital filter that mimics the
action of the RLC filter. Use the results of part (a) to write the coefficients in terms of the
resonant frequency 
circuit quality factor 
and sampling interval T. [Hint: The
circuit equation contains an integral, so differentiate with respect to time to obtain a pure
differential equation.]
ω
0
Q
s
.
ω
0
,
Q
s
,

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T6.1. What is the basic concept of Fourier theory as it relates to real-world signals? How does
the transfer function of a filter relate to this concept?
T6.2. An input signal given by
is applied to the RL filter shown in Figure T6.2. Find the expression for the output signal 
Figure T6.2 
T6.3. Consider the Bode magnitude plot for the transfer function of a certain filter given by
a. What is the slope of the low-frequency asymptote?
b. What is the slope of the high-frequency asymptote?
c. What are the coordinates of the point at which the asymptotes meet?
d. What type of filter is this?
e. What is the value of the break frequency?
T6.4. A series resonant circuit has 
and 
Determine the values of:
a. the resonant frequency in Hz.
b. Q.
c. bandwidth in Hz.
d. the impedance of the circuit at the resonant frequency.
e. the impedance of the circuit at dc.
v
in
(
t
)=
3+4 cos(
1000πt
)
+5 cos(
2000πt−30°
)
v
out
(
t
).
H(
f
)=
V
out
V
in
=50 
j(
f/200
)
1+j(
f/200
)
R=5 Ω,
L=20 mH,
C=1 μF.

f. f.  the impedance of the circuit as the frequency approaches infinity.
T6.5. Repeat question T6.4 for a parallel resonant circuit with 
and
T6.6. We have a signal consisting of voice conversations and music with frequency components
from about 30 Hz to 8 kHz plus a loud sinusoidal tone of 800 Hz. Specify the type of ideal filter
and cutoff frequencies if
a. we want nearly all of the voice and music components to pass through the filter with the
800 Hz tone eliminated, so we can monitor the conversations better.
b. we want to eliminate nearly all of the voice and music components and pass the 800 Hz
tone through the filter so we can monitor slow variations in its amplitude, which can give
information about movement of the persons speaking.
 T6.7. Consider the transfer function 
for each of the circuits shown in Figure T6.7.
Classify each circuit as a first-order lowpass filter, second-order bandpass filter, etc. Justify your
answers.
Figure T6.7 
T6.8. Give a list of MATLAB commands to produce the magnitude Bode plot for the transfer
function of question T6.3 for frequency ranging from 10 Hz to 10 kHz.
R=10 kΩ, L=1 mH,
C=1000 pF.
V
out
/
V
in


Chapter 7 Logic Circuits
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
State the advantages of digital technology over analog technology.
Understand the terminology of digital circuits.
Convert numbers between decimal, binary, and other forms.
Use the Gray code for position and angular sensors.
Understand the binary arithmetic operations used in computers and other digital systems.
Interconnect logic gates of various types to implement a given logic function.
Use Karnaugh maps to minimize the number of gates needed to implement a logic function.
Understand how gates are connected together to form flip-flops and registers.
Introduction to this chapter:
So far, we have considered circuits, such as filters, that process analog signals. For
an analog signal, each amplitude in a continuous range has a unique significance.

For example, a position sensor may produce an analog signal that is proportional to
displacement. Each amplitude represents a different position. An analog signal is
shown in Figure 7.1(a).
Figure 7.1 
Analog signals take a continuum of amplitude values. Digital signals take a few
discrete amplitudes.
In this chapter, we introduce circuits that process digital signals. For a digital
signal, only a few restricted ranges of amplitude are allowed, and each amplitude in
a given range has the same significance. Most common are binary signals that take
on amplitudes in only two ranges, and the information associated with the ranges is
represented by the logic values 1 or 0. An example of a digital signal is shown in
Figure 7.1(b). Computers are examples of digital circuits. We will see that digital
approaches have some important advantages over analog approaches.

7.1 Basic Logic Circuit Concepts
We often encounter analog signals in instrumentation of physical systems. For example, a pressure
transducer can yield a voltage that is proportional to pressure versus time in the cylinder of an internal
combustion engine. In Section 6.10, we saw that analog signals can be converted to equivalent digital
signals that contain virtually the same information. Then, computers or other digital circuits can be used
to process this information. In many applications, we have a choice between digital and analog
approaches.
Advantages of the Digital Approach
Provided that the noise amplitude is not too large, the logic values represented
by a digital signal can still be determined after noise is added.
Digital signals have several important advantages over analog signals. After noise is added to an analog
signal, it is usually impossible to determine the precise amplitude of the original signal. On the other
hand, after noise is added to a digital signal, we can still determine the logic values—provided that the
noise amplitude is not too large. This is illustrated in Figure 7.2.

Figure 7.2 
The information (logic values) represented by a digital signal can still be determined precisely after noise
is added. Noise obscures the information contained in an analog signal because the original amplitude
cannot be determined exactly after noise is added.
For a given type of logic circuit, one range of voltages represents logic 1, and another range of voltages
represents logic 0. For proper operation, a logic circuit only needs to produce a voltage somewhere in
the correct range. Thus, component values in digital circuits do not need to be as precise as in analog
circuits.
With modern IC technology, it is possible to manufacture exceedingly complex
digital circuits economically.
It turns out that with modern integrated-circuit (IC) manufacturing technology, very complex digital logic
circuits (containing millions of components) can be produced economically. Analog circuits often call for
large capacitances and precise component values that are impossible to manufacture as large-scale
ICs. Thus, digital systems have become increasingly important in the past few decades, a trend that will
continue.

Positive versus Negative Logic
Usually, the higher amplitude in a binary system represents 1 and the lower-amplitude range represents
0. In this case, we say that we have positive logic. On the other hand, it is possible to represent 1 by
the lower amplitude and 0 by the higher amplitude, resulting in negative logic. Unless stated otherwise,
we assume positive logic throughout this book.
The logic value 1 is also called high, true, or on. Logic 0 is also called low, false, or off. Signals in logic
systems switch between high and low as the information being represented changes. We denote these
signals, or logic variables, by uppercase letters such as A, B, and C.
Logic Ranges and Noise Margins
Logic circuits are typically designed so that a range of input voltages is accepted as logic 1 and another
nonoverlapping range of voltages is accepted as logic 0. The input voltage accepted as logic 0, or low,
is denoted as 
 and the smallest input voltage accepted as logic 1, or high, is denoted as 
 This is
illustrated in Figure 7.3. No meaning is assigned to voltages between 
 and 
which normally
occur only during transitions.
Figure 7.3 
Voltage ranges for logic-circuit inputs and outputs.
For a logic signal, one range of amplitudes represents logic 1, a nonoverlapping
range represents logic 0, and no meaning is assigned to the remaining
amplitudes, which ordinarily do not occur or occur only during transitions.
VIL,
VIH.
VIL
V
IH
,

Furthermore, the circuits are designed so that the output voltages fall into narrower ranges than the
inputs (provided that the inputs are in the acceptable ranges). This is also illustrated in Figure 7.3. 
is the highest logic-0 output voltage, and 
is the lowest logic-1 output voltage.
Because noise can be added to a logic signal in the interconnections between outputs and inputs, it is
important that the outputs have narrower ranges than the acceptable inputs. The differences are called
noise margins and are given by
Ideally, noise margins are as large as possible.
Digital Words
A single binary digit, called a bit, represents a very small amount of information. For example, a logic
variable R could be used to represent whether or not it is raining in a particular location (say 
if it is
raining, and 
if it is not raining).
To represent more information, we resort to using groups of logic variables called digital words. For
example, the word RWS could be formed, in which R represents rain, W is 1 if the wind velocity is
greater than 15 miles per hour and 0 for less wind, and S could be 1 for sunny conditions and 0 for
cloudy. Then the digital word 110 would tell us that it is rainy, windy, and cloudy. A byte is a word
consisting of eight bits, and a nibble is a four-bit word.
Transmission of Digital Information
In parallel transmission, an n-bit word is transferred on 
wires, one wire for each bit, plus a
common or ground wire. On the other hand, in serial transmission, the successive bits of the word are
transferred one after the other with a single pair of wires. At the receiving end, the bits are collected and
combined into words. Parallel transmission is faster and often used for short distances, such as internal
data transfer in a computer. Long-distance digital communication systems are usually serial.
Examples of Digital Information-Processing Systems
V
OL
V
OH
N
M
L
=
V
IL
−
V
OL
N
M
H
=
V
OH
−
V
IH
R=1
R=0
n+1

By using a prearranged 100-bit word consisting of logic values and binary numbers, we could give a
rather precise report of weather conditions at a given location. Computers, such as those used by the
National Weather Bureau, process words received from various weather stations to produce contour
maps of temperature, wind velocity, cloud state, precipitation, and so on. These maps are useful in
understanding and predicting weather patterns.
Analog signals can be reconstructed from their periodic samples (i.e., measurements of instantaneous
amplitude at uniformly spaced points in time), provided that the sampling rate is high enough. Each
amplitude value can be represented as a digital word. Thus, an analog signal can be represented by a
sequence of digital words. In playback, the digital words are converted to the corresponding analog
amplitudes. This is the principle of the compact-disc recording technique.
Thus, electronic circuits can gather, store, transmit, and process information in digital form to produce
results that are useful or pleasing.

7.2 Representation of Numerical Data in Binary Form
Binary Numbers
Because digital circuits are (almost always) designed to operate with only two
symbols, 0 or 1, it is necessary to represent numerical and other data as words
composed of 0s and 1s.
Digital words can represent numerical data. First, consider the decimal (base 10) number 743.2. We
interpret this number as
Similarly, the binary or base-two number 1101.1 is interpreted as
Hence, the binary number 1101.1 is equivalent to the decimal number 13.5. Where confusion seems
likely to occur, we use a subscript to distinguish binary numbers (such as 
) from decimal
numbers (such as 
).
With three bits, we can form 
distinct words. These words can represent the decimal integers 0
through 7 as shown:
000
0
001
1
7×
10
2
+4×
10
1
+3×
10
0
+2×
10
−1
1×
2
3
+1×
2
2
+0×
2
1
+1×
2
0
+1×
2
−1
=13.5
1101.1
2
13.5
10
2
3

010
2
011
3
100
4
101
5
110
6
111
7
Similarly, a four-bit word has 16 combinations that represent the integers 0 through 15. (Frequently, we
include leading zeros in discussing binary numbers in a digital circuit, because circuits are usually
designed to operate on fixed-length words and the circuit produces the leading zeros.)
Conversion of Decimal Numbers to Binary Form
To convert a decimal integer to binary, we repeatedly divide by two until the quotient is zero. Then, the
remainders read in reverse order give the binary form of the number.
 Example 7.1 Converting a Decimal Integer to Binary
Convert the decimal integer 
to binary.
Solution 
The operations are shown in Figure 7.4. The decimal number is repeatedly divided by two. When
the quotient reaches zero, we stop. Then, the binary equivalent is read as the remainders in reverse
order. From the figure, we see that
343
10
343
10
=
101010111
2

Figure 7.4 
Conversion of 
to binary form.
To convert decimal fractions to binary fractions, we repeatedly multiply the fractional part by two and
retain the whole parts of the results as the successive bits of the binary fraction.
Example 7.2 Converting a Decimal Fraction to Binary
Convert 
to its closest six-bit binary equivalent.
Solution 
The conversion is illustrated in Figure 7.5. The fractional part of the number is repeatedly multiplied
by two. The whole part of each product is retained as a bit of the binary equivalent. We stop when
the desired degree of precision has been reached. Thus, from the figure, we have
Figure 7.5 
Conversion of 
to binary.
To convert a decimal number having both whole and fractional parts, we convert each part separately
and then combine the parts.
343
10
0.392
10
0.392
10
>
0.011001
2
0.392
10

 Example 7.3 Converting Decimal Values to Binary
Convert 
to binary.
Convert the whole and fractional parts of the number separately and combine
the results.
Solution 
From Examples 7.1 and 7.2, we have
and
Combining these results, we get
Example 7.4 Converting Binary Numbers to Decimal
Convert the binary number 
to decimal.
Solution 
We have
Exercise 7.1 
Convert the following numbers to binary form, stopping after you have found six bits (if necessary) for
the fractional part:
343.392
10
343
10
=
101010111
2
0.392
10
≅
0.011001
2
343.392
10
≅
101010111.011001
2
10011.011
2
10011.011
2
=1×
2
4
+0×
2
3
+0×
2
2
+1×
2
1
+1×
2
0
+0×
2
−1
+1×
2
−2
+1×
2
−3
=
19.375
10

a. 23.75;
b. 17.25;
c. 4.3.
Answer 
a. 10111.11;
b. 10001.01;
c. 100.010011.
Exercise 7.2 
Convert the following to decimal equivalents:
a. 
b. 
Answer 
a. 
b. 
Binary Arithmetic
We add binary numbers in much the same way that we add decimal numbers, except that the rules of
addition are different (and much simpler). The rules for binary addition are shown in Figure 7.6.
Figure 7.6 
Rules of binary addition.
Example 7.5 Adding Binary Numbers
Add the binary numbers 1000.111 and 1100.011.
1101.111
2
;
100.001
2
.
13.875
10
;
4.125
10
.

Solution 
See Figure 7.7.
Figure 7.7 
Addition of binary numbers.
Hexadecimal and Octal Numbers
Binary numbers are inconvenient for humans because it takes many bits to write large numbers (or
fractions to a high degree of precision). Hexadecimal (base 16) and octal (base 8) numbers are easily
converted to and from binary numbers. Furthermore, they are much more efficient than binary numbers
in representing information.
Table 7.1 shows the symbols used for hexadecimal and octal numbers and their binary equivalents.
Notice that we need 16 symbols for the digits of a hexadecimal number. Customarily, the letters A
through F are used to represent the digits for 10 through 15.
Table 7.1. Symbols for Octal and Hexadecimal Numbers and Their Binary Equivalents
Octal
Hexadecimal
0
000
0
0000
1
001
1
0001
2
010
2
0010
3
011
3
0011
4
100
4
0100
5
101
5
0101
6
110
6
0110

7
111
7
0111
8
1000
9
1001
A
1010
B
1011
C
1100
D
1101
E
1110
F
1111
Example 7.6 Converting Octal Numbers to Decimal
Convert the octal number 
to decimal.
Solution 
We have
Example 7.7 Converting Hexadecimal Numbers to Decimal
Convert the hexadecimal number 
to decimal.
Solution 
We have
We can convert an octal or hexadecimal number to binary simply by substituting the binary equivalents
for each digit.
173.21
8
173.21
8
=1×
8
2
+7×
8
1
+3×
8
0
+2×
8
−1
+1×
8
−2
=
123.265625
10
1FA.2
A
16
1FA.2
A
16
=1×
16
2
+15×
16
1
+10×
16
0
+2×
16
−1
+10×
16
−2
 
=
506.1640625
10

Example 7.8 Converting Octal and Hexadecimal Numbers to Binary
Convert the numbers 
and 
to binary.
In converting an octal or hexadecimal number to binary, use Table 7.1 to
replace each digit by its binary equivalent.
Solution 
We simply use Table 7.1 to replace each digit by its binary equivalent. Thus, we have
and
In converting binary numbers to octal, we first arrange the bits in groups of three, starting from the
binary point and working outward. If necessary, we insert leading or trailing zeros to complete the
groups. Then, we convert each group of three bits to its octal equivalent. Conversion to hexadecimal
uses the same approach, except that the binary number is arranged in groups of four bits.
Example 7.9 Converting Binary Numbers to Octal or Hexadecimal
Convert 
to octal and to hexadecimal.
Working both directions from the binary point, group the bits into three-(octal)
or four-(hexadecimal) bit words. Add leading or trailing zeros to complete the
groups. Then, use Table 7.1 to replace each binary word by the
corresponding symbol.
317.2
8
F3A
.2
16
317.2
8
=011 001 
111.010
2
=
011001111.010
2
F3A
.2
16
=1111 0011 1010.0010
=
111100111010.0010
2
11110110.1
2

Solution 
For conversion to octal, we first form three-bit groups, working outward from the binary point:
Notice that we have appended leading and trailing zeros so that each group contains three bits.
Next, we write the octal digit for each group. Thus, we have
For conversion to hexadecimal, we form four-bit groups appending leading and trailing zeros as
needed. Then, we convert each group to its equivalent hexadecimal integer, yielding
Exercise 7.3 
Convert the following numbers to binary, octal, and hexadecimal forms:
a. 
b. 
Answer 
a. 
b. 
Exercise 7.4 
Convert the following numbers to binary form:
a. 
b. 
Answer 
a. 
b. 
11110110.1
2
=011 110 110.100
11110110.1
2
=011 110 110.100=
366.4
8
11110110.1
2
=1111 0110.1000=F
6.8
16
97
10
;
229
10
.
97
10
=
1100001
2
=
141
8
=
61
16
;
229
10
=
11100101
2
=
345
8
=
E
5
16
.
72
8
;
FA
6
16
.
111010
2
;
111110100110
2
.

Binary-Coded Decimal Format
In converting a decimal number to BCD, each digit is replaced by its four-bit
equivalent.
Sometimes, decimal numbers are represented in binary form simply by writing the four-bit equivalents
for each digit. The resulting numbers are said to be in binary-coded decimal (BCD) format. For
example, 93.2 becomes
Code groups 1010, 1011, 1100, 1101, 1110, and 1111 do not occur in BCD (unless an error has
occurred). Calculators frequently represent numbers internally in BCD format. As each key is pressed,
the BCD code group is stored. The operation
would appear in BCD format as
Even though binary code words are used to represent the decimal integers, the operations inside a
calculator are partly decimal in nature. On the other hand, calculations are often carried out in true
binary fashion in computers.
Exercise 7.5 
Express 
in BCD form.
Answer 
Gray Code
93.2=1001 
0011.0010
BCD
9×3=27
1001×0011=0010 0111
197
10

197
10
=
000110010111
BCD
.

Consider a transducer for encoding the position of a robot arm in which black-and-white bands are
placed on the arm as illustrated in Figure 7.8. In the figure, we assume that the bands are read by light-
sensitive diodes in which a black band is converted to logic 1 and a white band is converted to logic 0.
Figure 7.8 
Black and white bands that can be read by a photodiode array resulting in a digital word representing
the position of a robot arm.
A problem occurs if the successive positions are represented by the binary code shown in Figure 7.8(a).
For example, when the arm moves from the position represented by 0011 to that of 0100, three bits of
the code word must change. Suppose that because the photodiode sensors are not perfectly aligned,
0011 first changes to 0001, then to 0000, and finally to 0100. During this transition, the indicated
position is far from the actual position.
In a Gray code, each word differs in only one bit from each of its adjacent words.
A better scheme for coding the positions is to use the Gray code shown in Fig­ure 7.8(b). In a Gray
code, each code word differs in only one bit from its neighboring code words. Thus, erroneous position
indications are avoided during transitions. Gray codes of any desired length can be constructed as
shown in Figure 7.9. (Notice that successive code words differ in a single bit.)

Figure 7.9 
A one-bit Gray code simply consists of the two words 0 and 1. To create a Gray code of length n, repeat
the code of length 
in reverse order, place a 0 on the left-hand side of each word in the first half of
the list, and place a 1 on the left-hand side of each word in the second half of the list.
Gray codes are also used to encode the angular position of rotating shafts. Then, the last word in the list
wraps around and is adjacent to the first word. To represent angular position with a resolution better
than 1 degree, we would need a nine-bit Gray code consisting of 
words. Each word would
represent an angular sector of 
degree in width.
Exercise 7.6 
We wish to represent the position of a robot arm with a resolution of 0.01 inch or better. The range of
motion is 20 inches. How many bits are required for a Gray code that can represent the arm position?
Answer 11 bits.
Complement Arithmetic
The one's complement of a binary number is obtained by replacing 1s by 0s, and vice versa. For
example, an eight-bit binary number and its one's complement are
The two's complement of a binary number is obtained by adding 1 to the one's complement,
neglecting the carry (if any) out of the most significant bit (MSB). For example, to find the two's
complement of
we first form the one's complement, which is
n−1
2
9
=512
360/512=0.703
01001101
10110010 (
one's complement
)
01001100

and then add 1. This is illustrated in Figure 7.10(a).
Figure 7.10 
Two ways to find the two's complement of the binary number 01001100.
Another way to obtain the two's complement of a number is to copy the number—working from right to
left—until after the first 1 is copied. Then, the remaining bits are inverted. An example of this process is
shown in Figure 7.10(b).
Complements are useful for representing negative numbers and performing subtraction in computers.
Furthermore, the use of complement arithmetic simplifies the design of digital computers. Most common
is the signed two's-complement representation, in which the first bit is taken as the sign bit. If the
number is positive, the first bit is 0, whereas if the number is negative, the first bit is 1. Negative
numbers are represented as the two's complement of the corresponding positive number. Figure 7.11
shows the signed two's-complement representation using eight bits. In this case, the range of numbers
that can be represented runs from 
to 
Of course, if longer words are used, the range is
extended.
Figure 7.11 
Signed two's-complement representation using eight-bit words.
Subtraction is performed by first finding the two's complement of the subtrahend and then adding in
binary fashion and ignoring any carry out of the sign bit.
10110011
−128
+127.

Example 7.10 Subtraction Using Two's-Complement Arithmetic
Perform the operation 
by using eight-bit signed two's-complement arithmetic.
Solution 
First, we convert 
and 
to binary form. This yields
and
Next, we find the two's complement of the subtrahend:
Finally, we add the numbers to find the result:
Of course, performing addition and subtraction in this manner is tedious for humans. However,
computers excel at performing simple operations rapidly and accurately.
In performing two's-complement arithmetic, we must be aware of the possibility of overflow in which the
result exceeds the maximum value that can be represented by the word length in use. For example, if
we use eight-bit words to add
and
we obtain
The result is the signed two's-complement representation for 
rather than the correct answer, which
is 
This error occurs because the signed two's-complement representation has a maximum
29
10
−
27
10
29
10
27
10
29
10
=00011101
27
10
=00011011
−
27
10
=11100101
00011101
29
+ 
11100101
_
+
(
−27
)
_
ignore carry out of sign bit→00000010
2
97
10
=01100001
63
10
=00111111
01100001
+
00111111
_
10100000
−96,
97+63=160.

value of 
(assuming eight-bit words).
Similarly, underflow occurs if the result of an arithmetic operation is less than 
Overflow and
underflow are not possible if the two numbers to be added have opposite signs. If the two numbers to be
added have the same sign and the result has the opposite sign, underflow or overflow has occurred.
If the two numbers to be added have the same sign and the result has the
opposite sign, overflow or underflow has occurred.
Exercise 7.7 
Find the eight-bit signed two's-complement representation of
a. 
and
b. 
Answer 
a. 00010110;
b. 11100010.
Exercise 7.8 
Carry out 
in eight-bit signed two's-complement form.
Answer 
+127
−128.
22
10
−
30
10
.
19
10
−
4
10
19
00010011
+
(
−4
)
_
+
11111100
_
15
00001111

7.3 Combinatorial Logic Circuits
In this section, we consider circuits called logic gates that combine several logic-variable inputs to
produce a logic-variable output. We focus on the external behavior of logic gates. Later, in Chapter 11,
we will see how gate circuits can be implemented with field-effect transistors.
The circuits that we are about to discuss are said to be memoryless because their output values at a
given instant depend only on the input values at that instant. Later, we consider logic circuits that are
said to possess memory, because their present output values depend on previous, as well as present,
input values.
AND Gate
An important logic function is called the AND operation. The AND operation on two logic variables, A
and B, is represented as AB, read as "A and B." The AND operation is also called logical
multiplication.
One way to specify a combinatorial logic system is to list all the possible combinations of the input
variables and the corresponding output values. Such a listing is called a truth table. The truth table for
the AND operation of two variables is shown in Figure 7.12(a). Notice that AB is 1 if and only if A and B
are both 1.
Figure 7.12 
Two-input AND gate.
For the AND operation, we can write the following relations:

The circuit symbol for a two-input AND gate (i.e., a circuit that produces an output equal to the AND
operation of the inputs) is shown in Figure 7.12(b).
It is possible to have AND gates with more than two inputs. For example, the truth table and circuit
symbol for a three-input AND gate are shown in Figure 7.13.
Figure 7.13 
Three-input AND gate.
Logic Inverter
The NOT operation on a logic variable is represented by placing a bar over the symbol for the logic
variable. The symbol 
is read as "not A" or as "A inverse." If A is 0, 
is 1, and vice versa.
Circuits that perform the NOT operation are called inverters. The truth table and circuit symbol for an
inverter are shown in Figure 7.14. The bubble placed at the output of the inverter symbol is used to
indicate inversion.
AA=A
(7.1)
A1=A
(7.2)
A0=0
(7.3)
AB=BA
(7.4)
A(
BC
)=(
AB
)C=ABC
(7.5)
A
¯
A
¯

Figure 7.14 
Logical inverter.
We can readily establish the following operations for the NOT operation:
OR Gate
The OR operation of logic variables is written as 
which is read as "A or B." The truth table and the
circuit symbol for a two-input OR gate are shown in Figure 7.15. Notice that 
is 1 if A or B (or both)
are 1. The OR operation is also called logical addition. The truth table and circuit symbol for a three-
input OR gate are shown in Figure 7.16. For the OR operation, we can write
Figure 7.15 
Two-input OR gate.
A
A
¯
=0
(7.6)
A
¯
¯
=A
(7.7)
A+B,
A+B

Figure 7.16 
Three-input OR gate.
Boolean Algebra
Equation Equation 7.13 illustrates that even though we use the addition sign 
to represent the OR
operation, manipulation of logic variables by the AND, OR, and NOT operations is different from
ordinary algebra. The mathematical theory of logic variables is called Boolean algebra, named for
mathematician George Boole.
One way to prove a Boolean algebra identity is to produce a truth table that lists all possible
combinations of the variables and to show that both sides of the expression yield the same results.
Example 7.11 Using a Truth Table to Prove a Boolean Expression
(
A+B
)+C=A+(
B+C
)=A+B+C
(7.8)
A(
B+C
)=AB+AC
(7.9)
A+0=A
(7.10)
A+1=1
(7.11)
A+
A
¯
=1
(7.12)
A+A=A
(7.13)
(
+
)

Prove the associative law for the OR operation (Equation 7.8), which states that
Solution 
The truth table listing all possible combinations of the variables and the values of both sides of
Equation 7.8 is shown in Table 7.2. We can see from the truth table that 
and 
take the same logic values for all combinations of A, B, and C. Because both expressions yield the
same results, the parentheses are not necessary, and we can write
Table 7.2 Truth Table Used to Prove the Associative Law for the OR Operation (Equation 7.8)
A
B
C
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Exercise 7.9 
Use truth tables to prove Equations 7.5 and 7.9.
Answer See Tables 7.3 and 7.4.
Table 7.3 Truth Table Used to Prove That 
(Equation 7.5)
A
B
C
(AB)
(BC)
(AB)C
A(BC)
(
A+B
)+C=A+(
B+C
)
A+(
B+C
)
(
A+B
)+C
A+(
B+C
)=(
A+B
)+C=A+B+C
(
A+B
)
(
B+C
)
A+(
B+C
)
(
A+B
)+C
A+B+C
A(
BC
)=(
AB
)C

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Table 7.4 Truth Table Used to Prove That 
(Equation 7.9)
A
B
C
AB
AC
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
A(
B+C
)=AB+AC
(
B+C
)
AB+AC
A(
B+C
)

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Exercise 7.10
Prepare a truth table for the logic expression 
Answer See Table 7.5.
Table 7.5 Truth Table for 
A
B
C
AB
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Implementation of Boolean Expressions
Boolean algebra expressions can be implemented by interconnection of AND
D=AB+C.
D=AB+C
D=AB+C

gates, OR gates, and inverters.
Boolean algebra expressions can be implemented by interconnection of AND gates, OR gates, and
inverters. For example, the logic expression
can be implemented by the logic circuit shown in Figure 7.17.
Figure 7.17 
A circuit that implements the logic expression 
Sometimes, we can manipulate a logic expression to find an equivalent expression that is simpler. For
example, the last term on the right-hand side of Equation 7.14 can be expanded, resulting in
But the term 
always has the logic value 0, so it can be dropped from the expression. Factoring the
first two terms on the right-hand side of Equation 7.15 results in
However, the quantity 
always equals 1, so we can write
Factoring C from the first three terms on the right-hand side, we have
F=A
B
¯
C+ABC+(
C+D
)(
D
¯
+E
)
(7.14)
F=A
B
¯
C+ABC+(
C+D
)(
D
¯
+E
).
F=A
B
¯
C+ABC+C
D
¯
+CE+D
D
¯
+DE
(7.15)
D
D
¯
F=AC(
B
¯
+B
)+C
D
¯
+CE+DE
(7.16)
B
¯
+B
F=AC+C
D
¯
+CE+DE
(7.17)
F=C(
A+
D
¯
+E
)+DE
(7.18)

This can be implemented as shown in Figure 7.18.
Figure 7.18 
A simpler circuit equivalent to that of Figure 7.17.
We can often find alternative implementations for a given logic function.
Thus, we can often find alternative implementations for a given. Later, we consider methods for finding
the implementation using the fewest gates of a given type.
De Morgan's Laws
Two important results in Boolean algebra are De Morgan's laws, which are given by
and
De Morgan's laws can be extended to three variables as follows:
Another way to state these laws is as follows: If the variables in a logic expression are replaced by their
inverses, the AND operation is replaced by OR, the OR operation is replaced by AND, and the entire
expression is inverted, the resulting logic expression yields the same values as before the changes.
AB=
A
¯
+
B
¯
¯
(7.19)
A+B=
A
¯
 
B
¯
¯
(7.20)
ABC=
A
¯
+
B
¯
+
C
¯
¯
 and A+B+C=
A
¯
 
B
¯
 
C
¯
¯

Thus, De Morgan's laws can be used to change any (or all) of the AND operations in a logic expression
to OR operations and vice versa. By changing various combinations of the operations, a variety of
equivalent expressions can be found.
Example 7.12 Applying De Morgan's Laws
Apply De Morgan's laws, changing all of the ORs to ANDs and all of the ANDs to ORs, to the right-
hand side of the logic expression:
Solution 
First, we replace each variable by its inverse, resulting in the expression
Then, we replace the AND operation by OR, and vice versa:
Finally, inverting the expression, we can write
Therefore, De Morgan's laws give us alternative ways to write logic expressions.
Exercise 7.11 
Use De Morgan's laws to find alternative expressions for
and
Answer 
D=AC+
B
¯
C+
A
¯
(
B
¯
+BC
)
A
¯
 
C
¯
+B
C
¯
+A(
B+
B
¯
 
C
¯
)
(
A
¯
+
C
¯
)(
B+
C
¯
)[ A+B(
B
¯
+
C
¯
)
]
D=
(
A
¯
+
C
¯
)(
B+
C
¯
)[ A+B(
B
¯
+
C
¯
)
]
¯
D=AB+
B
¯
C
E=
[ F(
G+
H
¯
)+F
G
¯
]
¯
D=
(
A
¯
+
B
¯
)(
B+
C
¯
)
¯
E=(
F
¯
+
G
¯
H
)(
F
¯
+G
)

Any combinatorial logic function can be implemented solely with AND gates and
inverters.
An important implication of De Morgan's laws is that we can implement any logic function by using AND
gates and inverters. This is true because Equation 7.20 can be employed to replace the OR operation
by the AND operation (and logical inversions).
Any combinatorial logic function can be implemented solely with OR gates and
inverters.
Similarly, any logic function can be implemented with OR gates and inverters, because Equation 7.19
can be used to replace the AND operation with the OR operation (and logical inversions). Consequently,
to implement a logic function, we need inverters and either AND gates or OR gates, not both.
NAND, NOR, and XOR Gates
Some additional logic gates are shown in Figure 7.19. The NAND gate is equivalent to an AND gate
followed by an inverter. Notice that the symbol is the same as for an AND gate, with a bubble at the
output terminal to indicate that the output has been inverted after the AND operation. Similarly, the NOR
gate is equivalent to an OR gate followed by an inverter.
Figure 7.19 
Additional logic-gate symbols.

The exclusive-OR (XOR) operation for two logic variables A and B is represented by 
and is defined
by
Notice that the XOR operation yields 1 if A is 1 or if B is 1, but yields 0 if both A and B are 1. The XOR
operation is also known as modulo-two addition.
A buffer has a single input and produces an output with the same value as the input. (Buffers are
commonly used to provide large currents when a logic signal must be applied to a low-impedance load.)
The equivalence gate produces a high output only if both inputs have the same value. In effect, it is an
XOR followed by an inverter as the symbol of Figure 7.19(e) implies.
Logical Sufficiency of NAND Gates or of NOR Gates
As we have seen, several combinations of gates often can be found that perform the same function. For
example, if the inputs to a NAND are tied together, an inverter results. This is true because
which is illustrated in Figure 7.20(a).
Figure 7.20 
Basic Boolean operations can be implemented with NAND gates. Therefore, any Boolean function can
be implemented by the use of NAND gates alone.
Any combinatorial logic function can be implemented solely with NAND gates.
A⊕B
0⊕0=0
1⊕0=1
0⊕1=1
1⊕1=0
(
AA
)
¯
=
A
¯

Furthermore, as shown by De Morgan's laws, the OR operation can be realized by inverting the input
variables and combining the results in a NAND gate. This is shown in Figure 7.20(b), in which the
inverters are formed from NAND gates. Finally, a NAND followed by an inverter results in an AND gate.
Since the basic logic functions (AND, OR, and NOT) can be realized by using only NAND gates, we
conclude that NAND gates are sufficient to realize any combinatorial logic function.
Any combinatorial logic function can be implemented solely with NOR gates.
Exercise 7.12 
Show how to use only NOR gates to realize the AND, OR, and NOT functions.
Answer See Figure 7.21.
Figure 7.21 
The AND, OR, and NOT operations can be implemented with NOR gates. Thus, any combinatorial logic
circuit can be designed by using only NOR gates. See Exercise 7.12.

7.4 Synthesis of Logic Circuits
In this section, we consider methods to implement logic circuits given the specification for the output in
terms of the inputs. Often, the initial specification for a logic circuit is given in natural language. This is
translated into a truth table or a Boolean logic expression that can be manipulated to find a practical
implementation.
Sum-of-Products Implementation
Consider the truth table shown in Table 7.6. A, B, and C are input logic variables, and D is the desired
output. Notice that we have numbered the rows of the truth table with the decimal number
corresponding to the binary number formed by ABC.
Table 7.6 Truth Table Used to Illustrate SOP and POS Logical Expressions
Row
A
B
C
D
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
2
0
1
0
1
3
0
1
1
0
4
1
0
0
0
5
1
0
1
0
6
1
1
0
1
7
1
1
1
1
Suppose that we want to find a logic circuit that produces the output variable D. One way to write a logic
expression for Dis to concentrate on the rows of the truth table for which D is 1. In Table 7.6, these are

the rows numbered 0,2,6, and 7. Then, we write a logical product of the input logic variables or their
inverses that equals 1 for each of these rows. Each input variable or its inverse is included in each
product. In writing the product for each row, we invert the logic variables that are 0 in that row. For
example, the logical product 
equals logic 1 only for row 0. Similarly, 
equals
logic 1 only for row 2, 
equals logic 1 only for row 6, and ABC equals 1 only for row 7. Product
terms that include all of the input variables (or their inverses) are called minterms.
Finally, we write an expression for the output variable as a logical sum of minterms. For Table 7.6, it
yields
This type of expression is called a sum of products (SOP). Following this procedure, we can always
find an SOP expression for a logic output given the truth table. A logic circuit that implements Equation
7.21 directly is shown in Figure 7.22.
Figure 7.22 
Sum-of-products logic circuit for Table 7.6.
In a sum-of-products expression, we form a product of all the input variables (or
their inverses) for each row of the truth table for which the result is logic 1. The
output is the sum of these products.
A
¯
 
B
¯
 
C
¯
A
¯
B
C
¯
AB
C
¯
D=
A
¯
 
B
¯
 
C
¯
+
A
¯
B
C
¯
+AB
C
¯
+ABC
(7.21)

A shorthand way to write an SOP is simply to list the row numbers of the truth table for which the output
is logic 1. Thus, we can write
in which m indicates that we are summing the minterms corresponding to the rows enumerated.
Product-of-Sums Implementation
Another way to write a logic expression for D is to concentrate on the rows of the truth table for which D
is 0. For example, in Table 7.6, these are the rows numbered 1, 3, 4, and 5. Then, we write a logical
sum that equals 0 for each of these rows. Each input variable or its inverse in included in each sum. In
writing the sum for each row, we invert the logic variables that are 1 in that row. For example, the logical
sum 
equals logic 0 only for row 1. Similarly, 
equals logic 0 only for row 3, 
equals logic 0 only for row 4, and 
equals 0 only for row 5. Sum terms that
include all of the input variables (or their inverses) are called maxterms.
Finally, we write an expression for the output variable as the logical product of maxterms. For Table 7.6,
it yields
This type of expression is called a product of sums (POS). We can always find a POS expression for a
logic output given the truth table. A circuit that implements Equation 7.23 is shown in Figure 7.23.
Figure 7.23 
Product-of-sums logic circuit for Table 7.6.
D=
∑ m(0,2,6,7)
(7.22)
(
A+B+
C
¯
)
(
A+
B
¯
+
C
¯
)
(
A
¯
+B+C
)
(
A
¯
+B+
C
¯
)
D=(
A+B+
C
¯
)(
A+
B
¯
+
C
¯
)(
A
¯
+B+C
)(
A
¯
+B+
C
¯
)
(7.23)

In a product-of-sums expression, we form a sum of all the input variables (or their
inverses) for each row of the truth table for which the result is logic 0. The output
is the product of these sums.
A shorthand way to write a POS is simply to list the row numbers of the truth table for which the output is
logic 1. Thus, we write
in which M indicates the maxterms corresponding to the rows enumerated.
Example 7.13 Combinatorial Logic Circuit Design
The control logic for a residential heating system is to operate as follows: During the daytime,
heating is required only if the temperature falls below 68°F. At night, heating is required only for
temperatures below 62°F. Assume that logic signals D, L, and H are available. D is high during the
daytime and low at night. H is high only if the temperature is above 68°F. L is high only if the
temperature is above 62°F. Design a logic circuit that produces an output signal F that is high only
when heating is required.
Solution 
First, we translate the description of the desired operation into a truth table. This is shown in Figure
7.24(a). We have listed all combinations of the inputs. However, two combinations do not occur
because temperature cannot be below 62°F 
and also be above 68°F 
The output
listed for these combinations is 
which is called a don't care because we don't care what the
output of the logic circuit is for these input combinations.
Some combinations of input variables may not occur; if so, the corresponding
outputs are called "don't cares."
D=∏M(1,3,4,5)
(7.24)
(
L=0
)
(
H=1
).
×,

Figure 7.24 
See Example 7.10.
As we have seen, one way to translate the truth table into a logic expression is to write the SOP in
which there is a separate term for each high output. Applying this approach to Figure 7.24(a) yields
The first term on the right-hand side 
is high only for row 0 of the truth table. Also, the
second term 
is high only for row 4, and the third term 
is high only for row 5. Thus,
the shorthand way to write the logic expression is
Notice that in Equations 7.25 and 7.26, the don't cares turn out to be low.
The logic expression of Equation 7.25 can be manipulated into the form
A logic diagram for this is shown in Figure 7.24(b).
An alternative approach is to write a POS with a separate sum term for each row of the truth table
having an output value of 0. For the truth table of Figure 7.24(a), we have
The first term in the product 
is low only for row 1 of the truth table. (Recall that row 1 is
actually the second row because we start numbering with 0.) The second term 
is low
only for row 3, and the last term in the product is low only for the last row of the truth table.
F=
D
¯
 
H
¯
 
L
¯
+D
H
¯
 
L
¯
+D
H
¯
L
(7.25)
D
¯
 
H
¯
 
L
¯
D
H
¯
 
L
¯
D
H
¯
L
F=∑m(0,4,5)
(7.26)
F=D
H
¯
+
D
¯
 
H
¯
 
L
¯
F=(
D+H+
L
¯
)(
D+
H
¯
+
L
¯
)(
D
¯
+
H
¯
+
L
¯
)
(7.27)
(
D+H+
L
¯
)
(
D+
H
¯
+
L
¯
)

In short form, we can write Equation 7.27 as
For Equations 7.27 and 7.28, the don't cares are high. Because of the different outputs for the don't
cares, the expressions we have given for F in Equations 7.25 and 7.27 are not equivalent.
Exercise 7.13 
Show two ways to realize the XOR operation by using AND, OR, and NOT gates.
Answer See Figure 7.25.
Figure 7.25 
Answer for Exercise 7.13.
Exercise 7.14 
A traditional children's riddle concerns a farmer who is traveling with a sack of rye, a goose, and a
mischievous dog. The farmer comes to a river that he must cross from east to west. A boat is available,
but it only has room for the farmer and one of his possessions. If the farmer is not present, the goose
will eat the rye or the dog will eat the goose.
We wish to design a circuit to emulate the conditions of this riddle. A separate switch is provided for the
farmer, the rye, the goose, and the dog. Each switch has two positions depending on whether the
corresponding object is on the east bank or the west bank of the river. The rules of play stipulate that no
more than two switches be moved at a time and that the farmer must move (to row the boat) each time
switches are moved. The switch for the farmer provides logic signal F, which is high if the farmer is on
the east bank and low if he is on the west bank. Similar logic signals (G for the goose, D for the dog, and
R for the rye) are high if the corresponding object is on the east bank and low if it is on the west bank.
F=∏M(1,3,7)
(7.28)

Find a Boolean logic expression based on the sum-of-products approach for a logic signal A (alarm) that
is high anytime the rye or the goose is in danger of being eaten. Repeat for the product-of-sums
approach.
Answer The truth table is shown in Table 7.7.  The Boolean expressions are
and
Table 7.7 Truth Table for Exercise 7.14
F
D
G
R
A
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
A=∑m(3,6,7,8,9,12)=
F
¯
D
¯
GR+
F
¯
DG
R
¯
+
F
¯
DGR+F
D
¯
G
¯
R
¯
+F
D
¯
G
¯
R+FD
G
¯
R
¯
A=
∏ M(0,1,2,4,5,10,11,13,14,15)

1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
Decoders, Encoders, and Translators
Many useful combinatorial circuits known as decoders, encoders, or translators are available as ICs.
We discuss two examples. In a calculator or watch, we may represent information to be displayed in
BCD form. Thus, 0000 is for 0, 0001 is for 1, 0010 is for 2, 0011 is for 3, and so on. Using four-bit words,
16 combinations are possible. However, only 10 combinations are used in BCD. Codes such as 1010
and 1011 do not occur in BCD.
The calculator display typically consists of liquid crystals with seven segments, as illustrated in Figure
7.26(a). The digits 0 through 9 are displayed by turning on appropriate segments as shown in Figure
7.26(b). Thus, a decoder is needed to translate the four-bit BCD words into seven-bit words of the form
ABCDEFG, for which A is high if segment A of the display is required to be on, B is high if segment B is
required to be on, and so on. Thus, 0000 is translated to 1111110 because all segments except G are
on to display the symbol for zero. Similarly, 0001 becomes 0110000, and 0010 becomes 1101101.
Hence, the BCD-to-seven-segment decoder is a combinatorial circuit having four inputs and seven
outputs.
Figure 7.26 
Seven-segment display.

Another example is the three-to-eight-line decoder that has a three-bit input and eight output lines. The
three-bit input word selects one of the output lines and that output becomes high. The truth table and a
circuit implementation are shown in Figure 7.27.
Figure 7.27 
Three-line-to-eight-line decoder.
Decoders are available that are used to convert binary numbers to BCD, or vice versa, test whether one
number is larger or smaller than another, perform arithmetic operations on binary or BCD numbers, and
many similar functions.

7.5 Minimization of Logic Circuits
Implementations based on either a sum of minterms or a product of maxterms
may not be optimum in minimizing the number of gates needed to realize a logic
function.
We have seen that logic functions can be readily expressed either as a logical sum of minterms or as a
logical product of maxterms. However, direct implementation of either of these expressions may not
yield the best circuit in terms of minimizing the number of gates required. For example, consider the
logical expression
Implemented directly, this expression would require two inverters, four AND gates, and one OR gate.
Factoring the first pair of terms, we have
However, 
so we obtain
Of course, 
only if 
and 
In that case, either 
or 
because we must
have either 
or 
Thus, the term BCD is redundant and can be dropped from the expression.
Then, we get
Only one inverter, two AND gates, and one OR gate are required to implement this expression.
F=
A
¯
 
B
¯
D+
A
¯
BD+BCD+ABC
(7.29)
F=
A
¯
D(
B
¯
+B
)+BCD+ABC
B
¯
+B=1,
F=
A
¯
D+BCD+ABC
BCD=1
B=1, C=1,
D=1.
A
¯
D=1
ABC=1,
A
¯
=1
A=1.
F=
A
¯
D+ABC
(7.30)

Exercise 7.15 
Create a truth table to verify that the right-hand sides of Equations 7.29 and 7.30 yield the same result.
Answer See Table 7.8.
Table 7.8 Answer for Exercise 7.15
A
B
C
D
F
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0

1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
Karnaugh Maps
As we have demonstrated, logic expressions can sometimes be simplified dramatically. However, the
algebraic manipulations needed to simplify a given expression are often not readily apparent. By using a
graphical approach known as the Karnaugh map, we will find it much easier to minimize the number of
terms in a logic expression.
A Karnaugh map is an array of squares. Each square corresponds to one of the minterms of the logic
variables or, equivalently, to one of the rows of the truth table. Karnaugh maps for two, three, and four
variables are shown in Figure 7.28. The two-variable map consists of four squares, one corresponding
to each of the minterms. Similarly, the three-variable map has eight squares, and the four-variable map
has 16 squares.
Figure 7.28 
Karnaugh maps showing the minterms corresponding to some of the squares.
A Karnaugh map is a rectangular array of squares, where each square
represents one of the minterms of the logic variables

The minterms corresponding to some of the squares are shown in Figure 7.28. For example, for the
three-variable map, the minterm 
corresponds to the upper right-hand square. Also, the bit
combinations corresponding to the rows of the truth table are shown down the left-hand side and across
the top of the map. For example, on the four-variable map, the row of the truth table for which the four-
bit word ABCD is 1101 corresponds to the square in the third row (i.e., the row labeled 11) and second
column (i.e., the column labeled 01). Thus, we can readily find the square corresponding to any minterm
or to any row of the truth table.
In case you are wondering about the order of the bit patterns along the side or top of the four-variable
Karnaugh map (i.e., 00 01 11 10), notice that this is a two-bit Gray code. Thus, the patterns for squares
with a common side differ in only one bit, so that similar minterms are grouped together. For example,
the minterms containing A (rather than 
) fall in the bottom half of each map. In the four-variable map,
the minterms containing B are in the middle two rows, the minterms containing AB are in the third row,
and so forth. This grouping of similar terms is the key to simplifying logic circuits.
Exercise 7.16 
a. Write the minterm corresponding to the upper right-hand square in Figure 7.28(c).
b. Write the minterm corresponding to the lower left-hand square.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
The left and right (as well as top and bottom) edges of the Karnaugh map are
considered to be adjacent.
We call two squares that have a common edge a 2-cube. Similarly, four squares with common edges
are called a 4-cube. In locating cubes, the maps should be considered to fold around from top to bottom
and from left to right. Therefore, the squares on the right-hand side are considered to be adjacent to
those on the left-hand side, and the top of the map is adjacent to the bottom. Consequently, the four
squares in the map corners form a 4-cube. Some cubes are illustrated in Figure 7.29.
A
¯
B
C
¯
A
¯
A
¯
 
B
¯
C
D
¯
;
A
B
¯
 
C
¯
 
D
¯
.

Figure 7.29 
Karnaugh maps illustrating cubes.
To map a logic function, we place 1s in the squares for which the logic function takes a value of 1.
Product terms map 1s into cubes. For example, some product terms are mapped in Figure 7.30.
Figure 7.30 
Products of two variables map into 4-cubes on a 4-variable Karnaugh map.
Rectangular arrays (known as cubes) of adjacent squares in a Karnaugh map
represent products of logic variables or their inverses.
In a four-variable map consisting of 16 squares, a single logic variable or its inve­rse covers (maps into)
an 8-cube. A product of two variables (such as AB or 
) covers a 4-cube. A product of three
variables maps into a 2-cube.
The Karnaugh map of the logic function
is shown in Figure 7.31. The squares containing 1s form a 4-cube corresponding to the product term 
A
B
¯
F=
A
¯
 
B
¯
 
C
¯
D+
A
¯
 
B
¯
CD+
A
¯
B
C
¯
D+
A
¯
BCD+ABC
D
¯
+ABCD
(7.31)
A

plus a 2-cube corresponding to ABC. These are the largest cubes that cover the 1s in the map.
Thus, the minimum SOP expression for F is
Because it is relatively easy to spot the set of largest cubes that cover the 1s in a Karnaugh map, we
can quickly minimize a logic function.
By finding the fewest and largest (possibly overlapping) cubes for the region in
which the logic expression is one, we obtain the minimum SOP for the logic
expression.
Figure 7.31 
Karnaugh map for the logic function of Equation 7.31. From the map, it is evident that 
Example 7.14 Finding the Minimum SOP Form for a Logic Function
A logic circuit has inputs A,B,C, and D. The output of the circuit is given by
Find the minimum SOP form for E.
Solution 
First, we construct the Karnaugh map. Because there are four input variables, the map contains 16
squares as shown in Figure 7.32. Converting the numbers of the minterms to binary numbers, we
obtain 0001, 0011, 0100, 0101, 0111, 1010, 1100, and 1101. Each of these locates a square on the
map. For example, 1101 locates the square in the third row and second column, 0011 is the square
¯
D
F=
A
¯
D+ABC
(7.32)
F=
A
¯
D+ABC.
E=
∑ m(1,3,4,5,7,10,12,13)

in the first row and third column, and so forth. Placing a 1 in the square corresponding to each
minterm results in the map shown in Figure 7.32.
Figure 7.32 
Karnaugh map for Example 7.14.
Now we look for the smallest number of the largest size cubes that cover the ones in the map. To
cover the ones in this map, we need two 4-cubes and a 1-cube (i.e., a single isolated square) as
illustrated in the figure. Finally, the minimum SOP expression is
Minimum POS Forms
So far, we have concentrated on finding minimum SOP implementations for logic circuits. However, we
can easily extend the methods to finding minimal POS circuits by following these steps:
1. Create the Karnaugh map for the desired output.
2. Invert the Karnaugh map, replacing 1s by 0s and vice versa.
3. Look for the least number of cubes of the largest sizes that cover the ones in the inverted map.
Then, write the minimum SOP expression for the inverse of desired output.
4. Apply De Morgan's laws to convert the SOP expression to a POS expression. We illustrate with
an example.
Example 7.15 Finding the Minimum POS Form for a Logic Function
Find the minimum POS for the logic variable E of Example 7.14.
Solution 
The Karnaugh map for E is shown in Figure 7.32. The map for 
is obtained by replacing 1s with
E=
A
¯
D+B
C
¯
+A
B
¯
C
D
¯
E
¯

0s (blank squares) and vice versa. The result is shown in Figure 7.33.
Figure 7.33 
Karnaugh map of Example 7.15. (This is the inverse of the map shown in Figure 7.32.)
Now, we look for the smallest number of the largest size cubes that cover the ones in the map.
Clearly, there are no 8-cubes or 4-cubes contained in Figure 7.33. A total of eight 1s appear in the
map. Thus, the best we can do is to cover the map with four 2-cubes. One option is the grouping
shown in the figure, which yields
Next, we apply De Morgan's laws to obtain a minimum POS form:
Choosing a different grouping in Figure 7.33 produces another equally good form, which is
Then, applying De Morgan's laws gives another minimum POS form:
Exercise 7.17 
Construct the Karnaugh maps and find the minimum SOP expressions for each of these logic functions:
a. 
b. 
c. 
E
¯
=ABC+A
B
¯
D+
A
¯
C
D
¯
+
B
¯
 
C
¯
 
D
¯
E=(
A
¯
+
B
¯
+
C
¯
)(
A
¯
+B+
D
¯
)(
A+
C
¯
+D
)(
B+C+D
)
E
¯
=A
B
¯
 
C
¯
+
A
¯
 
B
¯
 
D
¯
+ACD+BC
D
¯
E=(
A
¯
+B+C
)(
A+B+D
)(
A
¯
+
C
¯
+
D
¯
)(
B
¯
+
C
¯
+D
)
Z=
W
¯
 
X
¯
 
Y
¯
+
W
¯
X
Y
¯
+W
X
¯
Y+WXY
D=
A
¯
 
B
¯
 
C
¯
+A
B
¯
 
C
¯
+
A
¯
 
B
¯
C+A
B
¯
C+
A
¯
BC
E=
A
¯
BC
D
¯
+AB
C
¯
 
D
¯
+AB
C
¯
D+ABC
D
¯

Answer See Figure 7.34.
Figure 7.34 
Answers for Exercise 7.17.
Exercise 7.18 
Construct the inverse maps and find the minimum POS expressions for each of the logic functions of
Exercise 7.17.
Answer See Figure 7.35.
Figure 7.35 
Answers for Exercise 7.18.

7.6 Sequential Logic Circuits
So far, we have considered combinatorial logic circuits, such as gates, encoders, and decoders, for
which the outputs at a given time depend only on the input values at that instant. In this section, we
discuss sequential logic circuits, for which the outputs depend on past as well as present inputs. We
say that such circuits have memory because they "remember" past input values.
Often, the operation of a sequential circuit is synchronized by a clock signal that consists of periodic
logic-1 pulses, as shown in Figure 7.36. The clock signal regulates when the circuits respond to new
inputs, so that operations occur in proper sequence. Sequential circuits that are regulated by a clock
signal are said to be synchronous.
Figure 7.36 
The clock signal consists of periodic logic-1 pulses.
Flip-Flops
One of the basic building blocks for sequential circuits is the flip-flop. A flip-flop has two stable
operating states; therefore, it can store one bit of information. Many useful versions of flip-flops exist,
differing in the manner that the clock signal and other input signals control the state of the flip-flop. We
discuss several types shortly.
A simple flip-flop can be constructed by using two inverters, with the output of one connected to the
input of the other, as shown in Figure 7.37.  Two stable states are possible in the circuit. First, the
output Q of the top inverter can be high and then the output of the bottom inverter is low. Thus, the
output of the bottom inverter is labeled as 
Notice that Q high and 
low are consistent with the
logic operation of the inverters, so the circuit can remain in that state. On the other hand, Q low and 
high are also consistent. The circuit can remain in either state indefinitely.
Q
¯
.
Q
¯
Q
¯

Figure 7.37 
Simple flip-flop.
SR Flip-Flop. 
The simple two-inverter circuit of Figure 7.37 is not very useful because no provision exists for
controlling its state. A more useful circuit is the set—reset (SR) flip-flop, consisting of two NOR gates,
as shown in Figure 7.38. As long as the S and R inputs are low, the NOR gates act as inverters for the
other input signal. Thus, with S and R both low, the SR flip-flop behaves just as the two-inverter circuit of
Figure 7.37 does.
Figure 7.38 
An SR flip-flop can be implemented by cross coupling two NOR gates.
If S is high and R is low, 
is forced low and Q is high (or set). When S returns low, the flip-flop
remains in the set state (i.e., Q stays high). On the other hand, if R becomes high and S low, Q is
forced low. When R returns low, the flip-flop remains in the reset state (i.e., Q stays low). In normal
operation, R and S are not allowed to be high at the same time. Thus, with R and S low, the SR flip-flop
remembers which input (R or S) was high most recently.
We use subscripts on logic variables to indicate a sequence of states. For example, the flip-flop output
state 
occurs before 
which occurs before 
and so on. The truth table for the SR flip-
flop is shown in Figure 7.39(a). In the first row of the truth table, we see that if both R and S are logic 0,
the output remains in the previous state 
The symbol for the SR flip-flop is shown in
Figure 7.39(b).
Q
¯
Q
n−1
Q
n
,
Q
n+1
,
(
Q
n
=
Q
n−1
).

Figure 7.39 
The truth table and symbol for the SR flip-flop.
Using an SR Flip-Flop to Debounce a Switch. 
One application for the SR flip-flop is to debounce a switch. Consider the single-pole double-throw
switch shown in Figure 7.40(a). When the switch is moved from position A to position B, the waveforms
shown in Figure 7.40(b) typically result. At first, 
is high because the switch is in position A. Then,
the switch breaks contact, and 
drops to zero. Next, the switch makes initial contact with B and 
goes high. Contact bounce at B again causes 
to drop to zero, then back high several times, until
finally it ends up high. Later, when the switch is returned to A, contact bounce occurs again.
Figure 7.40 
An SR flip-flop can be used to eliminate the effects of switch bounce.
V
A
V
A
V
B
V
B

This kind of behavior can be troublesome. For example, a computer keyboard consists of switches that
are depressed to select a character. Contact bounce could cause several characters to be accepted by
the computer or calculator each time a key is depressed.
An SR flip-flop can eliminate the effects of contact bounce. The switch voltages 
and 
are
connected to the S and R inputs as shown in Figure 7.40(a). At first, when the switch is at position A,
the flip-flop is in the set state, and Q is high. When contact is broken with A, 
drops to zero, but the
flip-flop does not change state until the first time 
goes high. As contact bounce occurs, the flip-flop
stays in the reset state with Q low. The waveforms for the flip-flop outputs Q and 
are shown in
Figure 7.40(b).
Exercise 7.19 
The waveforms present at the input terminals of an SR flip-flop are shown in Figure 7.41. Sketch the
waveforms for Q versus time.
Figure 7.41 
See Exercise 7.19.
Answer See Figure 7.42.
Figure 7.42 
Answer for Exercise 7.19.
Exercise 7.20 
Prepare a truth table similar to that of Figure 7.39(a) for the circuit of Figure 7.43.
V
A
V
B
V
A
V
B
Q
¯

Figure 7.43 
A flip-flop implemented with NAND gates. See Exercise 7.20.
Answer See Table 7.9.
Table 7.9 Truth Table for Exercise 7.20
A
B
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
Clocked SR Flip-Flop. 
Often, it is advantageous to control the point in time that a flip-flop responds to its inputs. This is
accomplished with the clocked SR flip-flop shown in Figure 7.44. Two AND gates have been added at
the inputs of an SR flip-flop. If the clock signal C is low, the inputs to the SR flip-flop are both low, and
the state cannot change. The clock signal must be high for the R and S signals to be transmitted to the
input of the SR flip-flop.
Figure 7.44 
C
n
D
n
C
n−1
D
n−1

A clocked SR flip-flop.
The truth table for the clocked SR flip-flop is shown in Figure 7.44(b), and the circuit symbol is shown in
Figure 7.44(c). We say that a high clock level enables the inputs to the flip-flop. On the other hand, the
low clock level disables the inputs.
Usually, we design digital systems so that R, S, and C are not all high at the same time. If all three
signals are high and then C goes low, the state of the flip-flop settles either to 
or to 
unpredictably. Usually, systems that behave in an unpredictable manner are not useful.
Sometimes, a clocked SR flip-flop is needed, but it is also necessary to be able to set or clear the flip-
flop state independent of the clock. A circuit having this feature is shown in Figure 7.45(a). If the preset
input Pr is high, Q becomes high even if the clock is low. Similarly, the clear input Cl can force Q low.
The Pr and Cl inputs are called asynchronous inputs because their effect is not synchronized by the
clock signal. On the other hand, the R and S inputs are recognized only if the clock signal is high, and
are therefore called synchronous inputs.
Figure 7.45 
A clocked SR flip-flop with asynchronous preset and clear inputs.
Edge-Triggered D Flip-Flop. 
So far, we have considered circuits for which the level of the clock signal enables or disables other input
signals. On the other hand, edge-triggered circuits respond to their inputs only at a transition in the
clock signal. If the clock signal is steady, either high or low, the inputs are disabled. At the clock
transition, the flip-flop responds to the inputs present just prior to the transition. Positive-edge-
triggered circuits respond when the clock signal switches from low to high. Conversely, negative-edge-
triggered circuits respond on the transition from high to low. The positive-going edge of the clock is also
called the leading edge, and the negative-going edge is called the trailing edge. A clock signal
Q=1
Q=0

illustrating these points is shown in Figure 7.46. Thus, clocked flip-flops can be sensitive either to the
level of the clock or to transitions.
Figure 7.46 
Clock signal.
An example of an edge-triggered circuit is the D flip-flop, which is also known as the delay flip-flop. Its
output takes the value of the input that was present just prior to the triggering clock transition. The circuit
symbol for the edge-triggered D flip-flop is shown in Figure 7.47(a). The "knife edge" symbol at the C
input indicates that the flip-flop is edge triggered. The truth table for a positive-edge-triggered version is
shown in Figure 7.47(b). Notice the symbols in the clock column of the truth table, indicating transitions
of the clock signal from low to high.
Figure 7.47 
A positive-edge-triggered D flip-flop.
Exercise 7.21 
The input signals to a positive-edge-triggered D flip-flop are shown in Figure 7.48. Sketch the output Q
to scale versus time. (Assume that Q is low prior to 
)
Figure 7.48 
t=2.

See Exercise 7.21.
Answer See Figure 7.49.
Figure 7.49 
Answer for Exercise 7.21.
JK Flip-Flop. 
The circuit symbol and truth table for a negative-edge-triggered JK flip-flop are shown in Figure 7.50.
Its operation is very similar to that of an SR flip-flop except that if both control inputs (J and K) are high,
the state changes on the next negative-going clock edge. Thus when both J and K are high, the output
of the flip-flop toggles on each cycle of the clock-switching from high to low on one negative-going
clock transition, back to high on the next negative transition, and so on.
Figure 7.50 
Negative-edge-triggered JK flip-flop.
Serial-In Parallel-Out Shift Register
A register is an array of flip-flops that is used to store or manipulate the bits of a digital word. For
example, if we connect several positive-edge-triggered D flip-flops as shown in Figure 7.51, a serial-in
parallel-out shift register results. As the name implies, the digital input word is shifted through the
register moving one stage for each clock pulse.

Figure 7.51 
Serial-input parallel-output shift register.
The waveforms shown in Figure 7.51 illustrate the operation of the shift register. We assume that the
flip-flops are initially 
all in the reset state 
The input data are applied
to the input of the first stage serially (i.e., one bit after another). On the leading edge of the first clock
pulse, the first data bit is transferred into the first stage. On the second clock pulse, the first bit is
transferred to the second stage, and the second bit is transferred into the first stage. After four clock
pulses, four bits of input data have been transferred into the shift register. Thus, serial data applied to
the input are converted to parallel form available at the outputs of the stages of the shift register.
Parallel-In Serial-Out Shift Register
Sometimes, we have parallel data that we wish to transmit serially. Then, the parallel-in serial-out shift
register shown in Figure 7.52 is useful. This register consists of four positive-edge-triggered D flip-flops
with asynchronous preset and clear inputs. First, the register is cleared by applying a high pulse to the
clear input. (The clear input is asynchronous, so a clock pulse is not necessary to clear the register.)
Parallel data are applied to the A, B, C, and D inputs. Then, a high pulse is applied to the parallel enable
(PE) input. The result is to set each flip-flop for which the corresponding data line is high. Thus, four
(
t=0
)
(
Q
0
=
Q
1
=
Q
2
=
Q
3
=0
).

parallel bits are loaded into the stages of the register. Then, application of clock pulses produces the
data in serial form at the output of the last stage.
Figure 7.52 
Parallel-input serial-output shift register.
Counters
Counters are used to count the pulses of an input signal. An example is the ripple counter shown in
Figure 7.53. It consists of a cascade of JK flip-flops. Reference to Figure 7.50 shows that with the J and
K inputs high, the Q-output of the flip-flop toggles on each falling edge of the clock input. The input
pulses to be counted are connected to the clock input of the first stage, and the output of the first stage
is connected to the clock input of the second stage.

Figure 7.53 
Ripple counter.
Assume that the flip-flops are initially all in the reset state 
When the falling edge of the first input
pulse occurs, 
changes to logic 1. On the falling edge of the second pulse, 
toggles back to logic
0, and the resulting falling input to the second stage causes 
to become high. As shown by the
waveforms in Figure 7.53, after seven pulses, the shift register is in the 111 state. On the eighth pulse,
the counter returns to the 000 state. Thus, we say that this is a modulo-8 or mod-8 counter.
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
 7.1
Biomedical Engineering Application of Electronics: Cardiac Pacemaker
In certain types of heart disease, the biological signals that should stimulate the heart to beat are
(
Q=0
).
Q
0
Q
0
Q
1

blocked from reaching the heart muscle. When this blockage occurs, the heart muscle may
spontaneously beat at a very low rate, so death does not occur. However, the afflicted person is
not able to function at a normal level of activity because of the low heart rate. The application of
electrical pacemaker pulses to force beating at a higher rate is dramatically helpful in many of
these cases.
Sometimes, the blockage of the natural pacemaking is not complete. In this case, the heart
beats normally part of the time but experiences missed beats sporadically. A demand
pacemaker can be useful for the patient with partial blockage. The demand pacemaker contains
circuits that sense natural heartbeats and apply an electrical pulse to the heart muscle only if a
beat does not occur within a predetermined interval. If natural beats are detected, no pulses are
applied. This type of circuit is called a demand pacemaker because pulses are issued only when
needed.
It turns out to be advantageous to the patient for the heart to beat naturally, provided that its
natural rate is above some limit. On the other hand, if artificial pulses are required, a slightly
higher rate is better. Typical values are a natural limit of 66.7 beats per minute (corresponding to
0.9 s between beats) and 75 beats per minute (corresponding to 0.8 s between beats) for forced
pacing. Thus, in a typical situation, the circuit waits 0.9 s after a natural beat before applying a
pacing pulse but waits only 0.8 s after an artificial pulse before applying another artificial pulse.
Another feature of the pacemaker is that it should ignore signals from the heart for a short period
(about 0.4 s) after detection of a natural beat or after issuing a pacemaker pulse. This is
because natural signals occur during the contraction and relaxation of the heart muscle. These
signals should not cause the timing functions of the pacemaker to be reset. Thus, when the start
of a contraction is sensed (or is stimulated by the circuit), the timing circuits are reset, but cannot
be reset again until the contraction and relaxation is over.
The electrical signals present at the terminals of the pacemaker are shown for a typical case in
Figure PA7.1. At the left side of the tracing, the signals occurring during natural beating are
shown. Then, blockage of the natural beating occurs, and a pacemaker pulse is issued 0.9 s
after the last natural beat. The amplitude of these pulses is typically 5 V and their durations are
0.7 ms. After the pacemaker pulse, natural signals occur from the contraction and relaxation of
the heart. These are ignored by the circuit. After two forced cycles, the heart again begins
natural beating.

FIGURE
PA7.1 
Typical electrical signals at the terminals of a demand cardiac pacemaker.
The pacemaker circuitry and battery are enclosed in a metal case. This is implanted under the
skin on the chest of the patient. A wire (enclosed in an insulating tube known as a catheter)
leads from the pacemaker through an artery into the interior of the heart. The electrical terminals
of the pacemaker are the metal case and the tip of the catheter. A pacemaker and catheter are
shown in Figure PA7.2.
FIGURE
PA7.2 
A cardiac pacemaker and catheter.
The block diagram of a typical demand pacemaker is shown in Figure PA7.3. Notice that the
electrical terminals serve both as the input to the amplifier and the output terminals for the pulse
generator. The input amplifier increases the amplitude of the natural signals. Amplification is
necessary because the natural heart signals have a very small amplitude (on the order of 1 mV),
which must be increased before a comparator circuit can be employed to decide on the
presence or absence of a natural heartbeat. Filtering to eliminate certain frequency components

is employed in the amplifier to enhance the detectability of the heartbeats. Furthermore, proper
filtering eliminates the possibility that radio or power-line signals will interfere with the
pacemaker. Thus, the important specifications of the amplifier are its gain and frequency
response.
FIGURE
PA7.3 
Block diagram of a demand cardiac pacemaker.
Amplifiers and comparators are discussed at length in Part III of this book.
The output of the amplifier is applied to an analog comparator circuit that compares the amplified
and filtered signal to a threshold value. If the input signal becomes higher than the threshold, the
output of the comparator becomes high. Thus, the comparator output is a digital signal that
indicates the detection of either a natural heartbeat or an output-pacing pulse.
This detection decision is passed through an AND gate to the counting and timer circuitry. The
second input to the AND gate comes from the counter circuit and is low for 0.4 s after a detected
beat. Thus, the AND gate prevents another decision from passing through for 0.4 s after the first.
In this manner, the pacemaker ignores input signals for 0.4 s after the start of a natural or forced
beat.
The timing functions are accomplished by counting the output cycles of a timing oscillator. The
timing oscillator generates a square wave with a period of 0.1 s. When a heartbeat is detected,
the timing oscillator is reset to the beginning of a cycle, so the completion of each oscillator cycle
occurs exactly at an integer multiple of 0.1 s after the heartbeat. The timing oscillator must
maintain a precise period because the proper operation of the circuit depends on accurate
timing. Thus, the frequency stability of the timing oscillator is its primary specification.

The counter is a digital circuit that counts the output cycles of the timing oscillator. The counter is
also capable of being reset to zero when a heartbeat occurs or when a pacemaker pulse is
issued. The digital signals produced by the counter are applied to a digital comparator. Signals
from a reference circuit are also applied to the digital comparator. The reference count is nine if
the last beat was natural, but the reference count is eight if the last beat was forced. When the
counter input to the digital comparator agrees with the reference count, the output of the digital
comparator goes to a high level. This causes the pulse generator to issue an output pulse.
The pulse generator must produce output pulses of a specified amplitude and duration. In some
designs, the output pulse amplitude is required to be higher than the battery voltage. This can be
accomplished by charging capacitors in parallel with the battery and then switching them to
series to generate the higher voltage.
What we have described so far is a relatively simple demand pacemaker readily implemented
with registers, counters, and gates. By substituting a microcontroller and software (discussed
in Chapter 8) for the digital functions of the pacemaker, many additional useful features can be
accommodated. For example, an accelerometer can sense the physical activity of the patient
and the software can use this information to adjust heart rate. Communicating through magnetic
fields linked to a coil in the pacemaker, the physician can instruct the software to alter the
operating characteristics appropriately for each patient.
Extremely low power consumption is an important requirement for all pacemaker circuits. This is
because the circuit must operate from a small battery for many years. After all, replacement of
the battery requires a surgical procedure. When pacing pulses are not needed, a typical circuit
can function with a few microamperes from a 2.5-V battery. When pacing pulses are required,
the average current drain increases to a few tens of microamperes. This higher current
consumption is unavoidable because of the output power required in the form of pacing pulses.
High reliability is very important because malfunction can be life-threatening. A very detailed
failure-mode analysis must be performed for every component in the circuit. This is necessary
because some failures are much more threatening than others. For example, if the pacemaker
fails to issue pacemaking pulses, the person may survive because of the natural (low-rate)
pacing of the heart muscle. On the other hand, if the timing generator fails in such a manner that
it runs too fast, the unfortunate person's heart will be forced to beat much too fast. This can be
quickly fatal, especially for those in a weakened condition from heart disease.
Clearly, circuit design is not the total solution to this problem. Physicians must provide the
specifications for the pacemaker. Mechanical and chemical engineers must be involved in
selecting the materials and form of the catheter and the case. By working in teams, engineers
and physicians have designed electronic pacemakers that provide very dramatic health
improvements for many people. Those who have contributed can be most proud of their
achievements. Nevertheless, many further improvements are possible and may be achieved by
some of the students of this book.


Summary
1. Digital signals are more immune to the effects of noise than analog signals. The logic levels of a
digital signal can be determined after noise is added, provided that the noise amplitude is not too
high.
2. Component values in digital circuits do not need to be as precise as in analog circuits.
3. Digital circuits are more amenable than analog circuits to implementation as large-scale ICs.
4. In positive logic, the higher voltage represents logic 1.
5. Numerical data can be represented in decimal, binary, octal, hexadecimal, or BCD forms.
6. In the Gray code, each word differs from adjacent words in only a single bit. The Gray code is
useful for representing position or angular displacement.
7. In computers, numbers are frequently represented in signed two's-complement form. (See
Figure 7.11 on page 366.)
8. Logic variables take two values, logic 1 or logic 0. Logic variables may be combined by the AND,
OR, and inversion operations according to the rules of Boolean algebra. A truth table lists all
combinations of input variables and the corresponding output.
9. De Morgan's laws state that
and
10. NAND (or NOR) gates are sufficient to realize any combinatorial logic function.
11. Any combinatorial logic function can be written as a Boolean expression consisting of a logical
SOP. Each product is a minterm corresponding to a line of the truth table for which the output
variable is logic 1.
12. Any combinatorial logic function can be written as a Boolean expression consisting of a logical
POS. Each sum is a maxterm corresponding to a line of the truth table for which the output
variable is logic 0.
13. Many useful combinatorial circuits, known as decoders, encoders, or translators, are available as
ICs.
14. Karnaugh maps can be used to minimize the number of gates needed to implement a given logic
function.
15. Sequential logic circuits are said to have memory because their outputs depend on past as well
as present inputs. Synchronous or clocked sequential circuits are regulated by a clock signal.
16. Various types of flip-flops are the SR flip-flop, the clocked flip-flop, the D flip-flop, and the JK flip-
flop.
AB=
A
¯
+
B
¯
¯
A+B=
A
¯
 
B
¯
¯

17. Flip-flops can be combined to form registers that are used to store or manipulate digital words.
18. Logic gates can be interconnected to form flip-flops. Interconnections of flip-flops form registers.
A complex digital system, such as a computer, consists of many gates, flip-flops, and registers.
Thus, logic gates are the basic building blocks for complex digital systems.

Problems
Section 7.1: Basic Logic Circuit Concepts
Section 7.2: Representation of Numerical Data in Binary Form
*P7.1. State three advantages of digital technology compared with analog technology.
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
P7.2. Define these terms: bit, byte, and nibble.
P7.3. Explain the difference between positive logic and negative logic.
P7.4. What are noise margins? Why are they important?
P7.5. How is serial transmission of a digital word different from parallel transmission?
P7.6. Convert the following binary numbers to decimal form:
a. * 101.101;
b. 0111.11;
c. 1010.01;
d. 111.111;
e. 1000.0101;
f. * 10101.011.
P7.7. Express the following decimal numbers in binary form and in BCD form:
a. 17;
b. 8.5;
c. * 9.75;
d. 73.03125;
e. 67.375.
P7.8. How many bits per word are needed to represent the decimal integers 0 through 100? 0
through 1000? 0 through 
P7.9. Add these pairs of binary numbers:
10
6
?

a. * 1101.11 and 101.111;
b. 1011 and 101;
c. 10001.111 and 0101.001.
P7.10. Find the result (in BCD format) of adding the BCD numbers:
a. * 10010011.0101 and 00110111.0001;
b. 01011000.1000 and 10001001.1001.
P7.11. Express the following decimal numbers in binary, octal, and hexadecimal forms:
a. 173;
b. 299.5;
c. 735.75;
d. * 313.0625;
e. 112.25.
P7.12. Write each of the following decimal numbers as an eight-bit signed two's-complement
number:
a. 19;
b. 
c. * 75;
d. * 
e. 
f. 99.
P7.13. Express each of the following hexadecimal numbers in binary, octal, and decimal forms:
a. 
b. 
c. 
P7.14. Express each of the following octal numbers in binary, hexadecimal, and decimal forms:
a. 
b. 
c. 
P7.15. What number follows 777 when counting in
a. decimal;
b. octal;
c. hexadecimal?
P7.16. What range of decimal integers can be represented by
−19;
−87;
−95;
FA.
F
16
;
2A
.1
16
;
777.7
16
.
777.7
8
;
123.5
8
;
24.4
8
.

Section 7.3: Combinatorial Logic Circuits
a. three-bit binary numbers;
b. three-digit octal numbers;
c. three-digit hexadecimal numbers?
*P7.17. Starting with the three-bit Gray code listed in Figure 7.9, construct a four-bit Gray code.
For what applications is a Gray code advantageous? Why?
P7.18. Convert the following numbers to decimal form:
a. * 
b. * 
c. 
d. 
e. 
P7.19. Find the one's and two's complements of the binary numbers:
a. * 11101000;
b. 00000000;
c. 10101010;
d. 11111100;
e. 11000000.
P7.20. Perform these operations by using eight-bit signed two's-complement arithmetic:
a. 
b. 
c. * 
d. 
e. 
P7.21. Describe how to test whether overflow or underflow has occurred in adding signed two's-
complement numbers.
FA
5.6
16
;
725.3
8
;
3F
4.8
16
;
73.25
8
;
FF.F
0
16
.
17
10
+
15
10
;
17
10
−
15
10
;
33
10
−
37
10
;
15
10
−
63
10
;
49
10
−
44
10
.
P7.22. What is a truth table?
*P7.23. State De Morgan's laws.
P7.24. Draw the circuit symbol and list the truth table for the following: an AND gate, an OR
gate, an inverter, a NAND gate, a NOR gate, and an XOR gate. Assume two inputs for each
gate (except the inverter).
P7.25. Describe a method for proving the validity of a Boolean algebra identity.
P7.26. Write the truth table for each of these Boolean expressions:

a. 
b. *
c. 
d. 
e. 
 P7.27. Write a Boolean expression for the output of each of the logic circuits shown in Figure
P7.27.
Figure P7.27 
*P7.28. Use a truth table to prove the identity
P7.29. Use a truth table to prove the identity
P7.30. Use a truth table to prove the identity
P7.31. Use a truth table to prove the identity
P7.32. Draw a circuit to realize each of the following expressions using AND gates, OR gates,
and inverters:
a. 
D=ABC+A
B
¯

E=AB+A
B
¯
C+
C
¯
D
Z=WX+
(
W+Y
)
¯
D=A+
A
¯
B+C
D=
(
A+BC
)
¯
(
A+B
)(
A+C
)=A+BC
(
A+B
)(
A
¯
+AB
)=B
A+
A
¯
B=A+B
ABC+AB
C
¯
+A
B
¯
 
C
¯
+A
B
¯
C=A
F=A+
B
¯
C

b. 
c. * 
P7.33. Replace the AND operations by ORs and vice versa by applying De Morgan's laws to
each of these expressions:
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. * 
e. * 
P7.34. Why are NAND gates said to be sufficient for combinatorial logic? What other type of gate
is sufficient?
P7.35. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P7.35. The switches are controlled by logic
variables such that, if A is high, switch A is closed, and if A is low, switch A is open. Conversely,
if B is high, the switch labeled 
is open, and if B is low, the switch labeled 
is closed. The
output variable is high if the output voltage is 5 V, and the output variable is low if the output
voltage is zero. Write a logic expression for the output variable. Construct the truth table for the
circuit.
Figure P7.35 
P7.36. Repeat Problem P7.35 for the circuit shown in Figure P7.36.
Figure P7.36 
F=A
B
¯
C+AB
C
¯
+
A
¯
BC
F
=
(
A
¯
+
B
¯
+C)(A+B+
C
¯
)
(A+
B
¯
+C)
F=AB+(
C
¯
+A
)
D
¯
F=A(
B
¯
+C
)+D
F=A
B
¯
C+A(
B+C
)
F
=
(A+B+C)(A+
B
¯
+C)
(
A
¯
+B+
C
¯
)
F=ABC+A
B
¯
C+
A
¯
B
C
¯
B
¯
B
¯

Section 7.4: Synthesis of Logic Circuits
P7.37. Sometimes "bubbles" are used to indicate inverters on the input lines to a gate, as
illustrated in Figure P7.37. What are the equivalent gates for those of Figure P7.37? Justify your
answers.
Figure P7.37 
P7.38. Using the sum-of-products approach, describe the synthesis of a logic expression from a
truth table. Repeat for the product-of-sums approach.
P7.39. Give an example of a decoder.
*P7.40. Consider Table P7.40. A, B, and C represent logic-variable input signals; F through K
are outputs. Using the product-of-sums approach, write a Boolean expression for F in terms of
the inputs. Repeat by using the sum-of-products approach.
Table P7.40 
A
B
C
F
G
H
I
J
K
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
P7.41. Repeat Problem P7.40 for G.
P7.42. Repeat Problem P7.40 for H.
P7.43. Repeat Problem P7.40 for I.
P7.44. Repeat Problem P7.40 for J.
P7.45. Repeat Problem P7.40 for K.
P7.46. Show how to implement the sum-of-products circuit shown in Figure P7.46 by using only
NAND gates.
Figure P7.46 
P7.47. Show how to implement the product-of-sums circuit shown in Figure P7.47 by using only
NOR gates.
Figure P7.47 
P7.48. Design a logic circuit to control electrical power to the engine ignition of a speed boat.
Logic output I is to become high if ignition power is to be applied and is to remain low otherwise.
Gasoline fumes in the engine compartment present a serious hazard of explosion. A sensor
provides a logic input F that is high if fumes are present. Ignition power should not be applied if
fumes are present. To help prevent accidents, ignition power should not be applied while the
outdrive is in gear. Logic signal G is high if the outdrive is in gear and is low otherwise. A blower
is provided to clear fumes from the engine compartment and is to be operated for 5 minutes
before applying ignition power. Logic signal B becomes high after the blower has been in
operation for 5 minutes. Finally, an emergency override signal E is provided so that the operator
can choose to apply ignition power even if the blower has not operated for 5 minutes and if the
outdrive is in gear, but not if gasoline fumes are present.

Section 7.5: Minimization of Logic Circuits
a. Prepare a truth table listing all combinations of the input signals B, E, F, and G. Also,
show the desired value of I for each row in the table.
b. Using the sum-of-products approach, write a Boolean expression for I.
c. Using the product-of-sums approach, write a Boolean expression for I.
d. Try to manipulate the expressions of parts (b) and (c) to obtain a logic circuit having the
least number of gates and inverters. Use AND gates, OR gates, and inverters.
*P7.49. Use only NAND gates to find a way to implement the XOR function for two inputs, A and
B. [Hint: The inputs of a two-input NAND can be wired together to obtain an inverter. List the
truth table and write the SOP expression. Then, apply De Morgan's laws to convert the OR
operation to AND.]
 P7.50. Use only two-input NOR gates to find a way to implement the XOR function for two
inputs, A and B. [Hint: The inputs of a two-input NOR can be wired together to obtain an inverter.
List the truth table and write the POS expression. Then, apply De Morgan's laws to convert the
AND operation to OR.]
P7.51. Consider the BCD-to-seven-segment decoder discussed in conjunction with Figure 7.26
on page 380. Suppose that the BCD data are represented by the logic variables 
and 
For example, the decimal number 7 is represented in BCD by the word 0111 in which
the leftmost bit is 
the second bit is 
and so forth.
a. Find a logic circuit based on the product of maxterms having output A that is high only if
segment A of the display is to be on.
b. Repeat for segment B.
*P7.52. Suppose that two numbers in signed two's-complement form have been added. 
is
the sign bit of the first number, 
is the sign bit of the second number, and 
is the sign bit of
the total. Suppose that we want a logic circuit with output E that is high if either overflow or
underflow has occurred; otherwise, E is to remain low.
a. Write the truth table.
b. Find an SOP expression composed of minterms for E.
c. Draw a circuit that yields E, using AND, OR, and NOT gates.
B
8
, 
B
4
, 
B
2
,
B
1
.
B
8
=0,
B
4
=1,
S
1
S
2
S
T
*P7.53.
a. Construct a Karnaugh map for the logic function
b. Find the minimum SOP expression. c. Find the minimum POS expression.
F
=
A
¯
B
C
¯
D
¯
+AB
C
¯
D
¯
+
A
¯
B
C
¯
D
+AB
C
¯
D+
A
¯
BC
D
¯
+
A
¯
B
¯
C
D
¯

P7.54. A logic circuit has inputs A, B, and C. The output of the circuit is given by
a. Construct the Karnaugh map for D.
b. Find the minimum SOP expression.
c. Find two equally good minimum POS expressions.
P7.55. A logic circuit has inputs A, B, and C. The output of the circuit is given by
a. Construct the Karnaugh map for D.
b. Find the minimum SOP expression.
c. Find the minimum POS expression.
P7.56.
a. Construct a Karnaugh map for the logic function
b. Find the minimum SOP expression and realize the function, using AND, OR, and NOT
gates.
c. Find the minimum POS expression and realize the function, using AND, OR, and NOT
gates.
P7.57.
a. Construct a Karnaugh map for the logic function
b. Find the minimum SOP expression.
c. Real­ize the minimum SOP function, using AND, OR, and NOT gates.
d. Find the minimum POS expression.
*P7.58. Consider Table P7.58 in which A, B, C, and D are input variables. F, G, H, and I are the
output variables.
a. Construct a Karnaugh map for the output variable F.
b. Find the minimum SOP expression for this logic function.
c. Use AND, OR, and NOT gates to realize the minimum SOP function.
d. Find the minimum POS expression.
Table P7.58 
A
B
C
D
F
G
H
I
D=∑m(
0, 3, 4
)
D=∏M(
1, 3, 4, 6
)
D=ABC+
A
¯
BC+AB
C
¯
+BC
F=AB
C
¯
 
D
¯
+ABCD+ABC
D
¯
+
A
¯
BCD

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
P7.59. Repeat Problem P7.58 for output variable G.
 P7.60. Repeat Problem P7.58 for output variable H.
P7.61. Repeat Problem P7.58 for output variable I.
P7.62. We need a logic circuit that gives an output X that is high only if a given hexadecimal digit
is even (including 0) and less than 7. The inputs to the logic circuit are the bits 
and 
of the binary equivalent for the hexadecimal digit. (The MSB is 
and the LSB is 
) Construct a truth table and the Karnaugh map; then, write the minimized SOP expression for X.
B
8
, 
B
4
, 
B
2
,
B
1
B
8
,
B
1
.

P7.63. We need a logic circuit that gives an output X that is high when an error in the form of an
unused code occurs in a given BCD codeword. The inputs to the logic circuit are the bits 
and 
of the BCD codeword. (The MSB is 
and the LSB is 
) Construct the
Karnaugh map and write the minimized SOP and POS expressions for X.
P7.64. We need a logic circuit that gives a high output if a given hexadecimal digit is 4, 6, C, or
E. The inputs to the logic circuit are the bits 
and 
of the binary equivalent for
the hexadecimal digit. (The MSB is 
and the LSB is 
) Construct the Karnaugh map and
write the minimized SOP and POS expressions for X.
P7.65. We need to design a logic circuit for interchanging two logic signals. The system has
three inputs 
and S as well as two outputs 
and 
When S is low, we should have
and 
On the other hand, when S is high, we should have 
and 
Thus, S acts as the control input for a reversing switch. Use Karnaugh maps to obtain a
minimal SOP design. Draw the circuit.
P7.66. A city council has three members, A, B, and C. Each member votes on a proposition (1
for yes, 0 for no). Find a minimized SOP logic expression having inputs A, B, and C and output X
that is high when the majority vote is yes and low otherwise. Show that the minimized logic
circuit checks to see if any pair of the three board members have voted yes. Repeat for a council
with five members. [Hint: In this case, the circuit checks to see if any group of three has all voted
yes.]
P7.67. A city council has four members, A, B, C, and D. Each member votes on a proposition (1
for yes, 0 for no). Find a minimized SOP logic expression having inputs A, B, C, and D and
output X that is high when the vote is tied and low otherwise.
P7.68. One way to help ensure that data are communicated correctly is to append a parity bit to
each data word such that the number of 1s in the transmitted word is even. Then, if an odd
number are found in the received result, we know that at least one error has occurred.
a. Show that the circuit in Figure P7.68 produces the correct parity bit P for the nibble (four-
bit data word) ABCD. In other words, show that the transmitted word ABCDP contains an
even number of 1s for all combinations of data.
Figure P7.68 
b. Determine the minimum SOP expression for P in terms of the data bits.
c. If the received word contains a single bit error, the number of ones in the word will be
odd. Draw a circuit using four XOR gates that outputs a 1 if the received word ABCDP
contains an odd number of 1s and outputs a 0 otherwise.
B
8
, 
B
4
, 
B
2
,
B
1
B
8
,
B
1
.
B
8
, 
B
4
, 
B
2
,
B
1
B
8
,
B
1
.
I
1
, 
I
2
,
O
1
O
2
.
O
1
=
I
1
O
2
=
I
2
.
O
1
=
I
2
O
2
=
I
1
.

P7.69. Suppose we want circuits to convert the binary codes into the three-bit Gray codes shown
in Table P7.69. Find the minimum SOP expressions for X, Y, and Z in terms of A, B, and C.
Table P7.69 
Binary Code ABC
Gray Code XYZ
000
000
001
001
010
011
011
010
100
110
101
111
110
101
111
100
 P7.70. Find the minimum SOP expressions for A, B, and C in terms of X, Y, and Z for the codes
of Table P7.69.
*P7.71. We have discussed BCD numbers in which the bits have weights of 8, 4, 2, and 1.
Another way to represent decimal integers is the 4221 code in which the weights of the bits are
4, 2, 2, and 1. The decimal integers, the BCD equivalents, and the 4221 equivalents are shown
in Table P7.71. We want to design logic circuits to convert BCD codewords to 4221 codewords.
a. Fill in the Karnaugh map for F, placing x's (don't cares) in the squares for BCD codes
that do not occur in the table. Find the minimum SOP expression allowing the various x's
to be either 1s or 0s to make the expression as simple as possible.
b. Repeat (a) for G.
c. Repeat (a) for H.
d. Repeat (a) for I.
Table P7.71 BCD, 4221, and excess-3 codewords for the decimal integers.
Decimal
Integer
BCD Codeword
ABCD
4221 Codeword
FGHI
Excess-3 Codeword
WXYZ

0
0000
0000
0011
1
0001
0001
0100
2
0010
0010
0101
3
0011
0011
0110
4
0100
1000
0111
5
0101
0111
1000
6
0110
1100
1001
7
0111
1101
1010
8
1000
1110
1011
9
1001
1111
1100
P7.72. We want to design logic circuits to convert the 4221 codewords of Problem P7.71 to
BCD codewords.
a. Fill in the Karnaugh map for A, placing x's (don't cares) in the squares for 4221 codes
that do not occur in the table. Find the minimum SOP expression allowing the various x's
to be either 1s or 0s to make the expression as simple as possible.
b. Repeat (a) for B.
c. Repeat (a) for C.
d. Repeat (a) for D.
P7.73. Another code that is sometimes used to represent decimal digits is the excess-3 code. To
convert a decimal digit to excess-3, we add 3 to the digit and express the sum as a four-bit
binary number. For example, to convert the decimal digit 9 to excess-3 code, we have
Thus, 1100 is the excess-3 codeword for 9. The excess-3 codewords for the other decimal digits
are shown in Table P7.71.
We want to design logic circuits to convert BCD codewords to excess-3 codewords.
a. Fill in the Karnaugh map for W, placing x's (don't cares) in the squares for BCD codes
that do not occur in the table. Find the minimum SOP expression allowing the various x's
9
10
+
3
10
=
12
10
=
1100
2

Section 7.6: Sequential Logic Circuits
to be either 1s or 0s to make the expression as simple as possible.
b. Repeat (a) for X.
c. Repeat (a) for Y.
d. Repeat (a) for Z.
P7.74. We want to design logic circuits to convert the excess-3 codewords of Problem P7.73 to
BCD codewords.
a. Fill in the Karnaugh map for A, placing x's (don't cares) in the squares for excess-3
codes that do not occur in the table. Find the minimum SOP expression allowing the
various x's to be either 1s or 0s to make the expression as simple as possible.
b. Repeat (a) for B.
c. Repeat (a) for C.
d. Repeat (a) for D.
P7.75. Use NOR gates to draw the diagram of an SR flip-flop. Repeat using NAND gates.
P7.76. Draw the circuit symbol and give the truth table for an SR flip-flop.
P7.77. Draw the circuit symbol and give the truth table for a clocked SR flip-flop.
P7.78. Explain the distinction between synchronous and asynchronous inputs to a flip-flop.
P7.79. What is edge triggering?
P7.80. Draw the circuit symbol and give the truth table for a positive-edge-triggered D flip-flop.
*P7.81. Assuming that the initial state of the shift register shown in Figure P7.81 is 100 (i.e., 
and 
), find the successive states. After how many shifts does the register
return to the starting state?
Figure P7.81 
 P7.82. Repeat Problem P7.81 if the XOR gate is replaced with
a. an OR gate;
b. an AND gate.
P7.83. The D flip-flops of Figure P7.83 are positive-edge triggered. Assuming that prior to 
Q
0
=1, 
Q
1
=0,
Q
2
=0
t=0,

the states are 
sketch the voltage waveforms at 
and 
versus time. Assume
logic levels of 0 V and 5 V.
Figure P7.83 
P7.84. The D flip-flops of Figure P7.84 are positive-edge triggered, and the Cl input is an
asynchronous clear. Assume that the states are 
at 
The clock input
is shown in Figure P7.83. Sketch the voltage waveforms at 
and 
versus time. Assume logic levels of 0 V and 5 V.
Figure P7.84 
*P7.85. Use AND gates, OR gates, inverters, and a negative-edge-triggered D flip-flop to show
how to construct the JK flip-flop of Figure 7.50 on page 391.Use AND gates, OR gates,
inverters, and a negative-edge-triggered D flip-flop to show how to construct the JK flip-flop of
Figure 50.
P7.86. Consider the ripple counter of Figure 7.53 on page 393. Suppose that the flip-flops have
Q
0
=
Q
1
=0,
Q
0
Q
1
Q
0
=
Q
1
=
Q
2
=
Q
3
=0
t=0.
V
IN
Q
0
, 
Q
1
, 
Q
2
,
Q
3

asynchronous clear inputs. Show how to add gates so that the count resets to zero immediately
when the count reaches six. This results in a modulo-six counter.
P7.87. Figure P7.87 shows the functional diagram of an electronic die that can be used in
games of chance. The system contains a high-speed clock, a push-button momentary contact
switch that returns to the upper (logic 1) position when released, and a counter that counts
through the cycle of states: 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110 (i.e., the binary equivalents of the
number of spots on the various sides of the die). 
is the MSB, and 
is the LSB. The
system has a display consisting of seven light-emitting diodes (LED), each of which lights when
logic 1 is applied to it. The encoder is a combinatorial logic circuit that translates the state of the
counter into the logic signals needed by the display. Each time the switch is depressed, the
counter operates, stopping in a random state when the switch is released.
a. Use JK flip-flops having asynchronous preset and clear inputs to draw the detailed
diagram of the counter.
b. Design the encoder, using Karnaugh maps to minimize the logic elements needed to
produce each of the seven output signals.
Figure P7.87 
Electronic die.
P7.88. Four LED are arranged at the corners of a diamond, as illustrated in Figure P7.88. When
logic 1 is applied to an LED, it lights. Only one diode is to be on at a time. The on state should
move from diode to diode either clockwise or counterclockwise, depending on whether S is high
or low, respectively. One complete revolution should be completed in each two-second interval.
a. What is the frequency of the clock?
b. Draw a suitable logic circuit for the counter.
c. Construct the truth table and use Karnaugh maps to determine the minimum SOP
expressions for 
through 
in terms of S, 
and 
Q
3
Q
1
D
1
D
4
Q
1
,
Q
2
.

Figure P7.88 

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T7.1. First, think of one or more correct ways to complete each statement in Table T7.1(a).
Then, select the best choice from the list given in Table T7.1(b). [Items in Table T7.1(b) may be
used more than once or not at all.]
Table T7.1 
Item
Best Match
(a)
a. The truth table for a logic expression contains . . . 
b. De Morgan's laws imply that . . . 
c. If the higher voltage level represents logic 1 and the lower level represents logic 0, we
have . . . 
d. For a Gray code . . . 
e. If we invert each bit of a binary number and then add 1 to the result, we have . . . 
f. If we add two negative signed two's complement numbers, and the left-hand bit of the
result is zero, we have had . . . 
g. Squares on the top and bottom of a Karnaugh map are considered to be . . . 
h. If the 
output of a positive-edge-triggered D flip-flop is connected to the D input, at
each positive clock edge, the state of the flip-flop . . . 
i. Provided that it is not too large, noise can be completely eliminated from . . . 
j. Registers are composed of . . . 
k. An SOP logic circuit is composed of . . . 
l. Working out from the decimal point and converting four-bit groups of a BCD number to
their hexadecimal equivalents produces . . . 
(b)
A. the decimal equivalent
B. old recordings of music
C. inverse logic
Q
¯

D. congruent
E. OR gates
F. AND gates and one OR gate
G. digital signals
H. inverters, AND gates, and one OR gate
I. inverses
J. flip-flops
K. overflow
L. a listing of all combinations of inputs and the corresponding outputs
M. a table of ones and zeros
N. code words appear in numerical order
O. analog signals
P. adjacent
Q. each code word is rotated to form the next word
R. if AND operations are changed to OR and vice versa, and the result is inverted, the
result is equivalent to the original logic expression
S. NAND gates are sufficient to implement any logic expression
T. positive logic
U. the two's complement
V. negative logic
W. adjacent words differ in a single bit
X. underflow
Y. toggles
T7.2. Convert the decimal integer, 
to each of these forms:
a. binary;
b. octal;
c. hexadecimal;
d. BCD.
T7.3. Find the octal equivalent of 
T7.4. Find the decimal equivalent for each of these eight-bit signed two's complement integers:
a. 01100001;
b. 10111010.
T7.5. For the logic circuit of Figure T7.5:
a. write the logic expression for D in terms of A, B, and C directly from the logic diagram;
b. construct the truth table and the Karnaugh map;
c. determine the minimum SOP expression for D;
353.875
10
FA
.7
16
.

d. determine the minimum POS expression for D.
Figure T7.5 
 T7.6. Suppose we need a logic circuit with a logic output G that is high only if a certain
hexadecimal digit is 1, 5, B, or F. The inputs to the logic circuit are the bits 
and
of the binary equivalent for the hexadecimal digit. (The MSB is 
and the LSB is 
)
a. Fill in the Karnaugh map shown in Figure T7.6.
b. Determine the minimized SOP expression for G.
c. Determine the minimum POS expression for G.
Figure T7.6 
Karnaugh map to be filled in for G.
T7.7. Consider the shift register shown in Figure T7.7. Assuming that the initial shift-register
state is 100 (i.e., 
and 
), list the next six states. After how many shifts
does the register return to its initial state?
Figure T7.7 
B
8
, 
B
4
, 
B
2
,
B
1
B
8
,
B
1
.
Q
0
=1, 
Q
1
=0,
Q
2
=0


Chapter 8 Computers, Microcontrollers and Computer-Based
Instrumentation Systems
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Identify and describe the functional blocks of a computer.
Define the terms microprocessor, microcomputer, and microcontroller.
Select the type of memory needed for a given application.
Understand how microcontrollers can be applied in your field of specialization.
Identify the registers in the programmer's model and their functions for the HCS12/9S12
microcon­troller family from Freescale Semiconductor, Inc.
List some of the instructions and addressing modes of HCS12/9S12 microcontrollers.
Write simple assembly language programs, using the CPU12 instruction set.
Describe the operation of the elements of a computer-based instrumentation system.
Identify the types of errors that may be encountered in instrumentation systems.
Avoid common pitfalls such as ground loops, noise coupling, and loading when using sensors.
Determine specifications for the elements of computer-based instrumentation systems such as data-
acquisition boards.

Introduction to this chapter:
Certainly you are familiar with general-purpose electronic computers that are used
for business, engineering design, word processing, and other applications. Although
it is sometimes not readily apparent, special-purpose computers can be found in
many products such as automobiles, appliances, cameras, fax machines, garage-
door openers, and instrumentation. An embedded computer is part of a product
that is not called a computer. Virtually any recently manufactured device that is
partly electrical in nature is almost certain to contain one or more embedded
computers. Typical automobiles contain over 100 embedded computers. The
emphasis of this chapter is on embedded computers.
Relatively simple computers for embedded control applications can be completely
implemented on a single silicon chip costing less than a dollar. This type of
computer is often called a microcontroller (MCU) and is useful for problems such
as control of a washing machine, a printer, or a toaster.
An embedded computer is part of a product, such as an
automobile, printer, or bread machine, that is not called a
computer.
In this chapter, we give an overview of MCU organization and instruction sets using
the Freescale Semiconductor HCS12/9S12 family as an example. Hundreds of
types of MCUs and their variations are in use, but most of the underlying concepts
are similar from one to another. The primary intent is to give you an understanding
of these basic concepts. Space is not available in this book for the intensive
coverage of a particular MCU needed to prepare you to design complex
mechatronic systems.
Instrumentation concepts are important in systems with embedded microcontrollers.
We discuss the concepts related to computer-based instrumentation in the last

several sections of this chapter.
Computer capability has advanced rapidly and costs have fallen dramatically, a
trend that will continue for the foreseeable future. For the past several decades, the
price for a given computer capability has been cut in half about every 18 months.
You should view embedded MCUs as powerful, but inexpensive, resources that are
appropriate for solving virtually any control or instrumentation problem in your field
of engineering, no matter how complex or mundane the problem may be.

8.1 Computer Organization
Figure 8.1 shows the system-level diagram of a computer. The central processing unit (CPU) is
composed of the arithmetic/logic unit (ALU) and the control unit.
Figure 8.1 
A computer consists of a central processing unit, memory, buses, and input output devices.
The ALU carries out arithmetic and logic operations on data such as addition, subtraction, comparison,
or multiplication. Basically, the ALU is a logic circuit similar to those discussed in Chapter 7 (but much
more complex).
The control unit supervises the operation of the computer, such as determining the location of the next
instruction to be retrieved from memory and setting up the ALU to carry out operations on data. The
ALU and control unit contain various registers that hold operands, results, and control signals. (Recall
from Section 7.6 that a register is simply an array of flip-flops that can store a word composed of binary
digits.) Later in this chapter, we will discuss the functions of various CPU registers for the CPU12 which
is used in the Freescale HCS12/9S12 family.
Memory
Memory can be thought of as a sequence of locations that store data and instructions. Each memory
location has a unique address and typically stores one byte of data, which can conveniently be
represented by two hexadecimal digits. (Of course, within the computer circuits, data appear in binary
form.)

Several notations are used for hexadecimal numbers, including the subscript 16,
the subscript H, and the prefix $. Thus, 
and $F2 are alternative
ways to indicate that F2 is a hexadecimal number.
Usually, memory capacity is expressed in Kbytes, where 
Similarly, 1 Mbyte is 
bytes. A 64-Kbyte memory is illustrated in Figure 8.2. Under the direction of the control unit,
information can either be written to or read from each memory location. (We are assuming that we have
the read/write type of memory. Later, we will see that another type, known as read-only memory, can
also be very useful.)
Figure 8.2 
A 64-Kbyte memory that has 
memory locations, each of which contains one byte (eight
bits) of data. Each location has a 16-bit address. It is convenient to represent the addresses and data in
hexadecimal form as shown. The addresses range from 
to 
For example, the memory
location 
contains the byte 
Programs
Programs are sequences of instructions stored in memory. Typically, the controller fetches (i.e.,
retrieves) an instruction, determines what operation is called for by the instruction, fetches data from
memory as required, causes the ALU to perform the operation, and writes results back to memory.
Then, the next instruction is fetched, and the process is repeated. We will see that the CPU12 can
execute a rich variety of instruction types.
F2
16
,
F2
H
,
1 K=
2
10
=1024.
2
20
=1.048,576
2
16
=65,536
0000
H
FFFF
H
.
0004
H
B
2
H
=
10110010
2
.

Buses
The various elements of a computer are connected by buses, which are sets of conductors that transfer
multiple bits at a time. For example, the data bus transfers data (and instructions) between the CPU
and memory (or I/O devices). In small computers, the width of the data bus (i.e., the number of bits that
can be transferred at a time) is typically eight bits. Then, one byte can be transferred between the CPU
and memory (or I/O) at a time. (The bus is wider in more powerful general-purpose CPUs such as those
found in personal computers, which typically have data-bus widths of 64 bits.)
Several control buses are used to direct the operations of the computer. For example, one control bus
sends the addresses for memory locations (or I/O devices) as well as signals that direct whether data
are to be read or written. With an address bus width of 16 bits, 
of memory locations (and I/O
devices) can be addressed. Another control bus internal to the CPU transfers signals from the control
unit to the ALU. These control signals direct the ALU to perform a particular operation, such as addition.
Buses can be bidirectional. In other words, they can transfer data in either direction. Let us consider the
data bus connecting the CPU and memory. Of course, the memory and the CPU cannot apply
conflicting data signals to the bus at the same time. Conflict is avoided by transferring data to the bus
through tristate buffers, as illustrated in Figure 8.3. Depending on the control signal, the tristate buffers
function either as open or as closed switches. When a byte of data is to be transferred from the CPU to
memory, the tristate buffers are enabled (switches closed) on the CPU and disabled (switches open) in
the memory. The data inputs of both the CPU and the memory are connected to the bus at all times, so
data can be accepted from the bus as desired. Thus, the data from the CPU appear on the bus and can
be stored by the memory. When data are to be transferred from memory to the CPU, the conditions of
the tristate buffers are reversed.
2
16
=64K

Figure 8.3 
Data are applied to the data bus through tristate buffers, which can function either as closed or as open
switches.
Input Output
Some examples of I/O devices are keyboards, display devices, and printers. An important category of
input devices in control applications are sensors, which convert temperatures, pressures,
displacements, flow rates, and other physical values to digital form that can be read by the computer.
Actuators are output devices such as valves, motors, and switches that allow the computer to affect the
system being controlled.
Some computers are said to have memory-mapped I/O, in which I/O devices are addressed by the
same bus as memory locations. Then, the same instructions used for storing and reading data from
memory can be used for I/O. Other computers have a separate address bus and instructions for I/O. We
discuss primarily systems that use memory-mapped I/O.
A microprocessor is a CPU contained on a single integrated-circuit chip. The first microprocessor was
the Intel 4004, which appeared in 1971 and cost several thousand dollars each. Subsequently,
microprocessors have dramatically fallen in price and increased in performance. A microcomputer,
such as a PC or a laptop, combines a microprocessor with memory and I/O chips. A MCU combines
CPU, memory, buses, and I/O on a single chip and is optimized for embedded control applications. We
give a more detailed overview of the HCS12/9S12 MCU family later in this chapter.
A microcontroller is a complete computer containing the CPU, memory, and I/O
on a single silicon chip.
There are several variations of computer organization. In computers with Harvard architecture, there
are separate memories for data and instructions. If the same memory contains both data and
instructions, we have von Neumann architecture. The HCS12/9S12 MCU family uses von Neumann
architecture.

Exercise 8.1 
Suppose that a microprocessor has an address bus width of 20 bits. How many memory locations can it
access?
Answer 
Exercise 8.2 
How many bits can be stored in a 64-Kbyte memory?
Answer 524,288.

2
20
=1,048,576=1024 K=1 M.

8.2 Memory Types
Several types of memory are used in computers: (1) Read-and-write memory (RAM), (2) Read-only
memory (ROM), and (3) Mass storage. We discuss each type in turn. Then, we consider how to select
the best type of memory for various applications.
RAM
Read-and-write memory (RAM) is used for storing data, instructions, and results during execution of a
program. Semiconductor RAM consists of one or more silicon integrated circuits (each of which has
many storage cells) and control logic so that information can be transferred into or out of the cell
specified by the address.
Usually, the information that is stored in RAM is lost when power is removed. Thus, we say that RAM is
volatile. Originally, the acronym RAM meant random-access memory, but the term has changed its
meaning over time. As the term is used now, RAM means volatile semiconductor memory. (Actually,
RAM is also available with small batteries that maintain information in the absence of other power.)
RAM and ROM do not incur any loss of speed when the memory locations are
accessed in random order. In fact, RAM originally meant random-access
memory.
The time required to access data in RAM is the same for all memory locations. The fastest RAM is
capable of access times of a few nanoseconds. No time penalty is incurred by accessing locations in
random order.
There are two types of RAM in common use. In static RAM, the storage cells are SR flip-flops that can
store data indefinitely, provided that power is applied continuously. In dynamic RAM, information is
stored in each cell as charge (or lack of charge) on a capacitor. Because the charge leaks off the
capacitors, it is necessary to refresh the information periodically. This makes the use of dynamic RAM

more complex than the use of static RAM. The advantage of dynamic RAM is that the basic storage cell
is smaller, so that chips with larger capacities are available. A relatively small amount of RAM is needed
in most control applications, and it is simpler to use static RAM.
An 8K-word by 8-bit static RAM chip is illustrated in Figure 8.4. The chip has 13 address lines, eight
data lines, and three control lines. The "bubbles" on the control input lines indicate that they are active
when low. Unless the chip select line is low, the chip neither stores data nor places data on the data
bus. If both the output-enable and the chip-select inputs are low, the data stored in the location specified
by the address appear on the data lines. If both the write-enable and the chip-select lines are low, the
data appearing on the data bus are stored in the location specified by the address signals. In normal
operation, both the output enable and write enable lines are never low at the same time.
Figure 8.4 
A generic 8K-word by 8-bit word RAM.
ROM
In normal operation, read-only memory (ROM) can be read, but not written to. The chief advantages of
ROM are that data can be read quickly in random order and that information is not lost when power is
turned off. Thus, we say that ROM is non-volatile (i.e., permanent). ROM is useful for storing programs
such as the boot program, which is executed automatically when power is applied to a computer. In
simple dedicated applications such as the controller for a clothes washer, all of the programs are stored
in ROM.
The primary advantage of ROM is that it is non-volatile. Information stored in

RAM is lost when power is interrupted.
Several types of ROM exist. For example, in mask-programmable ROM, the data are written when the
chip is manufactured. A substantial cost is incurred in preparing the mask that is used to write the data
while manufacturing this type of ROM. However, mask-programmable ROM is the least expensive form
of ROM when the mask cost is spread over a sufficiently large number of units. Mask-programmable
ROM is not a good choice if frequent changes in the information stored are necessary, as in initial
system development.
In programmable read-only memory (PROM), data can be written by special circuits that blow tiny
fuses or leave them unblown, depending on whether the data bits are zeros or ones. Thus, with PROM,
we write data once and can read it as many times as desired. PROM is an economical choice if a small
number of units are needed.
Erasable PROM (EPROM) is another type that can be erased by exposure to ultraviolet light (through a
window in the chip package) and rewritten by using special circuits. Electrically erasable PROMs
(EEPROMs) can be erased by applying proper voltages to the chip. Although we can write data to an
EEPROM, the process is much slower than for RAM.
Flash memory is a non-volatile technology in which data can be erased and rewritten relatively quickly
in blocks of locations, ranging in size from 512 bytes up to 512 Kbytes. Flash memory has a limited
lifetime, typically on the order of 10 thousand to 100 thousand read/write cycles. Flash is a rapidly
advancing technology and may eventually replace hard drives for mass storage in general purpose
computers.
Mass Storage
Mass-storage units include hard disks and flash memory, both of which are read/write memory. Another
type is CD-ROM and DVD-ROM disks, which are used for storing large amounts of data. Mass storage
is the least expensive type of memory per unit of capacity. With all forms of mass storage except flash, a
relatively long time is required to access a particular location. Initial access times for mass storage
range upward from several milliseconds, compared with fractions of a microsecond for RAM or ROM.
However, if mass-storage locations are accessed sequentially, the transfer rate is considerably higher
(but still lower than for RAM or ROM). Usually, data and instructions need to be accessed quickly in
random order during execution of a program. Thus, programs are stored in RAM or ROM during
execution.

Hard disks, CD-ROMs, and DVDs are examples of sequential memories in which
access is faster if memory locations are accessed in order.
Selection of Memory
The main considerations in choosing the type of memory to be used are:
1. The trade-off between speed and cost.
2. Whether the information is to be stored permanently or must be changed frequently.
3. Whether data are to be accessed in random order or in sequence.
In general-purpose computers, programs and data are read into RAM before execution from mass-
storage devices such as hard disks. Because many different programs are used, it is not practical to
store programs in semiconductor ROM, which would be too expensive for the large memory space
required. Furthermore, information stored in ROM is more difficult to modify compared to data stored on
a hard disk. We often find a small amount of ROM used for the startup or boot program in general-
purpose computers, but most of the memory is RAM and mass storage.
On the other hand, in embedded MCUs, programs are usually stored in semiconductor ROM, and only a
small amount of RAM is needed to store temporary results. For example, in a controller for a television
receiver, the programs for operating the TV are stored in ROM, but time and channel information
entered by the user is stored in RAM. In this application, power is applied to the RAM even when the TV
is "turned off." However, during a power failure, the data stored in RAM are lost (unless the TV has a
battery backup for its RAM). Usually, we do not find mass-storage devices used in embedded
computers.

8.3 Digital Process Control
Figure 8.5 shows the general block diagram of a control scheme for a physical process such as an
internal combustion engine. Various physical inputs such as power and material flow are regulated by
actuators that are in turn controlled by the MCU.
Figure 8.5 
Microcontroller-based control of a physical process.
D/A and DAC are both acronyms for digital-to-analog converter.
Some actuators are analog and some are digital. Examples of digital actuators are switches or valves
that are either on or off, depending on the logic value of their control signals. Digital actuators can be
controlled directly by digital control lines. Analog actuators require an analog input. For example, the
rudder of an airplane may deflect in proportion to an analog input signal. Then, digital-to-analog (D/A)
converters are needed to convert the digital signals to analog form before they are applied to analog
actuators.
Various sensors produce electrical signals related to process parameters (such as temperature,

pressure, pH, velocity, or displacement) of the process under control. Some sensors are digital and
some are analog. For example, a pressure sensor may consist of a switch that closes producing a high
output signal when pressure exceeds a particular value. On the other hand, an analog pressure sensor
produces an output voltage that is proportional to pressure. Analog-to-digital (A/D) converters are
used to convert the analog sensor signals to digital form.
Often, a display is provided so that information about the process can be accessed by the operator. A
keyboard or other input device enables the operator to direct operation of the control process.
Many variations of the system shown in Figure 8.5 are possible. For example, sometimes we simply
want to instrument a process and present information to the operator. This is the situation for automotive
instrumentation in which sensors provide signals for speed, fuel reserve, oil pressure, engine
temperature, battery voltage, and so on. These data are presented to the driver by one or more
displays.
Actuators, sensors, and I/O tend to be unique to each application and do not lend themselves to
integration with the MCU. A/D and D/A converters often are included within the MCU. Thus, a typical
system consists of an MCU, sensors, actuators, and I/O devices. Systems may not contain all of these
elements. Within a given MCU family, variations are usually available with respect to the amount and
type of memory, the number of A/D channels, and so forth, that are included on the chip.
Virtually any system can be controlled or monitored by an MCU. Here is a short list: traffic signals,
engines, chemical plants, antiskid brakes, manufacturing processes, stress measurement in structures,
machine tools, aircraft instrumentation, monitoring of patients in a cardiac-care unit, nuclear reactors,
and laboratory experiments.
Interrupts versus Polling
In many control applications, the MCU must be able to respond to certain input signals very quickly. For
example, an overpressure indication in a nuclear power plant may require immediate attention. When
such an event occurs, the MCU must interrupt what it is doing and start a program known as an
interrupt handler that determines the source of the interrupt and takes appropriate action. Many MCUs
have hardware capability and instructions for handling these interrupts.
Instead of using interrupts, an MCU can use polling to determine if any parts of the system need
attention. The processor checks each sensor in turn and takes appropriate actions as needed. However,
continuous polling is wasteful of processor time. In complex applications, the processor may be required
to carry out extensive, but lower-priority activities, much of the time. In this case, interrupts provide
faster response to critical events than polling does. For a breadmaker, polling would be acceptable

because no activity ties up the MCU for more than a few milliseconds. Furthermore, any of the actions
required could be delayed by a few tens of milliseconds without undue consequences.
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
 8.1
Fresh Bread Anyone?
Let us consider a relatively simple MCU application: a breadmaker. Possibly, you have had
experience with this popular appliance. The chef measures and adds the ingredients (flour,
water, dried milk, sugar, salt, yeast, and butter) to the bread pan, makes selections from the
menu by using a keypad, and takes out a finished loaf of bread after about four hours.
The diagram of a bread machine is shown in Figure PA8.1. There are three digital actuators in
the bread machine: a switch to control the heating element, a switch for the mixing and kneading
motor, and a switch for the fan used to cool the loaf after baking is finished. Analog actuators are
not needed in this application.
FIGURE
PA8.1 
A relatively simple application for an MCU—a breadmaking machine.
An analog sensor is used to measure temperature. The sensor output is converted to digital form
by an A/D converter.

A timer circuit is part of the MCU that is initially loaded with the time needed to complete the loaf.
The timer is a digital circuit that counts down, similar to the counter circuits discussed in Section
7.6.
The timer indicates the number of hours and minutes remaining in the process. The MCU can
read the time remaining and use it to make decisions. Time remaining to completion of the loaf is
also displayed for the convenience of the chef.
The control programs are stored in ROM. The parameters entered by the chef are written into
RAM (for example, whether the bread crust is to be light, medium, or dark). The MCU continually
checks the time remaining and the temperature. By executing the program stored in ROM, the
computer determines when the machine should mix the ingredients, turn on the heating element
to warm the dough and cause it to rise, knead the dough, bake, or cool down. The duration and
temperature of the various parts of the cycle depend on the initial selections made by the chef.
First, the machine mixes the ingredients for several minutes, and the heating element is turned
on to warm the yeast that makes the dough rise. While the dough is rising, a warm temperature
is required, say 90°F. Thus, the heating element is turned on and the MCU reads the
temperature frequently. When the temperature reaches the desired value, the heating element is
turned off. If the temperature falls too low, the element is again turned on.
The MCU continues to check the time remaining and the temperature. According to the
programs stored in ROM and the parameters entered by the chef (which are saved in RAM), the
motors and heating element are turned on and off.
In this application, about 100 bytes of RAM would be needed to store information entered by the
operator and temporary data. Also, about 16 Kbytes of ROM would be needed to store the
programs. Compared to the total price of the appliance, the cost of this amount of ROM is very
small. Therefore, many variations of the program can be stored in ROM, and bread machines
can be very versatile. In addition to finished loaves of bread, they can also bake cakes, cook
rice, make jam, or prepare dough for other purposes, such as cinnamon rolls.

8.4 Programming Model for the HCS12/9S12 Family
Earlier, we discussed a generic computer shown in Figure 8.1 on page 409. In this section, we give a
more detailed internal description of the HCS12/9S12 MCU family from Freescale Semiconductor.
Space does not allow us to discuss all of the features, instructions, and programming techniques for
these MCUs. However, we will describe the programming model, selected instructions, and a few simple
programs to give you a better understanding of how MCUs can be used for embedded applications that
you will encounter in your field.
The HCS12/9S12 Programming Model
The ALU and the control unit contain various registers that are used to hold operands, the address of
the next instruction to be executed, addresses of data, and results. For example, the programmer's
model for the CPU12 is illustrated in Figure 8.6. (Actually, the MCUs contain many other registers-only
the registers of concern to the programmer are shown in the figure; thus, Figure 8.6 is often called the
programming model.)
The accumulators are general-purpose registers that hold one of the arguments and the result of all
arithmetic and logical operations. Registers A and B each contain 8 bits with the least significant bit on
the right (bit 0 in Figure 8.6) and the most significant bit on the left. Sometimes A and B are used as
separate registers, and other times they are used in combination as a single 16-bit register, denoted as
register D. It is important to remember that D is not separate from A and B.
It is important to remember that register D is not separate from registers A and B.

Figure 8.6 
The CPU12 programmer's model.
The program counter (PC) is a 16-bit register that contains the address of the first byte of the next
instruction to be fetched (read) from memory by the control unit. The size of the PC is the same as the
size of memory addresses; thus, the memory potentially contains up to 
locations, each of
which contains one byte of data or instructions as illustrated in Figure 8.2 on page 410.
The index registers X and Y are mainly used for a type of addressing (of data) known as indexed
addressing, which we will discuss later.
The condition-code register (CCR) is an 8-bit register in which each bit depends either on a condition
of the processor or on the result of the preceding logic or arithmetic operation. The details of the CCR
are shown in Figure 8.6. For example, the carry bit C (bit 0 of the CCR) is set (to logic 1) if a carry (or
borrow) occurred in the preceding arithmetic operation. Bit 1 (overflow or V) is set if the result of the
preceding operation resulted in overflow or underflow. Bit 2 (zero or Z) is set to 1 if the result of the
preceding operation was zero. Bit 3 (negative or N) is set if the result was negative. The meaning and
use of the remaining bits will be discussed as the need arises.
Stacks and the Stack Pointer Register
2
16
=64 K

A stack is a sequence of locations in memory used to store information such as the contents of the
program counter and other registers when a subroutine is executed or when an interrupt occurs. (We
discuss subroutines shortly.) As the name implies, information is added to (pushed onto) the top of the
stack and later read out (pulled off) in the reverse order that it was written. This is similar to adding
plates to the top of a stack when clearing a dinner table and then taking the plates off the top of the
stack when loading a dishwasher. After data are pulled off the stack, they are considered to no longer
exist in memory and are written over by later push commands. The first word pushed onto the stack is
the last to be pulled off, and stacks are called last-in first-out memories (LIFOs).
Stacks are last-in first-out memories. Information is added to (pushed onto) the
top of the stack and eventually read out (pulled off) in the reverse order that it
was written.
The stack pointer is a CPU register that keeps track of the address of the top of the stack. Each time
the content of a register is pushed onto the stack, the content of the stack pointer is decremented by
one if the register contained one byte. If the register contained two bytes, the stack-pointer content is
decreased by two. (Addresses are smaller in value as we progress upward in the stack.) Conversely,
when data is pulled from the stack and transferred to a register, the stack-pointer content is increased
by one or two (depending on the length of the register). When the content of one of the 8-bit registers
(A, B, or CCR) is pushed onto the stack (by the commands PSHA, PSHB, or PSHC, respectively), these
operations take place:
1. The content of the stack pointer is reduced by one.
2. The content of the 8-bit register is stored at the address corresponding to the content of the
stack pointer.
When the content of one of the 16-bit registers D, X, or Y is pushed onto the stack (by the commands
PSHD, PSHX, or PSHY), the following operations take place:
1. The content of the stack pointer is decremented by one and the least significant byte (bits 8
through 15) of the content of the 16-bit register is stored at the address corresponding to the
content of the stack pointer.
2. The content of the stack pointer is again decremented by one, and the most significant byte of
the content of the 16-bit register is stored at the address corresponding to the content of the
stack pointer.

In pulling data off of the stack, the operations are reversed. For an 8-bit register (commands PULA,
PULB, or PULC):
1. The data in the memory location pointed to by the stack pointer is stored in the register.
2. The content of the stack pointer is incremented by one.
For a 16-bit register (commands PULD, PULX, or PULY):
1. The data in the memory location to which the stack pointer points is stored in the high byte of the
register, and the content of the stack pointer is incremented by one.
2. The data in the memory location to which the stack pointer points is stored in the low byte of the
register, and the content of the stack pointer is again incremented by one.
Figure 8.7 illustrates the effects of the command sequence PSHA, PSHB, PULX. Figure 8.7(a) shows
the original contents of pertinent registers and memory locations. (Memory locations always contain
something; they are never blank. However, when the content of a memory location is unknown or does
not matter, we have left the location blank.) Figure 8.7(b) shows the new contents after the command
PSHA has been executed. Notice that the initial content of register A has been stored in location 090A
and that the content of SP has been decremented by one. (Furthermore, the initial contents of A and B
are unchanged.) Figure 8.7(c) shows the contents after the command PSHB has been executed. Notice
that the content of register B has been stored in location 0909 and that the content of SP has been
decremented by one. Finally, Figure 8.7(d) shows the new contents after the command PULX has been
executed. Notice that the content of memory location 0909 has been stored in the first byte of register X
and the content of memory location 090A has been stored in the second byte of register X. Also, the
content of SP has been increased by two.
Figure 8.7 

Register and memory contents for the command sequence: PSHA, PSHB, PULX.
Exercise 8.3 
Starting from the initial contents shown in Figure 8.7(a), determine the content of register X after
execution of the command sequence PSHB, PSHA, PULX.
Answer The content of the X register is 34A2.
Exercise 8.4 
Starting from the initial contents shown in Figure 8.7(a), determine the content of register X after the
command sequence PSHX, PSHA, PULX.
Answer The content of the X register is 3400ss.
Exercise 8.5 
Suppose that initially the contents of all memory locations in the stack are 00, and the stack pointer
register contains 0806. Then, the following operations occur in sequence:
1. The data byte 
is pushed onto the stack.
2. 
is pushed onto the stack.
3. One byte is pulled from the stack.
4. FF is pushed onto the stack.
List the contents of memory locations 0800 through 0805 after each step. Also, give the content of the
stack pointer (SP).
Answer After step 1, we have:
0800: 00   SP: 0805
0801: 00
0802: 00
0803: 00
0804: 00
0805: A7
A
7
H
78
H

After step 2, we have:
0800: 00   SP: 0804
0801: 00
0802: 00
0803: 00
0804: 78
0805: A7
After step 3, we have:
0800: 00   SP: 0805
0801: 00
0802: 00
0803: 00
0804: 78
0805: A7
After step 4, we have:
0800: 00   SP: 0804
0801: 00
0802: 00
0803: 00
0804: FF (New data replaces old.)
0805: A7

8.5 The Instruction Set and Addressing Modes for the CPU12
Computers excel at executing simple instructions, such as quickly and accurately adding a number
stored in a given memory location to the content of a specified register. Computers are capable of highly
sophisticated and seemingly intelligent behavior by following instruction sequences called programs or
software. These are prepared by a human programmer.
Unfortunately, even the smallest oversight on the part of the programmer can render a program useless
until the error is corrected. A substantial part of the effort in designing an MCU-based controller is in
writing software. To be effective, the programmer must be fully knowledgeable about the fine details of
the instruction set for the MCU in use. Our objective in this and the next section is simply to give you a
brief overview, not to make you an expert programmer.
A substantial part of the effort in designing an MCU-based controller is in writing
software.
In general, instruction sets are similar between different MCU types, but details differ. Once one has
mastered programming of a given machine, it is much easier to learn and make good use of the
instruction set of another processor. Here again, we take the CPU12 as an example. More details about
it can be readily found on the Web.
Instructions for the CPU12
A selected set of instructions for the CPU12 is listed in Table 8.1. The first column in the table gives the
mnemonic for each instruction, the second column is a brief description and an equivalent Boolean
expression for the instruction. For example, the ABA instruction adds the content of register B to the
content of A with the result residing in A. We can indicate this operation as
(
A
)+(
B
)→A

as shown in the second column of the table.
(A) represents the content of register A.
Table 8.1. Selected Instructions for the CPU12
Source
Form
Operation
Addr.
Mode
Machine
Code
Condition Codes
S
X
H
I
N
Z
V
C
ABA
Add Accumulators 
INH
18 06
-
-
-
ADDA
(opr)
Add Memory to A 
IMM
DIR
EXT
IDX
8B 
9B 
BB 
AB *
-
-
-
ADDB
(opr)
Add Memory to B 
IMM
DIR
EXT
IDX
CB 
DB 
FB 
EB *
-
-
-
ADDD
(opr)
Add Memory to D 
IMM
DIR
EXT
IDX
C3 
D3 
F3 
E3 *
-
-
-
-
(
A
)+(
B
)→A
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
(
A
)+(
M
)→A
ii
dd
hh ll
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
(
B
)+(
M
)→B
ii
dd
hh ll
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
(
D
)+(
M:
M+1
)→D
jj kk
dd
hh ll
↕
↕
↕
↕

BCS
(rel)
Branch if Carry Set (if 
)
REL
25 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
BEQ
(rel)
Branch if Equal (if 
)
REL
27 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
BLO
(rel)
Branch if Lower  (if 
)
REL
25 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
BMI
(rel)
Branch if Minus  (if 
)
REL
2B 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
BNE
(rel)
Branch if Not Equal (if 
)
REL
26 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
BPL
(rel)
Branch if Plus  (if 
)
REL
2A 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
BRA
(rel)
Branch Always
REL
20 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
CLRA
Clear Accumulator A 
INH
87
-
-
-
-
0
1
0
0
CLRB
Clear Accumulator B 
INH
C7
-
-
-
-
0
1
0
0
COMA
Complement Accumulator
A 
INH
41
-
-
-
-
0
1
INCA
Increment Accumulator A 
INH
42
-
-
-
-
-
INCB
Increment Accumulator B 
INH
52
-
-
-
-
-
INX
Increment Index Register X
INH
08
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
JMP
(opr)
Jump Routine 
EXT
06 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C=1
rr
Z=1
rr
U
C=1
rr
s
N=1
rr
Z=0
rr
s
N=0
rr
rr
≥00→A
≥00→B

(
A
¯
)→A
↕
↕
(
A
)+≥01→A
↕
↕
↕
(
B
)+≥01→B
↕
↕
↕
(
X
)+≥0001→X
↕
Address→PC
hh ll

IDX
05 *
JSR
(opr)
Jump to Subroutine (See
Text)
DIR
EXT
IDX
17 
16 
15 *
LDAA
(opr)
Load Accumulator A 
IMM
DIR
EXT
IDX
86 
96 
B6 
A6 *
-
-
-
-
0
-
LDAB
(opr)
Load Accumulator B 
IMM
DIR
EXT
IDX
C6 
D6 
F6 
E6 *
-
-
-
-
0
-
LDD
(opr)
Load Accumulator D 
IMM
DIR
EXT
IDX
CC 
DC 
FC 
EC *
-
-
-
-
0
-
LDX
(opr)
Load Index Register X 
IMM
DIR
EXT
IDX
CE 
DE 
FE 
EE *
-
-
-
-
0
-
LDY
Load Index Register Y 
IMM
CD 
-
-
-
-
0
-
dd
hh ll
(
M
)→A
ii
dd
hh ll
↕
↕
(
M
)→B
ii
dd
hh ll
↕
↕
(
M
): (
M+1
)→D
jj kk
dd
hh ll
↕
↕
(
M
): (
M+1
)→X
jj kk
dd
hh ll
↕
↕
(
M
jj kk
↕
↕

(opr)
DIR
EXT
IDX
DD 
FD 
ED *
MUL
Multiply A by B  
INH
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
NOP
No Operation
INH
A7
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
PSHA
Push A onto Stack 
INH
36
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
PSHB
Push B onto Stack 
INH
37
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
PSHX
Push X onto Stack 
INH
34
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
PSHY
Push Y onto Stack 
INH
35
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
PULA
Pull A from Stack 
INH
32
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
PULB
Pull B from Stack 
INH
33
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
PULX
Pull X from Stack 
INH
30
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
PULY
Pull Y from Stack 
INH
31
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
RTS
Return from Subroutine 
INH
3D
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
): (
M+1
)→Y
dd
hh ll
U

(
A
)×(
B
)→D
↕
(
SP
)−1⇒SP;(
A
)⇒
M
(
SP
)
(
SP
)−1⇒SP;(
B
)⇒
M
(
SP
)
(
SP
)−2⇒SP;(
X
H
: 
X
L
)⇒
M
(
SP
)
: 
M
(
SP+1
)
(
SP
)−2⇒SP;(
Y
H
: 
Y
L
)⇒
M
(
SP
)
: 
M
(
SP+1
)
(
M
(
SP
)
)⇒A;(
SP
)+1⇒SP
(
M
(
SP
)
)⇒B;(
SP
)+1⇒SP
(
M
(
SP
)
: 
M
(
SP+1
)
)⇒
X
H
: 
X
L
;(
SP
)+2⇒SP
(
M
(
SP
)
: 
M
(
SP+1
)
)⇒
Y
H
: 
Y
L
;(
SP
)+2⇒SP
(
M
(
SP
)
: 
M
(
SP+1
)
)⇒PC;(

STAA
(opr)
Store Accumulator A 
DIR
EXT
IDX
5A 
7A 
6A *
-
-
-
-
0
-
STAB
(opr)
Store Accumulator B 
DIR
EXT
IDX
5B 
7B 
6B *
-
-
-
-
0
-
STD
(opr)
Store Accumulator D 
DIR
EXT
IDX
5C 
7C 
6C *
-
-
-
-
0
-
STOP
Stop Internal Clocks. If S
control 
the STOP
instruction is disabled and
acts like a NOP
INH
18 3E
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
TSTA
Test Accumulator A; 
INH
97
-
-
-
-
0
0
TSTB
Test Accumulator B; 
INH
D7
-
-
-
-
0
0
S   indicates instructions that are intended for two's complement signed numbers
U   indicates instructions that are intended for unsigned numbers
*  For indexed addressing (IDX). Only the first byte of the machine coded is given. An additional
one to three bytes are needed.
The details are beyond the scope of our discussion.
ii   8-bit immediate data
dd   low byte of a direct address
hh ll high and low bytes of an extended address
SP
)+2⇒SP
(
A
)→M
dd
hh ll
↕
↕
(
B
)→M
dd
hh ll
↕
↕
(
A
)→M;(
B
)→M+1
dd
hh ll
↕
↕
bit=1,

(
A
)−00
↕
↕

(
B
)−00
↕
↕

jj kk high and low bytes of 16-bit immediate data
rr   signed 8-bit offset in branch instruction
Mnemonics are easy for humans to remember. However, in the microcomputer memory, the instructions
are stored as machine codes (or op codes) consisting of one or more 8-bit numbers, each of which is
represented in the table as a two-digit hexadecimal number. For example, in the row for the ABA
instruction, we see that the op code is 1806. Thus, the ABA instruction appears in memory as the binary
numbers 00011000 and 00000110.
Look at the row for the ADDA(opr) instruction in which (opr) stands for the address of a memory
location. The effect of the instruction is to add the content of a memory location to the content of
accumulator A with the result residing in A. This is represented by the expression
in which (M) represents the content of a memory location. Several addressing modes can be used to
select the memory location to be accessed by some instructions. For example, the ADDA instruction can
use any of several addressing modes. We will discuss the CPU12 addressing modes shortly.
Table 8.1 also shows the effect of each instruction on the contents of the CCR. The meanings of the
symbols shown for each bit of the condition code are
-
the bit is unchanged by this instruction
0
the bit is always cleared by this instruction
1
the bit is always set by this instruction
the bit is set or cleared depending on the result
The CPU12 has many more instructions than those listed in the table; we have just given a sample of
various kinds. Next, we briefly describe each of the addressing modes used by the CPU12.
Extended (EXT) Addressing
(
A
)+(
M
)→A
↕

Recall that the CPU12 uses 16 bits (usually written as four hexadecimal digits) for memory addresses.
In extended addressing, the complete address of the operand is included in the instruction. Thus, the
instruction
ADDA $CA01
In CPU12 assembly language, a prefix of $ indicates that the number is
hexadecimal.
adds the content of memory location CA01 to the content of register A. (Later, we will see that a
program called an assembler is used to convert the mnemonics to op codes. The $ sign indicates to the
assembler that the address is given in hexadecimal form.) The op codes appear in three successive
memory locations as
BB
(op code for ADDA with extended addressing)
CA
(high byte of address)
01
(low byte of address)
Notice that the high byte of the address is given first followed by the low byte.
Direct (DIR) Addressing
In direct addressing, only the least significant two (hexadecimal) digits of the address are given, and
the most significant two digits are assumed to be zero. Therefore, the effective address falls between
0000 and 00FF. For example, the instruction

ADDA $A9
adds the content of memory location 00A9 to the content of register A. The instruction appears in two
successive memory locations as
9B
(the op code for ADDA with direct addressing)
A9
(the low byte of the address)
Notice that the same result could be obtained by using extended addressing, in which case the
instruction would appear as
ADDA $00A9
However, the extended addressing form of the instruction would occupy three bytes of memory, rather
than two with direct addressing. Furthermore, the direct addressing form is completed more quickly.
Inherent (INH) Addressing
Some instructions, such as ABA, access only the MCU registers. We say that this instruction uses
inherent addressing. An instruction sequence that adds the numbers in locations 23A9 and 00AA, then
stores the result in location 23AB is
LDAA $23A9
(extended addressing, load A from location 23A9)
LDAB $AA
(direct addressing, load B from location 00AA)
ABA
(inherent addressing, add B to A)

STAA $23AB
(extended addressing, store result in 23AB)
Immediate (IMM) Addressing
In CPU12 assembly language, the symbol # indicates immediate addressing.
In immediate addressing, which is denoted by the symbol#, the address of the operand is the address
immediately following the instruction. For example, the instruction ADDA #$83 adds the hexadecimal
number 83 to the contents of A. It is stored in two successive memory locations as
8B
(op code for ADDA with immediate addressing)
83
(operand)
Because A is a single-byte register, only one byte of memory is needed to store the operand.
On the other hand, D is a double-byte (16-bit) register, and its operand is assumed to occupy two
memory bytes. For example, the instruction ADDD #$A276 adds the two-byte hexadecimal number
A276 to the contents of D. It is stored in three successive memory locations as
C3
(op code for ADDD with immediate addressing)
A2
(high byte of operand)
76
(low byte of operand)

Indexed (IDX) Addressing
Indexed addressing is useful when we want to access a list of items either one after another in order, or
perhaps skipping forward or backward through the list by twos, threes, etc. The CPU12 has a variety of
indexed addressing options. (In Table 8.1, we have grouped all of these options under the IDX label.
Only the first bite of the machine code, of two to four in all, is given in the table. This has been done
because of space limitations in this chapter.)
Constant-Offset Indexed Addressing. In constant-offset indexed addressing, the effective address is
formed by adding a signed offset to the content of a selected CPU register (X, Y, SP, or PC). The
contents of X, Y, SP, or PC are not changed in this type of addressing. Suppose that X contains $1005
and Y contains $200A. Then, some examples of source code using this type of addressing and their
effects are
STAA 5,X
store the content of A in location $100A
store the content of D in locations $2007 and $2008
ADDB $A,X
add the content of location $100F to register B
Accumulator-Offset Indexed Addressing. In this form of addressing, the content of one of the
accumulators (A, B, or D) is added as an unsigned number to the content of a designated register (X, Y,
SP, or PC) to obtain the effective address. For example, if X contains $2000 and A contains $FF, the
command
LDAB A,X
loads the content of memory location $20FF into B. The contents of A and X remain the same after the
command is completed as they were before the command.
Next, we discuss four types of indexed addressing that increment or decrement the contents of the
selected CPU register (X, Y, or SP) either before or after the instruction is carried out. The amount of the
increment or decrement can range from 1 to 8 and the selected CPU register contains the incremented
or decremented value after the instruction is completed.
Auto Pre-Incremented Indexed Addressing. Suppose that X contains $1005. Then, the instruction
STD−3,Y

STAA 5,
pre-increments X so the content of X becomes $100A and the content of A is stored in location $100A.
X contains $100A after the completion of the instruction.
Auto Pre-Decremented Indexed Addressing. Again, suppose that X contains $1005. Then, the
instruction
STD 5,-X
pre-decrements X so the content of X becomes $1000 and the content of D is stored in locations $1000
and $1001. X contains $1000 after the completion of the instruction.
Notice that the sign preceding X determines whether we have a pre-increment or a pre-decrement. On
the other hand, if the algebraic sign comes after the register name, we have either a post-increment or
post-decrement. Here again, the increment or decrement can range from 1 to 8.
Auto Post-Incremented Indexed Addressing. Suppose that X contains $1005. Then, the instruction
STAA 5,X+
stores the content of A in location 1005 and then increments X so the content of X becomes $100A. As
before, the increment can vary from 1 to 8.
Auto Post-Decremented Indexed Addressing. Again, suppose that X contains $1005. Then, the
instruction
STAA 3,X-
stores the content of A in location $1005 and then decrements X so the content of X becomes $1002.
Indirect Indexed Addressing. In this type of addressing, a 16-bit (or equivalently, four-digit
hexadecimal) constant given in the command is added to the content of a selected CPU register (X, Y,
SP, or PC). This results in a pointer to a location containing the address of the operand. To illustrate an
example, first assume that the contents of the CPU registers and some of the memory locations are as
shown in Figure 8.8. Then, if the command
LDY [$1002, X]
+X

is executed, $1002 is added to the content of X resulting in $2003. The content of locations $2003 and
$2004 contain the high byte and low byte for the starting address of the operand. Thus, the starting
address of the operand is $3003. Finally, the content of locations $3003 and $3004 is written to register
Y. Thus, after the execution of this command Y contains $A3F6.
Figure 8.8 
Illustration of the command LDY [$1002, X].
Instead of specifying an offset value in the command, the content of register D can be used. Thus, in
Figure 8.8, the command
LDY[D,X]
adds the content of D to the content of X again resulting in $2003. The content of locations $2003 and
$2004 is $3003. This is the (initial) address of the operand. So $A3F6 is loaded into register Y as it was
for the command LDY[$1002,X].
To recap, the steps followed by indexed indirect addressing are:
1. Add either the offset or the content of D to the content of the CPU register (X, Y, SP, or PC)
specified in the command.
2. Go to the address resulting from step 1. The content of this location and the next is the address
of the operand.
Relative Addressing

Branch instructions are used to alter the sequence of program flow. Recall that if we add two numbers,
the Z bit of the condition code register is clear if the result was not zero and is set if the result was zero.
The BEQ (branch if result equals zero) command can be used to change the program flow depending
on the value of the Z bit.
In the CPU12, branch instructions use only relative addressing. Conversely, branches are the only
instructions that use relative addressing.
For example, suppose that initially the A register contains FF and the B register contains 01. Then, if the
instruction ABA is executed, the binary addition shown in Figure 8.9(a) is performed. Because the result
is zero, the Z bit of the condition code register is set. If the branch instruction BEQ $05 is executed, the
next instruction is the content of the program counter plus the offset (which is 05 in this case). If the Z bit
had been clear, the instruction immediately following the branch instruction would have been executed.
This is illustrated in Figure 8.9(b).
Figure 8.9 
Using the BEQ instruction.
Machine Code and Assemblers
We have seen that ADDA is a mnemonic for an instruction executed by the processor. It turns out that in
the CPU12, the instruction ADDA with extended addressing is stored in memory as 
We say that BB is the machine code for the instruction ADDA with extended addressing. Machine
codes are also known as operation codes or simply op codes. In extended addressing, the address of
the operand is stored in the two memory locations immediately following the instruction code. The
instruction ADDA $070A appears in three successive memory locations as
BB=
10111011
2
.

BB
07
0A
It would be a daunting task for a human to make conversions from instruction mnemonics to machine
codes, whereas computers excel at this type of task. Furthermore, mnemonics are much easier for us to
remember than machine codes. Thus, we generally start writing a program by using mnemonics. A
computer program called an assembler is then employed to convert the mnemonics into machine code.
Assemblers also help in other chores associated with programming, such as converting decimal
numbers to hexadecimal and keeping track of branching addresses and operand addresses. We will
have more to say about assembly language in the next section.
Exercise 8.6 
Suppose that the contents of certain memory locations are as shown in Figure 8.10. Furthermore, the
content of register A is zero and the X register contains 0200 prior to execution of each of these
instructions:
Figure 8.10 
Contents of memory for Exercise 8.6.
a. LDAA $0202
b. LDAA #$43
c. LDAA $05,X
d. LDAA $06
e. LDAA $07,X-
f. LDAA $05,+X

Find the contents of registers A and X after each instruction.
Answer 
a. Register A contains 1A and X contains 0200.
b. Register A contains 43 and X contains 0200.
c. Register A contains FF and X contains 0200.
d. Register A contains 13 and X contains 0200
e. Register A contains 10 and X contains 01F9.
f. f. Register A contains FF and X contains 0205.n
Exercise  8.7 
Suppose that starting in location 0200 successive memory locations contain op codes for the
instructions
CLRA
BEQ $15
a. Show the memory addresses and contents (in hexadecimal form) for these instructions.
b. What is the address of the instruction executed immediately after the branch instruction?
Answer 
a. The memory addresses and contents are:
0200:87
(op code for CLRA)
0201:27
(op code for BEQ)
0202:15
(offset for branch instruction)
b. The address of the next instruction is 0218.n

8.6 Assembly-Language Programming
A program consists of a sequence of instructions used to accomplish some task. No doubt, you have
been introduced to programming that uses high-level languages such as BASIC, C, Java, MATLAB, or
Pascal. When using high-level languages, a compiler or interpreter converts program statements into
machine code before they are executed. It would be much too tedious to write machine-language
programs for sophisticated engineering analysis. In application-oriented software, such as computer-
aided design packages, even greater emphasis is placed on making the programs easy to use.
However, in writing programs for embedded computers in control applications, we often need to keep
the number of instructions relatively small and to minimize the time required to execute the various
operations; quick response to events in the system being controlled can be highly important.
Though we may program MCUs for control applications in machine language, it is possible to relieve
much of the drudgery by using an assembler. This provides many conveniences, such as allowing us to
write instructions with mnemonics, using labels for memory addresses, and including user in the source
program file.
In practice, we write the program as source code using a text editor on a general-purpose computer,
called the host computer. The source code is then converted to object code (machine code) by the
assembler program. Finally, the machine code is loaded into the memory of the MCU, which is called
the target system. Sometimes, we say that the source code is written in assembly language. Assembly
language code, nevertheless, is very close to the actual machine code executed by the computer.
In general, CPU12 assembly language statements take the following form:
LABEL   INSTRUCTION/DIRECTIVE   OPERAND   COMMENT
Typically each line of source code is converted into one machine instruction. Some of the source code
statements, called directives, however, are used to give commands to the assembler. One of these is
the origin directive ORG. For example,
 ORG   $0100

instructs the assembler to place the first instruction following the directive in memory location 0100 of
the target system.
In CPU12 assembly language, labels must begin in the first column. The various fields are separated by
spaces. Thus, when we want ORG to be treated as a directive, rather than as a label, we need to place
one or more spaces ahead of it. If the first character of a line is a semicolon, the line is ignored by the
assembler. Such lines are useful for comments and line spaces that make the source code more
understandable to humans.
Usually, there are many ways to write a program to accomplish a given task.
In writing a program, we start by describing the algorithm for accomplishing the task. We then create a
sequence of instructions to carry out the algorithm. Usually, there are many ways to write a program to
accomplish a given task.
 Example 8.1 An Assembly-Language Program
Suppose that we want a program starting in memory location 0400 that retrieves the number stored
in location 0500, adds 5 to the number, writes the result to location 0500, and then stops. (We will
use only the instructions listed in Table 8.1, even though the CPU12 has many additional
instructions, which often could make our programs shorter.)
Solution 
The source code is:
; SOURCE CODE FOR EXAMPLE  8.1
; THIS LINE IS A COMMENT THAT IS IGNORED BY THE ASSEMBLER
;
         ORG       $0400      ;ORIGIN DIRECTIVE
BEGIN    LDAA      $0500      ;LOAD NUMBER INTO A
         ADDA      #$05       ;ADD 5, IMMEDIATE ADDRESSING
         STAA      $0500      ;STORE RESULT
         STOP

         END             ;END DIRECTIVE
Comments have been included to explain the purpose of each line. BEGIN is a label that identifies
the address of the LDAA instruction. (In this case, BEGIN has a value of 0400.) If we wanted to
reference this location somewhere in a more complex program, the label would be useful. STOP is
the mnemonic for the instruction that halts further action by the MCU. END is a directive that informs
the assembler that there are no further instructions. ■
Example 8.2 Absolute Value Assembly Program
Write the source code for a program starting in location $0300 that loads register A with the signed
two's-complement number in location $0200, computes its absolute value, returns the result to
location $0200, clears the A register, and then stops. Use the instructions listed in Table 8.1.
(Assume that the initial content of location $0200 is never 
which does not have a
positive equivalent in 8-bit two's complement form.)
Solution 
Recall that branch instructions (also known as conditional instructions) allow different sets of
instructions to be executed depending on the values of certain bits in the condition code register. For
example, in Table 8.1, we see that the branch on plus instruction (BPL) causes a branch if the N bit
of the condition code register is clear (i.e., logic 0).
Testing occurs automatically in many instructions. For example, in the load A instruction LDAA, the
N and Z bits of the condition code register are set if the value loaded is negative or zero,
respectively.
Our plan is to load the number, compute its two's complement if it is negative, store the result, clear
the A register, and then stop. Recall that one way to find the two's complement is to first find the
one's complement and add one. If the number is positive, no calculations are needed. The source
code is:
; SOURCE CODE FOR EXAMPLE  8.2
;
          ORG       $0300     ;ORIGIN DIRECTIVE
          LDAA      $0200     ;LOAD NUMBER INTO REGISTER A
          BPL       PLUS      ;BRANCH IF A IS POSITIVE
          COMA                ;ONES'S COMPLEMENT
          INCA                ;ADD ONE TO FORM TWO'S COMPLEMENT
1000000=−
128
10

          STAA      $0200     ;RETURN THE RESULT TO MEMORY
PLUS      CLRA                ;CLEAR A
          STOP
          END                 ;DIRECTIVE
In this program, the number is first loaded into register A from memory location $0200. If the number
is negative (i.e., if the most significant bit is 1), the N bit of the CCR is set (logic 1); otherwise, it is
not set. If the N bit is zero, the BPL PLUS instruction causes the next instruction executed to be the
one starting in the location labeled PLUS. On the other hand, if the N bit is one, the next instruction
is the one immediately following the branch instruction. Thus, if the content of the memory location is
negative, the two's complement is computed to change its sign. Then, the result is written to the
original location and A is cleared.■
Next, to illustrate some of the chores performed by the assembler, we manually convert the source code
of the previous example to machine code.
Example 8.3 Manual Conversion of Source Code to Machine Code
Manually determine the machine code for each memory location produced by the source code of
Example 8.2. What is the value of the label PLUS? (Hint: Use Table 8.1 to determine the op codes
for each instruction.)
Solution 
The assembler ignores the title and other comments. Because of the ORG directive, the machine
code is placed in memory starting at location 0300. The memory addresses and their contents are:
0300: B6 Op code for LDAA with extended addressing.
0301: 02 High byte of address.
0302: 00 Low byte of address.
0303: 2A Op code for BPL which uses relative addressing.
0304: 05 Offset (On the first pass this value is unknown.)
0305: 41 Op code for COMA which computes one's complement.
0306: 42 Op code for INCA.
0307: 7A Op code for STAA with extended addressing.
0308: 02 High byte of address.
0309: 00 Low byte of address.
030A: 87 Clear A.
030B: 18 Halt processor.

030C: 3E
A comment has been added to explain each line; however, the assembler does not produce these
comments.
Recall that branch instructions use relative addressing. The required offset for the BPL command is
not known on the first pass through the source code. However, after the first pass, we see that the
location corresponding to the label PLUS is 030A and that an offset of 05 is needed for the BPL
command. The END directive does not produce object code.■
Subroutines
Sometimes, certain sequences of instructions are used over and over in many different places. Memory
is saved if these sequences are stored once and used wherever needed. A sequence of instructions
such as this is called a subroutine. At any point in the main program that the subroutine needs to be
executed, we place the Jump to SubRoutine instruction:
JSR address
in which address is a direct, extended, or indexed address of the first instruction of the subroutine. At the
end of the subroutine, we place the ReTurn from Subroutine command
RTS
which causes the next instruction to be taken from the location following the JSR instruction in the main
program. This is illustrated in Figure 8.11.
Figure 8.11 

Illustration of the jump-to-subroutine command with extended addressing. (Other addressing modes are
allowed with the JSR instruction.)
The stack is used to keep track of where to return after the subroutine is finished. The address of the
instruction following the JSR is pushed onto the system stack when the jump is executed. This address
is pulled off the stack and loaded into the program counter when the return instruction is executed. After
the subroutine is completed, the next instruction executed is the one following the JSR.
One of the chores that the assembler can perform is to keep track of the starting addresses of the
subroutines. We simply label the first instruction of the subroutine in the source code. This is convenient
because we usually don't know where subroutines will eventually be located when writing programs.
After all of the source code is written, the assembler can calculate the amount of memory needed for
each portion of the program and determine the subroutine starting addresses, which are then
substituted for the labels.
Example 8.4 Subroutine Source Code
Assume that the content of register A is a signed two's-complement number n. Using the instructions
of Table 8.1, write a subroutine called SGN that replaces the content of A with +1 (in signed two's-
complement form) if n is positive, replaces it with -1 if n is negative, and does not change the content
of A if n is zero.
Solution 
The source code for the subroutine is:
;  SOURCE CODE FOR SUBROUTINE OF  EXAMPLE 8.4 
;
SGN       TSTA                ;TEST CONTENT OF A
          BEQ      END        ;BRANCH IF A IS ZERO
          BPL      PLUS       ;BRANCH IF A IS POSITIVE
          LDAA     #$FF       ;LOAD −1, IMMEDIATE ADDRESSING
          JMP      END        ;JUMP TO END OF SUBROUTINE
PLUS      LDAA   #$01         ;LOAD +1, IMMEDIATE ADDRESSING
END       RTS            ;RETURN FROM SUBROUTINE
First, the number is tested. If it is zero, the Z flag is set. If it is negative, the N flag is set. Next, if the
number is zero, the BEQ instruction compels a branch to END, causing a return from the subroutine.

If the number is positive, the subroutine branches to PLUS, loads the hexadecimal code for the
signed two's-complement representation of +1, and returns. If the number is negative, the LDA #FF
instruction is executed, followed by the return. [Notice that in this subroutine, END is a label (rather
than a directive) because it begins in column 1.]■
Exercise 8.8 
Write a program starting in location $0100 that adds 52
10
to the content of location $0500, stores the
result in location $0501, and then stops. Assume that all values are represented in signed two's-
complement form.
Answer The source code is:
; SOLUTION FOR  Exercise 8.8 
;
      ORG          $0100
      LDAA         #$34      ;LOAD HEX EQUIVALENT OF 52 BASE TEN
      ADDA         $0500     ;ADD CONTENT OF 0500
      STAA         $0501     ;STORE RESULT IN 0501
      STOP
      END                    ;DIRECTIVEn
Exercise 8.9 
Write a subroutine named MOVE that tests the content of register A. If A is not zero, the subroutine
should move the content of location 0100 to 0200. Otherwise, no move is made. The contents of A, B,
X, and Y must be the same on return as before the subroutine is called.
Answer One version of the desired subroutine is:
; SUBROUTINE FOR  Exercise 8.9.
;
MOVE   TSTA              ;TEST CONTENT OF A
BEQ    END               ;BRANCH IF CONTENT OF A IS ZERO
       PSHA              ;SAVE CONTENT OF A ON STACK
       LDAA $0100        ;LOAD CONTENT OF MEMORY LOCATION 0100
       STAA $0200        ;STORE CONTENT OF A IN LOCATION 0200
       PULA              ;RETRIEVE ORIGINAL CONTENT OF A
END    RTS               ;RETURN FROM SUBROUTINEn

Resources for Additional Study
In this chapter, we have given a very brief overview of MCUs focusing on the HCS12/9S12 family of
devices from Freescale Semiconductor. Much more detail about the HCS12/9S12 can be found at
www.freescale.com.
We have emphasized assembly language programming because it gives a clear picture of the inner
workings of MCUs. As MCUs have gained higher speed and complexity, the trend has been away from
assembly language and toward higher-level languages such as C.
If you are interested in applying MCUs to a project of your own, you should take a course devoted to
MCUs exclusively or a course in mechatronics. Hands-on work is very important in learning about
MCUs.  Typically, one starts with a training board containing the MCU of interest, provisions for
prototyping, LEDs, a small display, switches, and other components. Such boards are often equipped
with an interface so programs can be downloaded to the MCU from a host computer through a USB link.
An example for the HCS12 MCU is the Dragon12-Plus-USB board from EVBplus.com.
Design and construction of robots, model railroads, remotely controlled model airplanes equipped with
video cameras, and so forth can become an engrossing hobby for those with an interest in combining
MCUs, mechanical systems, and electronic elements. For numerous examples, look at Nuts and Volts
Magazine at www.nutsvolts.com or Make Magazine at www.makezine.com. These may give you some
good ideas for a senior project.
The Arduino MCU boards are very popular with artists, do-it-yourself enthusiasts, and students. You will
find many articles related to these boards in Nuts and Volts and Make Magazine. Also, look at
http://spectrum.ieee.org/geek-life/hands-on/the-making-of-arduino/0.

8.7 Measurement Concepts and Sensors
Overview of Computer-Based Instrumentation
Computer-based instrumentation systems consist of four main elements:
sensors, a DAQ board, software, and a general-purpose computer.
Figure 8.12 shows a computer-based system for instrumentation of a physical system such as an
automobile or chemical process. Physical phenomena such as temperatures, angular speeds,
displacements, and pressures produce changes in the voltages, currents, resistances, capacitances, or
inductances of the sensors. If the sensor output is not already a voltage, signal conditioners provide
an excitation source that transforms the changes in electrical parameters to voltages. Furthermore, the
signal conditioner amplifies and filters these voltages. The conditioned signals are input to a data-
acquisition (DAQ) board. On the DAQ board, each of the conditioned signals is sent to a sample-and-
hold circuit (S/H) that periodically samples the signal and holds the value steady while the multiplexer
(MUX) connects it to the (A/D or ADC) that converts the values to digital words. The words are read by
the computer, which then processes the data further before storing and displaying the results. For
example, the signals derived from a force sensor and a velocity sensor could be multiplied to obtain a
plot of power versus time. Furthermore, the power could be integrated to show energy expended versus
time. Long-term statistical analysis of a process can be carried out to facilitate quality control.

Figure 8.12 
Computer-based DAQ system.
In this section, we consider sensors. Then, in the next several sections, we discuss other aspects of
computer-based DAQ systems.
Sensors
We emphasize sensors or signal conditioners that produce electrical signals (usually voltages) which
are analogous to the physical quantity, or measurand, to be measured. Often, the voltage is
proportional to the measurand. Then, the sensor voltage is given by
in which 
is the voltage produced by the sensor, K is the sensitivity constant, and m is the
measurand. For example, a load cell is a sensor consisting of four strain-gauge elements (see page 30)
connected in a Wheatstone bridge (see page 107) and bonded to a load-bearing element. As force is
applied to the load cell, a proportional voltage appears across two terminals of the bridge. Excitation in
the form of a constant voltage is applied to the other two terminals of the bridge. For a given excitation
voltage, the sensitivity constant has units of V/N or V/lbf.
A good source of detailed information about computer-based instrumentation and
control, including sensors, is the National Instruments, website: www.ni.com .
Some examples of measurands and sensor types are shown in Table 8.2. These are only a few of the
many types of sensors that are available.
Table 8.2 Measurands and Sensor Types
Measurands
Sensor types
Acceleration
Seismic mass accelerometers
Piezoelectric accelerometers
(8.1)
V
sensor

Angular displacement
Rotary potentiometers
Optical shaft encoders
Tachometric generators
Light
Photoconductive sensors
Photovoltaic cells
Photodiodes
Liquid level
Capacitance probes
Electrical conductance probes
Ultrasonic level sensors
Pressure sensors
Linear displacement
Linear variable differential transformers (LVDTs) (see page 152)(LVDTs)
Strain gauges (see page 30)
Potentiometers
Piezoelectric devices
Variable-area capacitance sensors
Force/torque
Load cells
Strain gauges
Fluid flow
Magnetic flowmeters (see page 758)
Paddle wheel sensors
Constriction-effect pressure sensors
Ultrasonic flow sensors
Gas flow
Hot-wire anemometers

Pressure
Bourdon tube/linear variable differential transformer combinations
Capacitive pressure sensors
Proximity
Microswitches
Variable-reluctance proximity sensors
Hall-effect proximity sensors
Optical proximity sensors
Reed-switch sensors
Temperature
Diode thermometers
Thermistors
Thermocouples
Equivalent Circuits and Loading
An equivalent circuit that applies to many sensors is shown in Figure 8.13; the source voltage 
is analogous to the measurand, and 
is the Thévenin resistance. Frequently, as part of the
signal conditioning, the sensor voltage must be amplified. Figure 8.13 shows the sensor connected to
the input terminals of an amplifier. (Amplifiers are discussed in Chapter 10.) Looking into the input
terminals of any amplifier, we see a finite impedance, which is represented as 
in Figure 8.13. Using
the voltage-division principle, we have
Because of the current flowing through the circuit, the amplifier input voltage is less than the internal
voltage of the sensor. This effect is known as loading. Loading is unpredictable and, therefore,
undesirable. Provided that 
is very large compared with 
the amplifier input voltage is
nearly equal to the internal sensor voltage. Thus, when we need to measure the internal voltage of the
sensor, we should specify a signal-conditioning amplifier having an input impedance that is much larger
in magnitude than the Thévenin impedance of the sensor.
V
sensor
R
sensor
R
in
(8.2)
R
in
R
sensor
,

Figure 8.13 
Model for a sensor connected to the input of an amplifier.
When we need to measure the internal voltage of the sensor, we should specify a
signal-conditioning amplifier having an input impedance that is much larger in
magnitude than the Thévenin impedance of the sensor.
Example 8.5 Sensor Loading
Suppose that we have a temperature sensor for which the open-circuit voltage is proportional to
temperature. What is the minimum input resistance required for the amplifier so that the system
sensitivity constant changes by less than 0.1 percent when the Thévenin resistance of the sensor
changes from 
to 
Solution 
The sensitivity constant is proportional to the voltage division ratio between the input resistance and
the Thévenin resistance of the sensor. We require that this ratio changes by 0.1% (or less) when the
Thévenin resistance changes. Thus, with resistances in 
we have
Solving, we determine that 
is required to be greater than 
■
Sensors with Electrical Current Output
Some types of sensors produce electrical current that is proportional to the measurand. For example,
with suitable applied voltages, photodiodes produce currents that are proportional to the light intensities
15kΩ
5kΩ?
kΩ,
V
sensor
 
R
in
15+
R
in
≥0.999
V
sensor
 
R
in
5+
R
in
R
in
9985kΩ.

falling on the diodes. A photodiode is shown in Figure 8.14(a). Like the load cell, the photodiode
requires a constant-voltage excitation source. Figure 8.14(b) shows diode current versus diode voltage
for various light intensities. If we want the current to depend only on light intensity, the diode voltage
must be held nearly constant.
Figure 8.14 
Photodiode light-sensing system. Because the diode voltage should be constant, 
should ideally
equal zero.
Usually a current-to-voltage converter (also known as a transresistance amplifier) is used to produce
an output voltage that is proportional to the photodiode current. As in the case of amplifiers, we see an
impedance looking into the input terminals of the current-to-voltage converter. This is shown as 
in
Figure 8.14(a). In order for the diode voltage to remain constant as the current varies, 
must be very
small (so the voltage across it is negligible). Thus, when we want to sense the current produced by a
sensor, we use a current-to-voltage converter having a very small (ideally zero) input impedance
magnitude.
When we want to sense the current produced by a sensor, we need a current-to-
voltage converter having a very small (ideally zero) input impedance magnitude.
Variable-Resistance Sensors
Other sensors produce a changing resistance in response to changes in the measurand. For example,
the resistance of a thermistor changes with temperature. Changes in resistance can be converted to
R
in
R
in
R
in

changes in voltage by driving the sensor with a constant current source. To avoid loading effects, the
voltage is applied to a high-input impedance amplifier as illustrated in Figure 8.15. Similar circuits that
use ac excitation can convert changes in capacitance or inductance into voltage changes.
Figure 8.15 
Variable-resistance sensor.
Errors in Measurement Systems
Many types of errors can occur in making measurements. We define the error of a measurement as
in which 
is the measured value and 
is the actual or true value of the measurand. Often, error
is expressed as a percentage of the full-scale value 
(i.e., the maximum value that the system is
designed to measure).
There are many possible sources of error, some of which are specific to particular measurands and
measurement systems. However, it is useful to classify the types of errors that can occur. Some are
bias errors, also called systematic errors, that are the same each time a measurement is repeated
under the same conditions. Sometimes, bias errors can be quantified by comparing the measurements
with more accurate standards. For example, we could calibrate a weight scale by using it to measure the
weights of highly accurate standards of mass. Then, the calibration data could be used to correct
subsequent weight measurements.
Bias errors include offset, scale error, nonlinearity, and hysteresis, which are illustrated in Figure
8.16. Offset consists of a constant that is added to, or subtracted from, the true value. Scale error
produces measurement errors that are proportional to the true value of the measurand. Nonlinearity can
result from improper design or overdriving an electronic amplifier. When hysteresis error is present, the
error depends on the direction and distance from which the measurand arrived at its current value. For
Error=
x
m
−
x
true
(8.3)
x
m
x
true
x
full
Percentage error=
x
m
−
x
true
x
full
×100%
(8.4)

example, hysteresis can result from static friction in measuring displacement or from materials effects in
sensors that involve magnetic fields. All types of bias error are potentially subject to slow drift due to
aging and changes in environmental factors such as temperature or humidity.
Figure 8.16 
Illustration of some types of instrumentation error. 
represents the value of the measurand reported
by the measurement system, and 
represents the true value.
Although bias errors are the same for each measurement made under apparently identical conditions
(except for drift), random errors are different for each instance and have zero average value. For
example, in measuring a given distance, friction combined with vibration may cause repeated
measurements to vary. We can sometimes reduce the effect of random errors by making repeated
measurements and averaging the results.
Some additional terms used in rating instrumentation performance are as follows:
1. Accuracy: The maximum expected difference in magnitude between measured and true values
(often expressed as a percentage of the full-scale value).
2. Precision: The ability of the instrument to repeat the measurement of a constant measurand.
More precise measurements have less random error.
3. Resolution: The smallest possible increment discernible between measured values. As the term
is used, higher resolution means smaller increments. Thus, an instrument with a five-digit display
(e.g., 0.0000 to 9.9999) is said to have higher resolution than an otherwise identical instrument
with a three-digit display (e.g., 0.00 to 9.99).
x
m
x
true

Exercise 8.10 
Suppose that a given magnetic flow sensor has an internal resistance (say, with variations in the
electrical conductivity of the fluid) that varies from 
to 
The internal (open-circuit) voltage of
the sensor is proportional to the flow rate. Suppose that we want the changes in the sensitivity constant
of the measurement system (including loading effects) to vary by less than 0.5 percent with changes in
sensor resistance. What specification is required for the input resistance of the amplifier in this system?
Answer The input resistance of the amplifier must be greater than 
Exercise 8.11 
a. Can a very precise instrument be very inaccurate?
b. Can a very accurate instrument be very imprecise?
Answer 
a. Yes. Precision implies that the measurements are repeatable; however they could have large bias
errors.
b. No. If repeated measurements vary a great deal under apparently identical conditions, some of the
measurements must have large errors, and therefore must be inaccurate.
5 kΩ
10 kΩ.
990 kΩ.

8.8 Signal Conditioning
Some functions of signal conditioners are amplification of the sensor signals, conversion of currents to
voltages, supply of (ac or dc) excitations to the sensors so that changes in resistance, inductance, or
capacitance are converted to changes in voltage, and filtering to eliminate noise or other unwanted
signal components. Signal conditioners are often specific to particular applications. For example, a
signal conditioner for a diode thermometer may not be appropriate for use with a thermocouple.
Single-Ended versus Differential Amplifiers
Often, the signal from the sensor is very small (one millivolt or less) and an important step in signal
conditioning is amplification. Thus, the sensor is often connected to the input terminals of an amplifier. In
an amplifier with a single-ended input, one of its input terminals is grounded as shown in Figure
8.17(a), and the output voltage is a gain constant A times the input voltage.
An amplifier with a differential input is shown in Figure 8.17(b). Differential amplifiers have non-
inverting and inverting input terminals as indicated in the figure, and ideally, the output is the differential
gain 
times the difference between the input voltages.
Figure 8.17 
Amplifiers with single-ended and differential input terminals.
A model for the voltages produced by a typical sensor connected to a differential amplifier is shown in
Figure 8.18. The difference between the amplifier input voltages is the differential signal:
A
d
v
d
=
v
1
−
v
2
(8.5)

Sometimes, a large common-mode signal is also present, which is given by
Figure 8.18 
Model for a sensor with differential and common-mode components.
Almost always, the differential signal is of interest, and the common-mode signal represents unwanted
noise. Thus, it is often very important for the differential amplifier to respond only to the differential
signal. Great care must be taken in designing amplifiers that reject large common-mode signals
sufficiently. A measure of how well a differential amplifier rejects the common-mode signal is the
common-mode rejection ratio (CMMR). When large common-mode signals are present, it is important
to select a differential amplifier with a large CMRR. Instrumentation amplifiers are very good in this
respect. Differential amplifiers, CMRR, and instrumentation amplifiers are discussed at length in
Chapters 10 and 13.
When large common-mode signals are present, it is important to select a
differential amplifier having a large CMRR specification.
Ground Loops
Often, the sensor and the signal-conditioning unit (such as an amplifier or current-to-voltage converter)
are located some distance apart and are connected by a cable. Furthermore, the voltage (or current)
v
cm
=
1
2
 (
v
1
+
v
2
)
(8.6)

produced by the sensor may be very small (less than one millivolt or one microampere). Then, several
problems can occur that reduce accuracy or, in extreme cases, totally obscure the desired signal.
One of these problems is known as ground loops. If we have a single-ended amplifier, one of its input
terminals is connected to a ground wire of the electrical distribution system. These ground wires
eventually lead to the ground bus in the electrical distribution panel, which in turn is connected to a cold-
water pipe or to a conducting rod driven into the earth. In instrumentation systems, we often have
several pieces of equipment that are connected to ground through different wires. Ideally, the ground
wires would have zero impedance, and all of the ground points would be at the same voltage. In reality,
because of currents flowing through small but nonzero resistances of the various ground wires, small
but significant voltages exist between various ground points.
Consider Figure 8.19, in which we have a sensor, an amplifier with a single-ended input, and a cable
connecting the sensor to the amplifier. The cable wires have small resistances denoted by 
Several ground wires are shown with their resistances 
and 
The current source 
represents current flowing to ground. Typically, 
originates from the 60-Hz line voltage through power-
supply circuits of the instruments. If we connect both the sensor and the amplifier input to ground, part of
flows through the connecting cable, and the input voltage is the sensor voltage minus the drop
across 
When the sensor voltage is very small, it can be totally obscured by the drop across 
Figure 8.19 
Ground loops are created when the system is grounded at several points.
On the other hand, if we break the sensor ground connection so only the amplifier is grounded, 
becomes zero and the input voltage is the sensor voltage as desired. Thus, in connecting a sensor to an
R
cable
.
R
g1
R
g2
.
I
g
I
g
I
g
R
cable
 :
V
in
=
V
sensor
−
I
g1
R
cable
(8.7)
R
cable
.
I
g1

amplifier with a single-ended input, we should select an ungrounded or floating sensor.
In connecting a sensor to an amplifier with a single-ended input, we should select
a floating sensor.
If you have connected several audiovisual components, such as VCRs, TVs, radio tuners, CD players,
stereo amplifiers, and so forth, you have probably encountered ground loops, which cause an annoying
60-Hz hum to be produced by loudspeakers.
Alternative Connections
Figure 8.20 shows four combinations of sensors and amplifiers. As we have seen, we need to avoid the
combination of grounded sensor and single-ended input shown in part (a) of the figure because of
ground loops. Any of the other three connections can be used. However, for a floating sensor with a
differential amplifier as shown in part (d), it is often necessary to include two high-valued (much greater
than the internal impedance of the sensor to avoid loading effects) resistors to provide a path for the
input bias current of the amplifier. (Input bias current is discussed further in Section 10.12.) If the
resistors are not included, the common-mode voltage of the source can become so large that the
amplifier does not function properly. In part (c) of the figure, the ground connection to the sensor
provides a path for the bias current.

Figure 8.20 
Four sensor amplifier combinations.
Noise
Another problem that can occur in connecting sensors to signal-conditioning units is the inadvertent
addition of noise produced by the electric or magnetic fields generated by nearby circuits. (Computers
are infamous for creating high-frequency electrical noise.) Electric field coupling can be modeled as
small capacitances that are connected between nearby circuits and the cables, as shown in Figure
8.21. Currents are injected into the cable through these capacitances. This is particularly a problem with
unshielded cables and when the sensor impedance is large. A shielded cable, in which an outer
conductor in the form of metallic foil or braided wire encases the signal conductors, can eliminate much
of the noise caused by electric fields. The shield is connected to ground, providing a low-resistance path
for the capacitive currents. This is illustrated in Figure 8.22.

Figure 8.21 
Noise can be coupled into the sensor circuit by electric fields. This effect is modeled by small
capacitances between the noise source and the sensor cable.
Figure 8.22 
Electric field coupling can be greatly reduced by using shielded cables.
Electric field coupling of noise can be reduced by using shielded cables.
Noise problems can also occur due to magnetic coupling. Many circuits, particularly power-supply
transformers, produce time-varying magnetic fields. When these fields pass through the region bounded
by the cable conductors, voltages are induced in the cable. Magnetically coupled noise can be greatly
diminished by reducing the effective area bounded by the conductors. Twisted-pair and coaxial cables
(see Figure 8.23) are two good ways to accomplish this. Because the center lines of the conductors in
coaxial cable are coincident, the effective bounded area is very small.

Figure 8.23 
Magnetic field coupling can be greatly reduced by using twisted-pair or coaxial cables.
Magnetically coupled noise is reduced by using coaxial or twisted-pair cables.
Exercise 8.12 
The voltages produced by a sensor are 
and 
Determine the differential and
common-mode components of the sensor signal.
Answer 
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
 8.2
The Virtual First-Down Line
In American football, the team on offense must gain 10 yards in a series of four plays to retain
possession of the ball. Thus, a line marking the needed advance is of constant interest to fans
viewing a game.
On September 27, 1998, in a Sunday Night Football game on ESPN, Sportvision introduced
their "1st and Ten" system for electronically drawing the first-down line on television images. The
system has been enthusiastically accepted and even won an Emmy award for technical
innovation. In the 2003 season, 18 crews covered about 300 NCAA and NFL games.
v
1
=5.7 V
v
2
=5.5 V.

v
d
=0.2 V;
v
cm
=5.6 V.

While the concept of drawing a virtual line on a television image sounds simple, there are some
formidable problems that need to be overcome to produce a result that appears to be painted on
the field. Typically, three main cameras are situated above and back from the 50-yard line and
both of the 25-yard lines. Each camera pans, tilts, zooms, and changes focus rapidly during the
game. The virtual line needs to change its position, orientation, and width as the camera view
changes. In addition, some football fields are not flat—they are crowned to ensure drainage and
the yard lines are not exactly straight. If the virtual line does not closely match the curvature of
the lines on the field, it will not look natural. Furthermore, the line needs to be drawn thirty times
a second, once for each video frame. Of course, for realism, part of the line needs to disappear
when a player, an official, or the ball moves across it. An impressive array of sophisticated
electronic and computer technology has been employed by Sportvision engineers to meet these
demands.
To set up the system on a given field, Sportvision starts by using laser surveying instruments to
measure the elevation at a number of points along each 10-yard line. A computer uses this data
to produce a virtual three-dimensional model of the field.
Sensors attached to each of the cameras measure pan, tilt, zoom, and focus. This data is fed
into a computer that alters the model to match the perspective for a given camera, and a virtual
map is drawn in blue lines over the image of the field seen by the camera. Finally, the virtual
map is tweaked to match the real image for many combinations of pan, tilt, and zoom as
illustrated in Figure PA8.2. The resulting calibration data is saved for use by the system during
an actual game.

FIGURE
PA8.2 
Computers use a virtual map based on surveying the football field to draw the 1st and Ten line
on the television screen in real time.
A technique known as "chroma keying" has been around for a long time and is widely used in
televised weather reports. A meteorologist forecasting weather stands in front of a light blue wall.
Computers substitute weather maps and graphics for all the pixels (i.e., picture elements) that
are light blue. Thus, the forecaster seems to stand in front of the weather map. The same kind of
technology is used to allow officials, players, and the ball to seem to move over the virtual first-
down line. However, discerning which pixels are players and which are part of the field is much
more difficult than separating a forecaster from a blue wall. Weather forecasters usually avoid
wearing clothing that matches the color of the wall, and the wall is all the same color. On the
other hand, the field can be many different shades of white (painted yard lines on the field),
green (grass or artificial turf), or brown (grass or mud). Part of the field may be sunlit while other
parts are in shadow. Football teams, such as the Green Bay Packers, have uniforms that are
partly green, which is especially difficult to distinguish from sunlit artificial turf. Other colors, such

as brown, can also be difficult.
By constant recalibrating, the 1st and Ten system can keep track of which colors are part of the
field and which are not, so the virtual down line is not drawn over players.
During a game, a team of four people operates the system, which contains five computers. The
"spotter" is in the stadium and radios the location of the down line to a truck containing the
equipment and two of the other team members. The "line position technician" enters the location
data into the computers, monitors line position, and makes any needed adjustments. Another
operator monitors changes in field colors so the chroma keying is properly accomplished.
Finally, a troubleshooter looks for problems and solves them.
One of the computers receives and processes the pan, tilt, and zoom data from the cameras.
Another keeps track of which camera is "on air." A third displays the on-air video and
superimposes the virtual map of the field including the current down line. Another computer
discerns which parts of the image are field and which are players or officials. Finally, the fifth
computer places the virtual down line on the broadcast image while avoiding any superimposed
graphics that the network may place on the screen.
More information about the 1st and Ten system as well as similar technology for other sports
can be found at www.sportvision.com.

8.9 Analog-to-Digital Conversion
As discussed starting on page 331, analog signals are converted to digital form by a two-step process.
First, the analog signal is sampled (i.e., measured) at periodic points in time. A code word is then
assigned to represent the approximate value of each sample. The sampling rate and the number of bits
used to represent each sample are two very important considerations in the selection of a DAQ system.
Sampling Rate
The rate at which a signal must be sampled depends on the frequencies of the signal's components. (All
signals can be considered to be sums of sinusoidal components that have various frequencies,
amplitudes, and phases.) If a signal contains no components with frequencies higher than 
all of the
information contained in the signal is present in its samples, provided that the sampling rate is selected
to be more than twice 
If a signal contains no components with frequencies higher than 
all of the
information contained in the signal is present in its samples, provided that the
sampling rate is selected to be more than twice 
Aliasing
Sometimes, we may only be interested in the components with frequencies up to 
but the signal may
contain noise or other components with frequencies higher than 
Then, if the sampling rate is too
low, a phenomenon called aliasing can occur. In aliasing, the samples of a high-frequency component
appear to be those of a lower frequency component and may obscure the components of interest. For
example, Figure 8.24 shows a 7-kHz sinusoid sampled at 10 kHz. As illustrated by the dashed line, the
sample values appear to be those of a 3-kHz sinusoid. Because the sampling rate (10 kHz) is less than
twice the signal frequency (7 kHz), the samples appear to be those of an alias frequency (3 kHz).
(Notice that from the samples it is impossible to determine whether a 3-kHz or a 7-kHz signal was
f
H
,
f
H
.
f
H
,
f
H
.
f
H
,
f
H
.

sampled.)
Figure 8.24 
When a 7-kHz sinusoid is sampled at 10 kHz, the sample values appear to be those of a 3-kHz sinusoid.
Figure 8.25 shows the alias frequency as a function of the signal frequency f. When the signal
frequency f exceeds one-half of the sampling frequency 
the apparent frequency of the samples is
different from the true signal frequency.
Figure 8.25 
Alias or apparent frequency versus true signal frequency.
One way to avoid aliasing is to pick the sampling frequency high enough so that the alias frequencies
are higher than the frequencies of interest. Then, the computer can remove the unwanted components
by processing the samples with digital-filtering software. However, when high-frequency noise is
present, it can result in a sampling rate that exceeds the ability of the computer to process the resulting
data. Then, it is better to use an analog antialias filter ahead of the ADC to remove the noise above the
highest frequency of interest. Typically, this is a high-order Butterworth filter implemented with
operational amplifiers, such as those discussed in Section 13.10 starting on page 681. Because real
filters are unable to sufficiently reject components slightly above their cutoff frequencies, it is usually
necessary to select the sampling frequency at least three times the highest frequency of interest. For
f
s
,

example, the highest audible frequency is about 15 kHz, but in CD technology a sampling rate of 44.1
kHz is used.
Quantization Noise
A second consideration important in converting analog signals to digital form is the number of amplitude
zones to be used. Exact signal amplitudes cannot be represented, since all amplitudes falling into a
given zone have the same codeword. Thus, when a DAC converts the codewords to form the original
analog waveform, it is possible to reconstruct only an approximation to the original signal the
reconstructed voltage is in the middle of each zone, which was illustrated in Figure 6.46 on page 333.
Hence, some quantization error exists between the original signal and the reconstruction. This error
can be reduced by using a larger number of zones, which requires a longer codeword for each sample.
The number N of amplitude zones is related to the number of bits k in a codeword by
Analog-to-digital conversion is a two-step process. First, the signal is sampled at
uniformly spaced points in time. Second, the sample values are quantized so
they can be represented by words of finite length.
Therefore, if we are using an 8-bit 
ADC, we find that there are 
amplitude zones. The
resolution of a computer-based measurement system is limited by the word length of the ADC. In
compact-disc technology, 16-bit words are used to represent sample values. With that number of bits, it
is very difficult for a listener to detect the effects of quantization error on the reconstructed audio signal.
In the telephone system, 8-bit words are used and the fidelity of the reconstructed signal is relatively
poor.
The effect of finite word length can be modeled as adding quantization noise to the reconstructed signal.
It can be shown that the rms value of the quantization noise is approximately
where  is the width of a quantization zone.
N=
2
k
(8.8)
(
k=8
)
N=
2
8
=256
N
qrms
=
Δ
2
3
(8.9)
Δ

The effect of finite word length can be modeled as adding quantization noise to
the reconstructed signal.
In the example that follows, we illustrate how the various factors we have discussed are used in
selecting the components of a computer-based measurement system.
Example 8.6 Specifications for a Computer-Based Measurement System
Suppose that we have a single-ended (i.e., one terminal of the sensor is connected to power-system
ground) piezoelectric vibration sensor that produces a signal of interest having peak values of
an rms value of 3 mV, and components with frequencies up to 5 kHz. The internal
impedance of the sensor is 
We want the system resolution to be 
or better (i.e., smaller)
and the accuracy to be 
percent of the peak signal or better. (Note that the desired resolution is
considerably better than the accuracy. This allows the system to discern changes in the signal that
are smaller than the error.) The probe wiring is likely to be exposed to electric and magnetic field
noise having components at frequencies higher than 5 kHz. An ADC having an input range from -5 V
to +5 V is to be used. Draw the block diagram of the measurement system and give key
specifications for each block.
Solution 
Because one end of the sensor is grounded, we need to use an instrumentation amplifier with a
differential input to avoid ground-loop problems. (See Figure 8.20 on pg 443.)
To help reduce capacitively and inductively coupled noise, we should select a shielded twisted-pair
or coaxial cable to connect the sensor to the system. To avoid ground loops, the shield should be
grounded at the sensor end only. Furthermore, we should use an antialias filter to reduce noise
above 5 kHz. The block diagram of the system is shown in Figure 8.26.
Figure 8.26 
±25 mV,
1 kΩ.
2 μV
±0.2

See Example 8.6.
The voltage gain of the instrumentation amplifier/antialias filter combination should be 
so the sensor signal is amplified to match the range of the ADC. The input impedance
of the amplifier should be very large compared with the internal sensor impedance; therefore,
loading effects are insignificant. If we specify a minimum input impedance of 
loading effects
will reduce the signal by 0.1 percent, which is within the desired accuracy. (We need to allow for
errors from other unknown sources.)
To achieve a resolution of 
for a 
signal, we need an ADC with at least 
amplitude levels. This implies an ADC word length of at least 
Since word length must be an integer, 
is the smallest word length that will meet the desired
specifications. It turns out that DAQ boards with 16-bit ADCs are readily available, and to provide
some design margin, that is the word length we should specify.
Because the highest frequency of interest is 5 kHz, we need a sampling frequency of at least 10
kHz. However, the antialias filter will not effectively remove the components that are only slightly
above 5 kHz, so a greater sampling rate (20 kHz or greater) should be chosen.■
Exercise 8.13 
A certain 8-bit ADC accepts signals ranging from −5 V to +5 V. Determine the width of each quantization
zone and the approximate rms value of the quantization noise.
Answer 
Exercise 8.14 
A 25-kHz sinewave is sampled at 30 kHz. Determine the value of the alias frequency.
Answer 
(
5 V
)/(
25 mV
)=200;
1 MΩ,
2 μV
±25-mV
(
50 mV
)/(
2 μV
)=25,000
k=
log
2
(
25,000
)=14.6.
k=15

Δ=39.1 mV; 
N
qrms
=11.3 mV.

f
alias
=5 kHz.

Summary
1. A computer is composed of a central processing unit (CPU), memory, and input output (I/O)
devices. These are connected together with bidirectional data and control buses. The CPU
contains the control unit, the ALU, and various registers.
2. Memory is used to store programs and data. Three types of memory are RAM, ROM, and mass
storage.
3. In von Neumann computer architecture, data and instructions are stored in the same memory. In
Harvard architecture, separate memories are used for data and instructions.
4. Sensors are input devices that convert physical values to electrical signals. Actuators are output
devices that allow the MCU to affect the system being controlled.
5. Figure 8.5 (on pg 415) shows the elements of a typical microcomputer used for process control.
6. Analog-to-digital converters (A/D) transform analog voltages into digital words. Digital-to-analog
converters (D/A) transform digital words into analog voltages. Converters are needed to interface
analog sensors and actuators with an MCU.
7. Figure 8.6 (on pg 418) shows the register set for the CPU12.
8. In a stack memory, data is added to or read from the top of the stack. It is a last-in first-out
(LIFO) memory. The stack pointer is a register that contains the address of the top of the stack.
9. Table 8.1 (on pg 422) contains some of the instructions for the CPU12.
10. Six addressing modes are supported by the CPU12: extended addressing, direct addressing,
inherent addressing, immediate addressing, indexed addressing, and program-relative
addressing.
11. In writing programs for embedded microcon­trollers, we often start by writing a source
pro­gram using labels and mnemonics. An assembler converts the source program into an
object program consisting of machine code that is loaded into the target system.
12. High costs are incurred in software development for MCUs. However, when the cost can be
spread over many units, assembly language programming can be the best solution.
13. The block diagram of a typical computer-based instrumentation system is shown in Figure 8.12
on page 435.
14. When we need to sense the internal (open-circuit) voltage of a sensor, we should specify an
amplifier having an input impedance that is much larger in magnitude than the Thévenin
impedance of the sensor.
15. When we want to sense the current produced by a sensor, we need a current-to-voltage
converter having a very small (ideally zero) input impedance magnitude compared to the
Thévenin impedance of the sensor.
16. Bias errors are the same each time a measure­ment is repeated under the same apparent
conditions. Bias errors include offset, scale error, nonlinearity, and hysteresis.

17. Random errors are different for each measurement and have zero average value.
18. The accuracy of an instrument is the maximum expected difference in magnitude between
measured and true values (often expressed as a percentage of the full-scale value).
19. Precision is the ability of the instrument to repeat the measurement of a constant mea­surand.
More precise measurements have less random error.
20. The resolution of an instrument is the smallest increment discernible between measured values.
21. Some of the functions of signal conditioners are amplification, conversion of current signals to
voltage signals, supply of excitation to the sensor, and filtering to eliminate noise or other
unwanted signal components.
22. One of the input terminals of a single-ended amplifier is grounded. Neither input terminal of a
differential amplifier is grounded. The output of an ideal differential amplifier is its differential gain
times the difference between the input voltages.
23. If the input voltages to a differential amplifier are 
and 
the differential input signal is 
and the common-mode signal is 
Usually in instrumentation
systems, the differential signal is of interest and the common-mode signal is unwanted noise.
24. When large unwanted common-mode signals are present, it is important to select a differential
amplifier having a large CMRR (common-mode rejection ratio) specification.
25. Ground loops are created in an instrumen­tation system when several points are connected to
ground. Currents flowing through the ground conductors can produce noise that makes the
measurements less accurate and less precise.
26. To avoid ground-loop noise when we must connect a sensor to an amplifier with a single-ended
input, we should select a floating sensor (i.e., neither terminal of the sensor should be
grounded).
27. Shielded cables reduce the noise coupled by electric fields.
28. Coaxial or twisted-pair cables reduce magnet­ically coupled noise.
29. If a signal contains no components with frequencies higher than 
all of the information
contained in the signal is present in its samples, provided that the sampling rate is selected to be
more than twice 
30. Analog-to-digital conversion is a two-step process. First, the signal is sampled at uniformly
spaced points in time. Second, the sample values are quantized so they can be represented by
words of finite length.
31. We model the effect of finite word length as the addition of quantization noise to the signal.
32. If a sinusoidal signal component is sampled at a rate 
that is less than twice the signal
frequency f, the samples appear to be from a component with a different frequency known as the
alias frequency 
Alias frequency is plotted versus the true signal frequency in Figure 8.25
on pg 448.
33. If a sensor signal contains high-frequency components that are not of interest, we often use an
analog antialias filter to remove them so a lower sampling frequency can be used without
aliasing.
v
1
v
2
,
v
d
=
v
1
−
v
2
v
cm
=
1
2
(
v
1
+
v
2
).
f
H
,
f
H
.
f
s
f
alias
.


Problems
Section 8.1: Computer Organization
Section 8.2: Memory Types
P8.1.List the functional parts of a computer.
P8.2.What are tristate buffers? What are they used for?
P8.3.Give several examples of I/O devices.
P8.4.What is memory-mapped I/O?
P8.5.What is a bus? What is the function of the data bus? Of the address bus?
P8.6.What is an embedded computer?
*P8.7.The address bus of a computer is 16 bits wide and the data bus is 32 bits wide. How many
bytes does the memory potentially contain?
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
P8.8.Define the terms microprocessor, microcomputer, and microcontroller.
P8.9.Explain the difference between Harvard computer architecture and von Neumann computer
architecture.
P8.10.What is RAM? List two types. Is it useful for storing programs in embedded computers?
Explain.
*P8.11.What is ROM? List four types. Is it useful for storing programs in embedded computers?
Explain.
P8.12.List three examples of mass-storage devices.
P8.13.Which type of memory is least expensive per unit of storage? (Assume that many
megabytes of capacity are required.)
P8.14.How many memory locations can be add­ressed if the address bus has a width of 32
bits?
*P8.15.Which type of memory would be best in the controller for an ignition system for
automobiles?
P8.16.When might we choose EEPROM rather than mask-programmed ROM?

Section 8.3: Digital Process Control
Section 8.4: Programming Model for the HCS12/9S12 Family
P8.17.What types of memory are volatile? Non- volatile?
P8.18.List the elements that are potentially found in a microcomputer-based control application.
P8.19.What is a sensor? Give three examples.
P8.20.What is an actuator? Give three examples.
*P8.21.Explain the difference between a digital sensor and an analog sensor. Give an example
of each.
P8.22.List five common household products that potentially include an MCU.
P8.23.List two potential applications of MCU-based control or instrumentation in your field of
specialization.
P8.24.What is an A/D? Why might one be needed in an MCU-based controller?
*P8.25.What is a D/A? Why might one be needed in an MCU-based controller?
P8.26.What is polling? What is an interrupt? What is the main potential advantage of interrupts
versus polling?
P8.27.What is the function of the A, B, and D registers of the CPU12?
P8.28.What is the function of the program counter register? Of the MCU?
*P8.29.What is a stack? What is the stack pointer used for?
P8.30.What is a LIFO memory?
*P8.31.Suppose that initially the contents of the registers are
A:07   B:A9   SP:004F   X:34BF
and that memory locations 0048 through 004F initially contain all zeros. The commands PSHA,
PSHB, PULA, PULB, PSHX are then executed in sequence. List the contents of the registers A,
B, SP, and X, and the memory locations 0048 through 004F after each command is executed.
 P8.32.Suppose that initially the contents of the registers are
A:A7   B:69   SP:004E   Y:B804
and that memory locations 0048 through 004F initially contain all zeros. The commands PSHY,
PSHB, PULY, PSHA are then executed in sequence. List the contents of the registers A, B, SP,

Section 8.5: The Instruction Set and Addressing Modes for the CPU12
and X and the memory locations 0048 through 004F after each command is executed.
*P8.33.Write a sequence of push and pull commands to swap the high byte and low byte of the
X register. After the sequence of commands is executed, the contents of the other registers
should be the same as before.
P8.34.For each part of this problem, assume that the X register contains 2000 and the A register
initially contains 01. Name the type of addressing and give the content of A after each instruction
listed next. The contents of memory are shown in Figure P8.34.
a. *LDDA $2002
b. LDDA #$43
c. *LDDA $04
d. LDDA 6,X
e. *INCA
f. CLRA
g. *LDAA $2007
h. INX
Figure P8.34 
P8.35.Suppose that the contents of certain memory locations are as shown in Figure P8.34.
Furthermore, for each part of this problem, the initial contents of the CPU registers are: 
and 
Name the type of addressing and determine the
contents of registers D, X, and Y after each of these instructions is executed:
a. ADDB $1002,Y
b. LDAA B,X

(
D
)=$0003,(
X
)=$1 FFF,
(Y)=$1000.

c. LDAB 7, +X
d. LDX [$1004,Y]
e. LDAA [D,X]
P8.36.
a. *Assume that the A register initially contains FF and that the program counter is 2000.
What is the address of the instruction executed immediately after the branch command?
The content of memory and the corresponding instruction mnemonics are shown in
Figure P8.36(a).
b. Repeat for Figure P8.36(b).
c. Repeat for Figure P8.36(c).
Figure P8.36 
P8.37.Give the machine code for each of the following instructions:
a. *CLRA
b. *ADDA $4A
c. ADDA $02FF
d. BNE −$06
e. ADDA #$0D
How many memory locations are occupied by each instruction?
P8.38.Find the content of the A register after each instruction as the following sequence of
instructions is executed:
 LDAA   #$01

Section 8.6: Assembly-Language Programming
 ADDA   #$F1
 CLRA
Is the N bit of the condition-code register set or clear? Is the Z bit of the condition-code register
set or clear?
*P8.39.
a. Suppose that the content of A is 43. Find the content of A after the instruction ADDA
#$05 is executed.
b. Suppose that the content of A is FA. Find the content of A after the instruction ADDA
#$0F is executed. (In this case, overflow occurs.)
*P8.40.Assume that the content of A is $A7 and that the content of B is $20. Find the contents of
A and B after the MUL instruction is executed. [Hint: The MUL instruction assumes that the
contents of A and B are unsigned integer values.]
*P8.41.Write an assembly-language program starting in location 200 that multiplies the content
of the A register by 
and stores the result in memory locations $FF00 and $FF01, with the
most significant byte in location $FF00. The processor should then be stopped.
P8.42.Write an assembly-language program starting in location 0400 that stores 00 in location
0800, 01 in 0801, 02 in 0802, 03 in 0803, and then halts the processor.
*P8.43.Write a subroutine called DIV3 that divides the content of A by three. Assume that the
initial content of A is a positive integer in two's-complement form. On return from the subroutine,
the quotient should reside in B and the remainder in A.
P8.44.Consider the following assembly-language code for the CPU12:
;   PROBLEM 8.44
;
        ORG    $0600
START   LDAA   #$07
        LDAB   #$AF
        STD    $0609
        STOP
        END
Describe the effect of each line of this code and list the contents of memory locations 0600
through 060A after the code has been assembled and executed.
11
10

Section 8.7: Measurement Concepts and Sensors
P8.45.Write a subroutine called MUL3 that rounds the content of A to its nearest integer multiple
of 3. Assume that the initial content of A is a positive integer in two's-complement form. Memory
location $0A can be used for temporary storage. Include comments in your source code to
explain the program and its operation to human readers. [Hint: Repeatedly subtract 3 until the
result becomes negative. If the result is -3 the original content of A was a multiple of 3 and
should not be changed. If the result is -2 the original content of A was one plus an integer
multiple of 3, and we should subtract one from the original number to obtain the nearest multiple
of 3. If the result is -1 the original content of A is 2 plus an integer multiple of 3, and we should
add 1 to the original number to obtain the nearest multiple of 3.]
P8.46.Suppose that register B contains a two-decimal-digit BCD number n. Write a subroutine
called CONVERT that replaces the content of register B by its binary equivalent. The content of
the other registers (except the program counter) should be unchanged at the completion of the
subroutine. Memory locations $1A, $1B, and $1C can be used for temporary storage. [Hint: We
need to separate the upper nibble (four bits) of n from its lower nibble. This can be achieved by
shifting n four bits to the left, with the result appearing in the D register. Shifting by four bits to
the left is accomplished by multiplying by 
]
2
4
.
P8.47.Name the elements of a computer-based instrumentation system.
 *P8.48.Draw the equivalent circuit of a sensor in which the open-circuit sensor voltage is
proportional to the measurand. What are loading effects? How do we avoid them when we need
to measure the Thévenin (i.e., open-circuit) sensor voltage?
P8.49.What signal-conditioner input impedance is best if the sensor produces short-circuit
(Norton) current that is proportional to the measurand?
*P8.50.A load cell produces an open-circuit voltage of 
for a full-scale applied force of 
and the Thévenin resistance is 
The sensor terminals are connected to the input
terminals of an amplifier. What is the minimum input resistance of the amplifier so the overall
system sensitivity is reduced by less than 1 percent by loading?
*P8.51.A certain liquid-level sensor has a Thévenin (or Norton) resistance that varies randomly
from 
to 
The short-circuit current of the sensor is proportional to the measurand.
What type of signal-conditioning unit is required? Suppose we allow for up to 1 percent change
in overall sensitivity due to changes in the sensor resistance. Determine the specification for the
input resistance of the signal conditioner.
P8.52.How are bias errors different from random errors?
P8.53.List four types of bias error.
*P8.54.An instrumentation system measures distances ranging from 0 to 1 m full scale. The
system accuracy is specified as 
percent of full scale. If the measured value is 70 cm, what
is the potential range of the true value?
200 μV
10
4
 N,
1 kΩ.
10 kΩ
1 MΩ.
±0.5

Section 8.8: Signal Conditioning
P8.55.Explain how precision, accuracy, and resolution of an instrument are different.
*P8.56.Three instruments each make 10 repeated measurements of a flow rate known to be
with the results given in Table P8.56.
a. Which instrument is most precise? Least precise? Explain.
b. Which instrument has the best accuracy? Worst accuracy? Explain.
c. Which instrument has the best resolution? Worst resolution? Explain.
Table P8.56 
Trial
Instrument A
Instrument B
Instrument C
1
1.5
1.73
1.552
2
1.3
1.73
1.531
3
1.4
1.73
1.497
4
1.6
1.73
1.491
5
1.3
1.73
1.500
6
1.7
1.73
1.550
7
1.5
1.73
1.456
8
1.7
1.73
1.469
9
1.6
1.73
1.503
10
1.5
1.73
1.493
1.500 
m
3
/s
P8.57.List four or more functions of signal conditioners.
P8.58.How is a single-ended amplifier different from a differential amplifier?
P8.59.Suppose that the input voltages to an ideal differential amplifier are equal. Determine the
output voltage.
*P8.60.The input voltages to a differential amplifier are
v
1
(
t
)=0.002+5cos(
ωt
)

Section 8.9: Analog-to-Digital Conversion
and
Determine the differential input voltage and the common-mode input voltage. Assuming that the
differential amplifier is ideal with a differential gain 
determine the output voltage of
the amplifier.
P8.61.A sensor produces a differential signal of 6 mV dc and a 2-V-rms 60-Hz ac common-mode
signal. Write expressions for the voltages between the sensor output terminals and ground.
*P8.62.Suppose we have a sensor that has one terminal grounded. The sensor is to be
connected to a DAQ board in a computer 5 meters away. What type of amplifier should we
select? To mitigate noise from electric and magnetic fields, what type of cable should we use?
Draw the schematic diagram of the sensor, cable, and amplifier.
 P8.63.What is a floating sensor? When would we want to use a floating sensor?
*P8.64.Suppose that the data collected from a sensor is found to contain an objectionable 60-Hz
ac component. What potential causes for this interference would you look for? What are potential
solutions for each cause of the interference?
v
2
(
t
)=−0.002+5 cos(
ωt
)
A
d
=1000,
P8.65.In principle, analog-to-digital conversion involves two operations. What are they?
P8.66.What is aliasing? Under what conditions does it occur?
P8.67.What causes quantization noise?
*P8.68.We need to use the signal from a piezoelectric vibration sensor in a computer-aided
instrumentation system. The signal is known to contain components with frequencies up to 30
kHz. What is the minimum sampling rate that should be specified? Suppose that we want the
resolution of the sampled values to be 0.1 percent (or better) of the full range of the ADC. What
is the fewest number of bits that should be specified for the ADC?
*P8.69.A 2-V-peak sinewave signal is converted to digital form by a 12-bit ADC that has been
designed to accept signals ranging from -5 V to +5 V. (In other words, codewords are assigned
for equal increments of amplitude for amplitudes between -5 V and +5 V.)
a. Determine the width  of each quantization zone.
b. Determine the rms value of the quantization noise and the power that the quantization
noise would deliver to a resistance R.
c. Determine the power that the 2-V sinewave signal would deliver to a resistance R.
d. Divide the signal power found in part (c) by the noise power determined in part (b). This
ratio is called the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Express the SNR in decibels, using the
formula 
Δ
SNR
dB
=10 log(
P
signal
/
P
noise
).

*P8.70.We need an ADC that can accept input voltages ranging from 0 to 5 V and have a
resolution of 0.02 V. How many bits must the codewords have?
*P8.71.A 10-kHz sinewave is sampled. Determine the apparent frequency of the samples. Has
aliasing occurred? The sampling frequency is
a. 11 kHz;
b. 8 kHz;
c. 40 kHz.
P8.72.A 60-Hz sinewave 
is sampled at a rate of 360 Hz. Thus, the
sample values are 
in which n assumes integer values and 
is the time interval between samples. A new signal is computed by the equation
a. Show that 
for all n.
b. Now suppose that 
in which 
is constant
with time and again find an expression for y(n).
c. When we use the samples of an input x(n) to compute the samples for a new signal y(n),
we have a digital filter. Describe a situation in which the filter of parts (a) and (b) could
be useful.
x(
t
)=A cos(
120πt+ϕ
)
x(
n
)=A cos(
120πn
T
s
+ϕ
),
T
s
=1/360
y(
n
)=
1
2
[ x(
n
)+x(
n−3
) ]
y(
n
)=0
x(
t
)=
V
signal
+A cos(
120πt+ϕ
),
V
signal

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T8.1. First, think of one or more correct ways to complete each statement in Table T8.1(a).
Then, select the best choice from the list given in Table T8.1(b). [Items in Table T8.1(b) may be
used more than once or not at all.]
Table T8.1 
(a)
a. Tristate buffers . . . 
b. When I/O devices are accessed by the same address and data buses as data memory
locations, we have . . . 
c. In an microcontroller, programs are usually stored in . . . 
d. The type of memory most likely to be volatile is . . . 
e. The type of memory most likely to be used for temporary data in an microcontroller
is . . . 
f. Arithmetic operations are carried out in the . . . 
g. An microcontroller may be designed to respond to external events by . . . 
h. The registers of a CPU12 that hold one of the arguments and the results of arithmetic
and logical operations are . . . 
i. The registers of a CPU12 that are used mainly for indexed addressing are . . . 
j. The TSTA instruction may change the content of . . . 
k. Stacks are . . . 
l. The type of addressing used by the ABA instruction is . . . 
m. The type of addressing used by the ADDA $0AF2 instruction is . . . 
n. The type of addressing used by the ADDA #$0A instruction is . . . 
o. The register that holds the address of the next instruction to be retrieved from memory
is . . . 
p. The type of addressing used by the BEQ instruction is . . . 
(b)
1. are composed of switches that are always closed

2. mass storage
3. B and Y
4. I/O devices have their own addresses and data buses
5. are composed of open switches
6. A and X
7. control unit
8. extended
9. A, B, and D
10. contain switches that open and close under the direction of the program counter
11. facilitate the ability to transfer data in either direction over a bus
12. the condition code register
13. ALU
14. polling
15. LIFO memories
16. inherent
17. memory-mapped I/O
18. A and D
19. interrupts
20. X and Y
21. ROM
22. direct
23. the program counter
24. dynamic RAM
25. the stack pointer
26. either interrupts or polling
27. static RAM
28. indexed
29. immediate
30. relative
 T8.2. We have a CPU12 MCU. For each part of this problem, assume that the initial content of
A is 00, the initial content of B is FF, the initial content of Y is 2004, and the initial content of
selected memory locations is as shown in Figure P8.34 on page 453. Name the type of
addressing used and give the content of A (in hexadecimal form) after execution of the
instruction:
a. LDAA $03;
b. LDAA $03,Y;
c. COMA;
d. INCA;

e. LDAA #$05;
f. ADDD #A001.
T8.3. Suppose that initially the contents of the reg­isters of a CPU12 microcontroller are
A:A6   B:32   SP:1039   X:1958
and that memory locations 1034 through 103C initially contain all zeros. List the contents of the
registers A, B, SP, and X, and the contents of the memory locations 1034 through 103C after the
sequence of commands, PSHX, PSHB, PULA, PSHX, has been executed.
T8.4. Name the four elements of a computer-based instrumentation system.
T8.5. Name four types of systematic errors in measurement systems.
T8.6. How are bias errors different from random errors?
T8.7. What causes ground loops in an instrumen­tation system? What are the effects of a
ground loop?
T8.8. If a sensor must have one end connected to ground, what type of amplifier should we
choose? Why?
T8.9. What types of cable are best for connecting a sensor to an instrumentation amplifier to
avoid coupling of noise by electrical and magnetic fields?
T8.10. If we need to sense the open-circuit voltage of a sensor, what specification is important
for the instrumentation amplifier?
T8.11. How do we choose the sampling rate for an ADC? Why?

Chapter 9 Diodes
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Understand diode operation and select diodes for various applications.
Use the graphical load-line technique to analyze nonlinear circuits.
Analyze and design simple voltage-regulator circuits.
Use the ideal-diode model and piecewise-linear models to solve circuits.
Understand various rectifier and wave-shaping circuits.
Understand small-signal equivalent circuits.
Introduction to this chapter:
Electronic circuits are useful for processing information and controlling energy.
Some applications of electronic circuits are computers, radio, television, navigation
systems, light dimmers, calculators, appliances, controls for machines, motion
sensors, and surveying equipment. A basic understanding of electronic circuits will
help you in working with instrumentation in any field of engineering. In the next

several chapters, we introduce the most important electronic devices, their basic
circuit applications, and several important analysis techniques. In this chapter, we
discuss the diode.

9.1 Basic Diode Concepts
The diode is a basic but very important device that has two terminals, the anode and the cathode. The
circuit symbol for a diode is shown in Figure 9.1(a), and a typical volt-ampere characteristic is shown in
Figure 9.1(b). As shown in Figure 9.1(a), the voltage 
 across the diode is referenced positive at the
anode and negative at the cathode. Similarly, the diode current 
 is referenced positive from anode to
cathode.
Figure 9.1 
Semiconductor diode.
Notice in the characteristic that if the voltage 
 applied to the diode is positive, relatively large amounts
of current flow for small voltages. This condition is called forward bias. Thus, current flows easily
through the diode in the direction of the arrowhead of the circuit symbol.
vD
iD
vD

Diodes readily conduct current from anode to cathode (in the direction of the
arrow), but do not readily allow current to flow in the opposite direction.
On the other hand, for moderate negative values of 
 the current 
 is very small in magnitude. This is
called the reverse-bias region, as shown on the diode characteristic. In many applications, the ability of
the diode to conduct current easily in one direction, but not in the reverse direction, is very useful. For
example, in an automobile, diodes allow current from the alternator to charge the battery when the
engine is running. However, when the engine stops, the diodes prevent the battery from discharging
through the alternator. In these applications, the diode is analogous to a one-way valve in a fluid-flow
system, as illustrated in Figure 9.1(d).
If a sufficiently large reverse-bias voltage is applied to the diode, operation enters
the reverse-breakdown region of the characteristic, and currents of large
magnitude flow.
If a sufficiently large reverse-bias voltage is applied to the diode, operation enters the reverse-
breakdown region of the characteristic, and currents of large magnitude flow. Provided that the power
dissipated in the diode does not raise its temperature too high, operation in reverse breakdown is not
destructive to the device. In fact, we will see that diodes are sometimes deliberately operated in the
reverse-breakdown region.
Brief Sketch of Diode Physics
We concentrate our discussion on the external behavior of diodes and some of their circuit applications.
However, at this point, we give a thumbnail sketch of the internal physics of the diode.
The diodes that we consider consist of a junction between two types of semiconducting material
(usually, silicon with carefully selected impurities). On one side of the junction, the impurities create n-
type material, in which large numbers of electrons move freely. On the other side of the junction,
different impurities are employed to create (in effect) positively charged particles known as holes.
Semiconductor material in which holes predominate is called p-type material. Most diodes consist of a
vD,
iD

junction between n-type material and p-type material, as shown in Figure 9.1(c).
Even with no external applied voltage, an electric-field barrier appears naturally at the pn junction. This
barrier holds the free electrons on the n-side and the holes on the p-side of the junction. If an external
voltage is applied with positive polarity on the n-side, the barrier is enhanced and the charge carriers
cannot cross the junction. Thus, virtually no current flows. On the other hand, if a voltage is applied with
positive polarity on the p-side, the barrier is reduced and large currents cross the junction. Thus, the
diode conducts very little current for one polarity and large current for the other polarity of applied
voltage. The anode corresponds to the p-type material and the cathode is the n-side.
Small-Signal Diodes
Various materials and structures are used to fabricate diodes. For now, we confine our discussion to
small-signal silicon diodes, which are the most common type found in low- and medium-power electronic
circuits.
The characteristic curve of a typical small-signal silicon diode operated at a temperature of 300 K is
shown in Figure 9.2. Notice that the voltage and current scales for the forward-bias region are different
than for the reverse-bias region. This is necessary for displaying details of the characteristic, because
the current magnitudes are much smaller in the reverse-bias region than in the forward-bias region.
Furthermore, the forward-bias voltage magnitudes are much less than typical breakdown voltages.
Figure 9.2 
Volt-ampere characteristic for a typical small-signal silicon diode at a temperature of 300 K. Notice the
change of scale for negative current and voltage.
In the forward-bias region, small-signal silicon diodes conduct very little current (much less than 1 mA)

until a forward voltage of about 0.6 V is applied (assuming that the diode is at a temperature of about
300 K). Then, current increases very rapidly as the voltage is increased. We say that the forward-bias
characteristic displays a knee in the forward bias characteristic at about 0.6 V. (The exact value of the
knee voltage depends on the device, its temperature, and the current magnitude. Typical values are 0.6
or 0.7 V.) As temperature is increased, the knee voltage decreases by about 2 mV/K. (Because of the
linear change in voltage with temperature, diodes are useful as temperature sensors. The diode is
operated at a fixed current, and the voltage across the diode depends on its temperature. Electronic
thermometers used by physicians contain a diode sensor, amplifiers, and other electronic circuits that
drive the liquid-crystal temperature display.)
In the reverse-bias region, a typical current is about 1 nA for small-signal silicon diodes at room
temperature. As temperature increases, reverse current increases in magnitude. A rule of thumb is that
the reverse current doubles for each 10-K increase in temperature.
When reverse breakdown is reached, current increases in magnitude very rapidly. The voltage for which
this occurs is called the breakdown voltage. For example, the breakdown voltage of the diode
characteristic shown in Figure 9.2 is approximately 
 Breakdown-voltage magnitudes range from
several volts to several hundred volts. Some applications call for diodes that operate in the forward-bias
and nonconducting reverse-bias regions without entering the breakdown region. Diodes intended for
these applications have a specification for the minimum magnitude of the breakdown voltage.
Shockley Equation
Under certain simplifying assumptions, theoretical considerations result in the following relationship
between current and voltage for a junction diode:
This is known as the Shockley equation. The saturation current 
 has a value on the order of 
A for small-signal junction diodes at 300 K. (  depends on temperature, doubling for each 5-K increase
in temperature for silicon devices.) The parameter n, known as the emission coefficient, takes values
between 1 and 2, depending on details of the device structure. The voltage 
 is given by
and is called the thermal voltage. The temperature of the junction in kelvin is represented by T.
Furthermore, 
 is Boltzmann's constant, and 
 is the magnitude of the
electrical charge of an electron. At a temperature of 300 K, we have 
−100 V.
i
D
 = 
I
s
[ exp(
v
D
n
V
T
)−1
]
(9.1)
Is,
10−14
Is
VT
V
T
 = 
kT
q
(9.2)
k=1.38×10−23 J/K
q=1.60×10−19 C
VT≅0.026 V.

If we solve the Shockley equation for the diode voltage, we find that
For small-signal junction diodes operated at forward currents between 
 and 10 mA, the Shockley
equation with n taken as unity is usually very accurate. Because the derivation of the Shockley equation
ignores several phenomena, the equation is not accurate for smaller or larger currents. For example,
under reverse bias, the Shockley equation predicts 
 but we usually find that the reverse current is
much larger in magnitude than  (although still small). Furthermore, the Shockley equation does not
account for reverse breakdown.
With forward bias of at least several tenths of a volt, the exponential in the Shockley equation is much
larger than unity; with good accuracy, we have
This approximate form of the equation is often easier to use.
Occasionally, we are able to derive useful analytical results for electronic circuits by use of the Shockley
equation, but much simpler models for diodes are usually more useful.
Zener Diodes
Diodes that are intended to operate in the breakdown region are called Zener diodes. Zener diodes are
useful in applications for which a constant voltage in breakdown is desirable. Therefore, manufacturers
try to optimize Zener diodes for a nearly vertical characteristic in the breakdown region. The modified
diode symbol shown in Figure 9.3 is used for Zener diodes. Zener diodes are available with breakdown
voltages that are specified to a tolerance of 
Figure 9.3 
Zener-diode symbol.
Exercise 9.1 
vD=nVT ln[(iDIs)+1]
(9.3)
0.01 μA
iD≅−Is,
Is
iD≅Is exp(vDnVT)
(9.4)
±5%.

At a temperature of 300 K, a certain junction diode has 
 for 
 Assume that n is unity
and use 
 Find the value of the saturation current 
 Then, compute the diode current at
 and at 0.70 V.
Answer 
Exercise 9.2 
Consider a diode under forward bias so that the approximate form of the Shockley equation (Equation
9.4) applies. Assume that 
 and 
a. By what increment must 
 increase to double the current?
b. To increase the current by a factor of 10?
Answer 
a. 
b. 
iD=0.1 mA
vD=0.6 V.
VT=0.026 V.
Is.
vD=0.65 V
Is=9.50×10−15 A, iD=0.684 mA, iD=4.68 mA.
VT=0.026 V
n=1.
vD
ΔvD=18 mV;
ΔvD=59.9 mV.

9.2 Load-Line Analysis of Diode Circuits
In Section 9.1, we learned that the volt-ampere characteristics of diodes are nonlinear. We will see
shortly that other electronic devices are also nonlinear. On the other hand, resistors have linear volt-
ampere characteristics, as shown in Figure 9.4. Because of this nonlinearity, many of the techniques
that we have studied for linear circuits in Chapters 1 through 6 do not apply to circuits involving diodes.
In fact, much of the study of electronics is concerned with techniques for analysis of circuits containing
nonlinear elements.
Figure 9.4 
In contrast to diodes, resistors have linear volt-ampere characteristics.
Graphical methods provide one approach to analysis of nonlinear circuits. For example, consider the
circuit shown in Figure 9.5. By application of Kirchhoff's voltage law, we can write the equation
Figure 9.5 
Circuit for load-line analysis.
V
SS
 = R
i
D
 + 
v
D
(9.5)

We assume that the values of 
 and R are known and that we wish to find 
 and 
 Thus,
Equation 9.5 has two unknowns, and another equation (or its equivalent) is needed before a solution
can be found. This is available in graphical form in Figure 9.6, which shows the volt-ampere
characteristic of the diode.
Figure 9.6 
Load-line analysis of the circuit of Figure 9.5.
We can obtain a solution by plotting Equation 9.5 on the same set of axes used for the diode
characteristic. Since Equation 9.5 is linear, it plots as a straight line, which can be drawn if two points
satisfying the equation are located. A simple method is to assume that 
 and then Equation 9.5
yields 
 This pair of values is shown as point A in Figure 9.6. A second point results if we
assume that 
 for which the equation yields 
 The pair of values is shown as point B in
Figure 9.6. Then, connecting points A and B result in a plot called the load line. The operating point is
the intersection of the load line and the diode characteristic. This point represents the simultaneous
solution of Equation 9.5 and the diode characteristic.
Example 9.1 Load-Line Analysis
If the circuit of Figure 9.5 has 
 and a diode with the characteristic shown in
Figure 9.7, find the diode voltage and current at the operating point.
VSS
iD
vD.
iD=0,
vD=VSS.
vD=0,
iD=VSS/R.
VSS=2 V, R=1 kΩ,

Figure 9.7 
Load-line analysis for Examples 9.1 and 9.2.
Solution 
First, we locate the ends of the load line. Substituting 
 and the values given for 
 and R into
Equation 9.5 yields 
 These values plot as point B in Figure 9.7. Substitution of 
 and
circuit values results in 
 These values plot as point A in the figure. Constructing the load line
results in an operating point of 
 and 
 as shown in the figure.
Example 9.2 Load-Line Analysis
Repeat Example 9.1 if 
 and 
Solution 
If we let 
 and substitute values into Equation 9.5, we find that 
 This is plotted as point
C in Figure 9.7.
When an intercept of the load line falls off the page, we select a point at the
edge of the page.
vD=0
VSS
iD=2 mA.
iD=0
vD=2 V.
VDQ≅0.7 V
IDQ≅1.3 mA,
VSS=10 V
R=10 kΩ.
vD=0
iD=1 mA.

If we proceed as before by assuming that 
 we find that 
 This is a perfectly valid point
on the load line, but it plots at a point far off the page. Of course, we can use any other point
satisfying Equation 9.5 to locate the load line. Since we already have point C on the 
 axis, a good
point to use would be on the right-hand edge of Figure 9.7. Thus, we assume that 
 and
substitute values into Equation 9.5, resulting in 
 These values plot as point D. Then, we
can draw the load line and find that the operating-point values are 
 and 
Exercise 9.3 
Find the operating point for the circuit of Figure 9.5 if the diode characteristic is shown in Figure 9.8
and:
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
c. 
 and 
Figure 9.8 
Diode characteristic for Exercise 9.3.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
c. 
iD=0,
vD=10 V.
iD
vD=2 V
iD=0.8 mA.
VDQ≅0.68 V
IDQ≅0.93 mA.
VSS=2 V
R=100 Ω;
VSS=15 V
R=1 kΩ;
VSS=1.0 V
R=20 Ω.
VDQ≅1.1 V, IDQ≅9.0 mA;
VDQ≅1.2 V, IDQ≅13.8 mA;
VDQ≅0.91 V, IDQ≅4.5 mA.

9.3 Zener-Diode Voltage-Regulator Circuits
Sometimes, a circuit that produces constant output voltage while operating from a variable supply
voltage is needed. Such circuits are called voltage regulators. For example, if we wanted to operate
computer circuits from the battery in an automobile, a voltage regulator would be needed. Automobile
battery voltage typically varies between about 10 and 14 V (depending on the state of the battery and
whether or not the engine is running). Many computer circuits require a nearly constant voltage of 5 V.
Thus, a regulator is needed that operates from the 10 to 14 V supply and produces a nearly constant 5-
V output.
A voltage regulator circuit provides a nearly constant voltage to a load from a
variable source.
In this section, we use the load-line technique that we introduced in Section 9.2 to analyze a simple
regulator circuit. The regulator circuit is shown in Figure 9.9. (For proper operation, it is necessary for
the minimum value of the variable source voltage to be somewhat larger than the desired output
voltage.) The Zener diode has a breakdown voltage equal to the desired output voltage. The resistor R
limits the diode current to a safe value so that the Zener diode does not overheat.
Figure 9.9 
A simple regulator circuit that provides a nearly constant output voltage 
 from a variable supply
voltage.
Assuming that the characteristic for the diode is available, we can construct a load line to analyze the
vo

operation of the circuit. As before, we use Kirchhoff's voltage law to write an equation relating 
 and 
(In this circuit, the diode operates in the breakdown region with negative values for 
 and 
) For the
circuit of Figure 9.9, we obtain
Once again, this is the equation of a straight line, so location of any two points is sufficient to construct
the load line. The intersection of the load line with the diode characteristic yields the operating point.
 Example 9.3 Load-Line Analysis of a Zener-Diode Voltage Regulator
The voltage-regulator circuit of Figure 9.9 has 
 and uses a Zener diode having the
characteristic shown in Figure 9.10. Find the output voltage for 
 Repeat for 
Figure 9.10 
See Example 9.3.
Solution 
The load lines for both values of 
 are shown in Figure 9.10. The output voltages are determined
from the points where the load lines intersect the diode characteristic. The output voltages are found
to be 
 for 
 and 
 for 
 Thus, a 5-V change in the supply
voltage results in only a 0.5-V change in the regulated output voltage.
Actual Zener diodes are capable of much better performance than this. The slope of the
characteristic has been accentuated in Figure 9.10 for clarity-actual Zener diodes have a more
nearly vertical slope in breakdown.
vD
iD.
vD
iD.
VSS+RiD+vD=0
(9.6)
R=1 kΩ
VSS=15 V.
VSS=20 V.
VSS
vo=10.0 V
VSS=15 V
vo=10.5 V
VSS=20 V.

Slope of the Load Line
Notice that the two load lines shown in Figure 9.10 are parallel. Inspection of Equation 9.5 or Equation
9.6 shows that the slope of the load line is 
 Thus, a change of the supply voltage changes the
position, but not the slope of the load line.
Load lines for different source voltages (but the same resistance) are parallel.
Load-Line Analysis of Complex Circuits
Any circuit that contains resistors, voltage sources, current sources, and a single two-terminal nonlinear
element can be analyzed by the load-line technique. First, the Thévenin equivalent is found for the linear
portion of the circuit as illustrated in Figure 9.11. Then, a load line is constructed to find the operating
point on the characteristic of the nonlinear device. Once the operating point of the nonlinear element is
known, voltages and currents can be determined in the original circuit.
Figure 9.11 
Analysis of a circuit containing a single nonlinear element can be accomplished by load-line analysis of
a simplified circuit.
 Example 9.4 Analysis of a Zener-Diode Regulator with a Load
Consider the Zener-diode regulator circuit shown in Figure 9.12(a). The diode characteristic is
shown in Figure 9.13. Find the load voltage 
 and source current 
 if 
 and
−1/R.
vL
IS
VSS=24 V, R=1.2 kΩ,
RL=6 kΩ.

Figure 9.12 
See Example 9.4.
Figure 9.13 
Zener-diode characteristic for Example 9.4 and Exercise 9.4.
Solution 
First, consider the circuit as redrawn in Figure 9.12(b), in which we have grouped the linear
elements together on the left-hand side of the diode. Next, we find the Thévenin equivalent for the
linear portion of the circuit. The Thévenin voltage is the open-circuit voltage (i.e., the voltage across
 with the diode replaced by an open circuit), which is given by
RL
VT=VSS RLR+RL=20 V

The Thévenin resistance can be found by zeroing the voltage source and looking back into the
circuit from the diode terminals. This is accomplished by reducing 
 to zero so that the voltage
source becomes a short circuit. Then, we have R and 
 in parallel, so the Thévenin resistance is
The resulting equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 9.12(c).
Now, we can use Kirchhoff's voltage law to write the load-line equation from the equivalent circuit as
Using the values found for 
 and 
 we can construct the load line shown in Figure 9.13 and
locate the operating point. This yields 
Once 
 is known, we can find the voltages and currents in the original circuit. For example, using
the output voltage value of 10.0 V in the original circuit of Figure 9.12(a), we find that
Exercise 9.4 
Find the voltage across the load in Example 9.4 if:
a. 
b. b. 
Answer 
a. 
b. 
 (Notice that this regulator is not perfect because the load voltage varies as the load
current changes.)
Exercise 9.5 
Consider the circuit of Figure 9.14(a). Assume that the breakdown characteristic is vertical, as shown in
Figure 9.14(b). Find the output voltage 
 for:
a. 
b. 
VSS
RL
RT=RRLR+RL=1 kΩ
VT+RTiD+vD=0
VT
RT,
vL=−vD=10.0 V.
vL
IS=(VSS−vL)/R=11.67 mA.
RL=1.2 kΩ;
RL=400 Ω.
vL≅9.4 V;
vL≅6.0 V.
vo
iL=0;
iL=20 mA;

c. 
 [Hint: Applying Kirchhoff's voltage law to the circuit, we have
Construct a different load line for each value of 
]
Figure 9.14 
See Exercise 9.5.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
c. 
 (Notice that the regulator is not effective for large load currents.)
iL=100 mA.
15=100(iL−iD)−vD
iL.
vo=10.0 V;
vo=10.0 V;
vo=5.0 V.

9.4 Ideal-Diode Model
Graphical load-line analysis is useful for some circuits, such as the voltage regulator studied in Section
9.3. However, it is too cumbersome for more complex circuits. Instead, we often use simpler models to
approximate diode behavior.
One model for a diode is the ideal diode, which is a perfect conductor with zero voltage drop in the
forward direction. In the reverse direction, the ideal diode is an open circuit. We use the ideal-diode
assumption if our judgment tells us that the forward diode voltage drop and reverse current are
negligible, or if we want a basic understanding of a circuit rather than an exact analysis.
The ideal diode acts as a short circuit for forward currents and as an open circuit
with reverse voltage applied.
The volt-ampere characteristic for the ideal diode is shown in Figure 9.15. If 
 is positive, 
 is zero,
and we say that the diode is in the on state. On the other hand, if 
 is negative, 
 is zero, and we say
that the diode is in the off state.
Figure 9.15 
Ideal-diode volt-ampere characteristic.
Assumed States for Analysis of Ideal-Diode Circuits
iD
vD
vD
iD

In analysis of a circuit containing ideal diodes, we may not know in advance which diodes are on and
which are off. Thus, we are forced to make a considered guess. Then, we analyze the circuit to find the
currents in the diodes assumed to be on and the voltages across the diodes assumed to be off. If 
 is
positive for the diodes assumed to be on and if 
 is negative for the diodes assumed to be off, our
assumptions are correct, and we have solved the circuit. (We are assuming that 
 is referenced
positive in the forward direction and that 
 is referenced positive at the anode.) Otherwise, we must
make another assumption about the diodes and try again. After a little practice, our first guess is usually
correct, at least for simple circuits.
A step-by-step procedure for analyzing circuits that contain ideal diodes is to:
1. Assume a state for each diode, either on (i.e., a short circuit) or off (i.e., an open circuit). For n
diodes there are 
 possible combinations of diode states.
2. Analyze the circuit to determine the current through the diodes assumed to be on and the
voltage across the diodes assumed to be off.
3. Check to see if the result is consistent with the assumed state for each diode. Current must flow
in the forward direction for diodes assumed to be on. Furthermore, the voltage across the diodes
assumed to be off must be positive at the cathode (i.e., reverse bias).
4. If the results are consistent with the assumed states, the analysis is finished. Otherwise, return
to step 1 and choose a different combination of diode states.
Example 9.5 Analysis by Assumed Diode States
Use the ideal-diode model to analyze the circuit shown in Figure 9.16(a). Start by assuming that 
is off and 
 is on.
Figure 9.16 
iD
vD
iD
vD
2n
D1
D2

Analysis of a diode circuit, using the ideal-diode model. See Example 9.5.
Solution 
With 
 off and 
 on, the equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 9.16(b). Solving results in
 Since the current in 
 is positive, our assumption that 
 is on seems to be correct.
However, continuing the solution of the circuit of Figure 9.16(b), we find that 
 This is not
consistent with the assumption that 
 is off. Therefore, we must try another assumption.
This time, we assume that 
 is on and 
 is off. The equivalent circuit for these assumptions is
shown in Figure 9.16(c). We can solve this circuit to find that 
 and 
 These
values are consistent with the assumptions about the diodes (
 on and 
 off) and, therefore, are
correct.
Notice in Example 9.5 that even though current flows in the forward direction of 
 for our first guess
about diode states (
 off and 
 on), the correct solution is that 
 is off. Thus, in general, we cannot
decide on the state of a particular diode until we have found a combination of states that works for all
the diodes in the circuit.
In general, we cannot decide on the state of a particular diode until we have
found a combination of states that works for all of the diodes in the circuit.
For a circuit containing n diodes, there are 
 possible states. Thus, an exhaustive search eventually
yields the solution for each circuit.
Exercise 9.6 
Show that the condition 
 off and 
 off is not valid for the circuit of Figure 9.16(a).
Exercise 9.7 
Show that the condition 
 on and 
 on is not valid for the circuit of Figure 9.16(a).
Exercise 9.8 
D1
D2
iD2=0.5 mA.
D2
D2
vD1=+7 V.
D1
D1
D2
iD1=1 mA
vD2=−3 V.
D1
D2
D2
D1
D2
D2
2n
D1
D2
D1
D2

Find the diode states for the circuits shown in Figure 9.17. Assume ideal diodes.
Figure 9.17 
Circuits for Exercise 9.8.
Answer 
a. 
 is on;
b. 
 is off;
c. 
 is off; and 
 is on.
D1
D2
D3
D4

9.5 Piecewise-Linear Diode Models
Sometimes, we want a more accurate model than the ideal-diode assumption, but do not want to resort
to nonlinear equations or graphical techniques. Then, we can use piecewise-linear models for the
diodes. First, we approximate the actual volt-ampere characteristic by straight-line segments. Then, we
model each section of the diode characteristic with a resistance in series with a constant-voltage source.
Different resistance and voltage values are used in the various sections of the characteristic.
Consider the resistance 
 in series with a voltage source 
 shown in Figure 9.18(a). We can write
the following equation, relating the voltage and current of the series combination:
Figure 9.18 
Circuit and volt-ampere characteristic for piecewise-linear models.
The current i is plotted versus v in Figure 9.18(b). Notice that the intercept on the voltage axis is at
 and that the slope of the line is 
Given a straight-line volt-ampere characteristic, we can work backward to find the corresponding series
voltage and resistance. Thus, after a nonlinear volt-ampere characteristic has been approximated by
several straight-line segments, a circuit model consisting of a voltage source and series resistance can
be found for each segment.
Ra
Va
v=Rai+Va
(9.7)
v=Va
1/Ra.

 Example 9.6 Piecewise-Linear Model for a Zener Diode
Find circuit models for the Zener-diode volt-ampere characteristic shown in Figure 9.19. Use the
straight-line segments shown.
Figure 9.19 
Piecewise-linear models for the diode of Example 9.6.
Solution 
For line segment A of Figure 9.19, the intercept on the voltage axis is 0.6 V and the reciprocal of the
slope is 
 Hence, the circuit model for the diode on this segment is a 
 resistance in series
with a 0.6-V source, as shown in the figure. Line segment B has zero current, and therefore, the
equivalent circuit for segment B is an open circuit, as illustrated in the figure. Finally, line segment C
has an intercept of 
 and a reciprocal slope of 
 resulting in the equivalent circuit shown.
Thus, this diode can be approximated by one of these linear circuits, depending on where the
operating point is located.
Example 9.7 Analysis Using a Piecewise-Linear Model
Use the circuit models found in Example 9.6 to solve for the current in the circuit of Figure 9.20(a).
10 Ω.
10-Ω
−6 V
12 Ω,

Figure 9.20 
Circuit for Example 9.7.
Solution 
Since the 3-V source has a polarity that results in forward bias of the diode, we assume that the
operating point is on line segment A of Figure 9.19. Consequently, the equivalent circuit for the
diode is the one for segment A. Using this equivalent circuit, we have the circuit of Figure 9.20(b).
Solving, we find that 
Exercise 9.9 
Use the appropriate circuit model from Figure 9.19 to solve for 
 in the circuit of Figure 9.21 if:
a. 
 and
b. 
 (Hint: Be sure that your answers are consistent with your choice of equivalent circuit for
the diode-the various equivalent circuits are valid only for specific ranges of diode voltage and
current. The answer must fall into the valid range for the equivalent circuit used.)
Figure 9.21 
Circuit for Exercise 9.9.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
iD=80 mA.
vo
RL=10 kΩ;
RL=1 kΩ.
vo=6.017 V;
vo=3.333 V.

Exercise 9.10 
Find a circuit model for each line segment shown in Figure 9.22(a). Draw the circuit models identifying
terminals a and b for each equivalent circuit.
Figure 9.22 
Hypothetical nonlinear device for Exercise 9.10.
Answer 
See Figure 9.22(b). Notice the polarity of the voltage sources with respect to terminals a and b.
Simple Piecewise-Linear Diode Equivalent Circuit
Figure 9.23 shows a simple piecewise-linear equivalent circuit for diodes that is often sufficiently
accurate. It is an open circuit in the reverse-bias region and a constant voltage drop in the forward
direction. This model is equivalent to a battery in series with an ideal diode.

Figure 9.23 
Simple piecewise-linear equivalent for the diode.

9.6 Rectifier Circuits
Now that we have introduced the diode and some methods for analysis of diode circuits, we consider
some additional practical circuits. First, we consider several types of rectifiers, which convert ac power
into dc power. These rectifiers form the basis for electronic power supplies and battery-charging
circuits. Typically, a power supply takes power from a raw source, which is often the 60-Hz ac power
line, and delivers steady dc voltages to a load such as computer circuits or television circuits. Other
applications for rectifiers are in signal processing, such as demodulation of a radio signal.
(Demodulation is the process of retrieving the message, such as a voice or video signal.) Another
application is precision conversion of an ac voltage to dc in an electronic voltmeter.
Half-Wave Rectifier Circuits
A half-wave rectifier with a sinusoidal source and resistive load 
 is shown in Figure 9.24. When the
source voltage 
 is positive, the diode is in the forward-bias region. If an ideal diode is assumed, the
source voltage appears across the load. For a typical real diode, the output voltage is less than the
source voltage by an amount equal to the drop across the diode, which is approximately 0.7 V for silicon
diodes at room temperature. When the source voltage is negative, the diode is reverse biased and no
current flows through the load. Even for typical real diodes, only a very small reverse current flows.
Thus, only the positive half-cycles of the source voltage appear across the load.
Figure 9.24 
Half-wave rectifier with resistive load.
Battery-Charging Circuit. 
RL
vs(t)

We can use a half-wave rectifier to charge a battery as shown in Figure 9.25. Current flows whenever
the instantaneous ac source voltage is higher than the battery voltage. As shown in the figure, it is
necessary to add resistance to the circuit to limit the magnitude of the current. When the ac source
voltage is less than the battery voltage, the diode is reverse biased and the current is zero. Hence, the
current flows only in the direction that charges the battery.
Figure 9.25 
Half-wave rectifier used to charge a battery.
Half-Wave Rectifier with Smoothing Capacitor. 
Often, we want to convert an ac voltage into a nearly constant dc voltage to be used as a power supply
for electronic circuits. One approach to smoothing the rectifier output voltage is to place a large
capacitance across the output terminals of the rectifier. The circuit and waveforms of current and voltage
are shown in Figure 9.26. When the ac source reaches a positive peak, the capacitor is charged to the
peak voltage (assuming an ideal diode). When the source voltage drops below the voltage stored on the
capacitor, the diode is reverse biased and no current flows through the diode. The capacitor continues
to supply current to the load, slowly discharging until the next positive peak of the ac input. As shown in
the figure, current flows through the diode in pulses that recharge the capacitor.

Figure 9.26 
Half-wave rectifier with smoothing capacitor.
Because of the charge and discharge cycle, the load voltage contains a small ac component called
ripple. Usually, it is desirable to minimize the amplitude of the ripple, so we choose the largest
capacitance value that is practical. In this case, the capacitor discharges for nearly the entire cycle, and
the charge removed from the capacitor during one discharge cycle is
where 
 is the average load current and T is the period of the ac voltage. Since the charge removed
from the capacitor is the product of the change in voltage and the capacitance, we can also write
where 
 is the peak-to-peak ripple voltage and C is the capacitance. Equating the right-hand sides of
Equations 9.8 and 9.9 allows us to solve for C:
In practice, Equation 9.10 is approximate because the load current varies and because the capacitor
does not discharge for a complete cycle. However, it gives a good starting value for calculating the
capacitance required in the design of power-supply circuits.
The average voltage supplied to the load if a smoothing capacitor is used is approximately midway
Q≅IL T
(9.8)
IL
Q=VrC
(9.9)
Vr
C = 
I
L
T
V
r
(9.10)

between the minimum and maximum voltages. Thus, referring to Figure 9.26, the average load voltage
is
Peak Inverse Voltage
An important aspect of rectifier circuits is the peak inverse voltage (PIV) across the diodes. Of course,
the breakdown specification of the diodes should be greater in magnitude than the PIV. For example, in
the half-wave circuit with a resistive load, shown in Figure 9.24, the PIV is 
The addition of a smoothing capacitor in parallel with the load increases the PIV to (approximately) 
Referring to Figure 9.26, for the negative peak of the ac input, we see that the reverse bias of the diode
is the sum of the source voltage and the voltage stored on the capacitor.
Full-Wave Rectifier Circuits
Several full-wave rectifier circuits are in common use. One approach uses two ac sources and two
diodes, as shown in Figure 9.27(a). One feature of this diagram is the ground symbol. Usually in
electronic circuits, many components are connected to a common point known as ground. Often, the
chassis containing the circuit is the electrical ground. Therefore, in Figure 9.27(a), the lower end of 
and the point between the voltage sources are connected together.
Figure 9.27 
Full-wave rectifier.
VL≅Vm−Vr2
(9.11)
Vm.
2Vm.
RL

A wire or other conductor, not shown explicitly in the diagram, connects all of the
points that are connected to ground symbols.
When the upper source applies a positive voltage to the left-hand end of diode A, the lower source
applies a negative voltage to the left-hand end of diode B, and vice versa. We say that the sources are
out of phase. Thus, the circuit consists of two half-wave rectifiers with out-of-phase source voltages
and a common load. The diodes conduct on alternate half-cycles.
Usually, the two out-of-phase ac voltages are provided by a transformer. (Transformers are discussed
in Chapter 15.) Besides providing the out-of-phase ac voltages, the transformer also allows the
designer to adjust 
 by selection of the turns ratio. This is important, because the ac voltage available
is often not of a suitable amplitude for direct rectification-usually either a higher or lower dc voltage is
required.
A second type of full-wave rectifier uses the diode bridge shown in Figure 9.28. When the ac voltage,
 is positive, current flows through diode A, then through the load, and returns through diode
B, as shown in the figure. For the opposite polarity, current flows through diodes C and D. Notice that in
either case, current flows in the same direction through the load.
Figure 9.28 
Diode-bridge full-wave rectifier.
Usually, neither of the ac source terminals is connected to ground. This is necessary if one side of the
load is to be connected to ground, as shown in the figure. (If both the ac source and the load have a
common ground connection, part of the circuit is shorted.)
If we wish to smooth the voltage across the load, a capacitor can be placed in parallel with the load,
similar to the half-wave circuit discussed earlier. In the full-wave circuits, the capacitor discharges for
Vm
Vm sin(ωt),

only a half-cycle before being recharged. Hence, the capacitance required is only half as much in the
full-wave circuit as for the half-wave circuit. Therefore, we modify Equation 9.10 to obtain
for the full-wave rectifier with a capacitive filter.
Exercise 9.11 
Consider the battery-charging circuit of Figure 9.25 with 
 and 
a. Find the peak current assuming an ideal diode.
b. Find the percentage of each cycle for which the diode is in the on state.
Answer 
a. 
b. the diode is on for 25.3 percent of each cycle.
Exercise 9.12 
A power-supply circuit is needed to deliver 0.1 A and 15 V (average) to a load. The ac source has a
frequency of 60 Hz. Assume that the circuit of Figure 9.26 is to be used. The peak-to-peak ripple
voltage is to be 0.4 V. Instead of assuming an ideal diode, allow 0.7 V for forward diode drop. Find the
peak ac voltage 
 needed and the approximate value of the smoothing capacitor. (Hint: To achieve an
average load voltage of 15 V with a ripple of 0.4 V, design for a peak load voltage of 15.2 V.)
Answer 
Exercise 9.13 
Repeat Exercise 9.12 using the circuit of Figure 9.28 with the smoothing capacitor in parallel with the
load 
Answer 
C = 
I
L
T
2
V
r
(9.12)
Vm=20 V, R=10 Ω,
VB=14 V.
I peak=600 mA;
Vm
Vm=15.9, C=4166 μF.
RL.
Vm=16.6, C=2083 μF.

9.7 Wave-Shaping Circuits
A wide variety of wave-shaping circuits are used in electronic systems. These circuits are used to
transform one waveform into another. Numerous examples of wave- shaping circuits can be found in
transmitters and receivers for television or radar. In this section, we discuss a few examples of wave-
shaping circuits that can be constructed with diodes.
Clipper Circuits
A clipper circuit "clips off" part of the input waveform to produce the output
waveform.
Diodes can be used to form clipper circuits, in which a portion of an input signal waveform is "clipped"
off. For example, the circuit of Figure 9.29 clips off any part of the input waveform above 6 V or less
than 
 (We are assuming ideal diodes.) When the input voltage is between 
 and 
 both
diodes are off and no current flows. Then, there is no drop across R and the output voltage 
 is equal
to the input voltage 
 On the other hand, when 
 is larger than 6 V, diode A is on and the output
voltage is 6 V, because the diode connects the 6-V battery to the output terminals. Similarly, when 
 is
less than 
 diode B is on and the output voltage is 
 The output waveform resulting from a 15-V-
peak sinusoidal input is shown in Figure 9.29(b), and the transfer characteristic of the circuit is shown in
Figure 9.29(c).
−9 V.
−9
+6 V,
vo
vin.
vin
vin
−9 V,
−9 V.

Figure 9.29 
Clipper circuit.
The resistance R is selected large enough so that the forward diode current is within reasonable bounds
(usually, a few milliamperes), but small enough so that the reverse diode current results in a negligible
voltage drop. Often, we find that a wide range of resistance values provides satisfactory performance in
a given circuit.
In Figure 9.29, we have assumed ideal diodes. If small-signal silicon diodes are used, we expect a
forward drop of 0.6 or 0.7 V, so we should reduce the battery voltages to compensate. Furthermore,
batteries are not desirable for use in circuits if they can be avoided, because they may need periodic
replacement. Thus, a better design uses Zener diodes instead of batteries. Practical circuits equivalent
to ­Figure 9.29 are shown in Figure 9.30. The Zener diodes are labeled with their breakdown voltages.

Figure 9.30 
Circuits with nearly the same performance as the circuit of Figure 9.29.
Exercise 9.14 
a. Sketch the transfer characteristics to scale for the circuits of Figure 9.31(a) and (b). Allow a 0.6-V
forward drop for the diodes.

Figure 9.31 
See Exercise 9.14.
b. Sketch the output waveform to scale if 
Answer 
a. See Figure 9.31(c);
b. see Figure 9.31(d).
Exercise 9.15 
Design clipper circuits that have the transfer characteristics shown in
a. Figure 9.32(a) and
b. Figure 9.32(b). Allow for a 0.6-V drop in the forward direction for the diodes. [Hint for part (b):
Include a resistor in series with the diode that begins to conduct at 
 to achieve the slope
required for the section between 
 and 6 V.]
vin(t)=15 sin(ωt).
vin=3 V
vin=3 V

Figure 9.32 
See Exercise 9.15.
Answer 
a. See Figure 9.32(c);
b. see Figure 9.32(d).
Clamp Circuits
Another diode wave-shaping circuit is the clamp circuit, which is used to add a dc component to an ac
input waveform so that the positive (or negative) peaks are forced to take a specified value. In other
words, the peaks of the waveform are "clamped" to a specified voltage value. An example circuit is
shown in Figure 9.33. In this circuit, the positive peaks are clamped to −5 V.

Figure 9.33 
Example clamp circuit.
In a clamp circuit, a variable dc voltage is added to the input waveform so that
one of the peaks of the output is clamped to a specified value.
The capacitance is a large value, so it discharges only very slowly and we can consider the voltage
across the capacitor to be constant. Because the capacitance is large, it has a very small impedance for
the ac input signal. The output voltage of the circuit is given by
If a positive swing of the input signal attempts to force the output voltage to become greater than 
the diode conducts, increasing the value of 
 Thus, the capacitor is charged to a value that adjusts
the maximum value of the output voltage to 
 A large resistance R is provided so that the capacitor
can discharge slowly. This is necessary so the circuit can adjust if the input waveform changes to a
smaller peak amplitude.
vo(t)=vin(t)−VC
(9.13)
−5 V,
VC.
−5 V.

Of course, we can change the voltage to which the circuit clamps by changing the battery voltage.
Reversing the direction of the diode causes the negative peak to be clamped instead of the positive
peak. If the desired clamp voltage requires the diode to be reverse biased, it is necessary to return the
discharge resistor to a suitable dc supply voltage to ensure that the diode conducts and performs the
clamping operation. Furthermore, it is often more convenient to use Zener diodes rather than batteries.
A circuit including these features is shown in Figure 9.34.
Figure 9.34 
See Exercise 9.16.
Exercise 9.16 
Consider the circuit of Figure 9.34(a). Assume that the capacitance is large enough so that the voltage
across it does not discharge through R appreciably during one cycle of input.
a. What is the steady-state output voltage if 
b. Sketch the steady-state output to scale versus time if 
c. Suppose that the resistor is returned directly to ground instead of 
 (i.e., replace the 15-V
source by a short circuit). In this case, sketch the steady-state output versus time if 
Answer 
a. For 
 we have 
b. see Figure 9.34(b);
c. c. see Figure 9.34(c).
Exercise 9.17 
vin(t)=0?
vin(t)=2 sin(ωt).
−15 V
vin(t)=2 sin(ωt).
vin(t)=0,
vo=−5 V;

Design a circuit that clamps the negative peaks of an ac signal to 
 You can use batteries, resistors,
and capacitors of any value desired in addition to Zener or conventional diodes. Allow 0.6 V for the
forward drop.
Answer 
A solution is shown in Figure 9.35. Other solutions are possible.
Figure 9.35 
Answer for Exercise 9.17.
Exercise 9.18 
Repeat Exercise 9.17 for a circuit that clamps the positive peaks to 
Answer 
A solution is shown in Figure 9.36. Other solutions are possible.
Figure 9.36 
Answer for Exercise 9.18.
+6 V.
+6 V.

9.8 Linear Small-Signal Equivalent Circuits
We will encounter many examples of electronic circuits in which dc supply voltages are used to bias a
nonlinear device at an operating point, and a small ac signal is injected into the circuit. We often split the
analysis of such circuits into two parts. First, we analyze the dc circuit to find the operating point. In this
analysis of bias conditions, we must deal with the nonlinear aspects of the device. In the second part of
the analysis, we consider the small ac signal. Since virtually any nonlinear characteristic is
approximately linear (straight) if we consider a sufficiently small portion, we can find a linear small-
signal equivalent circuit for the nonlinear device to use in the ac analysis.
Often, the main concern in the design of such circuits is what happens to the ac signal. The dc supply
voltages simply bias the device at a suitable operating point. For example, in a portable radio, the main
interest is the signal being received, demodulated, amplified, and delivered to the speaker. The dc
currents supplied by the battery are required for the devices to perform their intended function on the ac
signals. However, most of our design time is spent in consideration of the small ac signals to be
processed.
The small-signal linear equivalent circuit is an important analysis approach that applies to many types of
electronic circuits. In this section, we demonstrate the principles with a simple diode circuit. In Chapters
11 and 12, we use similar techniques for transistor amplifier circuits.
The small-signal equivalent circuit for a diode is a resistance.
Now, we show that in the case of a diode, the small-signal equivalent circuit consists simply of a
resistance. Consider the diode characteristic shown in Figure 9.37. Assume that the dc supply voltage
results in operation at the quiescent point, or Q point, indicated on the characteristic. Then, a small ac
signal injected into the circuit swings the instantaneous point of operation slightly above and below the
Q point.

Figure 9.37 
Diode characteristic, illustrating the Q point.
For a sufficiently small ac signal, the characteristic is straight. Thus, we can write
where 
 is the small change in diode current from the Q-point current caused by the ac signal, 
 is
the change in the diode voltage from the Q-point value, and 
 is the slope of the diode
characteristic evaluated at the Q point. Notice that the slope has the units of inverse resistance.
Hence, we define the dynamic resistance of the diode as
and Equation 9.14 becomes
We find it convenient to drop the  notation and denote changes of current and voltage from the Q-point
values as 
 and 
 (Notice that lowercase subscripts are used for the small changes in current and
voltage.) Therefore, for these small ac signals, we write
As shown by Equation 9.15, we can find the equivalent resistance of the diode for the small ac signal
as the reciprocal of the slope of the characteristic curve. The current of a junction diode is given by the
Shockley equation (Equation 9.1), repeated here for convenience:
ΔiD≅(diDdvD)Q ΔvD
(9.14)
ΔiD
ΔvD
(diD/dvD)Q
r
d 
 = 
[ (
d
i
D
d
v
D
)
Q
]
−1
(9.15)
ΔiD≅ΔvDrd
(9.16)
Δ
vd
id.
id=vdrd
(9.17)
iD=Is [exp(vDnVT)−1]

The slope of the characteristic can be found by differentiating the Shockley equation, resulting in
Substituting the voltage at the Q point, we have
For forward-bias conditions with 
 at least several times as large as 
 the 
 inside the brackets of
the Shockley equation is negligible. Thus, we can write
Substituting this into Equation 9.19, we have
Taking the reciprocal and substituting into Equation 9.15, we have the dynamic small-signal resistance
of the diode at the Q point:
To summarize, for signals that cause small changes from the Q point, we can treat the diode simply as a
linear resistance. The value of the resistance is given by Equation 9.22 (provided that the diode is
forward biased). As the Q-point current 
 increases, the resistance becomes smaller. Thus, an ac
voltage of fixed amplitude produces an ac current that has higher amplitude as the Q point moves
higher. This is illustrated in Figure 9.38.
diDdvD=Is 1nVT exp (vDnVT)
(9.18)
(diDdvD)Q=Is 1nVT exp (VDQnVT)
(9.19)
VDQ
VT,
−1
IDQ≅Is exp (VDQnVT)
(9.20)
(diDdvD)Q=IDQnVT
(9.21)
r
d
 = 
n
V
T
I
DQ
(9.22)
IDQ

Figure 9.38 
As the Q point moves higher, a fixed-amplitude ac voltage produces an ac current of larger amplitude.
Notation for Currents and Voltages in Electronic Circuits
Perhaps we should review the notation we have used for the diode currents and voltages, because we
use similar notation throughout this book:
 and 
 represent the total instantaneous diode voltage and current. At times, we may wish to
emphasize the time-varying nature of these quantities, and then we use 
 and 
 and 
 represent the dc diode current and voltage at the quiescent point.
 and  represent the (small) ac signals. If we wish to emphasize their time-varying nature, we use
 and 
This notation is illustrated for the waveform shown in Figure 9.39.
vD
iD
vD(t)
iD(t).
VDQ
IDQ
vd
id
vd(t)
id(t).

Figure 9.39 
Illustration of diode currents.
Exercise 9.19 
Compute the dynamic resistance of a junction diode having 
 at a temperature of 300 K for 
a. 0.1 mA;
b. 1 mA;
c. 10 mA.
Answer 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Voltage-Controlled Attenuator
Now, we consider an example of linear-equivalent-circuit analysis for the relatively simple, but useful
circuit shown in Figure 9.40. The function of this circuit is to produce an output signal 
 that is a
variable fraction of the ac input signal 
 It is similar to the resistive voltage divider (see Section 2.3),
except that in this case, we want the division ratio to depend on another voltage 
 called the control
signal. We refer to the process of reduction of the amplitude of a signal as attenuation. Thus, the
circuit to be studied is called a voltage-controlled attenuator. The degree of attenuation depends on
the value of the dc control voltage 
n=1
IDQ=
260 Ω;
26 Ω;
2.6 Ω.
vo(t)
vin(t).
VC
VC.

Figure 9.40 
Variable attenuator using a diode as a controlled resistance.
Notice that the ac signal to be attenuated is connected to the circuit by a coupling capacitor. The
output voltage is connected to the load 
 by a second coupling capacitor. Recall that the impedance of
a capacitance is given by
in which  is the angular frequency of the ac signal. We select the capacitance values large enough so
that they are effectively short circuits for the ac signal. However, the coupling capacitors are open
circuits for dc. Thus, the quiescent operating point (Q point) of the diode is unaffected by the signal
source or the load. This can be important for a circuit that must work for various sources and loads that
could affect the Q point. Furthermore, the coupling capacitors prevent (sometimes undesirable) dc
currents from flowing in the source or the load.
Because of the coupling capacitors, we only need to consider 
 and the diode to perform the bias
analysis to find the Q point. Hence, the dc circuit is shown in Figure 9.41. We can use any of the
techniques discussed earlier in this chapter to find the Q point. Once it is known, the Q-point value of the
diode current 
 can be substituted into Equation 9.22 to determine the dynamic resistance of the
diode.
Figure 9.41 
Dc circuit equivalent to Figure 9.40 for Q-point analysis.
Now, we turn our attention to the ac signal. The dc control source should be considered as a short
RL
ZC=1jωC
ω
VC, RC,
IDQ

circuit for ac signals. The signal source causes an ac current to flow through the 
 source. However,
 is a dc voltage source, and by definition, the voltage across it is constant. Since the dc voltage
source has an ac component of current, but no ac voltage, the dc voltage source is equivalent to a short
circuit for ac signals. This is an important concept that we will use many times in drawing ac equivalent
circuits.
Dc sources and coupling capacitors are replaced by short circuits in small-signal
ac equivalent circuits. Diodes are replaced with their dynamic resistances.
The equivalent circuit for ac signals is shown in Figure 9.42. The control source and the capacitors have
been replaced by short circuits, and the diode has been replaced by its dynamic resistance. This circuit
is a voltage divider and can be analyzed by ordinary linear-circuit analysis. The parallel combination of
 and 
 is denoted as 
 given by
Figure 9.42 
Small-signal ac equivalent circuit for Figure 9.40.
Then, the voltage gain of the circuit is
(Of course, 
 is less than unity.)
Exercise 9.20 
Suppose that the circuit of Figure 9.40 has 
 and 
 The diode has 
 and
is at a temperature of 300 K. For purposes of Q-point analysis, assume a constant diode voltage of 0.6
VC
VC
RC, RL,
rd
Rp,
Rp=11/RC+1/RL+1/rd
(9.23)
Av=vovin=RpR+Rp
(9.24)
Av
R=100 Ω, RC=2 kΩ,
RL=2 kΩ.
n=1

V. Find the Q-point value of the diode current and 
 for 
a. 1.6 V;
b. 10.6 V.
Answer 
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
An application for voltage-controlled attenuators occurs in digital voice recorders in which the audio
signal from a microphone is amplified to a suitable level, converted to digital form in an analog-to-digital
converter (ADC), and stored in a digital memory. (Analog-to-digital conversion is discussed in Section
6.10, starting on page 331.) A problem frequently encountered in recording audio is that some persons
speak quietly, while others speak loudly. Furthermore, some may be far from the microphone, while
others are close. If an amplifier with fixed gain is used between the microphone and the ADC, either the
weak signals are small compared with the quantization error or the strong signals exceed the maximum
limits of the ADC so that severe distortion occurs.
A solution is to use a voltage-controlled attenuator in a system such as the one shown in Figure 9.43.
The attenuator is placed between the microphone and a highgain amplifier.When the signal being
recorded is weak, the control voltage is small and very little attenuation occurs. On the other hand, when
the signal is strong, the control voltage is large so that the signal is attenuated, preventing distortion.
The control voltage is generated by rectifying the output of the amplifier. The rectified signal is filtered by
a long-time constant RC filter so that the attenuation responds to the average signal amplitude rather
than adjusting too rapidly.With proper design, this system can provide an acceptable signal at the
converter for a wide range of input signal amplitudes.
Figure 9.43 
The voltage-controlled attenuator is useful in maintaining a suitable signal amplitude at the recording
head.
Av
VC=
IDQ=0.5 mA
Av=0.331;
IDQ=5 mA
Av=0.0492.

While the diode circuit we have discussed is convenient for illustrating principles, integrated-circuit
transistor amplifiers in which gain is controlled by changing the Q-points of the transistors offer better
performance. Examples are the AN-934 from Analog Devices and the MAX9814 from Maxim Integrated
Products.

Summary
1. A pn-junction diode is a two-terminal device that conducts current easily in one direction (from
anode to cathode), but not in the opposite direction. The volt-ampere characteristic has three
regions: forward bias, reverse bias, and reverse breakdown.
2. The Shockley equation relates current and voltage in a pn-junction diode.
3. Nonlinear circuits, such as those containing a diode, can be analyzed by using the load-line
technique.
4. Zener diodes are intended to be operated in the reverse-breakdown region as constant-voltage
references.
5. Voltage regulators are circuits that produce a nearly constant output voltage while operating from
a variable source.
6. The ideal-diode model is a short circuit (on) if current flows in the forward direction and an open
circuit (off) if voltage is applied in the reverse direction.
7. In the method of assumed states, we assume a state for each diode (on or off), analyze the
circuit, and check to see if the assumed states are consistent with the current directions and
voltage polarities. This process is repeated until a valid set of states is found.
8. In a piecewise-linear model for a nonlinear device, the volt-ampere characteristic is
approximated by straight-line segments. On each segment, the device is modeled as a voltage
source in series with a resistance.
9. Rectifier circuits can be used to charge batteries and to convert ac voltages into constant dc
voltages. Half-wave rectifiers conduct current only for one polarity of the ac input, whereas full-
wave circuits conduct for both polarities.
10. Wave-shaping circuits change the waveform of an input signal and deliver the modified
waveform to the output terminals. Clipper circuits remove that portion of the input waveform
above (or below) a given level. Clamp circuits add or subtract a dc voltage, so that the positive
(or negative) peaks have a specified voltage.
11. The small-signal (incremental) equivalent circuit of a diode consists of a resistance. The value of
the resistance depends on the operating point (Q point).
12. Dc sources and coupling capacitors are replaced by short circuits in small-signal ac equivalent
circuits. Diodes are replaced with their dynamic resistances.

Problems
Section 9.1: Basic Diode Concepts
P9.1. Draw the circuit symbol for a diode, labeling the anode and cathode.
P9.2. Draw the volt-ampere characteristic of a typical diode and label the various regions.
P9.3. Describe a fluid-flow analogy for a diode.
P9.4. Write the Shockley equation and define all of the terms.
P9.5. Compute the values of 
 for temperatures of 20°C and 150°C.
*P9.6. Sketch i versus v to scale for the circuits shown in Figure P9.6. The reverse-breakdown
voltages of the Zener diodes are shown. Assume voltages of 0.6 V for all diodes including the
Zener diodes when current flows in the forward direction.
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
Figure P9.6 
 P9.7. Repeat Problem P9.6 for the circuits shown in Figure P9.7.
VT

Figure P9.7 
*P9.8. A diode operates in forward bias and is described by Equation 9.4, with 
 For
 the current is 
 For 
 the current is 
 Determine
the values of  and n.
P9.9. With constant current flowing in the forward direction in a small-signal silicon diode, the
voltage across the diode decreases with temperature by about 2 mV/K. Such a diode has a
voltage of 0.650 V, with a current of 1 mA at a temperature of 25°C. Find the diode voltage at 1
mA and a temperature of 175°C.
P9.10. We have a junction diode that has 
 for 
 Assume that 
 and
 Use the Shockley equa­tion to compute the diode current at 
 and at
P9.11. We have a diode with 
 and 
a. Using a computer program of your choice, obtain a plot of 
 versus 
 for 
 ranging
from 
 to 10 mA. Choose a logarithmic scale for 
 and a linear scale for 
 What
type of curve results?
b. Place a 
 resistance in series with the diode, and plot current versus voltage across
the series combination on the same axes used for part (a). Compare the two curves.
When is the added series resistance significant?
P9.12. A silicon diode described by the Shockley equation has 
 and operates at 150°C with a
current of 1 mA and voltage of 0.25 V. Determine the current after the voltage is increased to
0.30 V.
*P9.13. The diodes shown in Figure P9.13 are identical and have 
 The temperature of the
VT=0.026 V.
vD1=0.600 V,
iD1=1 mA.
vD2=0.680 V,
iD2=10 mA.
Is
iD=0.2 mA
vD=0.6 V.
n=2
VT=0.026 V.
vD=0.65 V
vD=0.70 V.
n=1, Is=10−14 A,
VT=26 mV.
iD
vD
iD
10 μA
iD
vD.
100-Ω
n=2
n=1.

Section 9.2: Load-Line Analysis of Diode Circuits
diodes is constant at 300 K. Before the switch is closed, the voltage v is 600 mV. Find v after the
switch is closed. Repeat for 
Figure P9.13 
P9.14. Suppose we have a junction diode operating at a constant temperature of 300 K. With a
forward current of 1 mA, the voltage is 600 mV. Furthermore, with a current of 10 mA, the
voltage is 700 mV. Find the value of n for this diode.
*P9.15. Current hogging. The diodes shown in Figure P9.15 are identical and have 
 For
each diode, a forward current of 100 mA results in a voltage of 700 mV at a temperature of 300
K.
Figure P9.15 
a. If both diodes are at 300 K, what are the values of 
 and 
b. If diode A is at 300 K and diode B is at 305 K, again find 
 and 
 given that  doubles
in value for a 5-K increase in temperature. [Hint: Answer part (a) by use of symmetry. For
part (b), a transcendental equation for the voltage across the diodes can be found. Solve
by trial and error. An important observation to be made from this problem is that, starting
at the same temperature, the diodes should theoretically each conduct half of the total
current. However, if one diode conducts slightly more, it becomes warmer, resulting in
even more current. Eventually, one of the diodes "hogs" most of the current. This is
particularly noticeable for devices that are thermally isolated from one another with large
currents, for which significant heating occurs.]
n=2.
n=1.
IA
IB?
IA
IB,
Is
*P9.16. The nonlinear circuit element shown in Figure P9.16 has 
 Also, we
have 
 and 
 Use graphical load-line techniques to solve for  and 
 (You may
prefer to use a computer program to plot the characteristic and the load line.)
ix=[ exp(vx)−1 ]/10.
Vs=3 V
Rs=1 Ω.
ix
vx.

Figure P9.16 
P9.17. Repeat Problem P9.16 for 
 
 and 
P9.18. Repeat Problem P9.16 for 
 
 and 
P9.19. Repeat Problem P9.16 for 
 
 and 
P9.20. Several types of special-purpose diodes exist. One is the constant-current diode for
which the current is constant over a wide range of voltage. The circuit symbol and volt-ampere
characteristic for a constant-current diode are shown in Figure P9.20(a). Another special type is
the light-emitting diode (LED) for which the circuit symbol and a typical volt-ampere
characteristic are shown in Figure P9.20(b). Sometimes, the series combination of these two
devices is used to provide constant current to the LED from a variable voltage shown in Figure
P9.20(c).
Vs=20 V, Rs=5 kΩ,
ix=0.01/(1−vx/5)3 mA.
Vs=6 V, Rs=3 Ω,
i
x
=
v
x
3
/8.
Vs=3 V, Rs=1 Ω,
i
x
=
v
x
+
v
x
2
.
Sketch the overall volt-ampere characteristic to scale for the parallel combination shown
in Figure P9.20(d).
b.

Figure P9.20 
P9.21. Determine the values for i and v for the circuit of Figure P9.21. The diode is the LED
having the characteristic shown in Figure P9.20(b).
Figure P9.21 

Section 9.3: Zener-Diode Voltage-Regulator Circuits
 P9.22. Determine the values for  and  for the circuit of Figure P9.22. The device is the
constant-current diode having the characteristic shown in Figure P9.20(a).
Figure P9.22 
P9.23. Determine the values for i and v for the circuit of Figure P9.23. The diode is the LED
having the characteristic shown in Figure P9.20(b).
Figure P9.23 
P9.24. Repeat Problem P9.23 for the circuit of Figure P9.24.
Figure P9.24 
i1
i2
P9.25. What is a Zener diode? For what is it typically used? Draw the volt-ampere characteristic
of an ideal 5.8-V Zener diode.
*P9.26. Draw the circuit diagram of a simple voltage regulator.
P9.27. Consider the Zener-diode regulator shown in Figure 9.14 on page 470. What is the
minimum load resistance for which 
 is 10 V?
vo

Section 9.4: Ideal-Diode Model
P9.28. Consider the voltage regulator shown in Figure P9.28. The source voltage 
 varies from
10 to 14 V, and the load current  varies from 50 to 100 mA. Assume that the Zener diode is
ideal. Determine the largest value allowed for the resistance 
 so that the load voltage 
remains constant with variations in load current and source voltage. Determine the maximum
power dissipation in 
Figure P9.28 
P9.29. Design a voltage-regulator circuit to provide a constant voltage of 5 V to a load from a
variable supply voltage. The load current varies from 0 to 100 mA, and the source voltage
varies from 8 to 10 V. You may assume that ideal Zener diodes are available. Resistors of any
value may be specified. Draw the circuit diagram of your regulator, and specify the value of each
component. Also, find the worst case (maximum) power dissipated in each component in your
regulator. Try to use good judgment in your design.
P9.30. Repeat Problem P9.29 if the supply voltage ranges from 6 to 10 V.
P9.31. Repeat Problem P9.29 if the load current varies from 0 to 1 A.
P9.32. Outline a method for solving a circuit that contains a single nonlinear element plus
resistors, dc voltage sources, and dc current sources, given the volt-ampere characteristic of the
nonlinear device.
 *P9.33. A certain linear two-terminal circuit has terminals a and b. Under open-circuit conditions,
we have 
 A short circuit is connected across the terminals, and a current of 2 A flows
from a to b through the short circuit. Determine the value of 
 when a nonlinear element that
has 
is connected across the terminals.
Vs
iL
Rs
vL
Rs.
vab=10 V.
vab
i
ab
=
v
ab
3
P9.34. What is an ideal diode? Draw its volt-ampere characteristic. After solving a circuit with
ideal diodes, what check is necessary for diodes initially assumed to be on? Off?
P9.35. Two ideal diodes are placed in series, pointing in opposite directions. What is the
equivalent circuit for the combination? What is the equivalent circuit if the diodes are in parallel
and pointing in opposite directions?
P9.36. Find the values of I and V for the circuits of Figure P9.36, assuming that the diodes are

ideal.
Figure P9.36 
*P9.37. Find the values of I and V for the circuits of Figure P9.37, assuming that the diodes are
ideal.
Figure P9.37 
P9.38. Find the values of I and V for the circuits of Figure P9.38, assuming that the diodes are

ideal. For part (b), consider 
 and 10 V. Also, for part (b) of the figure, plot V versus
 for 
 ranging from 
 to 10 V.
Figure P9.38 
 P9.39. Sketch i versus v to scale for each of the circuits shown in Figure P9.39. Assume that
the diodes are ideal and allow v to range from 
 to 
Vin=0, 2, 6,
Vin
Vin
−10 V
−10 V
+10 V.

Figure P9.39 
P9.40.
a. The circuit shown in Figure P9.40(a) is a type of logic gate. Assume that the diodes are
ideal. The voltages 
 and 
 independently have values of either 0 V (for logic 0, or
low) or 5 V (for logic 1, or high). For which of the four combinations of input voltages is
the output high (i.e., 
)? What type of logic gate is this?
VA
VB
Vo=5 V

Section 9.5: Piecewise-Linear Diode Models
Figure P9.40 
b. Repeat for the circuit of Figure P9.40(b).
P9.41. Sketch 
 to scale versus time for the circuit shown in Figure P9.41. Assume that the
diodes are ideal.
Figure P9.41 
vo(t)

P9.42. If a nonlinear two-terminal device is modeled by the piecewise-linear approach, what is
the equivalent circuit of the device for each linear segment?
 P9.43. A resistor 
 is in series with a voltage source 
 Draw the circuit. Label the voltage
across the combination as v and the current as i. Draw and label the volt-ampere characteristic
(i versus v).
P9.44. The volt-ampere characteristic of a certain two-terminal device is a straight line that
passes through the points (2 V, 5 mA) and (3 V, 15 mA). The current reference points into the
positive reference for the voltage. Determine the equivalent circuit for this device.
P9.45. Consider the volt-ampere characteristic of an ideal 10-V Zener diode shown in Figure
9.14 on page 470. Determine the piecewise-linear equivalent circuit for each segment of the
characteristic.
*P9.46. Assume that we have approximated a nonlinear volt-ampere characteristic by the
straight-line segments shown in Figure P9.46(c). Find the equivalent circuit for each segment.
Use these equivalent circuits to find v in the circuits shown in Figure P9.46(a) and (b).
Figure P9.46 
*P9.47. The Zener diode shown in Figure P9.47 has a piecewise-linear model shown in Figure
Ra
Va.

Section 9.6: Rectifier Circuits
9.19 on page 473. Plot load voltage 
 versus load current  for  ranging from 0 to 100 mA.
Figure P9.47 
P9.48. The diode shown in Figure P9.48 can be represented by the model of Figure 9.23 on
page 475, with 
a. Assume that the diode operates as an open circuit and solve for the node voltages 
and 
 Are the results consistent with the model? Why or why not?
b. Repeat part (a), assuming that the diode operates as a 0.7-V voltage source.
Figure P9.48 
vL
iL
iL
Vf=0.7 V.
v1
v2.
P9.49. Draw the circuit diagram of a half-wave rectifier for producing a nearly steady dc voltage
from an ac source. Draw two different full-wave circuits.
P9.50. A 20-V-rms 60-Hz ac source is in series with an ideal diode and a 
 resistance.
Determine the peak current and PIV for the diode.
 P9.51. Consider the battery charging circuit shown in Figure 9.25 on page 476. The ac source
has a peak value of 24 V and a frequency of 60 Hz. The resistance is 
 the diode is ideal, and
 Determine the average current (i.e., the value of the charge that passes through the
battery in 1 second). Suppose that the battery starts from a totally discharged state and has a
capacity of 100 ampere hours. How long does it take to fully charge the battery?
100-Ω
2 Ω,
VB=12 V.

P9.52. Consider the half-wave rectifier shown in Figure 9.26 on page 477. The ac source has an
rms value of 20 V and a frequency of 60 Hz. The diodes are ideal, and the capacitance is very
large, so the ripple voltage 
 is very small. The load is a 
 resistance. Determine the PIV
across the diode and the charge that passes through the diode per cycle.
P9.53. Most dc voltmeters produce a reading equal to the average value of the voltage
measured. The mathematical definition of the average value of a periodic waveform is
in which T is the period of the voltage v(t) applied to the meter.
a. What does a dc voltmeter read if the applied voltage is 
b. What does the meter read if the applied voltage is a half-wave rectified version of the
sinewave?
c. What does the meter read if the applied voltage is a full-wave rectified version of the
sinewave?
*P9.54. Design a half-wave rectifier power supply to deliver an average voltage of 9 V with a
peak-to-peak ripple of 2 V to a load. The average load current is 100 mA. Assume that ideal
diodes and 60-Hz ac voltage sources of any amplitudes needed are available. Draw the circuit
diagram for your design. Specify the values of all components used.
P9.55. Repeat Problem P9.54 with a full-wave bridge rectifier.
P9.56. Repeat Problem P9.54 with two diodes and out-of-phase voltage sources to form a full-
wave rectifier.
P9.57. Repeat Problem P9.54, assuming that the diodes have forward drops of 0.8 V.
*P9.58. A half-wave rectifier is needed to supply 15-V dc to a load that draws an average current
of 250 mA. The peak-to-peak ripple is required to be 0.2 V or less. What is the minimum value
allowed for the smoothing capacitance? If a full-wave rectifier is needed?
P9.59. Consider the battery-charging circuit shown in Figure 9.25 on page 476, in which
 and the diode is ideal.
a. Sketch the current i(t) to scale versus time.
b. Determine the average charging current for the battery.
[Hint: The average current is the charge that flows through the battery in one cycle, divided by
the period.]
P9.60.
a. Consider the full-wave rectifier shown in Figure 9.27 on page 478, with a large
smoothing capacitance placed in parallel with the load 
 and 
 Assuming that
the diodes are ideal, what is the approximate value of the load voltage? What PIV
appears across the diodes?
b. Repeat for the full-wave bridge shown in Figure 9.28 on page 479.
Vr
100-Ω
Vavg = 1T∫0Tv(t)dt
v(t)=Vm sin(ωt)?
vs(t)=20 sin(200πt), R=80 Ω, VB=12 V,
RL
Vm=12 V.

Section 9.7: Wave-Shaping Circuits
P9.61. Figure P9.61 shows the equivalent circuit for a typical automotive battery charging
system. The three-phase delta-connected source represents the stator coils of the alternator.
(Three-phase ac sources are discussed in Section 5.7. Actually, the alternator stator is usually
wye connected, but the terminal voltages are the same as for the equivalent delta.) Not shown in
the figure is a voltage regulator that controls the current applied to the rotor coil of the alternator
and, consequently, 
 and the charging current to the battery.
a. Sketch the load voltage 
 to scale versus time. Assume ideal diodes and that 
 is
large enough that current flows into the battery at all times. [Hint: Each source and four of
the diodes form a full-wave bridge rectifier.]
b. Determine the peak-to-peak ripple and the average load voltage in terms of 
c. Determine the value of 
 needed to provide an average charging current of 30 A.
d. What additional factors would need to be considered in a realistic computation of 
Figure P9.61 
Idealized model of an automotive battery-charging system.
Vm
vL(t)
Vm
Vm.
Vm
Vm?
P9.62. What is a clipper circuit? Draw an example circuit diagram, including component values,
an input waveform, and the corresponding output waveform.
P9.63. Sketch to scale the output waveform for the circuit shown in Figure P9.63. Assume that
the diodes are ideal.

Figure P9.63 
P9.64. Sketch the transfer characteristic (
 versus 
) to scale for the circuit shown in Figure
P9.64. Assume that the diode is ideal.
Figure P9.64 
P9.65. Sketch the transfer characteristic (
 versus 
) to scale for the circuit shown in Figure
P9.65. Assume that the diodes are ideal.
Figure P9.65 
P9.66. Sketch the transfer characteristic (
 versus 
) to scale for the circuit shown in
FigureP9.66 . Allow 
 to range from 
 to 
 and assume that the diodes are ideal.
Figure P9.66 
P9.67. Sketch the transfer characteristic (
 versus 
) for the circuit shown in Figure P9.67,
carefully labeling the breakpoint and slopes. Allow 
 to range from 
 to 
 and assume
vo
vin
vo
vin
vo
vin
vin
−5 V
+5 V
vo
vin
vin
−5 V
+5 V

that the diodes are ideal.
Figure P9.67 
P9.68. What is a clamp circuit? Draw an example circuit diagram, including component values,
an input waveform, and the corresponding output waveform.
 P9.69. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P9.69, in which the RC time constant is very long
compared with the period of the input and in which the diode is ideal. Sketch 
 to scale
versus time.
Figure P9.69 
*P9.70. Sketch to scale the steady-state output waveform for the circuit shown in Figure P9.70.
Assume that RC is much larger than the period of the input voltage and that the diodes are ideal.
Figure P9.70 
P9.71. Voltage-doubler circuit. Consider the circuit of Figure P9.71. The capacitors are very
large, so they discharge only a very small amount per cycle. (Thus, no ac voltage appears
across the capacitors, and the ac input plus the dc voltage of 
 must appear at point A.) Sketch
vo(t)
C1

the voltage at point A versus time. Find the voltage across the load. Why is this called a voltage
doubler? What is the PIV across each diode?
Figure P9.71 
*P9.72. Design a clipper circuit to clip off the portions of an input voltage that fall above 3 V or
below 
 Assume that diodes having a constant forward drop of 0.7 V are available. Ideal
Zener diodes of any breakdown voltage required are available. Dc voltage sources of any value
needed are available.
P9.73. Repeat Problem P9.72, with clipping levels of 
 and 
 (i.e., every part of the input
waveform below 
 or above 
 is clipped off).
P9.74. Design circuits that have the transfer characteristics shown in Figure P9.74. Assume that
 ranges from 
 to 
 Use diodes, Zener diodes, and resistors of any values needed.
Assume a 0.6-V forward drop for all diodes and that the Zener diodes have an ideal
characteristic in the breakdown region. Power-supply voltages of 
 are available.
Figure P9.74 
*P9.75. Design a clamp circuit to clamp the negative extreme of a periodic input waveform to
−5 V.
+2 V
+5 V
+2
+5
vin
−10
+10 V.
±15 V

Section 9.8: Linear Small-Signal Equivalent Circuits
 Use diodes, Zener diodes, and resistors of any values required. Assume a 0.6-V forward
drop for all diodes and that the Zener diodes have an ideal characteristic in the breakdown
region. Power-supply voltages of 
 are available.
 P9.76. Repeat Problem P9.75 for a clamp voltage of 
−5 V.
±15 V
+5 V.
P9.77. A certain diode has 
 and 
 Find an expression for 
and sketch it to scale versus time.
P9.78. Of what does the small-signal equivalent circuit of a diode consist? How is the dynamic
resistance of a nonlinear circuit element determined at a given operating point?
P9.79. With what are dc voltage sources replaced in a small-signal ac equivalent circuit? Why?
P9.80. With what should we replace a dc current source in a small-signal ac equivalent circuit?
Justify your answer.
*P9.81. A certain nonlinear device has 
Sketch 
 versus 
 to scale for 
ranging from 
 to 
 Is this device a diode? Determine the dynamic resistance of the
device and sketch it versus 
 to scale for 
 ranging from 
 to 
P9.82. A breakdown diode has
where 
 is in amperes. Plot 
 versus 
 in the reverse-bias region. Find the dynamic
resistance of this diode at 
 and at 
P9.83. A certain nonlinear device is operating with an applied voltage given by
The current is given by
Determine the dynamic resistance and Q point of the device under the conditions given.
P9.84. Ideally, we want the voltage for a Zener diode to be constant in the breakdown region.
What does this imply about the dynamic resistance in the breakdown region for an ideal Zener
diode?
*P9.85. Consider the voltage-regulator circuit shown in Figure P9.85. The ac ripple voltage is 1
V peak to peak. The dc (average) load voltage is 5 V. What is the Q-point current in the Zener
diode? What is the maximum dynamic resistance allowed for the Zener diode if the output ripple
is to be less than 10 mV peak to peak?
IDQ=4 mA
id(t)=0.5 cos(200πt) mA.
iD(t),
i
D
=
v
D
3
/8.
iD
vD
vD
−2 V
+2 V.
vD
vD
−2 V
+2 V.
iD=−10−6(1+vD/5)3  for −5 V<vD<0
iD
iD
vD
IDQ=−1 mA
IDQ=−10 mA.
vD(t)=5+0.01 cos(ωt) V
iD(t)=3+0.2 cos(ωt) mA

Figure P9.85 

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T9.1. Determine the value of 
 for each of the circuits shown in Figure T9.1. The characteristic
for the diode is shown in Figure 9.8 on page 465.
Figure T9.1 
 T9.2. The diode shown in Figure T9.2 is ideal. Determine the state of the diode and the values
of 
 and 
Figure T9.2 
T9.3. The current versus voltage characteristic of a certain two-terminal device passes through
the points (5 V, 2 mA) and (10 V, 7 mA). The reference for the current points into the positive
reference for the voltage. Determine the values for the resistance and voltage source for the
piecewise linear equivalent circuit for this device between the two points given.
iD
vx
ix.

T9.4. Draw the circuit diagram for a full-wave bridge rectifier with a resistance as the load.
T9.5. Suppose we have a 10-V-peak sinusoidal voltage source. Draw the diagram of a circuit
that clips off the part of the sinusoid above 5 V and below 
 The circuit should be composed
of ideal diodes, dc voltage sources, and other components as needed. Be sure to label the
terminals across which the clipped output waveform 
 appears.
T9.6. Suppose we have a 10-Hz sinusoidal voltage source, 
 Draw the diagram of a circuit
that clamps the positive peaks to 
 The circuit should be composed of ideal diodes, dc
voltage sources, and other components as needed. List any constraints that should be observed
in selecting component values. Be sure to label the terminals across which the clamped output
waveform 
 appears.
T9.7. Suppose we have a silicon diode operating with a bias current of 5 mA at a temperature of
300 K. The diode current is given by the Shockley equation with 
Draw the small-signal
equivalent circuit for the diode including numerical values for the components.
−4 V.
vo(t)
vin(t).
−4 V.
vo(t)
n=2.

Chapter 10 Amplifiers: Specifications and External
Characteristics
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Use various amplifier models to calculate amplifier performance for given sources and loads.
Compute amplifier efficiency.
Understand the importance of input and output impedances of amplifiers.
Determine the best type of ideal amplifier for various applications.
Specify the frequency-response requirements for various amplifier applications.
Understand linear and nonlinear distortion in amplifiers.
Specify the pulse-response parameters of amplifiers.
Work with differential amplifiers and specify common-­mode rejection requirements.
Understand the various sources of dc offsets and design balancing circuits.
Introduction to this chapter:

The most important analog blocks found in electronic systems are amplifiers.
Basically, amplifiers are used to increase the amplitudes of electrical signals. For
example, the signals from most sensors (such as strain gauges used in mechanical
engineering or flow meters used in chemical processes) are small in amplitude and
need to be amplified before they can be utilized.
In this chapter, we consider the external characteristics of amplifiers that are
important in selecting them for instrumentation applications. After introducing the
basic concepts of amplifiers, we consider several nonideal properties of real
amplifiers. To avoid errors when working with electronic instrumentation in your field,
you need to be familiar with these amplifier imperfections. The internal operation of
amplifier circuits is treated in Chapters 11, 12, and 13.

10.1 Basic Amplifier Concepts
Ideally, an amplifier produces an output signal with identical waveshape as the input signal, but with a
larger amplitude. This concept is illustrated in Figure 10.1. The signal source produces a voltage 
that is applied to the input terminals of the amplifier, which generates an output voltage
across a load resistance 
 connected to the output terminals. The constant 
 is called the voltage
gain of the amplifier. Often, the voltage gain is much larger in magnitude than unity, but we will see later
that useful amplification can take place even if 
 is less than unity.
Figure 10.1
Electronic amplifier.
Ideally, an amplifier produces an output signal with identical waveshape as the
input signal, but with a larger amplitude.
An example of a signal source is a microphone that typically produces a signal of 1-mV peak as we
speak into it. This small signal can be used as the input to an amplifier with a voltage gain of 10,000 to
produce an output signal with a peak value of 10 V. If this larger output voltage is applied to a
loudspeaker, a much louder version of the sound entering the microphone results the principle of
operation for the electronic megaphone.
vi(t)
vo(t)=Avvi(t)
(10.1)
RL
Av
Av

Sometimes, 
 is a negative number, so the output voltage is an inverted version of the input, and the
amplifier is then called an inverting amplifier. On the other hand, if 
 is a positive number, we have a
noninverting amplifier. A typical input waveform and the corresponding output waveforms for a
noninverting amplifier and for an inverting amplifier are shown in Figure 10.2.
Figure 10.2
Input waveform and corresponding output waveforms.
Inverting amplifiers have negative voltage gain, and the output waveform is an
inverted version of the input waveform. Noninverting amplifiers have positive
voltage gain.
Av
Av

For monaural audio signals, it does not matter whether the amplifier is inverting or noninverting because
the sounds produced by the loudspeaker are perceived the same either way. However, in a stereo
system, it is important that the amplifiers for the left and right channels are the same (i.e., either both
inverting or both noninverting), so that the signals applied to the two loudspeakers have the proper
phase relationship. If video signals are inverted, a negative image with black and white interchanges
results; hence, it is important whether video amplifiers are inverting or noninverting.
Common Ground Node
Often, one of the amplifier input terminals and one of the output terminals are connected to a common
ground. Notice the ground symbol shown in Figure 10.1. Typically, the ground terminal consists of the
metal chassis that contains the circuit as well as circuit-board conductors. This common ground serves
as the return path for signal currents and, as we will see later, the dc power-supply currents in electronic
circuits.
You may be familiar with the concept of electrical grounds in automobile wiring. Here, the ground
conductor consists of the frame, fenders, and other conductive parts of the car. For example, current is
carried to the taillights by a wire, but may return through the ground conductors, consisting of the
fenders and frame. Similarly, residential 60-Hz power distribution systems are grounded, often to a cold-
water pipe. However, in this case, return currents are not intended to flow through the ground
conductors because that could pose safety hazards.
Sometimes, but not always, the chassis ground is connected through the line cord to the 60-Hz power-
system ground. Always be careful in working with electrical circuits. In some types of electronic circuits,
the chassis ground can be at 120 V ac with respect to the power-system ground. Touching the chassis
while in contact with the power-system ground (through a water pipe or a damp concrete floor for
example) can be fatal.
Always be careful in working with electrical circuits.
Exercise 10.1
A certain noninverting amplifier has a voltage-gain magnitude of 50. The input voltage is
vi(t)=0.1 sin(2000πt).

a. Find an expression for the output voltage 
b. Repeat for an inverting amplifier.
Answer
a. 
b. 
Voltage-Amplifier Model
Amplification can be modeled by a controlled source as illustrated in Figure 10.3. Because real
amplifiers draw some current from the signal source, a realistic model of an amplifier must include a
resistance 
 across the input terminals. Furthermore, a resistance 
 must be included in series with
the output terminals to account for the fact that the output voltage of a real amplifier is reduced when
load current flows. The complete amplifier model shown in Figure 10.3 is called the voltage-amplifier
model. Later, we will see that other models can be used for amplifiers.
Figure 10.3
Model of an electronic amplifier, including input resistance 
 and output resistance 
Amplifiers are characterized by their input impedance, output impedance, and a
gain parameter.
The input resistance 
 of the amplifier is the equivalent resistance seen when looking into the input
terminals. As we will find later, the input circuitry can sometimes include capacitive or inductive effects,
vo(t).
5 sin(2000πt);
−5 sin(2000πt).
Ri
Ro
Ri
Ro.
Ri

and we would then refer to the input impedance. For example, the input amplifiers of typical
oscilloscopes have an input impedance consisting of a 
 resistance in parallel with a 47-pF
capacitance. In this chapter, we assume that the input impedance is purely resistive, unless stated
otherwise.
The resistance 
 in series with the output terminals is known as the output resistance. Real
amplifiers are not able to deliver a fixed voltage to an arbitrary load resistance. Instead, the output
voltage becomes smaller as the load resistance becomes smaller, and the output resistance accounts
for this reduction. When the load draws current, a voltage drop occurs across the output resistance,
resulting in a reduction of the output voltage.
The voltage-controlled voltage source models the amplification properties of the amplifier. Notice that
the voltage produced by this source is simply a constant 
 times the input voltage 
 If the load is an
open circuit, there is no drop across the output resistance, and then, 
 For this reason, 
 is
called the open-circuit voltage gain.
In sum, the voltage-amplifier model includes the input impedance, the output impedance, and the open-
circuit voltage gain in an equivalent circuit for the amplifier.
The voltage-amplifier model includes the input impedance, the output impedance,
and the open-circuit voltage gain in an equivalent circuit for the amplifier.
Current Gain
As shown in Figure 10.3, the input current  is the current delivered to the input terminals of the
amplifier, and the output current  is the current flowing through the load. The current gain 
 of an
amplifier is the ratio of the output current to the input current:
The input current can be expressed as the input voltage divided by the input resistance, and the output
current is the output voltage divided by the load resistance. Thus, we can find the current gain in terms
of the voltage gain and the resistances as
1-MΩ
Ro
Avoc
vi.
vo=Avocvi.
Avoc
ii
io
Ai
Ai=i0ii
(10.2)

in which
is the voltage gain with the load resistance connected. Usually, 
 is smaller in magnitude than the
open-circuit voltage gain 
 because of the voltage drop across the output resistance.
 is the voltage gain with the load attached, whereas 
 is the voltage gain
with the output terminals open circuited.
Power Gain
The power delivered to the input terminals by the signal source is called the input power 
 and the
power delivered to the load by the amplifier is the output power 
 The power gain G of an amplifier is
the ratio of the output power to the input power:
Because we are assuming that the input impedance and load are purely resistive, the average power at
either set of terminals is simply the product of the root-mean-square (rms) current and rms voltage.
Thus, we can write
Notice that we have used uppercase symbols, such as 
 and 
 for the rms values of the currents and
voltages. We use lowercase symbols, such as 
 and 
 for the instantaneous values. Of course, since
we have assumed so far that the instantaneous output is a constant times the instantaneous input, the
ratio of the rms voltages is the same as the ratio of the instantaneous voltages, and both ratios are
equal to the voltage gain of the amplifier.
 Example 10.1 Calculating Amplifier Performance
Ai=ioii=vo/RLvi/Ri=Av RiRL
(10.3)
Av=vovi
Av
Avoc
Av
Avoc
Pi,
Po.
G=popi
(10.4)
G=PoPi=VoIoViIi=AvAi=(Av)2 RiRL
(10.5)
Vo
Io,
vo
io,

A source with an internal voltage of 
 and an internal resistance of 
 is
connected to the input terminals of an amplifier having an open-circuit voltage gain of 
 an
input resistance of 
 and an output resistance of 
 The load resistance is 
Find the voltage gains 
 and 
 Also, find the current gain and power gain.
Solution
First, we draw the circuit containing the source, amplifier, and load as shown in Figure 10.4. We can
apply the voltage-divider principle to the input circuit to write
Figure 10.4
Source, amplifier, and load for Example 10.1.
The voltage produced by the voltage-controlled source is given by
Next, the output voltage can be found by using the voltage-divider principle, resulting in
Now, we can find the required voltage gains:
and
Using Equations 10.3 and 10.5, we find that the current gain and power gain are
Vs=1 mV rms
Rs=1 MΩ
Avoc=104,
Ri=2 MΩ,
Ro=2 Ω.
RL=8 Ω.
Avs=Vo/Vs
Av=Vo/Vi.
Vi=RiRi+Rs Vs=0.667 mV rms
AvocVi=104 Vi=6.67 V rms
Vo=Avoc Vi RLRL+Ro=5.33 V rms
Av=VoVi=Avoc RLRo+RL=8000
Avs=VoVs=Avoc RiRi+Rs RLRo+RL=5333
Ai=Av RiRL=2×109
G=AvAi=16×1012

Notice that the current gain is very large, because the high input resistance allows only a small
amount of input current to flow, whereas the relatively small load resistance allows the output current
to be relatively large.
Loading Effects
Notice that not all of the internal voltage of the source appears at the input terminals of the amplifier in
Example 10.1. This is because the finite input resistance of the amplifier allows current to flow into the
input terminals, resulting in a voltage drop across the internal resistance 
 of the source. Similarly, the
voltage produced by the controlled source does not all appear across the load. These reductions in
voltage are called loading effects. Because of loading effects, the voltage gains (
 or 
) realized
are less than the internal gain 
 of the amplifier.
Because of loading effects, the voltage gains realized (
 or 
) are smaller in
magnitude than the internal gain 
 of the amplifier.
Exercise 10.2
An amplifier has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance of 
 and an open-circuit voltage
gain of 500. The source has an internal voltage of 
 and a resistance of 
 The
load resistance is 
 Find the voltage gains 
 and 
 Find the current gain and
the power gain.
Answer
Exercise 10.3
Assume that we can change the load resistance in Exercise 10.2. What value of load resistance
maximizes the power gain? What is the power gain for this load resistance?
Answer
Rs
Av
Avs
Avoc
Av
Avs
Avoc
2000 Ω,
25 Ω,
Vs=20 mV rms
Rs=500 Ω.
RL=75 Ω.
Av=Vo/Vi
Avs=Vo/Vs.
Av=375, Avs=300, Ai=104, G=3.75×106.
RL=25 Ω, G=5×106.


10.2 Cascaded Amplifiers
Sometimes, we connect the output of one amplifier to the input of another as shown in Figure 10.5. This
is called a cascade connection of the amplifiers. The overall voltage gain of the cascade connection is
given by
Figure 10.5
Cascade connection of two amplifiers.
When the output of one amplifier is connected to the input of another amplifier,
we say that the amplifiers are cascaded.
By multiplying and dividing by 
 this becomes
Moreover, referring to Figure 10.5, we see that 
 Therefore, we can write
However, 
 is the gain of the first stage, and 
 is the gain of the second stage, so
we have
Av=vo2vi1
vo1,
Av=vo1vi1×vo2vo1
vi2=vo1.
Av=vo1vi1×vo2vi2
Av1=vo1/vi1
Av2=vo2/vi2
Av=Av1Av2
(10.6)

Thus, the overall voltage gain of cascaded amplifier stages is the product of the voltage gains of the
individual stages. (Of course, it is necessary to include loading effects in computing the gain of each
stage. Notice that the input resistance of the second stage loads the first stage.)
It is necessary to include loading effects in computing the gain of each stage.
Similarly, the overall current gain of a cascade connection of amplifiers is the product of the current
gains of the individual stages. Furthermore, the overall power gain is the product of the individual power
gains.
Example 10.2 Calculating Performance of Cascaded Amplifiers
Consider the cascade connection of the two amplifiers shown in Figure 10.6. Find the current gain,
voltage gain, and power gain of each stage and for the overall cascade connection.
Figure 10.6
Cascaded amplifiers of Examples 10.2 and 10.3.
Solution
Considering loading by the input resistance of the second stage, the voltage gain of the first stage is
where we have used the fact that 
 as indicated in Figure 10.6. Similarly,
Av1=vo1vi1=vi2vi1=Avoc1Ri2Ri2+Ro1=150
Avoc1=200,
Av2=vo2vi2=Avoc2 RLRL+Ro2=50

The overall voltage gain is
Because 
 is the load resistance for the first stage, we can find the current gain of the first stage
by use of Equation 10.3:
Similarly, the current gain of the second stage is found as
The overall current gain is
Now, the power gains can be found as
and
Simplified Models for Cascaded Amplifier Stages
Sometimes, we will want to find a simplified model for a cascaded amplifier. The input resistance of the
cascade is the input resistance of the first stage, and the output resistance of the cascade is the output
resistance of the last stage. The open-circuit voltage gain of the cascade is computed with an open-
circuit load on the last stage. However, loading effects of each stage on the preceding stage must be
considered. Once the open-circuit voltage gain of the overall cascade connection is found, a simplified
model can be drawn.
Av=Av1Av2=7500
Ri2
Ai1=Av1 Ri1Ri2=105
Ai2=Av2 Ri2RL=750
Ai=Ai1Ai2=75×106
G1=Av1Ai1=1.5×107
G2=Av2Ai2=3.75×104
G=G1G2=5.625×1011

Simplified models can be found for cascaded amplifiers.
Example 10.3 Simplified Model for an Amplifier Cascade
Find the overall simplified model for the cascade connection of Figure 10.6.
Solution
The voltage gain of the first stage, accounting for the loading of the second stage, is
First, determine the voltage gain of the first stage accounting for loading by
the second stage.
With an open-circuit load, the gain of the second stage is
The overall voltage gain is the product of the gains of the separate stages.
The overall open-circuit voltage gain is
The input resistance of the cascade amplifier is
Av1=Avoc1 Ri2Ri2+Ro1=150
Av2=Avoc2=100
Avoc=Av1Av2=15×103

and the output resistance is
The input impedance is that of the first stage, and the output impedance is
that of the last stage.
The simplified model for the cascade is shown in Figure 10.7
Figure 10.7
Simplified model for the cascaded amplifiers of Figure 10.6. See Example 10.3.
Exercise 10.4
Three amplifiers with the following characteristics are cascaded:
Amplifier 1: 
Amplifier 2: 
Amplifier 3: 
Find the parameters for the simplified model of the cascaded amplifier. Assume that the amplifiers are
cascaded in the order 1, 2, 3.
Answer
Exercise 10.5
Ri=Ri1=1 MΩ
Ro=Ro2=100 Ω
Avoc1=10, Ri1=1 KΩ, Ro1=100 Ω
Avoc2=20, Ri2=2 KΩ, Ro2=200 Ω
Avoc3=30, Ri3=3 KΩ, Ro3=300 Ω
Ri=1 kΩ, Ro=300 Ω, Avoc=5357.

Repeat Exercise 10.4 if the order of the amplifiers is 3, 2, 1.
Answer
Ri=3 k Ω, Ro=100 Ω, Avoc=4348.

10.3 Power Supplies and Efficiency
Power is supplied to the internal circuitry of amplifiers from power supplies. The power supply typically
delivers current from several dc voltages to the amplifier; an example configuration is shown in Figure
10.8. The average power supplied to the amplifier by each voltage source is the product of the average
current and the voltage. The total power supplied is the sum of the powers supplied by each voltage
source. For example, the total average power supplied to the amplifier of Figure 10.8 is
Figure 10.8
The power supply delivers power to the amplifier from several dc voltage sources.
The number of terms in this equation depends on the number of supply voltages
applied to the amplifier.
Notice that we have assumed that the current directions in the supply voltages are such that both
sources deliver power to the amplifier. Rarely, a condition occurs for which some of the power taken
Ps=VAAIA+VBBIB
(10.7)

from one supply source is returned to another source. We may only have a single supply voltage or
there can be several, so the number of terms in a supply-power calculation such as Equation 10.7 is
variable. It is customary to use uppercase symbols with repeated uppercase subscripts, such as 
for dc supply voltages in electronic circuits.
We have seen that the power gain of typical amplifiers can be very large. Thus, the output power
delivered to the load is much greater than the power taken from the signal source. This additional power
is taken from the power supply. Power taken from the power supply can also be dissipated as heat in
the internal circuits of the amplifier. Such dissipation is an undesirable effect that we usually try to
minimize when designing the internal circuitry of an amplifier.
Power flows into an amplifier from dc power supplies and from the signal source.
Part of this power is delivered to the load as a useful signal, and part is
dissipated as heat.
The sum of the power entering the amplifier from the signal source 
 and the power from the power
supply 
 must be equal to the sum of the output power 
 and the power dissipated 
This is illustrated in Figure 10.9. Often, the input power 
 from the signal source is insignificant
compared with the other terms in this equation.
Figure 10.9
Illustration of power flow.
To summarize, we can view an amplifier as a system that takes power from the dc power supply and
converts part of this power into output signal power. For example, a stereo audio system converts part
of the power taken from the power supply into signal power that is finally converted to sound by the
VCC,
Pi
Ps
Po
Pd :
Pi+Ps=Po+Pd
(10.8)
Pi

loudspeakers.
Efficiency
The efficiency  of an amplifier is the percentage of the power supplied that is converted into output
power, or
Example 10.4 Amplifier Efficiency
Find the input power, output power, supply power, and power dissipated in the amplifier shown in
Figure 10.10. Also, find the efficiency of the amplifier. (The values given in this example are typical
of one channel of a stereo amplifier under high-output test conditions.)
Figure 10.10
Amplifier of Example 10.4.
Solution
The average signal power delivered to the amplifier is given by
(Recall that 
) The output voltage is
η
η=PoPs×100 percent
(10.9)
Pi=Vi2Ri=10−11 W=10 pW
1 pW=1 picowatt=10−12 W.

Then, we find the average output power as
The supply power is given by
Notice that (as often happens) the power of the input signal is insignificant compared with the output
and supply powers. The power dissipated as heat in the amplifier is
and the efficiency of the amplifier is
Exercise 10.6
A certain amplifier is supplied with 1.5 A from a 15-V supply. The output signal power is 2.5 W, and the
input signal power is 0.5 W. Find the power dissipated in the amplifier and the efficiency.
Answer
Vo=Avoc Vi RLRL+Ro=8 V rms
Po=Vo2RL=8 W
Ps=VAAIA+VBBIB=15+7.5=22.5 W
Pd=Ps+Pi−Po=14.5 W
η=PoPs×100 percent=35.6 percent
Pd=20.5 W, η=11.1 percent.

10.4 Additional Amplifier Models
Current-Amplifier Model
Until now, we have modeled amplifiers as shown in Figure 10.3, in which the gain property of the
amplifier is represented by a voltage-controlled voltage source. An alternative model known as a
current amplifier is shown in Figure 10.11. In this model, the gain property is modeled by a current-
controlled current source. As before, the input resistance accounts for the current that the amplifier
draws from the signal source. The output resistance is now in parallel with the controlled source and
accounts for the fact that the amplifier cannot supply a fixed current to an arbitrarily high-load resistance.
Figure 10.11
Current-amplifier model.
If the load is a short circuit, no current flows through 
 and the ratio of output current to input current is
 For this reason, 
 is known as the short-circuit current gain. An amplifier, initially modeled as
a voltage amplifier, can also be modeled as a current amplifier. The input resistance and output
resistance are the same for both models. The short-circuit current gain can be found from the voltage-
amplifier model by connecting a short circuit to the output and computing the current gain.
 is the current gain of the amplifier with the output short circuited.
Notice that we have converted the Thévenin circuit of the voltage-amplifier model to a Norton circuit in
the current-amplifier model.
Ro,
Aisc.
Aisc
Aisc

Example 10.5 Determining the Current-Amplifier Model from the Voltage-Amplifier Model
A certain amplifier is modeled by the voltage-amplifier model shown in Figure 10.12. Find the
current-amplifier model.
Figure 10.12
Voltage amplifier of Examples 10.5, 10.6, and 10.7.
Solution
Connect a short circuit across the output terminals and analyze the circuit to
determine 
To find the short-circuit current gain, we connect a short circuit to the output terminals of the
amplifier as shown in Figure 10.12. Then, we find that
The short-circuit current gain is
The resulting current-amplifier model is shown in Figure 10.13.
Aisc
ii=viRi and iosc=AvocviRo
Aisc=ioscii=Avoc RiRo=103

Figure 10.13
Current-amplifier model equivalent to the voltage-amplifier model of Figure 10.12.
Exercise 10.7
A certain amplifier modeled as a current amplifier has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance
of 
 and a short-circuit current gain of 200. Find the parameters for the voltage-amplifier model.
Answer
Transconductance-Amplifier Model
Another model for an amplifier, known as a transconductance amplifier, is shown in Figure 10.14. In
this case, the gain is modeled by a voltage-controlled current source, and the gain parameter 
 is
called the short-circuit transconductance gain. 
 is the ratio of the short-circuit output current
 to the input voltage 
Figure 10.14
Transconductance-amplifier model.
The units of transconductance gain are siemens. The input resistance and output resistance model the
same effects as they do in the voltage-amplifier and ­current-amplifier models. A given amplifier can be
modeled as a transconductance amplifier if the input resistance, output resistance, and short-circuit
transconductance gain can be found.
The input resistance is the resistance seen looking into the input terminals. It has the same value for all
models of a given amplifier. Similarly, the output resistance is the Thévenin resistance seen looking
back into the output terminals and is the same for all the models.
1 kΩ,
20 Ω,
Avoc=4, Ri=1 kΩ, Ro=20 Ω.
Gmsc
Gmsc
iosc
vi :
Gmsc=ioscvi

 Example 10.6 Determining the Transconductance-Amplifier Model
Find the transconductance model for the amplifier of Figure 10.12.
Solution
The short-circuit transconductance gain is given by
Connect a short circuit across the output terminals, and analyze the circuit to
determine 
The output current for a short-circuit load is
Thus, we find that
The resulting amplifier model is shown in Figure 10.15.
Figure 10.15
Transconductance-amplifier equivalent to the voltage amplifier of Figure 10.12. See Example 10.6.
Exercise 10.8
A current amplifier has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance of 
 and a short-circuit
Gmsc=ioscvi
Gmsc
iosc=AvocviRo
Gmsc=AvocRo=1.0 S
500 Ω,
50 Ω,

current gain of 100. Find the parameters for the transconductance-amplifier model.
Answer
 and 
Transconductance-Amplifier Model
Finally, we can model an amplifier as a transresistance amplifier as shown in Figure 10.16. In this
case, the gain property is modeled by a current-controlled voltage source. The gain parameter 
 is
called the open-circuit transresistance gain and has units of ohms. It is the ratio of the open-circuit
output voltage 
 to the input current 
Figure 10.16
Transresistance-amplifier model.
The values of the input resistance and output resistance are the same as in any of the other amplifier
models.
Example 10.7 Determining the Transresistance-Amplifier Model
Find the transresistance-amplifier model for the amplifier shown in Figure 10.12.
Open circuit the output terminals, and analyze the circuit to determine 
Solution
Gmsc=0.2 S, Ri=500 Ω,
Ro=50 Ω.
Rmoc
vooc
ii :
Rmoc=voocii
Rmoc

With an open-circuit load, the output voltage is
and the input current is
Thus, we find the transresistance gain as
The resulting transresistance model of the amplifier is shown in Figure 10.17.
Figure 10.17
Transresistance amplifier that is equivalent to the voltage amplifier of Figure 10.12. See Example
10.7.
Exercise 10.9
An amplifier has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance of 
 and 
 Find
 for this amplifier.
Answer
We have seen that an amplifier can be modeled by any of the four models: voltage amplifier, current
amplifier, transconductance amplifier, or transresistance amplifier. However, in cases for which either of
the resistances (input or output) is zero or infinity, it is not possible to make conversions to all the
models because the gain parameter is not defined for all the models. For example, if 
 then 
and the voltage gain 
 is not defined.
vooc=Avocvi
ii=viRi
Rmoc=voocii=AvocRi=100 kΩ
1 MΩ,
10 Ω,
Gmsc=0.05 S.
Rmoc
Rmoc=500 kΩ.
Ri=0,
vi=0,
Avoc=vo/vi

10.5 Importance of Amplifier Impedances in Various Applications
Applications Calling for High or Low Input Impedance
Some applications call for amplifiers with high input impedance, while others call
for low input impedance.
Sometimes, we have an application for an amplifier that calls for the internal voltage produced by the
source to be amplified. For example, an electrocardiograph amplifies and records the small voltages
generated by a person's heart. These voltages are detected by placing electrodes on the person's skin.
The impedance of the electrodes is variable from person to person and can be quite high. If the input
impedance of the electrocardiograph is low, a variable reduction in voltage occurs because of loading.
Thus, the amplitude of the signal can be affected by the contact resistance of the electrodes with the
skin and therefore does not truly represent the electrical activity of the heart. On the other hand, if the
input impedance of the electrocardiograph is much higher than the source impedance, the actual
voltage produced by the heart appears at the input terminals. Thus, the input impedance of an
electrocardiograph amplifier should be very high.
Other applications call for the amplifier to respond to the short-circuit current of a source. Then a very
low input impedance is needed. An example is an electronic ammeter inserted in series with a circuit to
measure current. Usually, we do not want the ammeter to change the current that is being measured.
This is accomplished by designing the ammeter to have a low enough input impedance so that it does
not change the impedance of the circuit significantly.
To summarize, if the input impedance of an amplifier is much higher than the internal impedance of the
source, the voltage produced across the input terminals is nearly the same as the internal source
voltage. This is illustrated in Figure 10.18(a). On the other hand, if the input impedance is very low, the
input current is nearly equal to the short-circuit current of the source. This is illustrated in Figure
10.18(b).

Figure 10.18
If we want to sense the open-circuit voltage of a source, the amplifier should have a high input
resistance, as in (a). To sense the short-circuit current of the source, low input resistance is called for,
as in (b).
Applications Calling for High or Low Output Impedance
Diverse requirements for output impedance also occur. For example, we could have an audio amplifier
that supplies background music to loudspeakers in many rooms of an office building, as shown in
Figure 10.19. A switch is provided so that each loudspeaker can be turned off independent of the others
(by opening its switch). Therefore, the load impedance presented to the amplifier is quite variable,
depending on the number of loudspeakers turned on. If the amplifier output impedance is high
compared with the load, the voltage supplied depends on the load impedance. Thus, as loudspeakers
are turned off, the voltage applied to the others becomes higher, resulting in louder music. This effect
could be undesirable. On the other hand, if the output impedance of the amplifier is very low compared
with the load impedance, the output voltage is nearly independent of the load. Thus, in this situation, a
low output impedance is better.
Figure 10.19
If the amplifier output resistance 
 is much less than the (lowest) load resistance, the load voltage is
nearly independent of the number of switches closed.
Another example occurs in optical communication systems, where a light-emitting diode (LED) can be
used to produce a light wave with intensity proportional to a message signal such as a voice waveform.
Over a certain range of operation, the intensity of the light output of an LED is proportional to the current
through it. Because LEDs have a nonlinear relationship between voltage and current, light intensity is
Ro

not proportional to the voltage across the LED. Thus, it is desirable to force a current proportional to the
message waveform to flow through the diode. This can be achieved by designing an amplifier with a
very high output impedance to drive the LED. (On the other hand, if a very low output impedance were
used, the voltage supplied to the diode would be proportional to the input signal to the amplifier, but
because of the nonlinear relationship between current and voltage for the diode, the light output would
no longer be proportional to the message.)
Some applications call for amplifiers with high output impedance while other
applications call for low output impedance.
To summarize, we can force a desired voltage waveform to appear across a variable load by designing
the amplifier to have a very low output impedance compared with the load impedance. On the other
hand, we can force a given current waveform through a variable load by designing the amplifier to have
a very high output impedance compared with the load impedance.
Applications Calling for a Particular Impedance
Some applications call for amplifiers that have specific input and output
impedances.
Not all applications call for amplifiers with either very small or very large impedances. For example,
consider an amplifier whose input is connected to a source by a transmission line as shown in Figure
10.20. An example of a transmission line with which you may be familiar is coaxial cable, commonly
used to connect TV sets to cable systems or to digital television (DTV) antennas. Each type of
transmission line has a characteristic impedance, which is typically 
 for the coaxial line used in
television applications. Unless the transmission line is terminated in its characteristic impedance, a
signal traveling along a transmission line is partially reflected and travels back toward the source. This is
illustrated in Figure 10.20. When connecting a signal source, such as a set-top box or antenna, to a
television set, the reflections from the TV set can be reflected again at the source, so the signal arrives a
75 Ω

second time at the set. These extra signals are delayed because of the round-trip travel along the
transmission line and can cause degradation of picture quality. In the case of analog signals, the effect
of the reflection is a faint image known as a "ghost" slightly to the right-hand side of the main image.
Digital signals can become so corrupted by these reflections that the set cannot decode them.
Therefore, it is important for the input impedance of the television set and the output impedance of the
source to be nearly equal to the characteristic impedance of the transmission line so that significant
reflections do not occur.
Figure 10.20
To avoid reflections, the amplifier input resistance 
 should equal the characteristic resistance 
 of the
transmission line.
The output impedance of an audio amplifier is another situation that sometimes calls for an intermediate
value. The frequency response of a loudspeaker depends on the output impedance of the amplifier
driving it. Thus, if high fidelity is a primary consideration, the amplifier should be designed so that it has
the output impedance that gives the most nearly constant response versus frequency.
Ri
Z0

10.6 Ideal Amplifiers
We have seen in Section 10.5 that certain applications call for amplifiers with very high or very low input
impedance (compared with the source impedance) and very high or very low output impedance
(compared with the load). Such amplifiers can be classified as follows:
1. An ideal voltage amplifier senses the open-circuit voltage of the source and produces an
amplified voltage across the load independent of the load impedance. Thus, the ideal voltage
amplifier has infinite input impedance (so the open-circuit voltage appears across the input
terminals) and zero output impedance (so the output voltage is independent of the load
impedance).
2. An ideal current amplifier senses the short-circuit current of the source and forces an amplified
version of this current to flow through the load. Thus, the ideal current amplifier has zero input
impedance and infinite output impedance.
3. An ideal transconductance amplifier senses the open-circuit voltage of the source and forces
a current proportional to this voltage to flow through the load. Thus, the ideal transconductance
amplifier has infinite input impedance and infinite output impedance.
4. An ideal transresistance amplifier senses the short-circuit current of the source and causes a
voltage proportional to this current to appear across the load. Thus, the ideal transresistance
amplifier has zero input impedance and zero output impedance. Table 10.1 shows the input
impedance, output impedance, and gain parameter for each type of ideal amplifier.
Table 10.1 Characteristics of Ideal Amplifiers
Amplifier Type
Input Impedance
Output Impedance
Gain Parameter
Voltage
0
Current
0
Transconductance
Transresistance
0
0
∞
Avoc
∞
Aisc
∞
∞
Gmsc
Rmoc

According to their input and output impedances, ideal amplifiers can be classified
into four types. These are the ideal voltage amplifier, the ideal current amplifier,
the ideal transconductance amplifier, and the ideal transresistance amplifier. The
best amplifier type to select depends on the application.
Classifying Real Amplifiers
In practice, amplifiers do not have either zero or infinite impedances. However, real amplifiers can often
be classified as approximately ideal amplifiers. For example, if the input impedance is very large
(compared with the source impedance) and the output impedance is very small (compared with the
load), we have an approximate ideal voltage amplifier.
Notice that a given amplifier cannot be classed as an approximate ideal amplifier unless the source and
load impedances to be encountered are known in advance. For example, an amplifier with an input
impedance of 
 and an output impedance of 
 would be classed as an approximate ideal
voltage amplifier if the source impedances to be encountered are much less than 
 and the load
impedances are much greater than 
 On the other hand, if the source impedances are on the order
of 
 and the load impedances are on the order of 
 the same amplifier would be properly classed
as an approximate ideal current amplifier.
The proper classification of a given amplifier depends on the ranges of source
and load impedances with which the amplifier is used.
In general, the "middle range" of impedances in low-power electronic circuits runs from 
 to 
Impedances less than 
 are usually considered to be "small," and impedances greater than 
are classed as "large." Thus, we would usually be inclined to classify an amplifier with an input
impedance of 
 and an output impedance of 
 as an approximate ideal current amplifier.
However, we might want to change this classification, depending on the actual load and source
impedances.
Exercise 10.10
1000 Ω
100 Ω
1000 Ω
100 Ω.
1 MΩ
1 Ω,
1 kΩ
100 kΩ.
100 Ω
1 MΩ
10 Ω
2 MΩ

A certain amplifier has an input resistance of 
 and an output resistance of 
 is the
source resistance, and 
 is the load. Classify the amplifier if:
a. 
 is less than 
 and 
 is greater than 
b. 
 is greater than 
 and 
 is less than 
c. 
 is less than 
 and 
 is less than 
d. 
 is greater than 
 and 
 is greater than 
e. 
 is approximately 
 and 
 is less than 
Answer
a. Approximate ideal voltage amplifier;
b. approximate ideal current amplifier;
c. approximate ideal transconductance amplifier;
d. approximate ideal transresistance amplifier;
e. for this source resistance, the amplifier does not fit into any ideal amplifier category.
Exercise 10.11
A particular transducer is to be used in measuring liquid level in a chemical process. The short-circuit
current of the transducer is proportional to the liquid level. (However, the open-circuit voltage of the
transducer is nearly independent of the level.) An amplifier is needed to deliver a voltage signal
proportional to liquid level to a resistive load that may vary in value between 
 and 
 What type
of ideal amplifier is needed?
Answer
A transresistance amplifier is needed, because we want the input impedance of the amplifier to be small
enough so it responds to the short-circuit transducer current. Furthermore, to deliver an output voltage
independent of the load, the output impedance of the amplifier must be very small compared with the
load impedance.
Ri=1 kΩ
Ro=1 kΩ. Rs
RL
Rs
10 Ω
RL
100 kΩ;
Rs
100 kΩ
RL
10 Ω;
Rs
10 Ω
RL
10 Ω;
Rs
100 kΩ
RL
100 kΩ;
Rs
1 kΩ
RL
10 Ω.
1 kΩ
10 kΩ.

10.7 Frequency Response
So far, we have considered the gain parameter of an amplifier to be a constant. However, if we apply a
variable-frequency sinusoidal input signal to an amplifier, we will find that gain is a function of frequency.
Moreover, the amplifier affects the phase as well as the amplitude of the sinusoid. Therefore, we now
give a more general definition of amplifier gain. We define complex gain to be the ratio of the phasor for
the output signal to the phasor for the input signal:
We use uppercase bold symbols to stand for the phasors of the input and output voltages. Similarly, we
define complex current gain, transconductance gain, and transresistance gain as the ratio of the
appropriate phasor quantities. We have used the term complex gain to emphasize the fact that these
gains have both magnitude and phase. Shortly, we will drop the word complex, for simplicity. Actually,
complex gain is the same concept as that of a transfer function, which we discussed in Chapter 6.
Recall that to express a transfer function in decibels, we take 20 times the common logarithm of its
magnitude.
Complex voltage gain is the output-voltage phasor divided by the input-voltage
phasor. Complex gain has magnitude and phase.
Example 10.8 Determining Complex Gain
The input voltage to a certain amplifier is
and the output voltage is
Find the complex voltage gain of the amplifier and express the magnitude of the gain in decibels.
Av=VoVi
(10.10)
vi(t)=0.1 cos(2000πt−30°)
vo(t)=10 cos(2000πt+15°)

Solution
Recall that the phasor for the input voltage is a complex number whose magnitude is the peak value
of the sinusoidal signal and whose angle is the phase angle of the sinusoidal signal. Thus,
Similarly,
Now, we can find the complex voltage gain as
The meaning of this complex voltage gain is that the output signal is 100 times larger in amplitude
than the input signal. Furthermore, the output signal is phase shifted by 45° relative to the input
signal.
To express gain in decibels, we first find the magnitude of the gain by dropping the angle and then
compute decibel gain:
Gain as a Function of Frequency
If we plot the magnitude of the gain of a typical amplifier versus frequency, a plot such as the one shown
in Figure 10.21 results. Notice that the gain magnitude is constant over a wide range of frequencies
known as the midband region.
Vi=0.1∠−30°¯
Vo=10∠15°¯
Av=VoVi=10∠15°¯0.1∠−30°¯=100∠45°¯
|Av|dB=20 log |Av|=20 log(100)=40 dB

Figure 10.21
Gain magnitude versus frequency.
Many amplifiers have a midband range in which the gain magnitude is constant.
AC Coupling versus Direct Coupling
Amplifiers may be ac coupled or dc coupled.
In some cases, such as the one shown in Figure 10.21(a), the gain drops to zero at dc (zero frequency).
Such amplifiers are said to be ac coupled because only ac signals are amplified. These amplifiers are
often constructed by cascading several amplifier circuits or stages that are connected together by

coupling capacitors so that the dc voltages of the amplifier circuits do not affect the signal source,
adjacent stages, or the load. This is illustrated in Figure 10.22. (Sometimes, transformers are used to
couple individual stages together, which also leads to an ac-coupled amplifier with zero gain at dc.
Transformers are discussed in Chapter 14.)
Figure 10.22
Capacitive coupling prevents a dc input component from affecting the first stage, dc voltages in the first
stage from reaching the second stage, and dc voltages in the second stage from reaching the load.
Other amplifiers have constant gain all the way down to dc, as shown in Figure 10.21(b). They are said
to be dc coupled or direct coupled. Amplifiers that are realized as integrated circuits are often dc
coupled because the capacitors or transformers needed for ac coupling cannot be fabricated in
integrated form.
Audio amplifiers are almost always ac coupled because audible sounds span the frequency range from
about 20 Hz to 15 kHz. Therefore, there is no need to provide gain down to dc, and furthermore, it is not
desirable to apply dc voltages to the loudspeakers.
Electrocardiograph amplifiers are deliberately ac coupled because a dc voltage of nearly a volt often
occurs at the input due to electrochemical potentials developed by the electrodes. The ac signal
generated by the heart is on the order of 1 mV, and therefore, the gain of the amplifier is high typically,
1000 or more. A 1-V dc input would cause the amplifier to try to produce an output of 1000 V. It would
be difficult (and highly undesirable) to design an amplifier capable of such large outputs. Therefore, it is
necessary to ac couple the input circuit of an electrocardiograph to prevent the dc component from
overloading the amplifier.
Amplifiers for (analog) video signals need to be dc coupled because video signals have frequency
components from dc into the MHz range. Dark pictures result in a different dc component than bright
pictures. To obtain pictures with the proper brightness, it is necessary to use a dc-coupled amplifier to
preserve the dc component.
High-Frequency Region

As indicated in Figure 10.21(a) and (b), the gain of an amplifier always drops off at high frequencies.
This is caused either by small amounts of capacitance in parallel with the signal path or by small
inductances in series with the signal path in the amplifier circuitry, as illustrated in Figure 10.23. Recall
that the impedance of a capacitor is inversely proportional to frequency, resulting in an effective short
circuit at sufficiently high frequencies. The impedance of an inductor is proportional to frequency, so it
becomes an open circuit at very high frequencies.
Figure 10.23
Capacitance in parallel with the signal path and inductance in series with the signal path reduce the gain
in the high-frequency region.
Gain magnitude declines for all amplifiers at sufficiently high frequencies.
Some of these small capacitances occur because of stray wiring capacitance between signal-carrying
conductors and ground. Other capacitances are integral parts of the active devices (transistors)
necessary for amplification. Small inductances result from the magnetic fields surrounding the
conductors in the circuit. For example, a critically placed piece of wire one-half inch long can have
enough inductance to limit severely the frequency response of an amplifier intended to operate at
several gigahertz.
Half-Power Frequencies and Bandwidth
Usually, we specify the approximate useful frequency range of an amplifier by giving the frequencies for
which the voltage (or current) gain magnitude is 
 the midband gain magnitude. These are
known as the half-power frequencies because the output power level is half the value for the midband
region if a constant-amplitude variable-frequency input test signal is used. Expressing the factor 
 in
1/2 times
1/2

decibels, we have 
 Thus, at the half-power frequencies, the voltage (or current)
gain is approximately 3 dB lower than the midband gain. The bandwidth B of an amplifier is the distance
between the half-power frequencies. These definitions are illustrated in Figure 10.24.
Figure 10.24
Gain versus frequency for a typical amplifier showing the upper and lower half-power (3-dB) frequencies
(
 and 
) and the half-power bandwidth B.
At the half-power frequencies, voltage-gain magnitude is 
 times the midband
value.
Wideband versus Narrowband Amplifiers
Amplifiers that are either dc coupled or have a lower half-power frequency that is a small fraction of the
upper half-power frequency are called wideband or baseband amplifiers. Wideband amplifiers are
used for signals that occupy a wide range of frequencies, such as audio signals (20 Hz to 15 kHz) or
video signals (dc into the MHz range).
On the other hand, the frequency response of an amplifier is sometimes deliberately limited to a small
bandwidth compared with the center frequency. Such an amplifier is called a narrowband or bandpass
amplifier. The gain versus frequency response of a bandpass amplifier is shown in Figure 10.25.
Bandpass amplifiers are used in radio receivers, where it is desired to amplify the signal from one
transmitter and reject the signals from other transmitters in adjacent frequency ranges.
20 log(1/2) = −3.01 dB.
fH
fL
1/2

Figure 10.25
Gain magnitude versus frequency for a bandpass amplifier.

10.8 Linear Waveform Distortion
Amplitude Distortion
If the gain of an amplifier has a different magnitude for the various frequency components of the input signal, a form of distortion
known as amplitude distortion occurs.
Audio systems often suffer from amplitude distortion because the amplifier, and particularly the loudspeakers, tend to reduce the
amplitudes of the high-pitched and low-pitched components relative to the midband components. This is especially true for
telephone systems. Hence, the music we hear while on hold is of poor quality.
Example 10.9 Amplitude Distortion
The input signal to a certain amplifier contains two frequency components and is given by
The gain of the amplifier at 1000 Hz is 
 and the gain at 3000 Hz is 
 Plot the input waveform and output
waveform to scale versus time.
Solution
The first term of the input signal is at a frequency of 1000 Hz, so it experiences a gain of 
 whereas the second term of
the input is at a frequency of 3000 Hz, so the gain for it is 
 Applying these gains and phase shifts to the terms of the
input signal, we find the output:
Plots of the input and output waveforms are shown in Figure 10.26. Notice that the output waveform has a different shape than
the input waveform because of amplitude distortion.
vi(t)=3 cos(2000πt)−2 cos(6000πt)
10∠0°¯,
2.5∠0°¯.
10∠0°¯,
2.5∠0°¯.
vo(t)=30 cos(2000πt)−5 cos(6000πt)

Figure 10.26
Linear amplitude distortion. See Example 10.9.
Phase Distortion
If the phase shift of an amplifier is not proportional to frequency, phase distortion occurs. Zero phase at all frequencies results in
an output waveform identical to the input. On the other hand, if the phase shift of the amplifier is proportional to frequency, the
output waveform is a time-shifted version of the input. However, we do not say that distortion has occurred because the shape of
the waveform is unchanged. If phase is not proportional to frequency, the waveform shape is changed in passing through the
amplifier and phase distortion has occurred.
Example 10.10 Phase Distortion
Suppose that the input signal given by
is applied to the inputs of three amplifiers having the gains shown in Table 10.2. Find and plot the output of each amplifier.
Table 10.2 Complex Gains of the Amplifiers Considered in Example 10.10
Amplifier
Gain at 1000 Hz
Gain at 3000 Hz
A
     
      
B
C
vi(t)=3 cos(2000πt)−cos(6000πt)
10∠0°¯
10∠0°¯
10∠−45°¯
10∠−135°¯
10∠−45°¯
10∠−45°¯

Solution
Applying the gains and phase shifts to the input signal, we find the output signals for the amplifiers to be
Plots of the output waveforms are shown in Figure 10.27. Amplifier A produces an output waveform identical to the input, and
amplifier B produces an output waveform identical to the input, except for a time delay. For amplifier A, the phase shift is zero
for both frequency components, whereas the phase shift of amplifier B is proportional to frequency. (The phase shift for the
3000-Hz component is three times the phase shift for the 1000-Hz component.) Amplifier C produces a distorted output
waveform because its phase response is not proportional to frequency.
Figure 10.27
Effect of amplifier phase response. See Example 10.10. [Note: Input waveform has the same shape as 
]
Amplitude and phase distortion are sometimes called linear distortion because they occur even though the amplifier is linear (i.e.,
voA(t)=30 cos(2000πt)−10 cos(6000πt)voB(t)=30 cos(2000πt−45°)−10 cos(6000πt−135°)voC(t)=30 cos(2000πt−45°)−10 cos(6000πt−45°)
vA(t).

obeys superposition). Later, we will see that another type of distortion, known as nonlinear distortion, can also occur in amplifiers.
If adding input signals always corresponds to adding the output signals, an amplifier is said to be linear.
Let us briefly consider the meaning of superposition, which we discussed in the context of resistive circuits in Section 2.7 starting
on page 103. For a given amplifier, suppose that the input 
 results in the output 
 and input 
 results in the output 
Then, if the input 
 always produces the output 
 we say that the amplifier obeys superposition or is linear. In
other words, if adding input signals always corresponds to adding the output signals, an amplifier is said to be linear. For example,
an amplifier for which 
 is linear because 
 However, an amplifier for which 
is not linear because 
Requirements for Distortionless Amplification
To avoid linear waveform distortion, an amplifier should have constant gain magnitude and a phase response that is linear versus
frequency for the range of frequencies contained in the input signal. Of course, departure from these requirements outside the
frequency range of the input signal components does not result in distortion. These requirements for distortionless amplification are
illustrated in Figure 10.28.
Figure 10.28
Linear distortion does not occur if the gain magnitude is constant and the phase is proportional to frequency over the frequency
range of the input signal.
vinA
voA
vinB
voB.
vinA+vinB
voA+voB,
vo(t)=10vin(t)
10(vinA+vinB)=10vinA+10vinB.
vo(t)=[vin(t) ]2
(vinA+vinB)2≠vinA2+vinB2.

To avoid linear waveform distortion, an amplifier should have constant gain magnitude and a phase
response that is linear versus frequency for the range of frequencies contained in the input signal.
In the examples we have given, the input signals contained only a few components at specific frequencies. However, most signals
of interest in electronic systems contain components spread over a continuous range of frequencies. For example, audio signals
contain components from about 20 Hz to about 15 kHz. Thus, we require an audio amplifier to have nearly constant gain magnitude
over that range. (However, since it turns out that the ear is not sensitive to phase distortion, we would not require the phase
response of an audio amplifier to be proportional to frequency.)
Analog video signals contain significant frequency components from dc to several MHz. Since the shape of the waveform ultimately
determines the brightness of various points in the picture, either phase distortion or amplitude distortion would affect the image.
Therefore, we require the gain magnitude to be constant and the phase response to be proportional to frequency over the stated
range for a video amplifier.
Definition of Gain Revisited
As a final comment, recall that we originally defined the gain of an amplifier to be the ratio of the output signal to the input:
However, if linear waveform distortion occurs (or even a time delay), the ratio of output to input is a function of time, rather than a
constant. Thus, we should not try to find the gain of an amplifier by taking the ratio of the instantaneous output and input. Instead,
we recognize that gain is a function of frequency and take the ratio of the phasors for a sinusoidal input signal to find the (complex)
gain for each frequency.
Exercise 10.12
Suppose that an input signal is given by
and the gain of an amplifier at 1000 Hz is 
 What are the required amplifier gain and phase shift at the frequencies of the
Av=vo(t)vi(t)
vi(t)=sin(1000πt)+cos(2000πt)+2 cos(3000πt)
5∠30°¯.

other components if both types of linear waveform distortion are to be avoided?
Answer
 for the 500-Hz component and 
 for the 1500-Hz component.
Exercise 10.13
The output of a certain amplifier is given by 
 Consider a sinusoidal input signal 
 and find the
complex gain (magnitude and phase) as a function of 
Answer
5∠15°¯
5∠45°¯
vo(t)=10vin(t−0.01).
vin(t)=Vm cos(ωt),
ω.
10∠−0.01ω¯.

10.9 Pulse Response
Often, we need to amplify a pulse signal such as the one shown in Figure 10.29(a). Pulses contain
components spread over a wide range of frequencies; therefore, amplification of pulses calls for a
wideband amplifier. A typical amplified output pulse is shown in Figure 10.29(b). The output waveform
differs from the input in several important respects: The pulse displays overshoot and ringing, the
leading and trailing edges are gradual rather than abrupt, and if the amplifier is ac coupled, the top of
the output pulse is tilted.
Figure 10.29
Input pulse and the corresponding output of a typical ac-coupled broadband amplifier.
Rise Time
The gradual rise of the leading edge of the amplifier response is often quantified by giving the rise time
 which is the time interval between the point 
 at which the amplifier achieves 10 percent of the
eventual output amplitude and the point 
 at which the output is 90 percent of the final value. This is
illustrated in Figure 10.30.
tr,
t10
t90

Figure 10.30
Rise time of the output pulse. (Note: No tilt is shown. When tilt is present, some judgment is necessary
to estimate the amplitude 
)
This approximate relationship is very useful in estimating bandwidth given rise
time or vice versa.
The rounding of the leading edge can be attributed to the roll-off of gain in the high-frequency region. A
rule-of-thumb relationship between the half-power bandwidth B and the rise time  of a wideband
amplifier is
This relationship is not exact for all types of wideband amplifiers, but it is a useful guide for estimating
performance. (It is accurate for first-order circuits; see Problem P10.80.)
Since pulse amplifiers are broadband, the bandwidth is almost equal to the upper half-power frequency.
Thus, it is mainly the high-frequency characteristics of the amplifier that restrict rise time.
Overshoot and Ringing
Vf.
tr
tr≅0.35B
(10.11)

Another aspect of the output pulse shown in Figure 10.29 is overshoot and ringing, which are also
related to the way the gain of the amplifier behaves in the high-frequency region. An amplifier that
displays pronounced overshoot and ringing usually has a peak in its gain characteristic, as shown in
Figure 10.31. The frequency of maximum gain approximately matches the ringing frequency.
Figure 10.31
Gain versus frequency for an amplifier that displays pronounced ringing in its pulse response. The
frequency of the ringing is approximately 
Because both rise time and overshoot are related to the high-frequency response, there is usually some
trade-off between these specifications. In a particular design, component values that reduce rise time
tend to produce more overshoot and ringing. However, more than about 10 percent overshoot is usually
undesirable.
Tilt
The tilt of the top of the output pulse, shown in Figure 10.32(a), occurs if the amplifier is ac coupled and
arises from charging of coupling capacitors during the pulse. (After all, if the pulse lasted indefinitely, it
would be the same as a new dc level at the input, and eventually the output voltage of an ac-coupled
amplifier would return to zero.) Tilt is specified as a percentage of the initial pulse amplitude,
fr.

Figure 10.32
Pulse responses of ac-coupled amplifiers. T is the input pulse duration, and  represents the shortest
time constant of the coupling circuits.
where 
 and P are defined in Figure 10.32(a). As the duration of the pulse is increased (or as the
lower half-power frequency of the amplifier is raised by changing the coupling circuits to have shorter
time constants), output waveforms such as those in Figure 10.32(b) and (c) result.
The pulse response of an amplifier may contain overshoot, ringing, and tilt. Rise
time is always nonzero.
For small amounts of tilt, the percentage tilt is related to the lower half-power frequency by the
approximate relation
where T is the duration of the pulse and 
 is the lower half-power frequency of the amplifier. (See
Problem P10.81 for a derivation of this formula for percentage tilt.)
Exercise 10.14
In a radar system, pulses of radio waves are transmitted and objects are detected by their reflected
τ
percentage tilt=ΔPP×100 percent
(10.12)
ΔP
percentage tilt≅200πfLT
(10.13)
fL

signals. After conversion of the reflected signals to baseband, they appear as pulses, and the time
interval between pulses indicates the distance between objects. To distinguish objects a given distance
apart, the maximum rise time allowed for the amplifiers is approximately equal to the time separation of
the reflections. For example, if it is desired to distinguish objects that are 10 m apart on a line from the
radar transmitter, the time separation of the echoes is 20 m (because the waves must make a round
trip) divided by the speed of light. This gives a required maximum rise time of approximately 66.7 ns.
Estimate the minimum bandwidth required for the amplifier.
Answer
Exercise 10.15
An amplifier is needed to amplify pulses with a duration of 
 with a sag (tilt) of not more than 1
percent. Estimate the highest value allowed for the lower half-power frequency of the amplifier.
Answer
B≅5.25 MHz.
100 μs
fL=15.9 Hz.

10.10 Transfer Characteristic and Nonlinear Distortion
The transfer characteristic of an amplifier is a plot of the instantaneous output amplitude versus the
instantaneous input amplitude. For an ideal amplifier, the output is simply a larger version of the input
waveform, and the transfer characteristic is a straight line whose slope is the gain. Real amplifiers have
transfer characteristics that depart from straight lines, particularly at large amplitudes. This is shown in
Figure 10.33. Curvature of the transfer characteristic results in an undesirable effect known as
nonlinear distortion.
Figure 10.33
Transfer characteristics. 
The transfer characteristic is a plot of instantaneous output amplitude versus
instantaneous input amplitude.
Sometimes, the departure from a straight characteristic can be very abrupt. Then the result of applying a
high-amplitude input signal is clipping of the output waveform, as shown in Figure 10.34. However,
even small departures from a straight characteristic can be very serious in some applications.
Av=10,000.

Figure 10.34
Illustration of input signal, amplifier transfer characteristic, and output signal, showing clipping for large
signal amplitude.
Curvature of the transfer characteristic results in nonlinear distortion.
Harmonic Distortion
The input output relationship of a nonlinear amplifier can be written as
where 
 and so on, are constants selected so that the equation matches the curvature of the
nonlinear transfer characteristic.
Consider the case for which the input signal is a sinusoid given by
vo=A1vi+A2(vi)2+A3(vi)3+...
(10.14)
A1, A2, A3,

Let us find an expression for the corresponding output signal. Substituting Equation 10.15 into 10.14,
applying trigonometric identities for 
 collecting terms, and defining 
 to be equal to the
sum of all of the constant terms, 
 to be the sum of the coefficients of the terms with frequency 
and so on, we find that
The desired output is the 
 term, which we call the fundamental component. The 
 term
represents a shift in the dc level (which does not appear at the load if it is ac coupled). In addition, terms
at multiples of the input frequency have resulted from the second and higher power terms of the transfer
characteristic. These terms are called harmonic distortion. The 
 term is called the second
harmonic, the 
 term is the third harmonic, and so on. The higher order terms in the transfer
characteristic given by Equation 10.14 produce the higher order harmonics. For example, the squared
term produces the second harmonic. Similarly, the cubic term generates the third harmonic.
For a sinewave input, nonlinear distortion produces output components having
frequencies that are integer multiples of the input frequency.
Harmonic distortion is objectionable in a wideband amplifier because the harmonics can fall in the
frequency range of the desired signal. In an audio amplifier, harmonic distortion degrades the aesthetic
qualities of the sound produced by the loudspeakers.
The second-harmonic distortion factor 
 is defined as the ratio of the amplitude of the second
harmonic to the amplitude of the fundamental. In equation form, we have
where 
 is the amplitude of the fundamental term of Equation 10.16 and 
 is the amplitude of the
second harmonic. Similarly, the third-harmonic distortion factor, and so on, are defined as
The total harmonic distortion (THD), denoted by D, is the ratio of the rms value of the sum of all the
vi(t)=Va cos(ωat)
(10.15)
[ cos(ωat) ]n,
V0
V1
ωa,
vo(t)=V0+V1 cos(ωat)+V2 cos(2ωat)+V3 cos(3ωat)+...
(10.16)
V1 cos(ωat)
V0
2ωa
3ωa
D2
D2=V2V1
(10.17)
V1
V2
D3=V3V1 D4=V4V1 ...
(10.18)

harmonic distortion terms to the rms value of the fundamental. The total harmonic distortion can be
found from
Total harmonic distortion is a specification that indicates the degree of nonlinear
distortion produced by an amplifier.
We will often find THD expressed as a percentage. A well-designed audio amplifier might have a THD
specification of 0.01 percent (i.e., 
) at rated power output. (Some years ago, THD of 5 percent
was typical for amplifiers found in inexpensive radios or phonographs.)
Notice that the THD specification of an amplifier depends on the amplitude of the output signal because
the degree of nonlinearity of the transfer characteristic is amplitude dependent. Certainly, any amplifier
eventually clips the output signal if the input signal becomes large enough. When severe clipping
occurs, THD becomes large.
Exercise 10.16
A certain amplifier has a transfer characteristic given by
a. Find the THD rating of the amplifier for a sinusoidal input voltage 
b. Repeat for 
 [Hint: Use the fact that 
 This amplifier
produces no third or higher harmonic distortion. Thus, 
 etc.]
Answer
a. 
b. 
 Notice that the THD is larger for the larger input amplitude.
D=D22+D32+D42+D52+...
(10.19)
D=0.0001
vo=100vi+vi2
vi(t)=cos(ωt).
vi(t)=5 cos(ωt).
cos2 x=1/2+(1/2) cos(2x).
D3=0, D4=0,
D=0.005;
D=0.025.

10.11 Differential Amplifiers
Until now, we have considered amplifiers that have only one input source. Now we consider differential
amplifiers, which have two input sources, as shown in Figure 10.35. An ideal differential amplifier
produces an output voltage proportional to the difference between the input voltages. This is
demonstrated by
Figure 10.35
Differential amplifier with input sources.
A differential amplifier has two input terminals: an inverting input and a
noninverting input.
Ideally, a differential amplifier produces an output that is proportional to the
difference between two input signals.
Notice that gain is positive for the voltage applied to terminal 1 and negative for the voltage applied to
vo(t)=Ad[ vi1(t)−vi2(t) ]=Advi1(t)−Advi2(t)
(10.20)

terminal 2. Therefore, terminal 2 is called an inverting input, and terminal 1 is called a noninverting
input. Inverting input terminals are marked with a  (minus) sign, and noninverting input terminals are
marked with a  (plus) sign, as indicated in Figure 10.35.
The difference between the input voltages, known as the differential signal, is given by
We refer to the gain 
 as the differential gain. Thus, we can write the output of the ideal differential
amplifier as
The common-mode signal 
 is the average of the input voltages, given by
The original input sources 
 and 
 can be replaced by the equivalent system of sources shown in
Figure 10.36. Thus, we can consider the inputs to the differential amplifier to be the differential signal
 and the common-mode signal 
Figure 10.36
The input sources 
 and 
 can be replaced by the equivalent sources 
 and 
Many applications exist in which a small differential signal is important and a
strong interfering common-mode signal is present.
−
+
vid=vi1−vi2
(10.21)
Ad
vo=Advid
(10.22)
vicm
vicm=12 (vi1+vi2)
(10.23)
vi1
vi2
vid
vicm.
vi1
vi2
vicm
vid.

Sometimes, we have a small differential signal that we wish to amplify, but a large common-mode signal
is also present that is of no interest. A good example of this is in recording the electrocardiogram (ECG)
of a patient. Imagine a patient lying on a bed insulated from electrical ground as shown in Figure 10.37.
If electrodes are placed in contact with each of the patient's arms, a differential signal generated by the
patient's heart appears between the electrodes, which is the signal of interest to the cardiologist. Also,
we often find a large 60-Hz common-mode signal present between each electrode and the local power-
system ground. This occurs because patients are connected to the 60-Hz power line by very small
incidental capacitances between their bodies and the power line. Similar small capacitances connect the
patient to ground. That network of capacitances forms a voltage-divider network, so the patient's body is
at a significant fraction of the power-line voltage with respect to ground. (You may have observed this
60-Hz common-mode signal in the laboratory if you have touched the input terminals of a high-input-
impedance ac meter or oscilloscope.) Thus, at the input to the electrocardiograph amplifier, there exists
a differential signal of about 1 mV and a 60-Hz common-mode signal of several tens of volts. Ideally, the
electrocardiograph should respond only to the differential signal.
Figure 10.37
Electrocardiographs encounter large 60-Hz common-mode signals.
Interfacing sensors to computers is pervasive in all fields of science and engineering. The problem of
large common-mode interference from the power line is also very common. Hence, it is important for
you to have a good grasp of these concepts.
Common-Mode Rejection Ratio
Unfortunately, real differential amplifiers respond to both the common-mode signal and the differential
signal. Recall that the gain for the differential signal is denoted as 
 If we denote the gain for the
Ad.

common-mode signal as 
 the output voltage of a real differential amplifier is given by
For well-designed differential amplifiers, the differential gain 
 is much larger than the common-mode
gain 
 A quantitative specification is the common-mode rejection ratio (CMRR), which is defined
as the ratio of the magnitude of the differential gain to the magnitude of the common-mode gain. Often,
CMRR is expressed in decibels as
Common-mode rejection ratio (CMRR) is a specification that indicates how well
the common-mode signal is rejected relative to the differential signal.
The CMRR of an amplifier is generally a function of frequency, becoming lower as frequency is raised.
At 60 Hz, a CMRR of 120 dB is considered good.
 Example 10.11 Determination of the Minimum CMRR Specification
Find the minimum CMRR for an electrocardiograph amplifier if the differential gain is 1000, the
desired differential input signal has a peak amplitude of 1 mV, the common-mode signal is a 100-V-
peak 60-Hz sine wave, and it is desired that the output contain a peak common-mode contribution
that is 1 percent or less of the peak output caused by the differential signal.
Solution
Since the peak differential input is 1 mV and the differential gain is 1000, the peak output of the
desired signal is 1 V. To meet the specification required, the common-mode output signal must have
a peak value of 0.01 V or less. Thus, the common-mode gain is
(Therefore, the common-mode gain actually amounts to attenuation.) Now, we can find the CMRR
by application of Equation 10.25:
Acm,
vo=Advid+Acmvicm
(10.24)
Ad
Acm.
CMRR=20 log |Ad||Acm|
(10.25)
Acm=0.01 V100 V=10−4

Hence, an electrocardiograph requires a very good CMRR specification.
Perhaps, we should note in passing that another simpler—but dangerous—approach exists to solving
the common-mode problem for the electrocardiograph: It is to short out the common-mode signal by
attaching another electrode to the patient and connecting it to the power-system ground. This would
reduce the 60-Hz interference to a very low level, so an amplifier with a much less stringent CMRR
specification could be used. However, once the patient is in good electrical contact with the power-
system ground, any contact with power-line voltages is potentially fatal. That is particularly true if the
patient is too ill to protest. Even small currents imperceptible under ordinary circumstances can be fatal
if conducted directly to the patient's heart. Such small currents can be conducted through other medical
instrumentation or even through a surgeon's hands. Keeping the patient isolated from ground provides
some measure of protection from such problems.
Measurement of CMRR
Measurements to find the CMRR of an amplifier are fairly straightforward. We must find both the
differential and common-mode gains. The common-mode gain is found by connecting the input
terminals of the amplifier together and attaching a test source, as shown in Figure 10.38. Notice that
with the input terminals of the amplifier connected together, the differential signal 
 is zero, and any
output is caused by the common-mode signal applied to both input terminals by the test source. Thus,
we measure both the input voltage and output voltage, and then we compute their ratio to find the
common-mode gain.
Figure 10.38
Setup for measurement of common-mode gain.
In theory, to apply a pure differential signal, we must provide two sources out of phase with each other
at the amplifier input terminals, as shown in Figure 10.39(a). However, since the common-mode gain is
usually much smaller than the differential gain, only a small error results if a single source is used, as
shown in Figure 10.39(b). [In Figure 10.39(b), the input contains both a differential signal 
 and a
CMRR=20 log |Ad||Acm|=20 log 100010−4=140 dB
vid
vid

common-mode signal 
] In any case, the differential gain is found by taking the ratio of the
output voltage to the input voltage when the common-mode voltage is zero or negligible. Finally, the
CMRR is found by taking the ratio of the gains.
Figure 10.39
Setup for measuring differential gain. 
Exercise 10.17
A certain amplifier has a differential gain 
 If the input terminals are connected together and a
1-V signal is applied to them, an output signal of 0.1 V results. What is the common-mode gain of the
amplifier and the CMRR, both expressed in dB?
Answer
Exercise 10.18
A certain amplifier has 
a. Assume that 
 and 
 Find 
 and 
 Find 
 and 
 in terms of 
 and 
b. Assume that 
 and 
 Find 
 and 
 Find 
 and 
 in terms of 
 and 
c. Use the results of parts (a) and (b) to find an expression for the CMRR in terms of 
 and 
Evaluate the CMRR if 
 and 
Answer
a. 
b. 
c. 
vicm=vid/2.
Ad=vo/vid.
Ad=50,000.
Acm=−20 dB, CMRR=114 dB.
vo=A1vi1−A2vi2.
vi1=1/2
vi2=−1/2.
vid
vicm.
vo
Ad
A1
A2.
vi1=1
vi2=1.
vid
vicm.
vo
Acm
A1
A2.
A1
A2.
A1=100
A2=101.
vid=1, vicm=0, vo=Ad=(1/2)A1+(1/2)A2;
vid=0, vicm=1,vo=Acm=A1−A2;
CMRR=20 log |(A1+A2)/2(A1−A2)|=40.0 dB.


10.12 Offset Voltage, Bias Current, and Offset Current
Until now, we have assumed that the output of an amplifier is zero if the input sources are zero, but in
real direct-coupled amplifiers that is not true. A dc output voltage is usually observed even if the input
sources are zero. This is caused by undesired imbalances in the internal component values of the
amplifier and because, in some types of amplifier circuits, it is necessary for the external input circuits to
supply small dc currents to the amplifier input terminals. Assuming a differential amplifier, these effects
can be modeled by the addition of three current sources and one voltage source to the input terminals of
an otherwise ideal amplifier. These sources are shown in Figure 10.40.
Figure 10.40
Differential amplifier, including dc sources to account for the dc output that exists even when the input
signals are zero.
PRACTICAL APPLICATION 10.1
Electronic Stud Finder
When we want to hang a heavy picture or shelf on a wall, we often need to locate a wood stud
capable of bearing the weight of the picture or shelf. Usually, this can be accomplished with an
electronic stud finder.
A simple electronic stud finder, illustrated in Figures PA10.1 and PA10.2, can be designed by
using several of the electrical-engineering concepts discussed in this book. First, as discussed in

Section 3.3, the capacitance between metal plates depends on the dielectric constants of the
materials surrounding the plates. For the configuration shown in Figure PA10.1, the capacitance
between plates A and B is less than the capacitance between B and C because the dielectric
constant of the wood stud is higher than that of air. As the stud finder moves to the right and
becomes centered on the stud, the capacitances become equal. Then, as the stud finder moves
slightly past center, the capacitance between A and B becomes higher.
FIGURE
PA10.1
FIGURE
PA10.2
The second concept used in the stud finder is an ac bridge circuit similar to the Wheatstone
bridge of Section 2.8. As shown in Figure PA10.2, the variable capacitances are connected in
the bridge with two equal resistances and an ac source. Recall that the voltage between nodes
A and C becomes zero when the bridge is balanced, which, in this case, occurs when the
capacitances are equal.

The third concept is the use of a high-gain differential amplifier (such as those discussed in
Section 10.11) and a beeper (which is a simple loudspeaker) to form a sensitive detector for the
bridge circuit.
When the stud finder is over the stud, but not centered, the capacitances are unequal and the
bridge is not balanced. Then, an ac voltage appears as the input to the differential amplifier, and
a sound is emitted from the beeper. When the stud finder is centered, the bridge becomes
balanced, and the sound disappears. Thus, by moving the stud finder over the surface of a wall,
we can easily locate the center lines of the studs.
The two current sources labeled 
 are known as bias-current sources. These sources account for the
small dc currents drawn by the internal amplifier circuitry through the input terminals. The bias currents
have the same value and direction (either both flow toward the amplifier input terminals or both flow
toward ground). The value of the bias current 
 is a function of temperature, and it varies from unit to
unit of a given amplifier type.
The current 
 is called offset current. Offset current arises from incidental imbalances in the internal
components of the amplifier. The offset current value is usually somewhat smaller than the bias current.
The direction of the offset current is unpredictable—it can flow toward either input terminal. The direction
of flow may be different from unit to unit of a given amplifier model. Notice that the offset current source
(Figure 10.40) has a value of 
The voltage source 
 in series with the input terminals is called an offset voltage. Like the offset
current, it is caused by internal circuit imbalances. The value of the offset voltage is usually a function of
temperature. Furthermore, it changes in value and polarity from unit to unit. The offset voltage source
can be placed in series with either input terminal.
Real differential amplifiers suffer from imperfections that can be modeled by
several dc sources: two bias-current sources, an offset current source, and an
offset voltage source. The effect of these sources is to add a (usually
undesirable) dc term to the ideal output.
Minimizing the Effect of Bias Current
IB
IB
Ioff
Ioff/2.
Voff

The effects of bias current can be mitigated by ensuring that the Thévenin impedances of the circuits
connected to the input terminals are the same. (Recall from Section 2.6 that to find the Thévenin
impedance of a network, we zero the independent sources and then compute the impedance of the
network. Independent voltage sources are zeroed by replacing them with short circuits, whereas
independent current sources are replaced by open circuits.) Figure 10.41(a) shows a differential
amplifier with source resistances and bias-current sources. Each current source can be converted to a
voltage source in series with the corresponding resistance as shown in Figure 10.41(b). If the source
resistances are equal, these voltages are equal, so there is no differential signal supplied to the
amplifier. Assuming that the common-mode gain is zero, the resulting output voltage is zero.
Figure 10.41
The effects of the bias-current sources cancel if 
 Example 10.12 Calculation of Worst-Case DC Output Voltage
A certain direct-coupled differential amplifier has a differential voltage gain of 100, an input
impedance of 
 an input bias current of 200 nA, a maximum offset current of 80 nA, and a
maximum offset voltage of 5 mV. Compute the worst-case output voltage if the amplifier input
terminals are connected to ground through 
 source resistances.
Solution
The circuit, including the source resistances, is shown in Figure 10.42(a). Since the circuit is linear,
we can use superposition, considering each source separately. Because the impedances for the two
inputs are the same, the effects of the bias currents balance and, therefore, can be ignored.
Rs1=Rs2.
1 MΩ,
100-kΩ

Figure 10.42
Amplifier of Example 10.12.
Because the circuit is linear, we use superposition, thereby dividing the
problem into several relatively simple problems.
The offset current flows through the parallel combination of 
 and the sum of the source
resistances as shown in Figure 10.42(b). Thus, the differential input voltage arising from the offset
current has a maximum value given by
The circuit with only the offset voltage source activated is shown in Figure 10.42(c). The differential
input voltage resulting from the offset voltage is found by noting that part of the input offset source
voltage appears across the input terminals and the rest appears across 
 and 
 The portion
across the input terminals can be computed by use of the voltage-divider principle as
Rin
VIoff=Ioff2 Rin(Rs1+Rs2)Rin+Rs1+Rs2=6.67 mV
Rs1
Rs2.
VVoff=Voff RinRin+Rs1+Rs2=4.17 mV

Multiplying by the amplifier gain, we find that the maximum output voltage caused by the offset
current source is 0.667 V and the maximum output voltage caused by the offset voltage source is
0.417 V. These voltages are maximum values and they can have either polarity, so the total output
voltage can range between 
 and 
Balancing Circuits
The effects of the offset current and voltage can be canceled by the use of a balancing circuit such as
that shown in Figure 10.43. The resistors 
 and 
 on each side of the potentiometer form voltage
dividers that supply small voltages to opposite ends of the potentiometer positive on one end and
negative on the other. In use, the potentiometer is simply adjusted so that the amplifier output is zero if
the input from the signal source is zero.
Figure 10.43
Network that can be adjusted to cancel the effects of offset and bias sources.
Balancing circuits can be used to cancel the dc offset added to the output signal
by amplifier imperfections.
Even if such a balancing circuit is used, it is good practice to maintain equal resistances from both input
terminals to ground, because bias current varies with temperature. Equal resistances provide balancing
for bias current, independent of its value. Unfortunately, the offset current and voltage vary with
temperature, so perfect balance at all temperatures is not possible with a fixed circuit.
−1.084
−1.084 V.
R1
R2

In principle, the dividers (
 and 
) could be left out of the circuit of Figure 10.43, and the ends of the
potentiometer could be connected directly to the power-supply voltages. However, the range of
adjustment would then be much lar­ger than necessary, and the correct adjustment would be very
difficult to achieve.
Some amplifiers provide separate terminals for attachment of balancing circuits so that the signal input
terminals are not encumbered.
Exercise 10.19
A certain direct-coupled differential amplifier has a differential voltage gain of 500, an input impedance
of 
 an input bias current of 400 nA, a maximum offset current of 100 nA, and a maximum offset
voltage of 10 mV. Compute the worst-case output voltages if the amplifier input terminals are connected
to ground through 
 resistances.
Answer
 ranges from 
 to 
Exercise 10.20
Repeat Exercise 10.19 if the inverting input terminal is grounded directly and the noninverting input is
connected to ground through a 
 resistance.
Answer
 ranges from 
 to 
R1
R2
100 kΩ,
50-kΩ
vo
−3.75
+3.75 V.
50-kΩ
vo
−2.5 V
−10.84 V.

Summary
1. The purpose of an amplifier is to deliver a larger signal to a load than is available from the signal
source.
2. Amplifiers are characterized by their input impedance, output impedance, and a gain parameter.
3. Inverting amplifiers have negative voltage gain, so the output waveform is an inverted version of
the input waveform. Noninverting amplifiers have positive voltage gain.
4. Loading effects result from voltage drops across the internal source impedance and across the
output impedance of the amplifier.
5. In a cascade connection, the output of each amplifier is connected to the input of the next
amplifier.
6. The efficiency of an amplifier is the percentage of the supply power that is converted into output
signal power.
7. Several models are useful in characterizing amplifiers. They are the voltage-amplifier model, the
current-amplifier model, the transconductance-amplifier model, and the transresistance-amplifier
model.
8. According to their input and output impedances, ideal amplifiers can be classified into four types:
the ideal voltage amplifier, the ideal current amplifier, the ideal transconductance amplifier, and
the ideal transresistance amplifier. The best amplifier type to select depends on the application.
9. Amplifiers may be direct coupled, in which case constant gain extends to dc. On the other hand,
amplifiers may be ac coupled, in which case the gain falls off at low frequencies, reaching zero
gain at dc. Gain magnitude falls to zero at sufficiently high frequencies for all amplifiers.
10. Linear distortion can be either amplitude distortion or phase distortion. Amplitude distortion
occurs if the gain magnitude is different for various compo­nents of the input signal. Phase
distortion occurs if amplifier phase shift is not proportional to frequency.
11. Amplifier pulse response is characterized by rise time, overshoot, ringing, and tilt.
12. Nonlinear distortion occurs if the transfer char­acteristic of an amplifier is not straight. Assuming
a sinusoidal input signal, nonlinear distortion causes harmonics to appear in the output. The total
harmonic distortion rating of an amplifier indicates the degree of nonlinear distortion.
13. A differential amplifier ideally responds only to the difference between its two input signals (i.e.,
the differential input signal).
14. The common-mode input is the average of the two inputs to a differential amplifier. CMRR is the
ratio of the differential gain to the common-mode gain. CMRR is an important specification for
many instrumentation applications.
15. Dc offset is the addition of a dc term to the signal being amplified. It is the result of bias current,
offset current, and offset voltage, and it can be canceled by use of a properly designed balance
circuit.

Problems
Section 10.1: Basic Amplifier Concepts
P10.1. What are two causes of "loading effects" in an amplifier circuit?
P10.2. Explain how an inverting amplifier differs from a noninverting amplifier.
P10.3. Draw the voltage-amplifier model and label its elements.
*P10.4. The output voltage 
 of the circuit of Figure P10.4 is 100 mV with the switch closed.
With the switch open, the output voltage is 50 mV. Find the input resistance of the amplifier.
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
Figure P10.4
*P10.5. A certain amplifier operating with a 
 load has a voltage gain of 50 and a power
gain of 5000. Determine the current gain and input resistance of the amplifier.
*P10.6. A signal source with an open-circuit voltage of 
 and an internal resistance
of 
 is connected to the input terminals of an amplifier having an open-circuit voltage gain of
100, an input resistance of 
 and an output resistance of 
 A 
 load is connected to
the output terminals. Find the voltage gains 
 and 
 Also, find the power gain
and current gain.
*P10.7. An ideal ac current source is applied to the input terminals of an amplifier, and the
amplifier output voltage is 2 V rms. Then, a 
 resistance is placed in parallel with the current
source and the amplifier input terminals, and the output voltage is 1.5 V rms. Determine the input
resistance of the amplifier.
P10.8. An amplifier with 
 and 
 is operated with a 
 load. A
source having a Thévenin resistance of 
 and a short-circuit current of 
 is
connected to the input terminals. Determine the output voltage as a function of time and the
vo
100-Ω
Vs=2 mV rms
50 kΩ
100 kΩ,
4 Ω.
4-Ω
Avs=Vo/Vs
Av=Vo/Vi.
2-kΩ
Ri=12 kΩ, Ro=1 kΩ,
Avoc=−10
1-kΩ
4 kΩ
2 cos(200πt) mA

Section 10.2: Cascaded Amplifiers
power gain.
P10.9. An amplifier has an open-circuit voltage gain of 100. With a 
 load connected, the
voltage gain is found to be only 80. Find the output resistance of the amplifier.
P10.10. An amplifier having 
 and 
 is operated with a 
 load. A
source having a Thévenin resistance of 
 and an open-circuit voltage of 
 is
connected to the input terminals. Determine the output voltage as a function of time and the
power gain.
P10.11. The current gain of an amplifier is 500, the load resistance is 
 and the input
resistance of the amplifier is 
 Determine the voltage gain and power gain under these
conditions.
P10.12. A certain amplifier has an open-circuit voltage gain of unity, an input resistance of 
and an output resistance of 
 The signal source has an internal voltage of 5 V rms and an
internal resistance of 
 The load resistance is 
 If the signal source is connected to
the amplifier input terminals and the load is connected to the output terminals, find the voltage
across the load and the power delivered to the load. Next, consider connecting the load directly
across the signal source without the amplifier, and again find the load voltage and power.
Compare the results. What do you conclude about the usefulness of a unity-gain amplifier in
delivering signal power to a load?
P10.13. Suppose we have a resistive load that varies from 
 to 
 We connect this load
to an amplifier, and we need the voltage across the load to vary by less than 1 percent with
variations in the load resistance. What parameter of the amplifier is important in this situation?
What range of values is allowed for the parameter?
P10.14. A certain amplifier has a voltage gain of 0.1. However, the power gain is 10. How is this
possible? What is the value of the current gain? How does the load resistance compare with the
input resistance of the amplifier?
P10.15. An amplifier has an open-circuit voltage gain of 1000, an input resistance of 
 and
an output resistance of 
 A signal source with an internal resistance of 
 is connected to
the input terminals of the amplifier. An 
 load is connected to the output terminals. Find the
voltage gains 
 and 
 Also, find the power gain and current gain.
P10.16. Suppose we have a sensor, with a Thévenin resistance that varies from zero to 
connected to the input of an amplifier. We want the output voltage of the amplifier to vary by less
than 2 percent with changes in the Thévenin resistance of the sensor. What parameter of the
amplifier is important in this situation? What range of values is allowed for the parameter?
P10.17. A certain amplifier operates with a resistive load. The current gain and the voltage gain
are equal. What can you say about the input resistance and the load resistance?
10-kΩ
Ri=1 MΩ, Ro=1 kΩ,
Avoc=−104
1-kΩ
2 MΩ
3 cos(200πt) mV
100 Ω,
1 MΩ.
1 MΩ,
100 Ω.
100 kΩ.
50 Ω.
5 kΩ
10 kΩ.
20 kΩ,
2 Ω.
10 kΩ
8-Ω
Avs=Vo/Vs
Av=Vo/Vi.
10 kΩ,
*P10.18. Amplifiers having 
 and 
 are available. How many of these
Avoc=10, Ri=2 kΩ,
Ro=2 kΩ

Section 10.3: Power Supplies and Efficiency
amplifiers must be cascaded to attain a voltage gain of at least 1000 when operating with a 
load?
*P10.19. Three amplifiers with the following charac­teristics are cascaded in the order 1, 2, 3.
Amplifier 1: 
Amplifier 2: 
Amplifier 3: 
Find the parameters for the simplified model of the cascaded amplifier.
P10.20. Three identical amplifiers having 
 and 
 are cascaded.
Determine the input resistance, the open-circuit voltage gain, and the output resistance of the
cascade.
P10.21. Given that the amplifiers having the characteristics shown in Table P10.21 are
cascaded in the order 
 find the input impedance, output impedance, and open-­circuit
voltage gain of the cascade. Repeat when the order is 
Table P10.21 Amplifier Characteristics
Amplifier
Open-Circuit Voltage Gain
Input Resistance
Output Resistance
A
100
B
500
P10.22. Draw the cascade connection of two amplifiers. Write an expression for the open-circuit
voltage gain of the cascade connection in terms of the open-circuit voltage gains and
impedances of the individual amplifiers.
P10.23. Three amplifiers with the following charac­teristics are cascaded in the order 1, 2, 3.
Amplifier 1: 
Amplifier 2: 
Amplifier 3: 
Find the parameters for the simplified model of the cascaded amplifier.
1-kΩ
Avoc1=100, Ri1=2 kΩ,Ro1=1 kΩ
Avoc2=200, Ri2=4 kΩ,Ro2=2 kΩ
Avoc3=300, Ri3=6 kΩ,Ro3=3 kΩ
Avoc=25,Ri=2 kΩ,
Ro=3 kΩ
A−B,
B−A.
3 kΩ
400 Ω
1 MΩ
2 kΩ
Avoc1=300, Ri1=6 kΩ,Ro1=3 kΩ
Avoc2=200, Ri2=4 kΩ,Ro2=2 kΩ
Avoc3=100, Ri3=2 kΩ,Ro3=1 kΩ
*P10.24. Find the net power delivered to the amplifier by the three dc supply voltages shown in

Section 10.4: Additional Amplifier Models
Figure P10.24.
Figure P10.24
 P10.25. Under high-signal test conditions, a certain audio amplifier supplies a 24 V rms 1-kHz
sinusoidal voltage to an 
 load. The power supply delivers 4 A at a voltage of 50 V to the
amplifier. The signal power supplied by the input source is negligible. Determine the efficiency
and the power dissipated in the amplifier.
P10.26. An amplifier operates from a 12-V power supply that supplies a current of 1.5 A. The
input signal current is 
 and the input resistance is 
 The amplifier delivers 10 V
rms to a 
 load. Determine the power dissipated in the amplifier and the efficiency of the
amplifier.
P10.27. A certain amplifier has an input voltage of 100 mV rms, an input resistance of 
and produces an output of 10 V rms across an 
 load resistance. The power supply has a
voltage of 15 V and delivers an average current of 2 A. Find the power dissipated in the amplifier
and the efficiency of the amplifier.
P10.28. Define the efficiency of a power amplifier. What is dissipated power in an amplifier?
What form does dissipated power take?
P10.29. Two amplifiers are cascaded. The first has supply power of 2 W, an input resistance of
 and an input voltage of 2 mV rms. The second has a supply power of 22 W, a load
resistance of 
 and output voltage of 12 V rms. Determine the overall power gain, dissipated
power, and efficiency.
8-Ω
1 μA rms,
100 kΩ.
10−Ω
100 kΩ,
8−Ω
1 MΩ,
8 Ω,
*P10.30. An amplifier has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance of 
 and a
1 kΩ,
200 Ω,

short-circuit transconductance gain of 0.5 S. Determine the open-circuit voltage gain, the short-
circuit current gain, and the open-circuit transresistance gain.
*P10.31. Amplifier A has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance of 
 and an
open-circuit transresistance gain of 
 Amplifier B has an input resistance of 
 an
output impedance of 
 and a short-circuit current gain of 100. Find the voltage amplifier
model for the cascade of A followed by B. Then, determine the corresponding transconductance
amplifier model.
*P10.32. An amplifier has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance of 
 and an
open-circuit transresistance gain of 
 Determine the open-circuit voltage gain, the short-
circuit current gain, and the short-circuit transconductance gain.
*P10.33. An amplifier has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance of 
 and a short-
circuit current gain of 3000. The signal source has an internal voltage of 100 mV rms and an
internal impedance of 
 The load is a 
 resistance. Find the current gain, voltage gain,
and power gain of the amplifier. If the power supply has a voltage of 12 V and supplies an
average current of 2 A, find the power dissipated in the amplifier and the efficiency.
*P10.34. An amplifier has 
 and 
 Determine the values
(including units) of 
 and 
 for this amplifier.
P10.35. Draw a voltage-amplifier model. Is the gain parameter measured under open-circuit or
short-circuit conditions? Repeat for a current amplifier model, a transresistance-amplifier model,
and a transconductance-amplifier model.
P10.36.
a. Which amplifier model contains a current- controlled voltage source?
b. A current- controlled current source?
c. A voltage- controlled current source?
P10.37. Amplifier A has an input resistance of 
 an output impedance of 
 and a
short-circuit current gain of 100. Amplifier B has an input resistance of 
 an output
resistance of 
 and an open-circuit transresistance gain of 
 Find the voltage
amplifier model for the cascade of A followed by B. Then, determine the corresponding
transconductance amplifier model.
P10.38. An amplifier has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance of 
 and a short-
circuit current gain of 500. Draw the voltage amplifier model for the amplifier, including numerical
values for all parameters. Repeat for the transresistance and transconductance models.
P10.39. An amplifier has 
 and 
 Determine the values
(including units) of 
 and 
 for this amplifier.
P10.40. An amplifier with 
 and 
 is operated with a 
 load.
A source having a Thévenin resistance of 
 and an open-circuit voltage of 
is connected to the input terminals. Determine the output voltage as a function of time and the
power gain.
P10.41. An amplifier has an open-circuit transresistance gain of 
 a short-circuit
1 MΩ,
200 Ω,
100 MΩ.
50 Ω,
500 kΩ,
10 kΩ,
2 kΩ,
200 kΩ.
20 Ω,
10 Ω,
200 Ω.
5-Ω
Ri=100 Ω, Ro=1 kΩ,
Rmoc=10 kΩ.
Avoc, Gmsc,
Aisc
50 Ω,
500 kΩ,
1 MΩ,
200 Ω,
100 MΩ.
100 Ω,
10 Ω,
Ri=10 kΩ, Ro=100 Ω,
Gmsc=0.5 S.
Avoc, Rmoc,
Aisc
Ri=2 kΩ, Ro=500 Ω,
Rmoc=−107 Ω
1−kΩ
1 kΩ
2 cos(200πt) mV
200 Ω,

Section 10.5: Importance of Amplifier Impedances in Various Applications
Section 10.6: Ideal Amplifiers
transconductance gain of 0.5 S, and a short-circuit current gain of 50. Determine the input
resistance, the output resistance, and the open-circuit voltage gain.
P10.42. An amplifier has a short-circuit current gain of 10. When operated with a 
 load, the
current gain is 8. Find the output resistance of the amplifier.
P10.43. An amplifier has 
 and 
 Determine the values (including
units) of 
 and 
 for this amplifier.
P10.44. An amplifier has an open-circuit voltage gain of 100, a short-circuit transconductance
gain of 0.2 S, and a short-circuit current gain of 50. Determine the input resistance, the output
resistance, and the open-circuit transresistance gain.
50-Ω
Ri=2 kΩ, Ro=300 Ω,
Aisc=200.
Avoc, Rmoc,
Gmsc
P10.45. Give an example of a situation in which a specific input impedance is needed for an
amplifier.
P10.46. Suppose we have a voltage source 
 connected to the input
terminals of an amplifier. The load is a nonlinear device such as an LED.
a. What output impedance is needed for the amplifier if we need the current through the
load to be proportional to v(t)?
b. If we need the voltage across the load to be proportional to v(t)?
P10.47. We need an amplifier to supply a constant signal to each of a variable number of loads
connected in parallel. What output impedance is needed in this situation? Why? What if the
loads are connected in series?
P10.48. Give an application in which an amplifier with very low input impedance is needed.
P10.49. Describe an application in which an amplifier with very high input impedance is needed.
v(t)=Vdc+Vm cos(ωt)
*P10.50. The amplifier shown in Figure P10.50 has an input resistance of 
 an output
impedance of 
 and an open-circuit transresistance gain of 
 Find the resistance
 seen from the input terminals.
1000 Ω,
20 Ω,
10 kΩ.
Rx=vx/ix

Figure P10.50
*P10.51. Suppose we have a two-stage cascaded amplifier with an ideal transconductance
amplifier as the first stage and an ideal transresistance amplifier as the second stage. What type
of amplifier results and what is its gain in terms of the gains of the two stages? Repeat for the
amplifiers cascaded in the opposite order.
*P10.52. In instrumenting a physics experiment, we need to record the open-circuit voltage of a
certain sensor. The voltage needs to be amplified by a factor of 1000 and applied to a variable
load resistance. What type of ideal amplifier is needed? Justify your answer.
*P10.53. The output terminals of an ideal transresis­tance amplifier are connected to the input
terminals of an ideal transconductance amplifier. What type of ideal amplifier results? Determine
its gain parameter in terms of the gain parameters of the separate stages.
P10.54. Give the input and output impedances for an ideal-voltage amplifier. Repeat for each of
the other ideal amplifier types.
P10.55. An ideal transconductance amplifier having a short-circuit transconductance gain of
0.1 S is connected as shown in Figure P10.55. Find the resistance 
 seen from the input
terminals.
Figure 10.55
 P10.56. The output terminals of an ideal voltage amplifier are connected to the input terminals
of an ideal transconductance amplifier. What type of ideal amplifier results? Determine its gain
parameter in terms of the gain parameters of the separate stages.
P10.57. In a certain application, an amplifier is needed to sense the open-circuit voltage of a
source and force current to flow through a load. The source resistance and load resistance are
variable. The current delivered to the load is to be nearly independent of both the source
resistance and load resistance. What type of ideal amplifier is needed? If the source resistance
increases from 
 to 
 and it causes a 1 percent decrease in load current, what is the
value of the input resistance? If the load resistance increases from 100 to 
 and this causes
a 1 percent decrease in load current, what is the value of the output resistance?
P10.58. An amplifier has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance of 
 and an open-
circuit voltage gain of 10. Classify this amplifier as an approximate ideal type and find the
corresponding gain parameter. In deciding on an amplifier classification, assume that the source
Rx=vx/ix
1 kΩ
2 kΩ
300 Ω
1 Ω,
1 Ω,

Section 10.7: Frequency Response
and load impedances are on the order of 
P10.59. In recording automotive emissions, we need to sense the short-circuit current of a
chemical sensor that has a variable Thévenin impedance. A voltage that is proportional to the
current must be applied to the input of a data-acquisition module. What type of ideal amplifier is
needed? Justify your answer.
P10.60. What type of ideal amplifier is needed if we need to sense the short-circuit current of a
sensor and drive a proportional current through a variable load? Explain your answer.
P10.61. An amplifier is needed as a part of a system for documentation of voltages in the earth
created by an electrical power distribution system. Voltage waveforms occurring between probes
to be placed in the earth are to be amplified before being applied to the analog-to-digital
converter (ADC) inputs of laptop computers. The internal impedance of the probe can be as high
as 
 in dry sand or as low as 
 in muck. Because several different models of ADCs are
to be used in the project, the load impedance for the amplifier varies from 
 to 
Nominally, the voltage applied to the ADC is required to be 1000 times the open-circuit voltage
of the probe 
 What type of ideal amplifier is best suited for this application? Using
your best judgment, find the specifications for the impedances and gain parameter of this
amplifier.
P10.62. We need to design an amplifier for use in recording the short-circuit current of
experimental electrochemical cells versus time. (For this purpose, a short circuit is any
resistance less than 
) The amplifier output is to be applied to a strip-chart recorder that
deflects 
 for each volt applied. The input resistance of the recorder is unknown
and likely to be variable, but it is greater than 
 A deflection of 1 cm per milliampere of cell
current with an accuracy of about 
 is desired. What type of ideal amplifier is best
suited for this application? Using your best judgment, find specifications for the amplifier's input
impedance, output impedance, and gain parameter.
P10.63. An amplifier has an input resistance of 
 an output resistance of 
 and an
open-circuit voltage gain of 100. Classify this amplifier as an approximate ideal type and find the
corresponding gain parameter. In deciding on an amplifier classification, assume that the source
and load impedances are on the order of 
P10.64. An amplifier is needed as a part of a system for documentation of voltages in the earth
created by thunderstorms. Voltages occurring between probes to be placed in the earth are to be
amplified before being applied to a strip chart recorder. The internal impedance of the probe pair
can be as high as 
 in dry sand or as low as 
 in muck. The strip chart recorder has an
unknown impedance of less than 
 and deflects 
 per milliampere of applied
current. It is desired that the amplifier be designed so that the recorder deflects 1 cm for each
0.1 V of probe voltage. What type of ideal amplifier is best suited for this application? Using your
best judgment, find the specifications for the impedances and gain parameter of this amplifier.
1 kΩ.
10 kΩ
10 Ω
10 kΩ
1 MΩ.
±3 percent.
10 Ω.
1 cm±1 percent
10 kΩ.
±3 percent
1 MΩ,
1 MΩ,
1 kΩ.
10 kΩ
10 Ω
100 Ω
1 cm±1 percent

*P10.65. The gain of an amplifier is given by
Determine the upper half-power frequency in terms of 
P10.66. Sketch the gain magnitude of a typical de-coupled amplifier versus frequency. Repeat
for an ac-coupled amplifier.
*P10.67. Consider the amplifier of Problem P10.62. Should this amplifier be ac coupled or dc
coupled? Explain your answer.
*P10.68. The input to a certain amplifier is
and the corresponding output voltage is
Determine the values of the complex gain at 
 and at 
P10.69. How is a wideband amplifier different from a narrowband amplifier?
P10.70. Consider Figure P10.70, in which block A is an ideal voltage amplifier and block B is an
ideal transresistance amplifier.
a. Derive an expression for 
 in terms of the amplifier gains, 
 and the capacitance
C.
b. Derive an expression for the overall voltage gain of the system as a function of
frequency. [Hint: Assume that 
 determine the expression for 
and then determine the complex voltage gain by taking the ratio of the phasors for the
input and output.]
c. Given 
 and 
 sketch Bode plots of the voltage-gain
magnitude and phase to scale for the range from 1 Hz to 1 kHz.
Figure P10.70
P10.71. The output signal produced by a certain electret microphone consists of a 2-V dc term
plus an ac audio signal that has an rms value of 10 mV. The frequencies of the components of
the audio signal range from 20 Hz to 10 kHz. We need to amplify the audio signal to 10 V rms,
which is to be applied to a loudspeaker. Should this amplifier be ac coupled or dc coupled?
A=1000[ 1+j(f/fB) ]2
fB.
vin(t)=0.1 cos(2000πt)+0.2cos(4000πt+30°)
vo(t)=10 cos(2000πt−20°)+15cos(4000π+20°)
f=1000 Hz
f=2000 Hz.
vo(t)
vin(t),
vin(t)=Vm cos(2πft),
vo(t),
Rmoc=103 Ω, Avoc=50/π,
C=1 μF,

Section 10.8: Linear Waveform Distortion
Explain your answer. What midband voltage gain is needed? What values are appropriate for the
half-power frequencies?
P10.72. Consider Figure P10.72, in which block A is an ideal transconductance amplifier and
block B is an ideal voltage amplifier. The capacitance is initially uncharged.
a. Derive an expression for 
 for 
 in terms of the amplifier gains, 
 and the
capacitance C.
b. Derive an expression for the overall voltage gain of the system as a function of
frequency. [Hint: Assume that 
 determine the expression for 
and then determine the complex voltage gain by taking the ratio of the phasors for the
input and output.]
c. Given 
 
 and 
 sketch Bode plots of the voltage-gain
magnitude and phase to scale for the range from 1 Hz to 1 kHz.
Figure P10.72
vo(t)
t−0
vin(t),
vin(t)=Vm cos(2πft),
vo(t),
Gmsc=10−6 S, Avoc=200π,
C=1 μF,
*P10.73. The input signal to an amplifier is 
 The
complex gain of the amplifier at 1000 Hz is 
 What complex value must the gain have
at 2000 Hz for distortionless amplification? Sketch or write a computer program to plot the input
and output waveforms to scale versus time.
P10.74. What are the requirements for the gain magnitude and phase of an amplifier so that
linear distortion does not occur?
P10.75. The output of an amplifier used to create special effects for audio signals is given by
in which k and 
 are constants.
a. Is this amplifier linear? Explain carefully.
b. Dete­rmine the complex voltage gain as a function of frequency. [Hint: Assume that
 determine the corresponding output, and divide the phasor output by
the phasor input.]
c. Given 
 and 
 use a computer to plot the gain magnitude and phase versus
frequency for 
vin(t)=0.01 cos(2000πt)+0.02 cos(4000πt).
100 ∠−45°¯.
vo(t)=vin(t)+Kvin(t−td)
td
vin(t)=Vm cos(2πft),
K=0.5
td=1 ms,
0≤f≤10 kHz.

Section 10.9: Pulse Response
d. Does this amplifier produce amplitude distortion? Phase distortion? Explain carefully.
P10.76. The input signal to an amplifier is 
 The gain of
the amplifier as a function of frequency is given by
Find an expression for the output signal of the amplifier as a function of time.
P10.77. The output of a certain amplifier in terms of the input is 
a. Is this amplifier linear? Explain carefully.
b. Determine the complex voltage gain as a function of frequency. [Hint: Assume that
 determine the corresponding output, and divide the phasor output by
the phasor input.]
c. Given 
 and 
 plot the gain magnitude and phase versus frequency for
d. Does this amplifier produce amplitude distortion? Phase distortion? Explain carefully.
P10.78. The output of an amplifier used to create special effects for audio signals is given by
in which K is a constant.
a. Is this amplifier linear? Explain carefully,
b. Determine the complex voltage gain as a function of frequency. [Hint: Assume that
 determine the corresponding output, and divide the phasor output by
the phasor input.]
c. Given 
 use a computer to plot the gain magnitude and phase versus
frequency for 
d. Does this amplifier produce amplitude distortion? Phase distortion? Explain carefully.
vi(t)=0.01 cos(2000πt)+0.02 cos(4000πt).
A=10001+j(f/1000)
vo(t)=Kvin(t−td).
vin(t)=Vm cos(2πft),
K=100
td=0.1 ms,
0≤f≤10 kHz.
vo(t)=vin(t)+K ddt vin(t)
vin(t)=Vm cos(2πft),
K=1/(2000π),
0≤f≤10 kHz.
*P10.79. The gain magnitudes of several amplifiers are shown versus frequency in Figure
P10.79. If the input to the amplifiers is the pulse shown in the figure, sketch the output of each
amplifier versus time. Give quantitative estimates of as many features on each waveform sketch
as you can.

Figure P10.79
*P10.80. An audio amplifier is specified to have half-power frequencies of 15 Hz and 15 kHz.
The amplifier is to be used to amplify the pulse shown in Figure P10.82(b). Estimate the rise
time and tilt of the amplifier output. The pulse width T is 2 ms.
P10.81. Sketch the pulse response of an amplifier, showing the rise time, overshoot, ringing, and
tilt. Give an approximate relationship between rise time and the upper half-power frequency of a
broadband amplifier. Give an approximate relationship between percentage tilt and the lower
half-power frequency.

P10.82. Consider the simple highpass filter shown in Figure P10.82(a).
a. Find the complex gain 
 as a function of frequency.
b. What is the magnitude of the gain at dc? At very high frequencies? Find the half-power
frequency in terms of R and C.
c. Consider the input pulse shown in Figure P10.82(b). Assuming that the capacitor is
initially uncharged, find an expression for the output voltage 
 for t between 0 and T.
Assuming that RC is much greater than T, find an approximate expression for
percentage tilt.
d. Combine the results of parts (b) and (c) to find a relationship between percentage tilt and
the half-power frequency.
Figure P10.82
P10.83. The input signal and corresponding output signals are shown for several amplifiers in
Figure P10.83. Sketch the gain magnitude of each amplifier versus frequency. Give quantitative
estimates of as many features on the gain sketches as you can.
Figure P10.83
A=V2/V1
v2(t)

Section 10.10: Transfer Characteristic and Nonlinear Distortion
Figure P10.83
P10.84. Consider the simple lowpass filter shown in Figure P10.84.
a. Find the complex gain 
 as a function of frequency. What are the magnitudes of
A at dc and at very high frequencies? Find the half-power bandwidth B of the circuit in
terms of R and C.
b. Consider the case for which the capacitor is initially uncharged and 
 is a unit-step
function. Find 
 and an expression for the rise time  of the circuit in terms of R and
C.
c. Combine the results found in parts (a) and (b) to obtain a relationship between bandwidth
and rise time for this circuit. Compare your result with Equation 10.11 on page 531.
Figure P10.84
A=V2/V1
v1(t)
v2(t)
tr
P10.85. What is harmonic distortion? What causes it?
*P10.86. The input to an amplifier is
and the corresponding output is
vin(t)=0.1 cos(2000πt)

Section 10.11: Differential Amplifiers
Determine the distortion factors 
 and 
 Also, determine the percentage of total
harmonic distortion.
P10.87. The transfer characteristic of an amplifier is described by the equation
For the input 
 determine the distortion factors 
 and 
 Also, compute
the total harmonic distortion. You may find the following trigonometric identities useful:
P10.88. The transfer characteristic of an amplifier is described by the equation
For the input 
 determine the frequency and amplitude of each
component of the output. You may find the following trigonometric identities useful:
vo(t)=10 cos(2000πt)+0.2 cos(4000πt)+0.1cos(6000πt)
D2, D3,
D4.
vo(t)=10vin(t)+0.6vin2(t)+0.4vin3(t)
vin(t)=2 cos(200πt),
D2, D3,
D4.
cos2(A)=12+12 cos(2A)cos3(A)=34cos(A)+14cos(3A)
vo(t)=vin(t)+0.1vin(t)
vin(t)=cos(ω1t)+cos(ω2t),
cos2(A)=12+12 cos(2A)cos(A)cos(B)=12cos(A−B)+12cos(A+B)
P10.89. What is a differential amplifier? Define the differential input voltage and the common-
mode input voltage. Write an expression for the output in terms of the differential and common-
mode input components.
*P10.90. A certain amplifier has a differential gain of 500. If the two input terminals are tied
together and a 10-mV-rms input signal is applied, the output signal is 20 mV rms. Find the
CMRR for this amplifier.
P10.91. The input signals 
 and 
 shown in Figure P10.91 are the inputs to a differential
amplifier with a gain of 
 (Assume that the common-mode gain is zero.) Sketch the output
of the amplifier to scale versus time. Sketch the common-mode input signal to scale versus time.
vi1
vi2
Ad=10.

Section 10.12: Offset Voltage, Bias Current, and Offset Current
Figure P10.91
P10.92. In your own words, describe a situation in which a small differential signal is of interest
and a large common-mode signal is also present.
P10.93. Define the common-mode rejection ratio of a differential amplifier.
P10.94. The output of a certain instrumentation amplifier in terms of the inputs is
 Determine the CMRR of this amplifier in decibels.
P10.95. In a certain instrumentation amplifier, the input signal consists of a 20-mV-rms
differential signal and a 5-V-rms 60-Hz interfering common-mode signal. It is desired that the
common-mode contribution to the output signal be at least 60 dB lower than the contribution
from the differential signal. What is the minimum CMRR allowed for the amplifier in decibels?
vo(t)=1000vi1(t)−1001vi2(t).
P10.96. Sketch the circuit diagram of a balancing circuit for a differential amplifier.
*P10.97. A differential amplifier has a differential gain of 500 and negligible common-mode gain.
The input terminals are tied to ground through 
 resistors having tolerances of 
What are the extreme values of the output voltage caused by a bias current of 100 nA? What is
the output voltage if the resistors are exactly equal?
P10.98. Draw the differential amplifier symbol and show sources for the offset voltage, bias
current, and offset current. What effect do these sources have on the output signal of the
amplifier?
*P10.99. A differential amplifier has a bias current of 100 nA, a maximum offset current of 20 nA,
a maximum offset voltage of 2 mV, an input resistance of 
 and a differential gain of 1000.
1-kΩ
±5 percent.
1 MΩ,

The input terminals are tied to ground through (exactly equal) 
 resistors. Find the extreme
values of the output voltage if the common-mode gain is assumed to be zero.
P10.100. Repeat Problem P10.99 if the CMRR of the amplifier is 60 dB. By what percentage is
the extreme output voltage increased in this case, compared with zero common-mode gain?
P10.101. A differential amplifier, including sources to model its dc imperfections, is shown under
three different test conditions in Figure P10.101. The amplifier has a differential voltage gain of
100, a common-mode voltage gain of zero, and infinite input impedance. Determine the values
of 
 and 
100-kΩ
Voff, IB,
Ioff.

Figure P10.101

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T10.1. Suppose we have two identical amplifiers each of which has 
 and
 connected in cascade. Determine the open-circuit voltage gain, the input resistance,
and the output resistance of the cascade.
T10.2. Prepare a table showing the gain parameter, the input impedance, and the output
impedance for the four types of ideal amplifiers.
T10.3. Suppose we have a sensor with a variable internal impedance and a load of variable
impedance. What type of ideal amplifier would be best if we need:
a. the load current to be proportional to the Thévenin voltage of the source;
b. the load current to be proportional to the short-circuit current of the source;
c. the load voltage to be proportional to the open-circuit voltage of the source;
d. the load voltage to be proportional to the short-circuit current of the source?
T10.4. Suppose we have an amplifier with 
 and 
 Determine the
values (including units) of 
 and 
 for this amplifier. Then draw each of the four
models for the amplifier showing the value of each parameter.
T10.5. We have an amplifier that draws 2A from a 15-V dc power supply. The input signal
current is 1 mA rms, and the input resistance is 
 The amplifier delivers 12 V rms to an 
load. Determine the power dissipated in the amplifier and the efficiency of the amplifier.
T10.6. Suppose that the input voltage to an amplifier has a peak amplitude of 100 mV and
contains components with frequencies ranging from 1 to 10 kHz. We want the output voltage
waveform to be nearly identical to that of the input except with larger amplitude (by a factor of
100) and possibly delayed in time. Based on this information, what specifications can you make
for the amplifier?
T10.7. What is the principal effect of offset current, bias current, and offset voltage of an
amplifier on the signal being amplified?
T10.8. What is harmonic distortion? What causes it?
T10.9. What is the CMRR? For what types of applications is it important?
Avoc=50, Ri=60 Ω,
Ro=40 Ω
Ri=200 Ω, Ro=1 kΩ,
Aisc=50.
Avoc, Rmoc,
Gmsc
2 kΩ.
8-Ω

Chapter 11 Field-Effect Transistors
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Understand MOSFET operation.
Use the load-line technique to analyze basic FET amplifiers.
Analyze bias circuits.
Use small-signal equivalent circuits to analyze FET amplifiers.
Compute the performance parameters of several FET amplifier configurations.
Select a FET amplifier configuration that is appropriate for a given application.
Understand the basic operation of CMOS logic gates.
Introduction to this chapter:
Field-effect transistors (FETs) are important devices that are used in amplifiers
and logic gates. In this chapter, we discuss the enhancement-mode metal-oxide-
semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET), which is the primary device that

underlies the rapid advances in digital electronics over the past several decades.
(Several other types of FETs exist, but to simplify our discussion, we only discuss
enhancement-mode MOSFETs, which are presently the most important type.)
In the next chapter, we will discuss another device, the bipolar junction transistor,
which is also used in amplifiers and logic gates. Compared to BJTs, MOSFETs can
occupy less chip area and can be fabricated with fewer processing steps. Complex
digital circuits such as memories and microprocessors are often implemented solely
with MOSFETs. On the other hand, BJTs are capable of producing large output
currents that are needed for fast switching of a capacitive load such as a circuit-
board trace interconnecting digital chips. Each type of device has some applications
in which it performs better than the others.

11.1 NMOS and PMOS Transistors
Overview
The physical structure of an n-channel enhancement-mode MOSFET (also known as an NMOS
transistor) is shown in Figure 11.1. It is a chip of silicon crystal with impurities added to the various
regions to produce n-type and p-type material. In n-type material, conduction is due mainly to negatively
charged electrons, whereas in p-type material, conduction is due mainly to positively charged holes.
(Although positively charged particles called holes are a helpful concept for understanding conduction in
semiconductors, they are not fundamental subatomic particles, as electrons are.)
Figure 11.1
n-channel enhancement MOSFET showing channel length L and channel width W.
The device terminals are the drain (D), gate (G), source (S), and body (B). (Another commonly used
term for the body is substrate.) In normal operation, negligible current flows through the body terminal.
Sometimes, the body is connected to the source so that we have a three-terminal device. The gate is
insulated from the substrate by a thin layer of silicon dioxide, and negligible current flows through the
gate terminal. When a sufficiently large (positive) voltage is applied to the gate relative to the source,
electrons are attracted to the region under the gate, and a channel of n-type material is induced
between the drain and the source. Then, if voltage is applied between the drain and the source, current
flows into the drain through the channel and out the source. Drain current is controlled by the voltage
applied to the gate.

Drain current is controlled by the voltage applied to the gate.
Although the acronym MOS stands for metal-oxide-semiconductor, the gates of modern MOSFETs are
actually composed of polysilicon.
The channel length L and width W are illustrated in Figure 11.1. The trend over the past four decades
has been to reduce both L and W in order to fit an ever-increasing number of transistors into a given
chip area. In 1971, Intel introduced the first microprocessor, the 4004, which had a minimum feature
size of 
 and contained 2300 transistors. By 2016, processor chips had channel lengths of 7 nm,
oxide thickness on the order of 1 nm, and in excess of 10 billion transistors. This has led to the
remarkable performance improvements that we have come to expect for computers and other electronic
products. However, this trend is expected to slow in the near feature because of fundamental physical
limitations such as the size of the atoms involved. Certainly, oxide thickness or gate width cannot have
dimensions smaller than that of an atom.
Device characteristics depend on L, W, and process parameters such as doping levels and oxide
thickness. Usually, the process parameters are predetermined, but the circuit designer can adjust L and
W to obtain the device best suited for a given application.
The circuit designer can adjust L and W to obtain the device best suited for a
given application.
The circuit symbol for the n-channel enhancement MOSFET is shown in Figure 11.2. Next, we discuss
the basic operation of this device.
10 μm

Figure 11.2
Circuit symbol for an enhancement-mode n-channel MOSFET.
Operation in the Cutoff Region
Consider the situation shown in Figure 11.3. Suppose that positive voltage 
 is applied to the drain
relative to the source and that we start with 
 Notice that pn junctions (i.e., diodes) appear at the
drain/body and at the source/body interfaces. Under forward bias (positive on the p-side), electrons flow
easily across a pn junction, but under reverse bias (positive on the n-side), virtually no current flows.
Thus, virtually no current flows into the drain terminal because the drain/body junction is reverse biased
by the 
 source. This is called the cutoff region of operation. As 
 is increased, the device
remains in cutoff until 
 reaches a particular value called the threshold voltage 
 Typically, the
threshold voltage ranges from a fraction of a volt to one volt. Thus, in cutoff, we have
Figure 11.3
For 
 the pn junction between drain and body is reverse biased and 
vDS
vGS=0.
vDS
vGS
vGS
Vto.
vGS<Vto,
iD=0.

Key equation for enhancement NMOS in cutoff.
Operation in the Triode Region
The triode region is also called the linear region of operation.
For 
 and 
 we say that the NMOS is operating in the triode region. Consider the
situation shown in Figure 11.4, in which 
 is greater than the threshold voltage. The electric field
resulting from the applied gate voltage has repelled holes from the region under the gate and attracted
electrons that can easily flow in the forward direction across the source/body junction. This results in an
n-type channel between the drain and the source. Then, when 
 is increased, current flows into the
drain, through the channel, and out the source. For small values of 
 the drain current is proportional
to 
 Furthermore, for a given (small) value of 
 drain current is also proportional to the excess
gate voltage 
iD=0 for vGS≤Vto
(11.1)
vDS<vGS−Vto
vGS≥Vto,
vGS
vDS
vDS,
vDS.
vDS,
vGS−Vto.

Figure 11.4
For 
 a channel of n-type material is induced in the region under the gate. As 
 increases,
the channel becomes thicker. For small values of 
 is proportional to 
 The device behaves as
a resistance whose value depends on 
In the triode region, the NMOS device behaves as a resistor connected between
drain and source, but the resistance decreases as 
 increases.
Plots of 
 versus 
 are shown in Figure 11.4 for several values of gate voltage. In the triode region,
the NMOS device behaves as a resistor connected between drain and source, but the resistance
decreases as 
 increases.
Now, consider what happens if we continue to increase 
 Because of the current flow, the voltages
between points along the channel and the source become greater as we move toward the drain. Thus,
the voltage between gate and channel becomes smaller as we move toward the drain, resulting in
tapering of the channel thickness as illustrated in Figure 11.5. Because of the tapering of the channel,
vGS>Vto,
vGS
vDS, iD
vDS.
vGS.
vGS
iD
vDS
vGS
vDS.

its resistance becomes larger with increasing 
 resulting in a lower rate of increase of 
Figure 11.5
As 
 increases, the channel pinches down at the drain end and 
increases more slowly. Finally, for
 becomes constant.
For 
 and 
 the device is operating in the triode region, and the drain current is
given by
Key equation for enhancement NMOS in the triode region.
in which K is given by
As illustrated in Figure 11.1, W is the width of the channel and L is its length. The device parameter KP
vDS,
iD.
vDS
iD
vDS>vGS−Vto, iD
vDS<vGS−Vto
vGS≥Vto,
iD=K [2(VGS−Vto)vDS−vDS2]
(11.2)
K=(WL) KP2
(11.3)

depends on the thickness of the oxide layer and certain properties of the channel material. A typical
value of KP for n-channel enhancement devices is 
A typical value of KP for n-channel enhancement devices is 
Usually, KP is determined by the fabrication process. However, in designing a circuit, we can vary the
ratio W/L to obtain transistors best suited to various parts of the circuit. The condition 
 is
equivalent to 
 Thus, the device is in the triode region if both 
 and 
 are greater than the
threshold voltage 
Operation in the Saturation Region
We have seen that as 
 is increased the voltage between the gate and the drain end of the channel
decreases. When the gate-to-drain voltage 
 equals the threshold voltage 
 the channel thickness
at the drain end becomes zero. For further increases in 
 is constant, as illustrated in Figure 11.5.
This is called the saturation region, in which we have 
 and 
 and the current is
given by
Key equation for enhancement NMOS in the saturation region.
Keep in mind that in the saturation region, 
 is greater than the threshold, but 
 is less than the
threshold. Figure 11.6 shows the drain characteristics of an NMOS transistor.
50 μA/V2.
50 μA/V2.
vDS≤vGS−Vto
vGD≥Vto.
vGD
vGS
Vto.
vDS
vGD
Vto,
vDS, iD
vGS≥Vto
vDS≥vGS−Vto,
iD=K(vGS−Vto)2
(11.4)
vGS
vGD

Figure 11.6
Characteristic curves for an NMOS transistor.
Boundary between the Triode and Saturation Regions
Next, we derive the equation for the boundary between the triode region and the saturation region in the
 plane. At this boundary, the channel thickness at the drain is zero, which occurs when
 Thus, we want to find 
 in terms of 
 under the condition that 
 Since
 the condition at the boundary is given by
Key equation for the boundary between the triode and saturation regions.
Solving this for 
 substituting into Equation 11.4, and reducing, we have the desired boundary
equation given by
Notice that the boundary between the triode region and the saturation region is a parabola.
iD−vDS
vGD=Vto.
iD
vDS
vGD=Vto.
vGD=vGS−vDS,
vGS−vDS=Vto
(11.5)
vGS,
iD=KvDS
(11.6)

Solving Equation 11.5 for 
 and substituting into Equation 11.2 also produces Equation 11.6.
(Equations 11.2 and 11.4 give the same values for 
 on the boundary.)
Given the values for KP, L, W, and 
 we can plot the static characteristics of an NMOS transistor.
Example 11.1Plotting the Characteristics of an NMOS Transistor
A certain enhancement-mode NMOS transistor has 
and 
Plot the drain characteristic curves to scale for 
and 5 V.
Solution
First, we use Equation 11.3 to compute the device constant:
Equation 11.6 gives the boundary between the triode region and the saturation region. Thus, we
have
where 
 is in mA and 
 is in volts. The plot of this equation is the dashed line shown in Figure
11.6.
Next, we use Equation 11.4 to compute the drain current in the saturation region for each of the
 values of interest. Hence, we get
where again the current is in mA. Substituting values, we find that
For 
 and 1 V, the device is in cutoff and 
 These values are plotted in the saturation
region as shown in Figure 11.6.
Summary: In an NMOS transistor, when a sufficiently large (positive) voltage
vGS
iD
Vto,
W = 160 μm, L = 2 μm, KP = 50 μA/
V
2
, 
V
to
 = 2 V
v
GS
 = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
K=(WL) KP2=2 mA/V2
iD=KvDS2=2vDS2
iD
vDS
vGS
iD=K(vGS−Vto)2=2(vGS−2)2
iD=18 mA for vGS=5 V
iD=8 mA for vGS=4 V
iD=2 mA for vGS=3 V
iD=0 mA for vGS=2 V
vGS=0
iD=0.

is applied to the gate relative to the source, electrons are attracted to the
region under the gate, and a channel of n-type material is induced between
the drain and the source. Then, if positive voltage is applied to the drain
relative to the source, current flows into the drain through the channel and out
the source. Drain current is controlled by the voltage applied to the gate.
Finally, Equation 11.2 is used to plot the characteristics in the triode region. For each value of 
this equation plots as a parabola that passes through the origin (
 and 
). The apex of each
parabola is on the boundary between the triode region and the saturation region.
Exercise 11.1
Consider an NMOS having 
 What is the region of operation (triode, saturation, or cutoff) if:
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
c. 
 and 
d. 
 and 
Answer
a. cutoff;
b. triode;
c. saturation;
d. saturation.
Exercise 11.2
Suppose that we have an NMOS transistor with 
 and 
 Sketch
the drain characteristics for 
 ranging from 0 to 10 V and 
 and 4 V.
Answer The plots are shown in Figure 11.7
vGS,
iD=0
vDS=0
Vto=2 V.
vGS=1 V
vDS=5 V;
vGS=3 V
vDS=0.5 V;
vGS=3 V
vDS=6 V;
vGS=5 V
vDS=6 V?
KP=50 μA/V2, Vto=1 V, L=2 μm,
W=80 μm.
vDS
vGS=0, 1, 2, 3,

Figure 11.7
Answer for Exercise 11.2.
PMOS Transistors
MOSFETs can also be constructed by interchanging the n and p regions of n-channel devices, resulting
in p-channel devices. The circuit symbol for the p-channel MOSFET is shown in Figure 11.8. As
indicated in the figure, we usually orient the p-channel FETs with the source at the top and reference the
current out of the drain. The PMOS symbol is the same as the NMOS symbol, except for orientation and
the direction of the arrowhead.
Figure 11.8
Circuit symbol for PMOS transistor.
The characteristics of a PMOS transistor are very similar to those for the NMOS transistors, except that
voltage polarities are inverted. Because we reference the drain current into the drain for n-channel
devices and out of the drain for p-channel devices, the drain current assumes positive values in both
devices. Thus, the characteristic curves of a p-channel device are like those of an n-channel device,
except that the algebraic signs of the voltages must be inverted.
Table 11.1 gives the equations of operation for both NMOS and PMOS enhancement-mode transistors.
A typical value of KP for PMOS transistors is 
 which is about half the value for NMOS
25 μA/V2,

transistors. This is due to differences in the conduction properties of electrons and holes in silicon.
Notice that the threshold voltage for an enhancement-mode PMOS transistor assumes a negative value.
Table 11.1 MOSFET Summary
Exercise 11.3
Suppose that we have a PMOS transistor with 
 and 
 and 
Sketch the drain characteristics for 
 ranging from 0 to 
 and 
 and 
Answer The plots are shown in Figure 11.9
Figure 11.9
Answer for Exercise 11.3.
KP=25 μA/V2,
Vto=−1 V, L=2 μm,
W=200 μm.
vDS
−10 V
vGS=0, −1, −2, −3,
−4 V.

Channel-Length Modulation and Charge-Carrier-Velocity Saturation
The description of MOSFETs that we have given up to this point is reasonably accurate for devices with
channel lengths in excess of about 
 As the channel lengths become shorter, several effects that
modify MOSFET behavior eventually come into play. One of these is channel-length modulation, which
is caused because the effective length of the channel is reduced as 
 increases in magnitude.
Channel-length modulation causes the characteristics to slope upward in the saturation region and can
be taken into account by including the factor 
 in the expressions for 
 given in Table 11.1.
The channel-length modulation factor  is typically equal to 0.1/L, in which L is the channel length in
microns.
A second effect is caused by velocity saturation of the charge carriers. The equations we have given for
 are based on the assumption that charge carrier velocity is proportional to electric field strength in the
channel. However, at the higher field strengths encountered in devices with channels shorter than about
 carrier velocity tends to become more nearly constant as the field strength is increased. The result
is that the characteristic curves enter saturation at smaller values of 
 Furthermore, 
 is more
nearly linear with variations in 
 and the characteristic curves are more uniformly spaced than we
have shown.
Although these and other secondary effects are important to advanced MOS designers, we can gain a
basic understanding of MOSFET amplifiers and logic circuits by using the equations presented earlier in
this section, except when otherwise noted.
10 μm.
vDS
(1+λ|vDS|)
iD
λ
iD
2 μm,
|vDS|.
iD
vGS,

11.2Load-Line Analysis of a Simple NMOS Amplifier
In this section, we analyze the NMOS amplifier circuit shown in Figure 11.10 by using a graphical load-
line approach similar to the analysis we carried out for diode circuits in Section 9.2. The dc sources
bias the MOSFET at a suitable operating point so that amplification of the input signal 
 can take
place. We will see that the input voltage 
 causes 
 to vary with time, which in turn causes 
 to
vary. The changing voltage drop across 
 causes an amplified version of the input signal to appear at
the drain terminal.
Figure 11.10
Simple NMOS amplifier circuit.
The input voltage 
 causes 
 to vary with time, which in turn causes 
 to
vary. The changing voltage drop across 
 causes an amplified version of the
input signal to appear at the drain terminal.
Applying Kirchhoff's voltage law to the input loop, we obtain the following expression:
For our example, we assume that the input signal is a 1-V-peak, 1-kHz sinusoid and that 
 is 4 V.
Then, we have
vin(t)
vin(t)
vGS
iD
RD
vin(t)
vGS
iD
RD
vGS(t)=vin(t)+VGG
(11.7)
VGG

Writing a voltage equation around the drain circuit, we obtain
Load-line equation.
For our example, we assume that 
 and 
 so Equation 11.9 becomes
where we have assumed that 
 is in milliamperes. A plot of this equation on the drain characteristics
of the transistor is a straight line called the load line.
To establish the load line, we first locate two points on it.
To establish the load line, we first locate two points on it. Assuming that 
 in Equation 11.10, we find
that 
 These values plot as the lower right-hand end of the load line shown in Figure 11.11.
For a second point, we assume that 
 which yields 
 when substituted into Equation
11.10. This pair of values (
 and 
) plots as the upper left-hand end of the load line.
vGS(t)=sin(2000πt)+4
(11.8)
VDD=RDiD(t)+vDS(t)
(11.9)
RD=1 kΩ
VDD=20 V,
20=iD(t)+vDS(t)
(11.10)
iD(t)
iD=0
vDS=20 V.
vDS=0,
iD=20 mA
vDS=0
iD=20 mA

Figure 11.11
Drain characteristics and load line for the circuit of Figure 11.10.
The term "quiescent" implies that the input signal is zero.
The operating point of an amplifier for zero input signal is called the quiescent operating point or Q
point. For 
 Equation 11.8 yields 
 Therefore, the intersection of the curve for
 with the load line is the Q point. The quiescent values are 
 and 
The maximum and minimum values of the gate-to-source voltage are 
 and 
(see Equation 11.8). The intersections of the corresponding curves with the load line are labeled as
points A and B, respectively, in Figure 11.11.
At point A, we find that 
 and 
 At point B, we find that 
 and
Plots of 
 and 
 versus time are shown in Figure 11.12. Notice that the peak-to-peak swing of
 is 12 V, whereas the peak-to-peak swing of the input signal is 2 V. Furthermore, the ac voltage at
the drain is inverted compared to the input signal. (In other words, the positive peak of the input occurs
at the same time as the minimum value of 
) Therefore, this is an inverting amplifier. Apparently, the
circuit has a voltage gain 
 where the minus sign is due to the inversion.
vin(t)=0,
vGS=VGG=4 V.
vGS=4 V
IDQ=9 mA
VDSQ=11 V.
VGSmax=5 V
VGSmin=3 V
VDSmin=4 V
IDmax=16 mA.
VDSmax=16 V
IDmin=4 mA.
vGS(t)
vDS(t)
vDS(t)
vDS.
Av=−12V/2V=−6,

Figure 11.12
 and 
 versus time for the circuit of Figure 11.10.
Notice, however, that the output waveform shown in Figure 11.12(b) is not a symmetrical sinusoid like
the input. For illustration, we see that starting from the Q point at 
 the output voltage swings
down to 
 for a change of 7 V. On the other hand, the output swings up to 16 V for a change
of only 5 V from the Q point on the positive-going half cycle of the output. We cannot properly define
gain for the circuit, because the ac output signal is not proportional to the ac input. Nevertheless, the
output signal is larger than the input even if it is distorted. (This is an example of nonlinear distortion,
which we discuss in Section 11.10.)
In this circuit, distortion is due to the fact that the characteristic curves for the FET are not uniformly
spaced. If a much smaller input amplitude was applied, we would have amplification without appreciable
distortion. This is true because the curves are more uniformly spaced if a very restricted region of the
characteristics is considered. If we plotted the curves for 0.1-V increments in 
 this would be
apparent.
Distortion is due to the fact that the characteristic curves for the FET are not
uniformly spaced. If a much smaller input amplitude was applied, we would have
amplification without appreciable distortion.
vGS
vDS
VDSQ=11 V,
VCEmin=4 V
vGS,

The amplifier circuit we have analyzed in this section is fairly simple. Practical amplifier circuits are more
difficult to analyze by graphical methods. Later in the chapter, we develop a linear small-signal
equivalent circuit for the FET, and then we can use mathematical circuit-analysis techniques instead of
graphical analysis. Usually, the equivalent-circuit approach is more useful for practical amplifier circuits.
However, graphical analysis of simple circuits provides an excellent way to understand the basic
concepts of amplifiers.
Exercise 11.4
Find 
 and 
 for the circuit of Figure 11.10 if the circuit values are changed to
 and 
 The characteristics for the MOSFET are shown
in Figure 11.11.
Answer 
VDSQ, VDSmin,
VDSmax
VDD=15 V, VGG=3 V, RD=1 kΩ,
vin(t)=sin(2000πt).
VDSQ≅11 V, VDSmin≅6 V, VDSmax≅14 V.

11.3 Bias Circuits
Amplifier analysis has two steps: 1. Determine the Q point. 2. Use a small-signal
equivalent circuit to determine impedances and gains.
Analysis of amplifier circuits is often undertaken in two steps. First, we analyze the dc circuit to
determine the Q point. In this analysis, the nonlinear device equations or the characteristic curves must
be used. Then, after the bias analysis is completed, we use a linear small-signal equivalent circuit to
determine the input resistance, voltage gain, and so on.
The bias circuits that we discuss are suitable for discrete-component designs in which large
capacitances (for isolating the amplifier bias circuit from the source, load, and adjacent amplifier stages)
and relatively tight tolerance (
 percent or better) resistances are practical. Close-tolerance resistances
and large capacitances are not practical in integrated-circuit amplifiers; and their design is more
complicated due to interaction between source, amplifier stages, and the load. Integrated-circuit design
is mostly beyond the scope of this book.
The two-battery bias circuit used in the amplifier of Figure 11.10 is not practical. Usually, only one dc
voltage is readily available instead of two. However, a more significant problem is that FET parameters
vary considerably from device to device. In general, we want to establish a Q point near the middle of
the load line so the output signal can swing in both directions without clipping. When the FET
parameters vary from unit to unit, the two-battery circuit can wind up with some circuits biased near one
end or the other.
The Fixed- plus Self-Bias Circuit
The fixed- plus self-bias circuit shown in Figure 11.13(a) is a good circuit for establishing Q points
that are relatively independent of device parameters.
±5

Figure 11.13
Fixed- plus self-bias circuit.
For purposes of analysis, we replace the gate circuit with its Thévenin equivalent as shown in Figure
11.13(b). The Thévenin voltage is
and the Thévenin resistance 
 is the parallel combination of 
 and 
 Writing a voltage equation
around the gate loop of Figure 11.13(b), we obtain
(We have assumed that the voltage drop across 
 is zero because the gate current of an NMOS
transistor is extremely small.)
Usually, we want to bias the transistor in its saturation region, so we have
Simultaneous solution of Equations 11.12 and 11.13 yields the operating point (provided that it falls in
the saturation region). Plots of these two equations are shown in Figure 11.14. Equation 11.12 plots as
a straight line called the bias line. Notice that two roots will be found because Equation 11.13 plots as
the dashed curve for 
 Thus, the smaller root found for 
 is extraneous and should be
discarded. The larger root found for 
 and the smaller root for 
 are the true operating point.
VG=VDD R2R1+R2
(11.11)
RG
R1
R2.
VG=vGS+RSiD
(11.12)
RG
iD=K (vGS−Vto)2
(11.13)
vGS<Vto.
vGS
vGS
iD

Figure 11.14
Graphical solution of Equations 11.12 and 11.13.
Simultaneous solution of Equations 11.12 and 11.13 yields the operating point
(provided that it falls in the saturation region). The larger root found for 
 and
the smaller root for 
 are the true operating point.
Finally, writing a voltage equation around the drain loop of Figure 11.13 gives us
Example 11.2 Determination of Q Point for the Fixed- plus Self-Bias Circuit
Analyze the fixed- plus self-bias circuit shown in Figure 11.15. The transistor has
 and 
vGS
iD
vDS=VDD−(RD+RS)iD
(11.14)
KP=50 μA/V2, Vto=2 V, L=10 μm,
W=400 μm.

Figure 11.15
Fixed- plus self-bias circuit of Example 11.2.
Solution
First, we use Equation 11.3 to compute the device constant, which yields
Substituting values into Equation 11.11, we have
The Q-point values must satisfy Equations 11.12 and 11.13. Thus, we need to find the solution to
the following pair of equations:
Using the last equation to substitute for 
 in the expression for 
 we have
Rearranging, we have
After values are substituted, we have
K=(WL) KP2=1 mA/V2
VG=VDD R2R1+R2=20 1(3+1)=5 V
VG=VGSQ+RSIDQ
IDQK (VGSQ−Vto)2
IDQ
VG,
VG=VGSQ+RSK (VGSQ−Vto)2
VGSQ2+(1RSK−2Vto) VGSQ+Vto2−VGRSK=0
VGSQ2−3.630VGSQ+2.148=0

Solving, we find 
 and 
 The second root is extraneous and should be
discarded. Then, we have
Solving for the drain-to-source voltage, we get
which is high enough to ensure that operation is in saturation as assumed in the solution.
Exercise 11.5
Determine 
 and 
 for the circuit shown in Figure 11.16. The transistor has
 and 
Figure 11.16
Circuit for Exercise 11.5.
Answer 
Exercise 11.6
Determine 
 and 
 for the PMOS circuit shown in Figure 11.17. The transistor has
 and 
Figure 11.17
VGSQ=2.886 V
VGSQ=0.744 V.
IDQ=K (VGSQ−Vto)2=0.784 mA
VDSQ=VDD−(RD+RS) IDQ=14.2 V
IDQ
VDSQ
KP=50 μA/V2, Vto=1 V, L=10 μm,
W=200 μm.
IDQ=2 mA; VDSQ=16 V.
IDQ
VDSQ
KP=25 μA/V2, Vto=−1 V, L=10 μm,
W=400 μm.

Circuit for Exercise 11.6.
Answer IDQ=4.5 mA; VDSQ=−11 V.

11.4 Small-Signal Equivalent Circuits
In the preceding section, we considered discrete-component dc bias circuits for FET amplifiers. Now, we
consider the relationships between signal currents and voltages resulting in small changes from the Q
point. As in Section 9.8, we denote total quantities by lowercase letters with uppercase subscripts, such
as 
 and 
 The dc Q point values are denoted by uppercase letters with an additional Q
subscript, such as 
 and 
 The signals are denoted by lowercase letters with lowercase
subscripts, such as 
 and 
 The total current or voltage is the sum of the Q point value and the
signal. Thus, we can write
and
Figure 11.18 illustrates the terms in Equation 11.15.
Figure 11.18
Illustration of the terms in Equation 11.15.
In the discussion that follows, we assume that the FETs are biased in the saturation region, which is
usually the case for amplifier circuits. Equation 11.4, repeated here for convenience,
gives the total drain current in terms of the total gate-to-source voltage. Using Equations 11.15 and
iD(t)
vGS(t).
IDQ
VGSQ.
id(t)
vgs(t).
iD(t)=IDQ+id(t)
(11.15)
vGS(t)=VGSQ+vgs(t)
(11.16)
iD=K (vGS−Vto)2

11.16 to substitute into 11.4, we get
The right-hand side of Equation 11.17 can be expanded to obtain
However, the Q point values are also related by Equation 11.4, so we have
Therefore, the first term on each side of Equation 11.18 can be canceled. Furthermore, we are
interested in small-signal conditions for which the last term on the right-hand side of Equation 11.18 is
negligible and can be dropped [i.e., we assume that 
 is much smaller than 
 for all
values of time]. With these changes, Equation 11.18 becomes
If we define the transconductance of the FET as
Equation 11.20 can be written as
The gate current for the FET is negligible, so we obtain
For small signals, the FET is modeled by a voltage-controlled current source
connected between the drain and source terminals. The model has an open
circuit between gate and source.
IDQ+id(t)=K [ VGSQ+vgs(t)−Vto ]2
(11.17)
IDQ+id(t)=K (VGSQ−Vto)2+2K (VGSQ−Vto) vgs(t)+Kvgs2(t)
(11.18)
IDQ=K (VGSQ−Vto)2
(11.19)
|vgs(t)|
|(VGSQ−Vto)|
id(t)=2K (VGSQ−Vto) vgs(t)
(11.20)
gm=2K (VGSQ−Vto)
(11.21)
id(t)=gmvgs(t)
(11.22)
ig(t)=0
(11.23)

Equations 11.22 and 11.23 are represented by the small-signal equivalent circuit shown in Figure
11.19. Thus for small signals, the FET is modeled by a voltage-controlled current source connected
between the drain and source terminals. The model has an open circuit between gate and source.
Figure 11.19
Small-signal equivalent circuit for FETs.
Dependence of Transconductance on Q Point and Device Parameters
We will see that transconductance 
 is an important parameter in the analysis of amplifier circuits. In
general, better performance is obtained with higher values of 
 Thus, it is important to know how Q
point and device parameters influence transconductance.
Solving Equation 11.19 for the quantity 
 and substituting into Equation 11.21, we obtain
An important point to notice is that 
 is proportional to the square root of the Q point drain current.
Thus, we can increase 
 by choosing a higher value of 
We can increase 
 by choosing a higher value of 
If we use Equation 11.3 to substitute for K in Equation 11.24, we obtain
Thus, we can obtain higher values of 
 for a given value of 
 by increasing the width-to-length ratio
of the MOSFET.
gm
gm.
(VGSQ−Vto)
gm=2KIDQ
(11.24)
gm
gm
IDQ.
gm
IDQ.
gm=2KPW/LIDQ
(11.25)
gm
IDQ

We can obtain higher values of 
 for a given value of 
 by increasing the
width-to-length ratio of the MOSFET.
More Complex Equivalent Circuits
Sometimes, additions to the equivalent circuit are needed to accurately model FETs. For example, we
would need to include small capacitances between the device terminals if we considered the high-
frequency response of FET amplifiers. The device equations and the equivalent circuit that we have
derived from them describe only the static behavior of the device. For an accurate model with rapidly
changing currents and voltages, capacitances must be considered.
Furthermore, the first-order equations we have used to obtain the equivalent circuit for the FET did not
account for the effect of 
 on the drain current. We have assumed that the drain characteristics are
horizontal in the saturation region, but this is not exactly true—the drain characteristics of real devices
slope slightly upward with increasing 
 If we wish to account for the effect of 
 in the small-signal
equivalent circuit, we must add a resistance 
 called the drain resistance between drain and source as
shown in Figure 11.20. In this case, Equation 11.22 becomes
Figure 11.20
FET small-signal equivalent circuit that accounts for the dependence of 
 on 
Transconductance and Drain Resistance as Partial Derivatives
An alternative definition of 
 can be found by examination of Equation 11.26. Notice that if 
is the ratio of  and 
 In equation form, we have
gm
IDQ
vDS
vDS.
vDS
rd
iD
vDS.
id=gmvgs+vds/rd
(11.26)
gm
vds=0, gm
id
vgs.

However, 
 and 
 represent small changes from the Q point. Therefore, the condition 
 is
equivalent to requiring 
 to remain constant at the Q point value, namely 
 Thus, we can write
where 
 is an increment of drain current centered at the Q point. Similarly, 
 is an increment of
gate-to-source voltage centered at the Q point.
Equation 11.28 is an approximation to a partial derivative. Therefore, 
 is the partial derivative of 
with respect to 
 evaluated at the Q point:
Similarly, the reciprocal of the drain resistance is
Therefore, we can write
Given the drain characteristics, we can determine approximate values of the partial derivatives for a
given Q point. Then, we can model the FET by its small-signal equivalent in analysis of an amplifier
circuit and use the values found for 
 and 
 to compute amplifier gains and impedances. In the next
several sections, we show examples of this process. First, we show how to determine the values of 
and 
 starting from the characteristic curves.
Example 11.3 Determination of 
 and 
 from
the Characteristic Curves
Determine the values of 
 and 
 for the MOSFET having the characteristics shown in Figure 11.
21 at a Q point defined by 
 and 
gm=idvgs|vds=0
(11.27)
id, vgs,
vds
vds=0
vDS
VDSQ.
gm≅ΔiDΔvGS|vDS=VDSQ
(11.28)
ΔiD
ΔvGS
gm
iD
vGS,
gm=∂iD∂vGS|Q point
(11.29)
1rd≅ΔiDΔvDS|vGS=VGSQ
(11.30)
1rd≅∂iD∂vDS|Q point
(11.31)
gm
rd
gm
rd
 [ C=100 M=0 Y=0 K=0 ]gm
 [ C=100 M=0 Y=0 K=0 ]rd
gm
rd
VGSQ=3.5
VDSQ=10 V.

Figure 11.21
Determination of 
 and 
 See Example 11.3.
Solution
First, we locate the Q point as shown in the figure. Then, we use Equation 11.28 to find 
We must make changes around the Q point while holding 
 constant at 10 V. Thus, the
incremental changes are made along a vertical line through the Q point. To obtain a representative
value for 
 we consider an increment centered on the Q point (rather than making the changes in
one direction from the Q point). Taking the changes starting from the curve below the Q point and
ending at the curve above the Q point, we have 
 and 
 The 
increment is labeled in the figure. Thus, we have
The drain resistance is found by applying Equation 11.30:
Because the incremental changes are to be made while holding 
 constant, the changes are
made along the characteristic curve through the Q point. Thus, 
 is the slope of the curve through
the Q point. For 
 we obtain 
 at 
 and 
 at 
Thus, we get
gm
rd.
gm :
gm≅ΔiDΔvGS|vDS=VDSQ=10 V
vDS
gm,
ΔiD≅10.7−4.7=6 mA
ΔvGS=1 V.
ΔiD
gm=ΔiDΔvGS=6 mA1 V=6 mS
1rd=ΔiDΔvDS|vGS=VGSQ
vGS
1/rd
vGS=VGSQ=3.5 V,
iD≅6.7 mA
vDS=4 V,
iD≅8.0 mA
vDS=14 V.

Taking the reciprocal, we find 
Exercise 11.7
Find the values of 
 and 
 for the characteristics of Figure 11.21 at a Q point of 
 and
Answer 
 
Exercise 11.8
Show that Equation 11.21 results from application of Equation 11.29 to Equation 11.4.
1rd=ΔiDΔvDS≅(8.0−6.7) mA(14−4) V=0.13×10−3
rd=7.7 kΩ.
gm
rd
VGSQ=2.5 V
VDSQ=6 V.
gm≅3.3 mS, rd≅20 kΩ.

11.5 Common-Source Amplifiers
The circuit diagram of a common-source amplifier is shown in Figure 11.22. The ac signal to be
amplified is v(t). The coupling capacitors 
 and 
 as well as the bypass capacitor 
 are
intended to have very small impedances for the ac signal. In this section, we carry out a midband
analysis in which we assume that these capacitors are short circuits for the signal. The resistors
 and 
 form the bias network, and their values are selected to obtain a suitable Q point.
The amplified output signal is applied to the load 
Figure 11.22
Common-source amplifier.
The Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit
The small-signal equivalent circuit for the amplifier is shown in Figure 11.23. The input coupling
capacitor 
 has been replaced by a short circuit. The MOSFET has been replaced by its small-signal
equivalent. Because the bypass capacitor 
 is assumed to be a short circuit, the source terminal of the
FET is connected directly to ground—which is why the circuit is called a common-source amplifier.
C1
C2,
CS,
R1, R2, RS,
RD
RL.
C1
CS

Figure 11.23
Small-signal equivalent circuit for the common-source amplifier.
The dc supply voltage source acts as a short circuit for ac current.
The dc supply voltage source acts as a short circuit for the ac signal. (Even if ac current flows through
the dc source, the ac voltage across it is zero. Thus, for ac currents, the dc voltage source is a short.)
Consequently, both 
 and 
 are connected from gate to ground in the equivalent circuit. Similarly, 
is connected from drain to ground.
Voltage Gain
Next, we derive an expression for the voltage gain of the common-source amplifier. Refer to the small-
signal equivalent circuit, and notice that the resistances 
 
 and 
 are in parallel. We denote the
equivalent resistance by
The output voltage is the product of the current from the controlled source and the equivalent resistance,
given by
The minus sign is needed because of the reference directions selected (i.e., the current 
 flows out
of the positive end of the voltage reference for 
). Furthermore, the input voltage and the gate-to-
source voltage are equal:
Now if we divide the respective sides of Equation 11.33 by those of Equation 11.34, we obtain the
voltage gain:
R1
R2
RD
rd, RD,
RL
RL′=11/rd+1/RD+1/RL
(11.32)
vo=−(gmvgs) RL′
(11.33)
gmvgs
vo
vin=vgs
(11.34)

The minus sign in the expression for the voltage gain shows that the common-source amplifier is
inverting. Notice that the voltage gain is proportional to 
In small-signal midband analysis of FET amplifiers, the coupling capacitors,
bypass capacitors, and dc voltage sources are replaced by short circuits. The
FET is replaced with its small-signal equivalent circuit. Then, we write circuit
equations and derive useful expressions for gains, input impedance, and output
impedance.
Input Resistance
The input resistance of the common-source amplifier is given by
in which 
 denotes the parallel combination of 
 and 
 The resistances 
 and 
 form part of
the bias network, but their values are not critical. (See Section  11.3 for a discussion of the bias circuit.)
Practical resistance values range from 0 to perhaps 
 in discrete-component circuits. Thus, we
have a great deal of freedom in design of the input resistance of a common-source amplifier. (We will
see in the next chapter that this is not true for BJT amplifier circuits.)
We have a great deal of freedom in design of the input resistance of a common-
source amplifier.
Output Resistance
Av=vovin=−gmRL′
(11.35)
gm.
Rin=viniin=RG=R1‖R2
(11.36)
R1‖R2
R1
R2.
R1
R2
10 MΩ

To find the output resistance of an amplifier, we disconnect the load, replace the signal source by its
internal resistance, and then find the resistance looking into the output terminals. The equivalent circuit
with these changes is shown in Figure 11.24.
Figure 11.24
Circuit used to find 
To find the output resistance of an amplifier, we disconnect the load, replace the
signal source by its internal resistance, and then find the resistance by looking
into the output terminals.
Because there is no source connected to the input side of the circuit, we conclude that 
Therefore, the controlled current source 
 produces zero current and appears as an open circuit.
Consequently, the output resistance is the parallel combination of 
 and 
Example 11.4 Gain and Impedance Calculations for a Common-Source Amplifier
Consider the common-source amplifier shown in Figure 11.25. The NMOS transistor has
 and 
 Find the midband voltage gain, input resistance,
and output resistance of the amplifier. Then, assuming that the input source is given by
Ro.
vgs=0.
gmvgs
RD
rd :
Ro=11/RD+1/rd
(11.37)
KP=50 μA/V2, Vto=2 V, L=10 μm,
W=400 μm.

Figure 11.25
Common-source amplifier.
compute the output voltage. Also, assume that the frequency of the source (which is 1000 Hz) is in
the midband region.
Solution
First, we need to find the Q point so we can determine the value of 
 for the MOSFET. The bias
circuit consists of 
 and the MOSFET. This circuit was analyzed in Example 11.2,
where we determined that 
Next, we use Equation 11.25 to find the transconductance of the device:
Because the drain characteristics are horizontal in the saturation region, we have 
Now, we use Equations 11.32, 11.35, 11.36, and 11.37 to find
The signal voltage divides between the internal source resistance and the input resistance of the
amplifier. Thus, we have
v(t)=100 sin(2000πt) mV
gm
R1, R2, RD, RS,
IDQ=0.784 mA.
gm=2KPW/LIDQ=1.77 mS
rd=∞.
RL′=11/rd+1/RD+1/RL=3197 Ω
Av=vovin=−gmRL′=−5.66
Rin=viniin=RG=R1‖R2=750 kΩ
Ro=11/RD+1/rd=4.7 kΩ

Then, the output voltage can be found as
Notice the phase inversion of 
 compared to 
Exercise 11.9
Find the voltage gain of the amplifier of Example 11.4 with 
 replaced by an open circuit.
Answer 
Exercise 11.10
Consider the circuit of Figure 11.22 with the bypass capacitor 
 replaced by an open circuit. Draw the
small-signal equivalent circuit. Then assuming that 
 is an open circuit for simplicity, derive an
expression for the voltage gain in terms of 
 and the resistances.
Answer 
Exercise 11.11
Evaluate the gain expression found in Exercise 11.10 by using the values given in Example 11.4.
Compare the result with the voltage gain found in the example.
Answer 
 without the bypass capacitor compared to 
 with the bypass capacitor in
place. Notice that unbypassed impedance between the FET source terminal and ground strongly
reduces the gain of a common-source amplifier
Unbypassed impedance between the FET source terminal and ground strongly
reduces the gain of a common-source amplifier.
vin=v(t) RinR+Rin=88.23 sin(2000πt) mV
vo(t)=Avvin(t)=−500 sin(2000πt) mV
vo(t)
vin(t).
RL
Avoc=−8.32.
CS
rd
gm
Av=−gmRL′/(1+gmRS).
Av=−0.979
Av=−5.66

11.6 Source Followers
Another amplifier circuit known as a source follower is shown in Figure 11.26. The signal to be
amplified is v(t), and R is the internal (Thévenin) resistance of the signal source. The coupling capacitor
 causes the ac input signal to appear at the gate of the FET. The capacitor 
 connects the load to
the source terminal of the MOSFET. (In the midband analysis of the amplifier, we assume that the
coupling capacitors behave as short circuits.) The resistors 
 and 
 form the bias circuit.
Figure 11.26
Source follower.
The Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit
The small-signal equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 11.27. The coupling capacitors have been
replaced by short circuits, and the FET has been replaced by its small-signal equivalent. Notice that the
drain terminal is connected directly to ground because the dc supply becomes a short (for ac currents)
in the small-signal equivalent. Here the FET equivalent circuit is drawn in a different configuration (i.e.,
with the drain at the bottom) from that shown earlier, but it is the same electrically.
C1
C2
RS, R1,
R2

Figure 11.27
Small-signal ac equivalent circuit for the source follower.
The ability to draw the small-signal equivalent for an amplifier circuit is important. Test yourself to see if
you can obtain the small-signal circuit starting from Figure 11.26.
Voltage Gain
Now, we derive an expression for the voltage gain of the source follower. Notice that 
 and 
 are
in parallel. We denote the parallel combination by
The output voltage is given by
Furthermore, we can write the following voltage equation:
Using Equation 11.39 to substitute for 
 in Equation 11.40, we have
Dividing the respective sides of Equations 11.39 and 11.41, we obtain the following expression for the
voltage gain:
Notice that the voltage gain given in Equation 11.42 is positive and is less than unity. Thus, the source
follower is a noninverting amplifier with voltage gain less than unity.
The source follower is a noninverting amplifier with voltage gain less than unity.
rd, RS,
RL
RL′=11/rd+1/Rs+1/RL
(11.38)
vo=gmvgsRL′
(11.39)
vin=vgs+vo
(11.40)
vo
vin=vgs+gmvgsRL′
(11.41)
Av=vovin=gmRL′1+gmRL′
(11.42)

Input Resistance
The input resistance is the resistance seen looking into the input terminals of the equivalent circuit.
Thus, we have
in which 
 denotes the parallel combination of 
 and 
Output Resistance
To find the output resistance, we remove the load resistance, replace the signal source with its internal
resistance, and look back into the output terminals. It is helpful to attach a test source 
 to the output
terminals as shown in Figure 11.28. Then, the output resistance is found as
Figure 11.28
Equivalent circuit used to find the output resistance of the source follower.
where  is the current supplied by the test source as shown in the figure. It can be shown that the
output resistance is given by
This can be quite low in value, and one reason for using a source follower is to obtain low output
resistance.
Rin=viniin=RG=R1‖R2
(11.43)
R1‖R2
R1
R2.
vx
Ro=vxix
(11.44)
ix
Ro=1gm+1/RS+1/rd
(11.45)

One reason for using a source follower is to obtain low output resistance.
Example 11.5 Gain and Impedance Calculations for a Source Follower
Consider the source follower shown in Figure 11.26 given 
 and 
 The NMOS
transistor has 
 and 
 Find the value for 
 to achieve
 Then compute the voltage gain, input resistance, and output resistance.
Solution
From Equations 11.3 and 11.4, we have
and
Solving for 
 and substituting values, we get
The dc voltage at the gate terminal (with respect to ground) is given by
The dc voltage at the source terminal of the NMOS is
Finally, we find the source resistance as
(Of course, in a discrete circuit, we would choose a standard nominal value for 
 However, we will
continue this example by using the exact value computed for 
)
RL=1 kΩ
R1=R2=2 MΩ.
KP=50 μA/V2, L=2 μm, W=160 μm,
Vto=1 V.
RS
IDQ=10 mA.
K=(WL) KP2=2 mA/V2
IDQ=K (VGSQ−Vto)2
VGSQ
VGSQ=IDQ/K+Vto=3.236 V
VG=VDD×R2R1+R2=7.5 V
VS=VG−VGSQ=4.264 V
RS=VSIDQ=426.4 Ω
RS.
RS.

Next, we use Equation 11.25 to find the transconductance of the device:
Because the drain characteristics are horizontal in the saturation region, we have 
Next, we substitute values into Equation 11.38 to obtain
Then, the voltage gain, given by Equation 11.42, is
The input resistance is
The output resistance, given by Equation 11.45, is
This is a fairly low output resistance compared with that of other single-FET amplifier configurations.
The current gain is shown by the use of Equation 11.3 to be
The power gain is given by
Even though the voltage gain is less than unity, the output power is much greater than the input
power because of the high input resistance.
The source follower has voltage gain slightly less than unity, high input
impedance, and low output impedance. Current gain and power gain can be
larger than unity.
gm=2KPW/LIDQ=8.944 mS
rd=∞.
RL′=11/rd+1/RS+1/RL=298.9 Ω
Av=vovin=gmRL′1+gmRL′=0.7272
Rin=R1‖R2=1 MΩ
Ro=1gm+1/RS+1/rd=88.58 Ω
Ai=Av RinRL=727.2
G=AvAi=528.8

Exercise 11.12
Derive Equation 11.45.
Exercise 11.13
Derive expressions for the voltage gain, input resistance, and output resistance of the common-gate
amplifier shown in Figure 11.29, assuming that 
 is an open circuit.
Figure 11.29
Common-gate amplifier.
Answer The small-signal equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 11.30.
Figure 11.30
See Exercise 11.13.
rd
Av=gmRL′; Rin=1/(gm+1/RS); Ro=RD.

11.7 CMOS Logic Gates
In complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology, both NMOS and PMOS
transistors are fabricated on the same chip. Next, we describe how the basic building blocks of digital
systems (NAND gates or NOR gates) are constructed using CMOS technology.
CMOS Inverter
A CMOS inverter is shown in Figure 11.31. The NMOS and PMOS FETs are constructed by adding
impurities to a silicon crystal, forming regions of n-type and p-type semiconductor as shown in part (a) of
the figure. Notice that the gates G are insulated from the rest of the circuit by layers of silicon dioxide
 Thus, the input behaves as an open circuit (except for a small amount of capacitance).
Figure 11.31
CMOS inverter.
(SiO2).

PRACTICAL APPLICATION
11.1 Where Did Those Trout Go?
Fish biologists often need to learn about the migratory behavior of various kinds of fish to
properly regulate fishing and habitat changes. One example is the effort to reestablish the
coaster brook trout in various streams on the south shore of Lake Superior. Coaster brook trout
migrate from their natal streams into Lake Superior, where they grow much larger than their
stream-dwelling cousins. As adults, highly colored coasters return to their native streams each
fall to spawn. Originally, coasters were found in nearly all of the rivers entering Lake Superior;
however, over-fishing and habitat changes due mainly to logging have caused them to disappear
from much of their original range. Currently, several projects are underway to attempt to
reestablish these beautiful trout in south shore streams.
A powerful approach to gaining accurate information about fish migration is to implant radio
frequency identification (RFID) tags in the fish. Then, antennas located in the streams can
monitor movement of the fish. A wide variety of RFID systems are in use. We will describe a
single representative system.
A typical RFID tag used in fisheries research consists of a coil of enameled copper wire wound
on a ferrite core, a CMOS integrated circuit chip, and two capacitors, all hermetically sealed in a
glass tube comparable in size to a large grain of rice. These tags are implanted in fish through
hypodermic needles. The tags do not contain an internal power source, so they are sometimes
called passive identification tags (PIT).
A typical streamside fish monitoring station is illustrated in Figure PA11.1. Because the
important locations are often far from power lines, power for the station is provided by deep-
cycle storage batteries recharged by solar panels. The antenna often consists of a loop of wire
suspended above the stream on poles and weighted to the stream bottom with rocks.

FIGURE
PA11.1
Typical monitoring station.
A schematic diagram of a representative system is shown in Figure PA11.2. The stream
antenna appears as the inductance 
 typically 10 to 
 in value. A capacitance 
 called
an antenna tuner, forms a parallel resonant circuit with 
 having a resonant frequency of 134.2
kHz. The coil in the RFID tag also acts as an antenna and is represented by the inductance 
which forms a parallel resonant circuit with 
FIGURE
PA11.2
Electrical schematic diagram of a fish monitoring system.
In operation, the switch periodically moves to contact A, applying a 134.2-kHz sine wave to the
stream antenna, which creates an ac magnetic field in the vicinity of the antenna. When a
L1,
100 μH
C1,
L1
L2,
C2.

tagged fish is present, part of the magnetic flux links 
 resulting in a 134.2-kHz voltage at the
input to the CMOS IC chip. This voltage is rectified by the diode contained in the chip charging
 After about 50 ms, the switch moves to contact B so that the voltage applied to the stream
antenna becomes zero. Then, power is supplied to the CMOS chip by the charge stored on 
When the CMOS chip senses the end of the pulse, it transmits a 64-bit codeword that identifies
the particular tag and, hence, the fish into which it was implanted.
Frequency shift keying (FSK) is used to encode the bits. For a 1-bit, the chip applies 16 cycles of
a 123.2-kHz signal to 
 and for a 0-bit, it applies 16 cycles of a 134.2-kHz signal to 
 The
resulting magnetic field partially links 
 inducing a voltage that is applied to the FSK
demodulator and data logger.
The FSK demodulator determines the frequency of each 16-cycle segment and the resulting bit
value. The resulting code words are saved by the data logger, which is read periodically by the
fish biologist. The data logger can also save additional data, such as the time of day that the fish
passed through the station, the stream temperature, and the stream flow rate, if additional
sensors are placed in the stream.
Additional information about coaster brook-trout programs and fish monitoring systems can be
found on the web.
The circuit diagram is shown in Figure 11.31(b). The dc supply voltage 
 is applied at the top of the
circuit. When the input voltage is high 
 a conducting channel is induced between the drain D
and the source S of the NMOS transistor. Thus, the NMOS transistor becomes a low resistance and
ideally behaves as a closed switch, as shown in Figure 11.31(c). Furthermore, the PMOS transistor is
off, and it behaves as an open switch. Thus, with 
 high, the output voltage 
 becomes low (i.e.,
).
On the other hand, with 
 low, a conducting layer is induced under the gate in the PMOS transistor,
but not in the NMOS transistor. Therefore, the PMOS transistor is on and the NMOS transistor is off.
This is illustrated in Figure 11.31(d). Then the output voltage 
 is high 
With the input low, the PMOS is on, the NMOS is off, and the output is high. With
the input high, the situation is reversed.
Because of the switching action of the transistors, the output is low when the input is high, and vice
L2,
C3.
C3.
L2;
L2.
L1,
VDD
(Vin=VDD),
Vin
Vout
Vout=0
Vin
Vout
(Vout=VDD).

versa. This is exactly how a logic inverter is supposed to behave.
CMOS NAND Gate
By adding transistors to the inverter circuit, we can construct a NAND gate. The circuit for a two-input
NAND gate is shown in Figure 11.32(a). Notice that we have two PMOS transistors in parallel and two
NMOS transistors in series.
Figure 11.32
Two-input CMOS NAND gate.
When their gates are high, the NMOS devices are on, and when their gates are low, the NMOS devices
are off. The opposite is true for the PMOS transistors (i.e., the PMOS transistors are on when their gates
are low, and they are off when their gates are high).
Placing N PMOS transistors in parallel and N NMOS transistors in series
produces an N-input NAND gate.
The equivalent circuit with A high and B low is shown in Figure 11.32(b). Furthermore, the equivalent
circuit with both A and B high is shown in Figure 11.32(c). Notice that because of the switching action of
the transistors, the output is low only if both A and B are high. This is exactly the way that a NAND gate
is supposed to behave. By adding more transistors, we could produce a three-input NAND gate.

CMOS NOR Gate
Placing N PMOS transistors in series and N NMOS transistors in parallel
produces an N-input NOR gate.
The circuit diagram of a two-input NOR gate is shown in Figure 11.33. In this case, we have two PMOS
devices in series and two NMOS devices in parallel. The operation of the NOR gate is very similar to
that of the NAND gate discussed previously. Here again, the NMOS devices are on when their gates are
high and off when their gates are low. The situation is reversed for the PMOS devices.
Figure 11.33
Two-input CMOS NOR gate.
Exercise 11.14
Draw the equivalent circuits [similar to Figure 11.32(b) and (c)] of the NOR gate shown in Figure 11.33
for:
a. A high and B high;
b. A high and B low;

c. A low and B low. Then give a truth table for the gate.
Answer See Figure 11.34.
Figure 11.34
Answers for Exercise 11.14.
Exercise 11.15
Draw the circuit diagram of a three-input NOR gate.
Answer See Figure 11.35.

Figure 11.35
Three-input CMOS NOR gate. (Answer for Exercise 11.15.)
Conclusions
In Chapter 7, we saw that complex combinatorial logic functions can be achieved simply by
interconnecting NAND gates (or NOR gates). Furthermore, logic gates can be interconnected to form
flip-flops. Interconnections of flip-flops form registers. A complex digital system, such as a computer,
consists of many gates, flip-flops, and registers. Thus, logic gates are the basic building blocks for
complex digital systems.
Complex digital systems can be constructed by interconnecting billions of NMOS
and PMOS transistors, all of which are fabricated on a single silicon chip by a
relatively small number of processing steps.
Modern technology can construct billions of CMOS gates on a silicon wafer by adding impurities, oxide
layers, and metal interconnections. Relatively few (perhaps 20) steps are needed in the manufacturing
process. This results in the production of powerful computers at low cost.

Summary
1. The structure of an enhancement n-channel MOS transistor is shown in Figure 11.1 on page
558.
2. The MOSFET is the primary device that underlies the rapid advances in digital electronics over
the past several decades.
3. In an NMOS transistor, when a sufficiently large (positive) voltage is applied to the gate relative
to the source, electrons are attracted to the region under the gate, and a channel of n-type
material is induced between the drain and the source. Then if voltage is applied between the
drain and the source, current flows into the drain through the channel and out the source. Drain
current is controlled by the voltage applied to the gate.
4. MOSFETs operate in cutoff, in the linear region, or in saturation.
5. Usually, KP is determined by the fabrication process. However, in designing a circuit, we can
vary the ratio W/L to obtain transistors best suited to various parts of the circuit.
6. Simple amplifier circuits can be analyzed by using graphical (load-line) techniques.
7. Nonlinear distortion occurs in FET amplifiers because of the nonuniform spacing of the drain
characteristics. Distortion is less pronounced for smaller signal amplitudes.
8. For use as amplifiers, FETs are usually biased in the saturation region.
9. In a small-signal midband analysis, a FET can be modeled by the equivalent circuit shown in
Figure 11.20 on page 574.
10. Transconductance of a FET is defined as
11. Small-signal drain resistance of a FET is defined as
12. In small-signal midband analysis of FET amplifiers, the coupling capacitors, bypass capacitors,
and dc voltage sources are replaced by short circuits. The FET is replaced with its small-signal
equivalent circuit. Then, we write circuit equations and derive useful expressions for gains, input
impedance, and output impedance.
13. To find the output resistance of an amplifier, we disconnect the load, replace the signal source
by its internal resistance, and then find the resistance looking into the output terminals.
14. The common-source amplifier is inverting and can have voltage-gain magnitude larger than
unity.
15. Unbypassed impedance between the FET source terminal and ground strongly reduces the gain
of a common-source amplifier.
gm=∂iD∂vGS|Q point
1rd=∂iD∂vDS|Q point

16. The source follower has voltage gain slightly less than unity, high current gain, and relatively low
output impedance. It is noninverting.
17. Complex digital systems can be constructed by interconnecting millions of NMOS and PMOS
transistors, all of which are fabricated on a single chip by a relatively small number of processing
steps.

Problems
Section 11.1: NMOS and PMOS Transistors
P11.1. Sketch the physical structure of an n-channel enhancement MOSFET. Label the channel
length L, the width W, the terminals, and the channel region. Draw the corresponding circuit
symbol.
P11.2. Give the equations for the drain current and the ranges of 
 and 
 in terms of
the threshold voltage 
 for each region (cutoff, saturation, and triode) of an n-channel
MOSFET.
*P11.3. A certain NMOS transistor has 
 and 
 For each set of voltages, state the
region of operation and compute the drain current.
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
c. 
 and 
*P11.4. Suppose that we have an NMOS transistor with 
 and
 Sketch the drain characteristics for 
 ranging from 0 to 10 V and 
 and 4 V.
P11.5.We have an n-channel enhancement MOSFET with 
 and 
 Given
that 
 for what range of 
 is the device in the saturation region? In the triode region?
Plot 
 versus 
 for operation in the saturation region.
P11.6. Suppose we have an NMOS transistor that has 
 What is the region of operation
(linear, saturation, or cutoff) if
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
c. 
 and 
d. 
 and 
P11.7. What is the region of operation of an enhancement NMOS device if the gate is connected
to the drain and a positive voltage greater than the threshold is applied to the drain with respect
to the source? If the applied voltage is less than the threshold?
vGS, vDS,
vGD
Vto
Vto=1 V,
W=
vGS=4 V
vDS=10 V;
vGS=4 V
vDS=2 V;
vGS=0 V
vDS=10 V.
KP=50 μA/V2, Vto=1 V, L=10 μm,
W=200 μm.
vDS
vGS=
Vto=1 V
K=0.1 mA/V2.
vGS=4 V,
vDS
iD
vGS
Vto=1 V.
vGS=5 V
vDS=10 V;
vGS=3 V
vDS=1 V;
vGS=3 V
vDS=6 V;
vGS=0 V
vDS=5 V?

P11.8. Determine the region of operation for each of the enhancement transistors and the
currents shown in Figure P11.8. The transistors have 
 and 
Figure P11.8
P11.9. Suppose we need an NMOS transistor for which 
 when 
 Process
constraints result in 
 and 
 Determine the width-to-length ratio needed for
the transistor. If 
 what is the value of W?
P11.10. Because of process constraints, L and W are required to be at least 
Furthermore, to save chip area, we do not want L or W to exceed 
 How should we select L
and W to obtain the least drain current for a given transistor? The greatest drain current?
Assuming operation with identical voltages, what ratio of drain currents (between different
transistors) can be achieved?
*P11.11. Two points in the saturation region of a certain NMOS transistor are
 and 
 Determine the values of 
 and K for this
transistor.
P11.12. Suppose we have an NMOS transistor operating as a voltage-controlled resistance, as
shown in Figure 11.4 on page 560, with 
 Find an approximate expression for the
resistance of the channel in terms of the device parameters and voltages. Given 
 and
 compute the resistance for 
 1, 1.5, and 2 V.
P11.13. Find the currents and the region of operation for each of the enhancement transistors
shown in Figure P11.13 for 
 and for 
 The transistors have 
 and
|Vto|=1 V
K=0.1 mA/V2.
iD=2 mA
vGS=vDS=5 V.
KP=50 μA/V2
Vto=1 V.
L=2 μm,
0.25 μm.
2 μm.
(vGS=2 V, iD=0.2 mA)
(vGS=3 V, iD=1.8 mA).
Vto
vDS«vGS−Vto.
Vto=0.5 V
K=0.1 mA/V2,
vGS=0.5,
Vin=0
Vin=5 V.
|Vto|=1 V
K=0.2 mA/V2.

Section 11.2: Load-Line Analysis of a Simple NMOS Amplifier
Figure P11.13
P11.14.Given that the enhancement transistor shown in Figure P11.14 has 
 and
 find the value of the resistance R.
Figure P11.14
*P11.15. A p-channel enhancement MOSFET has 
 and 
 Assuming
operation in the saturation region, what value of 
 is required for 
Vto=1 V
K=0.5 mA/V2,
Vto=−0.5 V
K=0.2 mA/V2.
vGS
iD=0.8 mA?
P11.16. What is the principal cause of distortion in FET amplifiers?
*P11.17. Draw the load lines on the 
 axes for the circuit of Figure 11.10 on page 567 for
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
c. 
 and 
How does the position of the load line change as 
 increases in value?
P11.18. Draw the load lines on the 
 axes for the circuit of Figure 11.10 on page 567 for
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
c. 
 and 
How does the position of the load line change as 
 increases in value?
*P11.19. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 11.10 on page 567. The transistor characteristics
are shown in Figure 11.11. Suppose that 
 is changed to 0 V. Determine the values of
 and 
 Find the gain of the amplifier.
P11.20. Consider the amplifier shown in Figure P11.20.
iD−vDS
RD=1 kΩ
VDD=20 V
RD=2 kΩ
VDD=20 V
RD=3 kΩ
VDD=20 V
RD
iD−vDS
RD=1 kΩ
VDD=5 V
RD=1 kΩ
VDD=10 V
RD=1 kΩ
VDD=15 V
VDD
VGG
VDSQ, VDSmin,
VDSmax.

Figure P11.20
a. Find 
 assuming that the coupling capacitor is a short circuit for the ac signal and
an open circuit for dc. [Hint: Apply the superposition principle for the ac and dc sources.]
b. If the FET has 
 and 
 sketch its drain characteristics to scale for 
and 4 V.
c. Draw the load line for the amplifier on the characteristics.
d. Find the values of 
 and 
*P11.21. What is the largest value of 
 allowed in the circuit of Problem P11.20 if the
instantaneous operating point is required to remain in the saturation region at all times?
P11.22. Use a load-line analysis of the circuit shown in Figure P11.22 to determine the values of
 and 
 The characteristics of the FET are shown in Figure 11.21 on
page 576. [Hint: First, replace the 15-V source and the resistances by their Thévenin equivalent
circuit.]
Figure P11.22
P11.23. Suppose that the resistance 
 in Figure 11.10 (page 567) is replaced with an unusual
two-terminal nonlinear device for which 
 where 
 is the current through the device in
mA and v is the voltage across the device in volts (referenced positive at the end connected to
). Carefully sketch the load line on Figure 11.11 (page 567). What shape is this load line?
P11.24. Use a load-line analysis for the PMOS amplifier shown in Figure P11.24 to determine
vGS(t),
Vto=1 V
K=
vGS=1, 2, 3,
VDSQ, VDSmin,
VDSmax.
RD
VDSQ, VDS min,
VDS max.
RD
v=0.1iD2,
iD
VDD

Section 11.3: Bias Circuits
the maximum, minimum, and Q-point values of 
 The characteristics of the transistor are
shown in Figure 11.9 on page 565.
Figure P11.24
P11.25. The distorted signal shown in Figure 11.12(b) on page 568 can be written as
The term 
 is the desired signal. The term 
 is distortion, which
in this case has twice the frequency of the input signal, and is called second-harmonic distortion.
Determine the values of 
 and the percentage second-harmonic distortion, which is
defined as 
 (A high-quality audio amplifier has a distortion percentage less
than 0.1 percent.)
vo(t).
vDS(t)
=
VDC+V1m sin(2000πt)
+V2m cos(4000πt)
V1m sin(2000πt)
V2m cos(4000πt)
V1m, V2m,
|V2m/V1m|×100%.
P11.26. In an amplifier circuit, why do we need to bias the MOSFET at an operating point? What
would happen if the signal peak amplitude was smaller than 1 V, the transistor had 
 and
we biased the transistor at 
*P11.27. Find 
 and 
 for the circuit shown in Figure P11.27. The MOSFET has 
and 
Figure P11.27
Vto=1 V,
VGSQ=0?
IDQ
VDSQ
Vto=1 V
K=0.25 mA/V2.

*P11.28. We need a fixed- plus self-bias circuit for an NMOS source follower with
 and 
 The transistor has 
 and
 The circuit is to have 
 and 
 Determine the values of 
 and 
*P11.29. The transistor of Figure P11.29 has 
 and 
 Determine the values of 
 and
Figure P11.29
P11.30. The fixed- plus self-bias circuit of Figure 11.13 on page 569 has
 and 
 The MOSFET has 
 and
 Determine the Q point.
P11.31.
a. Find the value of 
 for the circuit shown in Figure P11.31. Assume that 
 and
Figure P11.31
b. Repeat for 
 and 
P11.32. Consider the fixed- plus self-bias circuit of Figure 11.13(a) on page 569, with
 and 
 Nominally, the transistor has
and 
 The circuit is to have 
 and
 Determine the values needed for 
 and for 
P11.33. Find 
 and 
 for the circuit shown in Figure P11.33. The MOSFET has 
VDD=12 V, RD=0,
R1=1 MΩ.
KP=50 μA/V2, W=800 μm, L=10 μm,
Vto=1 V.
VDSQ=6 V
IDQ≅2 mA.
R2
RS.
KP=
Vto=1 V.
R1
Rs.
VDD=15 V, R1=2 MΩ, R2=1 MΩ, RS=4.7 kΩ,
RD=4.7 kΩ.
Vto=1 V
K=0.25 mA/V2.
IDQ
Vto=4 V
K=1 mA/V2.
Vto=2 V
K=2 mA/V2.
VDD=12 V, R1=1 MΩ,
RD=3 kΩ.
KP=50 μA/V2, W=80 μm, L=10 μm,
Vto=1 V.
VDSQ=6 V
IDQ≅1 mA.
R2
RS.
IDQ
VDSQ
Vto=1 V

Section 11.4: Small-Signal Equivalent Circuits
and 
Figure P11.33
*P11.34. Find 
 and 
 for the circuit shown in Figure P11.34. The MOSFET has 
and 
Figure P11.34
P11.35. Both transistors shown in Figure P11.35 have 
 and 
 Determine
the value of R needed so that 
 For what range of 
 is the second transistor
operating in the saturation region? What is the resulting value of 
 Provided that 
 is large
enough so that the second transistor operates in saturation, to what ideal circuit element is the
transistor equivalent?
Figure P11.35
K=0.25 mA/V2.
IDQ
VDSQ
Vto=1 V
K=0.25 mA/V2.
KP=100 μA/V2
Vto=0.5 V.
iD1=0.2 mA.
Vx
iD2?
Vx

P11.36. Draw the small-signal equivalent circuit for a FET, including 
P11.37. Give definitions of 
 and 
 as partial derivatives.
P11.38. The characteristic curves of a certain NMOS transistor have constant values for 
 in the
saturation region. What is the value of 
 assuming operation in the saturation region?
P11.39. What is the value of 
 for 
 Draw the small-signal equivalent circuit at this
bias point. For what applications could the FET be used at this bias point?
*P11.40. Derive an expression for 
 in terms of K, 
 and 
 for an NMOS transistor
operating in the triode region.
*P11.41. Derive an expression for 
 in terms of K, 
 and 
 for an NMOS transistor
operating in the triode region.
P11.42. A certain NMOS transistor has the characteristics shown in Figure P11.42. Graphically
determine the values of 
 and 
 at the operating point defined by 
 and
Figure P11.42
P11.43. Suppose that we have an unusual type of FET for which
Here, 
 is in mA, 
 is in volts, and 
 is in volts. Determine the values of 
 and 
 for a Q
point of 
 and 
P11.44. Suppose that we have an unusual type of FET for which
Here, 
 is in mA, 
 is in volts, and 
 is in volts. Determine the values of 
 and 
 for a Q
point of 
 and 
P11.45. Suppose we have an NMOS transistor that has 
 and 
 for a Q point of
 and 
 Sketch the drain characteristics to scale for a small
region around the Q point, say, for 
 2.0, and 2.2 V and for 
P11.46. A certain NMOS transistor has
rd.
gm
rd
iD
rd,
gm
VDSQ=0?
gm
Vto, VGSQ,
IDQ
rd
Vto, VGSQ,
IDQ
gm
rd
VDSQ=6 V
VGSQ=2.5 V.
iD=3vGS3+0.1vDS
iD
vGS
vDS
gm
rd
VGSQ=1 V
VDSQ=10 V.
iD=3 exp(vGS)+0.01vDS2
iD
vGS
vDS
gm
rd
VGSQ=1 V
VDSQ=10 V.
gm=2 mS
rd=5 kΩ
VGSQ=2 V, IDQ=4 mA,
VDSQ=10 V.
vGS=1.8,
9.0<vDS<11.0 V.

Section 11.5: Common-Source Amplifiers
Which small-signal parameter (
 or 
) can be determined from this information? What is its
value? For what Q point (
 and 
) does this parameter apply?
P11.47. A certain NMOS transistor has
Which small-signal parameter (
 or 
) can be determined from this information? What is its
value? For what Q point (
 and 
) does this parameter apply?
vGS(t)
=1+0.2 sin(ωt) V
vDS(t)
=4 V
iD(t)
=2+0.1 sin(ωt) mA
gm
rd
VGSQ, IDQ,
VDSQ
vGS(t)
=2 V
vDS(t)
=5+2 sin(ωt) V
iD(t)
=3+0.01 sin(ωt) mA
gm
rd
VGSQ, IDQ,
VDSQ
P11.48. What is the function of coupling capacitors? Assuming that they are performing their
intended function, how do they appear in the ac equivalent circuit? In general, what effect do
coupling capacitors have on the gain of an amplifier as a function of frequency?
P11.49. Draw the circuit diagram of a resistance-capacitance coupled common-source amplifier.
*P11.50. Consider the common-source amplifier shown in Figure P11.50. The NMOS transistor
has 
 and 
Figure P11.50
a. Determine the values of 
 and 
b. Compute the voltage gain, input resistance, and output resistance, assuming that the
coupling capacitors are short circuits for the ac signal.
P11.51. Repeat Problem P11.50 for an NMOS transistor having
 and 
 Compare the gain with that attained in
Problem P11.50.
P11.52. Consider the amplifier shown in Figure P11.52.
KP=50 μA/V2, L=5 μm, W=500 μm, Vto=1 V,
rd=∞.
IDQ, VDSQ,
gm.
KP=50 μA/V2, W=600 μm, L=20 μm, Vto=2 V,
rd=∞.

Section 11.6: Source Followers
Figure P11.52
a. Draw the small-signal equivalent circuit, assuming that the capacitors are short circuits
for the signal.
b. Assume that 
 and derive expressions for the voltage gain, input resistance, and
output resistance.
c. Find 
 if 
 and
 Determine the value of 
 at the Q point.
d. Evaluate the expressions found in part (b) by using the values given in part (c).
e. Find 
 if 
f. Is this amplifier inverting or noninverting?
*P11.53. Find 
 and 
 for the FET shown in Figure P11.53, given 
 and
 Find the value of 
 at the operating point. Draw the small-signal equivalent
circuit, assuming that 
 Derive an expression for the resistance 
 in terms of 
 and 
Evaluate the expression for the values given.
Figure P11.53
rd=∞,
IDQ
R=100 kΩ, Rf=100 kΩ, RD=3 kΩ, RL=10 kΩ, VDD=20 V, Vto=5 V,
K=1 mA/V2.
gm
vo(t)
v(t)=0.2 sin(2000πt).
VDSQ
IDQ
Vto=3 V
K=0.5 mA/V2.
gm
rd=∞.
Ro
RD
gm.

Section 11.7: CMOS Logic Gates
P11.54. Draw the circuit diagram of a resistance-capacitance coupled source follower.
P11.55. Consider the common-source amplifier and the source follower. Which amplifier would
be used if a voltage-gain magnitude larger than unity is needed? Which would be used to obtain
low output resistance?
*P11.56. Consider the source follower shown in Figure 11.26 on page 581, given
 and 
 The NMOS transistor has
 and 
 Find the value for 
 to achieve
 Then, compute the voltage gain, input resistance, and output resistance.
P11.57. Consider the common-gate amplifier of Figure 11.29 on page 584, which was analyzed
in Exercise 11.13 on page 584. The MOSFET has 
 and 
 The supply
voltages are 
 and 
 The resistances are 
 and 
a. Determine the Q point and the value of 
b. Determine the input resistance and the voltage gain.
VDD=15 V, RL=2 kΩ, R1=1 MΩ,
R2=2 MΩ.
KP=50 μA/V2, L=10 μm, W=160 μm, rd=∞,
Vto=1 V.
RS
IDQ=2 mA.
KP=50 μA/V2, W=
rd=∞.
VDD=15 V
VSS=15 V.
RS=
RD=3 kΩ.
gm.
P11.58. Draw the circuit diagram of a CMOS inverter. Draw its equivalent circuit (open and
closed switches) if the input is high. Repeat if the input is low.
P11.59. Draw the circuit diagram of a two-input CMOS AND gate. [Hint: Use a two-input NAND
followed by an inverter.]
P11.60.
a. Draw the circuit diagram of a three-input CMOS NAND gate.
b. Draw its equivalent circuit (open and closed switches) if all three inputs are high.
c. Repeat if all three inputs are low.

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T11.1. An NMOS transistor has 
 and 
Carefully sketch to scale the drain characteristics for 
 ranging from 0 to 10V and 
and 4V.
T11.2. We have an amplifier identical to that of Figure 11.10 on page 567, except that 
 is
changed to 
 and the dc sources are changed to 
 and 
 The drain
characteristics for the transistor are shown in Figure 11.7 on page 564. Use load-line analysis to
determine the maximum, minimum, and Q-point values of 
T11.3. Consider the biasing circuit shown in Figure T11.3. The transistor has 
 and 
 What
value is required for 
 so the operating current is 
Figure T11.3
T11.4. A certain NMOS transistor has
Which small-signal parameter (
 or 
) can be determined from this information? What is its
value? For what Q point (
 and 
) does this parameter apply?
T11.5. What replaces each of the following elements when we draw the mid-band small-signal
equivalent circuit for an amplifier:
a. a dc voltage source;
b. a coupling capacitor;
c. a dc current source?
KP=80 μA/V2, Vto=1 V, L=4 μm,
W=100 μm.
vDS
vGS=0.5
RD
2 kΩ
VDD=10 V
VGG=3 V.
vDS.
KP=
W=
RS
IDQ=0.5 mA?
vGS(t)
=2+0.02 sin(ωt) V
vDS(t)
=5 V
iD(t)
=0.5+0.05 sin(ωt) mA
gm
rd
VGSQ, IDQ,
VDSQ

T11.6. Draw the circuit diagram of a CMOS inverter. When the input is high, which transistor is
on? Which is off?

Chapter 12 Bipolar Junction Transistors
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Understand bipolar junction transistor operation in amplifier circuits.
Use the load-line technique to analyze simple amplifiers and understand the causes of nonlinear
distortion.
Use large-signal equivalent circuits to analyze BJT circuits.
Analyze bias circuits.
Use small-signal equivalent circuits to analyze BJT amplifiers.
Compute performance of several important amplifier configurations.
Select an amplifier configuration appropriate for a given application.
Introduction to this chapter:
In Chapter 12, we considered the field-effect transistor, which is one of the
important devices in modern electronics. Now, we turn our attention to another

important device, the bipolar junction transistor (BJT), which is also very useful in
amplifiers and digital logic circuits. These two devices are the key building blocks for
modern electronics.
First, we discuss the device parameters and equations that relate the currents and
voltages in the npn BJT. Next, we discuss the BJT common-emitter characteristics,
which show the device operation graphically. Then, we use the graphical load-line
technique to analyze a simple amplifier circuit. In Section 12.4, the pnp BJT is
introduced. In the next several sections, we discuss large-signal models for the
three regions of BJT operation (the active, saturation, and cutoff regions) and use
the models to analyze bias circuits. Then, we develop a small-signal equivalent
circuit for the BJT and use it to analyze two important amplifier configurations
(common-emitter amplifiers and emitter followers).

12.1 Current and Voltage Relationships
BJTs are constructed as layers of semiconductor materials (usually silicon) doped with suitable
impurities. Different types of impurities are used to create n-type and p-type semiconductors. In n-type
material, conduction is due mainly to negatively charged electrons, whereas in p-type material,
conduction is due mainly to positively charged holes. An npn transistor consists of a layer of p-type
material between two layers of n-type material, as shown in Figure 12.1(a). Each pn junction forms a
diode, but if the junctions are made very close together in a single crystal of the semiconductor, the
current in one junction affects the current in the other junction. It is this interaction that makes the
transistor a particularly useful device.
Figure 12.1
The npn BJT.
An npn BJT consists of a layer of p-type semiconductor, called the base,
between two layers of n-type semiconductor, called the collector and the emitter.
Assuming that proper voltages are applied, small amounts of current flowing into
the base terminal cause much larger currents to flow from the collector to the
emitter.

We call the layers the emitter, the base, and the collector, as shown in Figure 12.1(a). The circuit
symbol for an npn BJT is shown in Figure 12.1(b), including reference directions for the currents.
Fluid-Flow Analogy
We will see that the BJT is somewhat analogous to a valve in a fluid-flow system. In suitable circuits, if a
small current is made to flow into the base terminal, a much larger current flows into the collector and
out of the emitter terminal. We can imagine that the base current opens a valve between collector and
emitter. Larger base currents open the valve wider. When a signal to be amplified is applied as a current
to the base, the valve between collector and emitter opens and closes in response to changes in the
signal. Thus, a current with magnified fluctuations flows between collector and emitter.
Equations of Operation
A pn junction is forward biased by applying voltage with the positive polarity on the p-side. On the other
hand, reverse bias occurs if the positive polarity is applied to the n-side. This is illustrated in Figure
12.2.
Figure 12.2
Bias conditions for pn junctions.
In normal operation of a BJT as an amplifier, the base-collector junction is reverse biased and the
base-emitter junction is forward biased. In the upcoming discussion, we assume that the junctions are
biased in this fashion unless stated otherwise.

The Shockley equation gives the emitter current 
 in terms of the base-to-emitter voltage 
This is exactly the same equation as that for the current in a junction diode given in Equation 10.1,
except for changes in notation. (We have let the emission coefficient n equal unity since that is the
appropriate value for most junction transistors.) Typical values for the saturation current 
 range from
 to 
 depending on the physical size of the device and other factors. (Recall that at a
temperature of 300 K, 
 is approximately 26 mV.)
Of course, Kirchhoff's current law requires that the current flowing out of the BJT is equal to the sum of
the currents flowing into it. Thus, referring to Figure 12.1(b), we have
(This equation is true regardless of the bias conditions of the junctions.)
In normal operation as an amplifier, the base-collector junction is reverse biased
and the base-emitter junction is forward biased.
We define the parameter  as the ratio of the collector current to the emitter current, displayed as
Values for  range from 0.9 to 0.999, with 0.99 being very typical. Equation 12.2 indicates that the
emitter current is supplied partly through the base terminal and partly through the collector terminal.
However, since  is nearly unity, most of the emitter current is supplied through the collector.
Normally,  is slightly less than unity.
iE
vBE :
iE=IES [exp (vBEVT)−1]
(12.1)
IES
10−12
10−16 A,
VT
iE=iC+iB
(12.2)
α
α=iCiE
(12.3)
α
α
α

Substituting Equation 12.1 into 12.3 and rearranging, we have
For 
 greater than a few tenths of a volt, the exponential term inside the brackets is much larger than
unity. Then, the 1 inside the brackets can be dropped. Also, we define the scale current as
and Equation 12.4 becomes
Solving Equation 12.3 for 
 substituting into Equation 12.2, and solving for the base current, we
obtain
Since  is slightly less than unity, only a very small fraction of the emitter current is supplied through the
base. Using Equation 12.1 to substitute for 
 we obtain
We define the parameter  as the ratio of the collector current to the base current. Taking the ratio of
Equations 12.4 and 12.8 results in
Values for  range from about 10 to 1000, and a very common value is 
 We can write
Note that since  is usually large compared to unity, the collector current is an amplified version of the
base current. Current flow in an npn BJT is illustrated in Figure 12.3.
iC=αIES [exp (vBEVT)−1]
(12.4)
vBE
Is=αIES
(12.5)
iC≅Is exp (vBEVT)
(12.6)
iC,
iB=(1−α)iE
(12.7)
α
iE,
iB=(1−α) IES [exp (vBEVT)−1]
(12.8)
β
β=iCiB=α1−α
(12.9)
β
β=100.
iC=βiB
(12.10)
β

Figure 12.3
Only a small fraction of the emitter current flows into the base (provided that the collector-base junction
is reverse biased and the base-emitter junction is forward biased).
Because  is usually large compared to unity, the collector current is an amplified
version of the base current.
Exercise 12.1
A certain transistor has 
 and 
 Assume that 
 Find
 and 
Answer 
Exercise 12.2
Compute the corresponding values of  if 
 and 0.999.
Answer 
 99, and 999, respectively.
Exercise 12.3
A certain transistor operated with forward bias of the base-emitter junction and reverse bias of the
β
β=50, IES=10−14 A, vCE=5 V,
iE=10 mA.
VT=0.026 V.
vBE, vBC, iB, iC,
α.
vBE=0.718 V, vBC=−4.28 V, iB=0.196 mA, iC=9.80 mA, α=0.980.
β
α=0.9, 0.99,
β=9,

base-collector junction has 
 and 
 Find the values of 
 and 
Answer 
iC=9.5 mA
iE=10 mA.
iB, α,
β.
iB=0.5 mA, α=0.95, β=19.

12.2 Common-Emitter Characteristics
The common-emitter configuration for an npn BJT is shown in Figure 12.4. The voltage source
connected between the base and emitter supplies a positive voltage 
 that forward biases the base-
emitter junction. The 
 voltage source produces a positive voltage at the collector with respect to the
emitter. Notice that the voltage across the base-collector junction is given by
Figure 12.4
Common-emitter circuit configuration for the npn BJT.
Thus, if 
 is greater than 
 the base-to-collector voltage 
 is negative (which is reverse bias).
The common-emitter characteristics of the transistor are plots of the currents 
 and 
 versus the
voltages 
 and 
 Representative characteristics for a small-signal silicon device are shown in
Figure 12.5.
Figure 12.5
vBE
vCE
vBC=vBE−vCE
(12.11)
vCE
vBE,
vBC
iB
iC
vBE
vCE.

Common-emitter characteristics of a typical npn BJT.
The common-emitter input characteristic shown in Figure 12.5(a) is a plot of 
 versus 
 which
are related by Equation 12.8. Notice that the input characteristic takes the same form as the forward-
bias characteristic of a junction diode. Thus, for appreciable current to flow at room temperature, the
base-to-emitter voltage must be approximately 0.6 to 0.7 V. (The base-to-emitter voltage for a given
current decreases with temperature by about 2 mV/K.)
The common-emitter output characteristics shown in Figure 12.5(b) are plots of 
 versus 
 for
constant values of 
 The transistor illustrated has 
 As long as the collector-base junction is
reverse biased (
 or equivalently, 
),
we have
As 
 becomes less than 
 the base-collector junction becomes forward biased, and eventually
the collector current falls as shown at the left-hand edge of the output characteristics.
Amplification by the BJT
Refer to Figure 12.5(a), and notice that a very small change in the base-to-emitter voltage 
 can
result in an appreciable change in the base current 
 particularly if the base-emitter junction is forward
biased so that some current (say 
) is flowing before the change in 
 is made. Provided that 
is more than a few tenths of a volt, this change in base current causes a much larger change in the
collector current 
 (because 
). In suitable circuits, the change in collector current is converted
into a much larger voltage change than the initial change in 
 Thus, the BJT can amplify a signal
applied to the base-emitter junction.
Example 12.1 Determining  from the Characteristic Curves
Verify that the value of  is 100 for the transistor with the characteristics shown in Figure 12.5.
Solution
The value of  can be found by taking the ratio of collector current to base current provided that 
is high enough so that the collector-base junction is reverse biased. For example, at 
 and
 the output characteristics yield 
 Thus, the value of  is
iB
vBE,
iC
vCE
iB.
β=100.
vBC<0
vCE>vBE
iC=βiB=100iB
vCE
vBE,
vBE
iB,
40 μA
vBE
vCE
iC
iC=βiB
vBE.
β
β
β
vCE
vCE=4 V
iB=30 μA,
iC=3 mA.
β

(For most devices, slightly different values of  result from different points on the output
characteristics.)
Exercise 12.4
Plot the common-emitter characteristics of an npn small-signal silicon transistor at a temperature of 300
K if 
 and 
 Allow 
 to range from 0 to 
 in 
 steps for the output
characteristics. [Hints: For the input characteristic, use Equation 12.8 to calculate values of 
 for
 and so on. The output characteristic is identical to Figure 12.5(b), except for a change
in scale for the 
 axis.]
Answer See Figure 12.6.
Figure 12.6
See Exercise 12.4.
β=iCiB=3 mA30 μA=100
β
IES=10−14 A
β=50.
iB
50 μA
10 μA
vBE
iB=10 μA, 20 μA,
iC

12.3 Load-Line Analysis of a Common-Emitter Amplifier
A simple BJT amplifier circuit is shown in Figure 12.7.  The dc power-supply voltages 
 and 
bias the device at an operating point for which amplification of the ac input signal 
 is possible. Next,
we demonstrate that an amplified version of the input signal voltage appears between the collector and
ground.
Figure 12.7
A simple common-emitter amplifier that can be analyzed by load-line techniques.
Analysis of the Input Circuit
We can analyze this circuit by use of load-line techniques similar to those that we used for diode circuits
in Chapter 9. For example, if we apply Kirchhoff's voltage law to the loop consisting of 
 and
the base-emitter junction, we obtain
Equation for the input load line.
A plot of Equation 12.12 is shown as the load line on the input characteristics of the transistor in
VBB
VCC
vin(t)
VBB, vin(t),
VBB+vin(t)=RBiB(t)+vBE(t)
(12.12)

Figure 12.8(a). To establish this load line, we must locate two points. If we assume that 
 Equation
12.12 yields 
 This establishes the point where the load line intersects the voltage axis.
Similarly, assuming that 
 results in 
 which establishes the load-line intercept on
the current axis. The load line is shown as the solid line in Figure 12.8(a).
Figure 12.8
Load-line analysis of the amplifier of Figure 12.7.
Equation 12.12 represents the constraint placed on the values of 
 and 
 by the external circuit. In
addition, 
 and 
 must fall on the device characteristic. The values that satisfy both constraints are
the values at the intersection of the load line and the device characteristic.
The slope of the load line is 
 Thus, the load line shifts position but maintains a constant slope as
 changes in value. For example, the dashed load line in Figure 12.8(a) is for a smaller value of 
than that for the solid load line.
The input load line shifts position but maintains constant slope as 
 changes.
The quiescent operating point, or Q point, corresponds to 
 Thus, as the ac input signal 
changes in value with time, the instantaneous operating point swings above and below the Q-point
value. Values of 
 can be found from the intersection of the load line with the input characteristic for
each value of 
iB=0,
vBE=VBB+vin.
vBE=0
iB=(VBB+vin)/RB,
iB
vBE
iB
vBE
−1/RB.
vin
vin
vin(t)
vin(t)=0.
vin(t)
iB
vin.

Analysis of the Output Circuit
After the input circuit has been analyzed to find values of 
 a load-line analysis of the output circuit is
possible. Referring to Figure 12.7, we can write a voltage equation for the loop through 
 and
the transistor from collector to emitter. Thus, we have
Equation for the output load line.
This is plotted on the output characteristics of the transistor in Figure 12.8(b).
As 
 swings through a range of values, 
 changes, and the instantaneous
operating point swings up and down the load line on the output characteristics.
Now, with the values of 
 found by prior analysis of the input circuit, we can locate the intersection of
the corresponding output curve with the load line to find values for 
 and 
 Thus, as 
 swings
through a range of values, 
 changes, and the instantaneous operating point swings up and down the
load line on the output characteristics. Usually, the ac component of 
 is much larger than the input
voltage, and amplification has taken place.
Examination of Figure 12.8(a) shows that as 
 swings positive, the input load line moves upward
and to the right, and the value of 
 increases (i.e., the intersection of the load line with the input
characteristic moves upward). This in turn causes the instantaneous operating point to move upward on
the output load line, and 
 decreases in value. Thus, a swing in the positive direction for 
 results in
a (much larger) swing in the negative direction for 
 Therefore, as well as being amplified, the signal
is inverted. Thus, the common-emitter circuit is an inverting amplifier.
Example 12.2 Load-Line Analysis of a BJT Amplifier
iB,
VCC, RC,
VCC=RCiC+vCE
(12.13)
vin
iB
iB
iC
vCE.
vin
iB
vCE
vin(t)
iB
vCE
vin
vCE.

Assume that the circuit of Figure 12.7 has 
 and 
 The
input signal is a 0.4-V-peak 1-kHz sinusoid given by 
 The common-emitter
characteristics for the transistor are shown in Figure 12.9. Find the maximum, minimum, and Q-
point values for 
Figure 12.9
Load-line analysis for Example 12.2.
VCC=10 V, VBB=1.6 V, RB=40 kΩ,
RC=2 kΩ.
vin(t)=0.4 sin(2000πt).
vCE.

Solution
First, we must find values for 
 The load lines for 
 (to find the Q point), 
 (positive
extreme), and 
 (negative extreme) are shown in Figure 12.9(a). The values for the base
current are found at the intersection of the load lines with the input characteristic. The (approximate)
values are 
 and 
Next, the load line is constructed on the output characteristic as shown in Figure 12.9(b). The
intersection of the output load line with the characteristic for 
 establishes the Q point on
the output characteristics. The values are 
 and 
 Similarly, the intersection of
the load line with the characteristic for 
 yields 
 The opposite extreme is
 resulting in 
If more points are found as 
 varies with time, we can eventually plot the 
 waveform versus
time. The waveforms for 
 and 
 are shown in Figure 12.10. Notice that the ac component
of 
 is inverted compared to the input signal [i.e., the minimum of 
 occurs at the same
instant as the maximum of 
 and vice versa].
Figure 12.10
Voltage waveforms for the amplifier of Figure 12.7. See Example 12.2.
The peak-to-peak value of the input voltage is 0.8 V and the peak-to-peak value of the ac
component of 
 is 4 V. Thus, the voltage-gain magnitude is 5 (i.e., the ac component of 
 is
five times larger in amplitude than 
). Usually, we would state the gain as 
 to emphasize the fact
that the amplifier inverts the input signal.
Nonlinear Distortion
iB.
vin=0
vin=0.4
vin=−0.4
IB max≅35 μA, IBQ≅25 μA,
IBmin≅15 μA.
IBQ=25 μA
ICQ=2.5 mA
VCEQ=5 V.
IB max=35 μA
VCEmin≅3 V.
IB min ≅15 μA
VCE max≅7 V.
vin
vCE
vin(t)
vCE(t)
vCE(t)
vCE(t)
vin(t),
vCE
vCE
vin
−5

It is not apparent in the waveforms of Figure 12.10, but unlike the input, the output signal is not a
precise sine wave. The amplifier is slightly nonlinear because of the curvature of the characteristics of
the transistor. Therefore, as well as being amplified and inverted, the signal is distorted. Of course,
distortion is not usually desirable. Figure 12.11 shows the output of the amplifier of Example 12.2 if the
input signal is increased in amplitude to 1.2-V peak. The distortion is obvious.
Figure 12.11
Output of the amplifier of Example 12.2 for 
 showing gross nonlinear distortion.
When 
 becomes zero, we say that the transistor is cut off.
Notice that the positive peak of 
 has been "clipped" at 
 This occurs when 
 and 
 have
been reduced to zero by the negative peaks of the input signal, and the instantaneous operating point
moves down to the voltage-axis intercept of the output load line. When this happens, we say that the
transistor has been driven into cutoff.
The negative-going peak of the output waveform in Figure 12.11 is clipped at 
 This occurs
because 
 becomes large enough so that operation is driven into the region at the upper end of the
output load line, where the characteristic curves are crowded together. We call this the saturation
region.
vin(t)=1.2 sin(2000πt)
vCE≅0.2 V.
vCE
VCC=10 V.
iB
iC
vCE≅0.2 V.
iB

When 
 we say that the transistor is in saturation.
Reasonably linear amplification occurs only if the signal swing remains in the active region between
saturation and cutoff on the load line. An output load line is shown in Figure 12.12, including labels for
the cutoff, saturation, and active regions.
Figure 12.12
Amplification occurs in the active region. Clipping occurs when the instantaneous operating point enters
saturation or cutoff. In saturation, 
Exercise 12.5
Repeat Example 12.2 if 
 Find the values of 
 and 
Answer 
Exercise 12.6
Repeat Example 12.2 if 
 and 
 Find the values of 
 and
Answer 
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
vCE≅0.2 V.
vCE≅0.2 V.
vin(t)=0.8 sin(2000πt).
VCEmax, VCEQ,
VCEmin.
VCEmax≅9.0 V, VCEQ≅5.0 V, VCEmin≅1.0 V.
vin(t)=0.8 sin(2000πt)
VBB=1.2 V.
VCEmax, VCEQ,
VCEmin.
VCEmax≅9.8 V, VCEQ≅7.0 V, VCEmin≅3.0 V.

 12.1
Soup Up Your Automobile by Changing Its Software?
Early automobiles contained no electronics and very little in the way of electrical circuits.
Perhaps the most important initial application was electrical ignition, an early version of which is
described briefly on page 198. The first step in modernizing the ignition system was to replace
the "points" (a mechanically operated switch) with a BJT. The transistor cycles between
saturation (in which it behaves as a closed switch) and cutoff (in which it behaves as an open
switch). The ignition spark is produced as the result of rapidly switching off the current flowing
through the coil.
A significant advantage of electronic switching is that the BJT does not wear out as points do.
However, the use of an electronic switch in the place of mechanically operated points has paved
the way for numerous additional improvements in ignition control. Optimum ignition timing
relative to engine rotation varies with engine speed, throttle setting, air temperature, engine
temperature, fuel quality, and load on the engine, as well as the design goals (good fuel
economy, long engine life, or highest racing performance). Early ignition systems used
mechanical and pneumatic systems to adjust timing, but such systems cannot achieve optimum
performance under all conditions. Modern engine-control systems employ electrical sensors to
determine operating conditions, various electronic circuits to process the sensor signals, and a
special-purpose computer (including software) to compute the optimum firing instant for each
cylinder. The computer switches the BJT from saturation to cutoff, creating the ignition spark.
In the 1950s, souping up an engine involved boring out cylinders and milling heads. Today, an
equally important factor is to modify the engine-control software. Hot-rod magazines abound with
advertisements offering ROMs (read-only memories, discussed in Chapter 8) loaded with
engine control software optimized for high performance (as opposed to fuel economy or long
engine life).
A milestone event underscores the importance of electronics in what was originally an almost
purely mechanical system. To commemorate the 100th anniversary of the first mass production
of the automobile, Automotive Engineering magazine surveyed the Society of Automotive
Engineers Fellows Committee to ascertain the top 10 significant events in automotive history.
What came out at the top of the list? The answer is as follows: "automotive electronics, including
applications in engine controls, brakes, steering, and stability control" (Automotive Engineering,
February 1996, p. 4). Of course, advances in electronics applications for automobiles did not
stop in 1996; instead, reports of automotive electronic innovations appear at an ever increasing
rate. A few more recent examples are collision avoidance systems, automatic parallel parking,
night vision systems, and even cars that drive themselves. Certainly, today's mechanical
engineers need to be familiar with the capabilities and limitations of the electronics, as well as
with mechanical design and materials issues.


12.4 pnp Bipolar Junction Transistors
So far, we have only considered the npn BJT, but an equally useful device results if the base is a layer
of n-type material between p-type emitter and collector regions. For proper operation as an amplifier, the
polarities of the dc voltages applied to the pnp device must be opposite to those of the npn device.
Furthermore, currents flow in opposite directions. Aside from the differences in voltage polarity and
current directions, the two types of devices are nearly identical.
A diagram of the structure of a pnp BJT and the circuit symbol are shown in Figure 12.13. Notice that
the arrow on the emitter of the pnp transistor symbol points into the device, which is the normal direction
of the emitter current. Furthermore, we have reversed the reference directions for the currents to agree
with the actual direction of current flow for the pnp in the active region.
Figure 12.13
The pnp BJT.
For the pnp transistor, we can write the following equations, which are exactly the same as for the npn
transistor:
iC=αiE
(12.14)
iB=(1−α)iE
(12.15)
iC=βiB
(12.16)

and
Equations 12.14 through 12.16 are valid only if the base-emitter junction is forward biased (
negative for a pnp) and the collector-base junction is reverse biased (
 positive for a pnp). As for the
npn transistor, typical values are 
 and 
Except for reversal of current directions and voltage polarities, the pnp BJT is
almost identical to the npn BJT.
For the pnp transistor in the active region, we have
and
These equations are identical to Equations 12.1 and 12.8 for the npn transistor, except that 
 has
been substituted for 
 (because 
 takes negative values for the pnp device). As for the npn device,
typical values for 
 range from 
 to 
 and at 300 K, we have 
The common-emitter characteristics of a pnp transistor are exactly the same as for the npn transistor,
except that the values on the voltage axes are negative. A typical set of characteristics is shown in
Figure 12.14.
iE=iC+iB
(12.17)
vBE
vBC
α≅0.99
β≅100.
iE=IES [exp (−vBEVT)−1]
(12.18)
iB=(1−α) IES [exp (−vBEVT)−1]
(12.19)
−vBE
vBE
vBE
IES
10−12
10−16 A,
VT≅0.026 V.

Figure 12.14
Common-emitter characteristics for a pnp BJT.
Exercise 12.7
Find the values of  and  for the transistor having the characteristics shown in Figure 12.14.
Answer 
Exercise 12.8
a. Use load-line analysis to find the maximum, minimum, and Q-point values of 
 and 
 for the
amplifier circuit shown in Figure 12.15. Use the characteristics shown in Figure 12.14.
Figure 12.15
Common-emitter amplifier for Exercise 12.8.
α
β
α=0.980, β=50.
iB
vCE

b. Does this pnp common-emitter amplifier invert the signal?
Answer 
a. 
 
b. Yes, the output signal is inverted. [If you are in doubt about this, try sketching the 
 and
 waveforms to scale versus time.]
IB max≅48 μA, IBQ≅24 μA, 
IB min≅5 μA, 
VCE max≅−1.8 V, VCEQ≅−5.3 V, VCEmin≅−8.3 V.
vin(t), iB(t),
vCE(t)

12.5 Large-Signal DC Circuit Models
In the analysis or design of BJT amplifier circuits, we often consider the dc operating point (Q point)
separately from the analysis of the signals. (This was illustrated for a voltage-controlled attenuator in
Section 9.8.) Usually, we consider the dc operating point first. Then, we turn our attention to the signal
to be amplified. In this section, we present models for large-signal dc analysis of BJT circuits. Then, in
the next section, we show how to use these models to analyze bias circuits for BJT amplifiers. Later, we
consider small-signal models used to analyze circuits for the signals being amplified.
It is customary to use uppercase symbols with uppercase subscripts to represent large-signal dc
currents and voltages in transistor circuits. Thus, 
 and 
 represent the dc collector current and
collector-to-emitter voltage, respectively. Similar notation is used for the other currents and voltages.
As we have seen, BJTs can operate in the active region, in saturation, or in cutoff. In the active region,
the base-emitter junction is forward biased, and the base-collector junction is reverse biased.
Active-Region Model
Circuit models for BJTs in the active region are shown in Figure 12.16(a). A current-controlled current
source models the dependence of the collector current on the base current. The constraints given in the
figure for 
 and 
 must be satisfied to ensure validity of the active-region model.
IC
VCE
IB
VCE

Figure 12.16
BJT large-signal models. (Note: Values shown are appropriate for typical small-signal silicon devices at
a temperature of 300 K.)
Let us relate the active-region model to the device characteristics. Figure 12.17 shows the characteristic
curves of an npn transistor. The base current 
 is positive and 
 for forward bias of the base-
to-emitter junction, as shown in Figure 12.17(b). Also notice in Figure 12.17(a) that 
 must be
greater than about 0.2 V to ensure that operation is in the active region (i.e., above the knees of the
characteristic curves).
IB
VBE≅0.7 V
VCE

Figure 12.17
Regions of operation on the characteristics of an npn BJT.
Similarly, for the pnp BJT, we must have 
 and 
 for validity of the active-region model.
(As usual, we assume that 
 is referenced positive out of the base for the pnp BJT.)
Saturation-Region Model
The BJT models for the saturation region are shown in Figure 12.16(b). In the saturation region, both
junctions are forward biased. Examination of the collector characteristics in Figure 12.17(a) shows that
 for an npn transistor in saturation. Thus, the model for the saturation region includes a 0.2-V
source between collector and emitter. As in the active region, 
 is positive. Also, we see in Figure
12.17(a) that for operation below the knee of the collector characteristic, the constraint is 
Cutoff-Region Model
In cutoff, both junctions are reverse biased and no currents flow in the device. Thus, the model consists
of open circuits among all three terminals, as shown in Figure 12.16(c). (Actually, if small forward-bias
voltages of up to about 0.5 V are applied, the currents are often negligible and we still use the cutoff-
region model.) The constraints on the voltages for the BJT to be in the cutoff region are shown in the
figure.
Example 12.3 Determining the Operating Region of a BJT
IB>0
VCE<−0.2 V
IB
VCE≅0.2 V
IB
βIB>IC>0.

A given npn transistor has 
 Determine the region of operation if
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
 c. 
 and 
Solution
a. Since 
 and 
 are positive, the transistor is either in the active or saturation region. The
constraint for saturation
is met, so the device is in saturation.
b. Since we have 
 and 
 the transistor is in the active region.
c. We have 
 and 
 Therefore, both junctions are reverse biased,
and operation is in the cutoff region.
Exercise 12.9
A certain npn transistor has 
 Determine the region of operation if
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
c. 
 and 
Answer 
a. cutoff;
b. saturation;
c. active.
β=100.
IB=50 μA
IC=3 mA;
IB=50 μA
VCE=5 V;
VBE=−2 V
VCE=−1 V.
IB
IC
βIB>IC
IB>0
VCE>0.2,
VBE<0
VBC=VBE−VCE=−1<0.
β=100.
VBE=−0.2 V
VCE=5 V;
IB=50 μA
IC=2 mA;
VCE=5 V
IB=50 μA.

12.6 Large-Signal DC Analysis of BJT Circuits
In Section 12.5, we presented large-signal dc models for the BJT. In this section, we use those models
to analyze circuits. In dc analysis of BJT circuits, we first assume that the operation of the transistor is in
a particular region (i.e., active, cutoff, or saturation). Then, we use the appropriate model for the device
and solve the circuit. Next, we check to see if the solution satisfies the constraints for the region
assumed. If so, the analysis is complete. If not, we assume operation in a different region and repeat
until a valid solution is found. This is very similar to the analysis of diode circuits using the ideal-diode
model or a piecewise-linear model. The step-by-step procedure is as follows:
1. Choose one of the three BJT operating regions: saturation, cutoff, or active.
2. Analyze the circuit to determine 
 and 
 by using the transistor model for the
region chosen.
3. Check to see if the constraints for the chosen region are met. If so, the analysis is completed. If
not, return to Step 1, and choose a different region.
This approach is particularly useful in the analysis and design of bias circuits for BJT amplifiers. The
objective of the bias circuit is to place the operating point in the active region so that signals can be
amplified. Because transistors show considerable variation of parameters, such as 
 from unit to unit
and with temperature, it is important for the bias point to be independent of these variations.
The next several examples illustrate the technique and provide some observations that are useful in
bias-circuit design.
Example 12.4 Analysis of the Fixed Base Bias Circuit
The dc bias circuit shown in Figure 12.18(a) has 
 and 
 The
transistor has 
 Solve for 
 and 
IC, IB, VBE,
VCE,
β,
RB=200 kΩ, RC=1 kΩ,
VCC=15 V.
β=100.
IC
VCE.

Figure 12.18
Bias circuit of Examples 12.4 and 12.5.
Solution
We will eventually see that the transistor is in the active region, but we start by assuming that the
transistor is cut off (to illustrate how to test the initial guess of operating region). Since we assume
operation in cutoff, the model for the transistor is shown in Figure 12.16(c), and the equivalent
circuit is shown in Figure 12.18(b). We reason that 
 and that there is no voltage drop across
 Hence, we conclude that 
 However, in cutoff, we must have 
 for an npn
transistor. Therefore, we conclude that the cutoff assumption is invalid.
Next, let us assume that the transistor is in saturation. The transistor model is shown in Figure
12.16(b). Then, the equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 12.18(c). Solving, we find that
and
Checking the conditions required for saturation, we find that 
 is met, but 
 is not met.
Therefore, we conclude that the transistor is not in saturation.
Finally, if we assume that the transistor operates in the active region, we use the BJT model of
Figure 12.16(a), and the equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 12.18(d). Solving, we find that
IB=0
RB.
VBE=15 V.
VBE<0.5
IC=VCC−0.2RC=14.8 mA
IB=VCC−0.7RB=71.5 μA
IB>0
βIB>IC
IB=VCC−0.7RB=71.5 μA

(We have assumed a forward bias of 0.7 V for the base-emitter junction. Some authors assume 0.6
V for small-signal silicon devices at room temperature; others assume 0.7 V. In reality, the value
depends on the particular device and the current level. Usually, the difference is not significant.)
Now, we have
Finally,
The requirements for the active region are 
 and 
 which are met. Thus, the transistor
operates in the active region.
Example 12.5 Analysis of the Fixed Base Bias Circuit
Repeat Example 12.4 with 
Solution
First, we assume operation in the active region. This leads to
The requirements for the active region are 
 and 
 which are not met. Thus, the
transistor is not operating in the active region.
Next, we assume that the transistor is in saturation. This leads to
and
Now, we find that the conditions for saturation (
 and 
) are met. Thus, we have solved the
circuit, and 
Implications for Bias-Circuit Design
IC=βIB=7.15 mA
VCE=VCC−RCIC=7.85 V
VCE>0.2 V
IB>0,
β=300.
IB
=VCC− 0.7RB=71.5 μA
IC
=βIB=21.45 mA
VCE
=VCC−RCIC=−6.45 V
VCE>0.2 V
IB>0,
IC=VCC−0.2RC=14.8 mA
IB=VCC−0.7RB=71.5 μA
IB>0
βIB>IC
VCE=0.2 V.

It is instructive to consider the load-line constructions that are shown in Figure 12.19 for Examples 12.4
and 12.5. For 
 the operating point (Q point) is approximately in the center of the load line. On the
other hand, for 
 the operating point has moved up into saturation.
Figure 12.19
Load lines for Examples 12.4 and 12.5.
The amplifiers that we discuss in this book need to be biased near the center of
the active region.
To use this circuit as an amplifier, we would want a Q point in the active region, where changes in base
current cause the instantaneous operating point to move up and down the load line. In saturation, the
operating point does not move significantly for small changes in base current, and amplification is not
achieved. Thus, a suitable Q point is achieved for 
 but not for 
 Since we often find unit-to-
unit variations in  of this magnitude, this circuit is not suitable as an amplifier bias circuit for mass
production. (We could consider adjusting 
 to compensate for unit-to-unit variations in 
 but this is
usually not practical.)
The fixed base bias circuit shown in Figure 12.18(a) is not suitable for amplifiers
because unit-to-unit variations in  cause some of the circuits to operate in
β=100,
β=300,
β=100
β=300.
β
RB
β,
β

saturation or close to cutoff.
Sometimes this circuit [Figure 12.18(a)] is called a fixed base bias circuit because the base current is
fixed by 
 and 
 and does not adjust for changes in 
 (Notice that if we want a circuit that achieves
a particular operating point on the collector load line, the base current must change when  changes.)
Exercise 12.10
Repeat Example 12.4 for
a. 
b. 
Answer 
a. 
b. 
Exercise 12.11
Assume that 
 and 
 in the circuit of Figure 12.18(a). Solve for the value
of 
 needed to place the operating point exactly in the middle of the output load line (i.e., the Q point
should fall at 
) for:
a. 
b. 
Answer 
a. 
b. 
Exercise 12.12
Solve the circuit shown in Figure 12.20 to find 
 and 
 if:
VCC
RB
β.
β
β=50;
β=250.
IC=3.575 mA, VCE=11.43 V;
IC=14.8 mA, VCE=0.2 V.
RC=5 kΩ, VBE=0.7 V,
VCC=20 V
RB
VCE=VCC/2=10 V
β=100;
β=300.
RB=965 kΩ;
RB=2.90 MΩ.
IC
VCE

Figure 12.20
Circuit for Exercise 12.12.
a. 
b. 
Answer 
a. 
b. 
 (transistor in saturation).
In the next example, we consider a circuit that achieves an emitter current that is relatively independent
of 
Example 12.6 Analysis of a BJT Bias Circuit
Solve for 
 and 
 in the circuit of Figure 12.21(a) given that 
 and 
Repeat for 
β=50;
β=150.
IC=0.965 mA, VCE=−10.35 V;
IC=1.98 mA, VCE=−0.2 V
β.
IC
VCE
VCC=15 V, VBB=
β=100.
β=300.

Figure 12.21
Circuit for Example 12.6.
Solution
We assume that the transistor is in the active region and use the equivalent circuit shown in Figure
12.21(b). Writing a voltage equation through 
 the base-emitter junction, and 
 we have
This can be solved for the emitter current:
Notice that the emitter current does not depend on the value of 
Next, we can compute the base current and collector current using Equations 12.2 and 12.10.
Using the first equation to substitute for 
 in the second equation, we have
Solving for the base current, we obtain
VBB,
RE,
VBB=0.7+IERE
IE=VBB−0.7RE=2.15 mA
β.
IC
=βIB
IE
=IB+IC
IC
IE=IB+βIB=(β+1)IB

Substituting values, we obtain the results given in Table 12.1. Notice that 
 is lower for the higher 
transistor, and 
 is nearly constant.
Table 12.1 Results for the Circuit of Example 12.6
100
21.3
2.13
6.44
300
 7.14
2.14
6.42
Now, we can write a voltage equation around the collector loop to find 
Substituting values found previously, we find that 
 for 
 and 
 for
The Q point for the circuit of Figure 12.21(a) is almost independent of 
 However, the circuit is not
practical for use in most amplifier circuits. First, it requires two voltage sources 
 and 
 but often
only one source is readily available. Second, we may want to inject the signal into the base (through a
coupling capacitor), but the base voltage is fixed with respect to ground by the 
 source. Because the
 source is constant, it acts as a short circuit to ground for ac signal currents (i.e., the 
 source
does not allow an ac voltage to appear at the base).
Analysis of the Four-Resistor Bias Circuit
The four-resistor BJT bias circuit is practical for amplifiers composed of discrete
components. However, it is not practical in integrated circuits.
IB=IEβ+1
IB
β
IC
β
IB (μA)
IC (mA)
VCE (V)
VCE :
VCC=RCIC+VCE+REIE
VCE=6.44 V
β=100
VCE=6.42 V
β=300.
β.
VCC
VBB,
VBB
VBB
VBB

A circuit that avoids these objections is shown in Figure 12.22(a). We call this the four-resistor BJT
bias circuit. The resistors 
 and 
 form a voltage divider that is intended to provide a nearly constant
voltage at the base of the transistor (independent of transistor ). As we saw in Example 12.6, constant
base voltage results in nearly constant values for 
 and 
 Because the base is not directly
connected to the supply or ground in the four-resistor bias circuit, it is possible to couple an ac signal to
the base through a coupling capacitor.
Figure 12.22
Four-resistor bias circuit.
The circuit can be analyzed as follows. First, the circuit is redrawn as shown in Figure 12.22(b). Two
separate voltage supplies are shown as an aid in the analysis to follow, but otherwise, the circuits in
parts (a) and (b) of the figure are identical. Next, we find the Thévenin equivalent for the circuit to the left
of the dashed line in Figure 12.22(b). The Thévenin resistance 
 is the parallel combination of 
 and
 given by
R1
R2
β
IC
VCE.
RB
R1
R2
RB=11/R1+ 1/R2=R1‖R2
(12.20)

The Thévenin voltage 
 is
The circuit with the Thévenin equivalent replacement is shown in Figure 12.22(c). Finally, the transistor
is replaced by its active-region model, as shown in Figure 12.22(d).
Now, we can write a voltage equation around the base loop of Figure 12.22(d), resulting in
Of course, for small-signal silicon transistors at room temperature, we have 
 Now, we can
substitute
and solve to find that
Once 
 is known, 
 and 
 can easily be found. Then, we can write a voltage equation around the
collector loop of Figure 12.22(d) and solve for 
 This yields
Example 12.7 Analysis of the Four-Resistor Bias Circuit
Find the values of 
 and 
 in the circuit of Figure 12.23 for 
 and 
 Assume that
Figure 12.23
Circuit for Example 12.7.
VB
VB=VCC R2R1+ R2
(12.21)
VB=RBIB+VBE+REIE
(12.22)
VBE≅0.7 V.
IE=(β+1) IB
IB=VB−VBERB+(β+1)RE
(12.23)
IB
IC
IE
VCE.
VCE=VCC−RCIC−REIE
(12.24)
IC
VCE
β=100
β=300.
VBE=0.7 V.

Solution
Substituting into Equations 12.20 and 12.21, we find that
Then, substituting into Equation 12.23 and using 
 we have
For 
 we find that 
 Notice that the base current is significantly smaller for the higher
Now, we can compute the collector current by using 
 For 
 we find that 
and for 
 we have 
 For a 3:1 change in 
 the collector current changes by less
than 3 percent. The emitter current is given by 
 The results are 
 for 
 and
 for 
Finally, Equation 12.24 can be used to find 
 The results are 
 for 
 and
 for 
Thus, we have seen that for proper resistance values, the four-resistor bias circuit can achieve a Q point
that is nearly independent of 
 Because of this fact, the circuit is commonly used for biasing BJT
amplifiers (except in integrated circuits, for which resistors tend to be impractical).
Exercise 12.13
Repeat Example 12.7 for 
 and 
 Compute the ratio of 
 for 
 to 
 for 
and compare to the ratio of the currents found in Example 12.7. Comment.
Answer For 
 and 
 For 
 and 
 The
ratio of the collector currents is 1.21. On the other hand, in the example, the ratio of the collector
currents is only 1.03. Larger values of 
 and 
 lead to larger changes in 
 with changes in 
RB
=11/R1+1/R2=3.33 kΩ
VB
=VCCR2R1+R2=5 V
β=100,
IB=VB−VBERB+(β+1)RE=41.2 μA
β=300,
IB=14.1 μA.
β.
IC=βIB.
β=100,
IC=4.12 mA,
β=300,
IC=4.24 mA.
β,
IE=IC+IB.
IE=4.16 mA
β=100
IE=4.25 mA
β=300.
VCE.
VCE=6.72
β=100
VCE=6.51
β=300.
β.
R1=100 kΩ
R2=50 kΩ.
IC
β=300
IC
β=100,
β=100, IC=3.20 mA,
VCE=8.57 V.
β=300, IC=3.86mA,
VCE=7.27 V.
R1
R2
IC
β.

12.7 Small-Signal Equivalent Circuits
In this section, we develop a BJT equivalent circuit that is useful in analyzing
amplifier circuits.
Now, we turn our attention to the signal currents and voltages in the BJT. First, we establish the notation
used in amplifier circuits. We denote the total currents and voltages by lowercase symbols with
uppercase subscripts. Thus, 
 is the total base current as a function of time.
The dc Q-point currents and voltages are denoted by uppercase symbols with uppercase subscripts.
Thus, 
 is the dc base current if the input signal is set to zero.
Finally, we denote the changes in currents and voltages from the Q point (due to the input signal being
amplified) by lowercase symbols with lowercase subscripts.
 denotes the signal current flowing into the base, 
 is the dc current that
flows when the signal is absent, and 
 is the total base current. Similar
notation is used for the other currents and voltages.
Thus, 
 denotes the signal component of the base current. Since the total base current is the sum of
the Q-point value and the signal component, we can write
These quantities are illustrated in Figure 12.24. Similarly, we can write
iB(t)
IBQ
ib(t)
IBQ
iB(t)
ib(t)
iB(t)=IBQ+ib(t)
(12.25)

Figure 12.24
Illustration of the Q-point base current 
 signal current 
 and total current 
The Q point is established by the bias circuit, as discussed in Section 12.6. Now, we consider how the
(small) signal components are related in the BJT. The total base current is given in terms of the total
base-to-emitter voltage by Equation 12.8, repeated here for convenience:
We are concerned with operation in the active region, for which the 1 inside the brackets is negligible
and can be dropped.
We substitute Equations 12.25 and 12.26 into 12.8 to obtain
This can be written as
Equation 12.8 also relates the Q-point values, so we can write
Substituting into Equation 12.28, we have
We are interested in small signals for which the magnitude of 
 is much smaller than 
 at all times.
IBQ,
ib(t),
iB(t).
vBE(t)=VBEQ+vbe(t)
(12.26)
iB=(1−α)IES [exp (vBEVT)−1]
IBQ+ib(t)=(1−α)IES exp [VBEQ+vbe(t)VT]
(12.27)
IBQ+ib(t)=(1−α)IES exp (VBEQVT) exp [vbe(t)VT]
(12.28)
IBQ=(1−α)IES exp (VBEQVT)
(12.29)
IBQ+ib(t)=IBQ exp (vbe(t)VT)
(12.30)
vbe(t)
VT

[Thus, the magnitude of 
 is confined to be a few millivolts or less.]
For 
 the following approximation holds:
This approximation is illustrated in Figure 12.25. Hence, we can write Equation 12.30 as
Figure 12.25
Comparison of 
 and its approximation 
If we subtract 
 from both sides and define 
 we have
Therefore, for small-signal variations around the Q point, the base-to-emitter junction of the transistor
appears to be a resistance 
 given by
Substituting 
 we have an alternative formula:
At room temperature, 
 A typical value of  is 100, and a typical bias current for a small-
signal amplifier is 
 These values yield 
The total collector current is  times the total base current:
vbe(t)
|x|<<1,
exp(x)≅1+x
(12.31)
ex
1+x.
IBQ+ib(t)≅IBQ [1+vbe(t)VT]
(12.32)
IBQ
rπ=VT/IBQ,
ib(t)=vbe(t)rπ
(12.33)
rπ,
rπ=VTIBQ
(12.34)
IBQ=ICQ/β,
rπ=βVTICQ
(12.35)
VT≅0.026 V.
β
ICQ=1 mA.
rπ=2600 Ω.
β

But, the total currents are the sum of the Q-point values and the signal components, so we have
Thus, the signal components are related by
Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit for the BJT
Equations 12.33 and 12.38 relate the small-signal currents and voltages in a BJT. It is convenient to
represent the BJT by the small-signal equivalent circuit shown in Figure 12.26. Notice that the circuit
embodies the relationships of Equations 12.33 and 12.38.
Figure 12.26
Small-signal equivalent circuit for the BJT.
The small-signal BJT equivalent circuit shown in Figure 12.26 is very useful in
amplifier analysis.
It turns out that the pnp transistor has exactly the same small-signal equivalent circuit as the npn -even
the reference directions for the signal currents are the same. The resistance 
 is given by Equation
12.35 for both types of transistors. (We assume that 
 is referenced out of the collector of the pnp, so
it has a positive value.) In the next several sections, we will find that the small-signal equivalent circuit is
iC(t)=βiB(t)
(12.36)
ICQ+ic(t)=βIBQ+βib(t)
(12.37)
ic(t)=βib(t)
(12.38)
rπ
ICQ

very useful in analysis of BJT amplifier circuits.

12.8 Common-Emitter Amplifiers
In a BJT amplifier circuit, the power supply biases the transistor at an operating point in the active region
for which amplification can take place. For example, we can use the four-resistor bias circuit discussed
in Section 12.6. Coupling capacitors can be used to connect the load and the signal source without
affecting the dc bias point.
Coupling capacitors can be used to connect the signal source and the load to a
BJT amplifier without affecting the dc bias point.
We can analyze amplifier circuits to find gain, input resistance, and output resistance by use of the
small-signal equivalent circuit. In this section and the next, we illustrate this procedure for two important
BJT amplifier circuits.
Figure 12.27(a) shows the circuit diagram of a common-emitter amplifier. The resistors 
and 
 form the four-resistor biasing network. The capacitor 
 couples the signal source to the base
of the transistor, and 
 couples the amplified signal at the collector to the load 
 The capacitor 
 is
called a bypass capacitor. It provides a low-impedance path for the ac emitter current to ground.
R1, R2, RE,
RC
C1
C2
RL.
CE

Figure 12.27
Common-emitter amplifier.
The coupling and bypass capacitors are chosen large enough so they have very low ac impedances at
the signal frequencies. Thus, for simplicity in our small-signal ac analysis, we treat the capacitors as
short circuits. However, at sufficiently low frequencies, the capacitors reduce the gain of the amplifier.
In small-signal ac analysis, we treat the coupling and bypass capacitors as short
circuits.

Because the bypass capacitor grounds the emitter for ac signals, the emitter terminal is common to the
input source and to the load. This is the origin of the name common-emitter amplifier.
The analysis we give here is valid for the midband region of frequency. In the low-frequency region,
the effects of the coupling and bypass capacitors must be considered. In the high-frequency region, a
more complex transistor model would be needed that includes its frequency limitations. Analysis for the
low- and high-frequency regions is beyond the scope of this book.
The Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit
Before we analyze the amplifier, it is very helpful to draw its small-signal ac equivalent circuit. This is
shown in Figure 12.27(b). The coupling capacitors have been replaced by short circuits, and the
transistor has been replaced by its small-signal equivalent, which was discussed in the preceding
section.
The dc power supply is replaced by a short circuit. This is appropriate because no ac voltage can
appear across an ideal dc voltage source that is assumed to have zero internal impedance.
Dc voltage sources act as short circuits for ac signals.
Carefully compare the actual circuit of Figure 12.27(a) with the small-signal ac equivalent shown in
Figure 12.27(b). Notice that the signal source is connected directly to the base terminal because 
has been treated as a short circuit. Similarly, the emitter is connected directly to ground, and the load is
connected to the collector.
Notice also that the top end of 
 connects to the supply in the original circuit, but 
 is connected from
base to ground in the equivalent circuit, because the power-supply voltage is treated as a short circuit to
ground for ac signals.
Notice that 
 ends up in parallel with 
 Similarly, 
 and 
 are in parallel. We find it convenient to
define 
 as the parallel combination of 
 and 
C1
R1
R1
R1
R2.
RC
RL
RB
R1
R2 :

Similarly, 
 is the parallel combination of 
 and 
These parallel combinations are indicated in Figure 12.27(b).
Voltage Gain
Now, we analyze the equivalent circuit to find an expression for the voltage gain of the amplifier. First,
the input voltage is equal to the voltage across 
 given by
The output voltage is produced by the collector current flowing through 
 given by
The minus sign is necessary because of the reference directions for the current and voltage-the current
flows out of the positive voltage reference. Dividing the respective sides of Equation 12.42 by those of
12.41 gives the voltage gain:
Notice that the gain is negative showing that the common-emitter amplifier is inverting. The gain
magnitude can be quite large-several hundred is not unusual.
The expression for gain given in Equation 12.43 is the gain with the load connected. We found the
open-circuit voltage gain useful to characterize amplifiers in Chapter 11. With 
 replaced by an open
circuit, the voltage gain becomes
Input Impedance
Another important amplifier specification is the input impedance, which in this case can be obtained by
RB=R1‖R2=11/R1+1/R2
(12.39)
RL′
RC
RL :
RL′=RL‖RC=11/RL+1/RC
(12.40)
rπ,
vin=vbe=rπib
(12.41)
RL′,
vo=−RL′βib
(12.42)
Av=vovin=−RL′βrπ
(12.43)
RL
Avoc=vovin=−RCβrπ
(12.44)

inspection of the equivalent circuit. The input impedance is the impedance seen looking into the input
terminals. For the equivalent circuit of Figure 12.27(b), it is the parallel combination of 
 and 
 given
by
(In this case, the input impedance is a pure resistance. Therefore, we can find the input impedance by
dividing the instantaneous voltage 
 by the instantaneous current 
 Of course, if there were
capacitances or inductances in the equivalent circuit, it would be necessary to obtain the impedance as
the ratio of the phasor voltage and the phasor current.)
Current Gain and Power Gain
The current gain 
 can be found by use of Equation 10.3. With some changes in notation, the equation
is
The power gain G of the amplifier is the product of the current gain and the voltage gain (assuming that
the input and load impedances are pure resistive).
Output Impedance
The output impedance is the impedance seen looking back from the load terminals with the source
voltage 
 set to zero. This situation is shown in Figure 12.27(c). With 
 set to zero, there is no driving
source for the base circuit, so  is zero. Therefore, the controlled source 
 produces zero current and
appears as an open circuit. Thus, the impedance seen from the output terminals is simply 
Example 12.8 Common-Emitter Amplifier
Find 
 and 
 for the amplifier shown in Figure 12.28. If 
 find and sketch
 versus time. Assume that the circuit operates at a temperature for which 
RB
rπ,
Zin=viniin=11/RB+1/rπ
(12.45)
vin
iin.
Ai
Ai=ioiin=Av ZinRL
(12.46)
G=AiAv
(12.47)
vs
vs
ib
βib
RC.
Zo=RC
(12.48)
Av, Avoc, Zin, Ai, G,
Zo
vs(t)=
vo(t)
VT=26 mV.

Figure 12.28
Common-emitter amplifier of Example 12.8.
Solution
First, we need to know 
 to be able to find the value of 
 Hence, we start by analyzing the dc
conditions in the circuit. Only the dc supply, the transistor, and the resistors 
 and 
need to be considered in the bias-point analysis. The capacitors, the signal source, and the load
resistance have no effect on the Q point (because the capacitors behave as open circuits for dc
currents).
The dc circuit was shown earlier in Figure 12.23 and was analyzed in Example 12.7. For 
 the
resulting Q point was found to be 
 and 
 Substituting values into Equation
12.35, we have
Using Equations 12.39 and 12.40, we find that
Equations 12.43 through 12.48 yield
Notice that 
 is somewhat smaller in magnitude than 
 This is due to loading of the amplifier by
 as discussed in Chapter 10. Power gain is quite large for the common-emitter amplifier, and
primarily for this reason, it is a commonly used configuration.
ICQ
rπ.
R1, R2, RC,
RE
β=100,
ICQ=4.12 mA
VCE=6.72 V.
rπ=βVTICQ=631 Ω
RB
=R1‖R2=11/R1+1/R2=3.33 kΩ
RL′
=RL‖RC=11/RL+1/RC=667 Ω
Av
=vovin=−RL′βrπ=−106
Avoc
=vovin=−RCβrπ=−158
Zin
=viniin=11/RB+1/rπ=531 Ω
Ai
=ioiin=AvZinRL=−28.1
G
=AiAv=2980
Zo
=RC=1 kΩ
Av
Avoc.
RL

The source voltage divides between the internal source resistance and the input impedance of the
amplifier. Thus, we can write
Now, with the load connected, we have
But, we are given that 
 so we have
The source voltage 
 and the output voltage are shown in Figure 12.29. Notice the phase
inversion.
Figure 12.29
Source and output voltages for Example 12.8.
Exercise 12.14
Repeat Example 12.8 if 
 [Hint: Do not forget that the Q point changes (slightly) when 
vin=vs ZinZin+Rs=0.515vs
vo=Avvin=−54.6vs
vs(t)=sin(ωt) mV,
vo(t)=−54.6 sin(ωt) mV
vs(t)
β=300.
β

changes.]
Answer 
 
Av=−109, Avoc=−163, Zin=1186 Ω, Ai=−64.4, G=7004, Zo=1 kΩ, vo(t)=−76.5 sin(ωt) mV.

12.9 Emitter Followers
The circuit diagram of another type of BJT amplifier called an emitter follower is shown in Figure
12.30(a). The resistors 
 and 
 form the bias circuit. The collector resistor 
 (used in the
common-emitter amplifier) is not needed in this circuit. Thus, we have a version of the four-resistor bias
circuit with 
 Analysis of this bias circuit is very similar to the examples that we considered in
Section 12.6.
Figure 12.30
Emitter follower.
R1, R2,
RE
RC
RC=0.

The input signal is applied to the base through the coupling capacitor 
 The output signal is coupled
from the emitter to the load by the coupling capacitor 
Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit
The ac small-signal equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 12.30(b). As before, we replace the capacitors
and power supply with short circuits. The transistor is replaced by its small-signal equivalent.
Notice that as a result, the collector terminal is connected directly to ground in the equivalent circuit. The
transistor equivalent circuit is oriented with the collector at the bottom in Figure 12.30(b), but it is
electrically the same as the transistor equivalent circuit we have used before. Because the collector is
connected to ground, this circuit is sometimes called a common-collector amplifier.
The ability to draw small-signal equivalent circuits is an important skill for analyzing electronic circuits.
Carefully compare the small-signal equivalent in Figure 12.30(b) to the original circuit. Better still, try to
draw the small-signal equivalent circuit on your own, starting from the original circuit.
Try to draw the small-signal equivalent on your own, referring to only Figure
12.30(a).
Notice that 
 and 
 are in parallel in the equivalent circuit. We denote the combination by 
 Also,
 and 
 are in parallel, and we denote the combination by 
 In equation form, we have
and
Voltage Gain
C1.
C2.
R1
R2
RB.
RE
RL
RL′.
RB=R1‖R2=11/R1+1/R2
(12.49)
RL′=RL‖RE=11/RL+1/RE
(12.50)

Next, we find the voltage gain of the emitter follower. The current flowing through 
 is 
 Thus, the
output voltage is given by
Writing a voltage equation from the input terminals through 
 and then through the load to ground, we
have
Division of each side of Equation 12.51 by the respective side of Equation 12.52 results in
The voltage gain of the emitter follower is less than unity because the denominator of the expression is
larger than the numerator. However, the voltage gain is usually only slightly less than unity. An amplifier
with voltage gain less than unity can sometimes be useful because it can have a large current gain.
Emitter followers have voltage gains that are less than unity.
Also, notice that the voltage gain is positive. In other words, the emitter follower is noninverting. Thus, if
the input voltage changes, the output at the emitter changes by almost the same amount and in the
same direction as the input. Thus, the output voltage follows the input voltage. This is the reason for the
name emitter follower.
Input Impedance
The input impedance 
 can be found as the parallel combination of 
 and the input impedance seen
looking into the base of the transistor, which is indicated as 
 in Figure 12.30(b). Thus, we can write
The input impedance of the emitter follower is relatively large compared with that
RL′
ib+βib.
vo=RL′ (1+β)ib
(12.51)
rπ
vin=rπib+(1+β)ibRL′
(12.52)
Av=(1+β)RL′rπ+(1+β)RL′
(12.53)
Zi
RB
Zit

of other BJT amplifiers.
The input impedance looking into the base can be found by dividing both sides of Equation 12.52 by 
The input impedance of the emitter follower is relatively high compared to other BJT amplifier
configurations. (However, in Chapter 11, we saw that field-effect transistors are capable of providing
much higher input impedance than BJTs.) Once we have found the voltage gain and input impedance of
the emitter follower, the current gain and power gain can be found by use of Equations 10.3 and 10.5.
Output Impedance
The output impedance of an amplifier is the Thévenin impedance seen from the output terminals. To find
the output impedance of the emitter follower, we remove the load resistance, zero the signal source, and
look back into the output terminals of the equivalent circuit. This is shown in Figure 12.30(c). We have
attached a test source 
 which delivers a current  to the impedance that we want to find. The output
impedance is given by
(Here again, the impedance can be found as the ratio of instantaneous time-varying quantities because
the circuit is purely resistive. Otherwise, we should use phasors.)
To find this ratio, we write equations involving 
 and 
 For example, summing currents at the top end
of 
 we have
We must eliminate  from this equation before we can find the desired expression for the output
impedance. We do not want any circuit variables such as  in the result—only transistor parameters
and resistance values. Thus, we need to write another circuit equation.
First, we denote the parallel combination of 
 and 
 as
Zi=11/RB+1/Zit=RB‖Zit
(12.54)
ib :
Zit=vinib=rπ+(1+β)RL′
(12.55)
vx,
ix
Zo=vxix
(12.56)
vx
ix.
RE,
ib+βib+ix=vxRE
(12.57)
ib
ib
Rs, R1,
R2

The additional equation needed can now be obtained by applying Kirchhoff's voltage law to the loop
consisting of 
 and 
If we solve Equation 12.59 for 
 substitute into Equation 12.57, and rearrange the result, we obtain
the output impedance:
This can be recognized as the parallel combination of 
 and the impedance
[It can be shown that 
 is the impedance seen looking into the emitter of the transistor, as indicated in
Figure 12.30(c).]
The output impedance of the emitter follower tends to be smaller than that of other BJT amplifier
configurations.
The output impedance of the emitter follower is relatively small compared with
that of other BJT amplifiers.
Example 12.9 Emitter-Follower Performance
Compute the voltage gain, input impedance, current gain, power gain, and output impedance for the
emitter-follower amplifier shown in Figure 12.31. Assume that the circuit operates at a temperature
for which 
Rs′=11/Rs+1/R1+1/R2
(12.58)
vx, rπ,
Rs′ :
vx+rπib+Rs′ib=0
(12.59)
ib,
Zo=vxix=1(1+β)(Rs′+rπ)+1/RE
(12.60)
RE
Zot=Rs′+rπ1+β
(12.61)
Zot
VT=26 mV.

Figure 12.31
Emitter follower of Example 12.9.
Solution
First, we must find the bias point so that the value of 
 can be calculated. The dc circuit is shown in
Figure 12.31(b). Because the coupling capacitors act as open circuits for dc, 
 and 
 do not
appear in the dc bias circuit.
First, we must determine the bias point so the value of 
 can be calculated.
Replacing the base bias circuit by its Thévenin equivalent, we obtain the equivalent circuit shown in
Figure 12.31(c). Now, if we assume operation in the active region, we can write the following
voltage equation around the base loop:
rπ
Rs
RL
rπ

Substituting values, we find 
 Then, we have
Since 
 is greater than 0.2 V and 
 is positive, the transistor is indeed operating in the active
region.
Equation 12.35 yields
Now that we have established that the transistor operates in the active region and found the value of
 we can proceed in finding the amplifier gains and impedances. Substituting values into
Equations 12.49 and 12.50, we discover that
Equation 12.53 gives the voltage gain:
Equations 12.54 and 12.55 give the input impedance:
Equations 12.58 and 12.60 yield
From Equation 10.3, we can find the current gain:
Using Equation 10.5, we find that the power gain is
Notice that even though the voltage gain is less than unity, the current gain is large (compared with
VB=RBIBQ+VBEQ+RE(1+β)IBQ
IBQ=20.6 μA.
ICQ
=βIBQ=4.12 mA
ICEQ
=VCC−IEQRE=11.7 V
VCEQ
IBQ
rπ=βVTICQ=1260 Ω
rπ,
RB
=R1‖R2=11/R1+1/R2=50 kΩ
RL′
=RL‖RE=11/RL+1/RE=667 Ω
Av=(1+β)RL′rπ+(1+β)RL′=0.991
Z
it
 = 
r
π
 + (1 + β)
R
L
'
 = 135 kΩ
Z
i
 = 
1
1/
R
B
+ 1/
Z
it
 = 36.5 kΩ
Rs′
=11/Rs+1/R1+1/R2=8.33 kΩ
Zo
=1(1+β)/(Rs′+rπ)+1/RE=46.6 Ω
Ai=Av ZiRL=36.2
G=AvAi=35.8

unity). Thus, the output power is larger than the input power, and the circuit is effective as an
amplifier.
Even though the voltage gain of the emitter follower is less than unity, the
current gain and power gain can be large.
In general, the output impedance of the emitter follower is much lower and the input impedance is higher
than those of other single-stage BJT amplifiers. Thus, we use an emitter follower if high input impedance
or low output impedance is needed.
If the emitter follower is cascaded with common-emitter stages, amplifiers with many useful
combinations of parameters are possible. Furthermore, there are several other useful amplifier
configurations using the BJT.
Exercise 12.15
Repeat Example 12.9 for 
 Compare the results to those of the example.
Answer 
β=300.
Av=0.991, Zi=40.1 kΩ, Zo=33.2 Ω, Ai=39.7, G=39.4.

Summary
1. An npn BJT consists of a layer of p-type material (the base) between two layers of n-type
material (the collector and emitter, respectively).
2. In the active region, the collector current is an amplified version of the base current. In equation
form, we have 
 A typical value of  is 100.
3. Typical common-emitter characteristics for an npn BJT are shown in Figure 12.5 on page 603.
4. Load-line analysis provides a basic understanding of amplifier circuits.
5. Besides being amplified, signals are often distorted by BJT amplifiers. In the active region,
distortion is due to curvature of the input characteristic or unequal spacing of the output
characteristics. For large signals, a more severe type of distortion, known as clipping, occurs
when the device operation swings either into saturation or cutoff.
6. The pnp BJT is similar to the npn except that the current directions and voltage polarities are
reversed.
7. BJTs can operate in three regions: the active region, the saturation region, and the cutoff region.
Circuit models for BJTs in each of the three regions of operation are shown in Figure 12.16 on
page 613.
8. In large-signal analysis of BJT circuits, we assume operation in a given region, use the
corresponding circuit model to solve for currents and voltages, and then check to see if the
results are consistent with the assumed operating region. The process is repeated until a self-
consistent solution is found.
9. To be effective as an amplifier, the BJT must be biased in the active region.The four-resistor bias
circuit [Figure 12.22(a) on page 620] is commonly used for simple amplifiers.
10. The small-signal equivalent circuit for the BJT is shown in Figure 12.26 on page 625.
11. To analyze an amplifier in the midrange of frequencies, we first draw the small-signal equivalent
circuit. The BJT is replaced by its equivalent circuit, the coupling and bypass capacitors are
replaced by short circuits, and the dc power voltage sources are replaced by short circuits. Then,
circuit equations are written, and algebra is used to find expressions for the gains and
impedances of interest.
12. Two important BJT amplifier circuits are the common-emitter amplifier [Figure 12.27(a) on page
626] and the emitter follower [Figure 12.30(a) on page 631]. The common-emitter amplifier is
inverting, has relatively large voltage and current gain magnitudes, and has moderate input
impedance. The emitter follower is noninverting and has nearly unity voltage gain, large current
gain, and moderate to high input impedance.
iC=βiB.
β

Problems
Section 12.1: Current and Voltage Relationships
P12.1. Write the Shockley equation for the emitter current of an npn transistor.
P12.2. Which side of a pn junction should be connected to the positive voltage for forward bias?
In normal operation, which type of bias (forward or reverse) is applied to the emitter-base
junction of a BJT? To the collector-base junction?
P12.3. Sketch the construction of an npn BJT and label the three regions. In normal operation,
does current flow into or out of the base terminal? The collector terminal? The emitter terminal?
P12.4. Give the definitions of  and  for a BJT. What bias conditions for each junction are
assumed in these definitions?
P12.5. Draw the circuit symbol for an npn BJT. Label the terminals and the currents. Choose
reference directions that agree with the true current directions for operation in the active region.
*P12.6. An npn transistor is operating with the base-emitter junction forward biased and the
base-collector junction reverse biased. Given 
 for 
 compute 
 and 
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
*P12.7. Suppose that we have an npn transistor at room temperature, with
 and 
 Determine 
 and 
 (Assume
that 
 at room temperature.)
P12.8. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P12.8 . The transistors 
 and 
 are identical,
both having 
 and 
 Calculate 
 and 
 Assume that 
 for both
transistors. [Hint: Both transistors are operating in the active region. Because the transistors are
identical and have identical values of 
 their collector currents are equal.]
α
β
iC=9 mA
iB=0.3 mA,
iE, α,
β.
IES=10−13 A, β=100, vCE=10 V,
iE=10 mA.
vBE, vBC, iB, iC,
α.
VT=26 mV
Q1
Q2
IES=10−14 A
β=100.
VBE
IC2.
VT=26 mV
VBE,

Figure P12.8
P12.9. Consider an npn transistor that is operating with the base-emitter junction forward biased
and the base-collector junction reverse biased. Given that the transistor has 
 and
 determine the values of 
 and 
P12.10. If a transistor has 
 what is its value for 
P12.11. Suppose that an npn transistor is operating with the base-emitter junction forward
biased and the base-collector junction reverse biased. Given 
 and 
 determine
the values of 
 and 
P12.12. Consider the circuit of Figure P12.12 in which 
 has 
 and 
 while
 has 
 and 
 Determine the values of 
 and 
 Assume that both
transistors have 
 and are operating in the active region.
Figure P12.12
P12.13. Suppose that a certain npn transistor has 
 for 
 Compute 
 for
 Repeat for 
 Assume that 
P12.14. At an absolute temperature of 
 a certain transistor has 
 and
 Determine the value of 
 At 310 K, the transistor has 
 and
 Determine the new value of 
 By what factor did 
 change for this 10 K
increase in temperature? (Recall that Equation 9.2 on page 462 gives 
 in which
 is ­Boltzmann's constant and 
 is the magnitude of the
charge on an electron.)
P12.15. Determine the value of  for the transistor of Figure P12.15 .
iC=10 mA
iE=10.5 mA,
iB, α,
β.
β=200,
α?
β=200
iB=10 μA,
iC
iE.
Q1
IES1=10−14 A
β1=100,
Q2
IES2=10−13 A
β2=100.
VBE
IC2.
VT=26 mV
VBE=0.7 V
IE=10 mA.
VBE
IE=1 mA.
IE=1 μA.
VT=26 mV.
T=300 K,
iE=10 mA
vBE=0.600 V.
IES.
iE=10 mA
vBE=0.580 V.
IES.
IES
VT=kT/q,
k=1.38×10−23 J/K
q=1.60×10−19 C
β

Figure P12.15
*P12.16. Two transistors 
 and 
 connected in parallel are equivalent to a single transistor,
as indicated in Figure P12.16 . If the individual transistors have 
 and
 determine 
 and 
 for the equivalent transistor. Assume that all transistors
have the same temperature.
Figure P12.16
P12.17. The transistors 
 and 
 shown in Figure P12.17 are said to be Darlington
connected and can be considered to be equivalent to a single transistor, as indicated. Find an
expression for 
 of the equivalent transistor in terms of 
 and 
Figure P12.17
Darlington pair.
Q1
Q2
IES1=IES2=10−13 A
β1=β2=100,
IES
βeq
Q1
Q2
βeq
β1
β2.

Section 12.2: Common-Emitter Characteristics
*P12.18. Determine the values of  and  for the transistor whose characteristics are shown in
Figure P12.18 .
Figure P12.18
*P12.19. A certain npn silicon transistor has 
 for 
 at a temperature of 30°C.
Sketch the input characteristic to scale at 30°C. What is the approximate value of 
 for
 at 180°C? (Use the rule of thumb that 
 is reduced in magnitude by 2 mV per
degree increase in temperature.) Sketch the input characteristic to scale at 180°C.
P12.20. Consider an npn silicon transistor that has 
 and 
 Sketch 
 versus 
for 
 ranging from 0 to 5 V. Repeat for 
P12.21. The transistor having the characteristics shown in Figure P12.18 is operating with
α
β
vBE=0.7 V
iB=0.1 mA
vBE
iB=0.1 mA
vBE
β=100
iB=0.1 mA.
iC
vCE,
vCE
β=300.

Section 12.3: Load-Line Analysis of a Common-Emitter Amplifier
Section 12.4: pnp Bipolar Junction Transistors
 and 
 Locate the point of operation on both the input and output
characteristics.
iC=8 mA
vCE=12 V.
*P12.22. Consider the circuit of Figure 12.7 on page 605. Assume that 
and 
 The input signal is a 0.2-V-peak 1-kHz sinusoid given by
 The common-emitter characteristics for the transistor are shown in
Figure P12.18. Determine the maximum, minimum, and Q-point values for 
 What is the
approximate voltage gain for this circuit?
P12.23. List several reasons that distortion occurs in BJT amplifiers.
P12.24. Consider the circuit of Figure 12.7 on page 605. Assume that 
and 
 The input signal is a 0.2-V-peak 1-kHz sinusoid given by
 The common-emitter characteristics for the transistor are shown in
Figure P12.18. Determine the maximum, minimum, and Q-point values for 
 What can you
say about the waveform for 
 Why isn't voltage gain an appropriate concept in this case?
P12.25. Consider the circuit of Figure 12.7 on page 605. Assume that 
and 
 The input signal is a 0.2-V-peak 1-kHz sinusoid given by
 The common-emitter characteristics for the transistor are shown in
Figure P12.18. Determine the maximum, minimum, and Q-point values for 
 What is the
approximate voltage gain for this circuit? Why is the gain so small in magnitude?
P12.26. Consider the circuit of Figure 12.7 on page 605. Given 
 and 
construct the load line on the 
 versus 
 axes. Repeat for 
 How does the slope of
the load line change when 
 changes?
VCC=20 V, 
VBB=0.8 V, 
RB=40 kΩ,
RC=2 kΩ.
vin(t)=0.2 sin(2000πt).
vCE.
VCC=20 V, 
VBB=0.8 V, 
RB=40 kΩ,
RC=10 kΩ.
vin(t)=0.2 sin(2000πt).
vCE.
vCE(t)?
VCC=20 V, 
VBB=0.3 V, 
RB=40 kΩ,
RC=2 kΩ.
vin(t)=0.2 sin(2000πt).
vCE.
VCC=10 V
RC=2 kΩ,
iC
vCE
VCC=15 V.
VCC
P12.27. Draw the circuit symbol for a pnp BJT. Label the terminals and the currents. Choose
reference directions that agree with the true current direction for operation in the active region.
P12.28. Figure P12.28 shows an npn transistor and a pnp transistor connected as a Sziklai
pair, which is equivalent to a single npn transistor, as indicated. Find an expression for 
 of
the equivalent transistor in terms of 
 and 
βeq
β1
β2.

Section 12.5: Large-Signal DC Circuit Models
Figure P12.28
Sziklai pair.
*P12.29. A certain pnp silicon transistor has 
 and 
 Sketch 
 versus 
 for
 ranging from 0 to 
 Repeat for 
*P12.30. The circuit shown in Figure P12.30 has 
 The transistor has 
a. Sketch the output characteristics for 
 5, 10, 15, 20, and 
 with 
 ranging
from zero to 
b. Draw the output load line on the characteristics sketched in part (a).
c. Determine the values for 
 and 
d. Sketch 
 to scale versus time.
e. Repeat parts (c) and (d) for 
Figure P12.30
P12.31. Suppose we have a certain pnp BJT that has 
 and 
Determine the values for  and  for this transistor.
P12.32. At a temperature of 30°C, a particular pnp transistor has 
 for 
Estimate 
 for 
 at a temperature of 180°C.
β=100
iB=50 μA.
iC
vCE,
vCE
−5 V.
β=300.
is(t)=
β=100.
iB=0,
25 μA
vCE
−20 V.
IC max, ICQ,
ICmin.
vCE(t)
is(t)=20
VCE=−5 V, IC=0.995 mA,
IE=
α
β
VBE=−0.7 V
IE=2 mA.
VBE
IE=2 mA
P12.33. Sketch the input characteristic curve to scale for a typical small-signal silicon npn BJT at
room temperature, allowing 
 to range from 0 to 
 Sketch the output characteristic curves
to scale, with 
 ranging from 0 to 
 in 
 steps, given that 
 Finally, label the
cutoff, active, and saturation regions.
P12.34. Each of the transistors shown in Figure P12.34 has 
 in saturation,
and 
 in the active and saturation regions. For each transistor, determine the region
of operation and the values of 
 and 
iB
40 μA.
iB
40 μA
10 μA
β=100.
β=100, |VCE|=0.2 V
|VBE|=0.6 V
VCE, IB, IE,
IC.

Section 12.6: Large-Signal DC Analysis of BJT Circuits

Figure P12.34
*P12.35. In the active region, how is the base-collector junction biased (forward or reverse)?
How is the base-emitter junction biased? Repeat for the saturation region. Repeat for the cutoff
region.
P12.36. Draw the large-signal dc circuit model for a silicon npn transistor in the active region at
room temperature. Include the constraints of currents and voltages that guarantee operation in
the active region. Repeat for the saturation region. Repeat for the cutoff region.
P12.37. Determine the region of operation for a room-temperature silicon npn transistor that has
 if:
a. 
 and 
b. 
c. 
 and 
d. 
 and 
P12.38. Shown in Figure P12.17 is the Darlington pair, which is equivalent to a single transistor,
as indicated in the figure. Assuming that both 
 and 
 are operating in the active region, with
 determine the value for 
 for the equivalent transistor in the active region.
Repeat for the Sziklai pair shown in Figure P12.28.
P12.39. Determine the region of operation for a room-temperature silicon pnp transistor that has
 if:
a. 
 and 
b. 
 and 
c. 
 and 
P12.40. Draw the large-signal dc circuit model for a silicon pnp transistor in the active region at
room temperature. Include the constraints of currents and voltages that guarantee operation in
the active region. Repeat for the saturation region. Repeat for the cutoff region.
β=100
VCE=10 V
IB=20 μA;
IC=IB=0;
VCE=3 V
VBE=0.4 V;
IC=1 mA
IB=50 μA.
Q1
Q2
|VBE|=0.6 V,
VBE
β=100
VCE=−5 V
VBE=
IC=10 mA
IB=1 mA;
IB=0.05 mA
VCE=−5 V.

*P12.41. List the step-by-step procedure for dc analysis of a BJT circuit, using the large-signal
circuit models.
*P12.42. Use the large-signal models shown in Figure 12.16 on page 613 for the transistors to
determine 
 and 
 for the circuits of Figure P12.42. Assume that 
 and 
 in
both the active and saturation regions. Repeat for 
 and compare the results for both
values.

Figure P12.42
P12.43. The transistors shown in Figure P12.43 operate in the active region and have 
and 
 Determine 
 and 
 for each transistor.
Figure P12.43
P12.44. Draw the four-resistor bias circuit for an npn BJT.
P12.45. Draw the fixed base bias circuit. What is the principal reason that this circuit is
unsuitable for mass production of amplifier circuits?
*P12.46. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P12.46 . A Q-point value for 
 between a
minimum of 4 mA and a maximum of 5 mA is required. Assume that resistor values are constant
and that  ranges from 100 to 300. It is desired for 
 to have the largest possible value while
meeting the other constraints. Determine the values of 
 and 
IC
VCE
β=100
|VBE|=0.7 V
β=300,
β=100
VBE=0.7 V.
IC
VCE
IC
β
RB
RB
RE.

Figure P12.46
P12.47. Analyze the circuits shown in Figure P12.47 to determine I and V. For all transistors,
assume that 
 and 
 in both the active and saturation regions. Repeat for
Figure P12.47
β=100
|VBE|=0.7 V
β=300.

*P12.48. The four-resistor bias network of Figure12.22(a)  on page 620 has
 and 
 Suppose that  ranges from 50 to
200, 
 and the resistors have tolerances of 
 percent. Calculate the maximum and
minimum values for 
P12.49. Consider the four-resistor bias network of Figure 12.22(a) on page 620, with
 and 
 Assume that
 Determine 
 and 
P12.50. The four-resistor bias network of Figure12.22(a)  on page 620 has 
 and 
Assume that 
 in both the
active and saturation regions. Determine 
 and 
 [Hint: The transistor may not be
operating in the active region.]
P12.51. Analyze the circuit of Figure P12.51 to determine 
 and 
Figure P12.51
P12.52. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P12.52 . Determine the values of 
 and 
 if a
bias point of 
 and 
 is required.
VCC=15V,R1=100kΩ,R2=47kΩ,RC=4.7kΩ,
RE=4.7 kΩ.
β
VBE=0.7 V,
±5
IC.
R1=200 kΩ, R2=100 kΩ, VCC=15 V, RC=10 kΩ, RE=10 kΩ,
β=200.
VBE=0.7 V.
ICQ
VCEQ.
R1=100 kΩ, 
R2=200 kΩ, 
VCC=15 V, RC=10 kΩ, 
RE=10 kΩ,
β=200.
VBE=0.7 V
ICQ
VCEQ.
IC
VCE.
R1
RC
VCE=5 V
IC=2 mA

Section 12.7: Small-Signal Equivalent Circuits
Section 12.8: Common-Emitter Amplifiers
Figure P12.52
P12.53. Give the formula for determination of 
 assuming that  and the  point are known.
P12.54. Draw the small-signal equivalent circuit for a BJT.
*P12.55. Suppose that a new type of BJT has been invented for which 
 where 
 is
in amperes and 
 is in volts. Also, this new transistor has 
 The small-signal
equivalent circuit for the transistor is shown in Figure 12.26 on page 625. Find an equation
relating 
 of this new transistor to 
 Evaluate 
 for 
P12.56. Shown in Figure P12.28 is the Sziklai pair, which is equivalent to a single transistor, as
indicated in the figure. Draw the small-signal equivalent circuits for the pair and for the equivalent
transistor. Find an expression for 
 in terms of 
 and 
P12.57. Shown in Figure P12.17 is the Darlington pair, which is equivalent to a single transistor,
as indicated in the figure. Draw the small-signal equivalent circuits for the pair and for the
equivalent transistor. Find an expression for 
 in terms of 
 and 
P12.58. A certain npn silicon transistor at room temperature has 
 Find the corresponding
values of 
 if 
 0.1 mA, and 
 Assume operation in the active region and that
rπ
β
Q
iB=10−5 vBE,
iB
vBE
iC=100iB.
rπ
ICQ.
rπ
ICQ=1 mA.
rπeq
rπ1, rπ2, β1,
β2.
rπeq
rπ1, rπ2, β1,
β2.
β=100.
rπ
ICQ=1 mA,
1 μA.
VT=26 mV.
P12.59. Draw the circuit diagram of a common-emitter amplifier circuit that uses the four-resistor
biasing network. Include a signal source and a load resistance.
P12.60. Why are coupling capacitors often used to connect the signal source and the load to

amplifier circuits? Should coupling capacitors be used if it is necessary to amplify dc signals?
Explain.
P12.61. Are common-emitter amplifiers inverting or noninverting? What can you say about the
magnitudes of the voltage and current gains?
*P12.62. Consider the common-emitter amplifier of Figure P12.62 . Draw the dc circuit and find
 Find the value of 
 Then, calculate values for 
 G, and 
 Assume
operation in the frequency range for which the coupling and bypass capacitors are short circuits.
Figure P12.62
P12.63. Consider the common-emitter amplifier of Figure P12.63 . Draw the dc circuit and find
 Find the value of 
 Then, calculate values for 
 G, and 
 Assume
operation in the frequency range for which the coupling and bypass capacitors are short circuits.
Figure P12.63
ICQ.
rπ.
Av, Avoc, Zin, Ai,
Zo.
ICQ.
rπ.
Av, Avoc, Zin, Ai,
Zo.

Section 12.9: Emitter Followers
P12.64. Consider the common-emitter amplifier shown in Figure P12.64 .
a. Draw the small-signal equivalent circuit by assuming that the coupling capacitors are
short circuits.
b. Derive an expression for the voltage gain in terms of resistor values, 
 and 
c. Derive an expression for the input resistance in terms of resistor values, 
 and 
d. Suppose that 
 and 
 Deter­mine the
value required for 
 so that 
e. Evaluate the expressions found in parts (c) and (d) for the values given in part (d).
Figure P12.64
rπ,
β.
rπ,
β.
β=100, VBEQ=0.7 V, RC=2 kΩ, RL=
VCC=20 V.
RB
ICQ=5 mA.
P12.65. Draw the circuit diagram of an emitter follower. Include a signal source and a load
resistance.
P12.66. What can you say about the voltage gain of an emitter follower? The current gain? The
power gain?
*P12.67. Consider the emitter-follower amplifier of Figure P12.67 . Draw the dc circuit and find
 Next, determine the value of 
 Then, calculate midband values for 
 G,
and 
ICQ.
rπ.
Av, Avoc, Zin, Ai,
Zo.

Figure P12.67
P12.68. Consider the emitter-follower amplifier of Figure P12.68 . Draw the dc circuit and find
 Next, determine the value of 
 Then, calculate midband values for 
 G, and 
Figure P12.68
ICQ.
rπ.
Av, Avoc,
Zo.

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T12.1. Match each entry in Table T12.1(a) with the best choice from the list given in Table
T12.1(b). [Items in Table T12.1(b) may be used more than once or not at all.]
Table T12.1
(a)
a. For a BJT in the active region, the collector-base junction is .
b. For a BJT in the active region, the emitter-base junction is .
c. For a BJT in the active region, the current is usually much smaller than the
current in the other two terminals.
d. aClipping occurs when the BJT in an amplifier circuit reaches or .
e. In a BJT amplifier, nonuniform spacing of the collector characteristics can
cause .
f. The large signal model for a BJT consists of two voltage sources in the region.
g. The large signal model for a BJT has open circuits between all three terminals
in the region.
h. A BJT with 
 and 
 is operating in the region.
i. The voltage gain of an emitter follower is typically .
j. The voltage gain of a common-emitter amplifier is typically .
k. In a midband small-signal equivalent circuit, a coupling capacitance appears as
.
(b)
1. cutoff
2. forward biased
3. reverse biased
4. emitter
5. base
6. collector
7. saturation
8. large gain
β=50, IC=1 mA,
IE=1.5 mA

T12.2. The simple amplifier of Figure 12.7 on page 605 has 
 and
 The characteristics are shown in Figure 12.5 on page 603.Use load-line analysis to
determine the values for 
 and 
T12.3. An npn BJT is operating in the active region with 
 and 
Determine the values for 
 and 
 Draw the small-signal equivalent circuit for the BJT.
Assume that 
T12.4. The BJT shown in Figure T12.4 has 
 and 
a. Determine the values of 
 and 
b. Repeat for 
Figure T12.4
T12.5. Draw the midband small-signal equivalent circuit for the amplifier shown in FigureT12.5 .
Be sure to label each element in your equivalent circuit.
9. small gain
10. distortion
11. active
12. large in magnitude compared to unity and negative
13. small in magnitude compared to unity and negative
14. inverting
15. slightly less than unity
16. noninverting
17. large in magnitude compared to unity and positive
18. an open circuit
19. a short circuit
RB=10 kΩ, VBB=0.8 V,
VCC=10 V.
VCE min, VCEQ,
VCE max.
ICQ=1.0 mA
IEQ=1.04 mA.
α, β,
rπ.
VT=26 mV.
β=50
VBE=0.7 V.
IC
VCE;
β=250.

Figure T12.5
T12.6. The common-emitter amplifier shown in Figure 12.27(a) on page 626 has 
 and
 Determine the value of the voltage gain 
 and the input impedance.
R1=
ICQ=4 mA.
Av=vo/vin

Chapter 13 Operational Amplifiers
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
List the characteristics of ideal op amps.
Identify negative feedback in op-amp circuits.
Use the summing-point constraint to analyze ideal-op-amp circuits that have negative feedback.
Select op-amp circuit configurations suitable for various applications.
Use op amps to design useful circuits.
Identify practical op-amp limitations and recognize potential inaccuracies in instrumentation
applications.
Work with instrumentation amplifiers.
Apply integrators, differentiators, and active filters.
Introduction to this chapter:
In Chapter 11, we discussed the external characteristics of amplifiers in general. In

Chapters 12 and 13, we saw how basic amplifiers can be built by using FETs or
BJTs. In this chapter, we introduce an important device known as the operational
amplifier, which finds application in a wide range of engineering instrumentation.
An operational amplifier is a circuit composed of perhaps 30 BJTs or FETs, 10
resistors, and several capacitors. These components are manufactured concurrently
on a single piece of silicon crystal (called a chip) by a sequence of processing steps.
Circuits manufactured in this way are called integrated circuits (ICs).
Because the manufacture of ICs is not much more complicated than the
manufacture of individual transistors, operational amplifiers provide an economical
and often better alternative to the discrete FET and BJT circuits that we studied
Chapters 12 and 13.
Currently, the term operational amplifier, or less formally op amp, refers to ICs that
are employed in a wide variety of general-purpose applications. However, this type
of amplifier originated in analog-computer circuits in which it was used to perform
such operations as integration or addition of signals—hence, the name operational
amplifier.
We will see that inexpensive integrated-circuit op amps can be combined with
resistors (and sometimes capacitors) to form many useful circuits. Furthermore, the
characteristics of these circuits can be made to depend on the circuit configuration
and the resistor values but only weakly on the op amp—which can have large unit-
to-unit variations in some of its parameters.

13.1 Ideal Operational Amplifiers
The circuit symbol for the operational amplifier is shown in Figure 13.1. The operational amplifier is a
differential amplifier having both inverting and noninverting input terminals. (We discussed differential
amplifiers in Section 10.11.) The input signals are denoted as 
 and 
 (As usual, we use
lowercase letters to represent general time-varying voltages. Often, we will omit the time dependence
and refer to the voltages simply as 
 and so on.)
Figure 13.1
Circuit symbol for the op amp.
The input signal of a differential amplifier consists of a differential component and
a common-mode component.
Recall that the average of the input voltages is called the common-mode signal and is given by
Also, the difference between the input voltages is called the differential signal, given by
v1(t)
v2(t).
v1, v2,
vicm=12 (v1+v2)
vid=v1−v2

Characteristics of ideal op amps.
An ideal operational amplifier has the following characteristics:
Infinite input impedances
Infinite gain for the differential input signal
Zero gain for the common-mode input signal
Zero output impedance
Infinite bandwidth
An equivalent circuit for the ideal operational amplifier consists simply of a controlled source as shown in
Figure 13.2. The open-loop gain 
 is very large in magnitude—ideally, infinite.
Figure 13.2
Equivalent circuit for the ideal op amp. The open-loop gain 
 is very large (approaching infinity).
As we will shortly see, op amps are generally used with feedback networks that return part of the output
signal to the input. Thus, a loop is created in which signals flow through the amplifier to the output and
back through the feedback network to the input. 
 is the gain of the op amp without a feedback
network. That is why we call it the open-loop gain.
For now, we assume that the open-loop gain 
 is constant. Thus, there is no distortion, either linear
or nonlinear, and the output voltage 
 has a waveshape identical to that of the differential input
 (Later, we will see that 
 is actually a function of frequency. Furthermore, we will learn
that real op amps suffer from nonlinear imperfections.)
Power-Supply Connections
For a real op amp to function properly, one or more dc supply voltages must be applied, as shown in
AOL
AOL
AOL
AOL
vo
vid=v1−v2.
AOL

Figure 13.3. Often, however, we do not explicitly show the power-supply connections in circuit
diagrams. (As indicated in the figure, it is standard practice to use uppercase symbols with repeated
uppercase subscripts, such as 
 and 
 to represent dc power-supply voltages.)
Figure 13.3
Op-amp symbol showing the dc power supplies, 
 and 
VCC
VEE,
VCC
VEE.

13.2 Inverting Amplifiers
Operational amplifiers are almost always used with negative feedback, in which part of the output
signal is returned to the input in opposition to the source signal. (It is also possible to have positive
feedback, in which the signal returned to the input aids the original source signal. However, negative
feedback turns out to be more useful in amplifier circuits.) Frequently, we analyze op-amp circuits by
assuming an ideal op amp and employing a concept that we call the summing-point constraint.
Operational amplifiers are almost always used with negative feedback, in which
part of the output signal is returned to the input in opposition to the source signal.
In a negative feedback system, the ideal-op-amp output voltage attains the value
needed to force the differential input voltage and input current to zero. We call
this fact the summing-point constraint.
For an ideal op amp, the open-loop differential gain is assumed to approach infinity, and even a very tiny
input voltage results in a very large output voltage. In a negative-feedback circuit, a fraction of the output
is returned to the inverting input terminal. This forces the differential input voltage toward zero. If we
assume infinite gain, the differential input voltage is driven to zero exactly. Since the differential input
voltage of the op amp is zero, the input current is also zero. The fact that the differential input voltage
and the input current are forced to zero is called the summing-point constraint.
Ideal-op-amp circuits are analyzed by the following steps:
1. Verify that negative feedback is present.
2. Assume that the differential input voltage and the input current of the op amp are forced to zero.
(This is the summing-point constraint.)

3. Apply standard circuit-analysis principles, such as Kirchhoff's laws and Ohm's law, to solve for
the quantities of interest.
Next, we illustrate this type of analysis for some important circuits that are commonly used in
engineering and scientific instrumentation.
The Basic Inverter
An op-amp circuit known as the inverting amplifier is shown in Figure 13.4. We will determine the
voltage gain 
 by assuming an ideal op amp and employing the summing-point constraint.
However, before starting analysis of an op-amp circuit, we should always check to make sure that
negative feedback is present rather than positive feedback.
Figure 13.4
The inverting amplifier.
In Figure 13.4, the feedback is negative, as we shall demonstrate. For example, suppose that due to
the input source 
 a positive voltage 
 appears at the inverting input. Then a negative output voltage
of large (theoretically infinite) magnitude results at the output. Part of this output voltage is returned to
the inverting input by the feedback path through 
 Thus, the initially positive voltage at the inverting
input is driven toward zero by the feedback action. A similar chain of events occurs for the appearance
of a negative voltage at the inverting input terminal. Hence, the output voltage of the op amp takes
precisely the value needed to oppose the source and produce (nearly) zero voltage at the op-amp input.
Since we assume that the gain of the op amp is infinite, a negligible (theoretically zero) input voltage 
is needed to produce the required output.
Figure 13.5 shows the inverting amplifier, including the conditions of the summing-point constraint at the
input of the op amp. Notice that the input voltage 
 appears across 
 Thus, the current through 
 is
Av=vo/vin
vin,
vx
R2.
vx
vin
R1.
R1

Figure 13.5
We make use of the summing-point constraint in the analysis of the inverting amplifier.
Because the current flowing into the op-amp input terminals is zero, the current flowing through 
 is
Thus, from Equations 13.1 and 13.2, we have
Writing a voltage equation around the loop by including the output terminals, the resistor 
 and the op-
amp input, we obtain
Using Equation 13.3 to substitute for  in Equation 13.4 and solving for the circuit voltage gain, we
have
We refer to 
 as the closed-loop gain because it is the gain of the circuit with the feedback network in
place.
Under the ideal-op-amp assumption, the closed-loop voltage gain is determined solely by the ratio of the
resistances. This is a very desirable situation because resistors are available with precise and stable
values. Notice that the voltage gain is negative, indicating that the amplifier is inverting (i.e., the output
voltage is out of phase with the input voltage).
i1=vinR1
(13.1)
R2
i2=i1
(13.2)
i2=vinR1
(13.3)
R2,
vo+R2i2=0
(13.4)
i2
Av=vovin=−R2R1
(13.5)
Av

Under the ideal-op-amp assumption, the closed-loop voltage gain of the inverter
is determined solely by the ratio of the resistances.
The input impedance of the inverting amplifier is
Thus, we can easily control the input impedance of the circuit by our choice of 
Rearranging Equation 13.5, we have
Consequently, we see that the output voltage is independent of the load resistance 
 We conclude
that the output acts as an ideal voltage source (as far as 
 is concerned). In other words, the output
impedance of the inverting amplifier is zero.
The inverter has a closed-loop voltage gain 
 an input impedance
equal to 
 and zero output impedance.
Later, we will see that the characteristics of the inverting amplifier are influenced by nonideal properties
of the op amp. Nevertheless, in many applications, the departure of actual performance from the ideal is
insignificant.
Virtual-Short-Circuit Concept
Sometimes, the condition at the op-amp input terminals of Figure 13.5 is called a virtual short circuit.
That terminology is used because even though the differential input voltage of the op amp is forced to
zero (as if by a short circuit to ground), the op-amp input current is also zero.
Zin=vini1=R1
(13.6)
R1.
vo=−R2R1 vin
(13.7)
RL.
RL
Av = −R2/R1
R1

This terminology can be confusing unless it is realized that it is the action at the output of the op amp
acting through the feedback network that enforces zero differential input voltage. (Possibly, it would be
just as valid to call the condition at the op-amp input terminals a "virtual open circuit" because no current
flows.)
Variations of the Inverter Circuit
Several useful versions of the inverter circuit exist. Analysis of these circuits follows the same pattern
that we have used for the basic inverter: Verify that negative feedback is present, assume the summing-
point constraint, and then apply basic circuit laws.
Example 13.1 Analysis of an Inverting Amplifier
Figure 13.6 shows a version of the inverting amplifier that can have high gain magnitude without
resorting to as wide a range of resistor values as is needed in the standard inverter configuration.
Derive an expression for the voltage gain under the ideal-op-amp assumption. Also, find the input
impedance and output impedance. Evaluate the results for 
 and 
 Then,
consider the standard inverter configuration of Figure 13.5 with 
 and find the value of 
required to achieve the same gain.
Figure 13.6
An inverting amplifier that achieves high gain magnitude with a smaller range of resistance values
than required for the basic inverter. See Examples 13.1.
Solution
First, we verify that negative feedback is present. Assume a positive value for 
 which results in a
R1=R3=1 kΩ
R2=R4=10 kΩ.
R1=1 kΩ,
R2
vi,

negative output voltage of very large magnitude. Part of this negative voltage is returned through the
resistor network and opposes the original input voltage. Thus, we conclude that negative feedback is
present.
Generally, if a network of resistors is connected between the inverting input
and the output, negative feedback exists.
Next, we assume the conditions of the summing-point constraint:
Then, we apply Kirchhoff's current law, Kirchhoff's voltage law, and Ohm's law to analyze the circuit.
To begin, we notice that 
 appears across 
 (because 
). Hence, we can write
Next, we apply Kirchhoff's current law to the node at the right-hand end of 
 to obtain
(Here, we have used the fact that 
)
Writing a voltage equation around the loop through 
 and 
 we obtain
(In writing this equation, we have used the fact that 
) Applying Kirchhoff's current law at the top
end of 
 yields
Writing a voltage equation for the loop containing 
 and 
 gives
vi=0 and ii=0
vin
R1
vi=0
i1=vinR1
(13.8)
R1,
i2=i1
(13.9)
ii=0.
vi, R2,
R3,
R2i2=R3i3
(13.10)
vi=0.
R3
i4=i2+i3
(13.11)
vo, R4,
R3
vo=−R4i4−R3i3
(13.12)

Next, we use substitution to eliminate the current variables (
 and ) and obtain an equation
relating the output voltage to the input voltage. First, from Equations 13.8 and 13.9, we obtain
Then, we use Equation 13.13 to substitute for  in Equation 13.10 and rearrange terms to obtain
Using Equations 13.13 and 13.14 to substitute for  and  in Equation 13.11, we find that
Finally, using Equations 13.14 and 13.15 to substitute into 13.12, we obtain
Therefore, the voltage gain of the circuit is
The input impedance is obtained from Equation 13.8:
Inspection of Equation 13.16 shows that the output voltage is independent of the load resistance.
Thus, the output appears as an ideal voltage source to the load. In other words, the output
impedance of the amplifier is zero.
Evaluating the voltage gain for the resistor values given (
 and 
) yields
In the basic inverter circuit of Figure 13.5, the voltage gain is given by Equation 13.5, which states
that
Therefore, to achieve a voltage gain of 
 with 
 we need 
 Notice that a
resistance ratio of 120:1 is required for the basic inverter, whereas the circuit of Figure 13.6 has a
i1, i2, i3,
i4
i2=vinR1
(13.13)
i2
i3=vin R2R1R3
(13.14)
i2
i3
i4=vin(1R1+R2R1R3)
(13.15)
vo=−vin(R2R1+R4R1+R2R4R1R3)
(13.16)
Av=vovin=−(R2R1+R4R1+R2R4R1R3)
(13.17)
Rin=vini1=R1
(13.18)
R1=R3=1 kΩ
R2=R4=10 kΩ
Av=−120
Av=−R2R1
−120
R1=1 kΩ,
R2=120 kΩ.

ratio of only 10:1. Sometimes, there are significant practical advantages in keeping the ratio of
resistances in a circuit as close to unity as possible. Then, the circuit of Figure 13.6 is preferable to
the basic inverter shown in Figure 13.5.
Now that we have demonstrated how to make use of the summing-point constraint in analysis of ideal-
op-amp circuits having negative feedback, we provide some exercises for you to practice applying the
technique. Each of these circuits has negative feedback, and if we assume ideal op amps, the summing-
point constraint can be used in analysis.
Exercise 13.1
A circuit known as a summer is shown in Figure 13.7.
Figure 13.7
Summing amplifier. See Exercise 13.1.
a. Use the ideal-op-amp assumption to solve for the output voltage in terms of the input voltages and
resistor values.
b. What is the input resistance seen by 
c. By 
d. What is the output resistance seen by 
Answer
a. 
b. the input resistance for 
 is equal to 
c. the input resistance for 
 is equal to 
d. the output resistance is zero.
Exercise 13.2
vA?
vB?
RL?
vo=−(Rf/RA)vA−(Rf/RB)vB;
vA
RA;
vB
RB;

Solve for the currents and voltages labeled in the circuits of Figure 13.8.
Figure 13.8
Circuit for Exercise 13.2.
Answer
a. 
b. 
Exercise 13.3
Find an expression for the output voltage of the circuit shown in Figure 13.9.
i1=1 mA, i2=1 mA, io=−10 mA, ix=−11 mA, vo=−10 V;
i1=5 mA, i2=5 mA, i3=5 mA, i4=10 mA, vo=−15 V.

Figure 13.9
Circuit for Exercise 13.3.
Answer 
Positive Feedback
It is interesting to consider the inverting amplifier configuration with the input terminals of the op amp
interchanged as shown in Figure 13.10. In this case, the feedback is positive—in other words, the
feedback signal aids the original input signal. For example, if the input voltage  is positive, a very large
positive output voltage results. Part of the output voltage is returned to the op-amp input by the feedback
network. Thus, the input voltage becomes larger, causing an even larger output voltage. The output
quickly becomes saturated at the maximum possible voltage that the op amp can produce.
Figure 13.10
Circuit with positive feedback.
vo=4v1−2v2.
vi

With positive feedback, the op-amp's input and output voltages increase in
magnitude until the output voltage reaches one of its extremes.
If an initial negative input voltage is present, the output saturates at its negative extreme. Hence, the
circuit does not function as an amplifier—the output voltage is stuck at one extreme or the other and
does not respond to the input voltage 
 (However, if the input voltage 
 becomes sufficiently large in
magnitude, the output can be forced to switch from one extreme to the other. We saw in Chapter 7 that
positive-feedback circuits [i.e., flip-flops] are useful for memory in digital systems.)
If we were to ignore the fact that the circuit of Figure 13.10 has positive rather than negative feedback
and to apply the summing-point constraint erroneously, we would obtain 
 just as we did
for the circuit with negative feedback. This illustrates the importance of verifying that negative feedback
is present before using the summing-point constraint.
vin.
vin
vo=−(R2/R1)vin,

13.3 Noninverting Amplifiers
The circuit configuration for a noninverting amplifier is shown in Figure 13.11. We assume an ideal op
amp to analyze the circuit. First, we check to see whether the feedback is negative or positive. In this
case, it is negative. To see this, assume that  becomes positive and notice that it produces a very
large positive output voltage. Part of the output voltage appears across 
 Since 
 the voltage
 becomes smaller as 
 and 
 become larger. Thus, the amplifier and feedback network act to drive
 toward zero. This is negative feedback because the feedback signal opposes the original input.
Figure 13.11
Noninverting amplifier.
Having verified that negative feedback is present, we utilize the summing-point constraint: 
 and 
Applying Kirchhoff's voltage law and the fact that 
 we can write
Since  is zero, the voltage across 
 is given by the voltage-division principle:
Using Equation 13.20 to substitute into 13.19 and rearranging, we find that the closed-loop voltage gain
is:
Notice that the circuit is a noninverting amplifier (
 is positive), and the gain is set by the ratio of the
feedback resistors.
vi
R1.
vi=vin−v1,
vi
vo
v1
vi
vi=0
ii=0.
vi=0,
vin=v1
(13.19)
ii
R1
v1=R1R1+R2 vo
(13.20)
Av=vovin=1+R2R1
(13.21)
Av

Under the ideal-op-amp assumption, the noninverting amplifier is an ideal voltage
amplifier having infinite input resistance and zero output resistance.
The input impedance of the circuit is theoretically infinite because the input current  is zero. Since the
voltage gain is independent of the load resistance, the output voltage is independent of the load
resistance. Thus, the output impedance is zero. Therefore, under the ideal-op-amp assumption, the
noninverting amplifier is an ideal voltage amplifier. (Ideal amplifiers are discussed in Section 10.6.)
Voltage Follower
Notice from Equation 13.21 that the minimum gain magnitude is unity, which is obtained with 
Usually, we choose 
 to be an open circuit for unity gain. The resulting circuit, called a voltage
follower, is shown in Figure 13.12.
Figure 13.12
The voltage follower which has 
Exercise 13.4
Find the voltage gain 
 and input impedance of the circuit shown in Figure 13.13:
ii
R2=0.
R1
Av=1.
Av=vo/vin

Figure 13.13
Inverting or noninverting amplifier. See Exercise 13.4.
a. with the switch open;
b. with the switch closed.
Answer
a. 
b. 
Exercise 13.5
Assume an ideal op amp and use the summing-point constraint to find an expression for the output
current  in the circuit of Figure 13.14. Also find the input and output resistances of the circuit.
Figure 13.14
Voltage-to-current converter (also known as a transconductance amplifier). See Exercise 13.5.
Answer 
 (because the output current is independent of the load resistance).
Exercise 13.6
a. Derive an expression for the voltage gain 
 of the circuit shown in Figure 13.15.
Av=+1, Rin=∞;
Av=−1, Rin=R/2.
io
io=vin/RF, Rin=∞, Ro=∞
vo/vin

Figure 13.15
Circuit for Exercise 13.6.
b. Evaluate for 
 and 
c. Find the input resistance of this circuit.
d. Find the output resistance.
Answer
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
13.1 Mechanical Application of Negative Feedback: Power Steering
Besides its use in op-amp circuits, negative feedback has many other applications in
engineering—automotive power-assisted steering systems provide one example. A simplified
diagram of a typical system is shown in Figure PA13.1. A hydraulic pump driven by the engine
continuously supplies pressure to a control valve that routes the fluid to two sides of the booster
cylinder. For straight-ahead steering, pressure is applied equally to both sides of the cylinder
and no turning force results. As the steering wheel is moved by the driver, more pressure is
applied to one side of the cylinder or the other to help turn the wheels in the desired direction.
(The fluid path for one direction is illustrated in the figure.) A mechanical feedback arm from the
R1=10 kΩ
R2=100 kΩ.
Av=1+3(R2/R1)+(R2/R1)2;
Av=131;
Rin=∞;
Ro=0.

steering linkage causes the valve to return to its neutral position as the wheels turn. Thus, there
is a negative feedback path from the booster cylinder through the mechanical linkage back to the
control valve.
FIGURE
PA13.1
A simplified diagram of an automotive power-assisted steering system illustrating the importance
of negative feedback.
Negative feedback is an important aspect of the power-steering system. Consider what would
happen if the mechanical linkage between the output of the booster cylinder and the control
valve is removed. Then, if the steering wheel were moved slightly off center, pressure would be
applied continuously to the booster cylinder and the wheels would eventually move all the way to
their extreme position. It would be very difficult for the driver to make a gradual turn.
On the other hand, with the feedback linkage in place, the wheels move only far enough to
return the valve (nearly) to its neutral position. As the steering wheel is turned, the wheels move
a proportional amount.
Notice that the control valve responds to the difference between the input from the steering
wheel and the position of the steering linkage. This is similar to the way that the op amp
responds to its differential input signal. The pump is analogous to the power supply in an op-amp
circuit. Furthermore, the booster cylinder position is analogous to the op-amp output signal, and
the mechanical linkage back to the control valve is analogous to a feedback circuit.
Steer-by-wire systems are a more modern alternative for mechanical/hydraulic steering systems
and are under intense development. Here, the mechanical/hydraulic steering components are
replaced by electrical sensors, microcontrollers, software, and electrical motors. Just as in the
mechanical system, negative feedback is used in steer-by-wire systems. Actual and desired
wheel positions are derived from sensors connected to the wheels and to the steering wheel.

The software compares the actual wheel position to the desired position and uses the difference
to control motors that turn the wheels. There is no steering column or actual mechanical path
from the steering wheel to the vehicle wheels. These new electronic steering systems have the
potential to significantly reduce weight and increase fuel economy of a vehicle. However, they
also have some new safety issues. After all, loss of steering due to a software glitch could be
very serious.

13.4 Design of Simple Amplifiers
Many useful amplifiers can be designed by using resistive feedback networks
with op amps.
Many useful amplifiers can be designed by using resistive feedback networks with op amps. For now,
we consider the op amps to be ideal. Later, we consider the effects of the nonideal properties of real op
amps. Often in practice, the performance requirements of the circuits to be designed are not extreme,
and design can be carried out by assuming ideal op amps.
Amplifier design using op amps mainly consists of selecting a suitable circuit
configuration and values for the feedback resistors.
We illustrate design by using the op-amp circuits that we have considered in previous sections
(including the exercises). For these circuits, design consists primarily of selecting a suitable circuit
configuration and values for the feedback resistors.
Example 13.2 Design of a Noninverting Amplifier
Design a noninverting amplifier that has a voltage gain of 10, using an ideal op amp. The input
signals lie in the range 
 to 
 Use standard 5-percent-tolerance resistors in the design. (See
Appendix B for a list of standard 5-percent-tolerance resistor values.)
Solution
We use the noninverting amplifier configuration of Figure 13.11. The gain is given by Equation
−1
+1 V.

13.21. Thus, we have
Theoretically, any resistor values would provide the proper gain, provided that 
 However,
very small resistances are not practical because the current through the resistors must be supplied
by the output of the op amp, and ultimately, by the power supply. For example, if 
 and
 for an output voltage of 10 V, the op amp must supply 1 A of current. This is illustrated in
Figure 13.16. Most integrated-circuit op amps are not capable of such a large output current, and
even if they were, the load on the power supply would be unwarranted. In the circuit at hand, we
would want to keep 
 large enough so the current that must be supplied to them is reasonable.
For general design with power supplies operated from the ac power line, currents up to several
milliamperes are usually acceptable. (In battery-operated equipment, we would try harder to reduce
the current and avoid having to replace batteries frequently.)
Figure 13.16
If low resistances are used, an excessively large current is required.
If the resistances are too small, an impractical amount of current and power
will be needed to operate the amplifier.
On the other hand, very large resistances, such as 
 and 
 also present
problems. Such large resistances are unstable in value, particularly in a humid environment. Later,
we will see that large resistances lead to problems due to an op-amp imperfection known as bias
current. Furthermore, high-impedance circuits are prone to injection of unwanted signals from
nearby circuits through stray capacitive coupling. This is illustrated in Figure 13.17.
Av=10=1+R2R1
R2=9R1.
R1=1 Ω
R2=9 Ω,
R1+R2
R1=10 MΩ
R2=90 MΩ,

Figure 13.17
If very high resistances are used, stray capacitance can couple unwanted signals into the circuit.
Very large resistance may be unstable in value and lead to stray coupling of
undesired signals.
Generally, resistance values between about 
 and 
 are suitable for use in op-amp circuits.
Since the problem statement calls for standard 5-percent-tolerance resistors (see Appendix B), we
look for a pair of resistor values such that the ratio 
 is 9. One possibility is 
 and
 However, for many applications, we would find that 
 and 
 would work
just as well. Of course, if 5-percent-tolerance resistors are used, we can expect unit-to-unit variations
of about 
 percent in the ratio 
 This is because 
 could be 5 percent low while 
 is 5
percent high, or vice versa. Thus, the gain of the amplifier (which is 
) varies by about 
percent.
If more precision is needed, 1-percent-tolerance resistors can be used. Another possibility is an
adjustable resistor to set the gain to the desired value.
Example 13.3 Amplifier Design
A transducer for instrumentation of vibrations in a forge hammer has an internal impedance that is
always less than 
 but is variable over time. An amplifier that produces an amplified version of
the internal source voltage 
 is required. The voltage gain should be 
 percent. Design an
amplifier for this application.
100 Ω
1 MΩ
R2/R1
R2=180 kΩ
R1=20 kΩ.
R2=18 kΩ
R1=2 kΩ
±10
R2/R1.
R2
R1
Av=1+R2/R1
±9
500 Ω
vs
−10±5

Solution
Since an inverting gain is specified, we choose to use the inverting amplifier of Figure 13.4. The
proposed amplifier and the signal source are shown in Figure 13.18.
Figure 13.18
Circuit of Example 13.3.
Using the summing-point constraint and conventional circuit analysis, we can show that
Hence, we must select resistance values so that
Because the value of 
 is variable, we must choose 
 much greater than the maximum value of
 Thus, we are led to choose 
 (Then, as 
 ranges from zero to 
the sum 
 varies by only 1 percent.) To achieve the desired gain, we require that 
Since a gain tolerance of 
 percent is specified, we resort to the use of 1 percent resistors. This is
necessary because gain variations occur due to variations in 
 variations in 
 and variations in
 If each of these causes a 
 percent gain variation, the gain varies by about 
 percent, which is
within the allowed range.
Consulting a table of standard values for 1 percent resistors (see Appendix B), we choose
 and 
 As well as ensuring that the gain does not vary outside the specified
limits, these values are not so small that large currents occur or so large that undue coupling of
unwanted signals into the circuit is likely to be a problem.
Another solution would be to use 5-percent-tolerance resistors, but choose 
 and 
 as the
series combination of a 
 fixed resistor and a 
 adjustable resistor. Then the gain could
be set initially to the desired value. Some gain fluctuation would occur in operation due to variation of
vo=−R2R1+Rs vs
R2R1+Rs=10±5%
Rs
R1
Rs.
R1≅100, Rsmax=50 kΩ.
Rs
500 Ω,
R1+Rs
R2≅500 kΩ.
±5
Rs,
R1,
R2.
±1
±3
R1=49.9 kΩ
R2=499 kΩ.
R1=51 kΩ
R2
430-kΩ
200-kΩ

 and drift of the other resistance values due to aging, temperature changes, and so on.
Exercise 13.7
Find the maximum and minimum values of the gain 
 for the circuit designed in Example 13.3.
The nominal resistor values are 
 and 
 Assume that the resistors 
 and 
range as far as 
 percent from their nominal values and that 
 ranges from 0 to 
Answer The extreme gain values are 
 and 
Close-Tolerance Designs
When designing amplifiers with tight gain tolerances (1 percent or better), it is necessary to employ
adjustable resistors. We might be tempted to use lower cost 5-percent-tolerance resistors rather than 1-
percent-tolerance resistors and use the adjustable resistor to offset the larger variations. However, this
is not good practice because 5-percent-tolerance resistors tend to be less stable than 1-percent-
tolerance resistors. Furthermore, fixed resistors tend to be more stable than adjustable resistors. The
best approach from the standpoint of long-term precision is to use 1-percent-tolerance fixed resistors
and design for only enough adjustment to overcome the resulting gain variations.
Often, we combine various types of op-amp circuits in the design of a desired function. These points are
illustrated in the next example.
Example 13.4 Summing Amplifier Design
Two signal sources have internal voltages 
 and 
 respectively. The internal resistances of
the sources are known always to be less than 
 but the exact values are not known and are
likely to change over time. Design an amplifier for which the output voltage is 
The gains are to be 
 percent and 
 percent. Assume that ideal op amps are
available.
Solution
The summer circuit of Figure 13.7 can be used to form the weighted sum of the input voltages given
by
Rs
Avs=vo/vs
R1=49.9 kΩ
R2=499 kΩ.
R1
R2
±1
Rs
500 Ω.
−9.71
−10.20.
v1(t)
v2(t),
1 kΩ,
vo(t)=A1v1(t)+A2v2(t).
A1=5±1
A2=−2±1
vo=−RfRA vA−RfRB vB

in which the gains for both input signals are negative. However, the problem statement calls for a
positive gain for 
 and a negative gain for 
 Thus, we first pass 
 through an inverting amplifier.
The output of this inverter and 
 are then applied to the summer. The proposed circuit diagram is
shown in Figure 13.19.
Figure 13.19
Amplifier designed in Example 13.4.
It can be shown that the output voltage of this circuit is given by
We must select values for the resistances so that the gain for the 
 input is 
 and the gain for the
 input is 
 Many combinations of resistances can be used to meet these specifications.
However, we should keep the input impedances seen by the sources much larger than the internal
source impedances, to avoid gain variations due to loading. This implies that we should choose
large values for 
 and 
 (However, keep in mind that extremely large values are not practical.)
Since we want the gain values to remain within 
 percent of the design values, we choose
 Then, as the source impedances change, the gains change by only about 0.2
percent (because the input impedances are approximately 500 times larger than the highest value of
the source impedances).
Even if we choose to use 1-percent-tolerance resistors, we must use adjustable resistors to trim the
gain. For example, with 1 percent resistors, the gain
varies by about 
 percent, due to the resistance tolerances. Thus, to provide for adjustment of 
we use the combination of a fixed resistance in series with a variable resistance for 
 Similarly, to
provide for adjustment of 
 we use a second variable resistance in series with a fixed resistance
for 
v1
v2.
v1
v2
vo=R2Rs1+R1 RfRA v1−RfRs2+RB v2
(13.22)
v1
+5
v2
−2.
R1
RB.
±1
R1=RB≅500 kΩ.
A1=R2Rs1+R1 RfRA
±4
A1,
R1.
A2,
RB.

Suppose that we select 
 as a 
 (this is a standard nominal value for 1-percent-tolerance
resistors) fixed resistor in series with a 
 trimmer (i.e., an adjustable resistor having a
maximum value of 
). We use the same combination for 
 (Recall that we plan to design for
nominal values of 
 and 
 of 
 each.) The trimmers allow for approximately a 
 percent
adjustment, which is more than adequate to allow for variations of the fixed resistors.
The gain for the 
 input is
Because 
 has a nominal value 
 and we want to have 
 is selected to be a 
 1-percent-tolerance resistor. Now, since we want to achieve
and the values we have already selected result in 
 we must choose values of 
 and
 such that 
 Thus, we choose 
 as a 
 resistor and 
 as a 
 resistor. This
completes the design. The following values are selected:
 fixed resistor in series with a 
 trimmer (
 nominal design value).
 is the same as 
These are by no means the only values that can be used to meet the specifications. Usually, design
problems have many "right" answers.
Usually, design problems have many "right" answers.
Exercise 13.8
R1
453-kΩ
100-kΩ
100 kΩ
RB.
R1
RB
500 kΩ
±10
v2
A2=−RfRs2+RB
Rs2+RB
500 kΩ
A2=−2, Rf
1-
MΩ
A1=R2Rs1+R1 RfRA=5
Rf/(Rs1+R1)=2,
R2
RA
R2/RA≅2.5.
R2
1-MΩ
RA
402-kΩ
R1=a 453-kΩ
100-kΩ
500-kΩ
RB
R1.
R2=1 MΩ.
RA=402 kΩ.
Rf=1 MΩ.

Derive Equation 13.22.
Exercise 13.9
A certain source has an internal impedance of 
 percent. Design an amplifier whose output
voltage is 
 where 
 is the internal voltage of the source. Assume ideal op amps and design
for 
 percent.
Answer Many answers are possible. A good solution is the circuit of Figure 13.11 with 
For example, we could use 1-percent-tolerance resistors having nominal values of 
 and
Exercise 13.10
Repeat Exercise 13.9 for 
 percent.
Answer Many answers are possible. A good solution is the circuit of Figure 13.18 with 
 and
with 
 For example, we could use 1-percent-tolerance resistors having nominal values of
 and 
Exercise 13.11
Repeat Example 13.4 if 
 percent and 
 percent.
Answer Many answers can be found by following the approach taken in Example  13.4.
600 Ω±20
vo=Avsvs,
vs
Avs=20±5
R2≅19×R1.
R1=1 kΩ
R2=19.1 kΩ.
Avs=−25±3
R1≥20Rs
R2≅25(R1+Rs).
R1=20 kΩ
R2=515 kΩ.
A1=+1±1
A2=−3±1

13.5 Op-Amp Imperfections in the Linear Range of Operation
In Sections 13.1 through 13.4, we introduced the op amp, learned how to use the summing-point
constraint to analyze negative-feedback amplifier circuits, and learned how to design simple amplifiers.
So far, we have assumed ideal op amps. This assumption is appropriate for learning the basic principles
of op-amp circuits, but not for high-performance circuits using real op amps. Therefore, in this and the
next few sections, we consider the imperfections of real op amps and how to allow for these
imperfections in circuit design.
Real op amps have several categories of imperfections compared with ideal op
amps.
The nonideal characteristics of real op amps fall into three categories: (1) nonideal properties in linear
operation, (2) nonlinear characteristics, and (3) dc offsets. We discuss the imperfections for the linear
range of operation in this section. In the next several sections, we consider nonlinear operation and dc
offsets.
Input and Output Impedances
An ideal op amp has infinite input impedance and zero output impedance. However, a real op amp has
finite input impedance and nonzero output impedance. The input impedances of IC op amps having BJT
input stages are usually about 
 Op amps having FET input stages have much higher input
impedances, as much as 
 Output impedance is ordinarily between 1 and 
 for an IC op
amp, although it can be as high as several thousand ohms for a low-power op amp.
Real op amps have finite input impedance and nonzero output impedance.
1 MΩ.
1012 Ω.
100 Ω

In circuits with negative feedback, the impedances are drastically altered by the feedback action, and
the input or output impedances of the op amps rarely place serious limits on closed-loop circuit
performance.
Gain and Bandwidth Limitations
Ideal op amps have infinite gain magnitude and unlimited bandwidth. Real op amps have finite open-
loop gain magnitude, typically between 
 and 
 (We are referring to the open-circuit voltage gain of
the op amp without feedback resistors.) Furthermore, the bandwidth of real op amps is limited. The gain
of a real op amp is a function of frequency, becoming smaller in magnitude at higher frequencies.
Real op amps have finite open-loop gain and finite bandwidth.
Usually, the bandwidth of an IC op amp is intentionally limited by the op-amp designer. This is called
frequency compensation and is necessary to avoid oscillation in feedback amplifiers. An in-depth
discussion of frequency compensation is beyond the scope of this book. However, it turns out that the
open-loop gain of most integrated-circuit op amps is of the form
in which 
 is the dc open-loop gain of the amplifier, and 
 is the open-loop break frequency.
In a Bode plot for 
 the gain magnitude is approximately constant up to 
 Above 
 the
gain magnitude falls at 20 dB per decade. This is illustrated in Figure 13.20. (Bode plots are discussed
in Section 6.4.)
104
106.
AOL(f)=A0OL1+j(f/fBOL)
(13.23)
A0OL
fBOL
AOL(f),
fBOL.
fBOL,

Figure 13.20
Bode plot of open-loop gain for a typical op amp.
Closed-Loop Bandwidth
We will show that negative feedback reduces the dc gain of an op amp and extends its bandwidth.
Consider the noninverting amplifier circuit shown in Figure 13.21. The phasor output voltage 
 is the
open-loop gain times the phasor differential input voltage 
Figure 13.21
Noninverting amplifier circuit used for analysis of closed-loop bandwidth.
We assume that the input impedance of the op amp is infinite, so the input current is zero. Then, the
voltage across 
 can be found by applying the voltage-division principle to the feedback network
(which is composed of 
 in series with 
). The voltage across 
 is shown as 
 in which  is the
voltage-division ratio of 
 and 
Vo
Vid :
Vo=AOL(f)Vid
(13.24)
R1
R1
R2
R1
βVo,
β
R1
R2 :
β=R1R1+R2
(13.25)

Applying Kirchhoff's voltage law to Figure 13.21, we have
Solving for 
 and substituting into Equation 13.24, we have
Now, we can solve for the gain of the circuit including the feedback resistors, which is called the closed-
loop gain. This is given by
Using Equation 13.23 to substitute for the open-loop gain, we get
This can be put into the form
Now, we define the closed-loop dc gain as
and the closed-loop bandwidth as
Using these definitions in Equation 13.29, we obtain
Comparing this with Equation 13.23, we see that the closed-loop gain takes exactly the same form as
the open-loop gain. The dc open-loop gain 
 is very large, and we usually have 
Thus, from Equation 13.30, we see that the closed-loop gain is much smaller than the open-loop gain.
Furthermore, Equation 13.31 shows that the closed-loop bandwidth is much greater than the open-loop
bandwidth. In sum, we see that negative feedback reduces the gain magnitude and increases
bandwidth.
Vin=Vid+βVo
Vid
Vo=AOL(Vin−βVo)
(13.26)
ACL=VoVin=AOL1+βAOL
(13.27)
ACL(f)=A0OL/[ 1+j(f/fBOL) ]1+{ βA0OL/[ 1+j(f/fBOL) ] }
(13.28)
ACL(f)=A0OL/(1+βA0OL)1+{ jf/[fBOL(1+βA0OL)] }
(13.29)
A0CL=A0OL1+βA0OL
(13.30)
fBCL=fBOL(1+βA0OL)
(13.31)
ACL(f)=A0OL1+j(f/fBCL)
(13.32)
A0OL
(1+βA0OL) >> 1.

Negative feedback reduces gain magnitude and increases bandwidth.
Gain-Bandwidth Product
Now, consider the product of the closed-loop gain and closed-loop bandwidth. From Equations 13.30
and 13.31, we have
Hence, we see that the product of dc gain and bandwidth is independent of the feedback ratio 
 We
denote the gain-bandwidth as 
 Thus, we have
As indicated in Figure 13.20, it turns out that  is the frequency at which the Bode plot of the open-loop
gain crosses 0 dB. Recall that 0 dB corresponds to unity-gain magnitude. Consequently,  is also called
the unity-gain-bandwidth. General-purpose IC op amps have gain-bandwidth products of several
megahertz.
The gain-bandwidth product is constant for the noninverting amplifier. As we
reduce the gain (by choosing a lower value for 
), the bandwidth
becomes greater.
Example 13.5 Open-Loop and Closed-Loop Bode Plots
A certain op amp has a dc open-loop gain of 
 and 
 Find the closed-loop
bandwidth if this op amp is used with feedback resistors to form a noninverting amplifier having a
closed-loop dc gain of 10. Then, construct a Bode plot of the open-loop gain and a Bode plot of the
closed-loop gain.
A0CLfBCL=A0OL1+βA0OL×fBOL(1+βA0OL)=A0OLfBOL
(13.33)
β.
ft.
ft=A0CLfBCL=A0OLfBOL
(13.34)
ft
ft
1 R2/R1)
A0OL=105
fBOL=40 Hz.

Solution
The gain-bandwidth product is
Thus, if feedback is used to reduce the gain to 
 the bandwidth is 
In decibels, the dc open-loop gain becomes
The break frequency is 
 Recall from our discussion of Bode plots in Section 6.4 that
this gain function is approximated as being constant below the break frequency and falls at 20
dB/decade above the break frequency. The Bode plot is shown in Figure 13.22.
Figure 13.22
Bode plots for Example 13.5 and Exercise 13.12.
Converting 
 to decibels, we have
and the break frequency is 
 The resulting Bode plot is shown in Figure 13.22. Notice
that the closed-loop gain plot is constant until it reaches the open-loop plot and then the closed-loop
plot rolls off.
Exercise 13.12
ft=A0OLfBOL=105×40 Hz=4 MHz=A0CLfBCL
A0CL=10,
fBCL=
A0OL=20 log(105)=100 dB
fBOL=40 Hz.
A0CL=10
A0CL=10 log(10)=20 dB
fBCL=400 kHz.

Repeat Example 13.5 for 
Answer 
 The Bode plot is shown in Figure 13.22.
A0CL=100.
fBCL=40 kHz.

13.6 Nonlinear Limitations
Output Voltage Swing
There are several nonlinear limitations of the outputs of real op amps. First, the output voltage range is
limited. If an input signal is sufficiently large that the output voltage would be driven beyond these limits,
clipping occurs.
The output voltage of a real op amp is limited to the range between certain limits
that depend on the internal design of the op amp. When the output voltage tries
to go beyond these limits, clipping occurs.
The range of allowed output voltage depends on the type of op amp in use, on the load resistance
value, and on the values of the power-supply voltages. For example, with supply voltages of 
 and
 the LM741 op amp (LM741 is the manufacturer's type number for a popular op amp) is capable
of producing output voltages in the range from approximately 
 to 
 If smaller power-supply
voltages are used, the linear range is reduced. (These are typical limits for load resistances greater than
 The guaranteed output range for the LM741 is only from 
 to 
 Smaller load resistances
further restrict the range.)
Consider the noninverting amplifier with a sinusoidal input signal shown in Figure 13.23. Assuming an
ideal op amp, the voltage gain is given by Equation 13.21, which is repeated here for convenience:
+15 V
−15 V,
−14
+14 V.
10 kΩ.
−12
+12 V.

Figure 13.23
Noninverting amplifier used to demonstrate various nonlinear limitations of op amps.
Substituting the values shown in Figure 13.23 (
 and 
), we find 
 The output
waveform for 
 and 
 is shown in Figure 13.24. The output waveform is sinusoidal
because none of the nonlinear limits of the op amp have been exceeded. On the other hand, for
 the output reaches the maximum output voltage limits and the output waveform is clipped.
This is shown in Figure 13.25.
Figure 13.24
Output of the circuit of Figure 13.23 for 
 and 
 None of the limitations are exceeded,
and 
Av=1+R2R1
R1=1 kΩ
R2=3 kΩ
Av=4.
RL=10 kΩ
Vim=1 V
Vim=5 V,
RL=10 kΩ
Vim=1 V.
vo(t)=4vs(t).

Figure 13.25
Output of the circuit of Figure 13.23 for 
and 
 Clipping occurs because the maximum
possible output voltage magnitude is reached.
Output Current Limits
A second limitation is the maximum current that an op amp can supply to a load. For the LM741, the
limits are 
 If a small-value load resistance would draw a current outside these limits, the output
waveform becomes clipped.
The output current range of a real op amp is limited. If an input signal is
sufficiently large that the output current would be driven beyond these limits,
clipping occurs.
For example, suppose that we set the peak input voltage to 
 and adjust the load resistance to
 for the circuit of Figure 13.23. For an ideal op amp, we would expect a peak output voltage of
 and a peak load current of 
 However, output current magnitude of the LM741
is limited to 40 mA. Therefore, clipping occurs due to current limiting. The output voltage waveform of
the circuit is shown in Figure 13.26. Notice that the peak output voltage is 
RL=10 kΩ
Vim=5 V.
±40 mA.
Vim=1 V
RL=50 Ω
Vom=4 V
Vom/RL=80 mA.
40 mA×RL=2 V.

Figure 13.26
Output of the circuit of Figure 13.23 for 
 and 
 Clipping occurs because the maximum
output current limit is reached.
Slew-Rate Limitation
Another nonlinear limitation of actual op amps is that the magnitude of the rate of change of the output
voltage is limited. This is called the slew-rate limitation. The output voltage cannot increase (or
decrease) in magnitude at a rate exceeding this limit. In equation form, the slew-rate limit is
Another nonlinear limitation of actual op amps is that the magnitude of the rate of
change of the output voltage is limited.
For various types of IC op amps, the slew-rate limit ranges from 
 to 
 For the
LM741 with 
 supplies and 
 the typical value is 
 (which is often stated as
).
For example, consider the circuit of Figure 13.23, except that the input source voltage is changed to a
2.5-V-peak 50-kHz sine wave given by
RL=50 Ω
Vim=1 V.
|dvodt|≤SR
(13.35)
SR=105 V/s
SR=108 V/s.
±15 V
RL>2 kΩ,
5×105 V/s
0.5 V/μs

starting at 
 [
 is assumed to be zero prior to 
] The output waveform is shown in Figure 13.27.
Also plotted in the figure is four times the input voltage, which is the output assuming an ideal op amp.
At 
 the output voltage is zero. The ideal output increases at a rate exceeding the slew-rate limit of
the LM741, so the LM741 output increases at its maximum rate, which is approximately 
 At
point A, the actual output finally "catches up" with the ideal output, but by then, the ideal output is
decreasing at a rate that exceeds the slew-rate limit. Thus, at point A, the output of the LM741 begins to
decrease at its maximum possible rate. Notice that because of slew-rate limiting, the actual op-amp
output is a triangular waveform rather than a sinusoid.
Figure 13.27
Output of the circuit of Figure 13.23 for 
and 
 The output waveform is a
triangular waveform because the slew-rate limit is exceeded. The output for an ideal op amp, which is
equal to 
 is shown for comparison.
Full-Power Bandwidth
The full-power bandwidth of an op amp is the range of frequencies for which the op amp can produce
an undistorted sinusoidal output with peak amplitude equal to the guaranteed maximum output voltage.
The full-power bandwidth of an op amp is the range of frequencies for which the
op amp can produce an undistorted sinusoidal output with peak amplitude equal
to the guaranteed maximum output voltage.
vs(t)=2.5 sin(105πt)
t=0. vs(t)
t=0.
t=0,
0.5 V/μs.
RL=10 kΩ
vs(t)=2.5 sin(105πt).
4vs(t),

Next, we derive an expression for the full-power bandwidth in terms of the slew rate and peak amplitude.
The output voltage is given by
Taking the derivative with respect to time, we have
The maximum magnitude of the rate of change is 
 Setting this equal to the slew-rate
limit, we get
Solving for frequency, we obtain
where we have denoted the full-power bandwidth as 
 An undistorted full-amplitude sinusoidal output
waveform is possible only for frequencies less than 
Example 13.6 Full-Power Bandwidth
Find the full-power bandwidth of the LM741 op amp given that the slew rate is 
 and the
guaranteed maximum output amplitude is 
Solution
We substitute the given data into Equation 13.36 to obtain
Thus, we can obtain an undistorted 12-V-peak sinusoidal output from the LM741 only for frequencies
less than 6.63 kHz.
Exercise 13.13
vo(t)=Vom sin(ωt)
dvo(t)dt=ωVom cos(ωt)
ωVom=2πfVom.
2πfVom=SR
fFP=SR2πVom
(13.36)
fFP.
fFP.
SR=0.5 V/μs
Vom=12 V.
fFP=SR2πVom≅6.63 kHz

A certain op amp has a maximum output voltage range from 
 to 
 The maximum current
magnitude is 10 mA. The slew-rate limit is 
 This op amp is used in the circuit of Figure
13.28. Assume a sinusoidal input signal for all parts of this exercise.
Figure 13.28
Circuit for Exercise 13.13.
a. Find the full-power bandwidth of the op amp.
b. For a frequency of 1 kHz and 
 what peak output voltage is possible without distortion (i.e.,
clipping or slew-rate limiting)?
c. For a frequency of 1 kHz and 
 what peak output voltage is possible without distortion?
d. For a frequency of 1 MHz and 
 what peak output voltage is possible without distortion?
e. If 
 and 
 sketch the steady-state output waveform to scale versus time.
Answer
a. 
b. 4 V;
c. 1 V;
d. 0.796 V;
e. the output waveform is a triangular wave with a peak amplitude of 1.25 V.
−4
+4 V.
SR=5 V/μs.
RL=1 kΩ,
RL=100 Ω,
RL=1 kΩ,
RL=1 kΩ
vs(t)=5 sin(2π106t),
fFP=199 kHz;

13.7 DC Imperfections
Op amps have direct-coupled input circuits. Thus, dc bias currents that flow into (or from) the input
devices of the op amp must flow through the elements that are connected to the input terminals, such as
the signal source or feedback resistors.
The dc current flowing into the noninverting input is denoted as 
 and the dc current flowing into the
inverting input is 
 The average of the dc currents is called bias current and is denoted as 
 Thus,
we have
Nominally, the input circuit of the op amp is symmetrical, and the bias currents flowing into the inverting
and noninverting inputs are equal. However, in practice, the devices are not perfectly matched, and the
bias currents are not equal. The difference between the bias currents, called the offset current, is
denoted as
Another dc imperfection of op amps is that the output voltage may not be zero for zero input voltage.
The op amp behaves as if a small dc source known as the offset voltage is in series with one of the
input terminals.
The three dc imperfections (bias current, offset current, and offset voltage) can
be modeled by placing dc sources at the input of the op amp as shown in Figure
13.29.
IB+,
IB−.
IB.
IB=IB++IB−2
(13.37)
Ioff=IB+−IB−
(13.38)

Figure 13.29
Three current sources and a voltage source model the dc imperfections of an op
amp.
The three dc imperfections (bias current, offset current, and offset voltage) can be modeled by placing
dc sources at the input of the op amp as shown in Figure 13.29. The 
 current sources model the bias
current. The 
 current source models the offset current, and the 
 voltage source models the
offset voltage. (These sources were discussed in Section 11.12, and the discussion given there applies
to op-amp circuits as well as to amplifiers in general.)
The bias-current sources are equal in magnitude and are referenced in the same direction (which is
away from the input terminals in Figure 13.29). In some op amps, the bias current can have a negative
value, so the currents flow toward the input terminals. Usually, the direction of the bias current is
predictable for a given type of op amp. For example, if the input terminals of an op amp are the base
terminals of npn BJTs, the bias current 
 is positive (assuming the reference directions shown in
Figure 13.29). On the other hand, pnp BJTs would result in a negative value for 
Since the bias-current sources are matched in magnitude and direction, it is possible to design circuits in
such a way that their effects cancel. On the other hand, the polarity of the offset voltage and the
direction of the offset current are unpredictable—varying from unit to unit. For example, if the offset
voltage of a given type of op amp is specified as a maximum of 2 mV, the value of 
 ranges from 
to 
 from unit to unit. Usually, most units have offset values close to zero, and only a few have
values close to the maximum specification. A typical specification for the maximum offset-voltage
magnitude for IC op amps is several millivolts.
Bias currents are usually on the order of 100 nA for op amps with BJT input devices. Bias currents are
much lower for op amps with FET inputs—a typical specification is 100 pA at 25°C for a device with
JFET input devices. Usually, offset-current specifications range from 20 to 50 percent of the bias
IB
Ioff/2
Voff
IB
IB.
Voff
+2
+2 mV

current.
The effect of bias current, offset current, and offset voltage on inverting or noninverting amplifiers is to
add a (usually undesirable) dc voltage to the intended output signal. We can analyze these effects by
including the sources shown in Figure 13.29 and assuming an otherwise ideal op amp.
The effect of bias current, offset current, and offset voltage on inverting or
noninverting amplifiers is to add a (usually undesirable) dc voltage to the
intended output signal.
Example 13.7 Determining Worst-Case DC Output
Find the worst-case dc output voltage of the inverting amplifier shown in Figure 13.30(a), assuming
that 
 The maximum bias current of the op amp is 100 nA, the maximum offset-current
magnitude is 40 nA, and the maximum offset-voltage magnitude is 2 mV.
vin=0.

Figure 13.30
Circuits of Example 13.7.
Solution
Our approach is to calculate the output voltage due to each of the dc sources acting individually.
Then by using superposition, the worst-case output can be found by adding the outputs due to the
various sources.
First, we calculate the output voltage resulting from each of the dc sources
acting individually. Then, we use superposition.
First, we consider the offset voltage. The circuit, including the offset-voltage source, is shown in
Figure 13.30(b). The offset-voltage source can be placed in series with either input. We have
elected to place it in series with the noninverting input. Then, the circuit takes the form of a
noninverting amplifier. [Notice that although it is drawn differently, the circuit of Figure 13.30(b) is
electrically equivalent to the noninverting amplifier of Figure 13.11.] Thus, the output voltage is the
gain of the noninverting amplifier, given by Equation 13.21, times the offset voltage:
Substituting values, we find that
Since the offset voltage 
 is specified to have a maximum value of 2 mV, the value of 
ranges between extremes of 
 and 
 However, most units would have 
 closer to
zero.
Next, we consider the bias-current sources. The circuit, including the bias-current sources, is shown
in Figure 13.30(c). Because the noninverting input is connected directly to ground, one of the bias-
current sources is short circuited and has no effect. Since we assume an ideal op amp (aside from
the dc sources), the summing-point constraint applies, and 
 Thus, the current 
 is zero.
Applying Kirchhoff's current law, we have 
 Writing a voltage equation from the output through
Vo,voff=−(1+R2R1) Voff
Vo,voff=−11Voff
Voff
Vo,voff
−22
+22 mV.
Vo,voff
vi=0.
I1
I2=−IB.

 and 
 we have
Substituting 
 and 
 we obtain
Because the maximum value of 
 is 100 nA, the maximum value of 
 is 10 mV. As is often
the case, the maximum value of 
 is specified, but the minimum is not. Thus, 
 ranges from
some small indeterminate voltage (perhaps a few millivolts) up to 10 mV. (We will conservatively
assume that the minimum value of 
 is zero.)
Next, we consider the offset-current source. The circuit is shown in Figure 13.30(d). By an analysis
similar to that for the bias current, we can show that
The specification for the maximum magnitude of 
 is 40 nA. Therefore, the value of 
 ranges
between extremes of 
 and 
By superposition, the dc output voltage is the sum of the contributions of the
various sources acting individually.
By superposition, the dc output voltage is the sum of the contributions of the various sources acting
individually, yielding
Hence, the extreme values of the output voltage are
and
R2
R1,
Vo,bias=−R2I2−R1I1
I1=0
I2=−IB,
Vo,bias=R2IB
IB
Vo,bias
IB
Vo,bias
Vo,bias
Vo,ioff=R2 (Ioff2)
Ioff
Vo,ioff
−2
+2 mV.
Vo=Vo,voff+Vo,bias+Vo,ioff
Vo=22+10+2=34 mV

Thus, the output voltage ranges from 
 to 
 from unit to unit. (We have assumed a
minimum contribution of zero for the bias current.) Typical units would have total output voltages
closer to zero than to these extreme values.
Cancellation of the Effects of Bias Currents
As mentioned earlier, it is possible to design circuits in which the effects of the two bias-current sources
cancel. For example, consider the inverting amplifier configuration. Adding a resistor 
 in series with
the noninverting op-amp input, as shown in Figure 13.31, does not affect the gain of the amplifier, but
results in cancellation of the effects of the 
 sources. Notice that the value of 
 is equal to the
parallel combination of 
 and 
Figure 13.31
Adding the resistor 
to the inverting amplifier circuit causes the effects of bias currents to cancel.
Exercise 13.14
Consider the amplifier shown in Figure 13.31.
a. Assume an ideal op amp, and derive an expression for the voltage gain 
 Notice that the
result is the same as Equation 13.5, which was derived for the inverting amplifier without the bias-
current-compensating resistor 
b. Redraw the circuit with 
 but include the bias-current sources. Show that the output voltage is
zero.
c. Assume that 
 and a specification of 3 mV for the maximum magnitude of
 Find the range of output voltages resulting from the offset-voltage source 
d. Assume that 
 and a specification of 40 nA for the maximum magnitude of
 Find the range of output voltages resulting from the offset current.
Vo=−22+0−2=−24 mV
−24
+34 mV
Rbias
IB
Rbias
R1
R2.
Rbias
vo/vin.
Rbias.
vin=0,
R1=10 kΩ, R2=100 kΩ,
Voff.
Voff.
R1=10 kΩ, R2=100 kΩ,
Ioff.

e. Assuming the values given in parts (c) and (d), what range of output voltages results from the
combined action of the bias current, offset voltage, and offset current?
Answer
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Exercise 13.15
Consider the noninverting amplifier shown in Figure 13.32.
Figure 13.32
Noninverting amplifier, including resistor 
 to balance the effects of the bias currents. See Exercise
13.15.
a. Derive an expression for the voltage gain 
 Does the gain depend on the value of 
Explain.
b. Derive an expression for 
 in terms of the other resistance values so that the output voltage
due to the bias currents is zero.
Answer
a. 
 The gain is independent of 
 because the current through 
 is zero
(assuming an ideal op amp).
b. 
vo/vin=−R2/R1;
±33 mV;
±4 mV;
±37 mV.
Rbias
vo/vin.
Rbias?
Rbias
vo/vin=1+R2/R1.
Rbias
Rbias
Rbias=R1‖R2=

13.8 Differential and Instrumentation Amplifiers
Figure 13.33 shows a differential amplifier. Assuming an ideal op amp and that 
 the
output voltage is a constant times the differential input signal 
 The gain for the common-mode
signal is zero. (See Section 11.11 for a discussion of common-mode signals.) To minimize the effects of
bias current, we should choose 
 and 
Figure 13.33
Differential amplifier.
Differential amplifiers are widely used in engineering instrumentation.
The output impedance of the circuit is zero. The input impedance for the 
 source is 
A current that depends on 
 flows back through the feedback network (
 and 
) into the input
source 
 Thus, as seen by the 
 source, the circuit does not appear to be passive. Hence, the
concept of input impedance does not apply for the 
 source (unless 
 is zero).
In some applications, the signal sources contain internal impedances, and the desired signal is the
difference between the internal source voltages. Then, we could design the circuit by including the
internal source resistances of 
 and 
 as part of 
 and 
 respectively. However, to obtain very
high common-mode rejection, it is necessary to match the ratios of the resistances closely. This can be
troublesome if the source impedances are not small enough to be neglected and are not predictable.
R4/R3=R2/R1,
(v1−v2).
R2=R4
R1=R3.
v1
R3+R4.
v1
R1
R2
v2.
v2
v2
v1
v2
v1
R1
R3,

Instrumentation-Quality Differential Amplifier
Figure 13.34 shows an improved differential amplifier circuit for which the common-mode rejection ratio
is not dependent on the internal resistances of the sources. Because of the summing-point constraint at
the inputs of 
 and 
 the currents drawn from the signal sources are zero. Hence, the input
impedances seen by both sources are infinite, and the output voltage is unaffected by the internal
source impedances. This is an important advantage of this circuit compared to the simpler differential
amplifier of Figure 13.33. Notice that the second stage of the instrumentation amplifier is a unity-gain
version of the differential amplifier.
Figure 13.34
Instrumentation-quality differential amplifier.
A subtle point concerning this circuit is that the differential-mode signal experiences a higher gain in the
first stage (
 and 
) than the common-mode signal does. To illustrate this point, first consider a pure
differential input (i.e., 
). Then, because the circuit is symmetrical, point A remains at zero voltage.
Hence, in the analysis for a purely differential input signal, point A can be considered to be grounded. In
this case, the input amplifiers 
 and 
 are configured as noninverting amplifiers having gains of
 The differential gain of the second stage is unity. Thus, the overall gain for the differential
signal is 
Now, consider a pure common-mode signal (i.e., 
). Because of the summing-point
X1
X2,
X1
X2
v1=−v2
X1
X2
(1+R2/R1).
(1+R2/R1).
v1=v2=vcm

constraint, the voltage between the input terminals of 
 (or 
) is zero. Thus, the voltages at the
inverting input terminals of 
 and 
 are both equal to 
 Hence, the voltage across the series-
connected 
 resistors is zero, and no current flows through the 
 resistors. Therefore, no current
flows through the 
 resistors. Thus, the output voltages of 
 and 
 are equal to 
 and we have
shown that the first-stage gain is unity for the common-mode signal. On the other hand, the differential
gain of the first stage is 
 which can be much larger than unity, thereby achieving a reduction
of the common-mode signal amplitude relative to the differential signal. [Notice that if point A were
actually grounded, the gain for the common-mode signal would be the same as for the differential signal,
namely 
]
In practice, the series combination of the two 
 resistors is implemented by a single resistor (equal in
value to 
) because it is not necessary to have access to point A. Thus, matching of component
values for 
 is not required. Furthermore, it can be shown that close matching of the 
 resistors is not
required to achieve a higher differential gain than common-mode gain in the first stage. Since the first
stage reduces the relative amplitude of the common-mode signal, matching of the resistors in the
second stage is not as critical.
Thus, although it is more complex, the differential amplifier of Figure 13.34 has better performance than
that of Figure 13.33. Specifically, the common-mode rejection ratio is independent of the internal source
resistances, the input impedance seen by both sources is infinite, and resistor matching is not as critical.
Exercise 13.16
Assume an ideal op amp, and derive the expression shown for the output voltage of the differential
amplifier of Figure 13.33. Assume that 
X1
X2
X1
X2
vcm.
R1
R1
R2
X1
X2
vcm,
(1+R2/R1),
(1+R2/R1).
R1
2R1
R1
R2
R4/R3=R2/R1.

13.9 Integrators and Differentiators
Figure 13.35 shows the diagram of an integrator, which is a circuit that produces an output voltage
proportional to the running-time integral of the input voltage. (By the term running-time integral, we
mean that the upper limit of integration is t.)
Figure 13.35
Integrator.
Integrators produce output voltages that are proportional to the running-time
integral of the input voltages. In a running-time integral, the upper limit of
integration is t.
The integrator circuit is often useful in instrumentation applications. For example, consider a signal from
an accelerometer that is proportional to acceleration. By integrating the acceleration signal, we obtain a
signal proportional to velocity. Another integration yields a signal proportional to position.
In Figure 13.35, negative feedback occurs through the capacitor. Thus, assuming an ideal op amp, the
voltage at the inverting op-amp input is zero. The input current is given by

The current flowing into the input terminal of the (ideal) op amp is zero. Therefore, the input current 
flows through the capacitor. We assume that the reset switch is opened at 
 Therefore, the capacitor
voltage is zero at 
 The voltage across the capacitor is given by
Writing a voltage equation from the output terminal through the capacitor and then to ground through the
op-amp input terminals, we obtain
Using Equation 13.39 to substitute into 13.40 and the result into 13.41, we obtain
Thus, the output voltage is 
 times the running integral of the input voltage. If an integrator having
positive gain is desired, we can cascade the integrator with an inverting amplifier.
The magnitude of the gain can be adjusted by the choice of R and C. Of course, in selecting a capacitor,
we usually want to use as small a value as possible to minimize cost, volume, and mass. However, for a
given gain constant (1/RC), smaller C leads to larger R and smaller values of 
 Therefore, the bias
current of the op amp becomes more significant as the capacitance becomes smaller. As usual, we try
to design for the best compromise.
Exercise 13.17
Consider the integrator of Figure 13.35 with the square-wave input signal shown in Figure 13.36.
Figure 13.36
iin(t)=vin(t)R
(13.39)
iin
t=0.
t=0.
vc(t) = 1C∫0tiin(t)dt
(13.40)
vo(t)=−vc(t)
(13.41)
v0(t) = −1RC∫0tvin(t)dt
(13.42)
−1/RC
iin.

Square-wave input signal for Exercise 13.17.
a. If 
 and the op amp is ideal, sketch the output waveform to scale.
b. If 
 what value of C is required for the peak-to-peak output amplitude to be 2 V?
Answer
a. See Figure 13.37;
b. 
Figure 13.37
Answer for Exercise 13.17.
Exercise 13.18
Consider the circuit of Figure 13.35 with 
 and 
 As indicated in the figure, the
reset switch opens at 
 The op amp is ideal except for a bias current of 
a. Find an expression for the output voltage of the circuit as a function of time.
b. Repeat for 
Answer
a. 
b. 
Exercise 13.19
R=10 kΩ, C=0.1μF,
R=10 kΩ,
C=0.5 μF.
vin=0, R=10 kΩ,
C=0.01 μF.
t=0.
IB=100 nA.
C=1 μF.
vo(t)=10t;
vo(t)=0.1t.

Add a resistance R in series with the noninverting input of the op amp in Figure 13.35 and repeat
Exercise 13.18.
Answer
a. 
b. 
Differentiator Circuit
Figure 13.38 shows a differentiator that produces an output voltage proportional to the time derivative
of the input voltage. By an analysis similar to that used for the integrator, we can show that the circuit
produces an output voltage given by
Figure 13.38
Differentiator.
Exercise 13.20
Derive Equation 13.43.
vo(t)=−1 mV;
vo(t)=−1 mV.
vo(t)=−RC dvindt
(13.43)

13.10 Active Filters
Filters are circuits designed to pass input components with frequencies in one range to the output and
prevent input components with frequencies in other ranges from reaching the output. For example, a
lowpass filter passes low-frequency input components to the output but not high-frequency components.
A common application for filters is to separate a signal of interest from other signals and noise. For
example, in an electrocardiograph, we need a filter that passes the heart signals, which have
frequencies below about 100 Hz, and rejects higher frequency noise that can be created by contraction
of other muscles. We might use a lowpass filter to remove noise from historical phonograph recordings.
In radio receivers, filters separate one station from the others. In digital instrumentation systems, a
lowpass filter is often needed to remove noise and signal components that have frequencies higher than
half of the sampling frequency in order to avoid a type of distortion, known as aliasing, during sampling
and analog-to-digital conversion.
In Sections 6.2 and 6.8, we considered a few examples of passive-filter design. In this section, we show
how to design lowpass filters composed of resistors, capacitors, and op amps. Filters composed of op
amps, resistors, and capacitors are said to be active filters. In many respects, active filters have
improved performance compared to passive circuits.
Filters can be very useful in separating desired signals from noise.
Active filters have been studied extensively and many useful circuits have been found. Ideally, an active
filter circuit should:
1. Contain few components.
2. Have a transfer function that is insensitive to component tolerances.
3. Place modest demands on the op amp's gain-bandwidth product, output impedance, slew rate,
and other specifications.
4. Be easily adjusted.
5. Require a small spread of component values.
6. Allow a wide range of useful transfer functions to be realized.

Various circuits have been described in the literature that meet these goals to varying degrees. Many
complete books have been written that deal exclusively with active filters. In this section, we confine our
attention to a particular (but practical) means for implementing lowpass filters.
Butterworth Transfer Function
The magnitude of the Butterworth transfer function is given by
in which the integer n is the order of the filter and 
 is the 3-dB cutoff frequency. Substituting 
 yields
 thus, 
 is the dc gain magnitude. Plots of this transfer function are shown in Figure 13.39.
Notice that as the order of the filter increases, the transfer function approaches that of an ideal lowpass
filter.
Figure 13.39
Transfer-function magnitude versus frequency for lowpass Butterworth filters.
An active lowpass Butterworth filter can be implemented by cascading modified Sallen-Key circuits,
one of which is shown in Figure 13.40. In this version of the Sallen-Key circuit, the resistors labeled R
have equal values. Similarly, the capacitors labeled C have equal values. Useful circuits having unequal
components are possible, but equal components are convenient.
|H(f)​|=H01+(f/fB)2n
(13.44)
fB
f=0
|H(0)​|=H0;
H0

Figure 13.40
Equal-component Sallen-Key lowpass active-filter section.
The Sallen-Key circuit shown in Figure 13.40 is a second-order lowpass filter. To obtain an nth-order
filter, n/2 circuits must be cascaded. (We assume that n is even.)
The 3-dB cutoff frequency of the overall filter is related to R and C by
Usually, we wish to design for a given cutoff frequency. We try to select small capacitance values
because this leads to small physical size and low cost. However, Equation 13.45 shows that as the
capacitances become small, the resistance values become larger (for a given cutoff frequency). If the
capacitance is selected too small, the resistance becomes unrealistically large. Furthermore, stray
wiring capacitance can easily affect a high-impedance circuit. Thus, we select a capacitance value that
is small, but not too small (say not smaller than 1000 pF).
In selecting the capacitor, we should select a value that is readily available in the tolerance required.
Then, we use Equation 13.45 to compute the resistance. It is helpful to select the capacitance first and
then compute the resistance, because resistors are commonly available in more finely spaced values
than capacitors. Possibly, we cannot find nominal values of R and C that yield exactly the desired break
frequency; however, it is a rare situation for which the break frequency must be controlled to an
accuracy less than a few percent. Thus, 1-percent-tolerance resistors usually result in a break frequency
sufficiently close to the value desired.
Notice in the circuit of Figure 13.40 that the op amp and the feedback resistors 
 and 
 form a
noninverting amplifier having a gain of K. At dc, the capacitors act as open circuits. Then, the resistors
labeled R are in series with the input terminals of the noninverting amplifier and have no effect on gain.
Thus, the dc gain of the circuit is K. As K is varied from zero to three, the transfer function displays more
fB=12πRC
(13.45)
Rf
(K−1)Rf

and more peaking (i.e., the gain magnitude increases with frequency and reaches a peak before falling
off). For 
 infinite peaking occurs. It turns out that for K greater than three, the circuit is unstable—it
oscillates.
The most critical issue in selection of the feedback resistors 
 and 
 is their ratio. If desired, a
precise ratio can be achieved by including a potentiometer, which is adjusted to yield the required dc
gain for each section. To minimize the effects of bias current, we should select values such that the
parallel combination of 
 and 
 is equal to 2R. However, with FET input op amps, input bias
current is often so small that this is not necessary.
An nth-order Butterworth lowpass filter is obtained by cascading n/2 stages having proper values for K.
(Here again, we assume that n is even.) Table 13.1 shows the required K values for filters of various
orders. The dc gain 
 of the overall filter is the product of the K values of the individual stages.
Table 13.1 K Values for Lowpass or Highpass Butterworth Filters of Various Orders
Order
K
2
1.586
4
1.152
2.235
6
1.068
1.586
2.483
8
1.038
1.337
1.889
2.610
Example 13.8 Lowpass Active Filter Design
Design a fourth-order lowpass Butterworth filter having a cutoff frequency of 100 Hz.
K=3,
Rf
(K−1)Rf
Rf
(K−1)Rf
H0

Solution
We arbitrarily choose capacitor values of 
 This is a standard value and not prohibitively
large. (Perhaps we could achieve an equally good design by using smaller capacitances, say
 However, as we have mentioned earlier, there is a practical limit to how small the
capacitances can be.)
Next, we solve Equation 13.45 for R. Substituting 
 and 
 results in 
In practice, we would select a 
 1-percent-tolerance resistor. This results in a nominal cutoff
frequency slightly higher than the design objective.
Active lowpass filters such as this are useful as antialias filters in computer-
based instrumentation systems.
Consulting Table 13.1, we find that a fourth-order filter requires two sections having gains of
 and 2.235. This results in an overall dc gain of 
 We arbitrarily
select 
 for both sections. The complete circuit diagram is shown in Figure 13.41. The
resistors 
 and 
 consist of fixed resistors in series with small trimmers that can be adjusted to
obtain the required gain for each stage.
Figure 13.41
C=0.1 μF.
0.01 μF.
fB=100 Hz
C=0.1 μF
R=15.92 kΩ.
15.8-kΩ
K=1.152
H0=1.152×2.235≅2.575.
Rf=10 kΩ
R3
R13

Fourth-order Butterworth lowpass filter designed in Example 13.8.
A Bode plot of the overall gain magnitude for the filter designed in Example 13.8 is shown in Figure
13.42. It can be verified that the dc gain in decibels is 
 As desired, the 3-dB frequency
is very nearly 100 Hz.
Figure 13.42
Bode magnitude plot of the gain for the fourth-order lowpass filter of Example 13.8.
Figure 13.43 shows the gain of each section normalized by its dc gain. The figure also shows the
normalized overall gain. Of course, the overall normalized gain is the product of the normalized gains of
the individual stages. (Notice that the gains are plotted as ratios rather than in decibels.) The transfer
function of the first stage—which is the low-gain stage—rolls off without peaking. However, considerable
peaking occurs in the second stage. It is this peaking that squares up the shoulder of the overall transfer
characteristic.
20 logH0≅8.2 dB.

Figure 13.43
Comparison of gain versus frequency for the stages of the fourth-order lowpass filter of Example 13.8.
Exercise 13.21
Show that for frequencies much greater than 
 the magnitude of the lowpass Butterworth transfer
function given in Equation 13.44 rolls off at 
 decibels per decade.
Exercise 13.22
Design a sixth-order Butterworth lowpass filter having a cutoff frequency of 5 kHz.
Answer Many answers are possible. For a sixth-order filter, three stages like Figure 13.40 need to be
cascaded. A good choice is to use capacitors in the range from 1000 pF to 
 With 
 we
need 
 is a good choice. From Table 13.1, we find the gain values to be 1.068,
1.586, and 2.483.
fB,
20×n
0.01 μF.
C=0.01 μF,
R=3.183 kΩ. Rf=10 kΩ

Summary
1. If a differential amplifier has input voltages 
 and 
 the common-mode input is
 and the differential input signal is 
2. An ideal operational amplifier has infinite input impedance, infinite gain for the differential input
signal, zero gain for the common-mode input signal, zero output impedance, and infinite
bandwidth.
3. In an amplifier circuit with negative feedback, part of the output is returned to the input. The
feedback signal opposes the input source.
4. To analyze ideal op-amp circuits with negative feedback, we assume that the differential input
voltage and the input current of the op amp are driven to zero (this is the summing-point
constraint), and then we use basic circuit principles to analyze the circuit.
5. The basic inverting amplifier configuration is shown in Figure 13.4 on page 649. Its closed-loop
voltage gain is 
6. The basic noninverting amplifier configuration is shown in Figure 13.11 on page 655. Its closed-
loop voltage gain is 
7. Many useful amplifier circuits can be designed with the use of op amps. First, we select a
suitable circuit configuration, and then we determine the resistor values that achieve the desired
gain values.
8. In the design of op-amp circuits, very large resistances are unsuitable because their values are
unstable and because high-impedance circuits are vulnerable to capacitive coupling of noise.
Very low resistances are unsuitable because large currents flow in them for the voltages typically
encountered in op-amp circuits.
9. In the linear range of operation, the imperfections of real op amps include finite input impedance,
nonzero output impedance, and finite open-loop gain magnitude, which falls off with increasing
frequency.
10. Negative feedback reduces gain magnitude and extends bandwidth. For the noninverting
amplifier, the product of dc gain magnitude and bandwidth is constant for a given op-amp type.
11. The output voltage range and the output current range of any op amp are limited. If the output
waveform reaches (and tries to exceed) either of these limits, clipping occurs.
12. The rate of change of the output voltage of any op amp is limited in magnitude. This is called the
slew-rate limitation. The full-power bandwidth is the highest frequency for which the op amp can
produce a full-amplitude sinusoidal output signal.
13. Dc imperfections of op amps are bias current, offset current, and offset voltage. These effects
can be modeled by the sources shown in Figure 13.29 on page 672. The effect of dc
imperfections is a (usually undesirable) dc component added to the intended output signal.
v1
v2,
vicm=12 (v1+v2)
vid=v1−v2.
Av=−R2/R1.
Av=1+R2/R1.

14. A single op amp can be used as a differential amplifier as shown in Figure 13.33 on page 676.
However, the instrumentation amplifier shown in Figure 13.34 on page 677 has better
performance.
15. The integrator circuit shown in Figure 13.35 on page 679 produces an output voltage that is
proportional to the running time integral of the input voltage. A differentiator circuit is shown in
Figure 13.38 on page 680.
16. Active filters often have better performance than passive filters. Active Butterworth lowpass
filters can be obtained by cascading several Sallen-Key circuits having the proper gains.

Problems
Section 13.1: Ideal Operational Amplifiers
Section 13.2: Inverting Amplifiers
P13.1. What are the characteristics of an ideal op amp?
P13.2. A real op amp has five terminals. Name the probable function for each of the terminals.
P13.3. A differential amplifier has input voltages 
 and 
 Give the definitions of the differential
input voltage and of the common-mode input voltage.
*P13.4. The input voltages of a differential amplifier are
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
Find expressions for the common-mode and differential components of the input signal.
P13.5. Discuss the distinction between open-loop gain and closed-loop gain.
v1
v2.
v1(t)=0.5 cos(2000πt)+20 cos(120πt)
v2(t)=−0.5 cos(2000πt)+20 cos(120πt)
*P13.6. What are the steps in analyzing an amplifier containing an ideal op amp?
P13.7. What do we mean by the term summing-point constraint? Does it apply when positive
feedback is present?
P13.8. Draw the circuit diagram of the basic inverting amplifier configuration. Give an expression
for the closed-loop voltage gain of the circuit in terms of the resistances, assuming an ideal op
amp. Give expressions for the input impedance and output impedance of the circuit.
P13.9. Consider the circuit shown in FigureP13.9 . Sketch 
 and 
 to scale versus time.
The op amp is ideal.
vin(t)
vo(t)

Figure P13.9
*P13.10. Determine the closed-loop voltage gain of the circuit shown in FigureP13.10 ,
assuming an ideal op amp.
Figure P13.10
P13.11. Determine the closed-loop voltage gain of the circuit shown in FigureP13.11 , assuming
an ideal op amp.
Figure P13.11
P13.12. Consider the inverting amplifier shown in FigureP13.12 , in which one of the resistors
has been replaced with a diode. Assume an ideal op amp, 
 positive, and a diode current given
by Equation9.4 , which states that 
 Derive an expression for 
 in terms of
 R, 
 n, and 
vin
iD=Is exp(vD/nVT).
vo
vin,
Is,
VT.

Section 13.3: Noninverting Amplifiers
Figure P13.12
P13.13. Repeat ProblemP13.12  by interchanging the resistance R and the diode. Keep the
diode pointing toward the right-hand side.
P13.14. Consider the circuit shown in FigureP13.12 , with an unusual diode that has 
Derive an expression for 
 in terms of 
 R, and K.
P13.15. The op amp shown in FigureP13.15  is ideal, except that the extreme output voltages
that it can produce are 
 Determine two possible values for each of the voltages shown.
[Hint: Notice that this circuit has positive feedback.]
Figure P13.15
P13.16. Consider the inverting amplifier shown in FigureP13.16 . Assuming an ideal op amp,
solve for the currents and voltages shown. According to Kirchhoff's current law, the sum of the
currents entering a closed surface must equal the sum of the currents leaving. Explain how the
law is satisfied for the closed surface shown when we use a real op amp in this circuit.
Figure P13.16
iD=KvD3.
vo
vin,
±10 V.

*P13.17. Draw the circuit diagram of an op-amp voltage follower. What value is its voltage gain?
Input impedance? Output impedance?
*P13.18. The voltage follower of Figure13.12  on page 656 has unity voltage gain so that
 Why not simply connect the load directly to the source, thus eliminating the op amp?
Give an example of a situation in which the voltage follower is particularly good compared with
the direct connection.
P13.19. Draw the circuit diagram of the basic noninverting amplifier configuration. Give an
expression for the closed-loop voltage gain of the circuit in terms of the resistances, assuming
an ideal op amp. Give expressions for the input impedance and output impedance of the circuit.
P13.20. For each of the circuits shown in FigureP13.20 , assume that the op amp is ideal and
find the value of 
 Each of the circuits has negative feedback, so the summing-point constraint
applies.
Figure P13.20
vo=vin.
vo.

*P13.21. Analyze the ideal-op-amp circuit shown in FigureP13.21  to find an expression for 
 in
terms of 
 
 and the resistance values.
Figure P13.21
P13.22. The circuit shown in FigureP13.22  has
Determine the value required for 
 so that the dc component of the output 
 is zero. What is
the resulting output voltage?
vo
vA, vB,
vin(t)=2+3 cos(2000πt)
R2
vo(t)

Figure P13.22
P13.23. Analyze each of the ideal-op-amp circuits shown in FigureP13.23  to find expressions
for 
 What is the value of the output impedance for each of these circuits? Why? [Note: The
bottom end of the input voltage source is not grounded in part (b) of the figure. Thus, we say that
this source is floating.]
Figure P13.23
*P13.24. Consider the circuit shown in FigureP13.24 .
a. Find an expression for the output voltage in terms of the source current and resistance
values.
b. What value is the output impedance of this circuit?
c. What value is the input impedance of this circuit?
io.

d. This circuit can be classified as an ideal amplifier. What is the amplifier type? (See
Section11.6  for a discussion of various ideal-amplifier types.)
Figure P13.24
P13.25. Repeat ProblemP13.24  for the circuit shown in FigureP13.25 .
Figure P13.25
P13.26. Consider the circuit shown in FigureP13.26 .
a. Find an expression for the output current  in terms of the source voltage and resistance
values.
b. What value is the output impedance of this circuit?
c. What value is the input impedance of this circuit?
d. This circuit can be classified as an ideal amplifier. What is the amplifier type? (See
Section11.6  for a discussion of various ideal-amplifier types.)
io

Figure P13.26
P13.27. The power gain G of an amplifier is defined to be the power delivered to the load 
divided by the power delivered by the signal source 
 Find an expression for the power gain of
each of the amplifiers shown in FigureP13.27 . Assume ideal op amps. Which circuit has the
larger power gain?
Figure P13.27
*P13.28. Consider the circuits shown in FigureP13.28(a)  and (b). One of the circuits has
negative feedback, and the other circuit has positive feedback. Assume that the op amps are
ideal, except that the output voltage is limited to extremes of 
 For the input voltage
waveform shown in FigureP13.28(c) , sketch the output voltage 
 to scale versus time for
each circuit.
RL
vs.
±5 V.
vo(t)

Figure P13.28
P13.29. Repeat ProblemP13.28  for the circuits of FigureP13.29(a)  and (b). [The input voltage
waveform is shown in FigureP13.28(c) .]
Figure P13.29

P13.30. Suppose that we design an inverting amplifier using 5-percent-tolerance resistors and
an ideal op amp. The nominal amplifier gain is 
 What are the minimum and maximum gains
possible, assuming that the resistances are within the stated tolerance? What is the percentage
tolerance of the gain?
P13.31. Repeat ProblemP13.30  for a noninverting amplifier having a nominal voltage gain of
*P13.32. Consider the amplifier shown in FigureP13.32 . Find an expression for the output
current 
 What is the input impedance? What is the output impedance seen by 
Figure P13.32
P13.33. Derive an expression for the voltage gain of the circuit shown in FigureP13.33  as a
function of T, assuming an ideal op amp. (T varies from 0 to unity, depending on the position of
the wiper of the potentiometer.)
Figure P13.33
P13.34. The circuit shown in FigureP13.34  employs negative feedback. Use the summing-point
constraint (for both op amps) to derive expressions for the voltage gains 
 and 
−2.
+2.
io.
RL?
A1=
A2=vo2/vin.

Section 13.4: Design of Simple Amplifiers
Figure P13.34
P13.35. Suppose that we are designing an amplifier, using an op amp. What problems are
associated with using very small feedback resistances? With very large feedback resistances?
*P13.36. Using the components listed in TableP13.36 , design an amplifier having a voltage gain
of 
 percent. The input impedance is required to be as large as possible (ideally, an open
circuit). Remember to use practical resistance values. (Hint: Cascade a noninverting stage with
an inverting stage.)
Table P13.36 Available Parts for Design Problems
Standard 5%-tolerance resistors. (See AppendixB .)
Standard 1%-tolerance resistors. (Don't use these if a 5%-tolerance resistor will do, because
1%-tolerance resistors are more expensive.)
Ideal op amps.
Adjustable resistors (trimmers) having maximum values ranging from 
 to 
 in a 1-
2-5 sequence (i.e., 
 etc.). Don't use trimmers if fixed resistors will
suffice.
*P13.37. For Example13.4  on page 661, it is possible to achieve a design by using only one op
−10±20
100 Ω
1 MΩ
100 Ω, 200 Ω, 500 Ω, 1 kΩ,

Section 13.5: Op-Amp Imperfections in the Linear Range of Operation
amp. Find a suitable circuit configuration and resistance values. For this problem, the gain
tolerances are relaxed to 
 percent.
P13.38. Using the components listed in TableP13.36 , design an amplifier having an input
impedance of at least 
 and a voltage gain of
a. 
 percent;
b. 
 percent;
c. 
 percent.
P13.39. Design an amplifier having a voltage gain of 
 percent and an input impedance of
 percent, using the components listed in TableP13.36 .
P13.40. Using the components listed in TableP13.36 , design a circuit for which the output
voltage is 
 The voltages 
 and 
 are input voltages. Design to achieve 
percent and 
 percent. There is no restriction on input impedances.
*P13.41. Repeat ProblemP13.40  if the input impedances are required to be as large as
possible (ideally, open circuits).
P13.42. Two signal sources have internal voltages 
 and 
 respectively. The internal (i.e.,
Thévenin) resistances of the sources are known always to be less than 
 but the exact
values are not known and are likely to change over time. Using the components listed in
TableP13.36 , design an amplifier for which the output voltage is 
 The
gains are to be 
 percent and 
 percent.
P13.43. Suppose we have a signal source with an internal (i.e., Thévenin) impedance that is
always less than 
 but is variable over time. Using the components listed in TableP13.36 ,
design an amplifier that produces an amplified version of the internal source voltage. The voltage
gain should be 
 percent.
±5
10 kΩ
−10±20
−10±5
−10±0.5
+10±3
1 kΩ±1
vo=A1v1+A2v2.
v1
v2
A1=5±5
A2=−10±5
v1(t)
v2(t),
2 kΩ,
vo(t)=A1v1(t)+A2v2(t).
A1=−10±1
A2=3±1
1000 Ω,
−20±5
P13.44. List the imperfections of real op amps in their linear range of operation.
*P13.45. A certain op amp has a unity-gain-bandwidth of 
 If this op amp is used in a
noninverting amplifier having a closed-loop dc gain of 
 determine the closed-loop
break frequency 
 Repeat for a dc gain of 100.
P13.46. A certain op amp has an open-loop dc gain of 
 and an open-loop 3-dB
bandwidth of 
 Hz. Find the open-loop gain magnitude at a frequency of
a. 100 Hz;
b. 1000 Hz;
c. 1 MHz.
P13.47. The objective of this problem is to investigate the effects of finite open-loop gain, finite
input impedance, and nonzero output impedance of the op amp on the voltage follower. The
ft=15 MHz.
A0CL=10,
fBCL.
A0OL=200,000
fBOL=5

circuit, including the op-amp model, is shown in FigureP13.47 .
a. Derive an expression for the circuit voltage gain 
 Evaluate for 
 
and 
 Compare this result to the gain with an ideal op amp.
b. Derive an expression for the circuit input impedance 
 Evaluate for 
 and 
 Compare this result to the input impedance with an ideal op
amp.
c. Derive an expression for the circuit output impedance 
 Evaluate for 
 and 
 Compare this result to the output impedance with an ideal op
amp.
Figure P13.47
P13.48. The objective of this problem is to investigate the effects of finite gain, finite input
impedance, and nonzero output impedance of the op amp on the inverting amplifier. The circuit,
including the op-amp model, is shown in FigureP13.48 .
a. Derive an expression for the circuit voltage gain 
 Evaluate for 
 
 
 and 
 Compare this result to the gain with an ideal op amp.
b. Derive an expression for the circuit input impedance 
 Evaluate for 
 
 and 
 Compare this result to the input
impedance with an ideal op amp.
c. Derive an expression for the circuit output impedance 
 Evaluate for 
 and 
 Compare this result to the output
impedance with an ideal op amp.
vo/vs.
AOL=105, Rin=1 MΩ,
Ro=25 Ω.
Zin=vs/is.
AOL=105,
Rin=1 MΩ,
Ro=25 Ω.
Zo.
AOL=105,
Rin=1 MΩ,
Ro=25 Ω.
vo/vs.
AOL=105, Rin=1 MΩ,
Ro=25 Ω, R1=1 kΩ,
R2=10 kΩ.
Zin=vs/is.
AOL=105,
Rin=1 MΩ, Ro=25Ω, R1=1 kΩ,
R2=10 kΩ.
Zo.
AOL=105,
Rin=1 MΩ, Ro=25 Ω, R1=1 kΩ,
R2=10 kΩ.

Section 13.6: Nonlinear Limitations
Figure P13.48
P13.49. We need a noninverting amplifier that has a dc gain of 10, and the gain magnitude at 10
kHz must be not less than 9. Determine the minimum gain-bandwidth specification required for
the op amp.
P13.50. We need a noninverting amplifier that has a dc gain of 10, and the phase shift for the
200-kHz component must not exceed 10° magnitude. Determine the minimum gain-bandwidth
specification required for the op amp.
P13.51. Consider two alternatives for designing an amplifier having a dc gain of 100. The first
alternative is to use a single noninverting stage, having a gain of 100. The second alternative is
to cascade two noninverting stages, each having a gain of 10. Op amps having a gain-
bandwidth product of 
 are to be used. Write an expression for the gain as a function of
frequency for each alternative. Find the 3-dB bandwidth for each alternative.
*P13.52. A certain op amp has an open-loop dc gain of 
 and an open-loop 3-dB
bandwidth of 
 Sketch the Bode plot of the open-loop gain magnitude to scale. If this
op amp is used in a noninverting amplifier having a closed-loop dc gain of 100, sketch the Bode
plot of the closed-loop gain magnitude to scale. Repeat for a closed-loop dc gain of 10.
106
A0OL=200,000
fBOL=5 Hz.
P13.53. List the nonlinear limitations of real op amps.
P13.54. Define full-power bandwidth.
P13.55. If the ideal output, with a sinusoidal input signal, greatly exceeds the full-power
bandwidth, what is the waveform of the output signal? Under these conditions, if the slew rate of
the op amp is 
 and the frequency of the input is 1 MHz, what is the peak-to-peak
amplitude of the output signal?
P13.56. Suppose that we want to design an amplifier that can produce a 100-kHz sine-wave
output having a peak amplitude of 5 V. What is the minimum slew-rate specification allowed for
the op amp?
10 V/μs

*P13.57. Suppose that we have an op amp with a maximum output voltage range from 
 to
 The maximum output current magnitude is 20 mA. The slew-rate limit is 
This op amp is used in the circuit of Figure13.28  on page 672.
a. Find the full-power bandwidth of the op amp.
b. For a frequency of 1 kHz and 
 what peak output voltage is possible without
distortion?
c. For a frequency of 1 kHz and 
 what peak output voltage is possible without
distortion?
d. For a frequency of 1 MHz and 
 what peak output voltage is possible without
distortion?
e. If 
 and 
 sketch the steady-state output waveform to scale
versus time.
P13.58. We need a noninverting amplifier with a dc gain of 10 to amplify an input signal given by
in which t is in 
 Determine the minimum slew-rate specification required for the op amp if
distortion must be avoided.
P13.59. We need a voltage follower to amplify an input signal given by
in which t is in 
 Determine the minimum slew-rate specification required for the op amp if
distortion must be avoided.
*P13.60. One way to measure the slew-rate limitation of an op amp is to apply a sine wave (or
square wave) as the input to an amplifier and then increase the frequency until the output
waveform becomes triangular. Suppose that a 1-MHz input signal produces a triangular output
waveform having a peak-to-peak amplitude of 4 V. Determine the slew rate of the op amp.
P13.61. An op amp has a maximum output voltage range from 
 to 
 The maximum
output current magnitude is 25 mA. The slew-rate limit is 
 The op amp is used in the
amplifier shown in FigureP13.61 .
a. Find the full-power bandwidth of the op amp.
b. For a frequency of 5 kHz and 
 what peak output voltage is possible without
distortion?
c. For a frequency of 5 kHz and 
 what peak output voltage is possible without
distortion?
d. For a frequency of 100 kHz and 
 what peak output voltage is possible without
distortion?
−10
+10 V.
SR=10 V/μs.
RL=1 kΩ,
RL=100 Ω,
RL=1 kΩ,
RL=1 kΩ
vs(t)=5 sin(2π106t),
vin(t)
=0t≤0
=t exp(−t)t≤0
μs.
vin(t)
=0t≤0
=t20≤t≤3
=93≤t
μs.
−10
+10 V.
1 V/μs.
RL=100 Ω,
RL=10 kΩ,
RL=10 kΩ,

Section 13.7: DC Imperfections
Figure P13.61
P13.62. Consider the bridge amplifier shown in FigureP13.62 .
a. Assuming ideal op amps, derive an expression for the voltage gain 
b. If 
 sketch 
 and 
 to scale versus time.
c. If the op amps are supplied from 
 and clip at output voltages of 
 what is the
peak value of 
 just at the threshold of clipping? (Comment: This circuit can be useful
if a peak output voltage greater than the magnitude of the supply voltages is required.)
Figure P13.62
vo/vs.
vs(t)=3 sin(ωt),
v1(t), v2(t),
vo(t)
±15 V
±14 V,
vo(t)
*P13.63. Draw the circuit symbol for an op amp, adding sources to account for dc imperfections.
P13.64. Name the dc imperfections of real op amps. What is the net effect of these dc
imperfections?
P13.65. What is an advantage of a FET-input op amp compared with a BJT-input op amp?
*P13.66. Find the worst-case dc output voltages of the inverting amplifier shown in
Figure13.30(a)  on page 674 for 
 The bias current ranges from 100 to 200 nA, the
vin=0.

Section 13.8: Differential and Instrumentation Amplifiers
maximum offset-current magnitude is 50 nA, and the maximum offset-voltage magnitude is 4
mV.
P13.67. Sometimes, an ac-coupled amplifier is needed. The circuit shown in FigureP13.67  is a
poor way to accomplish ac coupling. Explain why. [Hint: Consider the effect of bias current.]
Show how to add a component (including its value) so that bias current has no effect on the
output voltage of this circuit.
Figure P13.67
P13.68. Consider the amplifier shown in FigureP13.61 . With zero dc input voltage from the
signal source, it is desired that the dc output voltage be no greater than 100 mV.
a. Ignoring other dc imperfections, what is the maximum offset voltage allowed for the op
amp?
b. Ignoring other dc imperfections, what is the maximum bias current allowed for the op
amp?
c. Show how to add a resistor to the circuit (including its value) so that the effects of the
bias currents cancel.
d. Assuming that the resistor of part (c) is in place, and ignoring offset voltage, what is the
maximum offset current allowed for the op amp?
P13.69. In terms of the differential and common-mode components of a signal, what is the
function of a differential amplifier?
*P13.70. Using the parts listed in TableP13.36 , design a single-op-amp differential amplifier
having a nominal differential gain of 10.
P13.71. Repeat ProblemP13.70 , using the instrumentation-quality circuit shown in
Figure13.34  on page 677.
P13.72. Consider the instrumentation-quality differential amplifier shown in Figure13.34  on
page 677, with 
 and 
 The input signals are given by
R1=1 kΩ, R2=9 kΩ,
R=10 kΩ.
v1(t)=0.5 cos(2000πt)+2 cos(120πt)
v2(t)=−0.5 cos(2000πt)+2 cos(120πt)

Section 13.9: Integrators and Differentiators
a. Find expressions for the differential and common-mode components of the input signal.
b. Assuming ideal op amps, find expressions for the voltages at the output terminals of 
and 
c. Again assuming ideal op amps, find an expression for the output voltage 
X1
X2.
vo(t).
P13.73. What do we mean by the term running-time integral?
*P13.74. Sketch the output voltage of the circuit shown in FigureP13.74  to scale versus time.
Sometimes, an integrator circuit is used as a (approximate) pulse counter. Suppose that the
output voltage is 
 How many input pulses have been applied (assuming that the pulses
have an amplitude of 5 V and a duration of 2 ms, as shown in the figure)?
Figure P13.74
P13.75. Sketch the output voltage of the ideal-op-amp circuit shown in FigureP13.75  to scale
versus time.
−10 V.

Section 13.10: Active Filters
Figure P13.75
P13.76. The displacement of a robot arm in a given direction is represented by a voltage signal
 The voltage is proportional to displacement, and 1 V corresponds to a displacement of 10
mm from the reference position. Design a circuit that produces a voltage 
 that is proportional
to the velocity of the robot arm such that 1 m/s corresponds to 1 V. Design an additional circuit
that produces a voltage 
 that is proportional to the acceleration of the robot arm such that
 corresponds to 1 V. Use the components listed in TableP13.36 , plus as many capacitors
as needed.
vin(t).
v1(t)
v2
1 m/s2
P13.77. What is the function of a filter? What is a typical application? What is an active filter?
*P13.78. Derive an expression for the voltage transfer ratio of each of the circuits shown in
FigureP13.78 . Also, sketch the magnitude Bode plots to scale. Assume that the op amps are
ideal.

Figure P13.78
P13.79. It is illuminating to look at the integrator circuit as a filter. Derive the transfer function for
the integrator of FigureP13.74 , and sketch the magnitude Bode plot to scale.
P13.80. Repeat ProblemP13.79  for the differentiator circuit shown in FigureP13.75 .

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T13.1. Draw the circuit diagram for each of the following amplifiers. Clearly label the op amp
input terminals and any resistances needed. Also, give the equation for the voltage gain of the
amplifier in terms of the resistances on your diagram.
a. The basic inverter.
b. The noninverting amplifier.
c. The voltage follower.
T13.2. Derive an expression for voltage gain 
 of the circuit shown in FigureT13.2  assuming
that the summing-point constraint applies. (There are both negative and positive feedback paths,
but the resistances have been carefully selected so the circuit has net negative feedback and the
summing-point constraint does apply.)
Figure T13.2
T13.3. A certain op amp has an open-loop dc gain of 
 and an open-loop 3-dB
bandwidth of 
 This op amp is used in a noninverting amplifier having a closed-loop
dc gain of 
a. Determine the closed-loop break frequency 
b. Given that the input voltage to the noninverting amplifier is 
find the expression for the output voltage.
T13.4. We have an op amp with a maximum output voltage range from 
 to 
 The
Av=
A0OL=200,000
fBOL=5 Hz.
A0CL=100.
fBCL.
vin(t)=0.05 cos(2π×105t) V,
−4.5
+4.5 V.

maximum output current magnitude is 5 mA. The slew-rate limit is 
 This op amp is
used in the circuit of Figure13.28  on page 672.
a. Find the full-power bandwidth of the op amp.
b. For a frequency of 1 kHz and 
 what peak output voltage, 
 is possible
without distortion?
c. For a frequency of 1 kHz and 
 what peak output voltage, 
 is possible
without distortion?
d. For a frequency of 5 MHz and 
 what peak output voltage, 
 is possible
without distortion?
T13.5. Draw an op amp symbol including sources to account for offset voltage, offset current,
and bias current. What is the principal effect of these sources in an amplifier circuit?
T13.6. Draw the circuit diagram of a differential amplifier using one op amp and resistances as
needed. Give the output voltage in terms of the input voltages and resistances.
T13.7. Draw the circuit diagrams for an integrator and for a differentiator. Also give an
expression for the output voltage in terms of the input voltage and component values.
T13.8. What is a filter? An active filter? Give one application for an active filter.
SR=20 V/μs.
RL=200 Ω,
Vom,
RL=10 kΩ,
Vom,
RL=10 kΩ,
Vom,

Chapter 14 Magnetic Circuits and Transformers
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Understand magnetic fields and their interactions with moving charges.
Use the right-hand rule to determine the direction of the magnetic field around a current-carrying
wire or coil.
Calculate forces on moving charges and current-carrying wires due to magnetic fields.
Calculate the voltage induced in a coil by a changing magnetic flux or in a conductor cutting through
a magnetic field.
Use Lenz's law to determine the polarities of induced voltages.
Apply magnetic-circuit concepts to determine the magnetic fields in practical devices.
Determine the inductance and mutual inductance of coils, given their physical parameters.
Understand hysteresis, saturation, core loss, and eddy currents in cores composed of magnetic
materials such as iron.
Understand ideal transformers and solve circuits that include transformers.
Use the equivalent circuits of real transform­ers to determine their regulations and power
efficiencies.

Introduction to this chapter:
In describing interactions of matter, we often employ field concepts. For example,
masses are attracted by gravitation. We envision gravitational fields produced by
masses and explain the forces on other masses in terms of their interaction with
these fields. Another example is stationary electrical charges. Charges of like sign
repel one another, and unlike charges attract one another. Conceptually, each
charge creates an electric field, and the other charge interacts with the field,
resulting in a force.
In this and the next two chapters, we study some important engineering applications
of magnetic fields, which are created by electrical charges in motion. Charges
moving through magnetic fields experience forces. Furthermore, changing magnetic
fields induce voltages in nearby conductors.
In this chapter, we start by reviewing basic magnetic-field concepts. Then, we
consider the relationships between magnetic fields and inductance, including mutual
inductance. Next, we study transformers, which greatly facilitate the distribution of
electrical power.
Magnetic fields also form the basis of most practical devices for converting energy
between electrical and mechanical forms. In subsequent chapters, we study the
basic operating principles of several types of rotating energy conversion devices,
collectively known as motors and generators.

14.1 Magnetic Fields
Magnetic fields exist in the space around permanent magnets and around wires that carry current. In
both cases, the basic source of the magnetic field is electrical charge in motion. In an iron permanent
magnet, fields are created by the spin of electrons in atoms. These fields aid one another, producing the
net external field that we observe. (In most other materials, the magnetic fields of the electrons tend to
cancel one another.) If a current-carrying wire is formed into a multiturn coil, the magnetic field is greatly
intensified, particularly if the coil is wound around an iron core.
We can visualize a magnetic field as lines of magnetic flux that form closed paths. The lines are close
together where the magnetic field is strong and farther apart where the field is weaker. This is illustrated
in Figure 14.1. The units of magnetic flux are webers (Wb).
Figure 14.1
Magnetic fields can be visualized as lines of flux that form closed paths. Using a compass, we can
determine the direction of the flux lines at any point. Note that the flux density vector B is tangent to the
lines of flux.

Magnetic flux lines form closed paths that are close together where the field is
strong and farther apart where the field is weak.
The earth has a natural magnetic field that is relatively weak compared with those in typical
transformers, motors, or generators. Due to interactions of the fields, magnets tend to align with the
earth's field. Thus, a magnet has a north-seeking end (N) and a south-seeking end (S). Unlike ends of
magnets are attracted. By convention, flux lines leave the north-seeking end (N) of a magnet and enter
its south-seeking end (S). A compass can be used to investigate the direction of the lines of flux. The
compass needle indicates north in the direction of the flux [i.e., the compass points toward the south-
seeking (S) end of the magnet]. (Note that the earth's field lines are directed from south to north. Thus, if
we were to place N and S marks on the earth as we do on a magnet, S would appear near the north
geographic pole, because that is where the field lines enter the earth.)
Flux lines leave the north-seeking end of a magnet and enter the south-seeking
end.
In equations, we represent the magnetic flux density as the vector quantity B. (Throughout our
discussion, we use boldface for vector quantities. The corresponding lightface italic symbols represent
the magnitudes of the vectors. Thus, B represents the magnitude of the vector B. We also use boldface
for phasors. However, it will be clear from the context which quantities are spatial vectors and which are
phasors.) Furthermore, we use the International System of Units (SI), in which the units of B are
 or, equivalently, teslas (T). The flux density vector B has a direction tangent to
the flux lines, as illustrated in Figure 14.1.
When placed in a magnetic field, a compass indicates north in the direction of the
flux lines.
webers/meter2 (Wb/m2)

Right-Hand Rule
The direction of the magnetic field produced by a current can be determined by the right-hand rule.
There are several interpretations of this rule. For example, as illustrated in Figure 14.2(a), if a wire is
grasped with the thumb pointing in the direction of the current, the fingers encircle the wire, pointing in
the direction of the magnetic field. Moreover, as illustrated in Figure 14.2(b), if the fingers are wrapped
around a coil in the direction of current flow, the thumb points in the direction of the magnetic field that is
produced inside the coil.
Figure 14.2
Illustrations of the right-hand rule.
The right-hand rule is used to determine the directions of magnetic fields.
Exercise 14.1
A wire horizontal to the ground carries current toward the north. (Neglect the earth's field.)
a. Directly underneath the wire, what is the direction of B?

b. Directly above the wire, what is the direction of B?
Answer
a. west;
b. east.
Exercise 14.2
A coil is wound around the periphery of a clock. If current flows clockwise, what is the direction of B in
the center of the clock face?
Answer Into the clock face.
Forces on Charges Moving in Magnetic Fields
An electrical charge q moving with velocity vector u through a magnetic field B experiences a force f as
illustrated in Figure 14.3. The force vector is given by
Figure 14.3
A charge moving through a magnetic field experiences a force f perpendicular to both the velocity u and
flux density B.
in which  represents the vector cross product. Note that due to the definition of the cross product, the
force is perpendicular to the plane containing the magnetic flux density B and the velocity u.
Furthermore, the magnitude of the force is given by
f=qu×B
(14.1)
×

in which  is the angle between u and B, as illustrated in the figure.
Force is exerted on a charge as it moves through a magnetic field.
In the SI system, the force vector f has units of newtons (N), the charge is in coulombs (C), and the
velocity vector u is in meters/second (m/s). Thus, for dimensional consistency in Equations 14.1 and
14.2, the magnetic field vector B must have units of newton seconds per coulomb meter (Ns/Cm), which
is the dimensional equivalent of the tesla (T).
Exercise 14.3
An electron 
 travels at 
 in the positive x direction. The magnetic flux density
is 1 T in the positive y direction. Find the magnitude and direction of the force on the electron. (Assume
a right-hand coordinate system such as that shown in Figure 14.3.)
Answer 
 in the negative z direction.
Forces on Current-Carrying Wires
Current flowing in a conductor consists of charge (usually, electrons) in motion. Thus, forces appear on
a current-carrying wire immersed in a magnetic field. The force on an incremental length of the wire is
given by
in which the direction of dl and the reference direction for the current are the same.
Force is exerted on a current-carrying conductor when it is immersed in a
magnetic field.
f=quB sin(θ)
(14.2)
θ
(q=−1.602×10−19 C)
105 m/s
f=1.602×10−14 N
df=i dl×B
(14.3)

For a straight wire of length l and a constant magnetic field, we have
in which  is the angle between the wire and the field. Notice that the force is maximized if the direction
of the field is perpendicular to the wire.
Exercise 14.4
A wire of length 
 carries a current of 10 A perpendicular to a field of 
 Compute the
magnitude of the force on the wire.
Answer 
Flux Linkages and Faraday's Law
The magnetic flux passing through a surface area A is given by the surface integral
in which dA is an increment of area on the surface. The direction of the vector dA is perpendicular to the
surface. If the magnetic flux density is constant and perpendicular to the surface, Equation 14.5
reduces to
The magnetic flux passing through a surface is determined by integrating the dot
product of B and incremental area over the surface.
We say that the flux passing through the surface bounded by a coil links the coil. If the coil has N turns,
then the total flux linkages are given by
f=ilB sin(θ)
(14.4)
θ
l=1 m
B=0.5 T.
f=5 N.
ϕ=∫AB.dA
(14.5)
ϕ=BA
(14.6)

Here, we have assumed that the same flux links each turn of the coil. This is a good approximation
when the turns are close together on an iron form, which is often the case in transformers and electrical
machines.
According to Faraday's law of magnetic induction, a voltage
is induced in a coil whenever its flux linkages are changing. This can occur either because the magnetic
field is changing with time or because the coil is moving relative to a magnetic field.
Lenz's law states that the polarity of the induced voltage is such that the voltage would produce a
current (through an external resistance) that opposes the original change in flux linkages. (Think of the
induced voltage as a voltage source.) For example, suppose that the magnetic field linking the coil
shown in Figure 14.4 is pointing into the page and increasing in magnitude. (This field is the result of a
coil or moving permanent magnet not shown in the figure.) Then, the voltage induced in the coil
produces a counterclockwise current. According to the right-hand rule, this current produces a magnetic
field directed out of the page, opposing the initial field change.
Figure 14.4
When the flux linking a coil changes, a voltage is induced in the coil. The polarity of the voltage is such
that if a circuit is formed by placing a resistance across the coil terminals, the resulting current produces
a field that tends to oppose the original change in the field.
Voltages Induced in Field-Cutting Conductors
λ=Nϕ
(14.7)
e=dλdt
(14.8)

Voltage is also induced in a conductor moving through a magnetic field in a direction such that the
conductor cuts through magnetic lines of flux. For example, consider Figure 14.5. A uniform magnetic
field is directed into the page. The sliding conductor and the stationary rails form a loop having an area
of 
 The flux linkages of the coil are
Figure 14.5
A voltage is induced in a conductor moving so as to cut through magnetic flux lines.
According to Faraday's law, the voltage induced in the coil is given by
However, 
 is the velocity of the sliding conductor, so we have
Equation 14.9 can be used to compute the voltage induced across the ends of a straight conductor
moving in uniform magnetic field, provided that the velocity, the conductor, and the magnetic-field vector
are mutually perpendicular.
Voltage is induced across the terminals of a coil if the flux linkages are changing
with time. Moreover, voltage is induced between the ends of a conductor moving
so as to cut through flux lines.
For example, a conductor in a typical dc generator rated for 1 kW has a length of 0.2 m, a velocity of 12
m/s, and cuts through a field of 0.5 T. This results in an induced voltage of 1.2 V. (Higher output
A=lx.
λ=BA=Blx
e=dλdt=Bl dxdt
u=dx/dt
e=Blu
(14.9)

voltages are produced by connecting many such conductors in series.)
Exercise 14.5
a. A 10-turn circular coil has a radius of 5 cm. A flux density of 0.5 T is directed perpendicular to the
plane of the coil. Evaluate the flux linking the coil and the flux linkages.
b. Suppose that the flux is reduced to zero at a uniform rate during an interval of 1 ms. Determine the
voltage induced in the coil.
Answer
a. 
 turns;
b. 
Magnetic Field Intensity and Ampère's Law
So far, we have considered the magnetic flux density B and its effects. To summarize, B produces
forces on moving charges and current-carrying conductors. It also induces voltage in a coil if the flux
linkages are changing with time. Furthermore, voltage is induced across a moving conductor when it
cuts through flux lines.
Now, we introduce another field vector, known as the magnetic field intensity H, and consider how
magnetic fields are established. In general, magnetic fields are set up by charges in motion. In most of
the applications that we consider, the magnetic fields are established by currents flowing in coils. We will
see that H is determined by the currents and the configuration of the coils. Furthermore, we will see that
the resulting flux density B depends on H, as well as the properties of the material filling the space
around the coils.
The magnetic field intensity H and magnetic flux density B are related by
in which  is the magnetic permeability of the material. The units of H are amperes/meter (A/m), and the
units of  are webers/ampere-meter (Wb/Am).
B is magnetic flux density with units of webers per square meter 
 or
ϕ=3.927 mWb, λ=39.27 mWb
e=39.27 V.
B=μH
(14.10)
μ
μ
(Wb/m2)

teslas (T), and H is magnetic field intensity with units of amperes per meter
(A/m).
For free space, we have
Some materials, most notably iron and certain rare-earth alloys, have a much higher magnetic
permeability than free space. The relative permeability of a material is the ratio of its permeability to that
of free space:
The value of 
 ranges from several hundred to 1 million for various iron and rare-earth alloys. The iron
used in typical transformers, motors, and generators has a relative permeability of several thousand.
The types of iron used in typical motors and transformers have relative
permeabilities of several thousand.
Ampère's law states that the line integral of the magnetic field intensity around a closed path is equal to
the algebraic sum of the currents flowing through the area enclosed by the path. In equation form, we
have
Ampère's law states that the line integral of the magnetic field intensity around a
closed path is equal to the algebraic sum of the currents flowing through the area
enclosed by the path.
μ = μ0 = 4π × 10−7 Wb/Am
(14.11)
μr=μμ0
(14.12)
μr

in which dl is a vector element of length having its direction tangent to the path of integration. Recall that
the vector dot product is given by
in which  is the angle between H and dl.
Depending on its reference direction, a given current carries either a plus sign or a minus sign in the
summation of Equation 14.13. If the reference direction for a current is related to the direction of
integration by the right-hand rule, it carries a plus sign. (According to the right-hand rule, if you place the
thumb of your right hand on the wire pointing in the reference direction, your fingers encircle the wires in
the direction of integration.) Currents that are referenced in the opposite direction carry a negative sign
in Equation 14.13. Ampère's law is illustrated by example in Figure 14.6, in which case the reference
directions of both currents are related to the direction of integration by the right-hand rule.
Figure 14.6
Ampère's law states that the line integral of magnetic field intensity around a closed path is equal to the
sum of the currents flowing through the surface bounded by the path.
If the magnetic intensity has constant magnitude and points in the same direction as the incremental
length dl everywhere along the path, Ampère's law reduces to
in which l is the length of the path.
In some cases, we can use Ampère's law to find formulas for the magnetic field in the space around a
current-carrying wire or coil.
∮H⋅dl=∑i
(14.13)
H⋅dl=Hdl cos(θ)
(14.14)
θ
Hl=∑i
(14.15)

Example 14.1 Magnetic Field around a Long Straight Wire
Consider a long straight wire carrying current I out of the page as shown in ­Figure 14.7. Find
expressions for the magnetic field intensity and magnetic flux density in the space around the wire.
Assume that the material surrounding the wire has permeability 
Figure 14.7
The magnetic field around a long straight wire carrying a current can be determined with Ampère's
law aided by considerations of symmetry.
Solution
By symmetry and the right-hand rule, we conclude that B and H fall in a plane perpendicular to the
wire (i.e., in the plane of the paper) and are tangent to circles having their centers at the wire. This is
illustrated in Figure 14.7. Furthermore, the magnitude of H is constant for a given radius r. Applying
Ampère's law (Equation 14.15) to the circular path shown in the figure, we have
Solving for the magnetic intensity, we obtain
Then by Equation 14.10, we find the magnetic flux density as
Example 14.2 Flux Density in a Toroidal Core
Consider the toroidal coil shown in Figure 14.8. Find an expression for the magnetic flux density B
on the center line of the core in terms of the number of coil turns N, the current I, the permeability 
of the core, and the physical dimensions. Then, assuming that the flux density is constant throughout
the core (this is approximately true if 
), find expressions for the total flux and the flux linkages.
μ.
Hl=H2πr=I
H=I2πr
B=μH=μI2πr
μ
R >> r

Figure 14.8
Toroidal coil analyzed in Examples 14.2, 14.3, and 14.4.
Solution
By symmetry, the field intensity is constant in magnitude along the dashed circular center line shown
in the figure. (We assume that the coil is wound in a symmetrical manner all the way around the
toroidal core. For clarity, only part of the coil is shown in the figure.) Applying Ampère's law to the
dashed path, we obtain
Solving for H and using Equation 14.10 to determine B, we have
and
Assuming that R is much greater than r, the flux density is nearly constant over the cross section of
the core. Then, according to Equation 14.6, the flux is equal to the product of the flux density and
the area of the cross section:
Finally, we note that all of the flux links all of the turns, and we have
Hl=H2πR=NI
H=NI2πR
(14.16)
B=μNI2πR
(14.17)
ϕ=BA=μNI2πR πr2=μNIr22R
(14.18)
λ=Nϕ=μN2Ir22R
(14.19)

Example 14.3 Flux and Flux Linkages for a Toroidal Core
Suppose that we have a toroidal core with 
 and 
 The current is
Compute the flux and the flux linkages. Then, use Faraday's law of induction to determine the
voltage induced in the coil.
Solution
First, the permeability of the core material is
Using Equation 14.18, we compute the flux:
The flux linkages are
Finally, using Faraday's law (Equation 14.8), we can find the voltage induced in the coil by the
changing field:
Exercise 14.6
A long straight wire surrounded by air 
 carries a current of 20 A. Compute the magnetic flux
density at a point 1 cm from the wire.
Answer 
Exercise 14.7
Figure 14.9 shows two wires carrying equal currents in opposite directions. Find the value of
μr=5000, R=10 cm, r=2 cm,
N=100.
i(t)=2 sin(200πt)
μ = μrμ0 = 5000 × 4π × 10−7
ϕ
=μNIr22R=5000×4π×10−7×100×2 sin(200πt)×(2×10−2)22×10×10−2
=(2.513×10−3) sin(200πt) Wb
λ
=Nϕ
=100×(2.513×10−3) sin(200πt)
=0.2513 sin(200πt) weber turns
e
=dλdt=0.2513×200π cos(200πt)
=157.9 cos(200πt) V
(μr≅1)
4×10−4 T.

Figure 14.9
See Exercises 14.7 and 14.8.
for each path shown in the direction indicated.
Answer Path 1, 10 A; path 2, 0; path 3, 
Exercise 14.8
Find the force between a 1-m length of the wires shown in Figure 14.9 if the distance between the wires
is 10 cm. Is this a force of attraction or of repulsion?
Answer 
 repulsion.
∮H⋅dl
−10 A.
f=2×10−4 N;

14.2 Magnetic Circuits
We will see that many useful devices (such as transformers, motors, and generators) contain coils
wound on iron cores. In this section, we learn how to calculate the magnetic fields in these devices. A
simple example, discussed in the preceding section, is the toroidal coil shown in Figure 14.8 and
analyzed in Example 14.2. The toroid possesses sufficient symmetry that we readily applied Ampère's
law to find an expression for the field intensity. However, in many applications, we need to analyze more
complex configurations (such as cores that lack symmetry and those with multiple coils) for which the
direct application of Ampère's law is not feasible. Instead, we use magnetic circuit concepts, which
are analogous to those used to analyze electrical circuits.
In many engineering applications, we need to compute the magnetic fields for
structures that lack sufficient symmetry for straight-forward application of
Ampère's law. Then, we use an approximate method known as magnetic-circuit
analysis.
The magnetomotive force (mmf) of an N-turn current-carrying coil is given by
A current-carrying coil is the magnetic-circuit analog of a voltage source in an electrical circuit.
Magnetomotive force is analogous to source voltage. Usually, we give the units of magnetomotive force
as 
 however, the number of turns is actually a pure number without physical units.
The reluctance of a path for magnetic flux, such as the bar of iron shown in Figure 14.10, is given by
ℱ=Ni
(14.20)
A⋅turns;

Figure 14.10
The reluctance  of a magnetic path depends on the mean length l, the area A, and the permeability 
of the material.
in which l is the length of the path (in the direction of the magnetic flux), A is the cross-sectional area,
and  is the permeability of the material. Reluctance is analogous to resistance in an electrical circuit.
When the bar is not straight, the length of the path is somewhat ambiguous, and then we estimate its
value as the length of the centerline. Thus, l is sometimes called the mean length of the path.
Magnetic flux  in a magnetic circuit is analogous to current in an electrical circuit. Magnetic flux,
reluctance, and magnetomotive force are related by
which is the counterpart of Ohm's law 
 The units of reluctance are 
Example 14.4 The Toroidal Coil as a Magnetic Circuit
Using magnetic circuit concepts, analyze the toroidal coil shown in Figure 14.8 to find an expression
for the flux.
Solution
As indicated in Figure 14.11, the magnetic circuit of the toroidal coil is analogous to a simple
electrical circuit with a resistance connected across a voltage source.
ℛ
μ
ℛ=lμA
(14.21)
μ
ϕ
ℱ=ℛϕ
(14.22)
(V=Ri).
A·turns/Wb.

Figure 14.11
The magnetic circuit for the toroidal coil.
The mean length of the magnetic path is
The cross section of the core is circular with radius r. Thus, the area of the cross section is
Substituting into Equation 14.21, we find the reluctance to be
The magnetomotive force is
Solving Equation 14.22 for the flux, we have
Substituting the expressions for  and  found earlier, we get
l=2πR
A=πr2
ℛ=lμA=2πRμπr2=2Rμr2
ℱ=NI
ϕ=ℱℛ
ℱ
ℛ
ϕ=μNr2I2R

This is the same expression for the flux that we obtained in Examples 14.2 and 14.3 by applying
Ampère's law.
Advantage of the Magnetic-Circuit Approach
The advantage of the magnetic-circuit approach is that it can be applied to unsymmetrical magnetic
cores with multiple coils. Coils are sources of magnetomotive forces that can be manipulated as source
voltages are in an electrical circuit. Reluctances in series or parallel are combined as resistances are.
Fluxes are analogous to currents. The magnetic-circuit approach is not an exact method for determining
magnetic fields, but it is sufficiently accurate for many engineering applications. We illustrate these
methods with a few examples.
The advantage of the magnetic-circuit approach is that it can be applied to
unsymmetrical magnetic cores with multiple coils.
Example 14.5 A Magnetic Circuit with an Air Gap
Consider the magnetic core with an air gap as shown in Figure 14.12(a). The core material has a
relative permeability of 6000 and a rectangular cross section 2 cm by 3 cm. The coil has 500 turns.
Determine the current required to establish a flux density of 
 in the air gap.
Figure 14.12
Magnetic circuit of Example 14.5.
Bgap=0.25 T

Solution
As shown in Figure 14.12(b), this magnetic circuit is analogous to an electrical circuit with one
voltage source and two resistances in series. First, we compute the reluctance of the core. Notice
that the centerline of the flux path is a square 6 cm by 6 cm. Thus, the mean length of the iron core
is
The cross-sectional area of the core is
The permeability of the core is
Finally, the reluctance of the core is
We approximately account for fringing by adding the length of the gap to the
depth and width in computing effective gap area.
Now, we compute the reluctance of the air gap. The flux lines tend to bow out in the air gap as
shown in Figure 14.12(a). This is called fringing. Thus, the effective area of the air gap is larger
than that of the iron core. Customarily, we take this into account by adding the length of the gap to
each of the dimensions of the air-gap cross section. Thus, the effective area of the gap is
The permeability of air is approximately the same as that of free space:
lcore=4×6−0.5=23.5 cm
Acore=2 cm×3 cm=6×10−4 m2
μcore=μrμ0=6000×4π×10−7=7.540×10−3
ℛcore
=lcoreμcore Acore=23.5×10−27.540×10−3×6×10−4
=5.195×104 A· turns/Wb
Agap=(2 cm+0.5 cm)×(3 cm+0.5 cm)=8.75×10−4 m2
μgap≅μ0=4π×10−7

Thus, the reluctance of the gap is
The total reluctance is the sum of the reluctance of the core and that of the gap:
Even though the gap is much shorter than the iron core, the reluctance of the gap is higher than that
of the core because of the much higher permeability of the iron. Most of the magnetomotive force is
dropped across the air gap. (This is analogous to the fact that the largest fraction of the applied
voltage is dropped across the largest resistance in a series electrical circuit.)
Now, we can compute the flux:
The flux in the core is the same as that in the gap. However, the flux density is higher in the core,
because the area is smaller. The magnetomotive force is given by
According to Equation 14.20, we have
Solving for the current and substituting values, we get
Example 14.6 A Magnetic Circuit with Reluctances in Series and Parallel
The iron core shown in Figure 14.13(a) has a cross section of 2 cm by 2 cm and a relative
permeability of 1000. The coil has 500 turns and carries a current of 
 Find the flux density in
each air gap.
ℛgap
=lgapμgapAgap=0.5×10−24π×10−7×8.75×10−4
=4.547×106 A· turns/Wb
R = Rgap + Rcore = 4.547 × 106 + 5.195 × 104 = 4.600 × 106
ϕ=BgapAgap=0.25×8.75×10−4=2.188×10−4 Wb
F = ∅R = 4.600 × 106 × 2.188 × 10−4 = 1006 A • turns
ℱ=Ni
i=ℱN=1006500=2.012 A
i=2 A.

Figure 14.13
Magnetic circuit of Example 14.6.
Solution
The magnetic circuit is depicted in Figure 14.13(b). First, we compute the reluctances of the three
paths. For the center path, we have
For the left-hand path, the total reluctance is the sum of the reluctance of the iron core plus the
reluctance of gap a. We take fringing into account by adding the gap length to its width and depth in
computing area of the gap. Thus, the area of gap a is 
 Then, the total
reluctance of the left-hand path is
Similarly, the reluctance of the right-hand path is
Next, we can combine the reluctances 
 and 
 in parallel. Then, the total reluctance is the sum of
 and this parallel combination:
Now, the flux in the center leg of the coil can be found by dividing the magnetomotive force by the
total reluctance:
ℛc
=lcμrμ0Acore=10×10−21000×4π×10−7×4×10−4
=1.989×105 A· turns/Wb
Aa=3 cm×3 cm=9×10−4 m2.
ℛa
=ℛgap+ℛcore
=lgapμ0Aa+lcoreμrμ0Acore
=1×10−24π×10−7×9×10−4+29×10−21000×4π×10−7×4×10−4
=8.842×106+5.769×105
=9.420×106 A·turns/Wb
ℛb
=ℛgap+ℛcore
=lgapμ0Ab+lcoreμrμ0Acore
=0.5×10−24π×10−7×6.25×10−4+
29.5×10−21000×4π×10−7×4×10−4
=6.366×106+5.869×105
=6.953×106 A·turns/Wb
ℛa
ℛb
ℛc
ℛtotal
=ℛc+11/ℛa+1/ℛb
=1.989×105+11/(9.420×106)+1/(6.953×106)
=4.199×106 A·turns/Wb

Fluxes are analogous to currents. Thus, we use the current-division principle to determine the flux in
the left-hand and right-hand paths, resulting in
Similarly, for gap b we have
As a check on these calculations, we note that 
Now, we find the flux densities in the gaps by dividing the fluxes by the areas:
Typically, we find that in magnetic circuits consisting of iron cores with air gaps, the reluctance of the
iron has a negligible effect on the results. Furthermore, we usually do not have a precise value of the
permeability for the iron. Thus, it is often sufficiently accurate to assume zero reluctance for the iron
cores. This is the counterpart of assuming zero resistance for the wires in an electrical circuit.
Exercise 14.9
Consider the magnetic circuit shown in Figure 14.14. Determine the current required to establish a flux
density of 0.5 T in the air gap.
Figure 14.14
Magnetic circuit of Exercise 14.9.
Answer 
ϕc=Niℛtotal=500×24.199×106=238.1 μWb
ϕa
=ϕc ℛbℛa+ℛb
=238.1×10−6×6.953×1066.953×106+9.420×106
=101.1 μWb
ϕb
=ϕc ℛaℛa+ℛb
=238.1×10−69.420×1066.953×106+9.420×106
=137.0 μWb
ϕc=ϕa+ϕb.
Ba=ϕaAa=101.1 μWb9×10−4 m2=0.1123 T
Bb=ϕbAb=137.0 μWb6.25×10−4 m2=0.2192 T
i=4.03 A.

Exercise 14.10
Repeat Example 14.6, taking the reluctance of the iron paths to be zero. Determine the error as a
percentage of the flux densities computed in the example.
Answer 
 11.9 percent error; 
 
 14.66 percent
error.
ϕa=113.1 μWb, Ba=0.1257 T,
ϕb=157.1 μWb, Bb=0.2513 T,

14.3 Inductance and Mutual Inductance
We have seen that when a coil carries current, a magnetic flux is produced that links the coil. If the
current changes with time, the flux also changes, inducing a voltage in the coil. This is the physical basis
of inductance that we introduced in Section 3.4. Now, we relate inductance to the physical parameters of
the coil and the core upon which it is wound.
Consider a coil carrying a current i that sets up a flux  linking the coil. The inductance of the coil can be
defined as flux linkages divided by current:
Assuming that the flux is confined to the core so that all of the flux links all of the turns, we can write
 Then, we have
Substituting 
 we obtain
Thus, we see that the inductance depends on the number of turns, the core dimensions, and the core
material. Notice that inductance is proportional to the square of the number of turns.
Equation 14.25 is valid only if all of the flux links all of the turns.
According to Faraday's law, voltage is induced in a coil when its flux linkages change:
Rearranging Equation 14.23, we have 
 Substituting this for  in Equation 14.26, we get
ϕ
L=λi
(14.23)
λ=Nϕ.
L=Nϕi
(14.24)
ϕ=Ni/ℛ,
L=N2ℛ
(14.25)
e=dλdt
(14.26)
λ=Li.
λ

For a coil wound on a stationary core, the inductance is constant with time, and Equation 14.27 reduces
to
Of course, this is the equation relating voltage and current that we used to analyze circuits containing
inductance in Chapters 3 through 6.
Example 14.7 Calculation of Inductance
Determine the inductance of the 500-turn coil shown in Figure 14.12 and analyzed in Example 14.5.
Solution
In Example 14.5, we found that the reluctance of the magnetic path is
Substituting into Equation 14.25, we obtain
Mutual Inductance
When two coils are wound on the same core, some of the flux produced by one coil links the other coil.
We denote the flux linkages of coil 2 caused by the current in coil 1 as 
 Correspondingly, the flux
linkages of coil 1 produced by its own current are denoted as 
 Similarly, the current in coil 2
produces flux linkages 
 in coil 2 and 
 in coil 1.
The self inductances of the coils are defined as
and
e=d(Li)dt
(14.27)
e=L didt
(14.28)
ℛ=4.600×106 A⋅turns/Wb
L=N2ℛ=50024.6×106=54.35 mH
λ21.
λ11.
λ22
λ12
L1=λ11i1
(14.29)
L2=λ22i2
(14.30)

The mutual inductance between the coils is
The total fluxes linking the coils are
and
where the  sign applies if the fluxes are aiding and the  sign applies if the fluxes are opposing.
Dot Convention
Aiding fluxes are produced by currents entering like-marked terminals.
It is standard practice to place a dot on one end of each coil in a circuit diagram to indicate how the
fluxes interact. An example of this is shown in Figure 14.15. The dots are placed such that currents
entering the dotted terminals produce aiding magnetic flux. Notice that (according to the right-hand rule)
a current entering either of the dotted terminals in Figure 14.15 produces flux in a clockwise direction in
the core. Thus, if both currents enter (or if both leave) the dotted terminals, the mutual flux linkages add
to the self flux linkages. On the other hand, if one current enters a dotted terminal and the other leaves,
the mutual flux linkages carry a minus sign.
Figure 14.15
According to convention, currents entering the dotted terminals produce aiding fluxes.
M=λ21i1=λ12i2
(14.31)
λ1=λ11±λ12
(14.32)
λ2=±λ21+λ22
(14.33)
+
−

Circuit Equations for Mutual Inductance
Solving Equations 14.29 through 14.31 for the flux linkages and substituting into Equations 14.32 and
14.33, we have
and
Applying Faraday's law to find the voltages induced in the coils, we get
and
Here again, we have assumed that the coils and core are stationary, so the inductances are constant
with respect to time. These are the basic equations used to analyze circuits having mutual inductance.
Example 14.8 Calculation of Inductance and Mutual Inductance
Two coils are wound on a toroidal core as illustrated in Figure 14.16. The reluctance of the core is
 (ampere-turns)/Wb. Determine the self inductances and mutual inductance of the coils. Assume
that the flux is confined to the core so that all of the flux links both coils.
Figure 14.16
Coils of Example 14.8.
Solution
λ1=L1i1−Mi2
(14.34)
λ2=±Mi1+L2i2
(14.35)
e1=dλ1dt=L1 di1dt±M di2dt
(14.36)
e2=dλ2dt=±M di1dt+L2 di2dt
(14.37)
107

The self inductances can be computed using Equation 14.25. For coil 1, we have
Similarly, for coil 2 we get
To compute the mutual inductance, we find the flux produced by 
The flux linkages of coil 2 resulting from the current in coil 1 are given by
Finally, the mutual inductance is
Exercise 14.11
Compute the mutual inductance in Example 14.8 by use of the formula 
Answer 
 Notice that we get the same value from 
 and from 
Exercise 14.12
Does the flux produced by  aid or oppose the flux produced by  for the coils shown in Figure 14.16?
If a dot is placed on the top terminal of coil 1, which end of coil 2 should have a dot? Write the
expressions for 
 and 
 taking care to select the proper sign for the mutual term.
Answer The fluxes oppose one another. The dot should be on the bottom terminal of coil 2, so the
correct expressions are
Exercise 14.13
For the core shown in Figure 14.17, the reluctances of all three paths between points a and b are equal.
L1=N12ℛ=1002107=1 mH
L2=N22ℛ=2002107=4 mH
i1 :
ϕ1=N1i1ℛ=100i1107=10−5 i1
λ21=N2ϕ1=200×10−5 i1
M=λ21i1=2 mH
M=λ12/i2.
M=2 mH.
M=λ21/i1
M=λ12/i2.
i2
i1
e1
e2,
e1=L1 di1dt−M di2dt and e2=−M di1dt+L2 di2dt

Figure 14.17
Magnetic circuit of Exercise 14.13.
Assume that all of the flux is confined to the core.
a. Do the fluxes produced by  and  aid or oppose one another in path 1? In path 2? In path 3? If a
dot is placed on the top end of coil 1, which end of coil 2 should carry a dot?
b. Determine the values of 
 and M.
c. Should the mutual term for the voltages (in Equations 14.36 and 14.37) carry a plus sign or a
minus sign?
Answer
a. Aid in paths 1 and 2, oppose in path 3; the dot should be on the top end of coil 2;
b. 
c. a plus sign.
ℛ1=ℛ2=ℛ3=106 (A⋅turns)/Wb
i1
i2
L1, L2,
L1=6.667 mH, L2=60 mH, M=10 mH;

14.4 Magnetic Materials
The relationship between B and H is not linear for the types of iron used in
motors and transformers.
So far, we have assumed that the relationship between B and H is linear (i.e., 
). Actually, for the
iron alloys used in motors, permanent magnets, and transformers, the relationship between B and H is
not linear.
Figure 14.18(a) shows a coil used to apply magnetic field intensity H to a sample of iron. Suppose that
we start with a sample that is not magnetized. If we look at the material on a microscopic scale, we see
that the magnetic fields of the atoms in small domains are aligned. However, the field directions are
random for the various domains, and the external macroscopic field is zero. This is illustrated in
Figure 14.18(b).
Figure 14.18
Materials such as iron display a B-H relationship with hysteresis and saturation.
Figure 14.18(c) shows a plot of B versus H. At point 1, both B and H are zero. As H is increased by
applying current to the coil, the magnetic fields of the domains tend to align with the applied field. At first
(point 1 to point 2), this is a reversible process, so that if the applied field is reduced to zero, the
B=μH

domains return to their original random orientations. However, for greater applied field intensities, the
domains align with the applied field such that they tend to maintain their alignment even if the applied
field is reduced to zero (point 2 to point 3). Eventually, for sufficiently high fields, all of the domains are
aligned with the applied field and the slope of the B-H curve approaches 
 We say that the material is
saturated. For typical iron core materials, saturation occurs for B in the range of 1 to 2 T.
For typical iron cores, saturation occurs for B in the range from 1 to 2 T.
If starting from point 3, the applied field H is reduced to zero, a residual flux density B remains in the
core (point 4). This occurs because the magnetic domains continue to point in the direction imposed
earlier by the applied field. If H is increased in the reverse direction, B is reduced to zero (point 5).
Eventually, saturation occurs in the reverse direction. If an ac current is applied to the coil, a hysteresis
loop is traced in the B-H plane.
Energy Considerations
Let us consider the energy flow to and from the coil shown in Figure 14.18(a). We assume that the coil
has zero resistance. As the current is increasing, the increasing flux density induces a voltage, resulting
in energy flow into the coil. The energy W delivered to the coil is the integral of power. Thus, we get
Now 
 and 
 where l is the mean path length and A is the cross-sectional area. Making
these substitutions in the expression on the right-hand side of Equation 14.38, we have
However, the product of the cross-sectional area A and the length of the core l is the volume of the core.
Dividing both sides of Equation 14.39 by the volume results in
in which 
 represents energy per unit volume of the core. As illustrated in Figure 14.19, the volumetric
energy delivered to the coil is the area between the B-H curve and the B-axis. Part of this energy is
μ0.
W = ∫0tvi dt = ∫0tNd∅dti dt = ∫0∅Ni d∅
(14.38)
Ni=Hl
dϕ=AdB,
W = ∫0BAlH dB
(14.39)
Wv = WAl = ∫0BH dB
(14.40)
Wv

returned to the circuit when H is reduced to zero, part of it remains stored in the residual field, and part
of it is converted to heat in the process of magnetizing the core.
Figure 14.19
The area between the B-H curve and the B axis represents the volumetric energy supplied to the core.
Core Loss
When an ac current is applied to a coil having an iron core, more energy is put into the coil on each
cycle than is returned to the circuit. Part of the energy is converted to heat in reversing the directions of
the magnetic domains. This is similar to the heat produced when we repeatedly bend a piece of metal.
The volumetric energy converted to heat per cycle is equal to the area of the hysteresis loop as
illustrated in Figure 14.20. This energy loss is called core loss. Since a fixed amount of energy is
converted to heat for each cycle, the power loss due to hysteresis is proportional to frequency.
Figure 14.20
The area of the hysteresis loop is the volumetric energy converted to heat per cycle.
Power loss due to hysteresis is proportional to frequency, assuming constant
peak flux.

In motors, generators, and transformers, conversion of energy into heat is undesirable. Therefore, we
would choose an alloy having a thin hysteresis loop as in Figure 14.21(a). On the other hand, for a
permanent magnet, we would choose a material having a large residual field, such as in Figure
14.21(b).
Figure 14.21
When we want to minimize core loss (as in a transformer or motor), we choose a material having a thin
hysteresis loop. On the other hand, for a permanent magnet, we should choose a material with a wide
loop.
Eddy-Current Loss
Besides hysteresis, there is another effect that leads to core loss for ac operation. First, let us consider a
solid iron core. Of course, the core itself is an electrical conductor, acting much like shorted turns. As the
magnetic fields change, voltages are induced in the core, causing currents, known as eddy currents, to
circulate in the core material. As a result, power is dissipated in the core according to 
A partial solution to eddy-current loss is to laminate the core with thin sheets of iron that are electrically
insulated from one another. The orientation of the sheets is selected to interrupt the flow of current.
Thus, the resistance is higher for eddy currents, and the loss is greatly reduced. Another approach is to
make the core with powdered iron held together by an insulating binder.
For operation with a given peak flux density, the voltages induced in the core are proportional to
frequency (because of Faraday's law). Therefore, power loss due to eddy currents increases with the
square of frequency (because 
).
P=v2/R.
P=v2/R

Power loss due to eddy currents is proportional to the square of frequency,
assuming constant peak flux.
Energy Stored in the Magnetic Field
Even though many core materials do not have a linear B-H characteristic, we often perform initial
design calculations assuming that 
 The properties of the core material are usually not accurately
known, so the calculations for motor or transformer design are approximate. The linear approximation is
convenient and sufficiently accurate as long as the cores are operated below the saturation level.
Substituting 
 into Equation 14.40 and integrating, we obtain
Notice that for a given flux density, the volumetric energy stored in the field is inversely proportional to
the permeability.
In a magnetic circuit having an air gap, the flux density is roughly the same in the iron core as in the air
gap. (It is usually a little less in the air gap, due to fringing.) The permeability of an iron core is much
greater (by a factor of several thousand or more) than that of air. Thus, the volumetric energy of the gap
is much higher than that of the core. In a magnetic circuit consisting of an iron core with a substantial air
gap, nearly all of the stored energy resides in the gap.
Exercise 14.14
Consider a coil wound on an iron core. For 60-Hz ac operation with a given applied current, the
hysteresis loop of the core material has an area of 
 The core volume is 
 Find the
power converted to heat because of hysteresis.
Answer 0.48 W.
Exercise 14.15
A certain iron core has an air gap with an effective area of 2 cm by 3 cm and a length of 0.5 cm. The
applied magnetomotive force is 1000 ampere turns and the reluctance of the iron is negligible. Find the
B=μH.
H=B/μ
Wv = ∫0BBμ dB = B22μ
(14.41)
40 J/m3.
200 cm3.

flux density and the energy stored in the air gap.
Answer B=0.2513 T, W=0.0754 J.

14.5 Ideal Transformers
A transformer consists of several coils wound on a common core that usually consists of laminated iron
(to reduce eddy-current loss). We will see that transformers can be used to adjust the values of ac
voltages. A voltage can be stepped up by using a transformer. For example, 2400 V can be stepped up
to 48 kV. Transformers can also be used to step a voltage down, such as 2400 V to 240 V.
Transformers find many applications in electric power distribution. In transporting power over long
distances (from a hydroelectric power-generating station to a distant city, for example), it is desirable to
use relatively large voltages, typically hundreds of kilovolts. Recall that the power delivered by an ac
source is given by
For a fixed power factor 
 many combinations of voltage and current can be used in transferring a
given amount of power. The wires that carry the current have nonzero resistances. Thus, some power is
lost in the transmission lines, given by
in which 
 is the resistance of the transmission line. By designing the power distribution system with
a large voltage value and a small current value, the line loss can be made to be a small fraction of the
power transported. Thus, larger voltage yields higher efficiency in power distribution.
For safety and other reasons, relatively small voltages must be employed where the power is
consumed. For example, in U.S. residences, the nominal voltages are either 110 or 220 V rms. Thus,
transformers are useful in stepping voltage levels up or down as needed in a power distribution system.
Transformers greatly facilitate power distribution by stepping voltage up and
down at various points in the distribution system.
P=VrmsIrms cos(θ)
(14.42)
(cos θ),
Ploss=RlineIrms2
(14.43)
Rline

Voltage Ratio
A transformer is illustrated in Figure 14.22. An ac voltage source is connected to the primary coil, which
consists of 
 turns of wire. Current flows into the primary side and causes an ac magnetic flux 
 to
appear in the core. This flux induces a voltage in the 
 secondary coil, which delivers power to
the load. Depending on the turns ratio 
 the rms secondary voltage can be greater or less than the
rms primary voltage.
Figure 14.22
A transformer consists of several coils wound on a common core.
For now, we neglect the resistances of the coils and the core loss. Furthermore, we assume that the
reluctance of the core is very small and that all of the flux links all of the turns of both coils.
The primary voltage is given by
According to Faraday's law, we have
which can be rearranged and integrated to yield
Assuming that all of the flux links all of the turns, the secondary voltage is given by
Using Equation 14.46 to substitute for 
 we have
N1
ϕ(t)
N2 turn
N2/N1,
v1(t)=V1m cos(ωt)
(14.44)
v1(t)=Vim cos(ωt)=N1 dϕdt
(14.45)
ϕ(t)=V1mN1ω sin(ωt)
(14.46)
v2(t)=N2 dϕdt
(14.47)
ϕ(t),

Notice that the voltage across each coil is proportional to its number of turns. This is an important
relationship to know when working with transformers.
In an ideal transformer, all of the flux links all of the turns, and the voltage across
each coil is proportional to its number of turns.
Also, notice that we have included a dot on the end of each winding in Figure 14.22. As usual, the dots
are placed so that if the currents entered the dotted terminals, they would produce aiding magnetic
fields. Furthermore, application of Lenz's law shows that the induced voltages have positive polarity at
both dotted terminals when  is increasing, and negative polarity at both dotted terminals when  is
decreasing. Thus in a transformer, the polarities of the voltages at the dotted terminals agree. When a
voltage with positive polarity at the dotted terminal appears across coil 1, the voltage across coil 2 is
also positive at the dotted terminal.
Voltage polarities are the same at like-dotted terminals.
Hence, we have established the fact that the voltage across each winding is proportional to the number
of turns. Clearly, the peak and rms values of the voltages are also related by the turns ratio:
Example 14.9 Determination of Required Turns Ratio
v2(t)=N2 V1mN1ω ddt [ sin(ωt) ]
(14.48)
v2(t)=N2N1 V1m cos(ωt)
(14.49)
v2(t)=N2N1 v1(t)
(14.50)
ϕ
ϕ
V2rms=N2N1 V1rms
(14.51)

Suppose that we have a 4700-V-rms ac source and we need to deliver 220 V rms to a load.
Determine the turns ratio 
 of the transformer needed.
Solution
Rearranging Equation 14.51, we have
Current Ratio
Again let us consider the transformer shown in Figure 14.22. Notice that the currents  and  produce
opposing magnetic fields (because  enters a dotted terminal and  leaves a dotted terminal). Thus,
the total mmf applied to the core is
Furthermore, the mmf is related to the flux and the reluctance of the core by
In a well-designed transformer, the core reluctance is very small. Ideally, the reluctance is zero, and the
mmf required to establish the flux in the core is zero. Then, Equation 14.52 becomes
The net mmf is zero for an ideal transformer.
Rearranging this equation, we obtain
This relationship also applies for the rms values of the currents:
N1/N2
N1N2=V1rmsV2rms=4700220=21.36
i1
i2
i1
i2
ℱ=N1i1(t)−N2i2(t)
(14.52)
ℱ=ℛϕ
(14.53)
ℱ=N1i1(t)−N2i2(t)=0
(14.54)
i2(t)=N1N2 i1(t)
(14.55)

Compare Equation 14.51 for the voltages to Equation 14.56 for the currents. Notice that if the voltage
is stepped up (i.e., 
), the current is stepped down, and vice versa.
Power in an Ideal Transformer
Again consider Figure 14.22. The power delivered to the load by the secondary winding is
Using Equations 14.50 and 14.55 to substitute for 
 and 
 respectively, we have
However, the power delivered to the primary winding by the source is 
 and we get
Thus, we have established the fact that the power delivered to the primary winding by the source is
delivered in turn to the load by the secondary winding. Net power is neither generated nor consumed by
an ideal transformer.
Power is neither generated nor consumed by an ideal transformer.
Summary
Let us summarize the idealizing assumptions and their consequences for the transformer.
1. We assumed that all of the flux links all of the windings of both coils and that the resistance of
the coils is zero. Thus, the voltage across each coil is proportional to the number of turns on the
coil. This led to the voltage relationship
I2rms=N1N2 I1rms
(14.56)
N2/N1>1
p2(t)=v2(t)i2(t)
(14.57)
v2(t)
i2(t),
p2(t)=N2N1 v1(t) N1N2 i1(t)=v1(t)i1(t)
(14.58)
p1(t)=
p2(t)=p1(t)
(14.59)
v2(t)=N2N1 v1(t)

2. We assumed that the reluctance of the core is negligible, so the total mmf of both coils is zero.
This led to the current relationship
3. A consequence of the voltage and current relationships is that all of the power delivered to an
ideal transformer by the source is transferred to the load. Thus, an ideal transformer has a power
efficiency of 100 percent.
The circuit symbol for the transformer is shown in Figure 14.23(a).
Figure 14.23
The circuit symbol for a transformer and its mechanical analog.
Mechanical Analog of the Transformer: The Lever
The lever illustrated in Figure 14.23(b) is a mechanical analog of the electrical transformer. The
velocities of the ends of the lever are related by the length ratio of the lever, 
 just as
transformer voltages are related by the turns ratio. Similarly, the forces are related by 
which is analogous to the relationship between currents in the transformer. As in a transformer, the
frictionless lever neither generates nor consumes energy. On one end of the lever, we have small force
and large velocity, while on the other end the force is large and the velocity is small. This mirrors the
effects of the transformer on current and voltage.
Example 14.10 Analysis of a Circuit Containing an Ideal Transformer
Consider the source, transformer, and load shown in Figure 14.24. Determine the rms values of the
currents and voltages:
i2(t)=N1N2 i1(t)
v2=v1(l2/l1),
F2=F1(l1/l2),

Figure 14.24
Circuit of Example 14.10.
a. with the switch open;
b. with the switch closed.
Solution
Because of the applied source, the primary voltage is 
 The primary and secondary
voltages are related by Equation 14.51:
Rearranging Equation 14.56, we have
a. With the switch open, the secondary current is zero. Therefore, the primary current 
 is
also zero, and no power is taken from the source.
b. With the switch closed, the secondary current is
Then, the primary current is
Let us consider the sequence of events in this example. When the source voltage is applied to the
primary winding, a very small primary current (ideally zero) flows, setting up the flux in the core. The
flux induces the voltage in the secondary winding. Before the switch is closed, no current flows in the
secondary. After the switch is closed, current flows in the secondary opposing the flux in the core.
However, because of the voltage applied to the primary, the flux must be maintained in the core.
(Otherwise, Kirchhoff's voltage law would not be satisfied in the primary circuit.) Thus, current must
begin to flow into the primary to offset the magnetomotive force of the secondary winding.
V1rms=110 V.
V2rms=N2N1 V1rms=15×110=22 V
I1rms=N2N1 I2rms
I1rms
I2rms=V2 rmsRL=2210=2.2 A
I1rms=N2N1 I2rms=15×2.2=0.44 A

Impedance Transformations
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 14.25. The phasor current and voltage in the secondary are related
to the load impedance by
Figure 14.25
The impedance seen looking into the primary is 
Using Equations 14.51 and 14.56 to substitute for 
 and 
 we have
Rearranging this, we get
in which 
 is the impedance seen by the source. We say that the load impedance is reflected to the
primary side by the square of the turns ratio.
Example 14.11 Using Impedance Transformations
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 14.26(a). Find the phasor currents and voltages. Also, find the
power delivered to the load.
ZL′=(N1/N2)2×ZL.
V2I2=ZL
(14.60)
I2
V2,
(N2/N1)V1(N1/N2)I1=ZL
(14.61)
ZL′=V1I1=(N1N2)2 ZL
(14.62)
ZL′

Figure 14.26
The circuit of Examples 14.11 and 14.12.
Solution
First, we reflect the load impedance 
 to the primary side of the transformer as shown in Figure
14.26(b). The impedance seen from the primary side is
The total impedance seen by the source is
Converting to polar form, we have
Now, we can compute the primary current and voltage:
Next, we can use the turns ratio to compute the secondary current and voltage:
ZL
ZL′=(N1N2)2 ZL=(10)2(10+j20)=1000+j2000
Zs=R1+ZL′=1000+1000+j2000=2000+j2000
Zs=2828∠45°¯
I1
=VsZs=1000∠0°¯2828∠45°¯=0.3536∠−45°¯ A peak
V1
I1ZL′=0.3536∠−45°¯×(1000+j2000)
=0.3536∠−45°¯×(2236∠63.43°¯)=790.6∠18.43°¯ V peak
I2=N1N2 I1=101 0.3536∠−45°¯=3.536∠−45°¯ A peak

Finally, we compute the power delivered to the load:
Besides transferring impedances from one side of a transformer to the other by using the square of the
turns ratio, we can also reflect voltage sources or current sources by using the turns ratio.
Example 14.12 Reflecting the Source to the Secondary
Consider Figure 14.26(a). Reflect 
 and 
 to the secondary side.
Solution
The voltage is reflected by using the turns ratio. Thus, we have
On the other hand, the resistance is reflected using the square of the turns ratio. This yields
The circuit with 
 and 
 transferred to the secondary side is shown in ­Figure 14.26(c).
Exercise 14.16
Working from the circuit of Figure 14.26(c), find the values of 
 and the power delivered to the load.
(Of course, the answers should be the same as the values found in Example 14.11.)
Answer 
Exercise 14.17
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 14.27. Compute the values of 
 the power delivered to 
and 
V2=N2N1 V1=110 790.6∠18.43°¯=79.06∠18.43°¯ V peak
PL=I2rms2RL=(3.5362)2 (10)=62.51 W
Vs
R1
Vs′=N2N1 Vs=110 1000∠0°¯=100∠0°¯
R1′=(N2N1)2 R1=(110)2 (1000)=10 Ω
Vs
R1
V2
V2=79.06∠18.43°¯, PL=62.51 W.
I1, I2, V2,
RL,
RL′.

Figure 14.27
Circuit of Exercises 14.16 and 14.17.
Answer 
Exercise 14.18
Recall that to achieve maximum power transfer from a source with an internal resistance of 
 we want
the effective load resistance 
 to equal 
 Find the turns ratio that would result in maximum power
delivered to the load in Figure 14.27.
Answer 
I1=1.538∠0°¯, I2=0.3846∠0°¯, V2=153.8∠0°¯, PL=29.60 W, RL′=25 Ω.
Rs,
RL′
Rs.
N1/N2=1/10.

14.6 Real Transformers
Well-designed transformers approximately meet the conditions that we assumed in our discussion of the
ideal transformer. Often for initial design calculations, we can assume that a transformer is ideal.
However, a better model is needed for accurate calculations in the final stages of design. Moreover, a
better understanding of transformers and their limitations is gained by considering a refined model.
The equivalent circuit of a real transformer is shown in Figure 14.28. The resistances 
 and 
account for the resistance of the wires used to wind the coils of the transformer.
Figure 14.28
The equivalent circuit of a real transformer.
For the ideal transformer, we assumed that all of the flux links all of the turns of both coils. In fact, some
of the flux produced by each coil leaves the core and does not link the other coil. We account for this
leakage flux by adding the inductances 
 and 
 to the ideal transformer, as shown in Figure 14.28.
In discussing the ideal transformer, we assumed that the core reluctance was zero and ignored core
loss. This meant that zero magnetomotive force was required to establish the flux in the core. Neither of
these assumptions is exactly true. The magnetizing inductance 
 shown in Figure 14.28 accounts
for the nonzero core reluctance. The current needed to establish the flux flows through 
 Finally, the
resistance 
 accounts for power dissipated in the core due to hysteresis and eddy currents.
Table 14.1 compares the values of the circuit elements of a real transformer with those of an ideal
transformer.
Table 14.1 Circuit Values of a 60-Hz 20-kVA 2400/240-V Transformer Compared with Those of an
R1
R2
L1
L2
Lm
Lm.
Rc

Ideal Transformer
Element Name
Symbol
Ideal
Real
Primary resistance
0
Secondary resistance
0
Primary leakage reactance
0
Secondary leakage reactance
0
Magnetizing reactance
Core-loss resistance
Variations of the Transformer Model
Figure 14.29 shows several variations of the transformer equivalent circuit. In Figure 14.29(a), the
secondary inductance and resistance have been referred to the primary side. In Figure 14.29(b), the
magnetizing inductance and loss resistance have been moved to the input side of the circuit. [Actually,
the circuit in Figure 14.29(b) is not precisely equivalent to that in Figure 14.29(a). However, in normal
operation, the voltage drop across 
 and 
 is very small compared to either the input voltage or the
voltage across 
 and 
 Thus, for normal operating conditions, virtually identical results are obtained
from either circuit.] Other equivalent circuits can be obtained by moving the circuit elements to the
secondary side and by moving 
 and 
 to the right-hand side. Usually, we select the equivalent
circuit configuration that is most convenient for the problem at hand.
Figure 14.29
R1
3.0 Ω
R2
0.03 Ω
X1=ωL1
6.5 Ω
X2=ωL2
0.07 Ω
Xm=ωLm
∞
15 kΩ
Rc
∞
100 kΩ
L1
R1
Lm
Rm.
Lm
Rc

Variations of the transformer equivalent circuit. The circuit of (b) is not exactly equivalent to that of (a),
but is sufficiently accurate for practical applications.
Regulation and Efficiency
Because of the elements 
 and 
 the voltage delivered to the load side of a transformer
varies with the load current. Usually, this is an undesirable effect. The regulation of a transformer is
defined as
in which 
 is the rms voltage across the load terminals for an open-circuit load and 
 is the
rms voltage across the actual load.
Ideally, we usually want the percentage regulation to be zero. For instance, poor regulation in a
residence would mean that the lights dim when an electric clothes dryer is started. Clearly, this is not a
desirable situation.
Because of the resistances in the transformer equivalent circuit, not all of the power input to the
transformer is delivered to the load. We define the power efficiency as
in which 
 is the power delivered to the load, 
 is the power dissipated in the transformer, and
 is the power delivered by the source to the transformer primary terminals.
Example 14.13 Regulation and Efficiency Calculations
Find the percentage regulation and power efficiency for the transformer of Table 14.1 for a rated
load having a lagging power factor of 0.8.
In this example, we are taking the rms values of currents and voltages (rather
than peak values) as the phasor magnitudes. This is often done by power-
distribution engineers. We will clearly indicate when phasors represent rms
values rather than peak values.
L1, L2, R1,
R2,
percent regulation=Vno load−VloadVload×100%
Vno load
Vload
power efficiency = PloadPin × 100% = (1−PlossPin) × 100%
Pload
Ploss
Pin

Solution
First, we draw the circuit as shown in Figure 14.30. Notice that we have placed the magnetizing
reactance 
 and core loss resistance 
 on the left-hand side of 
 and 
 because this makes
the calculations a bit simpler and is sufficiently accurate. We assume a zero phase reference for the
load voltage. It is ­customary in power-system engineering to take the values of phasors as the rms
values (rather than the peak values) of the currents and voltages. Thus, as a phasor, we have
Figure 14.30
Circuit of Example 14.13.
For rated load (20 kVA), the load current is
The load power factor is
Solving, we find that
Thus, the phasor load current is
where the phase angle is negative because the load was stated to have a lagging power factor.
Xm
Rc
R1
X1,
Vload=240∠0°¯ V rms
I2=20 kVA240 V=83.33 A rms
power factor=cos(θ)=0.8
θ=36.87°
I2=83.33∠−36.87°¯ A rms

The primary current is related to the secondary current by the turns ratio:
Next, we can compute the voltages:
The primary voltage is related to the secondary voltage by the turns ratio:
Now, we can compute the source voltage:
Next, we compute the power loss in the transformer:
The power delivered to the load is given by
The input power is given by
At this point, we can compute the power efficiency:
Next, we can determine the no-load voltages. Under no-load conditions, we have
Finally, the percentage regulation is
I1=N2N1 I2=110×83.33∠−36.87°¯=8.333∠−36.87°¯ A rms
V2
=Vload+(R2+jX2)I2
=240+(0.03+j0.07)83.33∠−36.87°¯
=240+6.346∠29.93°¯
=245.50+j3.166 V
rms
V1
=N1N2 V2=10×(245.50+j3.166)
=2455.0+j31.66 V rms
Vs
=V1+(R1+jX1) I1
=2455.0+j31.66+(3+j6.5)×(8.333∠−36.87°¯)
=2508.2∠1.37°¯ V rms
Ploss
=Vs2Rc+I12R1+I22R2
=62.91+208.3+208.63
=479.5 W
Pload
=VloadI2×power factor
=20 kVA×0.8=16,000 W
Pin
=Pload+Ploss
=16,000+479.5=16,479.5 W
efficiency
=(1−PlossPin)×100%
=(1−479.516,479.5)×100%=97.09%
I1
=I2=0
V1
=Vs=2508.2
Vno-load
=V2=V1N2N1=250.82 V rms
percent regulation
=Vno load−VloadVload×100%
=250.82−240240×100%
=4.51%


Summary
1. The right-hand rule can be used to determine the direction of the magnetic field produced by a
current. This is illustrated in Figure 14.2 on page 701.
2. Force is exerted on a charge moving through a magnetic field according to the equation
Similarly, forces appear on a current-carrying wire immersed in a magnetic field. The force on an
incremental length of wire is given by
3. According to Faraday's law of induction, voltage is induced in a coil when its magnetic flux
linkages change with time. Similarly, voltages are induced in conductors that cut through
magnetic flux lines. We can determine the polarity of the induced voltage by using Lenz's law.
4. Magnetic flux density B and the magnetic field intensity H are related by
where  is the magnetic permeability of the material. For air or vacuum, 
5. According to Ampère's law, the line integral of H around a closed path is equal to the algebraic
sum of the currents flowing through the area bounded by the path. We can use this law to find
the field around a long straight wire or inside a toroidal coil.
6. Practical magnetic devices can be approximately analyzed by using circuit concepts.
Magnetomotive forces are analogous to voltage sources, reluctance is analogous to resistance,
and flux is analogous to current.
7. The inductance and mutual inductance of coils can be computed from knowledge of the physical
parameters of the coils and the core on which they are wound.
8. The B-H relationship for iron takes the form of a hysteresis loop, which displays saturation in the
neighborhood of 1 to 2T. The area of the loop represents energy converted to heat per cycle.
Eddy currents are another cause of core loss. Energy can be stored in magnetic fields. In a
magnetic circuit consisting of an iron core with an air gap, most of the energy is stored in the
gap.
9. In an ideal transformer, the voltage across each coil is proportional to its number of turns, the net
mmf is zero, and the power efficiency is 100 percent.
10. Equivalent circuits for real transformers are shown in Figures 14.28 and 14.29 on pages 728
and 729, respectively.
11. Efficiency and regulation are important aspects of transformer operation.
f=qu×B
df=idl×B
B=μH
μ
μ = μ0 = 4π × 10−7


Problems
Section 14.1: Magnetic Fields
P14.1. What is the fundamental cause of magnetic fields?
P14.2. State Faraday's law of magnetic induction and Lenz's law.
P14.3. State Ampère's law, including the reference directions for the currents.
P14.4. State the right-hand rule as it applies to:
a. a current-carrying conductor;
b. a current-carrying coil.
*P14.5. A bar magnet is inserted into a single-turn coil as illustrated in Figure P14.5. Is the
voltage 
 positive or negative as the bar approaches the coil?
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
Figure P14.5
*P14.6. The magnetic field of the earth is approximately 
 At what distance from a long
straight wire carrying a steady current of 10 A is the field equal to 10 percent of the earth's field?
Suggest at least two ways to help reduce the effect of electrical circuits on the navigation
compass in a boat or airplane.
P14.7. An irregular loop of wire carries an electrical current as illustrated in Figure P14.7. Is
there a net force on the loop due to the magnetic fields created? Justify your answer. [Hint:
Consider Newton's third law of motion.]
vab
3×10−5 T.

Figure P14.7
*P14.8. A 0.5-m length of wire carries a 10-A current perpendicular to a magnetic field.
Determine the magnetic flux density needed so that the force on the wire is 3 N.
P14.9. A long copper pipe carries a dc current. Is there a magnetic field inside the pipe due to
the current? Outside? Justify your answers.
*P14.10. Suppose that we test a material and find that 
 for an applied H of 50 A/m.
Compute the relative permeability of the material.
P14.11. Consider two coils which are wound on nonmagnetic forms such that part of the flux
produced by each coil links the other, as shown in Figure P14.11. Assume that the inductance
of the left-hand coil is small enough so that 
 is equal to the voltage induced by the magnetic
field of the right-hand coil divided by the resistance. At 
 is the force between the coils
attraction, repulsion, or zero? Explain your reasoning. Repeat for 
 3, and 5 s.
Figure P14.11
*P14.12. A uniform flux density of 1 T is perpendicular to the plane of a five-turn circular coil of
radius 10 cm. Find the flux linking the coil and the flux linkages. Suppose that the field is
B=0.1 Wb/m2
i1(t)
t=1 s,
t=2,

decreased to zero at a uniform rate in 1 ms. Find the magnitude of the voltage induced in the
coil.
P14.13. Two very long parallel wires are 1 cm apart and carry currents of 10A in the same
direction. The material surrounding the wires has 
 Determine the force on a 0.5-m section
of one of the wires. Do the wires attract or repel one another?
P14.14. Suppose that the flux  linking the coils shown in Figure P14.14 is increasing in
magnitude. Find the polarity of the voltage across each coil.
Figure P14.14
P14.15. Using equations given in Section 14.1, perform dimensional analyses to determine the
units of 
 B, and H in terms of meters, kilograms, seconds, and coulombs.
P14.16. Use the right-hand rule to find the direction of the magnetic flux for each coil shown in
Figure P14.16. Mark the N and S ends of each coil. Do the coils attract or repel one another?
Figure P14.16
P14.17. A very long, straight wire carrying current i(t) and a rectangular single-turn coil lie in the
same plane, as illustrated in FigureP14.17 . The wire and the coil are surrounded by air.
Figure P14.17
a. Derive an expression for the flux linking the coil.
b. Derive an expression for the voltage 
 induced in the coil.
c. Determine the rms value of 
 given that i(t) is a 10-A rms 60-Hz sinusoid,
μr=1.
ϕ
μ,
vab(t)
vab,

 and 
P14.18. A 120-V-rms 60-Hz sinusoidal voltage appears across a 500-turn coil. Determine the
peak and rms values of the flux linking the coil.
P14.19. A uniform flux density given by 
 is perpendicular to the plane of a
1000-turn circular coil of radius 20 cm. Find the flux linkages and the voltage as functions of
time.
P14.20. A 200-turn toroidal coil (see Figure 14.8 on page 706) has 
 and 
 When
a current given by 0.05 sin (200t) A flows in the coil, the voltage is 0.5 cos (200t) A. Determine
the flux  as a function of time and the relative permeability of the core material.
P14.21. Suppose that, in designing an electrical generator, we need to produce a voltage of 120
V by moving a straight conductor through a uniform magnetic field of 0.5 T at a speed of 30 m/s.
The conductor, its motion, and the field are mutually perpendicular. What is the required length
of the conductor? It turns out that in generator design, a conductor of this length is impractical,
and we must use N conductors of length 0.1 m. However, by connecting the conductors in
series, we can obtain the required 120 V. What is the number N of conductors needed?
P14.22. A very long,  straight wire carrying a constant current 
 and a rectangular single-
turn coil lie in the same plane, as illustrated in FigureP14.17 . The wire and the coil are
surrounded by air. A source is applied to the coil causing a constant clockwise current 
 to flow
in the loop.
a. Derive an expression for the net force exerted on the coil due to the magnetic field of the
wire.
b. Evaluate the force given that 
 and 
c. Is the loop attracted or repelled by the wire?
P14.23. Two infinitely long, very thin wires lie on the x and y axes and carry currents as shown in
Figure P14.23.
Figure P14.23
a. Show the direction of the forces on the wires due to the magnetic fields on the positive
and negative part of each axis, assuming that  and  are both positive.
b. Compute the torque on the wire that lies on the y axis.
l=10 cm, r1=1 cm,
r2=10 cm.
B=0.3 sin(377t) T
r=1 cm
R=10 cm.
ϕ
i(t)=I1
I2
I1=I2=10 A, l=10 cm, r1=1 cm,
r2=10 cm.
Ix
Iy

Section 14.2: Magnetic Circuits
*P14.24. An air gap has a length of 0.1 cm. What length of iron core has the same reluctance as
the air gap? The relative permeability of the iron is 5000. Assume that the cross-sectional areas
of the gap and the core are the same.
*P14.25. Consider the magnetic circuit of Figure 14.13 on page 711 that was analyzed in
Example14.6 . Suppose that the length of gap a is reduced to zero. Compute the flux in gap b.
Why is the result less than that found in Example 14.6?
P14.26. What happens to the reluctance of a magnetic path if its length is doubled? If the cross-
sectional area is doubled? If the relative permeability is doubled?
*P14.27. What quantity in a magnetic circuit is analogous to a voltage source in an electrical
circuit? To resistance? To current?
P14.28. What are the physical units of reluctance in terms of kilograms, coulombs, meters, and
seconds?
P14.29. Consider the magnetic circuit shown in Figure P14.29. Assume that the reluctance of
the iron is small enough so it can be neglected. The lengths of the air gaps are 0.1 cm, and the
effective area of each gap is 
 Determine the total number of turns needed to produce a
flux density of 0.5 T in the gaps.
Figure P14.29
P14.30. Compute the flux in each leg of the magnetic core shown in Figure P14.30.
20 cm2.

Figure P14.30
*P14.31. Consider the solenoid shown in FigureP14.31 , which is typical of those commonly
used as actuators for mechanisms and for operating valves in chemical processes. Neglect
fringing and the reluctance of the core. Derive an expression for the flux as a function of the
physical dimensions, 
 the number of turns N, and the current.
Figure P14.31
P14.32. Consider the core shown in Figure P14.32, which has two coils of N turns, each
connected so that the fluxes aid in the center leg. Determine the value of N so that 
produces a flux density of 0.25 T in the gap. The gap and the core have square cross sections 2
cm on each side. Account for fringing by adding the gap length to the length of each side of the
gap.
Figure P14.32
P14.33. Compute the flux in each leg of the core shown in Figure P14.33. Account for fringing
by adding the gap length to each of the cross-sectional dimensions of the gap.
μ0,
I=2 A

Section 14.3: Inductance and Mutual Inductance
Figure P14.33
P14.34. Draw the electrical circuit analog for the magnetic circuit shown in Figure P14.34. Pay
special attention to the polarities of the voltage sources. Determine the flux density in the core.
Figure P14.34
P14.35. Consider a toroidal core, as shown in Figure 14.11 on page 709, that has a relative
permeability of 1000, 
 and 
 Two windings are wound on the core, one with 200
turns and the other with 400 turns. A voltage source described by 
 is applied to
the 200-turn coil, and the 400-turn coil is open circuited. Determine the current in the 200-turn
coil and the voltage across the 400-turn coil. Assume that all of the magnetic flux is confined to
the core and that the current is a pure sine wave.
R=5 cm,
r=2 cm.
v(t)=10 cos(105t)
*P14.36. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P14.36. The two coils have 
and 
 Prior to 
 the currents in the coils are zero. At 
 the switch closes. Determine
and sketch 
 and 
 to scale versus time.
L1=0.1 H, L2=10 H,
M=0.5 H.
t=0,
t=0,
i1(t)
i2(t)

Figure P14.36
*P14.37. A 500-turn coil is wound on an iron core. When a 120-V-rms 60-Hz voltage is applied to
the coil, the current is 1 A rms. Neglect the resistance of the coil. Determine the reluctance of the
core. Given that the cross-sectional area of the core is 
 and the length is 20 cm, determine
the relative permeability of the core material.
*P14.38. A 100-turn coil wound on a magnetic core is found to have an inductance of 200 mH.
What inductance will be obtained if the number of turns is increased to 200, assuming that all of
the flux links all of the turns?
*P14.39. Two coils wound on a common core have 
 and 
 The currents
are 
 and 
 Both of the currents enter dotted terminals. Find expressions for the
voltages across the coils.
P14.40. Write one or two paragraphs that explain the voltage-current relationship of an inductor
in terms of basic principles of magnetic fields.
P14.41. Two coils having inductances 
 and 
 are wound on a common core. The fraction of
the flux produced by one coil that links the other coil is called the coefficient of coupling and is
denoted by k. Derive an expression for the mutual inductance M in terms of 
 and k.
P14.42. Two coils wound on a common core have 
 and 
 The
currents are 
 and 
 Both of the currents enter dotted
terminals. Find expressions for the voltages across the coils.
P14.43. A 200-turn coil is wound on a core having a reluctance of 
 Determine
the inductance of the coil.
P14.44. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P14.44. The two coils have 
and 
 Prior to 
 the currents in the coils are zero. At 
 the switch closes. Determine
and sketch 
 and 
 to scale versus time.
Figure P14.44
5 cm2
L1=1 H, L2=2 H,
M=0.5 H.
i1=cos(377t) A
i2=
L1
L2
L1, L2,
L1=0.2 H, L2=0.5 H,
M=0.1 H.
i1=exp(−1000t) A
i2=2 exp(−1000t) A.
5×105 A⋅turns/Wb.
L1=0.1 H, L2=10 H,
M=1 H.
t=0,
t=0,
i1(t)
v2(t)

Section 14.4: Magnetic Materials
P14.45. Two coils wound on a common core have 
 and 
 The currents
are 
 and 
 If both currents enter dotted terminals, find the flux linkages of both
coils. Repeat if  enters a dotted terminal and  leaves a dotted terminal.
P14.46. Consider the coils shown in Figure P14.14. Suppose that a dot is placed on the leftmost
terminal. Place a dot on the appropriate terminal of the right-hand coil to indicate the sense of
the coupling.
P14.47. A 100-turn coil is wound on a toroidal core and has an inductance of 100 mH. Suppose
that a 200-turn coil is wound on a second toroidal core having dimensions (r and R as shown in
Figure 14.11 on page 709) that are double those of the first core.. Both cores are made of the
same material, which has very high permeability. Determine the inductance of the second coil.
P14.48. A symmetrical toroidal coil is wound on a plastic core (
) and is found to have an
inductance of 1 mH. What inductance will result if the core material is changed to a ferrite having
 Assume that the entire magnetic path is composed of ferrite.
P14.49. A relay has a 500-turn coil that draws 50 mA rms when a 60-Hz voltage of 24 V rms is
applied. Assume that the resistance of the coil is negligible. Determine the peak flux linking the
coil, the reluctance of the core, and the inductance of the coil.
L1=1 H, L2=2 H,
M=0.5 H.
i1=1 A
i2=0.5 A.
i1
i2
μr≅1
μr=200?
*P14.50. What are two causes of core loss for a coil with an iron core excited by an ac current?
What considerations are important in minimizing loss due to each of these causes? What
happens to the power loss in each case if the frequency of operation is doubled while
maintaining constant peak flux density?
*P14.51. For operation at 60 Hz and a given peak flux density, the core loss of a given core is 1
W due to hysteresis and 0.5 W due to eddy currents. Estimate the core loss for 400-Hz operation
with the same peak flux density.
P14.52. Sketch the B-H curve for a magnetic material such as iron. Show hysteresis and
saturation.
P14.53. What characteristic is desirable in the B-H curve for a prospective material to be used in
a permanent magnet? In a motor or transformer? Explain.
P14.54. Consider a coil wound on an iron core. Suppose that for operation with a given 60-Hz ac
current, the hysteresis loop of the core material takes the form of a rectangle, as shown in
Figure P14.54. The core volume is 
 Find the power converted to heat because of
hysteresis.
1000 cm3.

Section 14.5: Ideal Transformers
Figure P14.54
P14.55. A magnetic core has a mean length of 20 cm, a cross-sectional area of 
 and a
relative permeability of 2000. A 500-turn coil wound on the core carries a dc current of 0.1 A.
a. Determine the reluctance of the core, the flux density in the core, and the inductance.
b. Compute the energy stored in the magnetic field as 
c. Use Equation 14.41 on page 720 to compute the energy density in the core. Then,
compute the energy by taking the product of energy density and volume. Compare to the
value found in part (b).
P14.56. At a frequency of 60 Hz, the core loss of a certain coil with an iron core is 1.8 W, and at
a frequency of 120 Hz, it is 5.6 W. The peak flux density is the same for both cases. Determine
the power loss due to hysteresis and that due to eddy currents for 60-Hz operation.
P14.57. A certain iron core has an air gap with an effective area of 
 and a length 
The applied magnetomotive force is 
 and the reluctance of the iron is negligible.
Find the flux density and the energy stored in the air gap as a function of 
4 cm2,
W=(1/2)LI2.
2 cm×3 cm
lg.
1000 A⋅turns,
lg.
P14.58. What assumptions did we make in deriving the relationships between the voltages and
currents in an ideal transformer?
*P14.59. Consider the transformer having three windings, as shown in Figure P14.59.

Figure P14.59
a. Place dots on windings to indicate the sense of the coupling between coil 1 and coil 2;
between coil 1 and coil 3.
b. Assuming that all of the flux links all of the turns, determine the volt-ages 
 and 
c. Assuming that the net mmf required to establish the core flux is zero, find an expression
for 
 in terms of 
 and the turns ratios. Then, compute the value of 
*P14.60. Suppose that we need to cause a 
 load resistance to appear as a 
resistance to the source. Instead of using a transformer, we could place a 
 resistance in
series with the 
 resistance. From the standpoint of power efficiency, which approach is
better? Explain.
*P14.61. In U.S. residences, electrical power is generally utilized at a nominal voltage of 120 V
rms. What problems would become pronounced if the power distribution system and household
appliances had been designed for a lower voltage (say, 12 V rms)? For a higher voltage (say, 12
kV)?
P14.62. A voltage source 
 is to be connected to a resistive load 
 by a transmission
line having a resistance 
 as shown in Figure P14.62. In part (a) of the figure, no
transformers are used. In part (b) of the figure, one transformer is used to step up the source
voltage at the sending end of the line, and another transformer is used to step the voltage back
down at the load. For each case, determine the power delivered by the source; the power
dissipated in the line resistance; the power delivered to the load; and the efficiency, defined as
the power delivered to the load as a percentage of the source power.
V2
V3.
I1
I2, I3,
I1.
25 Ω
100 Ω
75 Ω
25 Ω
Vs
RL=10 Ω
Rline=10 Ω,

Figure P14.62
P14.63. A transformer is needed that will cause an actual load resistance of 
 to appear as
 to an ac voltage source of 240 V rms. Draw the diagram of the circuit required. What turns
ratio is required for the transformer? Find the current taken from the source, the current flowing
through the load, and the load voltage.
P14.64. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P14.64. Find the secondary voltage 
 the
secondary current 
 and the power delivered to the load if the turns ratio is 
Repeat for 
 and for 
Figure P14.64
P14.65. A type of transformer known as an autotransformer is shown in Figure P14.65.
25 Ω
100 Ω
V2rms,
I2rms,
N1/N2=10.
N1/N2=1
N1/N2=0.1.

Figure P14.65
a. a. Assuming that all of the flux links all of the turns, determine the relationship between
 and the number of turns.
b. Assuming that the total mmf required to establish the flux is zero, find the relationship
between the currents  and 
P14.66.
a. Reflect the resistances and voltage sources to the left-hand side of the circuit shown in
Figure P14.66 and solve for the current 
b. Repeat with the dot moved to the top of the right-hand coil.
Figure P14.66
P14.67. Consider the circuit shown in Figure P14.67.
v1, v2,
i1
i2.
I1.

Figure P14.67
a. Determine the values of 
 and 
b. For each of the sources, determine the average power and state whether power is
delivered by or absorbed by the source.
c. Move the dot on the secondary to the bottom end of the coil and repeat parts (a) and (b).
P14.68. An autotransformer is shown in Figure P14.68. Assume that all of the flux links all of the
turns and that negligible mmf is needed to establish the flux. Determine the values of 
and 
Figure P14.68
P14.69. Find the equivalent resistance 
 and capacitance 
 seen looking into the
transformers in Figure P14.69. [Hint: Keep in mind that it is the impedance that is reflected by
the square of the turns ratio.]
I1
V2.
I1, I2, I3,
V2.
RL′
CL′

Section 14.6: Real Transformers
Figure P14.69
*P14.70. Draw an equivalent circuit for a real transformer. Briefly discuss the reason that each
element appears in the equivalent circuit.
*P14.71. A 60-Hz 20-kVA 8000/240-V-rms transformer has the following equivalent-circuit
parameters:
Primary resistance
Secondary resistance
Primary leakage reactance
Secondary leakage reactance
Magnetizing reactance
Core-loss resistance
Find the percentage regulation and power efficiency for the transformer for a 2-kVA load (i.e., 10
percent of rated capacity) having a lagging power factor of 0.8.
*P14.72. Usually, transformers are designed to operate with peak flux densities just below
saturation of the core material. Why would we not want to design them to operate far below the
saturation point? Far above the saturation point? Assume that the voltage and current ratings
are to remain constant.
R1
15 Ω
R2
0.02 Ω
X1=ωL1
120 Ω
X2=ωL2
0.15 Ω
Xm=ωLm
30 kΩ
Rc
200 kΩ

P14.73. A certain residence is supplied with electrical power by the transformer of Table14.1  on
page 729. The residence uses 400 kWh of electrical energy per month. From the standpoint of
energy efficiency, which of the equivalent circuit elements listed in the table are most significant?
You will need to use good judgment and make some assumptions in obtaining an answer.
P14.74. When operating with an open-circuit load and with rated primary voltage, a certain 60-
Hz 20-kVA 8000/240-V-rms transformer has a primary current of 0.315 A rms and absorbs 360
W. Which of the elements of the equivalent circuit of Figure 14.29(b) on page 729 can be
determined from this data? Find the numerical values of these elements.
P14.75. Under the assumptions that we made for the ideal transformer, we determined that
 Theoretically, if a dc voltage is applied to the primary of an ideal transformer, a dc
voltage should appear across the secondary winding. However, real transformers are ineffective
for dc. Use the equivalent circuit of Figure 14.28 on page 728 to explain.
P14.76. A certain 60-Hz, 20-kVA, 8000/240 V-rms transformer is operated with a short-circuited
secondary and reduced primary voltage. It is found that, for an applied primary voltage of 500 V
rms, the primary current is 2.5 A rms (i.e., this is the rated primary current) and the transformer
absorbs 270 W. Consider the equivalent circuit of Figure 14.29(b) on page 729. Under the
stated conditions, the current and power for 
 and 
 can be neglected. Explain why.
Determine the values of the total leakage inductance referred to the primary 
 and the
total resistance referred to the primary 
P14.77. A 60-Hz 20-kVA 8000/240-V-rms transformer has the following equivalent-circuit
parameters:
Primary resistance
Secondary resistance
Primary leakage reactance
Secondary leakage reactance
Magnetizing reactance
Core-loss resistance
Find the percentage regulation and power efficiency for the transformer for a rated load having a
lagging power factor of 0.8.
P14.78. We have a transformer designed to operate at 60 Hz. The voltage ratings are 4800 V
rms and 240 V rms for the primary and secondary windings, respectively. The transformer is
rated for 10 kVA. Now, we want to use this transformer at 120 Hz. Discuss the factors that must
be considered in setting ratings appropriate for operation at the new frequency. (Keep in mind
that for best utilization of the material in the transformer, we want the peak flux density to be
v2=(N2/N1)v1.
Lm
Rc
(L1+a2L2)
(R1+a2R2).
R1
15 Ω
R2
0.02 Ω
X1=ωL1
120 Ω
X2=ωL2
0.15 Ω
Xm=ωLm
30 kΩ
Rc
200 kΩ

nearly at saturation for both frequencies.)

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T14.1. Consider a right-hand Cartesian coordinate system as shown in Figure 14.3 on page
701. We have a wire along the x-axis carrying 12 A in the positive x direction and a constant flux
density of 0.3 T directed in the positive z direction.
a. Determine the force and its direction on a 0.2 m length of the wire.
b. Repeat if the field is directed in the positive x direction.
T14.2. Suppose we have a ten-turn square coil 25 cm on each side lying in the x-y plane. A
magnetic flux density is directed in the positive z direction and is given by 
 The
flux is constant with respect to x, y, and z. Determine the voltage induced in the coil.
T14.3. A 20-cm length of wire moves at 15 m/s in a constant flux density of 0.4 T. The wire,
direction of motion, and direction of the flux are mutually perpendicular. Determine the voltage
induced in the wire segment.
T14.4. Consider the magnetic circuit shown in Figure T14.4. The core has a relative permeability
of 1500.
Figure T14.4
a. Carefully estimate the flux density in the air gap.
b. Determine the inductance of the coil.
0.7 sin(120πt) T.

T14.5. Suppose we have an ac current flowing through a coil wound on an iron core. Name two
mechanisms by which energy is converted to heat in the core material. For each, how is the core
material selected to minimize the power loss? How does each power loss depend on the
frequency of the ac current?
T14.6. Consider the circuit shown in Figure T14.6 which has 
 and
Figure T14.6
a. Determine the rms values of the currents and voltages with the switch open.
b. Repeat with the switch closed.
T14.7. You have been assigned to select a transformer to supply a peak power of 100 kW to a
load that draws peak power only a very small percentage of the time and draws very little power
the rest of the time. Two transformers, A and B, are both suitable. While both transformers have
the same efficiency at peak load, most of the loss in A is due to core loss, and most of the loss in
B is due to the resistances of the coils. From the standpoint of operating costs, which
transformer is better? Why?
Rs=0.5 Ω, RL=1000 Ω,
N1/N2=0.1.

Chapter 15 DC Machines
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Select the proper motor type for various applications.
State how torque varies with speed for various motors.
Use the equivalent circuit for dc motors to compute electrical and mechanical quantities.
Use motor nameplate data.
Understand the operation and characteristics of shunt-connected dc motors, series-connected dc
motors, and universal motors.
Introduction to this chapter:
In this chapter and the next, we consider machines that convert mechanical energy
to and from electrical energy. Motors convert electrical energy into rotational
mechanical energy. Conversely, generators convert mechanical energy into
electrical energy. Most electrical machines can be used either as motors or as

generators.
Electrical motors are used to power hundreds of the devices that we use in everyday
life, such as computer disks, refrigerators, garage-door openers, washing machines,
food mixers, vacuum cleaners, DVD players, ventilation fans, automotive power
windows, windshield wipers, elevators, and so on. Industrial applications include
bulk material handling, machining operations, pumps, rock crushers, fans,
compressors, and hoists. Electrical motors are the best choice in the vast majority of
stationary applications where mechanical energy is needed, whether it is a tiny
fraction of a horsepower or thousands of horsepower. It is important for designers of
mechanical systems that employ motors to have a good understanding of the
external characteristics of various motors so they can choose the proper types to
power their systems.

15.1 Overview of Motors
We will see that there are many kinds of electrical motors. In this section, we give a brief overview of
electrical motors, their specifications, and operating characteristics. Then, in the remainder of this
chapter, we discuss dc machines in detail. In Chapter 16, we treat ac machines. We cite the three-
phase ac induction motor as an example frequently in this section because it is the type in most
widespread use. However, many of the concepts discussed in this section apply to other types of
electrical motors as well.
You will find this section useful both as a preview of motor characteristics and as
a convenient summary after you finish studying this chapter and the next.
Basic Construction
An electrical motor consists of a stationary part, or stator, and a rotor, which is the rotating part
connected to a shaft that couples the machine to its mechanical load. The shaft and rotor are supported
by bearings so that they can rotate freely. This is illustrated in Figure 15.1.
Figure 15.1
An electrical motor consists of a cylindrical rotor that spins inside a stator.
Depending on the type of machine, either the stator or the rotor (or both) contains current-carrying
conductors configured into coils. Slots are cut into the stator and rotor to contain the windings and their
insulation. Currents in the windings set up magnetic fields and interact with fields to produce torque.

Usually, the stator and the rotor are made of iron to intensify the magnetic field. As in transformers, if the
magnetic field alternates in direction through the iron with time, the iron must be laminated to avoid large
power losses due to eddy currents. (In certain parts of some machines, the field is steady and
lamination is not necessary.)
The characteristics of several common types of machines are summarized in Table 15.1. At this point,
many of the entries in the table will probably not be very meaningful to you, particularly if this is the first
time that you have studied rotating electrical machinery. However, as we progress through this chapter
and the next, the table will become a useful tool for comparing the various types of motors. Also, it will
provide a convenient starting point for you when you face the problem of selecting the proper motor for
one of your systems.
Table 15.1. Characteristics of Electrical Motors

Armature and Field Windings
The purpose of the field winding is to set up the magnetic field required to
produce torque.
As we have mentioned, a machine may contain several sets of windings. In most types of machines, a
given winding can be classified either as a field winding or as an armature winding. (We avoid
classification of armature and field windings for induction motors and simply refer to stator windings and
rotor conductors.) The primary purpose of a field winding is to set up the magnetic field in the machine.
The current in the field winding is independent of the mechanical load imposed on the motor (except in
series-connected motors). On the other hand, the armature winding carries a current that depends on
the mechanical power produced. Typically, the armature current amplitude is small when the load is light
and larger for heavier loads. If the machine acts as a generator, the electrical output is taken from the
armature. In some machines, the field is produced by permanent magnets (PMs), and a field winding is
not needed.
Table 15.1 shows the location (stator or rotor) of the field and armature windings for some common
machine types. For example, in three-phase synchronous ac machines, the field winding is on the rotor,
and the armature is on the stator. In other machines, such as the wound-field dc machine, the locations
are reversed. You may find it convenient to refer to Table 15.1 from time to time throughout this chapter
and the next to help avoid confusion between the different types of machines.
The armature windings carry currents that vary with mechanical load. When the
machine is used as a generator, the output is taken from the armature windings.
AC Motors

Motors can be powered from either ac or dc sources. Ac power can be either single phase or three
phase. (Three-phase ac sources and circuits are discussed in Section 5.7.) Ac motors include several
types:
1. Induction motors, which are the most common type because they have relatively simple rugged
construction and good operating characteristics.
2. Synchronous motors, which run at constant speed regardless of load torque, assuming that the
frequency of the electrical source is constant, which is usually the case. Three-phase
synchronous machines generate most of the electrical energy used in the world.
3. A variety of special-purpose types.
About two-thirds of the electrical energy generated in the United States is consumed by motors. Of this,
well over half is used by induction motors. Thus, you are likely to encounter ac induction motors very
frequently. We discuss the various types of ac motors in Chapter 16.
DC Motors
Dc motors are those that are powered from dc sources. One of the difficulties with dc motors is that
nearly all electrical energy is distributed as ac. If only ac power is available and we need to use a dc
motor, a rectifier or some other converter must be used to convert ac to dc. This adds to the expense of
the system. Thus, ac machines are usually preferable if they meet the needs of the application.
Exceptions are automotive applications in which dc is readily available from the battery. Dc motors are
employed for starting, windshield wipers, fans, and power windows.
Dc motors are common in automotive applications.
In the most common types of dc motors, the direction of the current in the armature conductors on the
rotor is reversed periodically during rotation. This is accomplished with a mechanical switch composed
of brushes mounted on the stator and a commutator mounted on the shaft. The commutator consists
of conducting segments insulated from one another. Each commutator segment is connected to some of
the armature conductors (on the rotor). The brushes are in sliding contact with the commutator. As the

commutator rotates, switching action caused by the brushes moving from one segment to another
changes the direction of current in the armature conductors. We explain this in more detail later; the
important point here is that the brushes and commutator are subject to wear, and a significant
disadvantage of dc motors is their relatively frequent need for maintenance.
A significant disadvantage of dc motors is the need for relatively frequent
maintenance of brushes and commutators.
Until recently, an important advantage of dc motors was that their speed and direction could be
controlled more readily than those of ac motors. However, this advantage is rapidly disappearing
because electronic systems that can vary the frequency of an ac source have become economically
advantageous. These variable-frequency sources can be used with simple rugged ac induction motors
to achieve speed control.
Nevertheless, dc motors are still useful in some control applications and wherever dc power is readily
available, such as in vehicles. Later in this chapter, we examine the various types of dc motors in more
detail.
Losses, Power Ratings, and Efficiency
Figure 15.2 depicts the flow of power from a three-phase electrical source through an induction motor to
a mechanical load such as a pump. Part of the electrical power is lost (converted to heat) due to
resistance of the windings, hysteresis, and eddy currents. Similarly, some of the power that is converted
to mechanical form is lost due to friction and windage (i.e., moving the air surrounding the rotor and
shaft). Part of the power loss to windage is sometimes intentional, because fan blades to promote
cooling are fabricated as an integral part of the rotor.

Figure 15.2
Power flows left to right from a three-phase electrical source into an induction motor and then to a
mechanical load. Some of the power is lost along the way due to various causes.
The electrical input power 
 in watts, supplied by the three-phase source is given by
where 
 is the rms value of the line-to-line voltage, 
 is the rms value of the line current, and
 is the power factor.
The mechanical output power is
in which 
 is the output power in watts, 
 is the output torque in newton-meters, and 
 is the
angular speed of the load in radians per second.
Rotational speed may be given in revolutions per minute denoted by 
 or in radians per second
denoted by 
 These quantities are related by
Also, torque may be given in foot-pounds instead of in newton-meters. The conversion relationship is
Pin,
Pin=3VrmsIrms cos(θ)
(15.1)
Vrms
Irms
cos(θ)
Pout=Toutωm
(15.2)
Pout
Tout
ωm
nm,
ωm.
ωm=nm×2π60
(15.3)
Tfoot pounds=Tnewton meters×0.7376
(15.4)

In the United States, the mechanical output power for a given electric motor is frequently stated in
horsepower (hp). To convert from watts to horsepower, we have
The power rating of a motor is the output power that the motor can safely produce on a continuous
basis. For example, we can safely operate a 5-hp motor with a load that absorbs 5 hp of mechanical
power. If the power required by the load is reduced, the motor draws less input power from the electrical
source, and in the case of an induction motor, speeds up slightly. It is important to realize that most
motors can supply output power varying from zero to several times their rated power, depending on the
mechanical load. It is up to the system designer to ensure that the motor is not overloaded.
It is up to the system designer to ensure that the motor is not overloaded.
The chief output power limitation of motors is their temperature rise due to losses. Thus, a brief overload
that does not cause significant rise in temperature is often acceptable.
The power efficiency of a motor is given by
Well-designed electrical motors operating close to their rated capacity have efficiencies in the range of
85 to 95 percent. On the other hand, if the motor is called upon to produce only a small fraction of its
rated power, its efficiency is generally much lower.
Torque-Speed Characteristics
Consider a system in which a three-phase induction motor drives a load such as a pump. Figure 15.3
shows the torque produced by the motor versus speed. (In Chapter 16, we will see why the torque-
speed characteristic of the induction motor has this shape.) The torque required to drive the load is also
shown. Suppose that the system is at a standstill and then a switch is closed connecting the electrical
source to the motor. At low speeds, the torque produced by the motor is larger than that needed to drive
the load. The excess torque causes the system to accelerate. Eventually, the speed stabilizes at the
Phorsepower=Pwatts746
(15.5)
η=PoutPin×100%
(15.6)

point for which the torque produced by the motor equals the torque needed to drive the load.
Figure 15.3
The torque-speed characteristics of an induction motor and a load consisting of a pump. In steady state,
the system operates at the point for which the torque produced by the motor equals the torque required
by the load.
Now consider the torque-speed characteristics for a three-phase induction motor and a load consisting
of a hoist shown in Figure 15.4. Here, the starting torque of the motor is less than that demanded by the
load. Thus, if power is applied from a standing start, the system does not move. In this case, excessive
currents are drawn by the motor, and unless fuses or other protection equipment disconnect the source,
the motor could overheat and be destroyed.
Figure 15.4
This system will not start from a standstill because the motor cannot supply the starting torque
demanded by the load.
Even though the motor cannot start the load shown in Figure 15.4, notice that the motor is capable of
keeping the load moving once the speed exceeds 
 Perhaps this could be accomplished with a
mechanical clutch.
Designers must be able to choose motors having torque-speed characteristics
appropriate for various loads.
n1.

The various types of motors have different torque-speed characteristics. Some examples are shown in
Figure 15.5. It is important for the system designer to choose a motor suitable for the load
requirements.
Figure 15.5
Torque versus speed characteristics for the most common types of electrical motors.
Speed Regulation
Depending on the torque-speed characteristics, a motor may slow down as the torque demanded by the
load increases. Speed regulation is defined as the difference between the no-load speed and the full-
load speed, expressed as a percentage of the full-load speed:
Synchronous-Motor Operating Characteristics
The torque-speed characteristic for ac synchronous motors is shown in Figure 15.5(b). The operating
speed of a synchronous motor is constant and is given by
speed regulation=nno load−nfull loadnfull load×100%
(15.7)
ωs=2ωP
(15.8)

in which  is the angular frequency of the ac source and P is the number of magnetic poles possessed
by the machine. (We examine the internal structure of these machines in Section 16.3.) In rpm, the
synchronous speed is
in which f is the frequency of the ac source in hertz.
Synchronous motors operate at 
 rpm or one of its submultiples. If the
frequency f is fixed and if none of the available speeds is suitable for the load,
some other type of motor is needed.
We will see that the number of magnetic poles P is always an even integer. Substituting various values
for P into Equation 15.9 and assuming 60-Hz operation, the available speeds are 3600 rpm, 1800 rpm,
1200 rpm, 900 rpm, and so on. If some other speed is required, a synchronous machine is usually not a
good choice. (Electronic systems known as cycloconverters can be used to convert 60-Hz power into
any des­ired frequency. Thus, this speed limitation can be circumvented at additional cost.)
As shown in Figure 15.5(b), the starting torque of a synchronous motor is zero. Therefore, special
provisions must be made for starting. We will see that one approach is to operate the motor as an
induction motor with reduced load until the speed approaches synchronous speed, and then to switch to
synchronous operation.
The starting torque of a synchronous motor is zero.
Induction-Motor Operating Characteristics
ω
ns=120fP
(15.9)
(60 × f)

Induction motors have starting torques that are comparable to their rated full-load
torques.
The torque-speed characteristic typical of an induction motor is shown in Figure 15.5(a). The motor has
good starting torque. In normal operation, the speed of an induction motor is only slightly less than
synchronous speed, which is given by Equations 15.8 and 15.9. For example, at full load, a typical four-
pole 
 induction motor runs at 1750 rpm, and at no load, its speed approaches 1800 rpm. The
comments given earlier about speed limitations of synchronous motors also apply to induction motors.
Induction motors operate in narrow ranges of speed that are slightly less than
 rpm or one of its submultiples. If the frequency is fixed, the speeds
available may not be suitable for the load.
During startup, the current drawn by an induction motor can be many times larger than its rated full-load
current. To avoid excessive currents, large induction motors are usually started with reduced voltage. As
you might expect, the torque produced by a motor depends on the applied voltage. At a given speed,
the torque of an induction motor is proportional to the square of the magnitude of the voltage applied to
the armature. When starting a motor at, say, half of its rated voltage, its torque is one-fourth of its value
at rated voltage.
Shunt-Connected DC Motor Operating Characteristics
Dc motors contain field windings on the stator and armature windings located on the rotor. Depending
on whether the field windings are connected in shunt (i.e., parallel) or in series with the armature
windings, the torque-speed characteristics are quite different. We examine why this is true later in this
chapter.
The torque-speed characteristic of the shunt-connected dc motor is shown in Figure 15.5(c). The
shunt-connected motor has very high starting torque and draws very large starting currents. Usually,
resistance is inserted in series with the armature during starting to limit the current to reasonable levels.
(P=4)
(60 × f)

For fixed supply voltage and fixed field current, the shunt dc machine shows only a small variation in
speed within its normal operating range. However, we will see that several methods can be used to shift
the torque-speed characteristic of the shunt motor to achieve excellent speed control. Unlike ac
induction and synchronous motors, the speeds of dc motors are not limited to specific values.
Dc motors can be designed to operate over a wide range of speeds.
Series-Connected DC Motor Operating Characteristics
The torque-speed characteristic of the series dc motor is shown in Figure 15.5(d). The series-
connected dc motor has moderate starting torque and starting current. Its speed automatically adjusts
over a large range as the load torque varies. Because it slows down for heavier loads, its output power
is more nearly constant than for other motor types. This is advantageous because the motor can
operate within its maximum power rating for a wide range of load torque. The starter motor in
automobiles is a series dc motor. When the engine is cold and stiff, the starter motor operates at a lower
speed. On the other hand, when the engine is warm, the starter spins faster. In either case, the current
drawn from the battery remains within acceptable limits. (On the other hand, without sophisticated
controls, a shunt motor would attempt to turn the load at a constant speed and would draw too much
current in starting a cold engine.)
In some cases, the no-load speed of a series dc motor can be excessive—to the point of being
dangerous. A control system that disconnects the motor from the electrical source is needed if the
possibility of losing the mechanical load exists. We will see that a very useful type of ac motor known as
a universal motor is essentially identical to the series-connected dc motor.
Example 15.1 Motor Performance Calculations
A certain 5-hp three-phase induction motor operates from a 440-V-rms (line-to-line) three-phase
source and draws a line current of 6.8 A rms at a power factor of 78 percent lagging [i.e.,
] under rated full-load conditions. The full-load speed is 1150 rpm. Under no-load
conditions, the speed is 1195 rpm, and the line current is 1.2 A rms at a power factor of 30 percent
lagging. Find the power loss and efficiency with full load, the input power with no load, and the speed
regulation.
cos(θ)=0.78

Solution
The rated output power is 5 hp. Converting to watts, we have
Substituting into Equation 15.1, we find the input power under full load:
The power loss is given by
The full-load efficiency is
Under no-load conditions, we have
and the efficiency is
Speed regulation for the motor is given by Equation 15.7. Substituting values, we get
Now that we have presented an overall view of electrical motors, we will make a more detailed
examination of the most common and useful types. In the remainder of this chapter, we consider dc
machines, and in Chapter 16, we discuss ac machines.
Exercise 15.1 
A certain 50-hp dc motor operates from a 220-V dc source with losses of 3350 W under rated full-load
conditions. The full-load speed is 1150 rpm. Under no-load conditions, the speed is 1200 rpm. Find the
source current, the efficiency with full load, and the speed regulation.
Answer 
 speed 
Pout=5×746=3730 W
Pin
=3VrmsIrms cos(θ)
=3(440)(6.8)(0.78)=4042 W
Ploss=Pin−Pout=4042−3730=312 W
η=PoutPin×100%=37304042×100%=92.28%
Pin
=3(440)(1.2)(0.30)=274.4 W
Pout
=0
Ploss
=Pin=274.4 W
η=0%
speed regulation
=nno load−nfull loadnfull load×100%
=1195−11501150×100%=3.91%
Isource=184.8 A, η=91.76 percent,
regulation=4.35 percent.

Exercise 15.2 
Consider the torque-speed characteristics shown in Figure 15.5.
a. Which type of motor would have the most difficulty in starting a high-inertia load from a standing
start?
b. Which type of motor would have the poorest (i.e., largest) speed regulation in its normal operating
range?
c. Which would have the best (i.e., smallest) speed regulation?
d. Which has the best combination of high starting torque and good speed regulation?
e. Which should not be operated without a load?
Answer 
a. The synchronous motor, because its starting torque is zero;
b. the series-connected dc motor;
c. the synchronous motor;
d. the ac induction motor;
e. the series-connected dc motor because the speed can become excessive for zero load torque.

15.2 Principles of DC Machines
In this section, we introduce the basic principles of dc machines by considering the idealized linear
machine shown in Figure 15.6. Later, we will see that the operation of rotating dc machines is very
similar to that of this simple linear machine. In Figure 15.6, a dc voltage source 
 is connected through
a resistance 
 and a switch that closes at 
 to a pair of conducting rails. A conducting bar slides
without friction on the rails. We assume that the rails and the bar have zero resistance. A magnetic field
is directed into the page, perpendicular to the plane of the rails and the bar.
Figure 15.6
A simple dc machine consisting of a conducting bar sliding on conducting rails.
Study of the idealized linear dc machine clearly demonstrates how the principles
of electromagnetism apply to dc machines in general.
Suppose that the bar is stationary when the switch is closed at 
 Then, just after the switch is closed,
an initial current given by 
 flows clockwise around the circuit. A force given by
is exerted on the bar. The direction of the current (and l) is toward the bottom of the page. Thus, the
force is directed to the right. Because the current and the field are mutually perpendicular, the force
magnitude is given by
VT
RA
t=0
t=0.
iA(0+)=VT/RA
f=iAl×B
(15.10)

This force causes the bar to be accelerated toward the right. As the bar gains velocity u and cuts
through the magnetic field lines, a voltage is induced across the bar. The voltage is positive at the top
end of the bar and is given by Equation 15.9 (with a change in notation):
An equivalent circuit for the system is shown in Figure 15.7. Notice that the induced voltage 
 opposes
the source 
 The current is
Figure 15.7
Equivalent circuit for the linear machine operating as a motor.
As the velocity of the bar builds up, energy is absorbed by the induced voltage 
 and this energy
shows up as the kinetic energy of the bar. Eventually, the bar speed becomes high enough that 
Then, the current and the force become zero, and the bar coasts at constant velocity.
Operation as a Motor
Now, suppose that a mechanical load exerting a force to the left is connected to the moving bar. Then,
the bar slows down slightly, resulting in a reduction in the induced voltage 
 Current flows clockwise in
the circuit, resulting in a magnetically induced force directed to the right. Eventually, the bar slows just
enough so that the force created by the magnetic field 
 equals the load force. Then, the system
moves at constant velocity.
In this situation, power delivered by the source 
 is converted partly to heat in the resistance 
 and
partly to mechanical power. It is the power 
 delivered to the induced voltage that shows up as
mechanical power 
f=iAlB
(15.11)
eA=Blu
(15.12)
eA
VT.
iA=VT−eARA
(15.13)
eA,
eA=VT.
eA.
(f=iAlB)
VT
RA
p=eAiA
p=fu.

Operation as a Generator
Again suppose that the bar is moving at constant velocity such that 
 and the current is zero.
Then, if a force is applied pulling the bar even faster toward the right, the bar speeds up, the induced
voltage 
 exceeds the source voltage 
 and current circulates counterclockwise as illustrated in
Figure 15.8. Because the current has reversed direction, the force induced in the bar by the field also
reverses and points to the left. Eventually, the bar speed stabilizes with the pulling force equal to the
induced force. Then, the induced voltage delivers power 
 partly to the resistance 
and partly to the battery 
 Thus, mechanical energy is converted into electrical energy that
eventually shows up as loss (i.e., heat) in the resistance or as stored chemical energy in the battery.
Figure 15.8
Equivalent circuit for the linear machine operating as a generator.
Example 15.2 Idealized Linear Machine
Suppose that for the linear machine shown in Figure 15.6, we have 
 and
a. Assuming that the bar is stationary at 
 compute the initial current and the initial force on
the bar. Also, determine the final (i.e., steady-state) speed assuming that no mechanical load
is applied to the bar.
b. Now, suppose that a mechanical load of 4 N directed to the left is applied to the moving bar.
In steady state, determine the speed, the power delivered by 
 the power delivered to the
mechanical load, the power lost to heat in the resistance 
 and the efficiency.
c. Now, suppose that a mechanical pulling force of 2 N directed to the right is applied to the
moving bar. In steady state, determine the speed, the power taken from the mechanical
source, the power delivered to the battery, the power lost to heat in the resistance 
 and
the efficiency.
Solution
a. Initially, for 
 we have 
 and the initial current is given by
eA=VT
eA
VT,
p=eAiA,
(pR=RAiA2)
(pt=VTiA).
B=1 T, l=0.3 m, VT=2 V,
R=0.05 Ω.
t=0,
VT,
RA,
RA,
u=0,
eA=0,

The resulting initial force on the bar is
In steady state with no load, the induced voltage equals the battery voltage. Thus, we have
Solving for the velocity and substituting values, we get
b. Because the mechanical force opposes the motion of the bar, we have motor action. In
steady state, the net force on the bar is zero—the force created by the magnetic field equals
the load force. Thus, we obtain
Solving for the current and substituting values, we find that
From the circuit shown in Figure 15.7, we have
Now, we can find the steady-state speed:
The mechanical power delivered to the load is
The power taken from the battery is
The power dissipated in the resistance is
As a check, we note that 
 to within rounding error. Finally, the efficiency of
converting electrical power from the battery into mechanical power is
c. With a pulling force applied to the bar to the right, the bar speeds up, the induced voltage
exceeds 
 and current circulates counterclockwise, as illustrated in Figure 15.8. Thus, the
iA(0+)=VTRA=20.05=40 A
f(0+)=BliA(0+)=1(0.3)40=12 N
eA=Blu=VT
u=VTBl=21(0.3)=6.667 m/s
f=BliA=fload
iA=floadBl=41(0.3)=13.33 A
eA=VT−RAiA=2−0.05(13.33)=1.333 V
u=eABl=1.3331(0.3)=4.444 m/s
pm=floadu=4(4.444)=17.77 W
pt=VTiA=2(13.33)=26.67 W
pR=iA2R=(13.33)2×0.05=8.889 W
pt=pm+pR
η=pmpt×100%=17.7726.67×100%=66.67%
VT,

machine operates as a generator. In steady state, the force induced by the field is directed to
the left and equals the pulling force. Thus, we have
Solving for 
 and substituting values, we find that
From the circuit shown in Figure 15.8, we obtain
Now, we can find the steady-state speed:
The mechanical power delivered by the pulling force is
The power absorbed by the battery is
The power dissipated in the resistance is
As a check, we note that 
 to within rounding error. Finally, the efficiency of
converting mechanical power into electrical power charging the battery is
In Example 15.2, we have seen that only modest forces (12 N) were produced on a conductor carrying
a fairly large current (40 A). The force could be increased by using a longer conductor, but this
increases the size of the machine. Another option would be to increase the field strength. However,
because of the fact that magnetic materials used in motors saturate in the neighborhood of 1 T, it is not
practical to increase the forces on conductors greatly by increasing the field.
On the other hand, a cylindrical rotor containing many conductors is a practical way to obtain large
forces in a compact design. Furthermore, rotary motion is more useful than translation in many
applications. Thus, most (but not all) practical motors are based on rotational motion. We study rotating
dc machines in the remaining sections of this chapter.
Exercise 15.3 
Repeat the calculations of Example 15.2 if the field strength is doubled to 2 T.
f=BliA=fpull
iA
iA=fpullBl=21(0.3)=6.667 A
eA=VT+RAiA=2+0.05(6.67)=2.333 V
u=eABl=2.3331(0.3)=7.778 m/s
pm=fpullu=2(7.778)=15.56 W
pt=VTiA=2(6.667)=13.33 W
pR=iA2R=(6.667)2×0.05=2.222 W
pm=pt+pR
η=ptpm×100%=13.3315.56×100%=85.67%

Answer 
a. 
b. 
c. 
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
15.1 Magnetic Flowmeters, Faraday, and The Hunt for Red October
Flowmeters measure the flow rate of liquids through pipes and are very important sensors in
chemical-process-control systems. A commonly used type is the magnetic flowmeter (also called
a magflow), which operates on the same principles as the linear machine discussed in Section
15.2.
The basic operation of a magflow is illustrated in Figure PA15.1. Coils set up a vertical magnetic
field in the fluid, and electrodes are located at opposite sides of the pipe, which is lined with an
electrical insulating material such as ceramic or epoxy resin. Thus, the magnetic field, the
direction of flow, and the line between the electrodes are mutually perpendicular. As the
conductive fluid moves through the magnetic field, a voltage proportional to velocity is induced
between the electrodes. The flow rate can be determined by multiplying the cross-sectional area
of the pipe times the velocity. Hence, the meter measures the induced voltage, but can be
calibrated in units of volumetric flow.
FIGURE
PA15.1
A magnetic flowmeter.
iA(0+)=40 A, f(0+)=24 N, u=3.333 m/s;
iA=6.667, eA=1.667, u=2.778 m/s, pm=11.11 W, pt=13.33 W, pR=2.22 W, η=83.33%;
iA=3.333 A, eA=2.167 V, u=3.612 m/s, pm=7.222 W, pt=6.667 W, pR=0.555 W, η=92.3%.

Faraday realized the potential for using his law of electromagnetic induction to measure water
flow, and attempted to measure the flow rate of the Thames River with a device suspended from
a bridge. However, lacking the advantages of modern electronics, he was not successful.
In modern meters, an electronic amplifier is used to amplify the induced voltage. In many units,
this voltage is converted to digital form by an analog-to-digital converter and processed by a
microcomputer that drives a display or sends data to a central plant-control computer.
If the fluid has low electrical conductivity, the Thévenin resistance seen looking into the electrode
terminals is very high. Then, it is important for the amplifier input impedance to be very high;
otherwise, the observed voltage would vary with changes in electrical conductivity of the fluid,
leading to gross inaccuracies in flow rate. Of course, it is important for chemical engineers
employing magflows to understand this limitation. Even with their limitations, well-designed
meters are available for a wide range of applications.
As a meter, the magflow acts as a generator. However, it can also act as a motor if an electrical
current is passed through the fluid between the electrodes. Then force is exerted directly on the
fluid by the interaction of the magnetic field with the electrical current. Of course, if we wanted to
build a pump based on this approach, we would want a fluid with high conductivity, such as
seawater. We would also need a strong magnetic field and high current. By making these
modifications, a powerful pump can be constructed. This is the operating principle of the
ultraquiet submarine propulsion system mentioned by Tom Clancy in The Hunt for Red October.
Such a system can be very quiet because force is applied smoothly and directly to the seawater
without rotating parts or valves that could cause vibration.
Sources: Ian Robertson, "Magnetic flowmeters: the whole story," The Chemical Engineer, February 24, 1994, pp. 17-18; The Magmeter Flowmeter
Homepage, http://www.magmeter.com.

15.3 Rotating DC Machines
We have gained some familiarity with basic principles of dc machines from our analysis of the linear
machine in the preceding section. In this section, we will see that the same principles apply to rotating
dc machines.
The basic principles of rotating dc machines are the same as those of the linear
dc machine.
Structure of the Rotor and Stator
The most common type of dc machine contains a cylindrical stator with an even number P of magnetic
poles that are established by field windings or by PMs. The poles alternate between north and south
around the periphery of the stator.
Inside the stator is a rotor consisting of a laminated iron cylinder mounted on a shaft that is supported by
bearings so that it can rotate. Slots cut lengthwise into the surface of the rotor contain the armature
windings. A rotor with armature conductors (and other features to be discussed shortly) is illustrated in
Figure 15.9.
Figure 15.9

Rotor assembly of a dc machine.
The cross section of a two-pole machine showing the flux lines in the air gap is illustrated in Figure
15.10. Magnetic flux tends to take the path of least reluctance. Because the reluctance of air is much
higher than that of iron, the flux takes the shortest path from the stator into the rotor. Thus, the flux in the
air gap is perpendicular to the surface of the rotor and to the armature conductors. Furthermore, the flux
density is nearly constant in magnitude over the surface of each pole face. Between poles, the gap flux
density is small in magnitude.
Figure 15.10
Cross section of a two-pole dc machine.
In a motor, external electrical sources provide the currents in the field windings and in the armature
conductors. The current directions shown in Figure 15.10 result in a counterclockwise torque. This can
be verified by applying the equation 
 that gives the force on a current-carrying conductor.
The cross section of a four-pole machine is shown in Figure 15.11. Notice that the directions of the
currents in the armature must be reversed under south poles relative to the direction under the north
poles to achieve aiding contributions to total torque.
f=il×B

Figure 15.11
Cross section of a four-pole dc machine.
Induced EMF and Commutation
As the rotor turns, the conductors move through the magnetic field produced by the stator. Under the
pole faces, the conductors, the field, and the direction of motion are mutually perpendicular, just as in
the linear machine discussed in Section 15.2. Thus, a nearly constant voltage is induced in each
conductor as it moves under a pole. However, as the conductors move between poles, the field direction
reverses. Therefore, the induced voltages fall to zero and build up with the opposite polarity. A
mechanical switch known as a commutator reverses the connections to the conductors as they move
between poles so that the polarity of the induced voltage seen from the external machine terminals is
constant.
The commutator and brushes form a mechanical switch that reverses the
external connections to conductors as they move from pole to pole.
Let us illustrate these points with a two-pole machine containing one armature coil, as shown in Figure
15.12. In this case, the ends of the coil are attached to a two-segment commutator mounted on the
shaft. The segments are insulated from one another and from the shaft. Brushes mounted to the stator
make electrical contact with the commutator segments. (For clarity, we have shown the brushes inside
the commutator, but in a real machine, they ride on the outside surface of the commutator. A more

realistic version of the commutator and brushes was shown in Figure 15.9.)
Figure 15.12
Commutation for a single armature winding.
Notice that as the rotor turns in Figure 15.12, the left-hand brush is connected to the conductor under
the south stator pole, and the right-hand brush is connected to the conductor under the north stator pole.
The voltage 
 induced across the terminals of the coil is an ac voltage, as shown in the figure. As
mentioned earlier, this voltage passes through zero when the conductors are between poles where the
flux density goes to zero. While the conductors are under the pole faces where the flux density is
constant, the induced voltage has nearly constant magnitude. Because the commutator reverses the
external connections to the coil as it rotates, the voltage 
 seen at the external terminals is of constant
polarity.
Notice that the brushes short the armature winding briefly during the switching process. This occurs
because the brushes are wider than the insulation between commutator segments. This shorting is not a
problem, provided that the voltage is small when it occurs. (Actual machines have various provisions to
ensure that the coil voltage is close to zero during commutation for all operating conditions.)
Commutators in typical machines contain 20 to 50 segments. Because only part of the coils are
commutated at a time, the terminal voltage of a real machine shows relatively little fluctuation compared
to the two-segment example that we used for the illustration of concepts. The terminal voltage of an
vad
vT

actual dc machine is shown in Figure 15.13.
Figure 15.13
Voltage produced by a practical dc machine. Because only a few (out of many) conductors are
commutated (switched) at a time, the voltage fluctuations are less pronounced than in the single-loop
case illustrated in Figure 15.12.
Generally, the commutator segments are copper bars insulated from one another and from the shaft.
The brushes contain graphite that lubricates the sliding contact. Even so, a significant disadvantage of
dc machines is the need to replace brushes and redress the commutator surface because of mechanical
wear.
Actual armatures consist of a large number of conductors placed around the circumference of the rotor.
To attain high terminal voltages, many conductors are placed in series, forming coils. Furthermore, there
are usually several parallel current paths through the armature. The armature conductors and their
connections to the commutator are configured so that the currents flow in the opposite direction under
south stator poles than they do under north stator poles. As mentioned earlier, this is necessary so that
the forces on the conductors produce aiding torques. The construction details needed to produce these
conditions are beyond the scope of our discussion. As a user of electrical motors, you will find the
external behavior of machines more helpful than the details of their internal design.
Equivalent Circuit of the DC Motor
The equivalent circuit of the dc motor is shown in Figure 15.14. The field circuit is represented by a
resistance 
 and an inductance 
 in series. We consider steady-state operation in which the currents
are constant, and we can neglect the inductance because it behaves as a short circuit for dc currents.
Thus, for dc field currents, we have
RF
LF

Figure 15.14
Equivalent circuit for the rotating dc machine.
The voltage 
 shown in the equivalent circuit represents the average voltage induced in the armature
due to the motion of the conductors relative to the magnetic field. In a motor, 
 is sometimes called a
back emf (electromotive force) because it opposes the applied external electrical source. The
resistance 
 is the resistance of the armature windings plus the brush resistance. (Sometimes, the
drop across the brushes is estimated as a constant voltage of about 2 V rather than as a resistance.
However, in this book, we lump the brush drop with the armature resistance.)
The induced armature voltage is given by
in which K is a machine constant that depends on the design parameters of the machine,  is the
magnetic flux produced by each stator pole, and 
 is the angular velocity of the rotor.
The torque developed in the machine is given by
in which 
 is the armature current. (We will see that the output torque of a dc motor is less than the
developed torque because of friction and other rotational losses.)
The developed power is the power converted to mechanical form, which is given by the product of
developed torque and angular velocity:
This is the power delivered to the induced armature voltage, and therefore, is also given by
VF=RFIF
(15.14)
EA
EA
RA
EA=Kϕωm
(15.15)
ϕ
ωm
Tdev=KϕIA
(15.16)
IA
Pdev=ωmTdev
(15.17)

Magnetization Curve
The magnetization curve of a dc machine is a plot of 
 versus the field current
 with the machine being driven at a constant speed.
The magnetization curve of a dc machine is a plot of 
 versus the field current 
 with the machine
being driven at a constant speed. (
 can be found by measuring the open-circuit voltage at the
armature terminals.) A typical magnetization curve is shown in Figure 15.15.
Figure 15.15
Magnetization curve for a 200-V 10-hp dc motor.
Because 
 is proportional to the flux 
 the magnetization curve has the same shape as a  versus 
plot, which depends on the parameters of the magnetic circuit for the field. The magnetization curve
flattens out for high field currents due to magnetic saturation of the iron. Of course, different machines
usually have differently shaped magnetization curves.
The equivalent circuit, Equations 15.14 through 15.19, and the magnetization
Pdev=EAIA
(15.18)
EA
IF
EA
IF
EA
EA
ϕ,
ϕ
IF

curve are the key elements needed to solve dc machine problems.
As Equation 15.15 shows, the induced armature voltage 
 is directly proportional to speed. If 
represents the voltage at speed 
 and 
 is the voltage at a second speed 
 we have
Equations 15.14 through 15.19, in combination with the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 15.14 and
the magnetization curve, provide the basis for analyzing a dc machine.
Example 15.3 DC Machine Performance Calculations
The machine having the magnetization curve shown in Figure 15.15 is operating as a motor at a
speed of 800 rpm with 
 and 
 The armature resistance is 
 and the field
resistance is 
 Find the voltage 
 applied to the field circuit, the voltage 
 applied to the
armature, the developed torque, and the developed power.
Solution
Equation 15.14 allows us to find the voltage for the field coil:
From the magnetization curve, we see that the induced voltage is 
 at 
 and
 Rearranging Equation 15.19, we can find the induced voltage 
 for 
The machine speed in radians per second is
Rearranging Equation 15.15, we have
From Equation 15.16, the developed torque is
EA
EA1
n1,
EA2
n2,
EA1EA2=n1n2=ω1ω2
(15.19)
IA=30 A
IF=2.5 A.
0.3 Ω
RF = 50 Ω.
VF
VT
VF=RFIF=50×2.5=125 V
EA1=145 V
IF=2.5 A
n1=1200 rpm.
EA2
n2=800 rpm:
EA2=n2n1×EA1=8001200×145=96.67 V
ωm=n2×2π60=800×2π60=83.78 rad/s
Kϕ=EAωm=96.6783.78=1.154

The developed power is
As a check, we can also compute the developed power by using Equation 15.18:
Applying Kirchhoff's voltage law to the armature circuit in Figure 15.14, we have
Exercise 15.4 
Find the voltage 
 for the machine having the magnetization curve shown in Figure 15.15 for 
and a speed of 1500 rpm.
Answer 
Exercise 15.5 
The machine having the magnetization curve shown in Figure 15.15 is operating as a motor at a speed
of 1500 rpm with a developed power of 10 hp and 
 The armature resistance is 
 and the
field resistance is 
 Find the developed torque, the armature current 
 and the voltage 
applied to the armature circuit.
Answer 
In the next several sections, we will see that different torque-speed characteristics can result,
depending on how the field windings and the armature are connected to the dc source.
Tdev=KϕIA=1.154×30=34.62 Nm
Pdev=ωmTdev=2900 W
Pdev=IAEA=30×96.67=2900 W
VT=RAIA+EA=0.3(30)+96.67=105.67
EA
IF=2 A
EA≅156 V.
IF=2.5 A.
0.3 Ω
RF=50 Ω.
IA,
VT
Tdev=47.49 Nm, IA=41.16 A, VT=193.6 V.

15.4 Shunt-Connected and Separately Excited DC Motors
In a shunt-connected dc machine, the field circuit is in parallel with the armature, as shown in Figure
15.16. The field circuit consists of a rheostat having a variable resistance, denoted as 
 in series
with the field coil. Later, we will see that the rheostat can be used to adjust the torque-speed
characteristic of the machine.
Figure 15.16
Equivalent circuit of a shunt-connected dc motor. 
 is a rheostat that can be used to adjust motor
speed.
By designing the field windings to be connected either in parallel or in series with
the armature, we can obtain drastically different torque-speed characteristics.
We assume that the machine is supplied by a constant voltage source 
 The resistance of the
armature circuit is 
 and the induced voltage is 
 We denote the mechanical shaft speed as 
and the developed torque as 
Power Flow
Radj,
Radj
VT.
RA,
EA.
ωm
Tdev.

Figure 15.17 shows the flow of power in the shunt-connected dc machine. The electrical source
supplies an input power given by the product of the supply voltage and the line current 
Figure 15.17
Power flow in a shunt-connected dc motor.
Some of this power is used to establish the field. The power absorbed by the field circuit is converted to
heat. The field loss is given by
Furthermore, armature loss occurs due to heating of the armature resistance:
Sometimes, the sum of the field loss and armature loss is called copper loss.
The power delivered to the induced armature voltage is converted to mechanical form and is called the
developed power, given by
in which 
 is the developed torque.
The output power 
 and output torque 
 are less than the developed values because of
rotational losses, which include friction, windage, eddy-current loss, and hysteresis loss. Rotational
power loss is approximately proportional to speed.
Torque-Speed Characteristic
IL :
Pin=VTIL
(15.20)
Pfield loss=VT2RF+Radj=VTIF
(15.21)
Parm loss=IA2RA
(15.22)
Pdev=IAEA=ωmTdev
(15.23)
Tdev
Pout
Tout

Next, we derive the torque-speed relationship for the shunt-connected machine. Applying Kirchhoff's
voltage law to the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 15.16, we obtain
Next, rearranging Equation 15.16 yields
Then, using Equation 15.15 to substitute for 
 and Equation 15.25 to substitute for 
 in Equation
15.24, we obtain
Finally, solving for the developed torque, we get
The starting or stall torque of a shunt-connected machine is usually many times
higher than the rated full-load torque.
which is the torque-speed relationship that we desire. Notice that this torque-speed relationship plots
as a straight line, as illustrated in Figure 15.18. The speed for no load (i.e., 
) and the stall torque
are labeled in the figure. The normal operating range for most motors is on the lower portion of the
torque-speed characteristic, as illustrated in the figure.
VT=RAIA+EA
(15.24)
IA=TdevKϕ
(15.25)
EA
IA
VT=RATdevKϕ+Kϕωm
(15.26)
Tdev=KϕRA (VT−Kϕωm)
(15.27)
Tdev=0

Figure 15.18
Torque-speed characteristic of the shunt dc motor.
Example 15.4 Shunt-Connected DC Motor
A 50-hp shunt-connected dc motor has the magnetization curve shown in Figure 15.19. The dc
supply voltage is 
 the armature resistance is 
 the field resistance is 
and the adjustable resistance is 
 At a speed of 1200 rpm, the rotational loss is
 If this motor drives a hoist that demands a torque of 
 independent of
speed, determine the motor speed and efficiency.
Figure 15.19
Magnetization curve for the motor of Example 15.4.
Solution
The equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 15.20. The field current is given by
VT=240 V,
RA=0.065 Ω,
RF=10 Ω,
Radj=14 Ω.
Prot=1450 W.
Tout=250 Nm

Figure 15.20
Equivalent circuit for Example 15.4.
Next, we use the magnetization curve to find the machine constant 
 for this value of field current.
From the curve shown in Figure 15.19, we see that the induced armature voltage is 
 at
 and 
 Thus, rearranging Equation 15.15 and substituting values, we find that
the machine constant is
We assume that the rotational power loss is proportional to speed. This is equivalent to assuming
constant torque for the rotational loss. The rotational-loss torque is
Thus, the developed torque is
Now, we use Equation 15.16 to find the armature current:
Then, applying Kirchhoff's voltage law to the armature circuit, we have
Solving Equation 15.15 for speed and substituting values, we get
IF=VTRF+Radj=24010+14=10 A
Kϕ
EA=280 V
IF=10 A
nm=1200 rpm.
Kϕ=EAωm=2801200(2π/60)=2.228
Trot=Protωm=14501200(2π/60)=11.54 Nm
Tdev=Tout+Trot=250+11.54=261.5 Nm
IA=TdevKϕ=261.52.228=117.4 A
EA=VT−RAIA=240−0.065(117.4)=232.4 V

or
To find efficiency, we first compute the output power and the input power, given by
Exercise 15.6 
Repeat Example 15.4 with the supply voltage increased to 300 V while holding the field current constant
by increasing 
 What is the new value of 
 What happens to the speed?
Answer 
 the speed increases to 
 or 
Exercise 15.7 
Repeat Example 15.4 if the adjustable resistance 
 is increased in value to 
 while holding 
constant at 240 V. What happens to the speed?
Answer 
 percent, 
 thus, speed
increases as 
 is increased.
Separately Excited DC Motors
A separately excited dc motor is similar to a shunt-connected motor except that different sources are
used for the armature and field circuits. The equivalent circuit for a separately excited dc machine is
shown in Figure 15.21. Analysis of a separately excited machine is very similar to that of a shunt-
connected machine. The chief reason for using two separate sources for the armature and field is to be
able to control speed by varying one of the two sources.
ωm=EAKϕ=232.42.228=104.3 rad/s
nm=ωm(602π)=996.0 rpm
Pout
=Toutωm=250(104.3)=26.08 kW
Pin
=VTIL=VT(IF+IA)=240(10+117.4)=30.58 kW
η
=PoutPin×100%=26.0830.58×100%=85.3%
Radj.
Radj?
Radj=20 Ω;
ωm=131.2 rad/s
nm=1253 rpm.
Radj
30 Ω
VT
IF=6 A, EA=229.3 V, IA=164.3 A, ωm=144.0, η=88.08
nm=1376 rpm;
Radj

Figure 15.21
Equivalent circuit for a separately excited dc motor. Speed can be controlled by varying either source
voltage (
 or 
).
Permanent-Magnet Motors
Separately excited and permanent-magnet motors have similar characteristics to
those of shunt-connected motors.
In a PM dc motor, the field is supplied by magnets mounted on the stator rather than by field coils. Its
characteristics are similar to those of the separately excited machine except that the field cannot be
adjusted. PM motors have several advantages compared to motors with field windings. First, no power
is required to establish the field—leading to better efficiency. Second, PM motors can be smaller than
equivalent machines with field windings. PM motors are common in applications calling for fractional- or
subfractional-horsepower sizes. Typical applications include fan and power-window motors in
automobiles.
PM motors also have some disadvantages. The magnets can become demagnetized by overheating or
because of excessive armature currents. Also, the flux density magnitude is smaller in PM motors than
in wound-field machines. Consequently, the torque produced per ampere of armature current is smaller
in PM motors than in wound-field motors with equal power ratings. PM motors are confined to operation
at lower torque and higher speed than wound-field motors with the same power rating.
VF
VT

15.5 Series-Connected DC Motors
The equivalent circuit of a series-connected dc motor is shown in Figure 15.22. Notice that the field
winding is in series with the armature. In this section, we will see that the series connection leads to a
torque-speed characteristic that is useful in many applications.
Figure 15.22
Equivalent circuit of the series-connected dc motor.
Field windings are designed differently for series-connected machines than they
are for shunt-connected machines.
In series dc motors, the field windings are made of larger diameter wire and the field resistances are
much smaller than those of shunt machines of comparable size. This is necessary to avoid dropping too
much of the source voltage across the field winding.
Next, we derive the relationship between torque and speed for the series motor. We use a linear
equation to approximate the relationship between magnetic flux and field current. In equation form, we
have
in which 
 is a constant that depends on the number of field windings, the geometry of the magnetic
circuit, and the B-H characteristics of the iron. Of course, the actual relationship between  and 
 is
nonlinear, due to magnetic saturation of the iron. (A plot of  versus 
 has exactly the same shape as
ϕ=KFIF
(15.28)
KF
ϕ
IF
ϕ
IF

the magnetization curve of the machine.) However, Equation 15.28 will give us insight into the behavior
of the series dc motor. Later, we consider saturation effects.
Because 
 in the series machine, we have
Using Equation 15.29 to substitute for  in Equations 15.15 and 15.16, we obtain
and
If we apply Kirchhoff's voltage law to the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 15.22, we get
As usual, we are assuming steady-state conditions so that the voltage across the inductance is zero.
Then using Equation 15.30 to substitute for 
 in Equation 15.32 and solving for 
 we have
Finally, using Equation 15.33 to substitute for 
 in Equation 15.31, we obtain the desired relationship
between torque and speed:
Torque-speed relationship for series-connected dc machines.
A plot of torque versus speed for the series dc motor is shown in Figure 15.23. The figure shows a plot
of Equation 15.34 as well as an actual curve of torque versus speed, illustrating the effects of rotational
loss and magnetic saturation. Equation 15.34 predicts infinite no-load speed. (In other words, for
IA=IF
ϕ=KFIA
(15.29)
ϕ
EA=KKF ωmIA
(15.30)
Tdev=KKFIA2
(15.31)
VT=RFIA+RAIA+EA
(15.32)
EA
IA,
IA=VTRA+RF+KKF ωm
(15.33)
IA
Tdev=KKFVT2(RA+RF+KKF ωm)2
(15.34)

 the speed must be infinite.) Yet, at high speeds, rotational losses due to windage and eddy
currents become large, and the motor speed is limited.
Figure 15.23
Torque-speed characteristic of the series-connected dc motor.
However, in some cases, the no-load speed can become large enough to be dangerous. It is important
to have protection devices that remove electrical power to a series machine when the load becomes
disconnected.
At very low speeds, Equation 15.33 shows that the current 
 becomes large. Then, magnetic
saturation occurs. Therefore, the starting torque is not as large as predicted by Equation 15.34.
Example 15.5 Series-Connected DC Motor
A series-connected dc motor runs at 
 while driving a load that demands a torque of
12 Nm. Neglect the resistances, rotational loss, and saturation effects. Find the power output. Then,
find the new speed and output power if the load torque increases to 24 Nm.
Solution
Since we are neglecting losses, the output torque and power are equal to the developed torque and
power, respectively. First, the angular speed is
and the output power is
Tdev=0,
IF=IA
nm1 = 1200 rpm
ωm1=nm1×2π60=125.7 rad/s
Pdev1=Pout1=ωm1Tout1=1508 W

Setting 
 in Equation 15.34 gives
Thus, for a fixed supply voltage 
 torque is inversely proportional to speed squared, and we can
write
Solving for 
 and substituting values, we have
which corresponds to
Finally, the output power with the heavier load is
Exercise 15.8 
Find the speed and output power in Example 15.5 for a load torque of 
Answer 
Exercise 15.9 
Repeat Example 15.5 for a shunt-connected motor. (In an ideal shunt-connected motor, the field
resistance would be very large rather than zero.)
Answer With 
 and fixed 
 the shunt motor runs at constant speed, independent of load. Thus,
 and 
Notice that by comparing the results of Exercise 15.9 with those of Example 15.5 we find that the
output power variation is larger for the shunt-connected motor than for the series-connected motor.
RA=RF=0
Tdev=KKFVT2(RA+RF+KKF ωm)2=VT2KKF ωm2
VT,
Tdev1Tdev2=ωm22ωm12
ωm2
ωm2=ωm1Tdev1Tdev2=125.71224=88.88 rad/s
nm2=848.5 rpm
Pout2=Tdev2ωm2=2133 W
Tdev3=6 Nm.
Pout3=1066 W, ωm3=177.8 rad/s, nm3=1697 rpm.
RA=0
VT,
nm1=nm2=1200 rpm, Pout1=1508 W,
Pout2=

Universal Motors
Equation 15.34 shows that the torque produced by the series dc motor is proportional to the square of
the source voltage. Thus, the direction of the torque is independent of the polarity of the applied voltage.
The series-connected machine can be operated from a single-phase ac source, provided that the stator
is laminated to avoid excessive losses due to eddy currents. Since the field and armature inductances
have nonzero impedances for ac currents, the current is not as large for an ac source as it would be for
a dc source of the same average magnitude.
The universal motor is an important type of ac motor.
Series motors that are intended for use with ac sources are called universal motors because in
principle they can operate from either ac or dc. Any time that you examine an ac motor and find brushes
and a commutator, you have a universal motor. Compared with other types of single-phase ac motors,
the universal motor has several advantages:
1. For a given weight, universal motors produce more power than other types. This is a large
advantage for hand-held tools and small appliances, such as drills, saws, mixers, and blenders.
2. The universal motor produces large starting torque without excessive current.
3. When load torque increases, the universal motor slows down. Hence, the power produced is
relatively constant, and the current magnitude remains within reasonable bounds. (In contrast,
shunt dc motors or ac induction motors tend to run at constant speed and are more prone to
drawing excessive currents for high-torque loads.) Thus, the universal motor is more suitable for
loads that demand a wide range of torque, such as drills and food mixers. (For the same reason,
series dc motors are used as starter motors in automobiles.)
4. Universal motors can be designed to operate at very high speeds, whereas we will see that other
types of ac motors are limited to 3600 rpm, assuming a 60-Hz source.
One disadvantage of universal motors (as well as dc machines in general) is that the brushes and
commutators wear out relatively quickly. Thus, the service life is much less than for ac induction motors.
Induction motors are better choices than universal motors in applications that need to run often over a
long life, such as refrigerator compressors, water pumps, or furnace fans.

15.6 Speed Control of DC Motors
Speed control is an important consideration in the design of many systems.
Several methods can be used to control the speed of dc motors:
1. Vary the voltage supplied to the armature circuit while holding the field constant.
2. Vary the field current while holding the armature supply voltage constant.
3. Insert resistance in series with the armature circuit.
In this section, we discuss briefly each of these approaches to speed control.
Variation of the Supply Voltage
This method is applicable to separately excited motors and PM motors. For the shunt motor, varying the
supply voltage is not an appropriate method of speed control, because the field current and flux vary
with 
 The effects of increasing both armature supply voltage and the field current tend to offset one
another, resulting in little change in speed.
In normal operation, the drop across the armature resistance is small compared to 
 and we have
Since we also have
we can write
VT.
EA,
EA≅VT
EA=Kϕωm
ωm≅VTKϕ
(15.35)

Thus, the speed of a separately excited motor with constant field current or of a PM motor is
approximately proportional to the source voltage.
Variation of the supply voltage is also appropriate for control of a series-connected dc motor; however,
the flux does not remain constant in this case. Equation 15.34 shows that the torque of a series
machine is proportional to the square of the source voltage at any given speed. Thus, depending on the
torque-speed characteristic of the load, the speed varies with applied voltage. Generally, higher voltage
produces higher speed.
Variable DC Voltage Sources
Historically, variable dc voltages were obtained from dc generators. For example, one popular approach
was the Ward Leonard system, in which a three-phase induction motor drives a dc generator that in
turn supplies a variable dc voltage to the motor to be controlled. The magnitude and polarity of the dc
supply voltage are controlled by using a rheostat or switches to vary the field current of the dc generator.
A disadvantage of this scheme is that three machines are needed to drive one load.
Since the advent of high-power electronics, a more economical approach is to use a rectifier to convert
three-phase ac into dc, as illustrated in Figure 15.24. The resulting dc voltage 
 has some ripple, but a
smoother voltage can be obtained with a full-wave version of the rectifier using six diodes. In any case, it
is not necessary for the dc source supplying motors to be absolutely free of ripple, because the
inductances and inertia tend to smooth the response.
vL

Figure 15.24
Three-phase half-wave rectifier circuit used to convert ac power to dc.
Once a constant dc source has been created, an electronic switching circuit can be used to control the
average voltage delivered to a load, as illustrated in Figure 15.25. (In Chapter 11 and Chapter 12, we
showed how electronic devices such as BJTs and FETs can be used as switches. In high-power
electronics, similar devices such as silicon-controlled rectifiers perform the switching function.)
Figure 15.25
An electronic switch that opens and closes periodically can efficiently supply a variable dc voltage to a
motor from a fixed dc supply voltage.

The switch periodically opens and closes with period T, spending 
 in the closed state and the
remainder of the period open.  The inductance 
 tends to cause the armature current to continue
flowing when the switch is open. Thus, the armature current 
 is nearly constant even though the
voltage 
 switches rapidly between zero and 
 The diode provides a path for the armature current
while the switch is open. The average value of the voltage applied to the motor is given by
Thus, the average voltage, and therefore the speed of the motor, can be controlled by varying the
fraction of the period for which the switch is closed.
Speed Control by Varying the Field Current
The speed of either a shunt-connected or a separately excited motor can be controlled by varying the
field current. The circuit for the shunt-connected machine was shown in Figure 15.16, in which the
rheostat 
 provides the means to control field current.
On the other hand, PM motors have constant flux. In series-connected motors, the field current is the
same as the armature current and cannot be independently controlled. Thus, using field current to
control speed is not appropriate for either of these types of motors.
To understand the effect of field current on motor torque and speed, let us review the following
equations for the shunt-connected or separately excited motor:
Now, consider what happens when 
 is reduced (by increasing 
). Reducing 
 reduces the flux 
Immediately, the induced voltage 
 is reduced. This in turn causes 
 to increase. In fact, the
percentage increase in 
 is much greater than the percentage reduction in 
 because 
 and 
 are
nearly equal. Thus, 
 increases rapidly when 
 is reduced. Two of the terms in the
equation for torque 
 change in opposite directions; specifically,  falls and 
 rises. However,
the change in 
 is much greater and the torque rises rapidly when 
 falls. (You can verify this by
comparing your solution to Exercise 15.7 to the values in Example 15.4.)
Danger of an Open Field Circuit
Ton
LA
IA
vo(t)
Vs.
VT=Vs TonT
(15.36)
Radj
EA
=Kϕωm
IA
=VT−EARA
Tdev
=KϕIA
IF
Radj
IF
ϕ.
EA
IA
IA
ϕ,
VT
EA
IA=(VT−EA)/RA
EA
Tdev=KϕIA
ϕ
IA
IA
IF

What happens in a shunt or separately excited motor if the field circuit becomes open circuited and 
falls to nearly zero? (Because of residual magnetization, the field is not zero for zero field current.) The
answer is that 
 becomes very large and the machine speeds up very rapidly. In fact, it is possible for
excessive speeds to cause the armature to fly apart. Then, in a matter of seconds, the machine is
reduced to a pile of useless scrap consisting of loose windings and commutator bars. Thus, it is
important to operate shunt machines with well-designed protection circuits that open the armature circuit
automatically when the field current vanishes.
It is important to operate shunt machines with well-designed protection circuits
that automatically open the armature circuit when the field current vanishes.
Speed Control by Inserting Resistance in Series with the Armature
Another method for controlling the speed of a dc motor is to insert additional resistance in series with the
armature circuit. This approach can be applied to all types of dc motors: shunt, separately excited,
series, or PM. For example, a shunt-connected motor with added armature resistance is illustrated in
Figure 15.26(a). We denote the total resistance as 
 which consists of the control resistance plus the
resistance of the armature winding. The torque-speed relationship for a shunt-connected motor is given
by Equation 15.27, repeated here for convenience:
Figure 15.26
Speed can be adjusted by varying a rheostat that is in series with the armature.
ϕ
IA
RA,
Tdev=KϕRA (VT−Kϕωm)

Plots of the torque-speed characteristic for various resistances are shown in Figure 15.26(b). Similar
results apply to separately excited and PM motors.
Look at Figures 15.26, 15.27, and 15.28 to see how the torque-speed
characteristics of shunt-connected and separately excited dc motors can be
changed by varying armature resistance, armature supply voltage, or field current
to achieve speed control.
Figure 15.27
Torque versus speed for the separately excited dc motor for various values of
armature supply voltage 
Figure 15.28
Effect of varying 
 on the torque-speed characteristics of the shunt-connected
or separately excited dc motor.
VT.
IF

Starting controls for shunt or separately excited dc motors usually place resistance in series with the
armature to limit armature current to reasonable values while the machine comes up to speed.
A disadvantage of inserting resistance in series with the armature to control speed is that it is wasteful of
energy. When running at low speeds, much of the energy taken from the source is converted directly
into heat in the series resistance.
Equation 15.34 gives the torque for series-connected machines. For convenience, the equation is
repeated here:
Notice that if 
 is made larger by adding resistance in series with the armature, the torque is reduced
for any given speed.
Exercise 15.10 
Why is variation of the supply voltage 
 in the shunt machine (see Figure 15.16) an ineffective way to
control speed?
Answer Decreasing 
 decreases the field current, and therefore the flux. In the linear portion of the
magnetization curve, the flux is proportional to the field current. Thus, reduction of 
 leads to reduction
of 
 and according to Equation 15.35, the speed remains constant. (Actually, some variation of speed
may occur due to saturation effects.)
Exercise 15.11 
Figure 15.26(b) shows a family of torque-speed curves for various values of 
 Sketch a similar family
of torque-speed characteristics for a separately excited machine (see Figure 15.21) with various values
of 
 and constant field current.
Answer The torque-speed relationship is given by Equation 15.27. With constant field current,  is
constant. The family of characteristics is shown in Figure 15.27.
Exercise 15.12 
Sketch a family of torque-speed characteristics for a shunt-connected or separately excited machine
with constant 
 and variable 
Tdev=KKFVT2(RA+RF+KKF ωm)2
RA
VT
VT
VT
ϕ,
RA.
VT
ϕ
VT
IF.

Answer The torque-speed relationship is given in Equation 15.27. As field current is increased, the
flux  increases. The family of characteristics is shown in Figure 15.28.
ϕ

15.7 DC Generators
Generators convert kinetic energy from a prime mover, such as a steam turbine or a diesel engine, into
electrical energy. When dc power is needed, we can use a dc generator or an ac source combined with
a rectifier. The trend is toward ac sources and rectifiers; however, many dc generators are in use, and
for some applications they are still a good choice.
Several connections, illustrated in Figure 15.29, are useful for dc generators. We will discuss each type
of connection briefly and conclude with an example illustrating performance calculations for the
separately excited generator.

Figure 15.29
DC generator equivalent circuits.
Separately Excited DC Generators
The equivalent circuit for a separately excited dc generator is shown in Figure 15.29(a). A prime mover
drives the armature shaft at an angular speed 
 and the external dc source 
 supplies current 
 to
the field coils. The induced armature voltage causes current to flow through the load. Because of the
drop across the armature resistance, the load voltage 
 decreases as the load current 
 increases,
assuming constant speed and field current. This is illustrated in Figure 15.30(a).
Figure 15.30
Load voltage versus load current for various dc generators.
For some applications, it is desirable for the load voltage to be nearly independent of the load current. A
measure of the amount of decrease in load voltage with current is the percentage load voltage
regulation given by
in which 
 is the no-load voltage (i.e., 
) and 
 is the full-load voltage (i.e., with full-rated load
current).
One of the advantages of the separately excited dc generator is that the load voltage can be adjusted
over a wide range by varying the field current either by changing 
 or by changing 
 Also, the load
voltage is proportional to speed.
Shunt-Connected DC Generators
ωm,
VF
IF
VL
IL
voltage regulation=VNL−VFLVFL×100%
(15.37)
VNL
IL=0
VFL
VF
Radj.

One of the disadvantages of the separately excited dc generator is the need for a separate dc source to
supply the field windings. This disadvantage is overcome in the shunt-connected machine, for which the
field circuit is in parallel with the armature and the load, as shown in Figure 15.29(b). The output voltage
can be adjusted by changing the resistance 
 that is in series with the field winding.
Initial buildup of voltage in the shunt-connected machine usually occurs because of the residual
magnetic field of the iron. (Adjusting 
 to its minimum value and reversing the connections to the field
winding may be needed to ensure voltage buildup.) However, if the machine becomes demagnetized,
the induced armature voltage is zero, resulting in zero field current, and no output is produced. This can
be remedied by briefly applying a dc source of the correct polarity to the field winding to create a
residual field in the machine. Also, depending on the machine history, it is possible for the polarity of the
output voltage to build up with the opposite polarity to that desired. This can be corrected by applying an
external source of the correct polarity to the field winding or by reversing the connections to the
machine.
The load regulation of the shunt-connected generator is poorer (i.e., larger) than that of the separately
excited machine because the field current falls as the load current increases due to the drop across the
armature resistance. This increased drop due to field weakening is illustrated in Figure 15.30(a).
Compound-Connected DC Generators
It is possible to design a dc generator with both series and shunt windings. When both are connected,
we have a compound-connected machine. Several variations of the connections are possible. Figure
15.29(c) illustrates a long-shunt compound connection. Another possibility is the short-shunt
compound connection, in which the shunt field is directly in parallel with the armature and the series
field is in series with the load. Furthermore, in either the short-shunt or the long-shunt, the field of the
series field coil can either aid or oppose the field of the shunt field coil. If the fields aid, we have a
cumulative shunt connection. On the other hand, if the fields oppose, we have a differential shunt
connection. Thus, we have four types of connections in all.
It is possible to design a fully compensated cumulative-connected machine for which the full-load
voltage is equal to the no-load voltage, as illustrated in Figure 15.30(b). Curvature of the voltage versus
current characteristic is due to saturation effects. If the full-load voltage is less than the no-load voltage,
the machine is said to be undercompensated. In an overcompensated machine, the full-load voltage
is greater than the no-load voltage.
In a differential shunt connection, the output voltage falls rapidly with load current because the field of
the series winding opposes that of the shunt winding. Considerable load current may flow even after the
Radj
Radj

load voltage drops to zero. This is illustrated in Figure 15.30(b).
Performance Calculations
Next, we illustrate performance calculations for the separately excited generator. Analysis of the other
connections is left for the problems.
As for dc motors, the following equations apply to dc generators:
Referring to Figure 15.29(a), we can write:
Figure 15.31 illustrates the power flow of a dc generator. The efficiency is given by
Figure 15.31
Power flow in dc generators.
EA=Kϕωm
(15.38)
Tdev=KϕIA
(15.39)
EA=RAIA+VL
(15.40)
VF=(RF+Radj)IF
(15.41)

Equations 15.37 through 15.42, the magnetization curve of the machine, and Figure 15.31 are the
tools for analysis of the separately excited dc generator. (Recall that the magnetization curve is a plot of
 versus 
 for a given speed.)
Example 15.6 Separately Excited DC Generator
A separately excited dc generator has 
 the prime mover
rotates the armature at a speed of 1000 rpm, and the magnetization curve is shown in Figure 15.19
on page 768.A separately excited dc generator has 
 the
prime mover rotates the armature at a speed of 1000 rpm, and the magnetization curve is shown in
Figure 19. Determine the field current, the no-load voltage, the full-load voltage, and the percentage
voltage regulation for a full-load current of 200 A. Assuming that the overall efficiency (not including
the power supplied to the field circuit) of the machine is 85 percent, determine the input torque, the
developed torque, and the losses associated with friction, windage, eddy currents, and hysteresis.
Solution
The field current is
Then, referring to the magnetization curve on page 768, we find that 
 for a speed of 1200
rpm. Equation 15.38 shows that 
 is proportional to speed. So, for a speed of 1000 rpm, we have
which is also the no-load voltage of the machine. For a load current of 200 A, we get
Finally, we obtain
The output power is
efficiency=PoutPin×100%
(15.42)
EA
IF
VF=140, RF=10 Ω, Radj=4 Ω, RA=0.065 Ω,
VF=140, RF=10 Ω, Radj=4 Ω, RA=0.065 Ω,
IF=VFRadj+RF=1404+10=10 A
EA=280 V
EA
EA=280 10001200=233.3 V
VFL=EA−RAIA=233.3−200×0.065=220.3 V
voltage regulation=VNL−VFLVFL×100%=233.3−220.3220.3×100%=5.900%
Pout=ILVFL=200×220.3=44.06 kW

The developed power is the sum of the output power and the armature loss:
The angular speed is
The input power is
The power losses associated with friction, windage, eddy currents, and hysteresis are
The input and developed torques are
Exercise 15.13 
Repeat Example 15.6 for 
Answer 
 voltage
Pdev=Pout+RAIA2=44060+0.065(200)2=46.66 kW
ωm=nm 2π60=104.7 rad/s
Pin=Pout0.85=44.060.85=51.84 kW
Plosses=Pin−Pdev=51.84−46.66=5.18 kW
Tin
=Pinωm=51,840104.7=495.1 N⋅m
Tdev
=Pdevωm=46,660104.7=445.7 N⋅m
Radj=0.
IF=14 A, VNL=260, VFL=247,
regulation=5.263%, Plosses=6.1 kW, Tin=555 N⋅m, Tdev=497 N⋅m.

Summary
1. An electrical motor consists of a rotor and a stator, both of which may contain windings. A given
winding may be classified as either an armature winding or as a field winding.
2. The electrical source for a motor can be dc, single-phase ac, or three-phase ac.
3. Factors to consider in selecting an electrical motor for a given application include the electrical
sources available, the output power required, load torque versus speed, the service-life
requirements, efficiency, speed regulation, starting current, the desired operating speed, ambient
temperature, and the acceptable frequency of maintenance.
4. Dc motors in common use contain brushes and commutators that reverse the connections to the
armature conductors with rotation. The need for frequent maintenance of these parts is a
significant disadvantage of dc motors.
5. An advantage of dc motors is the ease with which their speed can be controlled. However, ac
motors used with modern electronic systems that can change the frequencies of ac sources are
taking over in many speed-control applications.
6. The speed of a motor load combination self-adjusts to the point at which the output torque of the
motor equals the torque demanded by the load. Thus, if the torque-speed characteristics of the
motor and of the load are plotted on the same axes, the steady-state operating point is at the
intersection of the characteristics.
7. The linear dc machine illustrates the basic principles of dc machines in an uncomplicated
manner. However, it is not practical for the vast majority of applications.
8. Commonly used dc machines have field windings on the stator that establish an even number of
magnetic poles. The armature windings on the rotor carry currents, resulting in forces induced by
the field. To achieve aiding contributions to torque (and induced armature voltage), a
commutator and a set of brushes reverse the connections to the armature conductors as they
move between poles.
9. The magnetization curve of a dc machine is a plot of the induced armature voltage versus field
current with the machine being driven at a constant speed. The equivalent circuit shown in
Figure 15.14 on page 763, the magnetization curve, and the following equations provide the
basis for analyzing dc machines:The equivalent circuit shown in Figure 15.14, the magnetization
curve, and the following equations provide the basis for analyzing dc machines:
10. The equivalent circuit of a shunt-connected dc motor is shown in Figure 15.16 on page 766.The
equivalent circuit of a shunt-connected dc motor is shown in Figure 16.The torque-speed
characteristic is shown in Figure 15.18 on page 767.The torque-speed characteristic is shown
EA=Kϕωm
Tdev=KϕIA
Pdev=EAIA=ωmTdev
Radj

in Figure 18. Speed can be controlled either by using 
 to vary the field current or by inserting
a variable resistance in series with the armature. Variation of 
 is not an effective means of
speed control.
11. The equivalent circuit of a separately excited dc motor is shown in Figure 15.21 on page
770.The equivalent circuit of a separately excited dc motor is shown in Figure 21. The torque-
speed characteristic is identical to that of the shunt-connected machine shown in Figure 15.18
on page 767.The torque-speed characteristic is identical to that of the shunt-connected machine
shown in Figure 18. Speed can be controlled by varying the field current, by varying the
armature source voltage 
 or by inserting additional resistance in series with the armature.
12. The characteristics of a permanent-magnet dc motor are similar to those of a separately excited
motor, except that no means is available to vary the field. Speed control can be achieved by
varying the armature supply voltage or by inserting additional resistance in series with the
armature.
13. The equivalent circuit of the series-connected dc motor is shown in Figure 15.22 on page
770.The equivalent circuit of the series-connected dc motor is shown in Figure 22. In the normal
range of operation, its torque is almost inversely proportional to the square of its speed. The
series-connected dc motor is suitable for starting heavy loads. It can reach dangerous speeds if
the load is totally removed.
14. The universal motor is basically a series dc motor designed for operation from an ac source. It is
to be found in applications where a large power-to-weight ratio is needed. However, due to
commutator wear, its service life is limited. Its speed can be controlled by varying the applied
voltage or by inserting series resistance.
15. Historically, variable dc voltages for speed control of dc motors were obtained by employing dc
generators. Presently, the approach of choice is to use rectifiers that first convert ac into dc.
Then, electronic chopper circuits with adjustable duty factors provide variable average voltages.
16. Figures 15.26, 15.27, and 15.28 on pages 777, 778 and 778 show how the torque-speed
characteristics of shunt-connected and separately excited dc motors can be changed by varying
armature resistance, armature supply voltage, or field current to achieve speed control.
17. Dc generators can be separately excited, shunt connected, or compound connected. Analysis of
dc generators is similar to that for dc motors.
VT
VT,

Problems
Section 15.1: Overview of Motors
P15.1. List the two principal types of three-phase ac motors. Which is in more common use?
P15.2. What types of motors contain brushes and a commutator? What is the function of these
parts?
P15.3. What two types of windings are used in electrical machines? Which type is not used in
permanent-magnet machines? Why not?
P15.4. In what application would dc motors be more advantageous than ac motors?
P15.5. Name the principal parts of a rotating electrical machine.
*P15.6. List two practical disadvantages of dc motors compared to single-phase ac induction
motors for supplying power to a ventilation fan in a home or small business.
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
*P15.7. A three-phase induction motor is rated at 5 hp, 1760 rpm, with a line-to-line voltage of
220 V rms.  The no-load speed of the motor is 1800 rpm. Determine the percentage speed
regulation.
*P15.8. A 440-V-rms (line-to-line voltage) three-phase induction motor runs at 1150 rpm driving
a load requiring 15 Nm of torque. The line current is 3.4 A rms at a power factor of 80 percent
lagging. Find the output power, the power loss, and the efficiency.
*P15.9. A certain 25-hp three-phase induction motor operates from a 440-V-rms (line-to-line)
three-phase source. The full-load speed is 1750 rpm. The motor has a starting torque equal to
200 percent of its full-load torque when started at rated voltage. For an engineering estimate,
assume that the starting torque of an induction motor is proportional to the square of the applied
voltage. To reduce the starting current of the motor, we decide to start it with a line-to-line
voltage of 220 V. Estimate the starting torque with this reduced line voltage.
P15.10. A three-phase induction motor is rated at 5 hp, 1760 rpm, with a line-to-line voltage of
220 V rms. Find the output torque and angular velocity of the motor under full-load conditions.
P15.11. Operating from a line-to-line voltage of 440 V rms with a line current of 14 A rms and a
power factor of 85 percent, a three-phase induction motor produces an output power of 6.5 hp.
Determine the losses in watts and the efficiency of the motor.
P15.12. A motor drives a load for which the torque required is given by

The torque-speed characteristic of the motor is shown in Figure P15.12.
a. Will this system start from zero speed? Why or why not?
b. Suppose that the system is brought up to speed by an auxiliary driver, which is then
disengaged. In principle, at what two constant speeds can the system rotate?
c. If the system is operating at the lower of the two speeds and power to the motor is briefly
interrupted so the system slows by a few radians per second, what will happen after
power is restored? Why?
d. Repeat (c) if the system is initially operating at the higher speed.
Figure P15.12
P15.13. A motor has output torque given by
where 
 is angular velocity in rad/s and 
 is the output torque in newton meters.
a. Find the no-load speed of the motor.
b. At what speed between zero and the no-load speed is the output torque maximum? What
is the maximum output torque?
c. At what speed between zero and the no-load speed is the output power maximum? What
is the maximum output power?
d. Find the starting torque of the motor. How could this motor be started?
P15.14. A three-phase induction motor is rated at 5 hp, 1760 rpm, with a line-to-line voltage of
220 V rms. The motor has a power factor of 80 percent lagging and an efficiency of 75 percent
under full-load conditions. Find the electrical input power absorbed by the motor under full-load
conditions. Also, find the rms line current.
P15.15. We want a four-pole synchronous motor that operates at a speed of 1000 rpm.
Determine the frequency of the ac source. List several other speeds that can be achieved by
using synchronous motors operating from this ac source. What is the highest speed achievable?
Tload=80020+ωm Nm
Tout=10−2 (60π−ωm)ωm
ωm
Tout

Section 15.2: Principles of DC Machines
P15.16. A 220-V-rms (line-to-line), 60-Hz, three-phase induction motor operates at 3500 rpm
while delivering its rated output power of 3 hp. The line current is 8 A rms and the losses are 300
W. Find the input power, power factor, and efficiency.
P15.17. A certain 25-hp three-phase induction motor operates from a 440-V-rms (line-to-line)
three-phase source and draws a line current of 35 A rms at a power factor of 83 percent lagging
under rated full-load conditions. The full-load speed is 1750 rpm. Under no-load conditions, the
speed is 1797 rpm, and the line current is 6.5 A rms at a power factor of 30 percent lagging. Find
the power loss and efficiency with full load, the input power with no load, and the speed
regulation.
P15.18. Consider a system consisting of a motor driving a load. The motor has the torque-speed
characteristic shown in Figure P15.12. The load is a fan requiring a torque given by
At a speed of 
 the power absorbed by the load is 0.75 hp. Determine the speed of
the system in radians per second and the power delivered to the fan in watts. Convert your
answers to rpm and horsepower.
P15.19. A 220-V-rms (line-to-line), 60-Hz, three-phase induction motor operates at 3500 rpm
while delivering its rated full-load output power. Estimate the no-load speed and speed
regulation for the motor.
Tload=Kωm2
n=1000 rpm,
*P15.20. Consider the linear dc machine of FigureP15.20 . When the switch closes, is the force
on the bar toward the top of the page or toward the bottom? Determine the magnitude of the
initial (starting) force. Also, determine the final velocity of the bar neglecting friction.
Figure P15.20

*P15.21. Consider the linear dc machine shown in Figure 15.6 on page 754 with no load force
applied. What happens to the steady-state velocity of the bar if:
a. the source voltage 
 is doubled in magnitude;
b. the resistance 
 is doubled;
c. the magnetic flux density B is doubled in magnitude?
P15.22. Consider the linear dc machine shown in Figure 15.6 on page 754. What happens to
the initial force (i.e., starting force) induced in the bar if:
a. the source voltage 
 is doubled in magnitude;
b. the resistance 
 is doubled;
c. the magnetic flux density B is doubled in magnitude?
P15.23. Suppose that an external force of 10 N directed toward the top of the page is applied to
the bar as shown in Figure P15.23. In steady state, is the machine acting as a motor or as a
generator? Find the power supplied by or absorbed by:
a. the electrical voltage source 
b. 
c. the external force.
Figure P15.23
P15.24. Suppose that we wish to design a linear motor based on Figure 15.6 on page 754 that
can deliver 1 hp at a steady bar velocity of 20 m/s. The flux density is limited to 1 T by the
magnetic properties of the materials to be used. The length of the bar is to be 0.5 m, and the
resistance is 
 Find the current 
 the source voltage 
 and the efficiency of the
machine. Assume that the only loss is due to the resistance 
P15.25. Suppose that an external force of 10 N directed toward the bottom of the page is applied
to the bar as shown in Figure P15.25. In steady state, is the machine acting as a motor or as a
generator? Find the power supplied by or absorbed by:
VT
RA
VT
RA
VT;
RA;
0.05 Ω.
iA,
VT,
RA.

a. the electrical voltage source 
b. 
c. the external force.
Figure P15.25
P15.26. We have presented the linear dc machine with an applied magnetic field, such as we
might have in a dc motor. However, forces are exerted on the slider by the magnetic field
produced by the currents in the rails. This is the principle of the electromagnetic rail gun for
which you can find many references on the web including many practical construction tips. A
version of such a rail gun is shown in Figure P15.26.
a. When the switch closes, in which direction is force exerted on the projectile? Use
physical principles discussed in this text to explain how you arrived at your answer.
b. Suppose that the projectile mass is 3 g (which is about that of a penny). Assuming that
all of the energy stored in the capacitor is transferred to kinetic energy in the slider,
determine its final velocity. (Note: The highest velocity achievable by ordinary rifle bullets
is about 1200 m/s.)
c. List as many effects as you can that cause the velocity to be lower than the value
calculated in part (b).
Figure P15.26
VT;
RA;

Section 15.3: Rotating DC Machines
*P15.27. Suppose that we are designing a 1200-rpm dc motor to run from a 240-V source. We
have determined that the flux density will be 1 T because smaller fluxes make inefficient use of
the iron and larger fluxes result in saturation. The radius of the rotor (and thus, the torque arm for
the armature conductors) is 0.1 m. The lengths of the armature conductors are 0.3 m.
Approximately how many armature conductors must be placed in series in this machine?
*P15.28. An alternative way to determine the direction of the torque produced by a dc machine is
to consider the interaction of the magnetic poles produced by the armature current with the
stator poles. Consider the cross section of a two-pole dc motor shown in Figure 15.10 on page
760. The magnetic poles established on the stator by the field windings are shown. For the
armature current directions shown in the figure, find the locations and label the rotor poles. Of
course, the rotor poles try to align with unlike stator poles. Which direction is the resulting torque,
clockwise or counterclockwise? Repeat for the four-pole machine shown in Figure 15.11 on
page 760.
*P15.29. A dc motor operates with a load that demands constant developed torque. With
 the motor operates at 1200 rpm and has 
 The armature resistance is 
and the field current remains constant. Determine the speed if 
 is increased to 250 V.
*P15.30. A certain dc motor has 
 and produces a back emf 
 while
operating at a speed of 1200 rpm. Determine the voltage applied to the armature, the developed
torque, and the developed power.
P15.31. Consider a motor having the model shown in Figure 15.14 on page 763. The motor runs
at a speed of 1200 rpm and has 
 and 
 Find
 and the power converted to heat in the resistances.
P15.32. A permanent-magnet dc motor has 
 and operates under no-load
conditions at a speed of 1500 rpm with 
 A load is connected and the speed drops to 1300
rpm. Determine the efficiency of the motor under loaded conditions. Assume that the losses
consist solely of heating of 
 and frictional loss torque that is independent of speed.
P15.33. A certain dc motor produces a back emf of 
 at a speed of 1200 rpm. Assume
that the field current remains constant. Find the back emf for a speed of 600 rpm and for a speed
of 1500 rpm.
P15.34. Under no-load conditions, a certain motor operates at 1200 rpm with an armature
current of 0.5 A and a terminal voltage of 480 V. The armature resistance is 
 Determine the
speed and speed regulation if a load demanding a torque of 50 Nm is connected to the motor.
Assume that the losses consist solely of heating of 
 and frictional loss torque that is
independent of speed.
P15.35. Consider the two-pole motor shown in Figure 15.10 on page 760. The gap between the
rotor and stator is 1.5 mm. Each of the two field coils has 250 turns and carries a current of 3 A.
VT=200 V,
IA=10 A.
5 Ω
VT
RA=1.3 Ω, IA=10 A,
EA=240 V,
RF=150 Ω, VF=VT=180 V, IA=10 A,
RA=1.2 Ω.
EA, Tdev, Pdev,
RA=7 Ω, VT=240 V,
IA=1 A.
RA
EA=240 V
2 Ω.
RA

Section 15.4: Shunt-Connected and Separately Excited DC Motors
Assume that the permeability of the iron is infinite.
a. Determine the flux density in the air gap.
b. Each armature conductor carries a current of 30 A and has a length of 0.5 m. Find the
force induced in each conductor.
P15.36. Sometimes the stator, particularly the yoke (shown in Figure 15.10 on page 760 shown
in Figure 15.10), of a dc machine is not laminated. However, it is always necessary to laminate
the rotor. Explain.
P15.37. A certain motor has an induced armature voltage of 200 V at 
 Suppose
that this motor is operating at a speed of 
 with a developed power of 5 hp. Find
the armature current and the developed torque.
nm1=1200 rpm.
nm2=1500 rpm
*P15.38. A certain shunt-connected dc motor has 
 and 
 At a
speed of 1200 rpm, the rotational losses are 50 W and 
a. Find the no-load speed in rpm.
b. Plot 
 and 
 versus speed for speed ranging from zero to the no-load speed.
*P15.39. Is a magnetization curve needed for a permanent-magnet dc motor? Explain.
*P15.40. A shunt dc motor has 
 and 
 For an output power of 50 hp, we have
 and 
 The field current remains constant for all parts of this problem.
a. Find the developed power, power lost in 
 and the rotational losses.
b. Assuming that the rotational power loss is proportional to speed, find the no-load speed
of the motor.
*P15.41. A permanent-magnet dc motor has 
 With no load, it operates at 1070 rpm
and draws 0.5 A from a 12.6-V source. Assume that rotational power loss is proportional to
speed. Find the output power and efficiency for a load that drops the speed to 950 rpm.
*P15.42. A shunt-connected dc motor has 
 and 
 Find the two speeds for which the
developed power is 5 hp. Neglect field loss and rotational loss. Find the value of 
 and
efficiency for each speed. Which answer is most likely to be in the normal operating range of the
machine?
P15.43. A permanent-magnet automotive fan motor draws 20 A from a 12-V source when the
rotor is locked (i.e., held motionless). The motor has a speed of 800 rpm and draws 3.5 A when
operating the fan with a terminal voltage of 
 Assume that the load (including the
rotational losses) requires a developed torque that is proportional to the square of the speed.
Find the speed for operation at 10 V. Repeat for 14 V.
*P15.44. A shunt-connected motor has the magnetization curve shown in Figure P15.44. Ignore
RA=1 Ω, RF+Radj=200 Ω,
VT=
EA=175 V.
Tdev, IA,
Pdev
RA=0.1 Ω
VT=
nm=1500 rpm
IA=103 A.
RA,
RA=0.5 Ω.
Kϕ=
VT=200 V.
IA
VT=12 V.

rotational losses in this problem. The motor is supplied from a source of 
 and has
 The total field resistance is 
a. Find the no-load speed.
b. A load is connected and the speed drops by 6 percent. Find the load torque, output
power, armature current, field loss, and armature loss.
Figure P15.44
P15.45. A shunt-connected motor delivers an output power of 24 hp at 1200 rpm while operating
from a source voltage of 440 V and drawing 
 The resistances are 
 and
 Find the developed torque and efficiency of the motor.
P15.46. A separately excited dc motor (see the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 15.21 on page
770) has 
 and 
 For an output power of 3 hp, 
 and 
The field current remains constant for all parts of this problem.
a. Find the developed power, developed torque, power lost in 
 and the rotational losses.
b. Assuming that the rotational power loss is proportional to speed, find the no-load speed
of the motor.
P15.47. A shunt-connected 5-hp dc motor is rated for operation at 
 and
 Furthermore, 
 and 
 Under rated conditions find:
a. the input power;
b. the power supplied to the field circuit;
c. the power lost in the armature resistance;
d. the rotational loss;
e. the efficiency.
P15.48. A permanent-magnet automotive fan motor draws 20 A from a 12-V source when the
VT=240 V
RA=1.5 Ω.
RF+Radj=240 Ω.
IL=50 A.
RA=0.05 Ω
RF+Radj=100 Ω.
RA=1.3 Ω
VT=220 V.
nm=950 rpm
IA=12.2 A.
RA,
VT=200 V, IL=23.3 A,
nm=1500 rpm.
IF=
RA=0.4 Ω.

rotor is locked (i.e., held motionless).
a. Find the armature resistance.
b. Find the maximum developed power that this motor can produce when operated from a
12-V source.
c. Repeat part (b) for operation at 10 V (this represents a nearly dead battery) and at 14 V
(this is the terminal voltage during charging of the battery after the engine is started).
P15.49. A shunt-connected dc motor has zero rotational losses and 
 Assume that
 is constant [except in part (d)] and that  is directly proportional to field current. For
 and 
 the speed is 1200 rpm. What is the effect on 
 and speed if:
a. the load torque doubles;
b. the load power doubles;
c. 
 is changed to 100 V and 
 remains constant;
d. 
 is doubled in value and 
 remains constant?
P15.50. A shunt-connected motor has the magnetization curve shown in Figure P15.50. Ignore
rotational losses in this problem. The motor is supplied from a source of 
 and has
 The total field resistance is 
a. Find the no-load speed.
b. A load is connected and the speed drops by 6 percent. Find the load torque, output
power, armature current, field loss, and armature loss.
Figure P15.50
P15.51. A shunt-connected dc motor has 
 and 
 For 
 and no
load, the motor runs at 1150 rpm and the line current is 
 Find the rotational loss at this
speed.
P15.52. A certain shunt-connected dc motor has 
 and 
 At a speed of 1000
rpm, the induced armature voltage is 120 V. Plot the torque-speed characteristic (
 versus
RA=0.
RF+Radj
ϕ
VT=200 V
Pout=2 hp,
IA
VT
Pout
RF+Radj
Pout
VT=240 V
RA=1.5 Ω.
RF+Radj=160 Ω.
RA=0.5 Ω
RF+Radj=400 Ω.
VT=200 V
IL=1.2 A.
RA=4 Ω
VT=240 V.
Tdev

Section 15.5: Series-Connected DC Motors
) to scale.
P15.53. Suppose that a dc machine is designed such that the voltage applied to the field
[&V_{F}&] is equal to the voltage 
[&V_{T}&] applied to the armature. (Refer to Figure 15.14
on page 763.) In a well-designed machine, which current, 
[&I_{F}&] or 
[&I_{A},&] is larger
under full-load operating conditions? Why? What do you estimate as an acceptable value for the
ratio 
 under full load?
P15.54. Consider a shunt-connected dc motor that has the magnetization curve shown in Figure
15.19 on page 768. The dc supply voltage is 
 the armature resistance is 
the field resistance is 
 and the adjustable resistance is 
 At a speed of 1200
rpm, the rotational loss is 
 If this motor drives a load that demands a torque of
 independent of speed, determine the motor speed and efficiency.
nm
VF
VT
IF
IA,
IA/IF
VT=200 V,
RA=0.085 Ω,
RF=10 Ω,
Radj=2.5 Ω.
Prot=1000 W.
Tout=200 Nm
*P15.55. A series-connected dc motor has 
 and draws 
 from the dc source
voltage 
 while running at 900 rpm. What is the speed for 
 Assume a linear
relationship between 
 and 
P15.56. List four potential advantages of universal motors compared to other types of ac motors.
P15.57. Would a universal motor be a good choice for a clock? For a furnace fan motor? For a
home coffee grinder? Give reasons for your answers.
P15.58. In examining a single-phase ac motor, what features could we look for to identify it as a
universal motor?
P15.59. Running at 1200 rpm from a 280-V source, a series-connected dc motor draws an
armature current of 25 A. The field resistance is 
 and the armature resistance is 
Assuming that the flux is proportional to the field current, determine the speed at which the
armature current is 10 A.
P15.60. Running at 1200 rpm from a 280-V source, a series-connected dc motor draws an
armature current of 25 A. The field resistance is 
 and the armature resistance is 
Rotational losses are 350 W and can be assumed to be proportional to speed. Determine the
output power and developed torque. Determine the new armature current and speed if the load
torque is increased by a factor of two.
P15.61. A series-connected dc motor has 
 and draws 
 from the dc source
voltage 
 while running at 900 rpm. The rotational losses are 400 W. Find the output
power and developed torque. Suppose that the load torque is reduced by a factor of two and that
the rotational power loss is proportional to speed. Find the new values of 
 and speed.
P15.62. A series-connected dc motor has 
 and 
 In driving a certain load at
1200 rpm, the current is 
 from a source voltage of 
 The rotational loss is 150
W. Find the output power and efficiency.
P15.63. A series-connected dc motor is designed to operate with a variable load. The
RF+RA=
IA=40 A
VT=220 V,
IA=20 A?
IA
ϕ.
0.2 Ω,
0.3 Ω.
0.2 Ω,
0.3 Ω.
RF+RA=
IA=40 A
VT=220 V,
IA
RA=0.5 Ω
RF=1.5 Ω.
IA=20 A
VT=220 V.

Section 15.6: Speed Control of DC Motors
resistances 
 and 
 are negligible. To attain high efficiency, the motor has been designed to
have very small rotational losses. For a load torque of 100 Nm, the machine runs at its maximum
rated speed of 1200 rpm.
a. Find the speed for a load torque of 300 Nm.
b. What is the no-load speed? What are the potential consequences of having the load
become disconnected from the motor without disconnecting the dc source?
RA
RF
*P15.64. A series-connected dc motor operates at 1400 rpm from a source voltage of 
The developed torque (load torque plus loss torque) is constant at 25 Nm. The resistance is
 Determine the value of resistance that must be placed in series with the motor to
reduce the speed to 1000 rpm.
*P15.65. Sketch the family of torque-speed characteristics for a separately excited dc motor
obtained by:
a. varying the field current;
b. varying the voltage applied to the armature;
c. varying the resistance in series with the armature.
*P15.66. A series-connected motor drives a constant torque load from a 50-V source at a speed
of 1500 rpm. The resistances 
 Neglect rotational losses. What average source voltage
is needed to achieve a speed of 1000 rpm? If this is achieved by chopping the 50-V source as
illustrated in Figure 15.25 on page 775, find the duty ratio 
P15.67. Suppose that a shunt-connected machine operates at 800 rpm on the linear portion of
its magnetization characteristic. The motor drives a load that requires constant torque. Assume
that 
 The resistances in the field circuit are 
 and 
 Find a new value for
 so that the speed becomes 1200 rpm. What is the slowest speed that can be achieved by
varying 
P15.68. Consider a PM motor that operates from a 12-V source with a no-load speed of 1700
rpm. Neglect rotational losses. What average source voltage is needed to achieve a no-load
speed of 1000 rpm? If this is achieved by chopping the 12-V source as illustrated in Figure
15.25 on page 775, find the duty ratio 
P15.69. List three methods that can be used to control the speed of dc motors. Which of these
apply to shunt-connected motors? To separately excited motors? To permanent-magnet motors?
To series-connected motors?
P15.70. Consider a shunt-connected dc motor that has the magnetization curve shown in Figure
15.19 on page 768. The dc supply voltage is 
 the armature resistance is 
the field resistance is 
 and the adjustable resistance is 
 At a speed of 1200
rpm, the rotational loss is 
 Assume that the rotational power loss is proportional to
VT=75 V.
RA+RF=0.1 Ω.
RF=RA=0.
Ton/T.
RA=0.
RF=50 Ω
Radj=25 Ω.
Radj
Radj?
Ton/T.
VT=200 V,
RA=0.085 Ω,
RF=10 Ω,
Radj=2.5 Ω.
Prot=1000 W.

Section 15.7: DC Generators
speed.
a. With a load that demands a torque of 
 independent of speed, determine
the steady-state armature current.
b. Suppose that in starting this machine, the field circuit has reached steady state and the
motor is not moving when power is applied to the armature circuit. What is the initial
value of 
 Determine the starting value of the developed torque. Compare these values
to the steady-state values from part (a).
c. What additional resistance must be inserted in series with the armature to limit the
starting current to 200 A? Find the starting torque with this resistance in place.
P15.71. A series-connected motor drives a load from a 50-V source at a speed of 1500 rpm. The
load torque is proportional to speed. The resistances 
 Neglect rotational losses. What
average source voltage is needed to achieve a speed of 1000 rpm? If this is achieved by
chopping the 50-V source as illustrated in Figure 15.25 on page 775, find the duty ratio 
Tload=200 Nm
IA?
RF=RA=0.
Ton/T.
*P15.72. A separately excited dc generator is rated for a load voltage of 150 V for a full load
current of 20 A at 1500 rpm. With the load disconnected, the output voltage is 160 V.
a. Determine the voltage regulation, the load resistance, the armature resistance, and the
developed torque at full load.
b. The speed of the generator is decreased to 1200 rpm, and the load resistance is
unchanged. Determine the load current, the load voltage, and the developed power.
P15.73. Using Figure 15.30 on page 780 as a guide, list the types of connections for dc
generators considered in Section 15.7, in order of percentage voltage regulation from highest to
lowest.
P15.74. Name the four types of compound connections for dc generators.
P15.75. What methods can be used to increase the load voltage of:
a. a separately excited dc generator?
b. a shunt-connected dc generator?
P15.76. What is the value of the voltage regulation for a fully compensated compound dc
generator?
P15.77. A separately excited dc generator has the magnetization curve shown in Figure P15.77,
 and 
 The prime mover rotates the armature at a speed
of 1300 rpm. Determine the field current, the no-load voltage, the full-load voltage, and the
percentage voltage regulation for a full-load current of 10 A. Assuming that the overall efficiency
(not including the power supplied to the field circuit) of the machine is 80 percent, determine the
VF=150, RF=40 Ω, Radj=60 Ω,
RA=1.5 Ω.

input torque, the developed torque, and the losses associated with friction, windage, eddy
currents, and hysteresis.
Figure P15.77

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T15.1. Consider a shunt-connected dc motor. What are the names of the two windings? Which is
on the stator? On the rotor? For which does the current vary with mechanical load?
T15.2. Sketch the torque versus speed characteristic for a shunt-connected dc motor. What
happens to the speed if the machine is lightly loaded and the field winding becomes
disconnected?
T15.3. Sketch the torque versus speed characteristic for a series-connected dc motor.
T15.4. Give the definition of percentage speed regulation.
T15.5. Explain how the magnetization curve is measured for a dc machine.
T15.6. Name and briefly discuss the types of power loss in a shunt-connected dc motor.
T15.7. What is a universal motor? What are its advantages and disadvantages compared to
other types of ac motors?
T15.8. List three methods for controlling the speed of a dc motor.
T15.9. Suppose we have a dc motor that produces a back emf of 
 at a speed of 1500
rpm.
a. If the field current remains constant, what is the back emf for a speed of 500 rpm?
b. For a speed of 2000 rpm?
T15.10. We have a dc motor that has an induced armature voltage of 120 V at 
 If
the field remains constant and this motor is operating at a speed of 
 with a
developed power of 4 hp, what are the values for the armature current and the developed
torque?
T15.11. Consider a separately excited dc motor (see the equivalent circuit shown in Figure
15.21 on page 770) that has 
 and 
 For a full-load output power of 6 hp, we
have 
 and 
 The field current remains constant for all parts of this problem.
a. Find the developed power, developed torque, power lost in 
 and the rotational losses.
b. Assuming that the rotational power loss is proportional to speed, find the speed
regulation of the motor.
T15.12. We have a series-connected dc motor that draws an armature current of 20 A while
running at 1000 rpm from a 240-V source. The field resistance is 
 and the armature
resistance is 
 Assuming that the flux is proportional to the field current, determine the
EA=240 V
nm1=1200 rpm.
nm2=900 rpm
RA=0.5 Ω
VT=240 V.
nm=1200 rpm
IA=20 A.
RA,
0.3 Ω,
0.4 Ω.

speed at which the armature current is 10 A.

Chapter 16 AC Machines
Study of this chapter will enable you to:
Select the proper ac motor type for various applications.
State how torque varies with speed for various ac motors.
Compute electrical and mechanical quantities for ac motors.
Use motor nameplate data.
Understand the operation and characteristics of three-phase induction motors, three-phase
synchronous machines, various types of single-phase ac motors, stepper motors, and brushless dc
motors.
Introduction to this chapter:
In this chapter, we continue our discussion of electrical machines. It is not necessary
to have studied all of Chapter 15 before reading this chapter. However, you should
read Section 15.1 to become familiar with the general concepts related to electrical

machines before starting this chapter.

16.1 Three-Phase Induction Motors
Three-phase induction machines account for the great majority of applications that call for motors with
power ratings over 5 hp. They are used to power pumps, fans, compressors, and grinders, and in other
industrial applications. In this section, we describe the construction and principles of these important
devices.
Rotating Stator Field
In this section, we see that the stator windings of three-phase induction machines
set up magnetic poles that rotate around the circumference of the stator.
The stator of a three-phase induction machine contains a set of windings to which three-phase electrical
power is applied. In the first part of this section, we show that these windings establish a rotating
magnetic field in the gap between the stator and rotor. The stator field can be visualized as a set of
north and south poles rotating around the circumference of the stator. (North stator poles are where
magnetic flux lines leave the stator, and south stator poles are where magnetic flux lines enter the
stator.) Because north and south poles occur in pairs, the total number of poles P is always even. The
field is illustrated for two-pole and four-pole machines in Figure 16.1. Similarly, it is possible for a three-
phase induction motor to have six, eight, or more poles.

Figure 16.1
The field established by the stator windings of a three-phase induction machine consists of an even
number of magnetic poles. The field rotates at a speed known as synchronous speed.
Next, we examine the stator windings and how the rotating field is established in a two-pole machine.
The stator of the two-pole machine contains three windings embedded in slots cut lengthwise on the
inside of the stator. One of the three stator windings is illustrated in Figure 16.2.
Figure 16.2
Two views of a two-pole stator showing one of the three windings. For simplicity, we represent the
winding with a single turn, but in a real machine, each winding has many turns distributed around the
circumference of the stator such that the air-gap flux varies sinusoidally with 
For simplicity, we represent each winding by only two conductors on opposite sides of the stator.
However, each winding actually consists of a large number of conductors distributed in various slots in
such a manner that the resulting air-gap flux varies approximately sinusoidally with the angle  (which is
defined in Figure 16.2). Thus, the field in the air gap due to the current 
 in winding a is given by
where K is a constant that depends on the geometry and materials of the stator and rotor as well as the
number of turns in winding a. 
is taken as positive when directed from the stator toward the rotor and
negative when directed in the opposite direction.
The field in the gap due to winding a is shown in Figure 16.3. Notice that the field is strongest at 
and at 
 Although it fluctuates in strength and polarity as the current changes with time, the field
produced by winding a alone does not rotate. However, we are about to demonstrate that the combined
field produced by all three windings does rotate.
θ.
θ
ia(t)
Ba=Kia(t) cos(θ)
(16.1)
Ba
θ=0
θ=180°.

Figure 16.3
The field produced by the current in winding a varies sinusoidally in space around the circumference of
the gap. The field is shown here for the positive maximum of the current 
 As illustrated, the field is
strongest in magnitude at 
 and at 
 Furthermore, the current and the field vary sinusoidally
with time. Over time, the field dies to zero and then builds up in the opposite direction.
Each winding sets up a field that varies sinusoidally around the circumference of
the gap and varies sinusoidally with time. These fields are displaced from one
another by 120° in both time and space.
The other two windings (b and c) are identical to winding a, except that they are rotated in space by
120° and 240°, respectively. This is illustrated in Figure 16.4. Thus, the fields in the air gap due to
windings b and c are given by
Figure 16.4
ia(t).
θ=0
θ=180°.

The stator of a two-pole machine contains three identical windings spaced 120° apart.
The total field in the gap is the sum of the individual fields produced by the three coils. Thus, the total
field is
Using Equations 16.1 through 16.3 to substitute into Equation 16.4, we have
Application of a balanced three-phase source to the windings results in currents given by
Now, using Equations 16.6, 16.7, and 16.8 to substitute for the currents in Equation 16.5 yields
The trigonometric identity 
 can be used to write Equation 16.9
as
Furthermore, we can write
because the three terms form a balanced three-phase set. A phasor diagram for these terms is shown in
Figure 16.5. (Notice that 
 is equivalent to 
 and that 
 is equivalent to 
) Thus,
Equation 16.10 reduces to
Bb=Kib(t) cos(θ−120°)
(16.2)
Bc=Kic(t) cos(θ−240°)
(16.3)
Bgap=Ba+Bb+Bc
(16.4)
Bgap=Kia(t) cos(θ)+Kib(t) cos(θ−120°)+Kic(t) cos(θ−240°)
(16.5)
ia(t)=Im cos(ωt)
(16.6)
ib(t)=Im cos(ωt−120°)
(16.7)
ic(t)=Im cos(ωt−240°)
(16.8)
Bgap=
KIm cos(ωt) cos(θ)+KIm cos(ωt−120°) cos(θ−120°)
KIm cos(ωt−240°) cos(θ−240°)
(16.9)
cos(x) cos(y)=(1/2)[ cos(x−y)+cos(x+y) ]
Bgap=
32 KIm cos(ωt−θ)+12 KIm[cos(ωt+θ)
+cos(ωt+θ−240°)+cos(ωt+θ−480°)]
(16.10)
[ cos(ωt+θ)+cos(ωt+θ−240°)+cos(ωt+θ−480°) ]=0
(16.11)
−240°
+120°,
−480°
−120°.

Figure 16.5
Phasor diagram for the three terms on the left-hand side of Equation 16.11. Regardless of the value of
 the phasors add to zero.
where we have defined 
 An important conclusion can be drawn from Equation 16.12: The
field in the gap rotates counterclockwise with an angular speed of 
 To verify this fact, notice that the
maximum flux density occurs for
The field in the gap rotates counterclockwise with an angular speed 
Thus, in the two-pole machine, the point of maximum flux rotates counterclockwise with an angular
velocity of 
Synchronous Speed
By a similar analysis, it can be shown that for a P-pole machine, the field rotates at an angular velocity
of
θ
Bgap=Bm cos(ωt−θ)
(16.12)
Bm=(3/2)KIm.
ω.
ω.
θ=ωt
dθ/dt=ω.

In a P-pole machine, the field rotates at the synchronous speed 
which is called the synchronous angular velocity. In rpm, the synchronous speed is
Table 16.1 gives synchronous speeds versus the number of poles assuming a frequency of 60 Hz.
Table 16.1 Synchronous Speed Versus Number of Poles for 
P
 2
3600
 4
1800
 6
1200
 8
 900
10
 720
12
 600
In summary, we have shown that the field set up by the stator windings consists of a system of P
magnetic poles that rotate at synchronous speed. These fields were illustrated in Figure 16.1 for two-
and four-pole machines.
The direction of rotation of a three-phase induction motor can be reversed by
interchanging any two of the three line connections to the three-phase source.
ωs
ωs=ωP/2
(16.13)
ns=120fP
(16.14)
θ.
ns

Exercise 16.1 
If the connections of b and c to the three-phase source are interchanged, the currents become
Show that, in this case, the field rotates clockwise rather than counterclockwise.
The result of Exercise 16.1 shows that the direction of rotation of the field in a three-phase induction
machine can be reversed by interchanging any two of the line connections to the electrical source. We
will see that this reverses the direction of mechanical rotation. You may find the fact that interchanging
two of the electrical connections to the source reverses the direction of rotation to be useful in working
with three-phase motors.
Squirrel-Cage Induction Machines
The rotor windings of a three-phase induction machine can take two forms. The simplest, least
expensive, and most rugged is known as a squirrel-cage rotor. It consists simply of bars of aluminum
with shorting rings at the ends, as illustrated in Figure 16.6. The squirrel cage is embedded in the
laminated iron rotor by casting molten aluminum into slots cut into the rotor. In the squirrel-cage
induction machine, there are no external electrical connections to the rotor. The other type of rotor
construction, which we discuss later, is known as a wound rotor.
Figure 16.6
The rotor conductors of a squirrel-cage induction machine are aluminum bars connected to rings that
short the ends together. These conductors are formed by casting molten aluminum into slots in the
laminated iron rotor.
Next, we consider how torque is produced in squirrel-cage induction machines. We have seen earlier in
this section that the stator sets up a system of P magnetic poles that rotate at synchronous speed. As
ia(t)=Im cos(ωt)
ib(t)=Im cos(ωt−240°)
ic(t)=Im cos(ωt−120°)

this magnetic field moves past, voltages are induced in the squirrel-cage conductors. Since the field, the
direction of relative motion, and the length of the conductors are mutually perpendicular, the induced
voltage 
is given by Equation 15.9, which is repeated here for convenience:
in which B is the flux density, l is the length of the conductor, and u is the relative velocity between the
conductor and the field.
The rotating stator field induces voltages in the rotor conductors resulting in
currents that produce magnetic poles on the rotor. The interaction of the rotor
poles and stator poles produces torque.
This voltage causes currents to flow in the conductors as illustrated in Figure 16.7. Of course, the
largest voltages are induced in the conductors that are directly under the stator poles because that is
where the flux density B is largest in magnitude. Furthermore, for conductors under south poles, the
voltage polarity and current direction are opposite to those for conductors under north poles. Currents
flow through the bars under the north pole, around the shorting ring, and back in the opposite direction
through the bars under the south pole.
Figure 16.7
Cross section of a squirrel-cage induction motor. The rotating stator field induces currents in the
conducting bars which in turn set up magnetic poles on the rotor. Torque is produced because the rotor
poles are attracted to the stator poles.
vc
vc=Blu
(16.15)

The rotor currents establish magnetic poles on the rotor. It is the interaction of the rotor poles with the
stator poles that produces torque. The north rotor pole 
attempts to align itself with the south stator
pole 
If the impedances of the rotor conductors were purely resistive, the largest currents would occur directly
under the stator poles 
and 
 as shown in Figure 16.7. Consequently, the rotor poles would be
displaced by 
 with respect to the stator poles, as illustrated for a two-pole machine in Figure
16.7. This is exactly the angular displacement between the sets of magnetic poles that produces
maximum torque.
Slip and Slip Frequency
The frequency of the voltages induced in the rotor conductors depends on the rotational speed of the
stator field relative to the rotor and on the number of poles. We have seen that the stator field rotates at
synchronous speed denoted as either 
or 
 We denote the mechanical speed of the rotor as 
(or
). In an induction motor, the mechanical speed 
varies from zero to almost synchronous speed.
Thus, the speed of the stator field relative to the rotor is 
(or 
).
The slip s is defined to be the relative speed as a fraction of synchronous speed:
Slip s varies from 1 when the rotor is stationary to 0 when the rotor turns at synchronous speed.
The frequency of the rotor currents is called the slip frequency.
The angular frequency of the voltages induced in the squirrel cage, called the slip frequency, is given
by
Notice that when the mechanical speed approaches the speed of the stator field (which is the
synchronous speed), the frequency of the induced voltages approaches zero.
Nr
Ss.
Ss
Ns,
δrs=90°
ωs
ns.
ωm
nm
ωm
ωs−ωm
ns−nm
s=ωs−ωm
ωs
=ns−nm
ns
(16.16)
ωslip=sω
(16.17)

Effect of Rotor Inductance on Torque
In Figure 16.7, we saw how torque is produced in an induction motor assuming purely resistive
impedances for the rotor conductors. However, the impedances of the conductors are not purely
resistive. Because the conductors are embedded in iron, there is significant series inductance
associated with each conductor. The equivalent circuit for a given conductor is shown in Figure 16.8, in
which 
is the phasor for the induced voltage, 
is the resistance of the conductor, and 
is its
inductance. Both the frequency and the amplitude of the induced voltage are proportional to slip.
Figure 16.8
Equivalent circuit for a rotor conductor. 
is the phasor for the induced voltage, 
is the resistance of
the conductor, and 
is the inductance.
Since the frequency of the induced voltage is 
 the impedance is
The current is
Because of the inductance, the current lags the induced voltage. As the slip s increases, the amount of
phase lag approaches 90°. Consequently, the peak current in a given rotor conductor occurs somewhat
after the stator pole passes by. Furthermore, the rotor poles are displaced from the stator poles by less
than 90°. This is illustrated in Figure 16.9. Because of this, the torque is reduced. (If the stator and rotor
poles were aligned, no torque would be produced.)
Because of the inductances of the rotor conductors, the rotor currents lag the
induced voltages.
Vc
Rc
Lc
Vc
Rc
Lc
ωslip=sω,
Zc=Rc+jsωLc
(16.18)
Ic=Vc
Rc+jsωLc
(16.19)

Figure 16.9
As slip s increases, the conductor currents lag the induced voltages. Consequently, the angular
displacement 
between the rotor poles and the stator poles approaches 0°.
Torque-Speed Characteristic
Now we are in a position to explain qualitatively the torque-speed characteristic shown in Figure 16.10
for the squirrel-cage induction motor. First, assume that the rotor speed 
equals the synchronous
speed 
(i.e., the slip s equals zero). In this case, the relative velocity between the conductors and the
field is zero (i.e., 
). Then according to Equation 16.15, the induced voltage 
is zero. Consequently,
the rotor currents are zero and the torque is zero.
Figure 16.10
Torque-versus-speed characteristic for a typical three-phase induction motor.
As the rotor slows down from synchronous speed, the stator field moves past the rotor conductors. The
δrs
nm
ns
u=0
vc

magnitudes of the voltages induced in the rotor conductors increase linearly with slip. For small slips,
the inductive reactances of the conductors, given by 
 are negligible, and maximum rotor current is
aligned with maximum stator field, which is the optimum situation for producing torque. Because the
induced voltage is proportional to slip and the impedance is independent of slip, the currents are
proportional to slip. Torque is proportional to the product of the field and the current. Hence, we
conclude that torque is proportional to slip, assuming small slip. This fact is illustrated in Figure 16.10.
For small values of slip, developed torque is proportional to slip.
As the motor slows further, the inductive reactance eventually dominates the denominator of Equation
16.19. Then, the magnitude of the current is nearly independent of slip. Thus, the torque tends to level
out as the motor slows. Because the poles on the rotor tend to become aligned with the stator poles, the
torque decreases as the motor slows to a stop. The torque for zero speed is called either the starting
torque or the stall torque. The maximum torque is called either the pull-out torque or the breakover
torque.
Motor designers can modify the shape of the torque-speed curve by changing
various aspects of the machine design, such as the cross section and depth of
the rotor conductors.
Our discussion has revealed the general characteristics of the three-phase induction motor. The motor
designer can modify the shape of the torque-speed characteristic by variations in the dimensions and
geometry of the motor and by materials selection. Some examples of torque-speed characteristics
available in induction motors are shown in Figure 16.11. However, the details of motor design are
beyond the scope of our discussion.
sωLc,

Figure 16.11
Depending on various design features, the torque-speed characteristic of the three-phase induction
motor can be modified to better suit particular applications.
Exercise 16.2 
A 5-hp four-pole 60-Hz three-phase induction motor runs at 1750 rpm under full-load conditions.
Determine the slip and the frequency of the rotor currents at full load. Also, estimate the speed if the
load torque drops in half.
Answer s=50/1800=0.02778, fslip=1.667 Hz, n=1775 rpm.

16.2 Equivalent-Circuit and Performance Calculations for
Induction Motors
In Section 16.1, we described the induction motor and its operation in qualitative terms. In this section,
we develop an equivalent circuit and show how to calculate the performance of induction motors.
The equivalent circuit for each phase of an induction motor is similar to that of a
transformer with the secondary winding shorted.
Consider the induction motor with the rotor locked so that it cannot turn. Then, the magnetic field of the
stator links the rotor windings and causes current to flow in them. Basically, the locked-rotor induction
motor is the same as a three-phase transformer with the stator windings acting as the primary. The rotor
conductors act as short-circuited secondary windings. Thus, we can expect the equivalent circuit for
each phase of the motor to be very similar to the transformer equivalent circuit shown in Figure 14.28
on page 728. Of course, modifications to the transformer equivalent circuit are necessary before it can
be applied to the induction motor because of rotation and the conversion of electrical energy into
mechanical form.
Rotor Equivalent Circuit
An equivalent circuit for one phase of the rotor windings is shown in Figure 16.12(a). (Equivalent circuits
for the other two phases are identical except for the phase angles of the current and voltage.) 
represents the induced voltage in phase a of the rotor under locked conditions. As discussed in the
preceding section, the voltage induced in the rotor is proportional to slip s. Thus, the induced voltage is
represented by the voltage source 
 (Recall that for a stationary rotor 
)
Er
sEr.
s=1.

Figure 16.12
Two equivalent circuits for one phase of the rotor windings.
We have seen that the frequency of the rotor currents is 
 The rotor inductance (per phase) is
denoted by 
and has a reactance of 
 where 
is the reactance under locked-rotor
conditions. The resistance per phase is denoted by 
 and the current in one phase of the rotor is 
which is given by
Dividing the numerator and denominator of the right-hand side of Equation 16.20 by s, we have
This can be represented by the circuit shown in Figure 16.12(b).
Complete Induction-Motor Equivalent Circuit
Figure 16.13 provides a convenient reference for the information needed to
analyze induction machines.
sω.
Lr
jsωLr=jsXr,
Xr=ωLr
Rr,
Ir,
Ir=sEr
Rr+jsXr
(16.20)
Ir=Er
Rr/s+jXr
(16.21)

Figure 16.13
Equivalent circuit for one phase of an induction motor and the associated power-
flow diagram. 
is the rms phase voltage and 
is the rms phase current.
As in a transformer, the induced rotor voltage 
under locked conditions is related to the stator voltage
by the turns ratio. Thus, we can reflect the rotor impedances of Figure 16.12(b) to the primary (stator)
side of the equivalent circuit. We denote the reflected values of 
and 
 by 
 and 
respectively.
The completed (per phase) induction-motor equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 16.13. The resistance
of the stator winding is 
 and the stator leakage reactance is 
 The magnetizing reactance 
accounts for the current needed to set up the rotating stator field. Except for changes in notation, these
parts of the equivalent circuit are the same as the transformer equivalent circuit.
Phase versus Line Quantities
The voltage 
across each winding and current 
through each winding shown in Figure 16.13 are
called the phase voltage and phase current, respectively.
Relationships between line and phase quantities for a delta-connected motor.
Vs
Is
Er
Xr
Rr/s
Xr′
Rr′/s,
Rs,
Xs.
Xm
Vs
Is

The windings of an induction motor may be connected in either a delta or a wye. In the case of a delta
connection, the phase voltage 
is the same as the line-to-line voltage 
 The line current 
is 
times the phase current 
 (This is explained in Section 5.7.) In equation form for the delta connection,
we have
On the other hand, for a wye connection, we get
Relationships between line and phase quantities for a wye-connected motor.
The voltage rating stated for a machine is invariably the line-to-line voltage.
The voltage rating stated for a machine is invariably the line-to-line voltage. For a given three-phase
source, the voltage across the windings is smaller by a factor of 
for the wye connection.
We will see that the starting current for induction motors can be very large compared to the full-load
running current. Sometimes, motors are started in the wye configuration and then switched to delta as
the motor approaches its running speed to lessen starting currents.
Power and Torque Calculations
In Figure 16.13, notice that we have split the reflected resistance 
 into two parts as follows:
Vs
Vline.
Iline
3
Is.
Vs
=Vline
Iline
Is3
Vs
=Vline3
IlineIs
3
Rr′/s

A power-flow diagram for induction motors is also shown in Figure 16.13. The power delivered to the
resistance 
is the part that is converted to mechanical form. This portion of the power, called
the developed power, is denoted by 
 The equivalent circuit shown in Figure 16.13 represents
one of three phases, so the total developed power is
On the other hand, the power delivered to the rotor resistance 
is converted to heat. Generally, we
refer to 
 losses as copper losses (even though the conductors are sometimes aluminum). The total
copper loss in the rotor is
and the stator copper loss is
The input power from the three-phase source is
in which 
 is the power factor.
Part of the developed power is lost to friction and windage. Another loss is core loss due to hysteresis
and eddy currents. Sometimes, a resistance is included in parallel with the magnetization reactance 
to account for core loss. However, we will include the core loss with the rotational losses. Unless stated
otherwise, we assume that the rotational power loss is proportional to speed. The output power is the
developed power minus the rotational loss:
As usual, the efficiency of the machine is given by
The developed torque is
Rr′
s=Rr′+1−ss Rr′
(16.22)
[ (1−s)/s ]Rr′
Pdev.
Pdev=3×1−ss Rr′(Ir′
)2
(16.23)
Rr′
I2R
Pr=3Rr′(Ir
)2
(16.24)
Ps=3RsIs2
(16.25)
Pin=3IsVs cos(θ)
(16.26)
cos(θ)
jXm
Pout=Pdev−Prot
(16.27)
η=Pout
Pin
×100%
Tdev=Pdev
ωm
(16.28)

The power 
that crosses the air gap into the rotor is delivered to the rotor resistances. Thus, we can
find the air-gap power by adding the respective sides of Equations 16.23 and 16.24:
Comparing Equations 16.23 and 16.31, we have
Using Equation 16.32 to substitute for 
in Equation 16.28, we get
However, we also have 
 Using this to substitute into Equation 16.33, we obtain
For speed to increase from a standing start, the initial torque or starting torque produced by the motor
must be larger than the torque required by the load. We can find starting torque as follows. Under
starting conditions (i.e., 
), we have 
 and 
 Then, the starting torque can be
computed by using Equation 16.34.
Equation 16.34 can be used to compute starting torque.
Example 16.1 Induction-Motor Performance
A certain 30-hp four-pole 440-V-rms 60-Hz three-phase delta-connected induction motor has
Pag
Pag=Pr+Pdev
(16.29)
Pag=3Rr′(Ir′)2+3×1−ss Rr′(Ir′)2
(16.30)
Pag=3×1s Rr′(Ir′)2
(16.31)
Pdev=(1−s)Pag
(16.32)
Pdev
Tdev=(1−s)Pag
ωm
(16.33)
ωm=(1−s)ωs.
Tdev=Pag
ωs
(16.34)
ωm=0
s=1
Pag=3Rr′(Ir′)2.
Rs=1.2 ΩRr′=0.6 Ω
Xs=2.0 ΩXr′=0.8 Ω
Xm=50 Ω

Under load, the machine operates at 1746 rpm and has rotational losses of 900 W. Find the power
factor, the line current, the output power, copper losses, output torque, and efficiency.
Solution
From Table 16.1, we find that synchronous speed for a four-pole motor is 
 Then, we
utilize Equation 16.16 to compute the slip:
We can use the data given to draw the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 16.14 for one phase of the
motor. The impedance seen by the source is
Figure 16.14
Equivalent circuit for one phase of the motor of Example 16.1.
The power factor is the cosine of the impedance angle. Because the impedance is inductive, we
know that the power factor is lagging:
For a delta-connected machine, the phase voltage is equal to the line voltage, which is specified to
be 440 V rms. The phase current is
Thus, the magnitude of the line current is
ns=1800 rpm.
s=ns−nm
ns
=1800−17461800=0.03
Zs
=1.2+j2+j50(0.6+19.4+j0.8)j50+0.6+19.4+j0.8
=1.2+j2+16.77+j7.392
=17.97+j9.392
=20.28∠27.59°¯ Ω
power factor=cos(27.59°)=88.63% lagging
Is=Vs
Zs
=440∠0°¯
20.28∠27.59°¯
=21.70∠−27.59°¯ A rms
Iline=Is3=21.703=37.59 A rms

In ac machine calculations, we take the rms values of currents and voltages
for the phasor magnitudes (instead of peak values as we have done
previously).
The input power is
Next, we compute 
and 
The copper losses in the stator and rotor are
and
Finally, the developed power is
As a check, we note that
to within rounding error.
The output power is the developed power minus the rotational loss, given by
This corresponds to 29.62 hp, so the motor is operating at nearly its rated load. The output torque is
Pin
=3IsVs cos θ
=3(21.70)440 cos(27.59°
=25.38 kW
Vx
Ir′:
Vx
=Isj50(0.6+19.4+j0.8)j50+0.6+19.4+j0.8
=21.70∠−27.59°¯×18.33∠23.78°¯
=397.8∠−3.807°¯ V rms
Ir′
Vxj0.8+0.6+19.4
397.8∠−3.807°¯20.01∠1.718°¯
=19.88∠−5.52°¯ A rms
Ps
=3RsIs2
=3(1.2)(21.70)2
=1695 W
Pr
=3Rr′(Ir′)2
=3(0.6)(19.88)2
=711.4 W
Pdev
=3×1−ss Rr′(Ir′)2
=3(19.4)(19.88)2
=23.00 kW
Pin=Pdev+Ps+Pr
Pout
=Pdev−Prot
=23.00−0.900
=22.1 kW

The efficiency is
Example 16.2 Starting Current and Torque
Calculate the starting line current and torque for the motor of Example 16.1.
Solution
For starting from a standstill, we have 
 The equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 16.15(a).
Combining the impedances to the right of the dashed line, we have
Figure 16.15
Equivalent circuit for Example 16.2.
The circuit with the combined impedances is shown in Figure 16.15(b).
The impedance seen by the source is
Tout
=Poutωm
=22,1001746(2π/60)
=120.9 Nm
η
=PoutPin×100%
22,10025,380×100%
=87.0%
s=1.
Zeq=Req+jXeq=j50(0.6+j0.8)j50+0.6+j0.8=0.5812+j0.7943 Ω
Zs
=1.2+j2+Zeq
=1.2+j2+0.5812+j0.7943
=1.7812+j2.7943
=3.314∠57.48°¯ Ω

Thus, the starting phase current is
and, because the motor is delta connected, the starting-line-current magnitude is
In Example 16.1, with the motor running under nearly a full load, the line current is 
Thus, the starting current is approximately six times larger than the full-load running current. This is
typical of induction motors.
The power crossing the air gap is three times the power delivered to the right of the dashed line in
Figure 16.15, given by
Finally, Equation 16.34 gives us the starting torque:
Notice that the starting torque is larger than the torque while running under full-load conditions. This
is also typical of induction motors.
Example 16.3 Induction-Motor Performance
A 220-V-rms 60-Hz three-phase wye-connected induction motor draws 31.87 A at a power factor of
75 percent lagging. For all three phases, the total stator copper losses are 400 W, and the total rotor
copper losses are 150 W. The rotational losses are 500 W. Find the power crossing the air gap 
the developed power 
 the output power 
 and the efficiency.
Solution
The phase voltage is 
 Next, we find the input power:
The air-gap power is the input power minus the stator copper loss:
Is, starting
=VsZs=440∠0°¯3.314∠57.48°¯
=132.8∠−57.48°¯ A rms
Iline, starting=3Is, starting=230.0 A rms
Iline=37.59 A.
Pag
=3Req(Is, starting)2
=30.75 kW
Tdev, starting
=Pagωs
=30,7502π(60)/2
=163.1 Nm
Pag,
Pdev,
Pout,
Vs=Vline/3=127.0 V rms.
Pin
=3VsIs cos(θ)
=3(127)(31.87)(0.75)
=9107 W
Pag
=Pin−Ps
=9107−400
=8707 W

The developed power is the input power minus the copper losses:
Next, by subtracting the rotational losses, we find that the output power is
Finally, the efficiency is
Exercise 16.3 
Repeat Example 16.1 for a running speed of 1764 rpm.
Answer 
 power 
 kW; 
 
 
 
Exercise 16.4 
Repeat Example 16.2 if the rotor resistance is increased to 
 Compare the starting torque with the
value found in the example.
Answer 
 
Wound-Rotor Induction Machine
A variation of the induction motor is the wound-rotor machine. The stator is identical to that of a
squirrel-cage motor. Instead of a cast aluminum cage, the rotor contains a set of three-phase coils that
are placed in slots. The windings are configured to produce the same number of poles on the rotor as on
the stator. The windings are usually wye connected and the three terminals are brought out to external
terminals through slip rings.
The results of Exercise 16.4 show that the starting torque of an induction motor can be increased by
increasing the rotor resistance. By using a set of variable resistances connected to the rotor terminals,
the torque-speed characteristic of the machine can be modified as illustrated in Figure 16.16. A degree
of speed control can be achieved by varying the resistances. However, efficiency becomes poorer as
the resistance is increased.
Pdev=9107−400−150=8557 W
Pout
=Pdev−Prot
=8557−500
=8057 W
η
=PoutPin×100%
=94.0%
s=0.02;
factor=82.62%; Pin=17.43
Pout=15.27 kW; Ps=919 W; Pr=330 W;
Tout=82.66 Nm; η=87.61%.
1.2 Ω.
Is, starting=119.7∠−50°¯; Tdev, starting=265.0 Nm.

Figure 16.16
Variation of resistance in series with the rotor windings changes the torque-speed characteristic of the
wound-rotor machine.
A disadvantage of the wound-rotor machine is that it is more expensive and less rugged than the cage
machine.
Selection of Induction Motors
Some of the most important considerations in selecting an induction motor are
1. Efficiency
2. Starting torque
3. Pull-out torque
4. Power factor
5. Starting current
High values for the first four factors and low starting current are generally most desirable. Unfortunately,
it is not possible to design a motor having the most desirable values for all of these criteria. It turns out
that in the design of a motor, various trade-offs between these criteria must be made. For example,
higher rotor resistance leads to lower efficiency and higher starting torque. Larger leakage reactance 
leads to lower starting current but poorer power factor. The design engineer must consider the various
motors available and select the one that best meets the needs of the application at hand.
Xs

16.3 Synchronous Machines
In this section, we discuss synchronous ac machines. These machines are used for nearly all electrical-
energy generation by utility companies. As motors, they tend to be used in higher-power, lower-speed
applications than those for which induction motors are used. Unlike other types of ac and dc motors that
we have studied to this point, the speed of a synchronous motor does not vary with mechanical load
(assuming a constant-frequency ac source). Instead, we will see that they run at synchronous speed 
which is given by Equation 16.13, repeated here for convenience:
Generation of electrical energy by utility companies is done almost exclusively
with synchronous machines.
Assuming a constant frequency source, the speed of a synchronous motor does
not vary with load.
(Recall that  is the angular frequency of the ac source and P is the number of magnetic poles of the
stator or rotor.) Unless stated otherwise, we assume that the rotor is turning at synchronous speed
throughout our discussion of synchronous machines.
The stator of a synchronous machine has the same construction as the stator of a three-phase induction
motor, which was described in Section 15.1. In review, the stator contains a set of three-phase windings
that establish the stator field. This field consists of P magnetic poles, alternating between north and
south around the circumference of the stator and rotating at synchronous speed. In a synchronous
machine, the set of stator windings is called the armature.
ωs,
ωs=ωP/2
ω

The stator windings of a synchronous machine are basically the same as those of
an induction machine.
The rotor of a synchronous machine is a P-pole electromagnet or (in low-power
machines) a permanent magnet.
The rotor of a synchronous machine is usually a P-pole electromagnet with field windings that carry dc
currents. (In smaller machines, the rotor can be a permanent magnet, but we will concentrate on
machines with field windings.) The field current can be supplied from an external dc source through
stationary brushes to slip rings mounted on the shaft. The slip rings are insulated from one another and
from the shaft. Another method is to place a small ac generator, known as an exciter, on the same shaft
and use diodes mounted on the shaft to rectify the ac. This avoids the maintenance associated with
brushes and slip rings.
Two- and four-pole synchronous machines are illustrated in Figure 16.17. The rotor can either be
cylindrical, as shown for the two-pole machine, or it can have salient poles as illustrated for the four-
pole machine. Generally, salient-pole construction is less costly but is limited to low-speed machines
having many poles. High-speed machines usually have cylindrical rotors. Salient-pole machines are
common in hydroelectric power generation, whereas cylindrical-rotor machines are common in thermal
(coal, nuclear, etc.) power plants.

Figure 16.17
Cross-sections of two synchronous machines. The relative positions of the stator and rotor poles are
shown for motor action. Torque is developed in the direction of rotation because the rotor poles try to
align themselves with the opposite stator poles.
Automobile Alternator
The alternators found in most automobiles are basically synchronous machines, except that the
armature is not connected to an independent ac source. Therefore, the speed of the alternator is not
fixed. As the rotor spins, the rotating field cuts the armature conductors, inducing a set of ac voltages.
The ac armature voltages are rectified, and the resulting dc is used to power the headlights, charge the
battery, and so on. The frequency and amplitude of the ac voltages increase with speed. The amplitude
of the induced ac armature voltages is proportional to the flux density, which in turn depends on the field
current. An electronic control circuit (or regulator) varies the field current to maintain approximately 14 V
dc at the output of the rectifier.
Motor Action
In using the machine as a motor, the armature is connected to a three-phase ac source. We have seen
that the resulting three-phase currents in the armature windings set up a rotating stator field. The rotor
turns at synchronous speed with the rotor poles lagging behind the stator poles. Torque is produced
because the rotor poles attempt to align with the stator poles. This is illustrated in Figure 16.17.
Electrical Angles

We denote the angular displacement around the air gap as 
 which is illustrated in Figure 16.17(a).
Sometimes, it is convenient to measure angular displacements in electrical degrees, for which 180°
corresponds to the angular distance from a north pole to the adjacent south pole. Thus, a four-pole
machine has 720 electrical degrees around the circumference of its air gap, a two-pole machine has 360
electrical degrees, and a six-pole machine has 
 degrees. We denote displacement in electrical
degrees as 
 Electrical and mechanical angular displacements are related by
Angles can be measured in electrical degrees for which the angle between
adjacent north and south poles is 180°.
Field Components
The total rotating field in the air gap is due partly to dc current in the field windings on the rotor and
partly to ac currents flowing in the armature windings. The air-gap flux components are functions of both
time and angular displacement. The field lines cross perpendicular to the gap, because that is the path
of least reluctance. Thus, at any given point, the field is directed perpendicular to the armature
conductors, which lie in slots cut lengthwise into the inside face of the stator.
The total field rotating in the air gap is partly due to the dc currents in the rotor
windings and partly due to the ac currents in the stator (armature) windings.
Most synchronous machines are designed so that the flux density varies sinusoidally with 
 Because
the field rotates at a uniform rate, the flux density at any point in the gap varies sinusoidally with time.
Thus, we can represent the field components at 
 by phasors denoted by 
 and 
 which
correspond to the stator flux component, rotor flux component, and total flux, respectively. Then, we can
θm,
3×360
θe.
θe=θm P2
(16.35)
θm.
θm=0
Bs, Br,
Btotal,

write
Synchronous machines are designed so the flux varies sinusoidally around the
air gap.
The torque developed in the rotor is given by
in which K is a constant that depends on the dimensions and other features of the machine. 
and
are the magnitudes of the phasors 
and 
 respectively.  is the electrical angle, called the
torque angle, by which the rotor field lags the total field.
Equivalent Circuit
The rotating field components induce corresponding voltage components in the armature windings. We
concentrate on the a phase of the armature winding. The voltages and currents in the other two
armature windings are identical except for phase shifts of 
The voltage component induced by the rotor flux can be represented as a phasor that is given by
in which k is a constant that depends on the machine construction features.
A second voltage component is induced in each winding by the rotating stator field. This voltage
component is given by
As we have seen, the stator field is established by the armature currents. The stator is a mutually
coupled three-phase inductor, and the voltage due to the stator field can be written as
Btotal=Bs+Br
(16.36)
Tdev=KBrBtotal sin(δ)
(16.37)
Btotal
Br
Btotal
Br,
δ
±120°.
Er=kBr
(16.38)
Es=kBs
(16.39)

where 
is an inductive reactance known as the synchronous reactance, and 
is the phasor for the
armature current. [Actually, the stator windings also have resistance, and more precisely, we have
 However, the resistance 
is usually very small compared to the synchronous
reactance, so Equation 16.40 is sufficiently accurate.]
and 
represent the rms phase voltage and phase current, respectively. The
relationship to line voltage and line current depends on whether the machine is
wye or delta connected.
The voltage observed at the terminals of the armature winding is the sum of these two components.
Thus, we can write
where 
is the phasor for the terminal voltage for the a-phase winding. Using Equation 16.40 to
substitute for 
 we have
Also, we can write
Throughout our discussion, we assume that the phase angle of 
is 0.
because the total voltage is proportional to the total flux.
Es=jXsIa
(16.40)
Xs
Ia
Es=(Ra+jXs
)Ia.
Ra
Va
Ia
Va=Er+Es
(16.41)
Va
Es,
Va=Er+jXsIa
(16.42)
Va
Va=kBtotal
(16.43)

The equivalent circuit of the synchronous motor is shown in Figure 16.18. Only the a phase of the
armature is shown. The three-phase source 
supplies current 
to the armature. The ac voltage
induced in the armature by the rotor field is represented by the voltage source 
 The dc voltage source
supplies the field current 
to the rotor. An adjustable resistance 
is included in the field circuit so
that the field current can be varied. This in turn adjusts the magnitudes of the rotor field 
and the
resulting induced voltage 
Figure 16.18
Equivalent circuit for the synchronous motor. The armature circuit is based on Equation 16.42.
The armature windings can be connected either in a wye or in a delta configuration. In our discussion,
we do not specify the way in which the windings are connected. For either connection, 
represents
the voltage across the a winding. In a wye connection, 
corresponds to the line-to-neutral voltage,
whereas in a delta connection, 
corresponds to the line-to-line voltage. Similarly, 
is the current
through the a winding, which corresponds to the line current in a wye connection but not in a delta
connection. The important things to remember are that 
is the voltage across the a winding and that
is the current through the a winding, regardless of the manner in which the machine is connected.
The phasor diagram for the current and voltages is shown in Figure 16.19(a). The corresponding
phasor diagram for the fields is shown in Figure 16.19(b). Because the rotor field is lagging the total
field, positive torque (given by Equation 16.37) and output power are being developed. In other words,
the machine is acting as a motor.
Figure 16.19
Phasor diagrams for the synchronous motor. Notice that the stator component of voltage 
is at
right angles to the current 
The developed torque is given by 
and the power factor is
Va
Ia
Er.
Vf
If
Radj
Br
Er.
Va
Va
Va
Ia
Va
Ia
Es = jXsIa
Ia
Tdev = KBrBtotal
cos(θ)

The input power taken from the three-phase ac source is given by
in which the factor of three accounts for the fact that there are three sets of windings. Since the
equivalent circuit does not include any losses, the input power and the developed mechanical power are
equal.
Potential for Power-Factor Correction
The total reactive power absorbed by the three windings is given by
in which  is defined to be the angle by which the phase current 
lags the phase voltage 
The synchronous motor can act as a source of reactive power.
Notice in Figure 16.19(a) that  takes a negative value because the phase current 
leads the phase
voltage 
 Therefore, the reactive power for the machine is negative, indicating that the synchronous
motor can supply reactive power. This is a significant advantage because most industrial plants have an
overall lagging power factor (due largely to the widespread employment of induction motors). Poor
power factor leads to larger currents in the transmission lines and transformers supplying the plant.
Thus, utility companies invariably charge their industrial customers more for energy supplied while the
power factor is low. By using some synchronous motors in an industrial plant, part of the reactive power
taken by inductive loads can be supplied locally, thereby lowering energy costs. Should you someday be
employed as a plant engineer, you will need to have a good understanding of these issues.
Proper use of synchronous motors can lower energy costs of an industrial plant
by increasing the power factor.
Pdev=Pin=3VaIa cos(θ)
(16.44)
Q=3VaIa sin(θ)
(16.45)
θ
Ia
Va.
θ
Ia
Va.

Unloaded synchronous machines have sometimes been installed solely for the purpose of power-factor
correction. With zero load (and neglecting losses), the rotor field and the total field align so that the
torque angle  is zero, and according to Equation 16.37, the developed torque is zero. Phasor
diagrams for unloaded synchronous machines are shown in Figure 16.20.
Figure 16.20
Phasor diagrams for unloaded synchronous machines. When a machine has 
 the current 
leads the
applied voltage 
by 90°, and each phase of the machine is electrically equivalent to a capacitor. Thus,
the machine supplies reactive power.
If we have
we say that the machine is underexcited. For an unloaded machine with 
 the machine is
underexcited if the magnitude of 
is less than the magnitude of the applied phase voltage 
 Then,
the current 
lags 
by 
 Consequently, the real power supplied (which is given by Equation
16.44) is zero, as we expect for an unloaded machine (neglecting losses). The underexcited machine
absorbs reactive power. This is the opposite of the desired result for most applications.
However, if the field current is increased such that
δ
θ.
Ia
Va
Va>Er cos(δ)
(16.46)
δ=0,
Er 
Va.
Ia 
Va 
θ=90°.

we say that the machine is overexcited. The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 16.20(b) for an
unloaded overexcited machine. In this case, the current leads the voltage by 90°, and the machine
supplies reactive power. In the overexcited state, an unloaded synchronous machine appears as a pure
capacitive reactance to the ac source. Machines used in this manner are called synchronous
capacitors.
Operation with Variable Load and Constant Field Current
Motors are usually operated from ac voltage sources of constant magnitude and phase. This fact in
combination with Equation 16.43 shows that the total flux phasor 
is constant in magnitude and
phase. Because speed is constant in a synchronous machine, power is proportional to torque, which in
turn is proportional to 
 as shown by Equation 16.37. Thus, we can write
This fact is illustrated in Figure 16.21(a).
Figure 16.21
Phasor diagrams for a synchronous motor.
Furthermore, 
is proportional to 
 Hence, we have established that
Va<Er cos(δ)
(16.47)
Btotal 
Br sin(δ),
Pdev∝Br sin(δ)
(16.48)
Er 
Br.
Pdev∝Er sin(δ)
(16.49)

Since 
 (neglecting stator copper loss) and since 
is constant, we also have
Equations 16.49 and 16.50 are illustrated in the phasor diagram shown in Figure 16.21(b).
Now suppose that we have a synchronous motor operating with a variable load and constant field
current. Because the field current is constant, 
is constant in magnitude. As the load changes, 
can
change in phase, but not in magnitude. Therefore, the locus formed by 
is a circle. The phasor
diagram for a machine with a variable load is shown in Figure 16.21(c). Notice that the power factor
tends to become lagging as the load is increased.
As the load varies with constant field current, the locus of 
is a circle. Notice
that if 
and 
are extended, they meet at right angles. Careful study of
Figure 16.21 shows that the power factor tends to become lagging as load is
increased.
Example 16.4 Synchronous-Motor Performance
A 480-V-rms 200-hp 60-Hz eight-pole delta-connected synchronous motor operates with a
developed power (including losses) of 50 hp and a power factor of 90 percent leading. The
synchronous reactance is 
Find the speed and developed torque.
Determine the values of 
 and the torque angle.
Suppose that the excitation remains constant and the load torque increases until the developed
power is 100 hp. Determine the new values of 
 the torque angle, and the power factor.
Solution
a. The speed of the machine is given by Equation 16.14:
For the first operating condition, the developed power is
Pdev=Pin=3VaIa cos(θ)
Va 
Pdev∝Ia cos(θ)
(16.50)
Er 
Er 
Er 
Er 
jXsIa 
Ia 
Xs=1.4 Ω.
Ia, Er,
Ia, Er,
ns=120fP=120(60)8=900 rpm ωs=ns2π60=30π=94.25 rad/s
Pdev1=50×746=37.3 kW

and the developed torque is
b. The voltage rating refers to the rms line-to-line voltage. Because the windings are delta
connected, we have 
 Solving Equation
16.44 for 
and substituting
values, we have
Next, the power factor is 
 which yields
Because the power factor was given as leading, we know that the phase of 
is positive.
Thus, we have
Then from Equation 16.42, we have
Consequently, the torque angle is 
c. When the load torque is increased while holding excitation constant (i.e., the values of 
and 
are constant), the torque angle must increase. In Figure 16.21(b), we see that the
developed power is proportional to 
 Hence, we can write
Solving for 
 and substituting values, we find that
Because 
is constant in magnitude, we get
(We know that 
lags 
because the machine is acting as a motor.) Next, we
can find the new current:
Finally, the new power factor is
Exercise 16.5 
Tdev1=Pdev1 ωs =37,30094.25=396 Nm
Va=Vline=480 V rms.
Ia 
Ia1=Pdev1 3Va cos(θ1 )=37,3003(480)(0.9)=28.78 A rms
cos(θ1 )=0.9,
θ1=25.84°
Ia1 
Ia1=28.78∠25.84°¯ A rms
Er1 =Va1−jXsIa=480−j1.4(28.78∠25.84°¯) =497.6−j36.3 =498.9∠−4.168°¯ V rms
δ1=4.168°.
If, Br,
Er 
sin(δ).
sin(δ2 )sin(δ1 )=P2 P1
sin(δ2 )
sin(δ2) =P2P1 sin(δ1)=100 hp50 hp sin(4.168°) δ2 =8.360°
Er
Er2=498.9∠−8.360°¯ V rms
Er2 
Va=480∠0°¯ 
Ia2=Va−Er2 jXs =52.70∠10.61°¯ A rms
cos(θ2 )=cos(10.61°)=98.3% leading

For the motor of Example 16.4, suppose that the excitation remains constant and the load torque
increases until the developed power is 
 Determine the new values of 
 the torque
angle, and the power factor.
Answer 
 power 
 lagging.
Operation with Constant Load and Variable Field Current
When operating with constant developed power 
 Figure 16.21(b) shows that the values of
 and 
 are constant. Then, if the field current increases, the magnitude of 
increases.
The resulting phasor diagram for several values of field current is shown in Figure 16.22. Notice that as
the field current increases, the armature current decreases in magnitude, reaching a minimum for 
(or unity power factor) and then increases with a leading power factor. The current magnitude reaches a
minimum when 
is in phase with 
(i.e., when 
 and the power factor is unity). Plots of 
versus
field current are shown in Figure 16.23. These plots are called V curves because of their shape.
Figure 16.22
Phasor diagram for constant developed power and increasing field current.
Figure 16.23
V curves for a synchronous motor with variable excitation.
Pdev3=200 hp.
Ia, Er,
Ia3=103.6∠−1.05°¯; Er3=498.9∠−16.90°¯; δ3=16.90°;
factor=
Pdev,
Ia cos(θ)
Er sin(δ)
Er 
θ=0°
Ia 
Va 
θ=0
Ia 

Power factor tends to become leading as field current, and consequently, 
increase in magnitude.
Example 16.5 Power-Factor Control
A 480-V-rms 200-hp 60-Hz eight-pole delta-connected synchronous motor operates with a
developed power (including losses) of 200 hp and a power factor of 85 percent lagging. The
synchronous reactance is 
 The field current is 
 What must the new field current be
to produce 100 percent power factor? Assume that magnetic saturation does not occur, so that 
is
proportional to 
Solution
First, we determine the initial value of 
 Because the initial power factor is 
 we can
determine that
Then, the phase current is
Thus, the phasor current is
The induced voltage is
The phasor diagram for the initial excitation is shown in Figure 16.24(a).
Er
Xs=1.4 Ω.
If=10 A.
Br 
If.
Er.
cos(θ1 )=0.85,
θ1=31.79°
Ia1=Pdev 3Va cos(θ1 )=200(746)3(480)0.85=121.9 A rms
Ia1=121.9∠−31.79°¯ A rms
Er1 =Va1−jXsIa1=480−j1.4(121.9∠−31.79°¯) =390.1−j145.0 =416.2∠−20.39°¯ V rms

Figure 16.24
Phasor diagrams for Example 16.5.
To achieve 100 percent power factor, we need to increase the field current and the magnitude of 
until 
is in phase with 
 as shown in Figure 16.24(b). The new value of the phase current is
Then, we have
Now the magnitude of 
is proportional to the field current, so we can write
Exercise 16.6 
Find the field current needed to achieve a power factor of 90 percent leading for the motor of Example
16.5.
Answer 
Pull-Out Torque
The developed torque of a synchronous motor is given by Equation 16.37, which states that
The pull-out torque is the maximum torque that the synchronous motor can
Er
Ia 
Va,
Ia2=Pdev 3Va cos(θ2 )=200(746)3(480)=103.6 A rms
Er2 =Va2−jXsIa2=480−j1.4(103.6) =480−j145.0 =501.4∠−16.81°¯ V rms
Er 
If2=If1 Er2 Er1 =10 501.4416.2=12.05 A dc
If=13.67 A.
Tdev=KBrBtotal sin(δ)

produce, which occurs for a torque angle of 90°.
This is plotted in Figure 16.25. The maximum or pull-out torque 
occurs for a torque angle of
Figure 16.25
Torque versus torque angle. 
is the maximum or pull-out torque.
Typically, the rated torque is about 30 percent of the maximum torque.
Suppose that a synchronous motor is initially unloaded. Then, it runs at synchronous speed with 
 As
the load increases, the motor slows momentarily and  increases just enough so that the developed
torque meets the demands of the load plus losses. Then, the machine again runs at synchronous
speed.
However, if the load on a synchronous machine was to exceed the pull-out torque, it would no longer be
possible for the machine to drive the load at synchronous speed and  would keep on increasing. Then,
the machine would produce enormous surges in torque back and forth, resulting in great vibration. Once
the rotor pulls out of synchronism with the rotating armature field, the average torque falls to zero, and
the system slows to a stop.
Generally, it is desirable to operate synchronous motors in the overexcited state
to obtain large pull-out torque and to generate reactive power.
Tmax 
δ=90°:
Tmax 
Tmax=KBrBtotal
(16.51)
δ=0.
δ
δ

The torque-speed characteristic of a synchronous motor is shown in Figure 16.26. Generally, it is
desirable to operate synchronous motors in an overexcited state (i.e., large values of 
 and 
), for
several reasons. First, the machine produces reactive power. Second, as shown by Equation 16.51, the
pull-out torque is higher with higher 
Figure 16.26
Torque-speed characteristic of synchronous motors.
Starting Methods
Because a synchronous motor develops zero starting torque, we need to make special provisions for
starting. Several methods can be used:
Because the starting torque of the synchronous motor is zero, special starting
provisions are needed.
1. Vary the frequency of the ac source starting very low (a fraction of a hertz) and gradually
increasing to the operating speed desired. This can be accomplished with power electronic
circuits known as cycloconverters that can convert 60-Hz ac power into three-phase power of
any desired frequency. Such a system can also be used for very accurate speed control.
2. Use a prime mover to bring the synchronous motor up to speed. Then, the motor is connected to
the ac source and the load is connected. Before the ac source is connected, it is important to
wait until the phases of the voltages induced in the armature closely match those of the line
voltages. In other words, we want the torque angle  to be close to zero before closing the
If, Br,
Er 
Br.
δ

switches to the ac source. Otherwise, excessive currents and torques occur as the rotor tries to
rapidly align itself with the stator field.
3. The rotors of many synchronous motors contain amortisseur or damper conductors, which are
similar in structure to the squirrel-cage conductors used in induction motors. Then, the motor can
be started as an induction motor with the field windings shorted and without load. After the motor
has approached synchronous speed, the dc source is connected to the field and the motor pulls
into synchronism. Then, the load is connected.
Damper conductors have another purpose besides use in starting. It is possible for the speed of a
synchronous motor to oscillate above and below synchronous speed so that the torque angle  swings
back and forth. This action is similar to that of a pendulum. By including the damper bars, the oscillation
is damped out. When running at synchronous speed, no voltage is induced in the damper bars and they
have no effect.
Exercise 16.7 
A synchronous motor produces maximum torque and maximum power for 
 Draw the phasor
diagram for this case and show that 
 and 
Answer The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 16.27
Figure 16.27
Phasor diagram for maximum developed torque and maximum power conditions. See Exercise 16.7.
δ
δ=90°.
Pmax=
Tmax=3(VaEr/ωmXs ).

16.4 Single-Phase Motors
In Chapter 15, we examined the universal motor, which can be operated from single-phase ac. In this
section, we discuss briefly several additional types of single-phase ac motors. Single-phase motors are
important because three-phase power is not available for homes, most offices, and many small
businesses.
Universal motors have relatively large power-to-weight ratios but short service
lives.
Compared with induction motors, universal motors have a higher power/weight ratio, but they do not
have as long a service life, due to wear of the brushes. Assuming constant source frequency, induction
motors are essentially constant-speed devices. On the other hand, the speed of a universal motor can
be varied by changing the amplitude of the applied voltage.
Basic Single-Phase Induction Motor
Let us begin by considering the basic single-phase induction motor shown in Figure 16.28. The stator of
this motor has a main winding that is connected to an ac source. (Later, we will see that an auxiliary
winding is needed for starting.) It has a squirrel-cage rotor that is identical to the rotor of the three-phase
induction motor shown in Figure 16.6.

Figure 16.28
Cross-section of the basic single-phase induction motor.
Ideally, the air-gap flux varies sinusoidally in space around the circumference of the gap. Thus, the flux
is given by
which is the same, except for changes in notation, as Equation 16.1 for the flux due to winding a of a
three-phase induction motor. The stator current is given by
Substituting this expression for the current into Equation 16.52, we have
Instead of rotating, this flux pulsates, switching direction twice per cycle.
However, by applying the trigonometric identity for the product of cosines, we can write Equation 16.54
as
The first term on the right-hand side of Equation 16.55 represents a flux that rotates counterclockwise
(i.e., in the positive  direction), while the second term rotates clockwise. Thus, the pulsating flux in the
basic single-phase induction motor can be resolved into two counter rotating components. On the other
hand, the three-phase motor has flux rotating in one direction only.
B=Ki(t) cos(θ)
(16.52)
i(t)=Im cos(ωt)
(16.53)
B=KIm cos(ωt) cos(θ)
(16.54)
B=12 KIm cos(ωt−θ)+12 KIm cos(ωt+θ)
(16.55)
θ

The pulsating flux produced by the main winding can be resolved into two
counter rotating components.
We assume that the rotor spins counterclockwise with speed 
 The field component that rotates in
the same direction as the rotor is called the forward component. The other component is called the
reverse component. Each of these components produces torque, but in opposite directions. The torque
versus speed characteristic for each component is similar to that of a three-phase induction motor. The
torques produced by the forward component, the reverse component, and the total torque are shown in
Figure 16.29.
Figure 16.29
The main winding produces two counter-rotating flux components each of which induces torque in the
rotor. The main winding alone induces no net starting torque.
Notice that the net starting torque is zero, and therefore the main winding will not start a load from a
standing start. Once started, however, the motor develops torque and accelerates loads within its
ratings to nearly synchronous speed. Its running characteristics (in the vicinity of synchronous speed)
are similar to
those of the three-phase induction motor. Because of the symmetry of its torque-speed
characteristic, the basic single-phase motor is capable of running equally well in either direction.
Two windings that are 90  apart physically and carry currents 90  apart in phase
produce a rotating magnetic field.
ωm.
°
°

Auxiliary Windings
Lack of starting torque is a serious flaw for a motor in most applications. However, the basic single-
phase induction motor can be modified to provide starting torque and improve its running characteristics.
It can be shown (see Problem P16.8) that equal-amplitude currents having a 90  phase relationship and
flowing in windings that are at right angles produce only a forward rotating component of flux. (This is
similar to the rotating flux produced by balanced three-phase currents flowing in windings displaced by
120  from one another.) If the two currents differ in phase by less than 90  (but by more than 0 ), the
forward flux component is larger than the reverse flux component and net starting torque results. Thus,
nearly all single-phase induction motors have an auxiliary winding rotated in space by 90 electrical
degrees from the main winding. Various provisions can be made to achieve the requisite phase shift
between the current in the main winding and the current in the auxiliary winding.
Single-phase induction motors contain an auxiliary winding displaced by 90
electrical degrees from the main winding.
One possibility is to wind the auxiliary winding with smaller wire that has a higher ratio of resistance to
inductive reactance than the main winding. Then, the current in the auxiliary winding has a different
phase angle than that of the main current. Motors using this approach are called split-phase motors
(Figure 16.30). Usually, the auxiliary winding is designed to be used only briefly during starting, and a
centrifugal switch disconnects it when the motor approaches rated speed. (A common failure in this type
of motor is for the switch to fail to open, and then the auxiliary winding overheats and burns out.)
Figure 16.30
°
°
°
°

The split-phase induction motor.
Single-phase induction motors produce more noise and vibration and are larger
than three-phase motors with equal power ratings.
When running on the main winding, the torque of a single-phase motor pulsates at twice the frequency
of the ac source, because no torque is produced when the stator current passes through zero. On the
other hand, torque is constant in a three-phase motor because the current is nonzero in at least two of
the three windings at all instants. Thus, single-phase induction motors display more noise and vibration
than do three-phase motors. Furthermore, single-phase induction motors are larger and heavier than
three-phase motors of the same ratings.
In a capacitor-start motor, a capacitor is placed in series with the auxiliary winding, resulting in much
higher starting torque than that of the split-phase motor, because the phase relationship between 
and
is closer to 90 . In a capacitor-run motor, the auxiliary winding is a permanent part of the circuit,
resulting in smoother torque and less vibration. Another variation is the capacitor-start, capacitor-run
motor shown in Figure 16.31.
Figure 16.31
The capacitor-start, capacitor-run motor.
Shaded-Pole Motors
Ia 
Im 
°

Shaded-pole motors are used for inexpensive low-power applications.
The least expensive approach to providing self-starting for single-phase induction motors is the shaded-
pole motor, shown in Figure 16.32. A shorted copper band is placed around part of each pole face. As
the field builds up, current is induced in this shading ring. The current retards changes in the field for
that part of the pole face encircled by the ring. As the current in the ring decays, the center of the
magnetic pole moves in the direction of the ring. This favors rotation in one direction over the other,
resulting in starting torque. This approach is used only for very small motors (1/20 hp or less).
Figure 16.32
The shaded-pole motor.

16.5 Stepper Motors and Brushless DC Motors
Stepper motors are used for accurate, repeatable positioning such as machine tool applications or for
moving the head in an ink-jet printer. By using an electronic controller that applies electrical pulses to
the motor windings, the motor shaft can be rotated in either direction in multiples of the step angle,
which can range from 0.72  (500 steps per revolution) to 15  (24 steps per revolution). Stepper motors
are available with rotational accuracies on the order of 3 percent of a step, which is noncumulative as
the motor is stepped back and forth. By controlling the rate at which pulses are applied to the windings
of the stepper motor, speed can be varied continuously from a standing stop to a maximum that
depends on the motor and load.
Anytime you need accurate repeatable positioning, consider using a stepper
motor.
There are several types of stepper motors. Figure 16.33(a) shows the cross-section of the simplest,
which is known as a variable-reluctance stepper motor. Notice that the stator has eight salient poles
that are 45  apart. On the other hand, the rotor has six salient poles 60  apart. Thus, when 1 is aligned
with A as shown, 2 is 15  counterclockwise from B, and 3 is 15  clockwise from D.
Figure 16.33
Variable-reluctance stepper motor.
°
°
°
°
°
°

The stator contains four windings (which are not shown in the cross-section). A controller applies power
to one of the coils at a time as shown in Figure 16.33(b). Coil A is wound partly around pole A and
partly around 
 such that, when current is applied, A becomes a north magnetic pole and 
 becomes a
south pole. Then, the rotor moves to shorten the air gaps between A (and 
) and the rotor. As long as
power is applied to coil A, the rotor is held in the position shown in the figure. However, if power is
removed from A and applied to B by moving the controller switch, the rotor moves 15  clockwise so that
2 is aligned with B. Then if power is removed from B and applied to C, the shaft rotates another 15
clockwise. Thus, applying power to the coils in the sequence ABCDABC . . . results in clockwise rotation
of the shaft in 15  increments. By changing the switching rate, the motor speed can be varied upward
from a standing stop. Furthermore, by reversing the switching sequence to ADCBADCB . . . , the
direction of rotation can be reversed.
Another type is the permanent-magnet stepper motor, which has a cylindrical rotor (called a "tin-can
rotor") that is permanently magnetized with north and south poles alternating around its circumference.
The stator of the permanent magnet motor is similar to that of the reluctance motor. As in the reluctance
type, the rotor position is stepped by applying a sequence of pulses to the stator windings. Hybrid
stepper motors that combine variable reluctance with permanent magnets are also available. Of
course, detailed specifications for stepper motors can be found from manufacturers' websites.
Brushless DC Motors
Conventional dc motors are particularly useful in applications that require high speeds and in those for
which dc power is available, such as those in aircraft and automobiles. However, because they contain
commutators and brushes, conventional dc motors have several disadvantages. These include relatively
short service lives due to brush and commutator wear, particularly at very high speeds. Also, arcing as
the brushes move between commutator segments can pose a hazard in explosive environments and
can create severe radio interference. A relatively new development, the brushless dc motor, provides
an excellent alternative when the disadvantages of conventional dc motors are prohibitive.
Brushless dc motors are essentially permanent-magnet stepping motors equipped with position sensors
(either Hall effect or optical) and enhanced control units. As in the stepper motor, power is applied to
one stator winding at a time. When the position sensor indicates that the rotor has approached
alignment with the stator field, the controller electronically switches power to the next stator winding so
that smooth motion continues. By varying the amplitude and duration of the pulses applied to the stator
windings, speed can be readily controlled. The result is a motor that can operate from a dc source with
characteristics similar to those of a conventional shunt dc motor.
A′,
A′
A′
°
°
°

Brushless dc motors are used primarily in low-power applications. Their advantages include relatively
high efficiency, long service life with little maintenance, freedom from radio interference, ability to
operate in explosive chemical environments, and capability for very high speeds (50,000 rpm or more).

Summary
1. Application of a three-phase source to the stator windings of an induction motor produces a
magnetic field in the air gap that rotates at synchronous speed. Interchanging any two of the
connections to the three-phase source reverses the direction of rotation.
2. A squirrel-cage rotor contains aluminum conductors embedded in the rotor. As the stator field
moves past, currents are induced in the rotor resulting in torque. The torque-speed
characteristic takes the form shown in Figure 16.10 on page 802. In normal steady-state
operation, typical motors operate with 0 to 5 percent slip, and the output power and torque are
approximately proportional to slip.
3. The per-phase equivalent circuit shown in Figure 16.13 on page 804 is useful in performance
calculations for induction motors.
4. Some of the most important considerations in selecting an induction motor are efficiency, starting
torque, pull-out torque, power factor, and starting current.
5. Typically, the starting torque of an induction motor is 150 percent or more of the rated full-load
running torque. Thus, induction motors can start all constant-torque loads that are within their
full-load ratings. Starting current with rated voltage is typically five to six times the full-load
running current.
6. A three-phase synchronous machine has stator windings that produce a magnetic field
consisting of P poles that rotate at synchronous speed. The rotor is an electromagnet. The
machine runs at synchronous speed, and the torque-speed characteristic is shown in Figure
16.26 on page 823.
7. When operated in the overexcited state, synchronous machines produce reactive power and can
help to correct the power factor of industrial plants, saving on energy costs.
8. The equivalent circuit for three-phase synchronous machines shown in Figure 16.18 on page
815 can be used in performance calculations.
9. Synchronous motors have zero starting torque, and special provisions must be made for starting.
10. Single-phase induction motors have a main winding and an auxiliary winding displaced by 90
electrical degrees. With power applied to only the main winding, the motor can run but has zero
starting torque. Because of differences in the resistance/reactance ratio or because a capacitor
is in the circuit, the currents in the two windings have different phases and this produces starting
torque. Frequently, the starting winding is disconnected from the ac source when the motor
approaches rated speed.
11. Single-phase induction motors are heavier and produce more vibration than do three-phase
motors of the same power rating.
12. Stepper motors are useful in applications that require accurate repeatable positioning.

13. Brushless dc motors are a good alternative to conventional dc motors for low-power
applications
that require long life with little maintenance, operation in explosive environments, freedom from
radio interference, or very high speed.

Problems
Section 16.1: Three-Phase Induction Motors
*P16.1. It is necessary to reduce the voltage applied to an induction motor as the frequency is
reduced from the rated value. Explain why this is so.
* Denotes that answers are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information
about accessing the Student Solutions.
*P16.2. The air-gap flux density of a two-pole induction motor is given by
where 
is the peak flux density,  is the angular displacement around the air gap, and we
have assumed clockwise rotation. Give the corresponding expression for the flux density of a
four-pole induction motor; of a six-pole induction motor.
*P16.3. A four-pole induction motor drives a load at 2500 rpm. This is to be accomplished by
using an electronic converter to convert a 400-V dc source into a set of three-phase ac voltages.
Find the frequency required for the ac voltages assuming that the slip is 4 percent. The load
requires 2 hp. If the dc-to-ac converter has a power efficiency of 88 percent and the motor has a
power efficiency of 80 percent, estimate the current taken from the dc source.
*P16.4. A 60-Hz induction motor is needed to drive a load at approximately 850 rpm. How many
poles should the motor have? What is the slip of this motor for a speed of 850 rpm?
P16.5. The magnetic field produced in the air gap of an induction motor by the stator windings is
given by 
 in which  is angular displacement in the counterclockwise direction
as illustrated in Figure 16.4 on page 797. How many poles does this machine have? Given that
the frequency of the source is 50 Hz, determine the speed of rotation of the field. Does the field
rotate clockwise or counterclockwise? Repeat for a field given by 
P16.6. Prepare a table that shows synchronous speeds for three-phase induction motors
operating at 50 Hz. Consider motors having eight or fewer poles. Repeat for 400-Hz motors.
P16.7. Explain why induction motors develop zero torque at synchronous speed.
P16.8. Consider the two-pole two-phase induction motor having two windings displaced 90  in
space shown in Figure P16.8. The fields produced by the windings are given by
 and 
 The two-phase source produces currents given by
 and 
 Show that the total field rotates. Determine the speed
B=Bm cos(ωt−θ)
Bm 
θ
B=Bm cos(ωt−2θ),
θ
B=Bm cos(ωt+3θ).
°
Ba=Kia(t) cos(θ)
Bb=Kib(t) cos(θ−90°).
ia(t)=Im cos(ωt)
ib(t)=Im cos(ωt−90°).

and direction of rotation. Also find the maximum flux density of the rotating field in terms of K and
Figure P16.8
Two-phase induction motor.
P16.9. In a proposed design for an electric automobile, the shaft of a four-pole three-phase
induction motor is connected directly to the drive axle; in other words, there is no gear train. The
outside diameter of the tires is 20 inches. Instead of a transmission, an electronic converter
produces variable-frequency three-phase ac from a 48-V battery. Assuming negligible slip, find
the range of frequencies needed for speeds ranging from 5 to 70 mph. The vehicle, including
batteries and occupants, has a mass of 1000 kg. The power efficiency of the dc-to-ac converter
is 85 percent, and the power efficiency of the motor is 89 percent.
a. Find the current taken from the battery as a function of time while accelerating from 0 to
40 mph uniformly (i.e., acceleration is constant) in 10 seconds. Neglect wind load and
road friction.
b. Repeat assuming that the vehicle is accelerated with constant power.
P16.10. A 10-hp six-pole 60-Hz three-phase induction motor runs at 1160 rpm under full-load
conditions. Determine the slip and the frequency of the rotor currents at full load. Also estimate
the speed if the load torque drops in half.
P16.11. Consider the induction motor shown in Figure 16.7 on page 800. Redraw the figure
showing the current directions in the rotor conductors, the magnetic rotor poles, and the direction
of the developed torque if a prime mover drives the rotor at a speed higher than synchronous
speed. In this case, does the machine operate as a motor or as a generator?
P16.12. Consider the two-pole two-phase induction motor having two windings displaced 90  in
space shown in Figure P16.8. The fields produced by the windings are given by
 and 
 The two-phase source produces currents given by
 and 
 Show that the total field rotates. Determine the
speed and direction of rotation. Also find the maximum flux density of the rotating field in terms
Im.
°
Ba=Kia(t) cos(θ)
Bb=Kib(t) cos(θ−90°).
ia(t)=Im cos(2ωt)
ib(t)=Im cos(2ωt+90°).

Section 16.2: Equivalent-Circuit and Performance Calculations for Induction Motors
of K and 
P16.13. Suppose that we could use superconducting material for the rotor conductors (i.e., rotor
conductors with inductance and zero resistance) of an induction motor. Would this improve the
performance of the motor? Explain by considering the torque-speed characteristic.
Im.
*P16.14. A two-pole 60-Hz induction motor produces an output power of 5 hp at a speed of 3500
rpm. With no load, the speed is 3598 rpm. Assume that the rotational torque loss is independent
of speed. Find the rotational power loss at 3500 rpm.
*P16.15. A certain four-pole 240-V-rms 60-Hz delta-connected three-phase induction motor has
Under load, the machine operates at 1728 rpm and has rotational losses of 200 W. Neglecting
the rotational losses, find the no-load speed, line current, and power factor for the motor.
*P16.16. Sketch the torque-speed characteristic of a delta-connected 220-V-rms 5-hp four-pole
60-Hz three-phase induction motor. Estimate values and label key features for things such as
the full-load running speed, the full-load torque, the pull-out torque, and the starting torque.
Estimate the full-load line current and the starting line current.
*P16.17. Sometimes, to reduce starting current to reasonable values, induction motors are
started with reduced source voltage. When the motor approaches its operating speed, the
voltage is increased to full rated value. Compute the starting line current and torque for the motor
of Example 16.2 if it is started with a source voltage of 220 V. Compare results with the values
found in the example, and comment.
*P16.18. A certain six-pole 440-V-rms 60-Hz three-phase delta-connected induction motor has
Neglecting the rotational losses, find the no-load speed, line current, and power factor for the
motor.
*P16.19. A 440-V-rms (line-to-line) 60-Hz three-phase wye-connected induction motor draws
16.8 A at a power factor of 80 percent lagging. The stator copper losses are 350 W, the rotor
copper loss is 120 W, and the rotational losses are 400 W. Find the power crossing the air gap
 the developed power 
 the output power 
 and the efficiency.
P16.20. A certain four-pole 240-V-rms 60-Hz delta-connected three-phase induction motor has
Neglecting losses, find the starting torque and starting line current for the motor.
P16.21. A 2-hp six-pole 60-Hz delta-connected three-phase induction motor is rated for 1140
rpm, 220 V rms, and 5.72 A rms (line current) at an 80 percent lagging power factor. Find the
Rs=1 ΩRr′=0.5 Ω Xs=1.5 ΩXr′=0.8 Ω
Xm=40 Ω
Rs=0.08 ΩRr′=0.06 Ω Xs=0.20 ΩXr′=0.15 Ω Xm=7.5 Ω
Pag,
Pdev,
Pout,
Rs=1 ΩRr′=0.5 Ω Xs=1.5 ΩXr′=0.8 Ω Xm=40 Ω

full-load efficiency.
P16.22. Another method that is used to limit starting current is to place additional resistance in
series with the stator windings during starting. The resistance is switched out of the circuit when
the motor approaches full speed. Compute the resistance that must be placed in series with
each phase of the motor of Examples 16.1 and 16.2 to limit the starting line current to
 Determine the starting torque with this resistance in place. Compare the starting
torque with the value found in Example 16.2 and comment.
P16.23. A certain six-pole 440-V-rms 60-Hz three-phase delta-connected induction motor has
Neglecting losses, find the starting torque and starting line current for the motor.
P16.24. What are the two basic types of construction used for the rotors of induction motors?
Which is the most rugged?
P16.25. The torque-speed characteristics of a 60-Hz induction motor and a load are shown in
Figure P16.25. How many poles does the motor have? In steady-state operation, find the speed,
the slip, the output power, and the rotor copper loss. Neglect rotational losses.
P16.26. A 60-Hz wound-rotor induction motor operates at 40 percent slip with added rotor
resistance to achieve speed control. The stator resistance is negligible compared with the rotor
resistance. Neglect rotational losses. Find the efficiency of this motor.
P16.27. List five important specifications to be considered (besides cost) in selecting induction
motors. Indicate the optimum value or whether a high or low value is desirable for each
specification.
P16.28. The torque-speed characteristics of a 60-Hz induction motor and a load are shown in
Figure P16.25. The rotational inertia of the motor and load is 
 Estimate the time required
for the motor to accelerate the load from a standing start to 1000 rpm. [Hint: The difference
between the motor output torque and the load torque is approximately 25 Nm in the range of
speeds under consideration.]
503 A rms.
Rs=0.08 ΩRr′=0.06 Ω
Xs=0.20 ΩXr′=0.15 Ω Xm=7.5 Ω
5 kgm2.

Section 16.3: Synchronous Machines
Figure P16.25
P16.29. A four-pole 60-Hz 240-V-rms induction motor operates at 1750 rpm and produces 2 hp
of output power. The load is a hoist that requires constant torque versus speed. Assume that the
motor is operating in the range for which torque is proportional to slip and write an equation for
motor torque in terms of slip when operating at rated voltage. Then modify the equation for
operation from a 220-V-rms source. Estimate the speed when operating the hoist from a 220-V-
rms source.
P16.30. An eight-pole 60-Hz ac induction motor produces an output power of 2 hp and has
rotational losses of 100 W at a speed of 850 rpm. Determine the slip, the frequency of the stator
currents, the frequency of the rotor currents, and the rotor copper loss.
P16.31. A certain six-pole 440-V-rms 60-Hz three-phase delta-connected induction motor has
Under load, the machine operates with a slip of 4 percent and has rotational losses of 2 kW.
Determine the power factor, output power, copper losses, output torque, and efficiency.
P16.32. A certain four-pole 240-V-rms 60-Hz delta-connected three-phase induction motor has
Under load, the machine operates at 1728 rpm and has rotational losses of 200 W. Find the
power factor, output power, copper losses, output torque, and efficiency.
Rs=0.08 ΩRr′=0.06 Ω Xs=0.20 ΩXr′=0.15 Ω Xm=7.5 Ω
Rs=1 ΩRr′=0.5 Ω Xs=1.5 ΩXr′=0.8 Ω Xm=40 Ω
*P16.33. List several methods for starting synchronous motors.
*P16.34.
a. A 12-pole 60-Hz synchronous motor drives a 10-pole synchronous machine that acts as
a generator. What is the frequency of the voltages induced in the armature windings of
the generator?
b. Suppose that we need to drive a load at exactly 1000 rpm. The power available is 60-Hz
three-phase. Diagram a system of synchronous machines to drive the load, specifying
the number of poles and frequency of operation for each. (Multiple correct answers
exist.)
*P16.35. A certain 480-V-rms delta-connected synchronous motor operates with zero developed
power and draws a phase current of 15 A rms, which lags the voltage. The synchronous
reactance is 
 The field current is 5 A. Assuming that the rotor field magnitude is proportional
to field current, what field current is needed to reduce the armature current to zero?
5 Ω.

*P16.36. A synchronous motor is running at 75 percent of rated load with unity power factor. If
the load increases to the rated output power, how do the following quantities change?
a. field current;
b. mechanical speed;
c. output torque;
d. armature current;
e. power factor;
f. torque angle.
*P16.37. A 10-pole 60-Hz synchronous motor operates with a developed power of 100 hp, which
is its rated full load. The torque angle is 20 . Plot the torque-speed characteristic to scale,
showing the values for rated torque and for the pull-out torque.
P16.38. A 60-Hz 480-V-rms 200-hp delta-connected synchronous motor runs under no-load
conditions. The field current is adjusted for minimum line current, which turns out to be 16.45 A
rms. The per-phase armature impe­dance is 
 (Until now in this chapter, we
have neglected 
 However, it is significant in efficiency calculations.) Estimate the efficiency of
the machine under full-load conditions operating with 90 percent leading power factor.
P16.39. What is a synchronous capacitor? What is the practical benefit of using one?
P16.40. Sketch the V curve for a synchronous motor. Label the axes. Indicate where the power
factor is lagging and where it is leading. Draw the phasor diagram corresponding to the minimum
point on the V curve.
P16.41. A synchronous motor is running at 100 percent of rated load with unity power factor. If
the field current is increased, how do the following quantities change?
a. output power;
b. mechanical speed;
c. output torque;
d. armature current;
e. power factor;
f. torque angle.
P16.42. A six-pole 60-Hz synchronous motor is operating with a developed power of 5 hp and a
torque angle of 5 . Find the speed and developed torque. Suppose that the load increases such
that the developed torque doubles. Find the new torque angle. Find the pull-out torque and
maximum developed power for this machine.
P16.43. An eight-pole 240-V-rms 60-Hz delta-connected synchronous motor operates with a
constant developed power of 50 hp, unity power factor, and a torque angle of 15 . Then, the field
current is increased such that 
increases in magnitude by 20 percent. Find the new torque
angle and power factor. Is the new power factor leading or lagging?
P16.44. A 240-V-rms delta-connected 100-hp 60-Hz six-pole synchronous motor operates with a
developed power (including losses) of 50 hp and a power factor of 90 percent leading. The
°
Rs+jXs=0.05+j1.4.
Rs.
°
°
Br 

Section 16.4: Single-Phase Motors
synchronous reactance is 
a. Find the speed and developed torque.
b. Determine the values of 
 and the torque angle.
c. Suppose that the excitation remains constant and the load torque increases until the
developed power is 100 hp. Determine the new values of 
 the torque angle, and
the power factor.
P16.45. A 240-V-rms 100-hp 60-Hz six-pole delta-connected synchronous motor operates with a
developed power (including losses) of 100 hp and a power factor of 85 percent lagging. The
synchronous reactance is 
 The field current is 
 What must the new field current
be to produce 100 percent power factor? Assume that magnetic saturation does not occur so
that 
is proportional to 
P16.46. A six-pole 240-V-rms 60-Hz delta-connected synchronous motor operates with a
developed power of 50 hp, unity power factor, and a torque angle of 15 . Find the phase current.
Suppose that the load is removed so that the developed power is zero. Find the new values of
the current, power factor, and torque angle.
P16.47. Suppose that a synchronous motor is instrumented to measure its armature current,
armature voltage, and field current. The field circuit contains a rheostat so that the field current
can be adjusted. Discuss how to adjust the field current to obtain unity power factor.
P16.48. Give two situations for which a synchronous motor would be a better choice than an
induction motor in an industrial application.
Xs=0.5 Ω.
Ia, Er,
Ia, Er,
Xs=0.5 Ω.
If=10 A.
Br 
If.
°
*P16.49. A farm house is located at the end of a country road in northern Michigan. The
Thévenin impedance seen looking back into the power line from the electrical distribution panel
is 
 The Thévenin voltage is 240 V rms 60 Hz ac. A 2-hp 240-V-rms capacitor-start
motor is used for pumping water. We want to estimate the voltage drop observed in the house
when the motor starts. Typically, such a motor has a power factor of 75 percent and an efficiency
of 80 percent at full load. Also, the starting current can be estimated as six times the full-load
current. Estimate the worst-case percentage voltage drop observed when the motor starts.
*P16.50. A 1-hp 120-V-rms 1740-rpm 60-Hz capacitor-start induction-run motor draws a current
of 10.2 A rms at full load and has an efficiency of 80 percent. Find the values of
a. the power factor and
b. the impedance of the motor at full load.
c. Determine the number of poles that the motor has.
P16.51. Which would be more suitable for use in a portable vacuum cleaner, an induction motor
or a universal motor? For the fan in a home heating system? For the compressor motor in a
0.2+j0.2 Ω.

Section 16.5: Stepper Motors and Brushless DC Motors
refrigerator? For a variable-speed hand-held drill? Give the reasons for your answer in each
case.
P16.52. Assuming small slip, the output power of a single-phase induction motor can be written
as 
 where 
and 
are constants and s is the slip. A 0.5-hp motor has a full-
load speed of 3500 rpm and a no-load speed of 3595 rpm. Determine the speed for 0.2-hp
output.
P16.53. How could the direction of rotation of a single-phase capacitor-start induction motor be
reversed?
P16.54. The winding impedances under starting conditions for a 60-Hz 0.5-hp motor are shown
in Figure P16.54. Determine the capacitance C needed so that the phase angle between the
currents 
and 
is 90 .
Figure P16.54
Pout=K1s−K2,
K1 
K2 
Ia 
Im 
°
P16.55. Sketch the cross-section of a reluctance stepper motor that has six stator poles and
eight rotor poles. Your sketch should be similar to Figure 16.33(a) on page 828. Label the
windings and specify the sequence of activation for clockwise rotation. What is the rotation angle
per step?
P16.56. Use the Web to find two or more sources for stepper
motors.
P16.57. List several advantages of brushless dc mot­ors compared to conventional dc motors.

Practice Test
Here is a practice test you can use to check your comprehension of the most important concepts in this
chapter. Answers can be found in Appendix D and complete solutions are included in the Student
Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about the Student Solutions.
T16.1.
a. Qualitatively describe the magnetic field set up in the air gap of a four-pole three-phase
induction motor by the currents in the stator windings.
b. Give an equation for the field intensity as a function of angular position around the gap
and time, defining the terms in your equation.
T16.2. Besides low cost, what are five desirable characteristics for an induction motor?
T16.3. A certain eight-pole, 240-V-rms, 60-Hz, wye-connected, three-phase induction motor has
Under load, the machine operates at 864 rpm and has rotational losses of 150 W. Find the
power factor, output power, line current, copper losses, output torque, and efficiency.
T16.4. We have a 20-hp, eight-pole, 60-Hz, three-phase induction motor that runs at 850 rpm
under full-load conditions. What are the values of the slip and the frequency of the rotor currents
at full load? Also, estimate the speed if the load torque drops by 20 percent.
T16.5. In one or two paragraphs, describe the construction and principles of operation for a six-
pole 60-Hz three-phase synchronous motor.
T16.6. We have a six-pole, 440-V-rms, 60-Hz delta-connected synchronous motor operating with
a constant developed power of 20 hp, unity power factor, and a torque angle of 10 . Then, the
field current is reduced such that 
is reduced in magnitude by 25 percent. Find the new torque
angle and power factor. Is the new power factor leading or lagging?
Rs=0.5 ΩRr′=0.5 Ω Xs=2 ΩXr′=0.8 Ω Xm=40 Ω
°
Br 

APPENDIX A Complex Numbers
In Chapter 5, we learnt that sinusoidal steady-state analysis is greatly facilitated if the currents and
voltages are represented as complex numbers known as phasors. In this appendix, we review complex
numbers.

Summary
1. Complex numbers can be expressed in rectangular, polar, or exponential forms. Addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division of complex numbers are necessary operations in solving
steady-state ac circuits by the phasor method.
2. Sinusoids and complex numbers are related through Euler's identities.

* Solutions for these problems are contained in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for more information about
accessing the Student Solutions.
PA.1. Give that 
 and 
 reduce 
 and 
 to rectangular
form.
PA.2. Given that 
 and 
 reduce 
 and 
 to rectangular
form.
PA.3. Given that 
 and 
 reduce 
 and 
 to rectangular
form.
PA.4. Express each of these complex numbers in polar form and in exponential form:
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
PA.5. Express each of these complex numbers in rectangular form and in exponential form:
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
PA.6. Express each of these complex numbers in rectangular form and in polar form:
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
PA.7. Reduce each of the following to rectangular form:
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
ܼଵ= 2 + ݆3
ܼଶ= 4 −݆3,
ܼଵ+ ܼଶ, ܼଵ−ܼଶ, ܼଵܼଶ,
ܼଵ/ܼଶ
ܼଵ= 1 −݆2
ܼଶ= 2 + ݆3,
ܼଵ+ ܼଶ, ܼଵ−ܼଶ, ܼଵܼଶ,
ܼଵ/ܼଶ
ܼଵ= 10 + ݆5
ܼଶ= 20 −
ܼଵ+ ܼଶ, ܼଵ−ܼଶ, ܼଵܼଶ,
ܼଵ/ܼଶ
ܼ௔= 5 −݆5;
ܼ௕= −10 + ݆5;
ܼ௖= −3 −݆4;
ܼௗ= −݆12.
ܼ௔= 5∠45°
̅ ̅ ̅̅ ̅ ̅;
ܼ௕= 10∠120°
̅ ̅ ̅ ̅̅ ̅ ̅ ̅;
ܼ௖= −15∠−90°
̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅;
ܼௗ= −10∠60°
̅ ̅ ̅̅ ̅ ̅.
ܼௗ= 5݁௝ଷ଴°.
ܼ௕= 10݁−௝ସହ°;
ܼ௖= 100݁௝ଵଷହ°;
ܼௗ= 6݁௝ଽ଴°.
ܼ௔= 5 + ݆5 + 10∠30°
̅ ̅ ̅̅ ̅ ̅
ܼ௕= 5∠45°
̅ ̅ ̅̅ ̅ ̅−݆10
ܼ௖=
ଵ଴∠ସହ°
̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅
ଷ+௝ସ
ܼௗ=
ଵହ
ହ∠ଽ଴°
̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅

APPENDIX B Nominal Values and the Color Code for Resistors
Several types of resistors are available for use in electronic circuits. Carbon-film and carbon-
composition resistors with tolerances of 5 percent, 10 percent, or 20 percent are available with various
power ratings (such as 1/8, 1/4, and 1/2 W). These resistors are used in noncritical applications such as
biasing.
Metal-film 1-percent-tolerance resistors are used where greater precision is required. For example, we
often choose metal-film resistors in applications such as the feedback resistors of an op amp.
Wire-wound resistors are available with high power-dissipation ratings. Wire-wound resistors often have
significant series inductance because they consist of resistance wire that is wound on a form, such as
ceramic. Thus, they are often not suitable for use as a resistance at high frequencies.
The value and tolerance are marked on 5-percent, 10-percent, and 20-percent-tolerance resistors by
color bands as shown in Figure B.1. The first band is closest to one end of the resistor. The first and
second bands give the significant digits of the resistance value. The third band gives the exponent of the
multiplier. The fourth band indicates the tolerance. The fifth band is optional and indicates whether the
resistors meet certain military reliability specifications.

Figure B.1
Resistor color code.
Table B.1 shows the combinations of significant figures available as nominal values for 5-percent, 10-
percent, and 20-percent-tolerance resistors. Table B.2 shows the standard nominal significant digits for
1-percent-tolerance resistors.
Table B.1. Standard Nominal Values for 5-Percent-Tolerance Resistors
10
16
27
43
68
11
18
30
47
75
12
20
33
51
82
13
22
36
56
91
15
24
39
62
 Resistors having tolerances of 10 percent and 20 percent are available only for the values given in
boldface.
a
a

Table B.2. Standard Values for 1-Percent-Tolerance Metal-Film Resistors
100
140
196
274
383
536
750
102
143
200
280
392
549
768
105
147
205
287
402
562
787
107
150
210
294
412
576
806
110
154
215
301
422
590
825
113
158
221
309
432
604
845
115
162
226
316
442
619
866
118
165
232
324
453
634
887
121
169
237
332
464
649
909
124
174
243
340
475
665
931
127
178
249
348
487
681
953
130
182
255
357
499
698
976
133
187
261
365
511
715
137
191
267
374
523
732

APPENDIX C The Fundamentals of Engineering Examination
Becoming licensed as a Professional Engineer (PE) is a very important step toward success in your
engineering career. In the United States, a PE license is required by all 50 states for engineers whose
work may affect life, health, or property, or who offer their services to the public. Thus, a license is an
absolute requirement for many types of work. Furthermore, licensed engineers have more opportunities
and earn higher salaries (from 15 percent to 25 percent) than other engineers.
Licensure requirements are set by the various states, but are similar from state to state. Furthermore, by
reciprocal agreements, many states recognize licenses granted in other states. Generally, a degree
from an ABET-accredited engineering program, four years of relevant work experience, and successful
completion of two state examinations are required. The National Council of Examiners for Engineering
and Surveying (NCEES) prepares and scores the examinations. The examinations are the
Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) Examination, which can be taken any time, and the Principles and
Practice of Engineering (PE) Examination, which must be taken after at least four years of experience.
Up-to-date information about the PE license can be found at the following
website: http://www.ncees.org/
You should plan on taking the FE Examination before or shortly after you graduate, rather than later,
because it contains questions on a wide variety of subjects. To pass the FE Examination, many
engineers struggle to relearn topics that they were familiar with at graduation. Most likely, if you are a
mechanical, civil, or chemical engineer, you will not routinely work with electrical circuits. After a number
of years, you may not be able to answer questions regarding electrical circuits that you could have
easily answered when you finished the courses for which you used this book. Thus, taking the
examination in your senior year is best. Keep this book to refresh your knowledge of electrical circuits
just before taking the FE Examination.
You should look carefully at the NCEES website www.ncees.org for current information about the FE
exam as it applies to your discipline. Practice exams are available there.

Additional very useful information about professional licensure is provided by the National Society of
Professional Engineers at their website www.nspe.org.

APPENDIX D Answers for the Practice Tests
Complete solutions for the practice tests are included in the Student Solutions files. See Appendix E for
information on how to access these files.

APPENDIX E On-Line Student Resources
Users of the book can access the Student Solutions Manual in electronic form by following links starting
from the website:
www.pearsonhighered.com/hambley
A pdf file for each chapter includes full solutions for the in-chapter exercises, answers for the end-of-
chapter problems that are marked with asterisks, and full solutions for the Practice Tests.
The MATLAB folder contains the m-files discussed in the book.

Index

