

OceanofPDF.com

GRACE HOPPER AND THE INVENTION OF THE INFORMATION AGE
OceanofPDF.com

LEMELSON CENTER STUDIES IN INVENTION AND INNOVATION
ARTHUR P. MOLELLA AND JOYCE BEDI, GENERAL EDITORS
Arthur P. Molella and Joyce Bedi, editors, Inventing for the
Environment
Paul E. Ceruzzi, Internet Alley: High Technology in Tysons Corner,
1945-2005
Robert H. Kargon and Arthur P. Molella, Invented Edens: Techno-
Cities of the Twentieth Century
Kurt Beyer, Grace Hopper and the Invention of the Information
Age
OceanofPDF.com

GRACE HOPPER AND THE INVENTION OF THE INFORMATION
AGE
KURT BEYER
THE MIT PRESS
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
LONDON, ENGLAND
OceanofPDF.com

© 2009 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without
permission in writing from the publisher.
For information on quantity discounts, email special_sales@mitpress. mit.edu.
Set in Engraver's Gothic and Bembo by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong Kong. Printed and
bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Beyer, Kurt W.
Grace Hopper and the invention of the information age/Kurt W. Beyer.
p. cm.—(Lemelson Center studies in invention and innovation series)
Includes bibiographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-262-01310-9 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. Hopper, Grace Murray. 2. Women computer engineers—United States—Biography. 3. Computer
science—United States—History.
I. Title.
QA76.2.H67B49    2009        004.092—dc22        2008044229
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
OceanofPDF.com

for my late father, Karl Beyer
OceanofPDF.com

CONTENTS
SERIES FOREWORD
IX
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
XI
 1      THE MYTH OF AMAZING GRACE
1
 2      THE REBIRTH OF GRACE MURRAY HOPPER
23
 3      THE ORIGINS OF COMPUTER PROGRAMMING
45
 4      THE HARVARD COMPUTATION LABORATORY
73
 5      THE BEGINNING OF A COMPUTING COMMUNITY
107
  6            THE 1947 HARVARD SYMPOSIUM ON LARGE-SCALE DIGITAL
CALCULATING MACHINERY
141
 7      STARING INTO THE ABYSS
175
 8      THE EDUCATION OF A COMPUTER
213
 9      IBM ANSWERS REMINGTON RAND'S CHALLENGE
247
10     THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROBLEM-ORIENTED LANGUAGES
263
11          DISTRIBUTED INVENTION MATURES: GRACE HOPPER AND THE
DEVELOPMENT OF COBOL
277
12     INVENTING THE INFORMATION AGE
311
NOTES
325
INDEX
381
OceanofPDF.com

SERIES FOREWORD
Invention and innovation have long been recognized as significant forces in
American history, not only in technological realms but also as models in
politics, society, and culture. They are arguably more important than
previously thought in other societies as well. What there is no question
about is that they have become the universal watchwords of the twenty-first
century, so much so that nations are staking their futures on them.
Since 1995, the Smithsonian's Lemelson Center has been investigating
the history of invention and innovation from such broad interdisciplinary
perspectives. So, too, does this series, the Lemelson Center Studies in
Invention and Innovation. Books in the series explore the work of inventors
and the technologies they create in order to advance scholarship in history,
engineering, science, and related fields that have a direct connection to
technological invention, such as urban planning, architecture, and the arts.
By opening channels of communication between the various disciplines and
sectors of society concerned with technological innovation, the Lemelson
Center Studies aim to enhance public understanding of humankind's
inventive impulse.
Arthur Molella and Joyce Bedi
OceanofPDF.com

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I first came across Admiral Grace Murray Hopper when I was a teenager
attending my sister's graduation from the College of William and Mary. The
fiery speaker stoked my imagination and influenced my own career choices,
first as a naval officer, then as an academic, and finally as an information
technology entrepreneur.
Hopper was a well-known figure in the Navy, but when I arrived at the
University of California at Berkeley I found, to my surprise, that many
people there did not know about her accomplishments. Berkeley in the late
1990s was at the epicenter of the "dot com" boom, a phenomenon
dominated by young male entrepreneurs who slept under their desks,
dreamed of stock options, and believed they were inventing the Information
Age for the first time.
Under the guidance of Cathryn Carson, Jack Lesche, Todd La Porte,
Roger Hahn, and Thomas Hughes, I began piecing together the evolution of
the Information Age.
Not only did Grace Hopper play a pivotal role in creating the foundation
for the computer industry; she was surrounded by remarkable men and
women whose contributions have been overlooked or forgotten. I have
woven their story into this book, with Hopper's early career serving as the
binding thread.
Cathy Carson influenced me greatly during my time at Berkeley. Her
work ethic and her dedication to this project will forever be appreciated. I
also felt very fortunate to spend quiet summer afternoons learning from one
of the founders of the field of the history of technology, Thomas Hughes.
He helped me understand how technologies evolve and grow, and what role
system builders such as Hopper play in the process of technical innovation.
Over the years I spent many hours in archives throughout the country.
The help of the archivists at these repositories in sifting through documents
was invaluable. In particular, the good people at the Archives Center at the
Smithsonian's National Museum of American History in Washington, at the
Charles Babbage Institute's Center for the History of Information
Technology at the University of Minnesota, at the Harvard University

Archives in Cambridge, and at the Van Pelt Library of the University of
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia must be commended. Special thanks to Alison
Oswald at the Smithsonian and to Jeffrey Yost and Arthur Norberg at the
Charles Babbage Institute. I especially enjoyed Arthur's insights based on
his Remington Rand research.
It takes a village to turn research into a manuscript, and many people
helped to forge this work along the way. My wife Johanna was a constant
springboard for ideas and put up with many late nights. Tim Kasta was a
valuable sounding board as we discussed the intricacies of technical
innovation over California wine. Colleagues at the Naval Academy,
especially Bob Artigiani and David Peeler, keenly commented on drafts.
Paul Cerruzi, W. Bernard Carlson, and Kathleen Williams provided
valuable support and feedback. During the final preparation of the
manuscript, Joyce Bedi and Art Molella of the Smithsonian's Lemelson
Center were indispensable. Joyce in particular must be thanked for long
discussions over cracked crab in Annapolis. Her unwavering support during
my transition to fatherhood will also not be forgotten.
OceanofPDF.com

GRACE HOPPER AND THE INVENTION OF THE INFORMATION AGE
OceanofPDF.com

1    THE MYTH OF AMAZING GRACE
Recently I typed "Grace Hopper" into a popular Internet search engine and
came up with more than a million "hits." Though this number pales in
comparison with those for other twentieth-century icons, say John F.
Kennedy (11 million) or Elvis Presley (8 million), Hopper is
unquestionably the most numerically popular computer pioneer on the
Web.1 The top results are an assortment of adoring websites dedicated to
"Amazing Grace" or "The Grandmother of Cobol" and numerous
quotations from Hopper herself. An image search produces hundreds of
pictures of the petite, heavily wrinkled computer programmer proudly
wearing her Navy uniform in the twilight of her career.
There is no denying that Grace Murray Hopper became a minor celebrity
during the autumn of her career, or that she came to personify computer
programming and the programming profession. But Hopper's career may
have gone unnoticed by the public had it not been for an interview
broadcast on the popular CBS television show 60 Minutes in March 1983.
In that interview (conducted by Morley Safer), the irreverent Hopper, then a
captain, playfully reflected on her life. Hers was a classic Hollywood-style
tale: a young, bright-eyed mathematics professor leaves her job to serve her
country during World War II and serendipitously finds herself at the
forefront of the computer revolution, facing technical challenges and gender
discrimination. With hard work and perseverance bordering on obstinacy,
she helps to drive the new technology forward. The result is a superlative
career that follows the meteoric trajectory of the information age.
Among the millions of people who saw the 60 Minutes interview was
U.S. Representative Philip Crane (R-Illinois). He promptly initiated a bill to
have the contributions of this extraordinary woman properly recognized.
The bill, passed by the House of Representatives, promoted Captain Grace
Hopper by special appointment to the lofty rank of Commodore. Later she
was promoted to Rear Admiral and was accorded further honors and
awards. In 1985 the Navy's newest Data Automation Center was renamed
the Grace Murray Hopper Center, and in 1997 the Navy's latest and most
advanced guided missile destroyer was named the USS Grace Hopper.

The accolades precipitated by the 60 Minutes interview were well
deserved, but the interview also marked a growing chasm between rhetoric
and reality. The public discourse since 1983 has preserved and perpetuated
the "myth" of Grace Hopper, depicting her as a heroic pioneer who was
single-handedly responsible for the invention of computer programming.
And, as evidenced by interviews, articles, and speeches in her final years,
Hopper enjoyed the limelight to a great extent, which only helped to further
her myth. The intention of this book is to strip back the layers of rhetoric
and to uncover a more authentic Grace Hopper in the context of the early
computer industry. The young, vibrant Grace Hopper portrayed in these
pages is far more complex and human then the popular press's portrayals of
the aging admiral.
HOPPER IN HER PRIME: THE COLLABORATIVE REBEL
Anecdotes abound of the late Admiral Hopper, the majority highlighting her
most lauded trait: irreverence bordering on insubordination. Nonetheless,
the first 36 years of her life were marked by a certain amount of
conventionality. In the 1920s it was not uncommon for privileged women
from the Northeast to seek higher education. In fact, the percentage of
women receiving doctorates in mathematics during the 1920s and the early
1930s was not achieved again until the 1980s.2 This reminds us that the
history of women's emancipation in America has not been linear. Rather
than steady progress, there have been waves of opportunity and
retrenchment—for example, increasing opportunity in the 10 years after
World War I, then retrenchment during the Depression. Hopper came of age
during the 1920s, and both her public choices and her private ones
coincided rather than conflicted with the desires of her family and her
community.
The attack on Pearl Harbor and the ensuing mobilization created
unprecedented 
career 
opportunities 
for 
women. 
The 
large-scale
reorganization of labor opened a wide variety of occupations that before 7
December 1941 were reserved for men. The most iconic cultural image of
this period, Rosie the Riveter, represented the millions of women who
replaced men in the workforce as they deployed to Europe and the Pacific.
Like millions of other women of her generation, Hopper benefited from this
labor shift. And Pearl Harbor was a watershed in Grace Hopper's personal

life as well as in her career. In the months following that fateful day, she
divorced her husband, left a secure tenure-track position at Vassar College,
and joined the Navy. She then became an officer in one of the most
gendered organizations of its day. Her military rank endowed her with the
external trappings of authority: uniform, title, pay, privilege. Military rank,
protocol, and tradition helped to neutralize societal prejudices against
women in positions of public responsibility.
The benefits of military rank were evident as newly minted Lieutenant
(j.g.) Hopper was assigned to Commander Howard Aiken's Harvard
Computation Laboratory during the war. Aiken, a difficult man who would
be classified as a "male chauvinist" by today's standards, found a kinship
with Hopper not because she was a rebel but because of her ability to
ingratiate herself to Aiken and her fellow workers. Of course she was a
talented mathematician and computer programmer, but more importantly
she was loyal to her boss and helped to organize and control his laboratory.
She actively erased gender differences through her clothing, her language,
her drinking habits, and her humor, gaining the trust and respect of Aiken
and her peers to the point that she became the most prominent person in the
Harvard Computation Laboratory apart from the fiery Aiken.
The pattern of collaboration rather than rebellion continued when Hopper
left Harvard and joined the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation
(EMCC) in 1949. Far from shunning organizational politics and attempting
to garner respect entirely on the basis of her technical talents, Hopper
actively participated in and even shaped the organizational culture of the
EMCC and that of the greater programming community. The alliances she
cultivated supported her career initiatives and protected her during times of
turmoil. Indeed, she was so good at understanding institutions and their
unwritten rules that she remained influential in male-dominated military
and business organizations throughout the postwar period, during which
women were encouraged to retreat from the public sphere. All things
considered, it was Hopper's collaborative abilities rather than her rebellious
nature that created the space for her independent thought and action within
potentially hostile organizations.
Hopper's professional freedom also was facilitated by the novelty of the
computer profession. The fact that computing was a new discipline afforded
her the flexibility to define her role within the emerging computing
community. More established fields often have gender-defined roles and

responsibilities.3 Hopper's programming knowledge and expertise stood her
in good stead with her peers, regardless of gender. And as the relevance of
programming grew, so did Hopper's stature.
It is important to note that when relatively well-established companies
such as Remington Rand and IBM became involved in computing, they
brought with them a masculine business culture that negatively affected the
evolving gender-neutral programming profession. Betty Snyder Holberton
and Betty "Jean" Jennings Bartik experienced the sea change at Remington
Rand, which effectively ended their private-sector careers, and John Backus
(the inventor of FORTRAN) described the programming culture at IBM in
the late 1950s as that of an elite male fraternity.4
The exceptional challenges that Grace Hopper and her female peers faced
as they attempted to forge careers after the war reminds us that "success" as
defined by one's society often come at a personal price. Hopper, like other
women during her era, consciously traded marriage and family for a career.
Though she filled the emotional gap with colleagues, Hopper's most
common method of dealing with personal loneliness was to throw herself
into her work. The stress of being a pioneer exploring uncharted intellectual
territory in an adolescent field weighed heavily on her at times. The burden
of constantly peering into an uncertain future became so daunting during
the late 1940s that Hopper reached a breaking point. Close friends and
family rescued her from alcoholism and dissuaded her from suicide. Rather
than tarnishing her enduring reputation, Hopper's personal struggles
highlight her achievements and remind us that even the best and brightest
among us are sometimes overwhelmed by life's challenges.
PROGRAMMING AS INVENTION
Most stories of invention revolve around a particular physical artifact, such
as the airplane or the automobile. The physical artifact lends itself to
description by the author and evolves physically over time, and its
importance within the context of the history of technology is readily
evident. Writing a book about the invention of programming comes with its
own challenges. Though programs are "physical" in the sense that they can
be printed out or viewed on a computer screen, "programming" is the active
process of making programs, so the invention of programming entails

describing the invention of an action or an activity as much as it has to do
with a thing.
It is no surprise, then, that historians have largely overlooked the history
of programming. It was not until the 1980s and the early 1990s that William
Aspray, Nancy Stern, Michael Mahoney, Paul Ceruzzi, and others began
exploring computer history.5 Their early works, for the most part,
concentrate on machines and the men who created them. In retrospect, the
emphasis on hardware is paradoxical insofar as by 1970 the vast majority of
the computer industry's productive resources went into programming and
software development. By 1985, software constituted 90 percent of the cost
of a computer system, and Microsoft soon eclipsed IBM in market
capitalization and influence.6
The first coordinated effort to promote the history of programming was a
1978 conference sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery.
Led by the longtime programmer Jean Sammet, the three-day conference
asked programming pioneers to dig into their personal notebooks and
diaries and attempt to reconstruct a computing past of which they had been
a part. The keynote speaker for the event was none other than Grace
Hopper. The ACM held a second History of Programming Languages
conference in 1993. Once again, the makers of history rather than
professional historians presented papers and discussed the historical
significance of their work. Fortunately, the historical community has
demonstrated a growing interest in computers and programming since the
last ACM conference, and in April 2001 a well-attended conference on the
history of software was held in Palo Alto.7
Programming was an afterthought during the process of designing the
first generation of large-scale computers. Consequently, the complexities of
programming caught the pioneering inventors off guard. In programming
the Mark I and Mark II computers, teams of specialists8 had to reduce each
problem to a series of mathematical steps. Each step was then represented
in code, producing a line-by-line translation that was transferred onto paper
tape and manually checked and rechecked for errors. Not until a 1953 paper
by John Mauchly and Grace Hopper concerning programming's influence
on future computer development did hardware design begin to take the
exigencies of programming into account.9
The first three modern "programmers" were Robert Campbell, Robert
Bloch, and Grace Hopper. As early as 1944 the Harvard trio began to search

for ways to write and run code more efficiently. Under wartime pressure,
they developed a systematic approach to coding that was relatively efficient
and accurate. In particular, Hopper and Bloch experimented with the
earliest instances of subroutines, branching techniques, code compression,
and debugging procedures, and they applied their techniques to a diverse
range of scientific and engineering problems. Furthermore, Hopper and
Bloch established an information-processing organization that achieved
remarkable rates of efficiency and accuracy while operating around the
clock, seven days a week.
The programming techniques developed by Hopper, Campbell, and
Bloch at Harvard did not come into their own until wedded with hardware
advances made at the University of Pennsylvania. Electronic computing, as
first demonstrated in the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator
(ENIAC), decoupled calculating speed from the realm of the physical.
Whereas Howard Aiken's mechanical hardware could complete three
calculations per second, the ENIAC could handle 5,000. For all of its
marvelous internal speed, however, the ENIAC was not programmable in
the present-day sense of the word.
It would take the dynamic mind of John von Neumann to imagine a
technology that melded the benefits of Mark I's programming with the
ENIAC's electronic circuitry. After spending the fall of 1944 in Cambridge
working with Hopper and Bloch on the nuclear implosion problem for the
Manhattan Project and the winter and spring in Pennsylvania brainstorming
with J. Presper Eckert Jr. and John Mauchly on the next-generation ENIAC,
von Neumann put pen to paper and captured an evolving revolutionary
computer architecture. The "First Draft of a Report on EDVAC," dated 30
June 1945, outlined the structural design of a general-purpose stored-
program computer and became the working blueprint for the next
generation of computers, including the EDSAC and ACE machines in
England and the UNIVAC and IAS machines in the United States.
Internal memory allowed long and complicated sequences of operations
to be executed at electronic rather than mechanical speed. This stored-
program architecture married the electronic speed of the ENIAC with the
automatic sequence control and programming capability of Mark I. The
subsequent "von Neumann architecture" was the theoretical underpinning
of the computer revolution, yet Grace Hopper and the programming crew at
Harvard have not previously been identified as important participants in the

concept's creation. This does not mean that we should discount von
Neumann's intellectual capacity to generate original ideas. Creative
concepts, however, do not appear out of a vacuum, and during the fall of
1944 von Neumann had a distinctly broad perspective on the nascent
computing field. He could identify the strengths and weaknesses of
computer projects and could fashion a new technical variation with shared
elements. "Von Neumann," Aiken recalled, "had this marvelous ability to
absorb and make big jumps, and then he talked about things, talked about
concepts without worrying about where they came from."10 (Interestingly,
von Neumann cites Aiken in the "First Draft" but does not cite either Eckert
or Mauchly.)
After the war, Hopper permanently resigned from her position at Vassar
College, joined the Naval Reserve, and remained with Aiken to establish the
Harvard Computation Laboratory. Apart from being placed in charge of
Mark I and writing that machine's manual of operation, Hopper emerged as
Aiken's most trusted deputy. She engaged visiting scholars, businessmen,
and military officials interested in developing their own computing
capabilities, represented the Computation Laboratory during visits to other
large-scale computing projects, and spoke for Aiken in his absence. She
also helped to organize two landmark computer conferences at Harvard, one
in 1947 and one in 1949. Remarkably, Hopper's rise to prominence at
Harvard occurred at a time when many women were forced from public life
under the pressure of postwar demobilization.
Hopper's most important contributions as an inventor, however, occurred
not on Harvard's campus but rather in Philadelphia at the Eckert-Mauchly
Computer Corporation from 1949 to 1960.11 Though Hopper continued to
be associated with EMCC until 1971, the years 1949-1960 are critical for a
number of reasons. First and foremost, that period coincides with Hopper's
seminal papers on programming and computer design.12 Those papers
describe a series of programming advances that permit humans to
communicate with computers in terms other than ones and zeros.13 Hopper's
achievements established the field known during the 1950s as automatic
programming, which influenced the direction of programming and software
development from that point forward and which served as the foundation
for future high-level computer languages. Second, the period marks the
point when programming transitioned from ancillary work assigned
primarily to women to the main "reverse salient"14 impeding the further

development of the computer industry. It made no difference how fast
hardware could compute if programming efficiency did not improve at a
similar rate. Moreover, most users were prevented from exploiting the
machines' computational power by the lack of useful program applications
and the cost and scarcity of a labor force skilled enough in advanced
mathematics to create such applications. Hopper's inventions broke down
the communication barrier between man and machine, "democratizing" the
field of computer programming, which aided mass adaptation of the
technology during the 1960s.
Though it is sometimes difficult to identify the motivation behind
particular inventions, it appears that a dearth of talented programmers, a
personal frustration with the monotony of existing programming
techniques, and the lack of resources made available by senior management
at Remington Rand to support computer clients led Hopper to invent the
technologies and techniques, such as the compiler, that allowed the
computers to, in effect, help program themselves. Interestingly enough, as
her A-0 compiler evolved into the A-1 and the A-2, Hopper's reasoning in
regard to the invention changed. Compilers became less about relieving
programmers of the monotony of coding and more about reducing
programming costs and processing time.
Hopper's dynamic representation of her invention is matched by an
evolving approach to innovation, which I refer to as distributed invention.
This term describes Hopper's unique style of program development,
wherein prototypes were farmed out to an ever-widening circle of
programmers and users. This growing network of invention crossed
organizational boundaries and provided Hopper with a variety of feedback
that she then incorporated into more advanced prototypes.
During the 1950s, Hopper established herself as a spokesperson for the
evolving computer industry. As a tireless advocate for her inventions,
Hopper provided a particular vision of the future, not only for those
working in the computer industry, but also for potential users. Building a
new technology is only half the battle; getting people to use it instead of an
alternative is the other half. "In my view," said Jean Sammet in her
welcoming remarks at the first ACM History of Programming Languages
Conference in 1978, "Grace Hopper did more than any single individual to
sell the concepts of the higher-level languages from both a technical and an

administrative viewpoint."15 That assertion was met with overwhelming
applause.
PRIMARY SOURCES
Historians of computing are fortunate in that many of the early pioneers
were fastidious in saving work documents, memos, notes, and letters. One
can speculate that Grace Hopper and her peers had a sense of destiny. Or
maybe they were detail-oriented people, on the verge of obsessive-
compulsive. In either case, historians and posterity benefited. The starting
point for researchers seeking primary source material is the Grace Murray
Hopper Collection in the Archives Center of the Smithsonian Institution's
National Museum of American History in Washington. Eight boxes contain
technical notes and manuals, operating instructions, descriptions of projects,
press clippings relating to computers, photographs, academic articles, and a
"humor file." The material is indexed chronologically, and much of it is
annotated in Hopper's own hand.
Harvard University and the Charles Babbage Institute at the University of
Minnesota hold the papers of many pioneering figures of the computer
industry. Harvard's Aiken Collection contains a wealth of personal
correspondence, memos, reports, notes, studies, news clippings, and
photographs. Associated with Howard Aiken's papers are the records of the
Computation Laboratory for the period 1944-1961. The Charles Babbage
Institute manages a vast collection of personal papers, most notably those of
Walter Anderson, Isaac Auerbach, Edmund Berkeley, Margaret Fox, and
Betty Holberton. The Charles Babbage Institute also holds the records of
the 1978 History of Programming Languages Conference. That conference
was organized by the Special Interest Group in Programming Languages of
the Association for Computing Machinery; the participants included a
number of people who were involved in the development of COBOL, and
Grace Hopper was the keynote speaker.
Other notable primary sources are housed in the Hagley Museum and
Library in Wilmington, Delaware (the Sperry Rand records), the Library of
Congress (the John von Neumann papers), the Van Pelt Library at the
University of Pennsylvania (the John Mauchly papers), and the IBM
Corporation Archives in Somers, New York.

Also located at the Archive Center of the Smithsonian's National
Museum of American History in Washington is the Computer Oral History
Collection,16 a rich assortment of interviews with computer pioneers
collected in 1972 under the sponsorship of the American Federation of
Information Processing Societies and the Smithsonian Institution. The
collection includes five restricted interviews with Grace Hopper and a rare
tape of a Hopper lecture, which I was fortunate to acquire through the
assistance of the Smithsonian archivist Alison Oswald. The oral history
collection holds about 70 further interviews relevant to the project,
including four with John Mauchly and one with Howard Aiken (used
extensively by I. Bernard Cohen in the preparation of Howard Aiken:
Portrait of a Computer Pioneer, MIT Press, 1999). Other interviewees
include Richard Bloch and Robert Campbell (Hopper's fellow programmers
on Mark I), Hopper's colleagues at the Harvard Computation Laboratory
(Morris Rubinoff, Robert Burns, An Wang), Hopper's colleagues at the
Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation (Jean Bartik, Betty Holberton, Isaac
Auerbach), and a wide variety of computer pioneers who interacted with
Hopper throughout her career (among them Irving Reed, Mina Rees,
Herman Goldstine, and Robert Patrick).
The Computer Oral History Collection also contains transcripts of panel
discussions held during a 1967 meeting of the Association for Computing
Machinery titled "In the Beginning, Reminiscences of the Creators."
Notable participants included Grace Hopper, John Mauchly, Herman
Goldstine, Richard Bloch, Maurice Wilkes, Betty Holberton, and Isaac
Auerbach. And the collection also contains transcripts from a 1972
computer forum held at the U.S. Military Academy, the keynote speakers at
which were Grace Hopper and Herman Goldstine.
Other sources of oral histories are the Charles Babbage Institute (already
mentioned) and the Schlesinger Library at the Radcliffe Institute for
Advanced Study in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The Charles Babbage
Institute is home to an extensive interview, conducted by Christopher Riche
Evans in 1976, in which Hopper discusses her involvement with Aiken at
the Harvard Computation Laboratory, the programming of Mark I, and her
work with J. Presper Eckert Jr. and John Mauchly. Among the other
interviewees are Eckert, Mauchly, Margaret Fox, Betty Holberton, William
Norris, and Walter Anderson. In the Schlesinger Library (dedicated to the
study the history of women in the United States), I located a very useful

interview with Adele Mildred Koss, a programmer who worked with
Hopper at the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation. I also uncovered the
video and transcript of Grace Hopper's interview with Morley Safer on the
television program 60 Minutes in 1983.
RECONSTRUCTING THE PAST: THE USE OF ORAL HISTORIES AND OTHER ARTIFACTS
Historians, like archeologists, are detectives, uncovering clues while
attempting to reconstruct a probable past. The analogy holds especially true
for historians of technology, for we have access to artifacts and objects
sculpted by the minds and hands of our protagonists. A wonderful depiction
of this special relationship between object and inventor is captured by a
video interview with J. Presper Eckert Jr. that I uncovered. The interview
was conducted in front of the ENIAC, the computer that the young Eckert
patiently designed and constructed during the 1940s.
The ENIAC itself was an extension of its creator. The materials chosen
for the machine reflect Eckert's understanding of cutting-edge concepts in
electronics. Its organization and its flow echo Eckert's design philosophy. In
the video interview, one can see the aging inventor being transported back
through the decades, remembering in an instant why certain dials were
placed in such arrays, why color codes were used, and how humans
interacted with the ENIAC to produce calculations at the speed of light.
So, too, can we learn about Grace Hopper by studying her programs,
manuals, operating instructions, professional publications, and flow charts.
At the dawn of the computer age, Hopper's work laid the foundation for the
programming profession. Principles of code preparation, logical program
design, documentation, and testing flowed from her work on Mark I, Mark
II, Mark III, and UNIVAC. Her training as a mathematician enabled her to
communicate with and to master the new machines. The individuals who
came to be known as programmers in the 1940s and the 1950s shared this
crucial educational attribute with her, and the budding profession became an
early "priesthood" of math wizards who held the key to the powerful new
technology.
Paradoxically, 
Hopper's 
mathematical 
mind 
constantly 
rejected
mathematics to a great extent. Hopper could speak the language of the
machine as well as anyone, but she always found herself trying to move the
early profession beyond mathematics. It wasn't enough to write programs

that could be understood by only a few people. At Harvard, Hopper created
documentation standards that explained each segment of code, and at
EMCC she drew graphical representations that explained the mathematical
logic behind her code and could be understood by the less mathematically
gifted. Eventually, Hopper created a compiler that permitted humans to
communicate with computers in non-mathematical terms. Much like
Eckert's hardware designs, Hopper's programs mirrored what she held dear,
which in her case was the overarching need to help others learn to
communicate with these wondrous mechanical creations. In this respect,
Hopper the "college professor" aligned with Hopper the inventor, for she
never stopped teaching.
Among the richest sources of information about Hopper and her peers
were the oral histories located at the Archive Center of the Smithsonian's
National Museum of American History and the Charles Babbage Institute.
Because of the foresight of a variety of historical and computing
organizations, academics, and computer pioneers, I was fortunate enough to
have access to interviews with Hopper and many of her colleagues spanning
50 years. Paradoxically, what I see as good fortune other academics
sometimes criticize as "soft" evidence. They protest that oral histories are
highly inaccurate, limited by the fragile nature of memory. Oftentimes the
interviews were conducted well after the events transpired and were further
corrupted by the agendas of the interviewer, the interviewee, or both. These
scholars would prefer concrete evidence, such as time cards, company
memorabilia, and office memos. Such evidence carries an aura of fact,
because it was generated while events transpired and because it is not
dependent on the limitations of memory.
Of course original documents from the period under study are essential
when reconstructing past events, because they serve as a skeleton for the
historical narrative. I argue that the rich volume of oral histories available in
this instance helps to flesh out those structural bones. And that flesh is what
makes this story so juicy, for we quickly realize that invention as a human
endeavor is complex and messy. Logic and reason are the twin pillars of
technology, but they do not in and of themselves explain the act of
invention. Why humans create and why those creations happen at particular
times and places are far more complicated then the cliché notion that
invention is the mother of logical necessity.

The thousands of pages of oral history I reviewed in writing this book
provide insight into the motivations behind people's actions. Childhood
insecurities, ambition, jealousy, the need to please, stubbornness, and
patriotism all drive the creative spark. We also get a real sense of the
conditions under which Hopper and her peers worked. The strain and stress
of wartime research and development at the Harvard Computation
Laboratory is described in detail by Grace Hopper, Howard Aiken, Robert
Campbell, Richard Bloch, and Edmund Berkeley in a way that time sheets
and organization manuals cannot capture. The memories of John Mauchly,
J. Presper Eckert Jr., Betty Holberton, Jean Bartik, and many others provide
a window into the world of the first computer start-up company as it was
half a century before Silicon Valley's "dot com" boom of the 1990s brought
the culture of the "start-up" company to the attention of the popular press.
This does not mean that all oral histories are created equal. Part of the
researcher's job is to develop a keen eye for identifying quality. Quality
starts with the interviewer, and the computing community should feel
fortunate that the majority of the oral histories held by the Smithsonian, the
ACM, and the Charles Babbage Institute were conducted by professionals
who understood both the techniques of interviewing and the technical
subject at hand. For the most part they knew what questions to ask and in
what order to ask them, and they had a good sense of when to give their
interviewees enough line to run with a topic and when to reel them in.
The sheer volume of interviews available afforded me the ability to look
at a given historical experience from a variety of different perspectives.
Hopper's memories could be compared and contrasted with the memories
of many others who were witness to the same events in question. Likewise,
Hopper was interviewed many times over 40 years, and it became apparent
that with time she became accustomed to telling a given story. But how
Hopper "scripted" the past also provides insight into how she viewed the
world and herself within that world. The depth and breadth of oral histories,
combined with other primary and secondary sources, allows for the accurate
plotting of the past, despite the fallibility of memory.
DISTRIBUTED BIOGRAPHY
For much of the twentieth century, biography was an accepted and widely
utilized genre within the history of technology. Early texts praised the

pioneers of various technologies, including Thomas Edison and the Wright
brothers.17 The ideal of the selfless individual inventor tinkering in a
basement or a garage for the benefit of society resonated with both
academics and lay readers. This hagiographic approach served to advance
the virtue of individual achievement while legitimizing the value of
technological change.
Books that highlighted specific technologies employed the biographical
genre as well. Hugh Aitken's tribute to radio and Thomas Hughes's detailed
account of the electrification of Western society anchor the narrative to a
few individuals responsible for the technical achievement.18 In fact, one
could argue that the cornerstone of Hughes's influential systems
methodology is not the system itself but rather its builder. The system
builder is a sovereign individual who, through leadership, intuition, and
technical prowess, superimposes order on the raw material of nature and the
surrounding society. The system builder is sovereign in the sense that
actions are willful and effect change. Hughes identifies Henry Ford, Elmer
Sperry, Thomas Edison, and Samuel Insull as archetypal system builders.
With the growing influence of sociology, women's studies, and
anthropology on historical literature during the 1980s, anthropocentric
accounts of technology came under fierce attack. The focus of the history of
technology shifted toward social and political structures that directed and
determined the construction of technological knowledge. Wiebe Bijker,
Trevor Pinch, Ruth Schwartz Cowan, and Donald MacKenzie established
the social construction of technology as the field's dominant methodology.
The result—a precipitous decline of biography as a compelling genre—was
reflected by the majority of winners of the Dexter Prize and the Usher Prize
in the 1990s.19 For these authors, individual engineers and inventors had
become reflections of larger social factors and institutional structures. Their
choices were over-determined by and limited to the restricted possibilities
of action offered by the historical trends within a given society.
A few academics on the frontiers of the history of technology, including
David Nye, Donald Reid, and Bruno Latour, went so far as to question the
very notion of human agency. In The Invented Self: An Antibiography, from
Documents of Thomas A. Edison, Nye asserts that individuals are "divided
selves who remain essentially unknowable in their endless variations."20
Nye concludes that it is futile for the historian to attempt to construct a
definitive person. The naive realist conception of personal coherence is but

a myth, for the agent is decentered and dispersed by language. The best a
historian can do, as in Reid's attempts in Paris Sewers and Sewermen,21 is
emphasize the centrality of rhetoric in communicating, interpreting, and
representing objects and people, and in uncovering the unsystematic
incoherence and flux of perceived reality. In the post-structuralist view of
technology, biography as an effective tool of historical study is limited at
best.
In view of the social constructivist and post-structuralist challenge, is
there a place for biography in the history of technology? Before we agree to
condemn the multitude of historical biographies to the methodological ash
heap, let us consider some of the arguments.
In response to the post-structuralist challenge, self-inspection suggests
that certain physical and mental continuities can be discerned apart from
language. These continuities can be identified in others living around us,
and also in those who came before us. When I began to study Grace
Hopper, there appeared to be unlimited possibilities concerning what
constituted her person. But as Hopper the historical figure is examined
further, options are eliminated, patterns emerge, and identity surfaces.
Granted, the essence of Hopper changes over time, gaps in her personality
exist, and contradictions abound, but in the end much of her identity and her
uniqueness can be salvaged.
If we accept that people are unique entities who can be recovered by
historians, the next step is to identify their place in relation to the greater
currents of social history. Though I believe that social constructivism
provides a better understanding of society's role in the development,
dissemination, and implementation of technological knowledge, I suspect
that this is only part of the story, for there is no society external to and
separate from the individual. Every institution, every organization, and
every government is an aggregate of unique individuals, each with his or
her own "personal society" that is continuously refined and updated. Most
importantly, when people become conscious of greater social trends, they
have the capacity to press up against them, and, with time, even break
through them. As Anthony Giddens writes in Modernity and Self-Identity
(1991), "the self is not a passive entity, determined by external influences:
in forging their self-identities, no matter how local their specific contexts of
action, individuals contribute to and directly promote social influences that
are global in their consequences and implications." I believe that Grace

Hopper is such an individual, and that a biographical approach is the best
methodological approach to her uniqueness and achieve greater
understanding of the human condition. But I also have learned the lessons
of the past 30 years, and I accept that Hopper is an individual embedded in
an ever-changing historical landscape. Therefore, the narrative of this work
has a distributed nature to it that attempts to highlight Hopper's
achievements from 1945 to 196022 within the context of the people and
events that surrounded her. Sometimes the computer pioneer is the
centerpiece of a chapter or subchapter; at other times her role is tangential
to the story line. In this sense the literary style of distributed biography
mirrors and supports my notion of distributed invention.
In the end, the career of this influential college professor turned naval
officer turned inventor turned business executive serves as the ideal conduit
for exploring the rise of the computer industry and the invention of
computer programming in what we refer to today as the information age.
OceanofPDF.com

2    THE REBIRTH OF GRACE MURRAY HOPPER
"I can still remember December 7," said Grace Hopper, reflecting on that
fateful day in 1941. "The two of us were up in our study. We had a great
double desk and we each had a window and solid books all around but there
was a little radio up in the shop and I can remember the announcement of
Pearl Harbor."1 Hopper and her husband Vincent sat in utter disbelief as
trusted voices described the surprise aerial attack by the Japanese that killed
2,403 Americans, wounded 1,178, destroyed 188 aircraft, and sent a
significant part of the Pacific Fleet to the bottom of the harbor.
How could this occur? What happened to our homeland defenses? Why
couldn't we track the movements of the Japanese fleet? Didn't we have
adequate intelligence to warn of an attack? What does this mean for the
nation? What does this mean to us? These were the immediate questions
that weighed heavily on Grace and Vincent Hopper as they stayed glued to
their radio like so many Americans. With each passing hour more complete
details of the attack were reported, and in the months to follow history
unfolded at a dizzying pace.
On 8 December, the United States and Britain declared war on the
Japanese Empire. Three days later, Germany declared war on the United
States. The Third Reich had consolidated its hold on Western Europe and
had moved its forces to within 19 miles of Moscow in the East. In January,
Germany launched "Operation Drumbeat," a devastating submarine
offensive against American shipping along the eastern coast of North
America. In the Pacific, Japanese expansion spread to Hong Kong, Guam,
Wake Island, Midway Island, and Singapore. In May 1942, U.S. forces
surrendered the Philippine Islands.
On the home front, life transformed just as rapidly. In January the
Emergency Price Control Act and Stabilization Act was passed, authorizing
the president to control prices, wages, and public utility rates. The
government initiated a system of rationing, which extended eventually to
food and gasoline, while certain consumer goods, such as automobiles,
were no longer produced. Finally, the War Powers Act granted the federal
government draconian powers ranging from the control of the country's
transportation systems and the unlimited acquisition and disposition of

property to the forced purchase by Federal Reserve Banks of government
obligations.
Indeed, the events in Hawaii that Sunday morning profoundly changed
America. Moreover, 7 December would also be the chronological fulcrum
from which Grace Hopper's own life would pivot. In the months that
followed that fateful day, Grace Murray Hopper would leave her position as
a tenured professor at Vassar College, divorce her husband, and join the
U.S. Navy at the age of 36 years.
GRACE MURRAY HOPPER: MATHEMATICIAN AND TEACHER
Like many highly educated young American women during the 1930s,2
Grace Brewster Murray came from a well-established Anglo-Saxon family.
Grace's mother was an accomplished mathematician, and her father, a life
insurance executive, made no distinction when it came to educating his son
and his two daughters. The Murray home at 316 West 95th Street in New
York City, filled with books, provided an environment in which young
Grace's academic ambitions were supported and encouraged.3
When Grace matriculated at Vassar College in 1924, it was customary for
an affluent young American woman to complete her education, work a few
years, then marry and start a family. Yet the thrill of academic achievement
at Vassar led Grace to pursue a graduate degree in mathematics and physics
at Yale University. By continuing her studies, Grace joined a growing
minority of women who strove for more visible public positions.4
But even among this exceptional group of scholarly women, Grace stood
out. First, she was one of only 396 Americans to be awarded doctorates in
mathematics between 1930 and 1934, and the first woman to receive a
mathematics degree from Yale. Second, whereas the vast majority of
educated women found employment in elementary or secondary schools,
Grace went on to become a college professor. Finally, many of the women
who did secure college and university positions remained unmarried.
Though the position of professor garnered respect, the broader society
questioned a woman's ability to balance a career with family life.5
In June 1930, Grace married Vincent Hopper, a quiet, studious man who
supported his wife's career ambitions. The two had first met in Wolfeboro,
New Hampshire, where the Murray and Hopper families had summer
homes. It has been suggested that Vincent had been dating Grace's sister.6

At the time of their marriage, Vincent Hopper was a doctoral candidate in
comparative literature at Columbia and was teaching at New York
University. Together, the two academics created a life that permitted each to
grow personally and professionally. During the academic year, they
occupied an apartment on the same city street on which Grace had grown
up. Among their neighbors were Grace's brother and his wife, Grace's sister
and her husband, and Grace's parents. Summers were spent in New
Hampshire fixing up an old farmhouse the couple had bought with wedding
money. When not working on the house, they were playing badminton and
golf, or Grace was hooking rugs for the farm or knitting sweaters for
friends.7
Supported by a loving family, Grace Murray Hopper completed her
dissertation in 1934 and (as I have already noted) became the first woman
to graduate from Yale with a doctorate in mathematics in the school's 233-
year history. Upon graduation she accepted a full-time academic position at
her undergraduate alma mater, Vassar.
BUILDING A CAREER: TEACHING AT VASSAR
In 1861, Matthew Vassar, a brewer and a businessman, established Vassar
College in Poughkeepsie, 75 miles north of New York City. Vassar's vision
at the time was to offer women a liberal arts education comparable to those
offered by the best men's colleges of the day. As a former Vassar student
and professor, Grace Hopper followed in the footsteps of many pioneering
alumni, including Ellen Swallow Richards (the first woman to graduate
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and Maria Mitchell (the
first woman to be elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences).
For a young professor beginning her academic career, Vassar offered a
variety of advantages. The college provided a friendly environment with a
significant proportion of female faculty. Furthermore, women occupied
positions of authority within the administration. Though during the 1930s
most women's colleges emphasized teaching above research, Hopper would
have ample opportunity to build a career that fulfilled her academic
ambitions.
Like all new professors, Hopper would spend her first years working her
way up the seniority ladder. "[O]f course [I] started with all of the courses
nobody else wanted to teach," she recalled.8 In addition to basic

trigonometry and calculus, she taught the entire technical drawing
curriculum, which included mechanical and architectural drawing and a lab
on shading and perspective.
Aware of the harsh economic climate outside of the Vassar campus,
Hopper did not complain even when faced with a teaching load of five or
six courses per semester. Instead, Hopper took what came to her and turned
it to her advantage. "[The courses] had gotten into terrible doldrums," she
recalled, "and I brought in new texts and new materials, and above all I
brought in new applications. I began dumping in a little non-Euclidean
[geometry] so they could begin to understand the new concepts of space.
See, all of that was new then—all the Einstein stuff was brand new and
exciting, and it was fun to try and bring it into the courses."9
Hopper's interdisciplinary approach to teaching sprang from her wide-
ranging academic interests. Vassar faculty members were permitted to audit
classes, and Hopper did not hesitate to do so. She attended classes in
astronomy, physics, chemistry, geology, biology, zoology, economics,
architecture, philosophy, and the history of scientific thought. Newfound
knowledge quickly found its way into her courses. "[T]here was a
continuing tendency throughout all those years of not just pure
mathematics," she recalled. "They learned their pure mathematics all right,
but also I kept bringing in applications of it and uses of it."10
Hopper's innovative pedagogical approach had a dramatic effect on both
students and faculty members. Students from a variety of departments
flocked to her classes. Classes that had traditionally drawn few students
began to attract 75 or more. Hopper had succeeded in making the
sometimes-esoteric field of mathematics relevant for a wide array of
majors. The mathematician Winifred Asprey, a Vassar undergraduate in the
1930s who had shared many mathematics classes with Grace Hopper,
remembered her as "the most inspirational [person] you can possibly
imagine."11
Surprisingly, many faculty members were not pleased with Hopper's
approach. She recalled: "The younger group—older than I was but younger
still—they disapproved of practically everything I did because I wasn't
doing the right things, and I was going off into things which were not
mathematics."12
In order to push through her curriculum revisions, Hopper allied herself
with senior members of the faculty, including the department chair and the

dean. "The dean liked it because it was interdisciplinary, which was just
beginning to be talked about," she recalled, ". . . and here was the math
department which they had thought of as the most isolated of all beginning
to draw people from the other departments and interrelate the work, so they
liked that too." Even Hopper's former calculus professor from her days as a
Vassar undergraduate, Gertrude Smith, approved of her unique approach:
"She was probably the most old-fashioned of the lot . . . but she just viewed
her child's adventures with delight so to speak. She wasn't quite sure it was
orthodox, but it delighted her."13
Hopper's first nine years as a college professor formed a foundation that
would serve her well in the years to come. Intellectually, she had broken
down traditionally rigid disciplines and had mastered a wide range of
academic subjects. All the while, she saw mathematics as the link across all
disciplines, and she found practical ways for her students to experience
those connections directly. Moreover, she learned to be an effective public
speaker, and she was credited by both students and fellow teachers as a
great communicator and motivator. Astute at navigating Vassar's
bureaucracy, she became an agent of change in the face of institutional
inertia.
By 1940, Professor Hopper had established herself as a respected
member of the Vassar faculty. She had mastered the art of teaching, but part
of her still yearned to move beyond the Poughkeepsie campus and rub
shoulders with the elite in her field. That year she decided to apply for the
Vassar faculty fellowship, which permitted recipients a one-year sabbatical
in order to pursue research or coursework at another institution. Hopper
chose to study with the celebrated mathematician Richard Courant at New
York University.
Courant had been the director of the renowned Mathematics Institute at
the University of Göttingen when Hitler had come to power. Because of his
Jewish ancestry, the talented mathematician had been placed on leave in the
spring of 1933, then temporarily reinstated in recognition of his
distinguished service in the German Army during World War I. In the spring
of 1934, with conditions deteriorating, Courant resigned. He left Germany
and accepted a full professorship at NYU, where in 1936 he set out to build
a department of applied mathematics in the Göttingen tradition.14
In the fall of 1941, Hopper began to work closely with Courant in the
emerging field of partial differential equations. This particular type of

equation was the mathematical foundation for an array of cutting-edge
scientific and engineering disciplines, including aerodynamics (the study of
gases in motion), hydrodynamics (liquids in motion), electrical engineering,
and quantum mechanics. These techniques could be applied to, among other
things, aircraft design, weather prediction, traffic flow, and the propagation
of radio waves.
Hopper admired Courant's mathematical genius, and she gained from
him the ability to glimpse at the obscured numerical tapestry underpinning
the physical world. "He [was] just one of the most delightful people to
study with I've ever known in my life," she recalled, "Of course, he scolded
me at intervals . . . because I kept on doing unorthodox things and wanted
to tackle unorthodox problems."15 But after Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, the
lighthearted mood of the NYU mathematics department changed. For the
rest of her time there, Hopper's work was dedicated to somber problems
concerning national defense.
IN SEARCH OF A NEW PATH
"I finished that year [with Courant], and then of course when we were in the
thick of it, my brother and my husband and everyone wanted in," Hopper
recalled.16 Vincent Hopper left NYU and desperately tried to get an officer's
commission. Because of his age and his poor eyesight, he was rejected.
Grace's brother Roger, who had just completed a doctorate in economics,
also had poor eyesight. Both men then put their promising academic and
business careers on hold and enlisted. Both served the entire extent of the
war in the Army Air Corps, Roger Murray eventually receiving a
commission and rising to the rank of captain.17
By the summer of 1942, Grace Hopper's husband, her brother, her
cousins, and many of her friends had joined the military. "Our whole family
was in," she recalled. "Everybody except my sister, who had small children
and wasn't acceptable."18 Grace, too, aimed to do her part. In the summer of
1942, not wanting to go back to Vassar, she took a position at Barnard
College, where she taught an improvised summer school course designed to
prepare mathematicians for the war effort.19 The unprecedented attack on
American soil had awakened a deep patriotism in Grace and others, but
traumatic events also affect individuals on a deeper level. Often they lead to

introspection. For Grace, Pearl Harbor became the external catalyst that led
to a series of changes in her personal life.
Though her tenured position at Vassar appeared ideal, deep down Grace
wanted to escape a job that was secure and respected but no longer
challenging. She wanted to break away from the mundane 75-mile
commute to Poughkeepsie from New York City, and from the 35 summers
she had spent with family members in New Hampshire. At last facing the
fact that her marriage had failed, she decided to leave everything behind
and join the Navy.
On 30 July 1942, President Roosevelt signed the Navy Women's Reserve
Act, which authorized the formation of the WAVES (Women Accepted for
Volunteer Emergency Service). WAVES were assigned to non-combat
positions as aircraft mechanics, pilots, radio operators, medical personnel,
and so on. Mildred McAfee, president of Wellesley College, was named the
new organization's first director. By 1945 the WAVES numbered 8,000
officers and 76,000 enlisted personnel.20
Hopper returned to Vassar in the fall, but she had lost the desire to teach
undergraduates. "I was beginning to feel pretty isolated sitting up there, the
comfortable college professor," she recalled. "All I was doing was more
teaching, and I wanted very badly to get in [to the Navy], so I finally gave
Vassar an ultimatum that if they wouldn't release me I would stay out of
work for 6 months because I was going into the Navy, period."21
The dissatisfied mathematician eventually arranged a leave of absence
from her teaching position, but she quickly discovered that joining the Navy
was not a simple matter. Aside from the fact that she was considered too old
and too small for naval service, her chosen profession as a mathematics
professor had been declared crucial to the war effort. Undeterred, Hopper
obtained waivers for her weight and age. In December 1943, on the eve of
her 37th birthday, she reported to the United States Naval Reserve
Midshipmen's School in Northampton, Massachusetts.
Midshipmen's School, designed to transform civilians into future naval
officers, was a harrowing experience for most young recruits. "When we
first got there we had to pack up all of our civilian clothes and ship them
home," Hopper recalled. "They wouldn't let us wear silk, so we had to wear
those horrible [cotton] stockings."22 Recruits were fitted for uniforms
(cotton stockings and all), given haircuts, and separated from their family
and friends. The first days were dedicated to learning proper military

protocol: how to wear a uniform, how to carry oneself, how to address
superiors and subordinates. Each recruit was expected to memorize a wide
assortment of facts and figures, including the ranks and rates of officers and
enlisted personnel and the names and capabilities of various ships and
weapon systems.
The training environment was deliberately made stressful in order to
fortify a recruit's resolve when faced with obstacles. Amenities were few,
personal time limited, and opportunities for sleep and relaxation restricted.
In the classroom, Hopper and her peers learned about naval history,
navigation, tactics, naval organization, and the basic principles of
leadership. Naval etiquette, from wearing the proper attire at functions to
the correct way to write business letters, was also emphasized.23 Despite all
the rigors, Midshipman Grace Hopper remembered an unexpectedly
pleasant experience:
When I got there I'd been teaching all these courses, doing all this outside work, running back and
forth from New York to Poughkeepsie and teaching at Barnard and Vassar and umpteen other things
trying to take courses, write stuff . . . and all of a sudden, I didn't have to decide anything, it was all
settled. I didn't even have to bother to decide what I was going to wear in the morning; it was there. I
just picked it up and put it on. So for me all of a sudden I was relieved of all minor decisions. All the
minor stuff was gone. I didn't even have to figure out what I was going to cook for dinner. . . . It's all
gone, and I just reveled in it. I had the most complete freedom I'd ever had. . . . I just promptly
relaxed into it like a featherbed and gained weight and had a perfectly heavenly time.24
Midshipmen's School was so agreeable to Hopper, in fact, that she was
named battalion commander, the highest-ranking position within the school.
She graduated first in her class.

THE FIRST DAY OF THE REST OF HER LIFE
When Lieutenant (junior grade) Grace Hopper graduated from
Midshipmen's School, in the summer of 1944, it became the responsibility
of the Bureau of Naval Personnel in Washington to decide how best to
utilize her talents. During peacetime, assignment decisions usually took into
consideration the desires of the officer in question. But during wartime, the
needs of the Navy usually superseded the needs and wants of the individual.
When Hopper entered officer training, she was under the impression that
upon graduation she would be assigned to the Navy Communications
Annex. The Communication Annex consisted of a covert cadre of

mathematicians and logicians tasked with breaking enemy codes. Modern
warfare's dependence on wireless communications for command and
control augmented the status of these technical elites, for knowledge
gleaned from intercepted enemy communications could influence a war's
outcome as much as traditional determinants such as superior weaponry and
manpower. It seemed logical that Hopper's mathematical expertise would
best serve the war effort in such a capacity. Furthermore, the head of the
Communication Annex, Captain Howard Engstrom, had been one of
Hopper's mathematics professors at Yale. "I had talked to Engstrom, and so
far as I knew it was set up that I would be assigned to the Communications
Annex," she recalled. In fact, during the fall of 1943,
Grace Hopper on the day of her graduation from the Naval Reserve Midshipmen's School in
Northampton, Massachusetts, 27 June 1944. Courtesy of Archives Center, National Museum of
American History, Smithsonian Institution.
while Hopper was waiting for her age and weight waivers, she took a
course in cryptographic analysis in preparation for working with
Engstrom.25 But while Hopper had been at Midshipmen's School, a one-of-
a-kind calculating machine had been shipped to Harvard University from
IBM's laboratory in Endicott, New York. The mysterious machine, placed
under the auspices of the Navy's Bureau of Ships, was a computer, though
it was not called that at the time. "Instead of being ordered to the
Communications Annex, I was ordered to Harvard, and my orders were
changed during the time I was at Midshipmen's School," Hopper stated.26
Through no choice of her own, Lieutenant (j.g.) Grace Hopper was about to
become the third programmer of the world's first computer.
The Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator, as the machine was
officially called, was the brainchild of Lieutenant Commander Howard
Aiken.27 Before the war, Aiken had been a physics graduate student at
Harvard. While working on his dissertation, he had formulated plans for a
distinctive mechanical arithmetic machine. The concept was supposedly
born out of Aiken's aggravation as he struggled through the calculations
that supported his doctoral thesis on the propagation of radio waves. The
scope and complexity of the mathematics that describe Aiken's work
weighed down upon the physicist, and even a small sampling would have
taken him years to work out by hand. Aiken's practical disposition led him
to consider the possibility of automating the calculating process, and in

1937 he began privately circulating a paper titled "Proposed Automatic
Calculating Machine."28 The paper describes in detail Aiken's vision of an
automated arithmetic machine able to solve any problem that could be
reduced to numerical analysis, including ordinary and non-linear
differential equations.
The culmination of Aiken's seven-year search for relief from tedious
calculations stood 8 feet high, 3 feet wide, and 51 feet long, weighed 9,445
pounds, and had 530 miles of wiring. The Automatic Sequence Controlled
Calculator, officially donated to Harvard University by the IBM
Corporation on 7 August 1944, 29 was capable of addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division. It was also hard-wired for logarithms,
trigonometric functions, and exponentials, much like today's hand-held
calculators. The massive machine's most noteworthy feature, however, was
a paper-tape mechanism. The tape was pre-coded with step-by-step
instructions that dictated the machine's operation and guided it toward a
solution without the need for further human intervention. Aiken's creation
was one of the first examples of a programmable machine. Up to that time,
machines had been passive tools used by humans to extend some human
physical attribute, as a telescope or a typewriter does. Aiken endowed his
machine with the ability to take autonomous action. Granted that a human
had to specify the parameters of that action, the Automatic Sequence
Controlled Calculator was intended to augment not the arm or the eye but
the mind.
The newly dedicated Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator (referred to by the Harvard crew as
Mark I), 1944. Courtesy of Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian

Institution.
Mark I, as Aiken called the peculiar "land-based ship" he commanded,30
was now charged with a much more serious task than helping Aiken to
complete his doctoral dissertation. It was a new type of secret weapon that
could change the outcome of the war. It was to be used to calculate
solutions for rocket trajectories, proximity fuses, and mines, and to generate
tables of mathematical functions that could be used to solve general
engineering problems ranging from radio wave propagation to ship hull
design. Staffing these efforts had become Aiken's main concern, and he had
begun to seek out mathematicians who had joined the Navy. Lieutenant
(j.g.) Grace Hopper seemed to fit the bill.
The original crew in charge of Mark I, August 1944. From left to right, top: Seaman Bissell, Seaman
Calvin, Seaman Verdonck; bottom: Ensign Bloch, Lieutenant Commander Arnold, Commander
Aiken, Lieutenant (j.g.) Hopper, Ensign Campbell. Courtesy of Archives Center, National Museum of
American History, Smithsonian Institution.
Hopper reported to Aiken's Harvard command in the basement of
Harvard University's Cruft Physics Laboratory on 2 July 1944. If being
escorted down to the basement by an armed guard wasn't disquieting
enough, the presence of her physically intimidating boss was. "I was a little
bewildered and at that point of course thoroughly scared," Hopper recalled.
Years later, she distinctly remembered the first words uttered to her by
Aiken: "Where have you been?" Aiken had expected Hopper months earlier
and had not seen the point of sending a female mathematician to
Midshipmen's School.31

Aiken proceeded to give his new recruit a tour of the Automatic
Sequenced Controlled Calculator. Hopper arrived before IBM had installed
the smooth steel casing, so the machine's thousands of moving parts were
fully exposed. "All I could do was look at it. I couldn't think of anything to
say at that point," she remembered. At the end of the tour, Aiken ordered his
new assistant to put off finding a place to live for another day and to get to
work immediately. Her first task was to compute the interpolation
coefficients for the arctangent to an accuracy of 23 decimal places within a
week.32
Hopper's frosty reception was an early indication of the antagonistic
environment she had just entered. Howard Aiken was disappointed that the
Navy had assigned him a female officer to be second in command, an
opinion that he openly shared with the rest of the men on his staff. "Well,
there was Aiken and then there was the boys," recalled Robert Campbell,
one of the two ensigns who arrived at the Computation Laboratory before
Hopper.33 Richard Bloch, the other ensign, also shared Aiken's misgivings.
"I later found out that they [Campbell and Bloch] had been . . . trying to
bribe each other as to which one would have the desk next to me," Hopper
recalled.34
Gender tensions aside, Hopper was faced with a technical obstacle of
imposing proportions. Aiken had given her a week to solve a fairly
straightforward math problem. Arctangents (the inverse of a tangent
function) were covered in most high school geometry curricula and were
child's play for a former college mathematics professor. The issue was not
the problem's complexity, but its scope. Solving for a huge array of
numbers to 23 decimal places was humanly impossible within the time
frame Aiken had provided. To assist her, Hopper had to rely on a machine
the likes of which she had never encountered. She could not turn to
previous experience. She could not review work done on other calculating
machines, since Mark I was unique.35 There was no manual of operation,
and no customer support. In fact, Hopper did not even know how to refer to
her new occupation; the term "programmer" would not enter the language
until years later.36
"Well, they gave me a code book and told me to do it," Hopper recalled.37
The "code book" was a crudely tabulated notebook containing instructional
codes for the machine. To the untrained eye, the notebook was nothing
more than a list of unintelligible numbers. Robert Campbell had quickly

thrown it together in the spring of 1944 while running test problems on
Mark I after it was brought from IBM's laboratory in Endicott to Harvard.
Not only was Campbell Mark I's first programmer; during 1943 and the
first half of 1944 he also served as manager of the project. Aiken had been
called up to active duty and assigned to the Naval Mine Warfare School in
Yorktown, Virginia. Aiken had chosen the clever young physicist from a list
of Harvard graduate students, and during his absence Campbell oversaw the
completion of the machine, kept Aiken informed, and served as the bridge
between Harvard and IBM. Upon Aiken's return, in May 1944, Campbell
was commissioned an ensign in the Naval Reserve and became a full-time
member of Aiken's staff.38
The techniques Campbell had compiled in the "code book" had been
gleaned during the programming of the initial three problems. The first
problem (referred to simply as Problem A39) involved solving trigonometric
functions in connection with antenna design for Professor Ronald King of
Harvard's Physics Department.40 Problem B, requested by the astronomer
and telescope lens designer James Baker, concerned refraction angles for
rays passing through a multi-component optical system. Problem C,
requested by the Navy Bureau of Ships, concerned the effects of small
impurities on the physical characteristics of steel. Problem C, in particular,
demonstrated to Campbell the true power and potential of the machine, as
ten equations were solved simultaneously.41
Hopper quickly recognized that to succeed in communicating with Mark
I she would have to rely on the experience that Bob Campbell and Richard
Bloch had acquired. "Whenever I got in trouble, I would yell at Bloch and
Campbell and [they] would tell me how to get out of it," Hopper
remembered.42 Bloch also recalled those early days tutoring the "professor":
"I remember sitting down . . . long into the night, going over how this
machine worked, how to program this thing, and so on. As I like to remind
her, she didn't know a computer from a tomato basket at the time."43 In fact,
as of July 1944 the 23-year-old Bloch knew little more than his pupil; he
had acquired only 3 months of coding experience before Hopper's arrival.
What Bloch lacked in experience he made up for in drive and
determination. A consummate overachiever, he had majored in
mathematics, minored in physics, and played in the Harvard band, and in
1941 he had won the Dexter Award for the top-ranking freshman. Bloch
envisioned becoming a college professor, but (as happened for so many

young men of his generation) the repercussions of Pearl Harbor translated
into an unintended career choice. Upon graduation, he reported for
midshipman training at the University of Notre Dame in Indiana, and in
September 1943 he was stationed at the Naval Research Laboratory in
Washington. "We all wanted to do our thing, and my idea was to get on the
biggest ship possible, so I applied for duty as a navigator on a battleship,"
he recalled.44 Upon review, the Bureau of Naval Personnel concluded that
Bloch's mathematical aptitude would best serve the war effort if applied to
analytic and computational work associated with antenna design in the
Naval Research Laboratory's Radio Division.
It was at the NRL, in January 1944, that Bloch first met Commander
Howard Aiken, whom he had been assigned to escort on a tour of the
facilities. "When he heard of my background at Harvard, he asked me
would I like to get involved," Bloch recalled. "He told me about this
fabulous machine that he had designed and asked if I would like to spend
my Naval duty up at Harvard. Of course it sounded intriguing to me, so I
jumped at it."45 At the time Bloch hadn't a clue what Aiken was actually
talking about, but on a leap of faith the ensign reported for duty in March
1944. When Bloch arrived at Harvard, Mark I had recently arrived from
Endicott. What Ensign Bloch saw on his first day at Harvard was much
more spectacular than he had expected.46
So Mark I—the most complex, unique computing machine ever created
—was placed in the care of a 37-year-old newly minted naval officer and
her 23-year-old sidekick. Howard Aiken and the engineers at IBM had
turned a Harvard graduate student's idea for an automated computing
machine into a physical reality. It was now up to Grace Hopper and Richard
Bloch to communicate with the hulking machine and make it do their
bidding. Little did the two know at the time that their work over the next
year not only would strongly assist the war effort but also would
demonstrate to America's military, academic, and business elites the
viability of large-scale automated computing machines, otherwise known as
computers.
OceanofPDF.com

3    THE ORIGINS OF COMPUTER PROGRAMMING
How does one go about programming the world's first operational
computer? With mentors of limited knowledge and experience, Lieutenant
Hopper was faced with the daunting task of making the Harvard Mark I's
750,000 parts move with purpose and generate accurate solutions. These
solutions, far from academic curiosities, were answers to problems with
immediate military applications. In the face of unusual wartime pressures,
Hopper relied on her ability to stay calm and rationally think through
problems.
The neophyte coder realized that she needed to understand the hardware
of Mark I in all its intricate detail if she hoped to have the machine calculate
according to her will. This meant quickly educating herself in electronics,
despite her limited engineering background. During her first 2 months at
Harvard, Hopper spent nights combing through the machine's basic
blueprints and circuit diagrams. If she could not understand the purpose of a
certain switch or relay, she tracked down Bob Hawkins, an electrical and
mechanical maintenance engineer who quickly became known to the early
Mark I crew as "Mr. Fixit."
Hopper's resolute effort to understand the machine's hardware provides
insight into an aspect of her innovative style.1 The former college professor
was not one to back down from an intellectual challenge, even when the
subject matter lay outside her realm of expertise. Nine years at Vassar
auditing assorted classes and teaching non-math courses had given her
confidence that she could learn just about anything. The new knowledge,
when mixed with what she already understood, made Hopper a potent
problem solver. To be a better programmer, she first needed to comprehend
the peculiar physical nature of Aiken's creation. Hopper's diligence would
pay dividends in avoiding coding pitfalls in the coming months and years.

Lieutenant (j.g.) Hopper and Seaman White inspecting Mark I's hardware, 1944. Courtesy of
Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution.
During her impromptu education in hardware design, Hopper was
astonished by the machine's sheer complexity and size. Mark I contained
more than 3,500 electromechanical relays, 2,300 storage counters, and
thousands of back-wired relay terminals. The myriad of parts was
orchestrated by a unique 3-inch-wide punch tape that sequentially entered
coded instructions into the machine. Unlike IBM calculating machines
based on punch-card technology, the continuously fed coded patterns could,
in theory, execute a problem from start to finish without the intervention of
an operator. The instructions on the punch tape were "fixed" in the sense
that there was no way to modify the sequence of instructions that the
machine was to obey without direct human intervention. This innovation
was captured in Mark I's official name: Automatic Sequence Controlled
Calculator.2
Each sequence of coding on the punch tape was broken down into three
sections of eight round holes no more than 1/16 inch in diameter. The first
section instructed the machine where to find its data; the second indicated
where to place the results; the third dictated the process to be applied. The
holes were punched according to an eight-bit code that spatially correlated
to the numbers 1 through 8 (the number 9 represented a "minus" sign). For
example, the code "753" was represented by holes in the 7, 5, and 3 places
on the tape. Automatic codes directed the machine to perform specific
operations, such as punching output into punch cards and printing on a

typewriter. Automatic codes were contained in a codebook or were
memorized by the crew.
Though far more complex, Mark I's coded tapes worked in a similar
fashion to a variety of other automated devices that appeared with increased
regularity during the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth.3
Player pianos, glockenspiels, and semi-automated textile looms all followed
the principle of sequenced information embedded in a control mechanism
that manipulated the outcome. These machines were hardware specific,
however; for example, a player piano could play a fugue or a sonata on the
basis of data entered, but it could do no more. What made Mark I unique
was that both data and operations could be changed, thus allowing the
machine to "simulate" the trajectory of a rocket, the movement of a ship, or
even the notes played by a piano. Mark I was the first general computer in
the sense that it could become whatever the operator wanted it to become.
But Mark I's flexibility was limited by its processing speed. The cycle
time for the thousands of parts was determined by a central driveshaft that
spun at 200 rpm. The shaft's rotation translated into a basic computational
speed of 300 milliseconds. That is, the main shaft completed a revolution
every 3/10 second. The shaft drove the complete skeleton of gears, which
manipulated the counter wheels. Therefore, the actual insertion of
information, or the addition or subtraction of two digits, was a mechanical
process done by the rotation of the counter wheels. Multiplication and
division, on the other hand, were computed in a separate multiplication
section of the machine.4
The cycle time of 300 milliseconds corresponded to the execution of one
line of coding. This also equaled one addition operation or one subtraction
operation. (The laptop computer used to write this book has the capacity to
make 1 billion additions per second, and can process information 333
million times as fast as Mark I.) More complex mathematical processes
were even slower. A single multiplication could take just under 10 seconds
to complete; a single division took nearly 16 seconds. For logarithms, Mark
I's main shaft had to spin 298 times, thus taking 90 seconds for this one
operation.5
By modern computing standards, Mark I's memory capacity was also
severely limited. Mark I had 72 storage registers, each capable of holding a
23-digit decimal number and its algebraic sign. Just as an automobile's
odometer stores mileage information on numbered wheels connected by a

system of toothed gears, Mark I used a system of gears, but with ten stable
positions to represent numerical information. The storage registers allowed
the machine to maintain intermediate results internally and proceed with
further calculations. The machine could also call upon other inputs via
switches, data tapes, and punch cards. Output was captured on punch cards
or with automated typewriters. Ultimately, the entire 81 feet of gears,
switches, wheels, rods, shafts, wires, and tapes was attempting to mimic a
human "computer" equipped with a pencil and a pad of paper.6
TAMING THE MECHANICAL BEAST
After a month or two working with Aiken's "Automatic Sequence
Controlled Calculator," it was apparent to both Hopper and Bloch that the
machine was anything but automatic. Automation of Mark I did not occur
without a great deal of planning and coding. Bloch thought the process was
analogous to a supervisor "calling off the shots—calling the sequence of
operations to take place."7 For example, in any given run, Hopper had to
define output accuracy to the decimal (e.g., tenth, hundredth, thousandth).
This was accomplished by means of an associated plug wire array that had
to be re-plugged from problem to problem. In fact, every machine function
had an associated plug wire array, and plug instructions had to be specified
accurately for every run of the machine. An error in plugging instructions
would cause a given run to abort, and, as Hopper discovered through
experience, an inadvertent crossing of wires would have disastrous results.8
In an attempt to reduce the time needed to code the machine, Mark I
contained built-in mathematical functions. These included multiplication,
division, and three functions that are commonly seen on hand-held
calculators today: logarithms, the sine function, and scientific notation
(10x). In fact, these functions were responsible for a considerable fraction of
the machine's relays, and Aiken had expended a great deal of energy
designing them. For all his efforts, Hopper concluded that it was best to
code for these manually. The hard-wired functions required approximately
200 machine cycles, or about a minute, to produce a result accurate to 23
places; manual coding required a fraction of that time. Most of the time
saving was attributable to the flexibility of manual coding. If, for a given
problem, variable x represented the angle of roll of a ship, common sense
dictated that the problem only needed to be solved for a limited range of

values. Harvard's mechanical brain was not savvy enough to differentiate
between capsized ships and ones that floated.
Hopper discovered other odd hardware peculiarities that further limited
the machine's automated nature. A nine in the 24th column of the register
represented a negative quantity. Because of the end-around carry circuit,
each register enabled a carry from the 24th column to the first column. This
meant that whenever a problem resulted in a carry, nines had to be supplied
to the left of the most significant digit in the shifted result if the quantity
were negative, or else a huge negative number would result. If all nines
were in the storage register, a negative zero would result. If all zeros where
in the register, a positive zero would result. Keeping track of negative zeros,
positive zeros, and nines became a task in and of itself, yet was critical in
order to bring a problem to a successful conclusion. In the end, the coding
practices developed by Hopper and Bloch during the war would have to be
adapted to the machine's bizarre hardware design.
Hopper's immediate interest in the hardware of Mark I highlights the fact
that hardware and software were not clearly demarcated at the genesis of
modern computing. This blurring of hardware and software was far more
apparent in the other major American wartime computer, the ENIAC
(Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer),9 a fully electronic
calculating machine developed by John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert Jr. at
the University of Pennsylvania with financial support from the US Army.
Instead of electromechanical relays, Eckert and Mauchly employed 18,000
vacuum tubes as computing switches, thus allowing speeds of up to 5,000
computations per minute. Since the electronic speeds were far greater than
the speeds at which instructions and data could be fed into the machine via
tape, the ENIAC had to be physically reconfigured to represent the problem
to be solved. That is, its hardware was re-wired in order to solve ballistics
problems for which it was specifically designed. Hence, there was no
coding, just hardware manipulation.10
"The system design of the ENIAC,"Robert Campbell correctly points
out, "derived more from analog techniques than it did from anything else. It
was sort of a translation into digital terms of the analog type of system
design."11 In other words, the "programming" of the machine was primarily
the way one interconnected the physical units of the machine. In this sense
the ENIAC was much like Vannevar Bush's differential analyzer, a
sophisticated mechanical computing device that the renowned MIT

engineer invented during the 1930s. The design similarity was no accident:
the University of Pennsylvania had a differential analyzer, and both Eckert
and Mauchly had been trained on it. Hopper's firsthand experience with the
ENIAC in 1945 during a visit to Philadelphia reiterates this point:
When I visited ENIAC, the tremendous contrast between Harvard and the activities of Eckert and
Mauchly was the programming. You see ENIAC was—you plugged the pieces and essentially you
built a special computer for each job, and we were used to the concept of programming and
controlling it by our program; there was a very sharp contrast between the automatically sequenced
and the plugboard system of ENIAC.12
To assist in the time-consuming task of reconfiguring ENIAC hardware
for each problem, Eckert and Mauchly hired six women from the U.S.
Army's Ballistic Research Laboratory. The BRL employed about 200
"computers," the majority of them recent female college graduates from the
Philadelphia and Baltimore area, to calculate firing tables for artillery.
Much like Campbell, Hopper, and Bloch at Harvard, the women of ENIAC
soon realized that the only way to accurately program the machine was to
be intensely familiar with its hardware and circuit design. The pioneers of
software, were, essentially, hardware experts.
THE WORLD'S FIRST DATA-PROCESSING CENTER
Six days after Lieutenant (j.g.) Grace Hopper was introduced to the Harvard
Mark I, Allied troops stormed the beaches of Normandy. This daring
landing, involving more than 5,000 ships, 11,000 planes, and 160,000
troops, attacked a 50-mile stretch of heavily defended French coastline.
History has certified the D-Day invasion as the beginning of the end of
Hitler's grip on the European continent, but for Hopper and the staff at the
Computation Laboratory the outcome of Operation Overlord was still in the
balance through the early summer of 1944. Moreover, the outcome in the
Pacific was undetermined, as the Japanese continued their offensive through
the spring of 1944 in China and New Guinea.
World War II created a surplus of practical computational problems that
required rapid and accurate solution. Hopper remembered the difficulty of
meeting computational demand with the limited laboratory staff, and the
anxiety it created for the small team of programmers: "On the Mark I there
was Dick Bloch and Bob Campbell and myself. We later acquired two more
lieutenant commanders who worked on it. But by and large the three of us

did the bulk of the programming."13 In fact, by the winter of 1944 coding
responsibilities almost exclusively fell upon the shoulders of Hopper and
Bloch. Campbell spent the majority of his time developing the blueprints
for a new computation machine, Mark II. In a desperate attempt to address
the ever-growing demand, Hopper and Bloch developed a systematic
approach to coding and batch processing that was efficient, accurate, and
relevant for future generations of programmers. The wartime demands on
the Harvard Computation Laboratory had inadvertently become the engine
for programming innovation.
In typical fashion, Hopper later downplayed the complexities associated
with mastering the machine: "You simply step by step told the computer
exactly what to do. Now get this number and add it to that number and put
the answer there. Now pick up this number and multiply it by that number
and put it there. You simply broke down all of your processes of
mathematics into a series of very small steps of add, multiply, divide, and
make a test, and put them in sequence."14 Theoretically the concept was not
difficult to grasp, but the realities of coding were much more complicated,
and the organizational demands substantial. The time sensitivity of the
wartime problems only added to the inherent pressures associated with
creating technical innovation.
Commander Aiken, Lieutenant (j.g.) Hopper, and Ensign Campbell standing before Mark I, 4 August
1944. Hopper is holding a sequence-control tape. Courtesy of Harvard University Archives.

INVENTING A SYSTEM OF CODING
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
Hopper and Bloch often found that the problem's originator could describe
the desired results but was at a loss concerning the particular equations that
needed to be solved. Conversely, Bloch and Hopper knew little about the
context from which problems came. "We had to learn their vocabularies in
order to be able to run their problems," Hopper recalled. "I learned
languages of oceanography, of this whole business of mines-weeping, of
detonators, of proximity fuses, of biomedical stuff. We had to talk to these
people—all we had to begin with was mathematics."15
Indeed, Hopper's mathematical background prepared her to break down
verbal problems into elementary mathematical parts. She could even handle
the complicated partial differential equations associated with heat and fluid
flow problems, thanks to her training under the mathematician Richard
Courant.16 If she got stuck, Aiken would often help to define a method of
solution. "Aiken," the programmer Harry Goheen recalled, "was a genius at
figuring out dirty methods."17
Hopper and Bloch soon realized that pre-determining parameters for
solution accuracy saved coding time and made results more relevant. "On
the first early problems, when we were computing how much accuracy we
were having, it was an appallingly rough computation," Hopper recalled.
"We didn't know much about it yet."18 Mark I was accurate to 23 decimal
places.19 This was necessary when partial differential equations were
involved. But more often then not, such extreme accuracy was superfluous.
For instance, most ballistic problems required solutions to no more than
four decimal places.
Hopper and Bloch also had to consider the effects of roundoff errors.
Luckily, Hopper's diverse educational background and her 8 years as a
professor had prepared her to deal with a wide range of intellectual
challenges. "I was unusual because most mathematicians didn't know
anything about round-off errors and truncation errors and the reason I did
was because I had taken a course on chemistry," she recalled. "That is
where I had learned about round-off errors and computational errors, not in
mathematics."20
CONSTRUCTING A CODING BLUEPRINT

Once the equations were identified, the blueprint of the finalized code had
to be planned. This included the mapping of instruction and data tapes and
the positioning of decimal places. As previously mentioned, decimal places
were controlled by precise plugboard configurations. The limits of storage,
physically embodied by the 72 23-decimal registers, severely affected the
planning of instruction and data tapes. The result was the necessary
segmentation of problems. Intermediate results had to be captured on punch
cards and then reentered into the machine as input for the next sequence.
Each series of inputs and outputs required the orchestration of multiple
instruction tapes and continuous human intervention.
At first Hopper and Bloch ran their own problems. "I got to the point
where I knew that machine like the back of my hand," Bloch
enthusiastically recalled, "whether it was a plugging or electrical question,
or questions of circuitry, debugging, or programming."21 But the time spent
running problems meant time away from defining and coding other
problems. Operating Mark I quickly became the responsibility of enlisted
Navy personnel,22 as the Harvard team turned to division of labor as a
means of maximizing the machine's output.
The personnel assignments made at Harvard during the war set important
precedents for future labor divisions within the general computing industry.
"Coding" (later to be called "programming") became the work of highly
skilled mathematicians like Hopper and Bloch. Rudimentary tasks such as
tape punching and plugboard manipulation were allocated to less skilled
operators. The difference in status between coders and operators at Harvard
was formally captured by military rank: coders were officers, while
operators were enlisted personnel.23
CREATING OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS
Hopper and Bloch codified the roles and responsibilities of the new
"operator" position.24 Operators managed the computation process from
start to finish. They were aided by directives known as "operating
instructions" that were written by Hopper and Bloch. The operating
instructions, much like the main instruction tape for the machine, described
the sequential steps to be performed by the operator. Plugging charts were
drawn for all plugboards. For instance, the plugboard for the printer
controlled the printing machine's decimal columns. This set tab positions,
vertical spaces, and horizontal spaces, and it eliminated non-significant

zeros. Other plugboards controlled input card feeds, output card punches,
and multiplying and dividing units. In addition, for each run a series of
switches had to be set. Data switches introduced constants into the problem,
while control switches controlled various machine units.
Not only did operators have to manually set initial register, switch, and
plugboard settings; these settings had to be changed after a certain number
of runs. Each run required the proper manual sequencing of instruction and
input tapes. Certain actions were required if an output variable reached a
particular threshold value. The active involvement of operators discounted
the claim that Mark I was a fully automatic calculation machine, as its
official name suggested. There is no doubt that Aiken had the concept of
automation as a guiding principle, but in reality the limitations inherent in
the machine's hardware required human intervention. This human-machine
symbiosis produced the final results.
The imposed division of labor permitted Mark I to operate 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week. As in naval shipboard organization, operators "stood
watch" for three eight-hour shifts, including midnight to 0800. Hopper and
Bloch managed the watch schedule, made sure personnel were properly
trained, and stepped in to deal with problems beyond the expertise of the
operators. Most calls in the middle of the night dealt with troubleshooting,
which effectively placed Hopper and Bloch on call 24 hours a day. The
operator Robert Burns remembered in particular Bloch's tendency to fall
asleep on the other end of the phone at 2 or 3 a.m. "You'd whistle, scream,
you couldn't wake him up," Burns recalled.25

A sequence-control tape for Mark I, 1945. Courtesy of Harvard University Archives.
CODING SEQUENCE CONTROL AND DATA TAPES
Transferring code from code sheets to tapes was the most arduous part of
the coding process. Hopper made the process less monotonous by assigning
small teams to punch each tape. During problem L, in December 1944,
Hopper assigned sequence tapes to Livingston and Verdonck and value
tapes to Knowlton, Brendel, Bissel, and White. New teams were then
created for quality assurance purposes. Knowlton, Brendel, and Calvin were
responsible for the accuracy of the sequence tapes, and Hawkins, Bissel,
and Calvin checked value tapes. The entire process, as written by Hopper in
the operating instructions, was "computed, designed, coded, babied, nursed,
pleaded with, and mothered by Lt. (j.g.) Grace Murray Hopper, USNR."26
TESTING
With the control and data tapes produced and the operator instructions
written, the moment of truth arrived. The initial run of the problem was
known as a "test." Regardless of the care and accuracy that went into
coding preparation up to this point, the cool logic of the crew gave way to
blind faith. To lighten the tense "moment of truth," operator Robert Burns
recalled, after a tape was prepared and placed on the machine, the crew
brought out an Islamic prayer rug, faced east, and prayed that their work
was not in vain.

The "test" began with a "starting tape" that, with a single pass, enabled
initial values to be fed into the 72 storage registers before the problem was
run.27 Operators set and checked preliminary plugboard and switch settings,
and the main sequence control tape and data tapes were loaded onto the
feed mechanisms of the machine. When the Start button was pressed, the
driveshaft turned, the relays clattered, and Mark I came to life. On test runs,
the melodious sounds of the machine usually lasted no longer than 30
seconds before clattering to a stop. First-time successes were elusive.
Instead, operators obtained complete readouts of all pertinent storage
positions, which were then analyzed by Hopper and Bloch for clues. The
detective work uncovered why the machine had stopped, and the process
was repeated until the problem ran to completion and results were obtained.
PACKAGING THE OUTPUT
Two electric typewriters captured Mark I's output. During the fall of 1944,
answers streamed forth from the machine in a chaotic mass of numbers.
"We hadn't fully learned how to control the typewriter that would print an
amount across a page and in blocks," Hopper recalled. "There was so much
of the techniques of handling the typewriter that had to be invented and all
of the dress-up we had to learn how to do."28
Hopper was the first to realize that Mark I could format the presentation
of results by typewriter, an minor insight at the time but one that would
have considerable implications. If a computer could be used to control a
typewriter, it could be used to control just about any mechanical process.
One of Hopper's initial experiments was to generate page numbers for a
table of mathematical functions that the machine was producing. "At
lunchtime, when Aiken was out of the office, I put a routine on which did
nothing but add one and print the number and space, and made it print out
just a sequence of numbers," she recalled. "But he [Aiken] came in and
found us with all $750,000 worth of Mark I adding one and printing digits
—waste of computer time—oh, he went through the ceiling."29 Eventually,
Hopper convinced Aiken that it was much faster to enlist the Mark I to
create page numbers and format text than sitting down at the typewriter and
manually recreating the presentation of the information. Moreover,
removing the human from the output process would help preserve accuracy.
The system of coding developed by Hopper and Bloch under wartime
pressure quickly and accurately defined a given problem, distilled it into

mathematics that could be represented by machine code, created operating
instructions to sequence an array of plugboards and switches, produced
sequence control and data tapes, provided quality assurance for those tapes,
tested the problem, and packaged the output. The system was embedded in
a differentiated organizational structure that borrowed from shipboard and
factory operations and took advantage of the efficiencies derived from the
division of labor. The end result was a data-processing center that generated
accurate solutions 24 hours a day, seven days a week. It is the earliest
example of the type of data-processing centers that dominated the computer
industry up until the 1960s and before the invention and implementation of
time sharing.30
THE FIRST HACKERS
Within 6 months of her arrival, Lieutenant (j.g.) Grace Hopper transformed
herself from a computing neophyte to an emerging expert in the field. The
system of coding she developed and implemented with Richard Bloch
successfully met the evergrowing demand generated by the necessities of
modern warfare. The wartime setting demanded the Harvard team to work
at a pace rarely experienced during peacetime. By the winter of 1945 Mark
I was up and running 95 percent of the time, which was astonishing in view
of the operational problems that plagued the ENIAC project at the
University of Pennsylvania during roughly the same period.31
Regardless of these advances in reliability, Mark I's hardware imposed
theoretical limits on speed. The rotation of the main driveshaft set the
processing speed at 300 milliseconds. The rate of data and instruction input
was limited to the mechanical speed of the feed mechanisms, and
information had to be entered sequentially—that is, tapes could not reverse
themselves in order to input a previous command or number.
Out of sheer necessity, Hopper and Bloch began to create innovative
coding techniques to augment hardware performance. "As early as 1944 we
started putting together things which would make it easier to write more
accurate programs and get them written faster," Hopper recalled.32 And like
so many of her computing advances throughout her career, "educated" trial
and error translated into innovation. "There was no theorizing, there was no
higher mathematics," Hopper remarked. "There was no future of

computers, there was nothing but get those problems going."33 War had
indeed become the mother of invention.
With their knowledge of hardware, Hopper and Bloch realized that a little
bit of programming ingenuity could maximize the machine's processing
power in the minimal number of driveshaft rotations. For instance, for an
operation requiring 25 cycles, only five actually produced activity in the
main bus of the machine. Hopper and Bloch began to embed additional
operations within instructions, making certain that the embedded codes did
not adversely affect the primary operation in progress. For instance, printing
commands could be implanted within a multiplication operation. Soon it
became standard practice to write programs that maximized the number of
embedded instructions. As a result, processing time decreased by as much
as 36 percent. Because of the relatively slow processing speed of Mark I, 36
percent could easily translate into weeks of saved run time.
This earliest form of "hacking,"34 which produced some ingeniously
efficient code, had detrimental consequences as well. For instance, the
logical flow of programs embedded with extra code became extremely
complicated. The flow was so complex, in fact, that often it was impossible
for the operator to decipher what was happening. Hopper admitted that she
was even at a loss in her attempts to deal with Bloch's hacking. "Dick used
to change the instructions on the Mark I overnight," she recalled. "If he
thought up a nice instruction to make one of his problems easier, he'd put it
in and none of our tapes would run the next morning."35
Complex code also made it difficult to analyze the causes of machine
stoppages. Both Hopper and Bloch had difficulty deciphering their own
handiwork, especially if enough time had passed between writing the code
and executing it. To address the problem, Hopper developed a system of
documentation within her code. On the master code sheet that was used to
punch the tape, she wrote notes and equations that corresponded to each
line of code. Bloch and others soon picked up this practice as the Harvard
team expanded, and program documentation eventually became standard
practice for coders and programmers.
Other techniques for speeding up processing time were not as refined.
Hopper had a particularly interesting way to deal with "rounding off" to
fewer than 23 decimal places. Instead of coding for the limited accuracy,
Hopper applied her knowledge of hardware to create the desired round-off
effect by reconfiguring the machine: "I pulled the relays. I pulled the lower

twelve position relays in the unit."36 This practice served her well until one
night she forgot to reconnect the machine. The operators on the next shift,
perplexed by Mark I's misbehavior, called in Howard Aiken to diagnose the
problem. An irate Aiken forbade Hopper or anyone else from reconfiguring
the hardware to meet their coding needs.
MOTHS IN THE MACHINE
Of the many anecdotal stories surrounding Grace Hopper, one of the most
famous concerns the discovery of the first computer "bug." The term "bug"
had been used by engineers since the time of Thomas Edison to describe
mechanical malfunctions. Hopper should be given the credit for introducing
the term into the language of computing and, in particular, programming.
She described the events surrounding the now-infamous moth as follows:
When we were debugging Mark II, it was over in another building, and the windows had no screens
on them and we were working on it at night, of course, and all the bugs in the world came in. And,
one night she [Mark II] conked out and we went to look for the bug and found an actual large moth,
about four inches wing span, in one of the relays beaten to death, and we took it out and put it in the
log book and pasted Scotch tape over it.37
From that moment on, it was common practice for Hopper and the rest of
the Harvard crew to inform Aiken that they were "debugging" the computer
when either the hardware or the coding went amiss.
The myth of the moth puts a playful spin on what would become a grave
matter for generations of programmers. "Bugs" hidden in hardware and in
software threatened to infect the early machines to such an extent that their
very utility came into question. In his memoirs, the English computer
pioneer Maurice Wilkes recalled the moment in 1949 when he became
conscious of the debugging quandary:

"First actual case of bug being found" as recorded in the Mark II log book on 9 September 1945.
Courtesy of Smithsonian Institution.
I well remember when this realization first came on me with full force. The EDSAC was on the top
floor of the building and the tape-punching and editing equipment one floor below I was trying to get
working my first non-trivial program, which was one for the numerical integration of Airy's
differential equation. It was on one of my journeys between the EDSAC room and the punching
equipment that 'hesitating at the angles of stairs' the realization came over me with full force that a
good part of the remainder of my life was going to be spent in finding errors in my own programs.38
Wilkes's observation had significance for the future of computing
because the EDSAC (Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Computer) was
the first operational electronic computer with stored-program capability.
But it is noteworthy that the Harvard crew came to the same conclusion 5
years earlier. Recalling the precarious period during the war, Robert
Campbell lamented that bugs jeopardized the entire Mark I project: "For a
while it was a very touch-and-go thing as to whether we could really keep
the machine going in any kind of satisfactory way. It would seem that a new
bug would develop before the bug we were looking for was found."39
Hopper added that Mark I was subject to Murphy's Law: anything bad that
could happen to the machine did happen.40
Hopper, Campbell, and Bloch invested substantial energy in developing
practices and procedures for debugging. Like physicians, they identified
symptoms, made diagnoses, and prescribed treatments. Sometimes
symptoms were obvious, as when Mark I would come to a crashing halt:
"The crash of that thing sounded as if a plane had run into the building,"
Hopper recalled. "You never heard such a crash in your life."41 But most

symptoms were far subtler. Incorrect results were the most troubling
outcome, and the verification of output accuracy became a chore in and of
itself. If accurate values previously established existed, then results were
compared. But for the most part, the team needed to generate results via an
alternate computation. At times Bloch went so far as to check results with a
mechanical desk calculator. "The task of performing divisions accurate to
51 places on a ten-decimal digit desk machine," he noted, "could have been
termed cruel and unusual punishment!"42
But checking every result on a desk calculator defeated the purpose of
having a large, automated machine. Hopper concluded that the machine
should be used to check itself as much as possible. Problems were run in
two different ways, and the answers were compared. The likelihood that
bugs would generate the same wrong answer was minute. This form of
double checking was initiated by operators at intermediate steps throughout
a problem's run. When an error was found, Hopper and Bloch provided
"rollback" procedures to find the point at which the problem went astray.
HARDWARE BUGS
If the operator determined that the code was "clean" and operating
procedures were accurate, then the bug was in the hardware. This required
inspecting the thousands of relays and counters, a difficult task because of
the machine's size and design. Hopper remembered that the vanity mirror in
her handbag became the preferred tool to inspect the $750,000 machine:
I always had a small mirror and one way to find the bugs in Mark I was that they were very often
caused by the fraying of the brushes on the counters in which case they would spark. So they would
turn out all the lights and then they would borrow my mirror and they would go along and run it and
they would look for the sparks in the counters and the mirror would pick up the sparks.43
If bugs could not be seen with Hopper's mirror, often the trained ear could
hear them. A distinct sound was emitted by Mark I's clutch mechanism as it
engaged and released every revolution. Bloch compared the sound to the
clatter of a horse's hooves on a paved street. This steady hum was
accompanied with the orderly clatter of storage counters and relays banks.
Different bugs resulted in distinct asynchronous rhythms. Frederick Miller,
a coder who joined the Harvard crew in 1946, remembered being able to

pinpoint the problem in the hardware just from the different sounds
emanating from the churning machine.44
Much to the dismay of the rest of the staff, the distinct sounds generated
by hardware bugs also served as an alarm system for Howard Aiken.
Aiken's desk was adjacent to the machine, and often he kept his door open
so he could hear the hum of the machine "makin' numbers" (as he liked to
call it). No matter how busy the Commander seemed to be, if there was an
unusual noise emanating from the machine, in no time he would be
demanding answers from Hopper or Bloch. Aiken's overzealous nature
caused Hopper to do much of her debugging after hours in the peace and
privacy of the night.
The concerted effort to lower the frequency of hardware failures not only
increased hardware efficiency; it also made debugging easier by isolating
potential errors to coding and operating problems. Many hardware bugs
related specifically to the relay design of Mark I. Relays registered either 1
or 0 (open or closed), depending on the flow of electricity to the relay
switch. If a relay did not function properly, the cause was interference with
the electricity flow controlling its action. Relays sometimes sparked when
metal flaked off and got caught between contacts. At other times, deficient
wiring caused the relays to make no contact at all. The potential for
problems was exacerbated by the machine's sheer size and complexity—it
had 750,000 moving parts. During the summer and the fall of 1944, faulty
and marginal hardware devices were weeded out and replaced with more
reliable parts. Because of material shortages attributable to the war, wire
salvaged from old pianos had originally been substituted for more optimal
materials. Piano wire against brass contacts produced a higher resistance
than was desirable, resulting in unreliable relay contacts.
Aiken had picked electromechanical relays over other available
technologies because of their proven reliability in the telephone industry.
Deployed as the switching backbone in telephone networks for years, relays
had first been employed for counting by George Stibitz in the mid 1930s.
Stibitz, then a research mathematician at the Bell Telephone Laboratories,
had created a circuit of relays that added in binary. Binary arithmetic
represented baseten numbers as a series of ones and zeroes, with one
represented by 0001, two by 0010, three by 0011, and so on.45
The tradeoff for electromechanical relay dependability was speed. For
telephone relays, speed was dictated by the rate in which human fingers

could dial. The vacuum tubes used in the ENIAC were thousands of times
faster than Mark I's relays. The first vacuum tube, constructed in 1904, was
a variation on the light bulb. The invention permitted engineers to regulate
and amplify the flow of electricity, but, as John Mauchly discovered, a
vacuum tube could also be employed as a binary counter, because it could
stop and start the flow of electricity like a gate. A rudimentary vacuum tube
has two states (on and off), just as an electromechanical relay has two states
(open and closed). But electricity flows through wire at nearly the speed of
light, whereas armatures of relays are subject to the limits of mechanical
motion. Hence, a tube could perform as a binary switch in the same fashion
as an electromechanical relay, but much faster.
In the 1940s a vacuum tube had an operational life of only a few hundred
hours. Thus, a machine with a few thousand vacuum tubes would be subject
to failure after a minute or two of run time. ENIAC had 18,000 vacuum
tubes, and Aiken cautiously assumed that such a machine could never run.
He was willing to accept the manageable bugs associated with
electromechanical relays in light of the theoretical complications associated
with vacuum tubes.46
CODING BUGS
If hardware bugs could be ruled out, the most likely source of error was the
coding of a problem. Unfortunately, Richard Bloch recalled, coding was
subject to a variety of oversights and blunders. A coder could call for the
wrong operands or the wrong arithmetic operations. Errors could appear in
the coder's calculation of input constants or starting values. Omissions and
duplications were common as the coder translated instructions into machine
language, while preparation of punch tape, punch cards, and plugboard
instructions were subject to human error. "We had to go through the
operation step by step," Campbell affirmed, "until we found something
which wasn't right, and then look at the circuit diagram and try and figure
out what the problem was."47 This was not a straightforward, linear process,
for a coding error could masquerade as a plugging error or vice versa.
Mark I coding required thinking through a vast number of minute steps,
then writing the instructions to carry them out. For instance, let us use the
analogy of leaving one's house to get one's mail. An equivalent set of
instructions in a high-level computer language would be analogous to

stating "Walk out the front door, follow the walkway to where it intersects
the street, and on your left is the mailbox." The equivalent in Mark I
machine language might sound more like "Find your right foot, place your
right foot forward, find your left foot, place your left foot in front of your
right foot, repeat this twenty times, etc." To minimize errors, Hopper had to
keep the details of coding in her head without confusing steps along the
way.
The solution required the development of preventive tools, practices, and
procedures. Code was initially handwritten in pencil, line by line, on a
standardized coding sheet.48 Coding sheets had a place for annotation,
which allowed Hopper and Bloch to attach clarifying equations and written
explanations next to each line of code. A fully annotated coding sheet
provided a neat, accessible record of the problem that could be double-
checked by a second person.
Machine operators were given explicit instructions that helped them to
manage the process from start to finish. It became standard operating
procedure to double-check all plugboards against plugging charts and to
reset control and data switches. In the case of a stoppage, rerun instructions
were followed closely, and preliminary printouts on punch cards were
compared by hand against source data before being reentered. As Bloch
recalled, the best programming techniques called for keeping operator
intervention to a minimum, both to reduce manual operational errors and to
reduce run time.
What the Harvard team did not do during the war years was explore the
possibility of hardware that ran automated checking. Though aware that at
the Bell Labs considerable energy was being devoted to creating self-
checking circuits, Campbell and Aiken initially did not see the need for
such design additions, even in future machines. "I think we felt that with
sufficiently reliable components . . . we could make out all right without
mechanical self-checking characteristics," Campbell recalled.49
Bug-free punch tapes and operator instructions did not guarantee
successful results. Hardware manipulation brought its own set of potential
errors. Erroneous switch and register settings, improper plugging, failure to
follow rerun instructions, and improper arrangement of data punch cards all
contributed to the significant challenge of obtaining fast, accurate results.
Improper hardware manipulation could even turn fatal, as was nearly the

case when an operator named David Green got his tie caught in the
sequence mechanism and was nearly strangled.50
The infestation of hardware bugs, coding bugs, and operation bugs
threatened the success of the first computational machines. The only things
separating the Harvard Mark I from failure were the unique abilities and
efficient operating procedures developed by Grace Hopper, Richard Bloch,
Robert Campbell, and the rest of the Harvard crew. By the spring of 1946,
Robert Burns recalled that Bloch "got to the point where he knew the
program so well that he could tell you what relay was failing, what counter
was bad."51 They had mastered Mark I while enduring the unrelenting
pressures of war.
OceanofPDF.com

4    THE HARVARD COMPUTATION LABORATORY
The person most responsible for the Harvard Computation Laboratory's
unique culture was Howard Hathaway Aiken. Aiken's leadership style was
more akin to that of a foreman on a factory floor than to that of an Ivy
League academic. This can probably be attributed to the fact that he had
worked for the electric utilities industry for 13 years before matriculating as
a doctoral candidate at Harvard. Aiken's laboratory also differed markedly
from more traditional academic environments because of its close
relationship with the U.S. Navy. Unlike Robert Oppenheimer, who
struggled to preserve civilian control of culture at Los Alamos, Aiken
purposely blurred the lines between academia and the military. According to
Hopper, Aiken saw himself first as a Navy officer and second as the head of
an academically affiliated research facility. Aiken's martial attitude and
industry-based sensibilities affected both the nature of the laboratory's
research and the technical choices made by its personnel.
Aiken was born 8 March 1900 in Hoboken, New Jersey. His hard
personality was forged under extreme conditions. As a teenager (when the
family lived in Indianapolis) he became financially responsible for his
mother after permanently driving his alcoholic father out of the house with
a fireplace poker. To pay the bills, Aiken held a night job as an electrician's
helper for the Indianapolis Light and Heat Company while attending
Arsenal Technical High School during the day. Upon graduation, Arsenal's
superintendent helped his industrious student obtain a job at the Madison
Gas and Electric Company so that he could afford to attend the University
of Wisconsin.1
Howard and his mother packed their bags for Madison, and in 1923
Howard completed a bachelor's degree in electrical engineering. Upon
graduation he accepted a full-time position with Madison Gas and Electric
Company as an operating engineer in a gas and electric plant. He was soon
placed in charge of the design and reconstruction of the company's main
electric generating station. In 1927 he and his mother moved to Chicago,
where he designed electric generating stations for the Westing-house
Electrical and Manufacturing Company. The two moved again in 1928 so

Howard could become the district manager of the Line Material Company
in Detroit.2
Management improved Howard's financial situation but brought him
farther away from hands-on technical problem solving. In 1932 he decided
to return to school, but he left the University of Chicago after two semesters
because he thought it was "a lousy institution."3 Howard and his mother left
Chicago and moved into a small apartment at 8 Plympton Street in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, so Howard could pursue his doctorate in
physics at Harvard. Throughout his years as director of the Computation
Laboratory, Howard would leave the lab precisely at noon each day to find
a hot lunch and two cold martinis waiting for him at 8 Plympton Street.4
But the journey from a graduate student with an idea for a calculating
machine to head of the Harvard Computation Laboratory had a number of
twists and turns. In the spring of 1941, when Aiken left Harvard to serve in
the Navy, many at Harvard saw his machine as marginal and Aiken as
dispensable. On 8 December 1939, Frederick Saunders, chairman of the
Department of Physics, sent a letter to Harvard's president, James Bryant
Conant, summarizing his department's position concerning Aiken and his
machine: "We do not feel committed to the promotion of H.H. Aiken in this
Department on account of his activities in connection with the calculating
machine or the building proposed to house it." Saunders further relayed the
department's indifference to the machine: "The machine and the building
are both desirable if money can be found, but not necessarily more desirable
than anything else."5 That same month, Conant called for a committee to
determine the fate of the proposed machine and its inventor. The
Calculating Machine Committee met on 18 December 1939 and agreed that
if the school were to go ahead with the computation project, multiple
departments, including physics, mathematics, communication engineering,
geophysics, and astronomy, should share the costs for housing and
maintenance. Regarding Aiken, the committee said this:
A good deal of discussion was devoted to the problem of Mr. Aiken and his future. Representatives of
the Department of Physics were rather divided in their feeling as to the possibility of his attaining a
professorship in physics. There seemed to be a general agreement that if Mr. Aiken is asked to raise
funds and in general to promote the project, it should be made quite clear to him that such activity did
not increase his chances of promotion to a professorship.6

The "problem" of Howard Aiken became a very sticky issue. In a private
letter to Dean George H. Chase, Dean John H. Van Vleck wrote: "If the
computing machine is a success, the University presumably is under
something of a moral obligation to see that Dr. Aiken is retained to man it.
However, this is no doubt a delicate question which can well be omitted
from the minutes."7
By the spring of 1940, Aiken's own department had some interest in the
machine, but the department refused to back Aiken unequivocally.
"Assuming that the machine goes forward and Aiken remains in charge of
it," Frederick Saunders wrote, "the Department agrees to provide from its
budget a sum not to exceed one quarter of Aiken's salary, under the
provision that, at the discretion of the Department, one-quarter of the
operating time of the machine be made available for the solution of
problems originating within the Department." Saunders also offered to
house the calculating machine if money could not be found to build a
separate facility.8
Feeling that Aiken was being hung out to dry by the Department of
Physics, astronomy professor Harlow Shapley wrote Dean Chase a
"bombshell" letter to "stir the physics department to greater activity."9 As a
stopgap measure, Shapley suggested that Aiken be retained at least another
2 years as a faculty instructor. If the money could be found to establish a
separate laboratory for the machine, Shapley recommended, Aiken should
be named director for a 5-year period without any assurance thereafter. If
Aiken could not accept the anemic salary of a faculty instructor with no
guarantees beyond 2 years, Dean Chase informed President Conant,
"Shapley is sure that Cunningham and one or two others would prove quite
capable of managing it, perhaps not quite so well as Dr. Aiken could, but
satisfactorily enough at a much smaller expense."10
On 26 April 1940, President Conant wrote to Aiken and offered him the
position of temporary faculty instructor for 2 years at a meager $3,000 the
first year and $3,300 the second. At some point during the academic year
1941-42, Conant stated, a decision would be made concerning whether or
not a more permanent position would come available "if your work here
justifies us in promoting you to a permanent rank." Maintaining an
impartial position, Conant ended the letter by suggesting to Aiken that he
speak with Dean Westergaard and then "let me know whether you wish to
continue at Harvard or not under this arrangement."11 On 2 May, a

disappointed Aiken replied that he hoped to continue at Harvard, and that he
would "endeavor to be worthy" of a more permanent position. "Conant said
that I was one of these 'faculty instructors' . . . that was a bitter letter,"
Aiken later recalled.12 Aiken agreed to continue teaching a course in applied
mathematics and to assist with Professor Emory L. Chaffee's course in
electron physics. But during the summer the dissatisfied but resourceful
Aiken utilized his reserve officer status to further his ties within the Navy.
In addition, Aiken initiated a correspondence with his former calculus
professor at Wisconsin, Dr. Warren Weaver, who had recently been named
the director of the Applied Mathematics Panel of the Office of Scientific
Research and Development. Aiken informed Weaver about the invention
that he had designed and was constructing with the help of International
Business Machines Corporation. In a letter to Weaver dated 5 September
1940, Aiken declared: "It is just possible that my calculating machine or
other experience might be useful in your projected research." With regard to
issues of military security, Aiken wrote: "You may be interested in knowing
that I am at present a member of the United States Naval Reserve with rank
of Lieutenant Commander."13 Aiken's reestablished relationship with
Weaver would prove useful in the coming years.
A SOLUTION FOR THE "PROBLEM OF DR. AIKEN'S FUTURE"
"Problem of Dr. Aiken's Future" was the title of a memo generated by a
Harvard committee that met 12 March 1940 to make recommendations
about Aiken's fate to President Conant. The committee concluded that "Dr.
Aiken's future is largely dependent on the success of the calculating
machine" and recommended that Harvard should make no long-term
commitments to him.14 The ambiguity of Aiken's arrangement at Harvard
was cleared up with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. As the United
States mobilized for war, Aiken was called to active service and given
orders to the Mine Warfare School in Yorktown, Virginia, during the spring
of 1941. Aiken asked physics graduate student Robert Campbell to serve as
the liaison between Harvard and IBM while he was away and to monitor the
construction of the machine. Aiken also maintained contact with Harlow
Shapley, who kept him abreast of developments within the Harvard
administration.15

Throughout 1942 and 1943, Aiken continued to expand his contacts
within the Navy, informing both civilian and military leaders of the
potential utility of his calculating machine for the war effort. As the
machine neared completion, Aiken urged his superiors that it would be
more beneficial for the Navy, rather than Harvard, to assume responsibility
for the machine, and that he should be named the project's acting
commander. According to Robert Campbell, "he started a sales campaign to
get the Navy interested in taking over the system some time before the
equipment was actually delivered [to Harvard]."16 Eventually, Aiken
convinced Admiral A. T. Solberg and Commander David Ferrier of the
Naval Research Laboratory, and the two officers recommended that the
Bureau of Ships take over the operation of the calculator, pay Harvard
rental fees for the machine, and staff the project with Navy personnel
instead of Harvard employees.17
Official portrait of Commander Howard Hathaway Aiken, officer in charge of the Harvard
Computation Laboratory. Courtesy of Archives Center, National Museum of American History,
Smithsonian Institution.
AIKEN TAKES COMMAND
On 27 April 1944, Lieutenant Commander Howard Aiken received orders to
report to Cambridge as the officer in charge of the Automatic Sequence
Controlled Calculator. He had successfully bypassed President Conant and
the Harvard administration by employing the political and financial clout of

the Navy in order to gain control of what he considered his project. But
since the source of his authority lay with the military and not with the
university, Aiken would run the Harvard Computation Laboratory like a
military installation, not a university laboratory.
From the start Aiken adopted and enforced formal Navy protocol. He was
not a research "director" but rather a "commander," and Mark I was his
ship. According to Grace Hopper, he called the Computation Laboratory
staff his "crew," and, like any Navy crew, they wore the proper uniform of
the day, addressed Aiken as "commander" or "sir," followed a strict,
hierarchical chain of command, and were on call seven days a week. "You
were in the Navy," asserted Hopper. "You were on duty 24 hours a day. You
were lucky if you went home to sleep."18
Seaman Robert Burns, one of the four original enlisted crew-members,
remembered that the laboratory even used the operational protocol found
aboard ship. Hopper was in charge of creating a monthly "watch list" that
assigned personnel to eight-hour shifts. The officers took turns at 24-hour
"Officer of the Day" shifts. The Officer of the Day spoke with the authority
of Commander Aiken, but was held directly accountable for mishaps or
problems during his or her watch. Burns recalled that discipline was so rigid
that the Officer of the Day had to relieve operators for lunch, and that "even
then when you relieved the operator you had to say 'so and so properly
relieved by Burns.' "19
Commander Aiken's understanding of Navy mores and his early life
experiences forged his work ethic. Years spent in school during the day and
working at night trained him to function effectively with little rest. Hopper,
Bloch, and Campbell all remembered his seemingly unending stamina. It
was not uncommon to see Aiken work a 12-hour day, leave for a late dinner,
and show up again at his office from midnight to 4 a.m. Aiken's nocturnal
habits could have detrimental consequences for the unprepared. Robert
Burns recalled an incident when Aiken decided to show up unexpectedly at
dawn one Sunday morning. Having forgotten his key, he pounded on the
door, but there was no response from the night operator. "He finally got in
and found the fellow was asleep," Burns recalled. "There's an entry in the
log book that he was going to court-martial him. The fellow signed his own
name as a witness." Word quickly got to the other enlisted operators that, if
found asleep on duty, one would be shot at dawn.20

Just as there was little empathy for those who did not display Aiken's
work ethic, he was loyal to those who did. "He was one of these individuals
that you are either with him or against him," crew member Frederick Miller
recalled. "If you were with him, why, there was nothing he wouldn't do for
you. If you were against him, why, there was nothing good that you could
do." Hopper remembered many nights spent sleeping on her desk in her
attempt to keep up with the never-ending workload. Aiken came in early
one morning, surprised to see his loyal lieutenant. "She'd been there most
of the night struggling with Mark I," Aiken recalled. "I said, 'What have
you been doing here all night?' And she said, 'Chaperoning these two damn
computers!' "21
Hopper even braved a hurricane in the fall of 1944 to get to her post. "We
held hands and one would hold on to the lamp post or a tree while the other
two would string out and get to the next one and hang on," she recalled.22
Richard Bloch kept up with the boss by drinking an unseemly amount of
Coca-Cola each day. At one point during the war Bloch worked through the
night two days in a row in order to meet a deadline. Recognizing that his
subordinate was approaching physical exhaustion, Aiken escorted Bloch to
his room on the other side of campus and would not leave him until Bloch
had put on his pajamas and was safely tucked in bed.23
During his years as a plant operator, Aiken had developed an unbending
ethic of efficiency, accuracy, and orderliness, which he later transferred to
the Harvard Laboratory. Operators had to meticulously account for every
minute of machine run time. Each day's (and night's) events were recorded
in an operational logbook and on a publicly displayed operational chart.
Aiken spent the first part of each morning reviewing the logbook and the
operational chart and interrogating those responsible for any discrepancies.
"He is probably one of the toughest bosses and also one of the best,"
Hopper recalled. "You could always make the mistake the first time and
nothing happened to you. You might get bawled out and you got told not to
make it again but nothing happened to you until you did the same dumb
thing over again."24
Aiken's emphasis on efficiency permeated his approach to technical
invention and innovation. Despite his doctorate in physics, Aiken was at
heart a hard-nosed industrial engineer. Deadlines were written in stone, and
no matter what, Miller recalled, "he was going to run it and get it done."
Miller was impressed by Aiken's discipline to stick with a given design

plan. Engineers, according to Miller, usually pay lip service to simplicity
and elegance, but often add complexity with multitude variations that often
sabotage the coherence of the final product. According to Miller, Aiken
would say "I'm going to have one kind of relay that has six double throw
contacts that will make it easy to test them and fix them."25
Aiken's efficiency in matters of hardware design went hand in hand with
his autocratic style of decision making. He kept the overall vision of the
project in his head and more often then not just assigned the tasks to be
accomplished. "We each had different problems that we worked on,"
Hopper recalled. "Problems were assigned to us to solve." This did not
mean that Aiken did not consider other people's ideas; they just had to be
prepared to defend their position. "I am a simple man and I want simple
answers!" would be his typical response when one of the crew did not
explain an idea clearly or concisely. Further opaqueness usually resulted in
a barrage of expletives.26
Members of the Harvard Computation Laboratory staff working on the backboard wiring for Mark II,
5 June 1946. Courtesy of Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian
Institution.
The British mathematician Maurice Wilkes remembered visiting Harvard
in the summer of 1946 and recalled the difficulty he had discussing design
ideas that differed from Aiken's own. Once, when Wilkes asked about the
potential of mercury delay lines, Aiken snapped back: "You are not
committed to the mercury memory, are you?" Instead of defending himself,
Wilkes avoided confrontation. "I was a little afraid of Aiken," admitted

Wilkes, "and I made the defensive reply that I was not committed to
anything."27 Paradoxically, the members of the original Harvard crew who
developed an effective working relationship with Aiken learned quickly that
the best way to earn his respect was to match fire with fire. "I remember
one time telling him that I thought he was a son of a bitch," Fred Miller
recalled. "He considered that a real compliment."28 Those who forged close
bonds with the commander during those first years all had similar stories.
One time when Burns and Aiken were in a heated discussion, Aiken yelled
"Don't I scare you?" "Hell no," Burns replied. "You put your pants on the
same way I do, one leg at a time." Instead of retribution, Burns's defiance
generated a laugh and a pat on the back.29
Humor was Hopper's preferred technique for dealing with her
domineering boss. If Aiken began pushing the crew too hard, a strategically
placed practical joke served to relieve the tension and to indirectly remind
the boss of his transgressions. During a week when Aiken was pressuring
the crew exceptionally hard to meet deadlines, Hopper and the crew
decided to revise the operational charts to show that the machine had been
"down" all night when in fact it had been operating fine. When Aiken
arrived in the morning and went through his ritual review of the operating
chart, he became infuriated when he saw the continuous line of red
indicating that the machine had been down all night. Aiken stormed from
one person to the next, demanding why he had not been notified during the
night. No one had a clue what he was so angry about. By the time he had
returned to the operating chart, the chart's red lines had been replaced with
blue. Aiken just stood there smirking, knowing that he had been had.
Hopper, to the delight of the crew, then presented him with a medal she had
made out of the chart's red line material. Aiken wore the medal on his
uniform proudly for two days thereafter.30
Humor and practical jokes became a central part of the Computation
Laboratory's culture, not only for the cathartic value of humor but also for
its bonding power. "Any time off was very brief and usually it turned into
pranks of one sort or another," Hopper recalled. "Comic relief almost."31
Burns remembered that Hopper was always playing jokes on people in the
name of "morale building."32 Besides pranks, the artistic lieutenant became
famous for her cartoon collection that captured the idiosyncrasies of the
machine and the people who ran it in the difficult wartime environment.
Her assortment of "gremlins" and "bugs" were blamed when programs did

not run or the machine acted up, thus adding lightheartedness to tense,
frustrating situations.
As might be expected, not everyone thrived under Aiken. Robert Seeber,
for instance, held ill feelings toward Aiken long after the war. Seeber was
an expert on IBM punch-card equipment who worked as a civilian for the
Navy during the war. After reading about Mark I in August 1944, he
requested a transfer to the Harvard Computation Laboratory. Seeber's wish
was granted, but the unsuspecting technician immediately got on Aiken's
bad side by requesting vacation time before joining the laboratory. Seeber
survived at Harvard until the end of the war, enduring 90-hour weeks as a
coder in addition to Aiken's constant pestering. He recalled trying to
participate in the planning for Mark II during the spring of 1945, but Aiken
ignored his ideas. The moment the war was over, Seeber quit and took his
ideas to IBM. His experience under Aiken made him believe that "his aim
in life must be to work for IBM and help them build a bigger and better
computer than the Mark I."33 That computer would be the IBM Selective
Sequence Electronic Calculator, a 120-foot-long colossus completed in
1948 and displayed in full view on the ground floor of IBM's world
headquarters in Manhattan.34
Problems with "fitting in" were not limited to civilian employees. Both
officers and enlisted crewmembers had difficulty with Aiken's heavy-
handedness at times. "He was totally involved in getting a job done for the
Navy," Hopper recalled, "and if one of the enlisted men made a mistake
during the night on the computer or went to sleep or something, he bawled
the hell out of him. Well, Dick [Bloch] would say you shouldn't treat a
human being that way, and as far as the Commander was concerned he was
supposed to be on duty and doing a job."35
Among the officers, it was Bloch who had the most volatile relationship
with Aiken, and Hopper usually found herself mediating between the two.
"I used to argue with Dick Bloch because he was always getting in trouble,"
she said. "I would try to explain to Dick that [Aiken] is just exactly like a
computer, he's wired a certain way [and] if you are going to work with him
you must realize how he is wired."36
Hopper believed that the root of the tension between Aiken and Bloch
was their similar disposition. Their similarities resulted in a fiery working
relationship, but also generated some creative technical solutions, for Aiken
respected the ideas of his young protégé. When tempers boiled over,

Hopper would remind the youthful Bloch that all of them were doing a job
for the Navy and that their individual differences had to be suppressed in
order to fulfill the mission. "I don't think [Aiken] ever demanded any more
of anybody, anything more of anyone then he would have aboard ship," she
asserted. "It's true we were on dry land, but we needed this and required
this same discipline. Once you realized that and realized what was going on
and understood it, there was no difficulty."37
Despite Aiken's and Bloch's differences, Hopper was able to keep the
peace. This was not the case with the Computation Laboratory's executive
officer, Lieutenant Commander Hubert Arnold. Rather than play
intermediary, Hopper's actions appeared to have heightened the tension
between Aiken and his second in command during the war. "Arnold never
should well, I can't say it that way. He wasn't really a naval officer; he was
still a college professor," admitted Hopper. The challenge during wartime,
according to Hopper, was finding mathematically qualified people who
were also naval personnel. Arnold had a difficult time performing under
pressure, and though he was a talented mathematician his limited aptitude
for coding put a strain on the rest of the crew. "Every time his programs
didn't run," Hopper recalled, "the Commander would come storming into
my office and say 'Find out what's wrong with Arnold's routine!' "38
To make matters worse, Arnold lacked the leadership skill to manage the
crew in Aiken's absence. Once, when Aiken was in Washington, tensions
ran so high between Arnold and the crew that upon Aiken's return the
executive officer complained to Aiken that the crew had been insubordinate
in his absence. "Aiken went up to the ceiling and said, if you can't run the
crew you shouldn't be a lieutenant commander," Hopper recalled. "You
should be able to run, manage, your crew and discipline your crew, I'm not
going to do anything about it for you."39 Arnold was "reassigned" for the
remainder of the war to the Widener Library, where he produced a
bibliography for applied mathematics and numerical analysis that was
included in Hopper's Manual of Operation for Mark I. "I think the
Commander wanted him out of the Laboratory because the crew was
insubordinate to the executive officer," Hopper recalled. "I'll admit it, we
were. We played all kinds of tricks on him. We were insubordinate I guess,
except he just asked for it, I swear he did."40
With Arnold physically removed from the Computation Laboratory,
Aiken turned to Hopper to be in charge of Mark I. By the spring of 1945,

Hopper had proved herself to be a talented coder, a dedicated member of
the crew, and an enforcer of Aiken's system. "I think we were more scared
of Grace than we were of the old man," the operator Robert Burns recalled.
"They really didn't pull any practical jokes on Grace."41 Not only had
Hopper overcome the technical challenges presented by Mark I; she had
demonstrated her leadership skills in an antagonistic environment. Being
placed in charge of Mark I "was a victory on my side because when I
walked in there [Aiken] had not wanted a woman officer and I had said he
was going to want a woman officer," Hopper recalled.42 Years later,
reflecting on his female lieutenant's dedicated service during the war, Aiken
said "Grace was a good man!"43
Aiken's crew taking a break from the wartime pressures. From left to right: Ensign Bloch on piano,
Commander Aiken, Lieutenant (j.g.) Hopper, Ensign Brendel, Ensign Campbell. Courtesy of
Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution.
LABORATORY CULTURE AND THE REALITIES OF WAR
The war shattered life's normal rhythms, and most Americans had to adjust
to a variety of inconveniences. Restrictions on travel, rationing of food, and
shortages of materials became the norm. If the pressures placed on the
Harvard crew by Commander Aiken weren't enough, they were also faced
with the stresses of the wartime environment. "Getting food was a difficult
proposition," Hopper recalled. "We didn't have ration stamps because we
were supposed to eat at the main mess that we could never get to. We only
got ration stamps when we were on leave, and it was rough rounding up
food."44 Once a week Hopper would send one of the enlisted men across

town to the Navy Supply Building to get food, Coca-Cola, and cigarettes
for the crew.
Locating supplies for the Computation Laboratory was difficult too.
Furniture was "borrowed" from other buildings on campus, and items as
basic as paper were held at a premium. "We discovered the backyard of the
Army store room which was next to the area the computer was in, and they
had lots of nice paper and stuff," Hopper recalled. Periodically Hopper and
Seaman Frank Verdonck would augment the Computation Laboratory's
supplies by siphoning off Army supplies. Hopper remembered that
Commander Aiken caught the two when they were removing an entire
carton of graph paper. "I can remember what he said," Hopper recalled. "He
said, 'Well you better leave one pack. The Army may not be able to count
but they can tell the difference between none and some.' "45
More stressful for the crew were the pressures associated with the
operational aspects of the war. Even though things looked better by the
summer of 1944, there was no end in sight to the conflict. "The entire
nation," Hopper recalled, "was operating on one idea. The whole drive was
on, just one thing, just win that war."46 Hopper and the rest of the crew
believed that their work was instrumental to a successful conclusion of the
conflict, yet that burden hung heavily on them. "There was one special
phone," Hopper recalled, "which was connected directly to the Bureau of
Ordnance in Washington. Well, we used to shake every time that darn thing
rang."47 Usually the Bureau was asking to have certain firing tables of
calculations ahead of schedule, which put further strain on the laboratory.
For the entirety of the war, Mark I was operating 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week, with the staff working three 8-hour shifts. Free time and holidays
were almost non-existent, and even Christmas leave was limited to 24
hours.48
The need for immediate results affected the technical choices Aiken and
the crew made when designing Mark I and Mark II. Aiken was constrained
by available materials and tended to choose standard components. "He had
to build things out of what worked at the time," Hopper recalled. "He
couldn't afford to fiddle around with circuits yet."49 According to Hopper,
the decision to use relay technology and not vacuum tubes in both Mark I
and Mark II could be directly attributed to the pressures of the war. Aiken
felt it was better to apply a tested and proven technology, such as switches.

Vacuum tubes, though used in radios for years, had not yet been
successfully applied to computation machines.
Early programming innovations also grew out of the intense pressure
generated by the war. Hopper compared the experience to working in a long
tunnel with only the problems to solve ahead of her. She and Bloch were
constantly searching for ways to increase the speed of the coding process,
and their solutions evolved out of expediency rather than intellectual
curiosity. "There was," Hopper recalled, "no theorizing, there was no higher
mathematics. There was no future of computers, there was nothing but get
those problems going, and what the computer was doing. The future in a
sense did not exist."50
Hopper and crew usually were too busy solving problems for the war
effort to speculate about the calculating machine's commercial potential.
This was the case even after the laboratory received several inquiries from
interested industry leaders through the summer and fall of 1944. A series of
articles was published after the machine's official dedication on 7 August
1944, and companies such as Eastman Kodak and Goodyear Aircraft
Corporation made inquiries about the possibility of running engineering
problems. Each inquiry was met with a form letter from Commander Aiken
regretting that the laboratory could not accommodate the request because
Mark I was engaged in the solution of problems strictly for the war effort.
In the final sentence, the letter said "perhaps, at some future date, after the
war, we may be of service to you."51
The only discussion Hopper recalled during the war concerning the
commercial potential of Mark I occurred while visiting her parents on
Christmas leave in 1944. Hopper's father was a prominent figure within the
insurance industry, with more than 50 years' experience, and her
grandfather had been president of the Great American Insurance Company.
When Hopper told her father about her work at Harvard, he immediately
understood Mark I's commercial potential for keeping records, calculating
premium tables, and generating premium and billing statements. "Now
whether he had gone to New York and mentioned that to any of the
insurance companies, I'll never know, but that was the first mention that I
ever heard of using the computer in industry," Hopper recalled. "It was
from my own father."52
THE POSTWAR ENVIRONMENT

With the conclusion of the war, the Harvard Computation Laboratory's
future was in question. The Bureau of Ships contract was to run out, and
Aiken had to find a new patron for his machine. Though the Harvard
administration's attitude toward Aiken and the Computation Laboratory had
softened with the success of the project, Aiken felt limited allegiance to
those who had not supported him earlier. "We entered into a phase in which
'Howard Aiken had a computing machine and nobody in the University
could get near it', which, in part, was true," recalled Aiken. "However,
since we had paid for it ourselves or raised the money to pay for it, it did
not disturb me very much."53
Since Aiken was not motivated by financial gain, he did not consider
exploring his invention's business potential.54 Instead, he renegotiated with
the Navy and signed a new contract with the Bureau of Ordnance in the fall
of 1945. The contract transferred control of Mark I to Ordnance from the
Bureau of Ships, which dedicated the machine to engineering and scientific
problems pertaining to national security. The contract also extended funding
of the proposed Mark II and made provisions for research and development
of Mark III.55
In order to preserve the Computation Laboratory's organizational
continuity, the contract recommended that the indispensable members of the
crew be removed from active duty and employed as civilians. This included
Aiken, Hopper, Campbell, and Bloch in particular. Harvard agreed to assign
Aiken and his staff to the newly created Department of Engineering
Sciences and Applied Physics, naming Aiken an associate professor and
Hopper, Campbell, and Bloch research associates.56
The original members of the crew served as the nucleus for the
laboratory's postwar expansion. To maximize their investment, the Navy
still wanted to operate the machine 24 hours a day and seven days a week.
But since the staff was now civilian, the Navy had to abide by the
peacetime directive of a 40-hour workweek. For this reason, it hired a
second shift of operators and programmers. Numbers also increased
because of the need to design and build the Mark II and Mark III. Because
Aiken would not receive direct assistance from IBM or any other
commercial manufacturer, the appropriate number of engineers and
technicians had to be hired to meet the terms of the contract.
One of the first hires after the war was Harry Goheen, who had received
his doctorate in mathematics from Stanford in 1940 and had enlisted in the

Navy after Pearl Harbor because, he recalled, "it seemed that I might
possibly be of greater assistance as an active duty officer at sea." But
instead of finding glory and adventure on the bridge of a battleship, Goheen
had a "terribly boring experience" as an armed guard in the Philippines.57
Goheen left Manila in July 1945 and arrived at the Computation
Laboratory in August. Hired as a coder, on the side he helped Hopper
prepare the Manual of Operation. "I never did learn to program, but that
was what I was supposed to be doing," said Goheen. He was immediately
struck by the intense, almost repressive nature of the laboratory's
environment. In particular, he saw Aiken and Hopper as zealots who were
completely dedicated to this strange new computing discipline. Even
though the laboratory was transitioning to a peacetime environment,
Goheen noted how martial the atmosphere remained.58
Goheen was very empathetic to those who were not enthusiastic about
the laboratory culture. "There were a couple of people who, for one reason
or another, had felt very badly put upon. I won't mention any names, but
they left," he recalled. "And I don't blame them because from their own
point of view they got a very raw deal at Harvard."59 A confidential
memorandum from Lieutenant Commander Edmund Berkeley, dated 27
May 1946 corroborates Goheen's unsettling assessment. Berkeley, assigned
by the U.S. Naval Proving Ground to the Harvard Computation Laboratory
to aid with the design and construction of Mark II, reported to his superiors
on the deteriorating conditions at Harvard after the end of hostilities.
Berkeley placed ultimate responsibility and blame for the high rate of
personnel turnover on the project's director, Howard Aiken.60
In his report, Berkeley systematically detailed the unfavorable conditions
at the Computation Laboratory, including the length of the work day and the
isolation of the staff from similar projects at MIT and the University of
Pennsylvania. He named eleven talented people who had left or been
dismissed by Aiken between August 1945 and May 1946, noting that all
were "very bitter over the conditions on the project." The root of the
problem, according to Berkeley, was that "in the Computation Laboratory
there is no provision for appealing any decision or ruling whatsoever made
by the project manager." He was amazed that no one at Harvard and no one
in the Navy seemed to have jurisdiction over the rogue director, so that
Aiken was able to rule with near absolute authority. Paradoxically, Berkeley
concluded, "It seems definitively undesirable that there should be a change

in the project manager. The vigor, energy, directness, and intolerance of
obstacles which make the problem of dealing with personnel difficult, are in
many respects virtues in the struggle to wrest information out of the
scientific unknown." Such was the contradiction of Howard Hathaway
Aiken.61
With so many members of the crew leaving, their replacements had
difficulty integrating into the Computation Laboratory's culture. The
members of the original crew had forged a powerful bond during the
hardship of the war years, and it became very difficult for new recruits to
prove their worthiness. Harry Goheen got along with Grace Hopper, his
immediate boss, but he was well aware that they were on two different
levels in Aiken's caste system. "She was on the inside, you see. The
difference between Grace and us was that she was the Commander's right-
hand girl," stated Goheen. "And he was lucky to have her for a right-hand
girl, because she was most skillful in writing and she worked hard, and she
was a clever mathematician, and completely dedicated both to computing
machinery and to Howard Aiken."62
Hopper's special relationship with Aiken afforded her freedom of thought
and action that others did not possess. Fred Miller remembered that her
opinions, both technical and organizational, carried more weight than those
of other staff members. She entertained important visitors to the
Computation Laboratory in Aiken's absence, and she was the only one
permitted to travel to other computing projects. Hopper, Goheen recalled,
"was the only one who had that freedom, not only of movement but of
moving at [Aiken's] level."63
POSTWAR INNOVATIONS AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF SUBROUTINES
For Harry Goheen and for others who had joined the postwar Computation
Laboratory, the laboratory's culture did not encourage experimentation and
innovation. Aiken's hierarchical system left technical decision making to a
chosen few. Campbell, Bloch, and Hopper, as members of the original crew,
were given special license to innovate, though not at the expense of their
primary duties. Despite the marginalization of the inventive spirit at the
Computation Laboratory, Bloch and Hopper consolidated the programming
insights gained during the war and developed a sophisticated system of
subroutines for Mark I in their spare time.

A subroutine was a segment of code representing algebraic functions that
could be recorded into and accessed from the internal memory of a
computer. A collection of subroutines was known as a subroutine library.
During her keynote address at the first History of Programming Languages
Conference in 1978, Captain Grace Hopper held up a piece of paper and
claimed that it was a subroutine that she had written back in 1944.64 That
audacious claim seems questionable on two accounts. First, subroutines are
generally associated with stored-program computer architecture, and the
Harvard Mark I did not have such an architecture. Second, the majority of
the Hopper's audience, made up primarily of computer pioneers and
historians, believed Maurice Wilkes to have been the originator of
subroutines and subroutine libraries.65
Wilkes, a British mathematician who made important contributions to the
wartime development of radar, was named the director of the Mathematical
Laboratory at Cambridge University in 1945. In May 1946, Wilkes was
visited by Leslie Comrie, who handed him an unpublished document,
written by John von Neumann, titled "First Draft of a Report on the
EDVAC."66 The paper described the architecture of a modern computer:
binary logic gates, stored instructions and data, and the serial execution of
instructions.
Wilkes spent the summer of 1946 touring the United States in order to
learn more about large-scale calculating machines. He attended the Moore
School lectures on large-scale calculating machines at the University of
Pennsylvania, where he met John Mauchly and Howard Aiken. Mauchly
gave Wilkes a tour of the ENIAC, and Aiken invited the British
mathematician to the Harvard Computation Laboratory.67
Inspired by the unique calculating machines he saw in Philadelphia and
Boston, Wilkes returned to Cambridge determined to construct a machine of
his own. The Mathematical Laboratory sponsored a series of colloquia on
Thursday afternoons in which issues concerning the proposed computing
machine were discussed, oftentimes over a few beers. The Cambridge
colloquia attracted researchers and students alike, and it soon evolved into
the team that would try to turn the stored-program machine into reality. On
6 May 1949, the EDSAC read its first program into memory and
successfully printed the results.68
That same summer, Wilkes established a committee to design a library of
coded subroutines. The idea was to generate code for the most widely used

elementary functions and standard operations so that future users would not
have to program from scratch. The main force behind the programming
effort was a recent Cambridge graduate named David Wheeler. Wheeler's
work, which included developing the protocol for the nesting of multiple
subroutines, was published in July 1951 under the names of Wilkes,
Wheeler, and Stanley Gill. (Gill was a research student.) One thousand
copies were sold within the year, including one bought by the senior
mathematician at the Eckert-Mauchly division of Remington Rand: Grace
Hopper.69
Hopper recalled being impressed by the work of Wilkes, Wheeler, and
Gill,70 but found most of the concepts within the book quite recognizable.
Seven years before the book's publication, Hopper and Bloch had stumbled
across the subroutine concept while programming Mark I. During the war,
they had developed the habit of saving snippets of code as reference
material for future coding. "Gradually we built up quite a lot of these little
pieces of code in our notebooks," Hopper recalled.71 Soon it became
apparent that different problems could apply the same segments of code. By
reapplying pre-written code to new problems, programming time could be
reduced.
By the spring of 1945, it was common practice for Harvard coders to
share each other's notebooks in order to copy segments of code. "We would
borrow from each other and copy them," Hopper said. "When we copied
them of course we had to change the address. They all started from zero and
we had to add those addresses and then we also had to copy them into
another program."72
To facilitate the transfer of code segments into subsequent programs,
Hopper and Bloch developed a system they called "relative coding." The
codes were relative because they were written in a general, abstract fashion
that allowed them to be entered anywhere in a given program. "I put the A's
and B's in instead of the specific storage locations," Hopper recalled, "and
what you had to do if you wanted to use it over again, was you put your
argument in A, and so on in B."73 Hopper's relative codes provided the
framework for a given mathematical function. All the user had to supply
was the specific parameters of the operation. For example, if the relative
code was a general segment for sine, the coder may specify solutions for a
range of angles.

Even though Hopper and Bloch's system of relative coding made it easier
to write more accurate codes in less time, the system itself was haphazard.
It was up to the coder to remember the contents of the notebooks. When a
useful code segment was located, it was copied by hand into the subsequent
program. Furthermore, the data and parameters unique to the problem were
hand-punched and manually fed into a set of mechanical inputs called
interpolators. Human intervention in the copying process increased the
probability of mistakes.
With the conclusion of the war, Hopper and Bloch had more time to
systematize the relative coding process. The rigid sequential nature of Mark
I design proved to be a considerable hindrance. The main sequence
mechanism was unidirectional, meaning that reversing or back-stepping the
mechanism was impossible. If a segment of code was to be repeated in a
given problem, the entire sequence had to be punched into the tape multiple
times, since each line of code could be executed only once. "No matter how
clever the coding," Bloch recalled, "it was not possible (without manual
intervention) to arrange for embedded subroutines, or to skip certain lines
of code, or to branch to another segment of the program."74
Branching permits a computer to make a decision based on the result of
intermediate output. That is, intermediate output A would initiate coding
instruction X, whereas output B would precipitate instruction Y. During the
war, branching was achieved by having the enlisted operators monitor
intermediate results and manually switch or advance main sequence tapes
when desired outputs appeared. "The operator would twirl the drum that
held the tape over to an indicated branch line and proceed from there,"
Bloch recalled. "You had instructions that would say 'if the machine stops
here, move it over to the red line next. If it stops somewhere else, ship it
over to the blue line.' "75 This crude and time-consuming procedure was
painfully evident when trying to calculate John von Neumann's implosion
problem for the first atomic bomb in the fall of 1944. The complex partial
differential equations associated with the implosion problem required
hundreds of manual manipulations, much to the dismay of Mark I
operators.76
In the summer of 1946, shortly after his decommission from the Navy,
Bloch took on the challenge and produced a subsidiary sequence unit that
permitted full branching capability. The unit could call in up to ten different
sub-sequences of code, each with up to 50 lines of instruction. The sub-

sequences of code were in fact the relative codes from the notebooks, pre-
punched and devoid of bugs. In essence, Bloch and Hopper had created a
fully functioning subroutine system, albeit saved on paper tape instead of
stored in the machine's memory. "This was," Bloch recalled, "the first
instance that I know of subroutines in any computer and branching of that
nature, being able to go to any of ten subroutines based upon the results that
might occur."77
Combining the subsidiary sequence unit with relative codes provided
Harvard coders with a powerful programming tool. "You avoided errors
because you used previously checked out valid pieces of code that you
knew worked which meant you could write the program much faster and
much easier," Hopper recalled.78 Once a clean code was created, it could be
plugged into any number of problems. This eliminated several steps,
including translating the mathematical problem into code, punching the
code, debugging the code, and testing the code. With blocks of relative
codes controlled by the subsidiary sequence unit, new problems no longer
had to be solved from scratch.
Hopper's and Bloch's coding innovations were captured by Aiken in the
design of his third calculating machine, the Harvard Mark III. Mark III was
assembled at Harvard on contract for the Dahlgren [Virginia] Naval Proving
Ground between 1946 and 1948 and was delivered to Dahlgren in January
1950. The machine was unique in utilizing magnetic tape for the input and
output of data, vacuum-tube circuitry for registers, and separate magnetic
drums for data and instructions storage.79
The magnetic drums were Aiken's attempt to solve the problem of
effective, high-speed internal memory.80 Each was 8 inches in diameter, 40
inches long, and covered with a thin plastic layer with embedded ferrous
oxide. As the drum rotated, the read/write heads magnetized spots that
represented data along the drum's surface, which could be re-read at a later
date. In this respect magnetic drums operated in a similar fashion to
audiocassette tapes, but the information could be accessed randomly and
not just in sequential fashion as with tapes. Hopper recalled the difficulty
the crew had finding a manufacturer who could produce a drum that did not
bulge in the middle when rotated at high speeds.81 Eventually the
horizontally mounted drums achieved an operating speed of 6,900 rpm and
could store up to 4,000 instructions, making them the most robust storage
medium to date.

The expanded memory permitted programs to be stored internally,82
which allowed instructions to be accessed at the speed of the arithmetic
unit. Now all that was necessary was to speed up the coding process itself.
Aiken's solution was to mechanize Hopper and Bloch's relative code
system. A library of prewritten relative codes was housed within a
mechanical coding device (later referred to as the Instructional Tape
Preparation Table). That device permitted the coder to introduce complete,
multi-instruction subroutines at the push of a button. For instance, the
"cosine" button placed the proper code sequence onto the magnetic
instruction tape, set parameters for the position of the decimal point, and
managed address storage information for instructions after completion of
the cosine routine.83
The Instructional Tape Preparation Table was split into lower and upper
sections, the lower section holding the more commonly used routines. The
Table could print the content of an instructional tape in order to facilitate
debugging before uploading the tape into Mark III's internal memory. If a
change had to be made, the coding machine could overwrite previously
entered instructions.84

Example of operating instructions for Mark I. Courtesy of Archives Center, National Museum of
American History, Smithsonian Institution.
Mark III's Instructional Tape Preparation Table was a mechanized
version of many of the concepts discussed in Wilkes, Wheeler, and Gill's
1951 book on subroutines. The coding machine embodied programming
innovations that Hopper and Bloch had developed between 1944 and 1946
while programming Mark I and Mark II. The question arises: Did
programmers in the Harvard University Computation Laboratory and the
Cambridge University Mathematical Laboratory have any contact between
1944 and 1951?
SUBROUTINES: AN EXAMPLE OF SIMULTANEOUS INVENTION

When historians consider the path of a technical innovation, they come
across a strange and unexpected phenomenon: Often, different inventors
invent a technology simultaneously in different geographic locations.
Further investigation uncovers no other connections between these
disparate groups, as is the case of such well-documented examples as the
telegraph, the light bulb, and the turbojet.85 Without any formal
communications between the different inventors, it is tempting to write off
the occurrence as chance or coincidence.
But the frequency of simultaneous invention dismisses serendipity on
statistical grounds. Why simultaneous inventions occur appears to be
contingent on a variety of factors, including the society's overall scientific
and technical acumen and the process of how technological problems are
defined and chosen. In the case of subroutines, the problems associated with
programming were similar on the two sides of the Atlantic because the
hardware was similar. Early pioneers in large-scale computing machines
criss-crossed the Atlantic, attended joint conferences, and shared published
and unpublished documents, the most famous being John von Neumann's
"First Draft." Because of the similar hardware solutions, comparable
programming problems arose as these machines became operational.
The more difficult question that arises is why members of the Harvard
crew and the Cambridge staff came to such similar solutions. Since the
concept of technological determinism carries little weight with most
historians, it is not wise to conclude that subroutines were the best or the
most logical solution to the problem. Yet why "closure" occurs for one
expression of technology but not for another is far from transparent.86
Technical "closure" has its roots in the concept of scientific certainty.
During the process of scientific inquiry, consensus within the scientific
community tends to form around a certain interpretation or theory. A similar
process occurs when consensus emerges around a particular technology
design. Communities of engineers, designers, and consumers interact until a
technology design stabilizes and reaches closure. The closure process has
produced rear-chain bicycles, QWERTY keyboards, and gasoline-powered
automobiles. It is important to remember that these technologies and others
could have stabilized with other design attributes.87
In the case of subroutines, closure may have occurred because there was
much more sharing of information between Harvard and Cambridge than
first meets the eye. During the summer of 1946, Wilkes accepted an

invitation by Howard Aiken to visit Harvard after the completion of the
Moore School lectures.88 Wilkes arrived in Boston on 11 September and
remained there for a week. The young Brit recalled observing Mark I in full
operation as well as having a variety of conversations with Harvard staff.89
Hopper remembered his visit years later: "We had gotten to concepts of
subroutines [by 1946] and I think a little bit had influenced Wilkes, who
had been there from England."90
Another connection to Wilkes runs through British mathematician Leslie
Comrie. Comrie managed the British Nautical Almanac Office from 1930 to
1936 and founded the Scientific Computing Services Ltd. in 1937. As a
leading proponent of calculating technology in Britain, Comrie kept abreast
of developments in America and passed them on to Maurice Wilkes. It was
Comrie who provided Wilkes with a copy of John von Neumann's report on
the stored-program concept, which heavily influenced the design of the
British EDSAC.91 As the historian James Cortada observes, "his help to
Wilkes was typical, and that of the EDVAC report was only one in a long
series of favors to Wilkes."92
In a review of Hopper's Manual of Operation in the 26 October 1946
issue of Nature, Comrie noted that he was extremely impressed with the
"brains of the machine" (that is, the sequence-control tapes). What struck
him was the fact that these tapes represented a sequence of processes that
were independent of the actual figures used, thus allowing the same tape to
be used multiple times. He explicitly mentioned the Computation
Laboratory's "tape library," which significantly lessened the coding burden
and made Mark I more efficient than a well-equipped manual computer.93
Though it cannot be confirmed that Comrie passed knowledge of the
Harvard tape library to Wilkes, we do know that Comrie was aware of
Hopper's and Bloch's coding innovations and that he kept Wilkes informed
of developments in the United States.
Wilkes returned to the United States in the summer of 1950 in order to
learn more about a new machine being constructed by the Eckert-Mauchly
Computer Corporation: the UNIVAC I. By that time, Wilkes's Cambridge
colloquium on programming had been meeting for a year. In Philadelphia,
Wilkes got to spend some time with Grace Hopper and her programming
staff. Hopper had left Harvard in 1949 to join the EMCC as a senior
mathematician. Wilkes remembered particularly stimulating conversations
with Hopper and her group: "I found that they had a full appreciation of the

importance of programming and of the need to develop organized and
disciplined methods. I felt that I was among people who looked at things in
the same way that I did myself."94
Whether or not Hopper and Bloch influenced Wilkes's development of
subroutines and subroutine libraries for stored-program computers, Wilkes
was the first to publish on the topic. Though Hopper discussed subroutines
in her 1949 Description of a Relay Calculator,95 she admitted that Wilkes,
Wheeler, and Gill systematically defined the programming concept and
disseminated it to a wide audience.
Ten years before her bold proclamation that she had written the first
subroutine in 1944, Hopper candidly admitted in an interview that
innovation at Harvard did not follow a smooth, logical path, and that at
times Hopper and her Harvard colleagues were not fully conscious of the
significance of their creations: "Those were essentially relative subroutines,
though we did not know it [in 1945]; we didn't realize it. In fact, I wasn't
aware of it fully until I got down to UNIVAC, when I had input-output
under my control, and could store those on tape and call them back into a
program without having to copy them."96 Her confession does not take
away from the accomplishments of the Harvard crew, but it reminds us that
sometimes inventors do not understand the significance of their creations
until well after the fact.
OceanofPDF.com

5    THE BEGINNING OF A COMPUTING COMMUNITY
During World War II, the crew of the Harvard Computation Laboratory
constituted a significant portion of the emerging computer community. The
members of the crew were bound together by shared ideas and knowledge,
but being a member of the crew went beyond the sharing of technical
information. The group cultivated its own style of being and sense of
purpose. Howard Aiken, Grace Hopper, and the external influence of the
Navy were all instrumental in developing this disposition, demeanor, and
outlook. Ultimately the Harvard Computation Laboratory became more
than just a place to house a large calculating machine. It was a community
of practitioners capable of generating, capturing, and disseminating highly
esoteric technical knowledge.1
WARTIME ISOLATION
During the war, the Harvard Computation Laboratory functioned in near
isolation. One obvious reason was the fact that there were only a few other
programs. In England, Alan Turing's work at Bletchley Park on the code-
breaking machine Colossus was shrouded in secrecy. In the United States,
Eckert and Mauchly's ENIAC project at the University of Pennsylvania was
in its infancy at the time of Mark I's dedication. "To a considerable extent,"
Robert Campbell recalled, "the Harvard project was sort of self-contained.
It pretty much went its own way, and there was not an awful lot of
interchange."2
Hopper recalled hearing about a computing program at MIT during the
war, but admitted that none of the Harvard crew ever interacted with their
MIT counterparts. It seems strange that two programs so close
geographically to one another would not share information, but a
confidential memorandum to Harvard president James Bryant Conant from
MIT president Karl Taylor Compton (dated 7 February 1940) sheds light on
the matter. Compton wanted to make sure that Conant was mindful of two
facts. First, for several years there had been a undisclosed program at MIT
that had developed numerical computing devices. Second, the MIT program
and its members were interested in obtaining patents for their work. As a

result, according to Compton, "there could be no cooperation between Dr.
Aiken and the MIT group as concerns the methods involved."3 Compton
goes on to question the wisdom of developing a computing program at
Harvard: "The lack of a practical engineering viewpoint permeating the
institution" looked like a significant handicap to the MIT president, both in
the development and utilization of such computing machines. Dependence
on IBM was believed by Compton to be another notable shortcoming, for
"the utility of such a machine, born fully developed, would be impaired by
the fact that the necessary personnel would not have passed through the
evolutionary stages with the machine." In contrast, the growth of the
computing center at MIT had been an evolutionary process. It had started
with Vannevar Bush's analog differential analyzer. As of February 1940, the
center had a variety of calculating machines and a seasoned staff, all housed
in a 5,600-square-foot space. The tone of the memorandum forcefully
suggested that the development of computing devices should be left to MIT,
though that wasn't stated explicitly.4
Compton's implied advice went unheeded, largely because Howard
Aiken persevered and because IBM and the Navy backed him. On 7 August
1944, Aiken celebrated his triumph with a formal ceremony marking the
transfer of the Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator (Mark I) from
IBM to Harvard University and the founding of the Harvard Computation
Laboratory. Aiken captured the event in pictures , and the Computation
Laboratory worked closely with the Harvard News Bureau to prepare a
news release.
The release was picked up by Boston's newspapers (the Herald, the
Globe, the Daily Record, and the Post), and also by the New York Times, the
Christian Science Monitor, and the New York Herald Tribune. Headlines
such as "Navy Man Inventor of World's Greatest Calculator" and "Aiken's
Calculator" infuriated IBM's president Thomas Watson and began a well-
documented feud between Aiken and IBM that would last through Watson's
lifetime.5 Despite Watson's accusations and objections, Aiken's crew rallied
around their leader. When questioned about the feud in the years to follow,
Hopper maintained her staunch support of Aiken, insisting that the overall
concept of the machine, as well as the design of the sequence mechanism
and interpolators were his, not IBM's. "IBM never gave the credit they
should have to Aiken," she stated.6

Aside from the tensions between Aiken and IBM, the formal dedication
on 7 August 1944 marked the start of a new era in mechanical information
processing. Harvard faculty members and administrators and high-ranking
Navy officers attended the event. Most notable among the latter were Rear
Admiral Edward L. Cochrane (chief of the Bureau of Ships), Rear Admiral
A. H. Van Keuran (director of the Naval Research Laboratory), and Rear
Admiral Julius Furer of the Office of Naval Research. Those three naval
organizations would play particularly important roles in the future
development of the computing industry.
Mark I listed as one of the ten most important scientific advancements of 1944 in Popular Science.
Courtesy of Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution.
JOHN VON NEUMANN AND MARK I
Also present at the dedication of Mark I was the mathematician John von
Neumann. Von Neumann played a pivotal role in the early history of
computing, for he authored one of the most influential papers in the field,
"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC."7 The "First Draft," dated 30 June
1945, outlined the architecture of a stored-program, general-purpose

machine (the basic architectural framework on which present-day
computers are based). Von Neumann's paper quickly became the working
blueprint for the next generation of computers, including EDSAC and ACE
in England and UNIVAC and the IAS computer in the United States.
The "First Draft" was also the center of a considerable controversy
involving J. Presper Eckert Jr., John Mauchly, and John von Neumann.
Herman Goldstine, the US Army's liaison officer to the ENIAC project in
1944-45, holds von Neumann most responsible for the ideas presented in
the document: "This report represents a masterful analysis and synthesis by
[von Neumann] of all the thinking that had gone into the EDVAC from the
fall of 1944 through the spring of 1945. Not everything in there is his, but
the crucial parts are."8 Through the years Eckert and Mauchly disagreed
adamantly about Goldstine's interpretation. The inventors of the ENIAC
claimed that they had developed many of the concepts found in the "First
Draft" during the spring of 1944, months before they even met von
Neumann. Despite their claims, it was not until 3 months after the release of
the "First Draft" that Eckert and Mauchly recorded their ideas (in a paper
titled "Progress Report on EDVAC").9
If Goldstine's interpretation is correct and von Neumann was responsible
for the architecture concepts in the "First Draft," the question remains: what
was the source of von Neumann's inspiration? Goldstine identified the
source as the famous mathematician's "genius." Further historical
inspection, however, shows that the time frame in which von Neumann
developed the ideas for the famous paper coincides with his four-month
stay at the Harvard Computation Laboratory. Though it is too strong to
assert that the work at the Harvard Computation Laboratory served as his
inspiration, there is no denying that von Neumann served as a bridge
between the Mark I and ENIAC computer projects during the fall of 1944,
or that his vision of a general-purpose stored-program computer grew out of
his conversations and observations in Cambridge and Philadelphia.

John von Neumann. Courtesy of Los Alamos National Laboratory Archives.
Identified during his youth as a gifted mathematician, John von Neumann
received his doctorate in mathematics from the University of Budapest at
the age of 22. After a three-year stint as a Privatdozent in mathematics at
the University of Berlin, von Neumann became a visiting professor at
Princeton University. As a result of Adolf Hitler's ascendance to power in
1933, von Neumann decided to remain in the United States and accepted a
position as a professor of mathematics at Princeton's Institute for Advanced
Study. While at the IAS, von Neumann became increasingly interested in
applied mathematics, and particularly in problems concerning supersonic
and turbulent fluid flows. Mathematical representations of dynamic fluids
required knowledge of non-linear partial differential equations, and by the
commencement of World War II von Neumann was one of the leading
experts in that field. Since shock and detonation waves fell under his
expertise, von Neumann was vigorously sought after by the Army's
Ballistic Research Laboratory and the Navy's Bureau of Ordnance.
His growing reputation gave von Neumann unparalleled access to
classified projects, including the top-secret Manhattan Project. For the
Manhattan Project's scientists and engineers working in secrecy in the New
Mexico desert, von Neumann's knowledge of fluid dynamics was highly

valued, and he joined the group as a consultant in late 1943. The Los
Alamos team was considering various ways to transform a non-critical mass
of fissionable material, such as uranium or plutonium, into a critical mass as
rapidly as possible. Once critical mass was achieved, the scientists
theorized, an atomic chain reaction should release tremendous amounts of
energy. One theory (proposed by Seth Neddermeyer) was to forcefully
implode a sub-critical sphere by means of conventional explosives in order
to compress it into a critical state. Von Neumann was called in to help
develop a mathematical model for Neddermeyer's implosion process. The
resulting partial differential equations were extremely difficult to solve for
the Los Alamos human computers, with their desk calculators. In March
1944, in an attempt to speed up the process, von Neumann asked his friend
Emory L. Chaffee about the possibility of using the new Harvard machine.
Chaffee was the head of Harvard's physics laboratory and Howard Aiken's
former graduate advisor. With time of the essence, von Neumann replied:
"The possibility of making these calculations on your new device was an
exceedingly tempting one."10
Aiken agreed to allocate machine time to von Neumann's problem, and
von Neumann arrived at Harvard for the dedication ceremony on 7 August
1944. It was, Aiken recalled, von Neumann's first exposure to large-scale
calculating machines. "He wanted to see the machine and I told him how it
worked and what it did."11 Impressed with the machine's potential, von
Neumann decided to work with the Harvard crew and attempt to solve the
implosion problem on the experimental machine.
Hopper remembered von Neumann's arrival and recalled his immediate
dependence on the crew "because that was the first computer he had his
hands on."12 Bloch was impressed how rapidly the computer neophyte
picked up both the design concepts and coding procedures. "He had a mind
that moved in rapid fashion on any subject relating to mathematics or
physics," Bloch recalled.13 Hopper and Bloch helped him "set up shop" in
the conference room off the main computer room with a large table and a
blackboard. Von Neumann quickly became a semipermanent fixture in the
conference room.14
Since Hopper had arrived only 2 months before von Neumann, Bloch
headed up the programming of the problem while Hopper assisted. For
security reasons, the two coders were told the specifics of the problem, a
partial differential equation of the second order, but not its context. In fact,

not until the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki almost a year later did
Aiken, Bloch, and Hopper become aware of the magnitude of their work.
But in the fall of 1944, von Neumann's problem was nothing more than an
interesting mathematical challenge. "The attack itself," Bloch recalled,
"was relatively new. Such equations had not been attempted numerically
before."15 Luckily for Hopper, she was well versed in partial differential
equations, for they were the focus of her study with Richard Courant at
New York University during the fall and spring of 1941.
Though the problem setup and the coding went relatively smoothly, the
speed limitation of Mark I hardware became a significant issue. The
numerous intermediate calculations needed to solve the equation, coupled
with Mark I's 300 millisecond processing speed, stretched the time of
computation to the point of impracticality. "Out of expediency, we had to
stop at a certain level [of accuracy] because it was just going to be too
long," Bloch recalled. I guess the war would have been over by the time the
machine would tackle it at a higher degree [of accuracy]."16
As the Harvard team stumbled through the difficulties of such a complex
problem, von Neumann provided feedback concerning the accuracy of
intermediate results. Hopper recalled that the prominent mathematician had
an uncanny ability to "predict accurately what the numbers would turn out
to be."17 She aided him in retrieving and interpreting data from the
printouts, data that he would peer at intensely and then make suggestions
concerning future runs. By December, Bloch had presented the results in a
final report to be taken back to Los Alamos and compared with the progress
of the human computer team. "Von Neumann insisted that my name be put
in front of his as the author, which embarrassed me a little bit because he
was the great mathematician and mathematical physicist of the day," Bloch
recalled.18
By the end of von Neumann's stay, the Harvard crew had gained valuable
experience operating Mark I and was markedly closer to developing a fast
and efficient system of programming. Not only did von Neumann have a
mathematical answer to the implosion problem, but also he was one of the
first people outside the Harvard team to have a hands-on education on how
to program and operate a large-scale digital calculating machine. That
newfound knowledge would have a significant impact on the future
direction of the computing developments at the University of Pennsylvania.

VON NEUMANN'S "FIRST DRAFT"
About the time that von Neumann arrived at Harvard to program his
problem on Mark I, the famous mathematician had a chance encounter on a
railroad platform in Aberdeen, Maryland. A young Army officer named
Herman Goldstine introduced himself and the two struck up a conversation.
Lieutenant Goldstine was not a typical young officer, for he had obtained a
doctorate in mathematics from the University of Chicago in 1936. Upon
entering the service in July 1942, the mathematically talented officer was
assigned to the US Army Ballistics Research Laboratory (BRL) at
Aberdeen.19
The BRL was the army's primary test site for artillery and other weapons.
One of Goldstine's jobs was to manage the group of human computers
assigned to produce ballistic firing tables. Gunners and bombardiers used
firing tables to adjust their weapons in order to hit targets that were beyond
the horizon. A multiplicity of variables, including horizontal distance to
target, wind direction and velocity, humidity and temperature, and elevation
above sea level, had to be taken into account in order to achieve accuracy.
The BRL's human computers created ballistic tables that accounted for
these variables and informed the gunner to which azimuth to set his
weapon.
In general the mathematics behind ballistics tables were not complex, but
rather time consuming to produce with a paper, pencil, and a desk
calculator. A typical trajectory required about 750 separate calculations, or
about 12 hours for a human computer.20 As the war progressed the backlog
of firing tables grew as the BRL struggled to keep up with demand.
Goldstine first attempted to alleviate the situation by teaming up with the
University of Pennsylvania to create a training program for mathematically
inclined young women. The faculty, consisting of Goldstine's wife Adele,
Mildred Kramer, and Mary Mauchly, worked diligently to identify and train
smart, young women from the Philadelphia area. Their efforts quickly
turned the BRL into one of the largest information processing centers,
staffed by more than 200 human computers.
Mary Mauchly's husband John, an instructor at the Moore School of
Electrical Engineering, offered a second way to deal with the growing
demand. In August 1942, Mauchly produced a memorandum describing an
electronic calculating machine, which caught the eye of both Goldstine and

a young graduate student at the Moore School, J. Presper Eckert Jr. On 9
April 1943, Eckert and Mauchly presented a more advanced proposal to
Colonel Leslie Simon, director of the BRL, and Colonel Paul Gillon,
assistant director. Simon signed the order to fund Project PX, Gillon named
the proposed machine ENIAC (standing, as has already been noted, for
Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer), and Goldstine became the
BRL's official liaison to the ENIAC project.21
By the time Goldstine had met von Neumann on the railroad platform,
the design of the ENIAC was complete and construction just underway.
Goldstine was very active in his role as liaison and had participated in many
of the theoretical discussions concerning design. "When it became clear to
von Neumann that I was concerned with the development of an electronic
computer capable of 333 multiplications per second, the whole atmosphere
of our conversation changed from one of relaxed good humor to one more
like the oral examination for the doctor's degree in mathematics," Goldstine
recalled.22
Excited by an electronic machine thousands of times faster than the
Harvard Mark I, von Neumann soon accompanied Goldstine to Philadelphia
to see if the machine could potentially handle partial differential equations.
"He grasped what we were doing quite quickly," said Eckert.23 But to von
Neumann's disappointment, the ENIAC, though potentially a great deal
faster than the Harvard machine, was limited in its mathematical versatility.
Much like the differential analyzer developed by Vannevar Bush, the
machine was "programmed" by the interconnection of its physical units.
Such a design was not an accident, considering that the Moore School
operated a differential analyzer, and both John Mauchly and Presper Eckert
(as he was usually called) had worked with it. The ENIAC, then, was a
hardware-specific machine designed to create ballistic tables, but not
equipped to handle partial differential equations.
Von Neumann did, however, see the potential of electronics when applied
to automated computing and remained engaged with the ENIAC group
while working with Harvard. On 21 August, Goldstine wrote to the
executive officer of the BRL, Colonel Gillon, and informed him that the
prominent mathematician was "displaying great interest in the ENIAC and
is conferring with me weekly on the use of the machine."24 According to
Goldstine, von Neumann quickly became a powerful influence on the

project, stimulating discussion about computer theory and practice, and
pushing forward ideas for the second machine.
Some of those ideas were already evident in Goldstine's letters to
Colonel Gillon in August and September 1944. In the letter dated 21
August, Goldstine suggests that "switches and controls of the ENIAC now
arranged to be operated manually, can easily be positioned by mechanical
relays and electromagnetic telephone switches which are instructed by a
teletype tape." He goes on to point out that "we would not have to spend
valuable minutes resetting switches when shifting from one phase of a
problem to the next."25
From a letter written by Goldstine 12 days later, it is evident that von
Neumann had been updating the Philadelphia group about developments at
Harvard. "To illustrate the improvements I wish to realize," Goldstine
wrote, "let me say that to solve a quite complex partial differential equation
of von Neumann's the new Harvard IBM will require about 80 hours as
against 1/2 hour on ENIAC." But where the ENIAC's theoretical processing
superiority was obvious, the reality was that its programming deficiencies
erased any processing gains. Even a less complex problem demonstrated
that the two systems were relatively equal in performance, despite the
ENIAC's overwhelming advantage in computational speed. "To evaluate
seven terms of a power series took 15 minutes on the Harvard device of
which 3 minutes was set-up time, whereas it will take at least 15 minutes to
set up ENIAC and about 1 second to do the computing."26
According to Goldstine, the 2 September letter represents the first
example of the stored-program concept in writing:
To remedy this disparity we propose a centralized programming device in which the program routine
is stored in coded form in the same type storage devices suggested above. The other crucial
advantage of central programming is that any routine, however complex, can be carried out whereas
in the present ENIAC we are limited now that we seem to be on the fairway as far as development
goes, I feel it most important to make plans for further improvements to realize in a second machine
the highly important features that seemed too difficult in the first model.27
According to Goldstine, von Neumann had derived the essential concept of
the stored-program architecture "in the fortnight between the two letters."
The concept would be fleshed out through the fall of 1944 and captured in
June 1945 in "First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC."

What Goldstine failed to mention in his recollections was that the period
he referred to as "the most eventful time in the intellectual history of the
computer" was the same time frame that von Neumann worked regularly
with the Harvard crew. Ideas concerning how to redesign the ENIAC
generated in conversations with Eckert, Mauchly, and Goldstine coincided
with the practical learning gained from programming Mark I with Bloch
and Hopper. Von Neumann served as a living conduit between two isolated,
top-secret computer projects.
From the Harvard project it appears that von Neumann was influenced by
the concept of automatic sequential control. Unlike the ENIAC, the
projected EDVAC would be programmed to process commands in sequence
similar to Mark I.28 "The instructions which govern this operation must be
given to the device in absolutely exhaustive detail," wrote von Neumann.
"Once these instructions are given to the device, it must be able to carry
them out completely and without any need for further intelligent human
intervention."29 Though in practice Mark I depended on operator
intervention, in theory Aiken had designed a machine that was fully
automated.
Von Neumann also noted that fully automatic-computing devices such as
Harvard's Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator used teletype tape and
punch cards as the means to input the instruction and data sequence, but
concluded that "a really high speed device would be very limited in its
usefulness, unless it can rely on M (internal memory)."30 Internal memory
was the key ingredient to allow long and complicated sequences of
operations to be executed at an electronic rather than a mechanical speed.
This single point was the great insight of the stored-program architecture,
and married the electronic speed of the ENIAC with the automatic sequence
control and programming capability of Mark I.
Von Neumann's proposed architecture broke from the Harvard machine
on a number of levels other than the use of vacuum tubes. The most
important distinction concerned the separation of instructions from data.
The Harvard machine isolated the two, which aided the programmer during
the debugging process. "First Draft" recommended that instructions and
numerical quantities be stored together within the internal memory. This
permitted both data and instructions to be modified, and created the
flexibility to generate an unlimited number of subsequent instructions and
data in memory. Non-linear partial differential equations could then be

solved with far fewer original instructions and operator interventions.
Hence, the burden of writing out the sequential variations of instructions, as
prepared by the Harvard crew during the implosion problem, was shifted
from the coder to the machine.
On balance, this does not mean that all credit should be given to the
Harvard crew for the logical control and programming concepts included in
"First Draft," nor does it discount von Neumann's intellectual capacity to
generate original ideas. Creative concepts do not appear out of a vacuum,
and during the fall of 1944 von Neumann had a privileged perspective of
the nascent computing field. He could identify the strengths and weaknesses
of both projects and fashion a new technical variation with shared elements.
"He obviously had a very very loud voice in the sense that he was very
influential," Aiken recalled. "The result was that things that he proposed,
good, bad, or indifferent, were in some cases followed."31 Interestingly, von
Neumann cites Aiken in the "First Draft" but does not cite Eckert or
Mauchly.
THE MAKING OF ORTHODOX COMPUTER HISTORY
"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC," though never officially published,
was one of the first documents distributed among the emerging computing
community. In the fall of 1944 Aiken also set out to record the technical
developments at the Harvard Computation Laboratory, and he chose Grace
Hopper as his author. As the story goes, Hopper was sitting at her desk busy
with a coding task when Commander Aiken interrupted her work. He stated
with his typical tone of urgency, "You are going to write a book!" Both the
abrupt statement and the nature of Aiken's request caught Hopper off guard.
"I can't write a book," she retorted; "I've never written a book." With the
war on and the machine operating around the clock, seven days a week,
there was no way that she would be able to take on such a monumental task
and keep up with her other coding and managerial duties. Aiken
acknowledged his new Lieutenant's concerns, but still insisted that she
would somehow find the time to write the book. "You're in the Navy now!"
he reminded her.32
Whatever the veracity of the story's details, Aiken did in fact order
Hopper to write the first manual of operation for Mark I. And somehow
between her other duties and responsibilities, Hopper completed the 561-

page manuscript in time to be published by the Harvard University Press for
its 1946 fall books release.33 "I wrote about five pages a day," Hopper
recalled, "which I had to read to [Aiken] at the end of the day. If he rejected
them, I had to start them over again."34
In view of Aiken's hands-on editorial approach, the fact that he trusted
Hopper to write the manual for his prized machine is significant. It would
have made more sense for Robert Campbell to do the job. Campbell had
been with Aiken since 1942. He participated to some extent in the design
process, oversaw the construction of the machine while Aiken was serving
the Navy in Norfolk, and programmed the first test problems for the
machine. His intricate knowledge of the hardware and the coding process
made him the ideal candidate. But by the fall of 1944, Aiken and Campbell
were already making plans for an improved follow-on machine, so Aiken
entrusted Hopper with the task of creating the first computer manual.
Hopper believed that Aiken had picked her because her reports during her
first months at Harvard had demonstrated a talent for clear, fluid prose.
Hopper had been encouraged as a child to write, a habit she had kept up
during her 13 years teaching mathematics at Vassar. "When they [meaning
her Vassar students] came into my probability course," Hopper recalled,
"the first thing I did was give them a lecture on Sterling's formula and then
asked them to write it up as an essay. I'd cover it with ink and I would get a
rebellion because they were taking a math course, not an English course.
Then I would explain: it was no use trying to learn math unless they could
communicate with other people."35
The ability to communicate ideas clearly in writing is not usually viewed
as a crucial skill for an engineer or an inventor. An emphasis on technical
knowledge and a strong mathematical foundation at the expense of non-
technical disciplines is even codified in most engineering school
curriculums. Both Aiken and Hopper understood that inventions are not
self-evident, especially one so unique and complicated as the Harvard Mark
I. Mark I would have to be described not only to other scientists and
mathematicians but also to university administrators, Navy officers,
business leaders, and government civil servants. Writing in such a way that
this disparate audience could grasp what Aiken and his team had
accomplished was crucial to the ultimate success of the invention.
Hopper completed the manuscript in the spring of 1946. Remarkably, she
was not listed as the author. Like all published documents written by

Aiken's staff, A Manual of Operation for the Automatic Sequence
Controlled Calculator was "Dedicated to the Staff of the Computation
Laboratory." At the Computation Laboratory, credit was distributed
hierarchically, starting with Comdr. Howard H. Aiken, USNR, Officer in
Charge, followed by staff members in order of their Navy rank: officers,
enlisted, and civilians last. Because of her rank, Hopper's name appeared
third on the inside cover. Though such a hierarchical ranking may not
appeal to a modern sense of fairness, in certain respects such a system
benefited Lieutenant Hopper. Aiken's constructed caste system was based
on the quality of ideas and on military rank, both of which, for the most
part, superseded gender. In the same way, Aiken's insistence on military
protocol, including military dress and titles, further dissolved societal
gender roles. Such an environment permitted Hopper to compete on a more
equal footing with her male colleagues, so long as she played within the
boundaries of the Aiken system.
THE CONTENTS OF HOPPER'S MANUAL
The manual began with a historical summary of the development of
mechanical aids from the abacus up to Aiken's idea for Mark I. Hopper's
history outlined the trajectory of technological progress and created a sense
of connection between the handful of talented individuals who advanced the
computing art. Hopper's history is interesting on a variety of levels. First, it
is one of the earliest attempts to document the historical progression of the
field. Second, and more importantly, it provides insight into Hopper's view
of technological change.
Because of travel limitations during the war, Hopper's historical research
was limited to resources found in Harvard University's Widener Library.36
The first significant figure introduced to the reader by Hopper is Blaise
Pascal. Pascal (1623-1662) is highly regarded as a Christian thinker and as
a scientist-mathematician, but few acknowledge his skills as an engineer.
Pascal the engineer was responsible for inventions as diverse as the medical
syringe, the hydraulic press, the wheelbarrow, and a horse-drawn public
transportation system used in Paris during the 1660s. Pascal's father,
Etienne, served as the chief tax collector for the Rouen district in France
during the 1640s, a job that required a vast amount of tedious calculations.
To escape the drudgery of his father's work, the clever youth devised plans

for a machine that would automate the process and produce error-free
results. The basic machine was a metal box containing a system of wheels
and cylinders that could add, subtract, and carry over numbers. The most
difficult problem Pascal faced was how to carry over numbers
automatically. Teaching a child to add 14 plus 8 and carry over a 1 to the
tens column to arrive at 22 is simple, but to teach a machine to do the same
is another matter. Pascal invented an ingenious weighted ratchet system
connected to the counters in each wheel. With each turn of the dial to the
next notch, the ratchet was raised. When the respective wheel passed 9, the
ratchet sprung and tripped a weight that turned the next wheel to the left
one space and the original wheel back to 0. The direct actuation of a
numbered wheel and its carrying method, Hopper wrote, "are the
foundation on which nearly all mechanical calculating machines since have
been constructed."37
The next significant individual on Hopper's historical path leading to
Aiken and Mark I was Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz (1646-1716).
Leibniz, the consummate genius of his day, excelled as a mathematician, a
diplomat, a lawyer, a historian, and a philosopher. Apart from his more
celebrated accomplishments, Leibniz was also responsible for an
extraordinary automated calculating machine, which he completed in 1694.
Hopper commended Leibniz for achieving multiplication and division
through an ingenious system of stepped wheels. These wheels, similar to
the inner workings of a mechanical clock, were interconnected in such a
way that mathematical solutions rather than the time of day were their
output. According to Hopper, the device's "stepped reckoner" design was so
mechanically eloquent that it would be included in most calculating
machines thereafter and serve as an important link to Mark I.38
The most significant section of the manual is dedicated to the English
philosopher-mathematician Charles Babbage. The story of Babbage's
computing engines begins with his honeymoon in 1819. While touring
Europe, Charles and his new wife met the prominent French civil engineer
Gaspard Francois de Prony. Years earlier, while making tables for the
fledgling French Republic, de Prony had applied an idea he had
encountered while reading Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations (1776).
Inspired by Smith's concept of the division of labor, de Prony applied it to
his teams of mathematicians. One group considered formulas, another
applied them numerically, and the third did the computations. The

efficiencies created by such a division produced more accurate tables in less
time. Babbage borrowed this concept and made it a part of his machine
designs.
Between 1820 and 1822, Babbage developed the plans for his first
computing machine, which he named the Difference Engine. The
Difference Engine would calculate a table for any linear mathematical
function by using Newton's method of differences, which allowed complex
polynomial equations to be solved without any need to multiply or divide.
The first prototype of the Difference Engine required a variety of precise
manufacturing processes and quickly evolved into the most expensive
government-funded research project of its day. But by the mid 1830s the
expensive project began to unravel for lack of concrete results. To make
matters worse, Babbage began championing a completely new design
concept. His novel idea developed into the blueprints for his Analytical
Engine, a device that broke from earlier calculating machines. But his
change of course cost Babbage his supporters in government and scuttled
any chance of his finishing the Difference Engine.
The Analytical Engine was not just an extension of the Difference
Engine; it was a new concept in automated information processing.
Information would be continuously fed into the "mill" of the machine by
means of the ingenious punchcard system that Joseph Jacquard used to
automate his textile looms. Hopper emphasized that two distinct decks of
cards fed the machine: "The first set was designed to select the particular
numbers to be operated upon from the store; the second set, to select the
operation to be performed by the mill. Since the deck of operational cards
represented mathematical solutions independent of the variables involved,
the analytical engine was general in regard to algebraic operations."39
The one person who truly understood the ramifications of Babbage's new
machine was a beautiful and eccentric woman 23 years his junior. Ada
Byron King, Countess of Lovelace and daughter of the renowned poet Lord
Byron, was a mathematician who had become interested in Babbage's
work. In 1834 she began to write regularly to the older mathematician, and
the two became close friends and colleagues. By 1840, Babbage had
completed the basic blueprints for the Analytical Engine. Ada Lovelace
wrote seven technical essays that provided powerful explanations for what
the machine could do and how it could do it, including what today would be
called a computer program.

Lovelace's work, published in 1843, did not aid Babbage in successfully
securing the vast amounts of funding needed to construct the Analytical
Engine. The aging mathematician had used up his goodwill with the
government on the uncompleted Difference Engine. Babbage would not be
able to turn his idea into reality during his lifetime. According to Hopper,
the world had to wait until 1943 before Babbage's dream would materialize
in the laboratory of Howard Hathaway Aiken.
THE HOPPER VERSION OF HISTORY
Grace Hopper's account of computing's early history is interesting on a
variety of levels. It is the story of a series of brilliant men separated by vast
expanses of time but connected by the dream of automating the drudgery of
mathematical calculations. Each one was personally responsible for
introducing radical and potent conceptual ideas, which were then
constrained by the technologies of the day. Their advances were
discontinuous and independent from the work of others. Such a historical
interpretation sheds light on the name Aiken gave to his creation: Mark I.
Mark I was a one-of-a-kind, discontinuous invention.
The historical account also provides the reader a sense that with the
publication of the Mark I manual the computational torch had been
officially passed to Howard Aiken and his team. The epigraph to chapter 1
of the manual includes this passage from Babbage's autobiography:
If, unwarned by my example, any man shall undertake and shall succeed in really constructing an
engine embodying in itself the whole of the executive department of mathematical analysis upon
different principles or by simpler mechanical means, I have no fear of leaving my reputation in his
charge, for he alone will be fully able to appreciate the nature of my efforts and the value of their
results.40
In a very real sense, Aiken believed that Babbage was speaking directly to
him through the years. Shortly after the publication of the Manual, Aiken
developed a personal relationship with Babbage's great-grandson and
decorated his office with Babbage memorabilia, including books once
owned by Babbage with marginal notes in Babbage's own hand. He even
acquired (through the Harvard library) original parts of the partially
constructed Difference Engine.41

When the Harvard crew moved into the new Computation Laboratory
facilities in 1946, the Babbage memorabilia were gallantly exhibited in the
vestibule. For members of the laboratory crew, Aiken's copy of Babbage's
autobiography, Passages from the Life of a Philosopher,42 became
mandatory reading. Hopper recalled being handed a copy when arriving at
Harvard in the summer of 1944. "The book [Babbage's Autobiography]
gave you a feeling that the development was inevitable," she remembered.
"It was bound to come." Passages from the Life of a Philosopher also
exposed Hopper to Ada King for the first time: "She wrote the first loop. I
will never forget; none of us ever will." Nor did people let Hopper forget
the uncanny coincidence of history, casting Aiken in the role of Babbage
and Hopper in the role of Lady Lovelace.43
Commander Aiken and Lieutenant (j.g.) Hopper posing with a piece of Charles Babbage's difference
engine for the Christian Science Monitor, March 1946. Courtesy of Archives Center, National
Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution.

THE IBM AUTOMATIC SEQUENCE CONTROLLED CALCULATOR: SAME MACHINE,
DIFFERENT HISTORY
About 6 months after Hopper was assigned the task of writing the Mark I
Manual, an anonymous technical writer at IBM produced a pamphlet aptly
named "IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator." This competing
document provided a general description of the same machine, yet its
differences speak volumes about underlying conceptions. Like Hopper's
manual, the first section of the pamphlet summarized the history leading up
to the machine and its creation:
The IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator dedicated at Harvard University on Aug. 7,
1944 marked the latest advance in International Business Machines Corporation's program of
adapting its equipment to use in the field of scientific computation, in which for many years it has
been collaborating with leading universities and research organizations.44
One can quickly glean the direction of the IBM narrative from the opening
sentence of the document. First, the assertion that the dedication marked the
"latest advance" suggests a continuous process in which the Automatic
Sequence Controlled Calculator was just the newest iteration. The
"corporation's program of adapting its equipment" further emphasizes
continuity of process, and reminds the reader that the technology used in
this machine was no different than that already employed in other IBM
business calculating machines. Finally, the very idea of applying business
machines for scientific computation is not novel, as IBM "has been
collaborating with leading universities and research organizations" for
many years. That collaboration, according to the IBM narrative, began in
1928 with the founding of the Columbia University Statistical Bureau. The
Bureau was established solely "for the purpose of assisting other
educational institutions and scientific and research organizations in adapting
IBM mechanisms to their computing requirements."45 It was here that
machines such as the IBM Difference Tabulator and the IBM Summary
Card Punch were developed. In 1934 a separate laboratory was established
in the Columbia Department of Astronomy, and since 1937 the Thomas J.
Watson Astronomical Computing Bureau, a joint enterprise of IBM with the
American Astronomical Society and Columbia University, operated the
laboratory.

Because IBM had been applying standard machinery to scientific
calculations since the 1920s, it was no wonder that "Harvard University's
need for a machine such as the IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled
Calculator had long been a topic of discussion among members of the
Harvard Faculty."46 Howard Aiken's inquiry had been but "one of these
discussions." Moreover, it was Professor Harlow Shapley (director of the
Harvard Observatory) and T. H. Brown (Professor of Business Statistics)
who pointed out to Howard Aiken that "IBM standard equipment for some
time had been successfully used for scientific calculation purposes."47
The IBM narrative squarely attempts to marginalize Aiken and his role in
the development of the machine. It was Professor Brown "who brought the
subject to the attention of Mr. J. W. Bryce, dean of IBM's scientists and
inventors," and it was Bryce who determined "the company's ability and
willingness to build the machine."48 Acting on Brown's and Bryce's
recommendations, Aiken met with IBM engineers and "outlined the
University's requirements."49 The IBM history does not acknowledge Aiken
as the initiator of the project or as the inventor of the machine. Furthermore,
it reminds the reader that Aiken was called to active duty in the Navy and
thus spent a significant time away from the project.
In fact, the IBM document shrewdly underlines Aiken's limited role with
Aiken's own words, quoting strategically from his laudatory speech at the
machine's dedication ceremony on 7 August 194450:
We approached the International Business Machines Corporation and asked their support to build
such a machine and construct it and put it into operation Our first contact with that company was
with Mr. J.W. Bryce. Mr. Bryce for more than thirty years has been an inventor of calculating
machine parts, and when I first met him he had to his credit over 400 fundamental inventions—
something more than one a month. They involved counters, multiplying and dividing apparatus, and
all of the other machines and parts which I have not the time to mention, which have become
components of the Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator that you are to see this afternoon.51
With this vast experience in the field of calculating machinery, our suggestion for a scientific
machine was quickly taken and quickly developed. Mr. Bryce at once recognized the possibilities. He
at once fostered and encouraged this project, and the multiplying and dividing unit included in the
machine is designed by him.
On Mr. Bryce's recommendation, the construction and design of the machine were placed in the
hands of Mr. C.D. Lake, at Endicott, and Mr. Lake called into the job Mr. Frank E. Hamilton and Mr.
Benjamin M. Durfee, two of his associates.52
Indeed, Aiken, in his own words, appears to give credit for the invention,
design, construction, and operation of the machine to IBM engineers.

DIFFERENT HISTORIES, DIFFERENT AGENDAS
Why do the historical accounts written by Grace Hopper and IBM differ to
such a great extent? One obvious explanation attributes the divergence to
the well-documented animosity between Thomas Watson Sr. and Howard
Aiken.53 On the surface this is reasonable, for evidence can be found that
self-importance drove each man to call the project his own. But in this case,
it seems that history is being employed as a tool for ambitions greater than
individual pride.
For Thomas Watson Sr., IBM interests were best served by replacing
individual history with organizational history. The locus of technological
innovation, according to IBM, was the corporation. The myth of the lone
radical inventor working in the laboratory or basement was replaced by the
reality of teams of faceless organizational engineers contributing
incremental advancements in the name of the company.54 To drive this point
home, the IBM narrative includes the following list:
Of the many basic units of the Calculator, invented or developed by IBM engineers, the more
important are:
•  Multiplying Machine, invented by Bryce in 1934.
•  Dividing Machine, invented by Bryce in 1936.
•  Multiplying Dividing Machine invented by Bryce and Dickinson in 1937.
•  Unit Counter invented by Carroll in 1925.
•  Ratchet Type Plate Counter, invented by Lake and Pfaff in 1935.
•  Pluggable Type Relay, invented by Lake and Pfaff in 1937.
•  Double-Deck Card Feed, invented by Lake in 1921.
•  Electromatic Typewriter developed for automatic operation by Lake and Hamilton in 1936.
•  Counter Readout and Emitter, invented by Bryce in 1928.
•  Commutator Total-Taking Mechanism, invented by Daly in 1926.55
The majority of these technical advances predate Howard Aiken's
inspiration for Mark I, serving as further proof of his marginal role. Not
even Aiken's inspiration, Charles Babbage, was safe from IBM's historical
scrutiny. Again, applying Aiken's own words , "I say Babbage failed but I
would like to make it especially clear that he failed because he lacked the
machine tools, electrical circuits, and metal alloys"56 In other words,
Charles Babbage failed because he lacked the support of a corporation such
as IBM.

IBM hoped to direct the future of calculating machines by controlling the
past. The Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator was not a disruptive
technology that would spawn a new calculating industry separate from
IBM's comparative advantage in punch-card equipment.57 Rather,
innovation would be contained within the research facilities of Endicott and
the patents retained by the organization. Eventually, IBM planned to
dominate the scientific and mathematical markets, much as it controlled the
business market for punch card machines.
For Aiken and Hopper, on the other hand, the connection with notable
geniuses such as Babbage served practical agendas both inside and outside
the Computation Laboratory. Years later, Hopper stated: "I'm quite sure that
he [Aiken] discovered Babbage well after he had the concept of the engine
and that he used it as a selling thing that made it more legitimate."58 In fact,
I. Bernard Cohen has considered the question of how much Babbage's
machines influenced Aiken, precisely because Aiken had equated himself
with Babbage as far back as 1937.59 It appears however, that Aiken did not
covet Babbage's ideas so much as he coveted his prestige. To be associated
with the man who held the same chair of mathematics at Cambridge as Sir
Isaac Newton would help the rather undistiguished 37-year-old graduate
student turn diagrams and notes into an 81-foot machine that weighed 9,445
pounds, contained 530 miles of wire, and cost $750,000.60
With the completion of the Mark I manual, the need for legitimacy, as
well as the benefits from it, had grown exponentially. The general
demobilization at the end of World War II affected research projects at
universities across the United States. Federal plans for a return to normalcy
necessitated termination of wartime contracts, which meant that
Commander Aiken and his machine would have to find sustainable sources
of revenue to keep the operation a float. This was particularly daunting
since relations with IBM were in shambles. Moreover, Aiken's position at
Harvard was somewhat precarious, given his lack of tenure, a volatile
disposition, and the administration's tepid support for applied mathematics.
The Mark I manual served as a manifesto for automated computation
after the war. Hopper produced an account in which the machine
represented both a technical and a conceptual break from the past. This
break is captured by the machine's official name, the Automated Sequence
Controlled Calculator. A fully automated machine would free itself from the
limitations of the human mind. As Aiken and his team proved during the

war, a fully automated machine could operate 24 hours a day, seven days a
week. The automation of mathematics and information processing would
subject society to unprecedented technological forces. Just as the steam
engine became the technological foundation of the industrial revolution, the
Automated Sequence Controlled Calculator could become the technological
foundation for a new type of revolution dealing with information.
From 1945 to 1947, the popular press embraced the Aiken-Hopper
version of history and propagated it.61 The successful spread of their
account is best represented by the Boston Sunday Post's cover story of 28
December 1947. Titled "Professor Aiken of Harvard Computation
Laboratory Talks of Wonders / Says Era of Mechanical Calculators Lies
Ahead of Us," the article includes a picture of Richard H. Babbage, great-
grandson of Charles Babbage, talking with "Professor Howard Aiken, father
of the modern calculating machine" while they inspect a piece of Babbage's
Difference Engine. The article includes a condensed version of Hopper's
history that recapitulates text found in the Mark I manual almost verbatim.
The academic press recognized Hopper's version of events just as
quickly. In 1946, in the British scientific journal Nature, the British
mathematician Leslie J. Comrie published a review of the Mark I manual
titled "Babbage's Dream Comes True." Comrie concludes that Aiken's
machine "is the realization of Babbage's project in principle," though he is
"astonished" by the omission of IBM from the title and from Aiken's
preface.62 As a leading proponent of large-scale computational machines in
Britain, Comrie openly lamented the fact that the British government had
failed to bring Babbage's machines to their successful conclusions, which
had "cost Britain the leading place in the art of mechanical computing."63
Aiken and Hopper also published three articles in Electrical Engineering,
the primary journal of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers.
Written once again by Hopper, the articles summarize the Mark I manual.64
Their purpose was not only to educate a wider audience about computers
but also to highlight the heroic achievement of Aiken and his crew deep in a
basement at Harvard during the war. While some (at IBM and elsewhere)
took issue with Aiken's depiction as a heroic inventor, Hopper—who
believed that his forceful personality had helped to launch the computer age
—defended her former boss. Reflecting years later on her time at Harvard,
Hopper said:

If somebody has imagination and thinks up new concepts and new ideas, we are very apt to put a
committee around them and cut them down to size. We don't tend to grow any giants anymore; we
try to cut them back to the average to make them like everybody else. We are afraid of giants, so we
are not growing any. We need a few giants.65
Hopper's public defense of Aiken and his achievements after the war
enhanced her position at Harvard and her position in the nascent computing
community. From the day she was assigned to Harvard, Hopper's instinct
was to work hard and make her mathematical and writing skills
indispensable to Aiken. Regardless of her military rank, Hopper was faced
with the challenge of how to gain power from the margins, especially in
view of Aiken's open distaste for being assigned a female officer. By
embracing Aiken's embryonic vision and nurturing it with skill and care to
maturity, Hopper endeared herself to her boss while creating a foundation
for his postwar career as well as hers.
SPREADING THE WORD: HARVARD'S POSTWAR PR EFFORT
Hopper's Manual of Operation and her articles captured the technical
achievements of the Harvard Computation Laboratory. These documents,
combined with Aiken's library of photographs of the machine and its crew,
were distributed to reporters, engineers, scientists, and businessmen who
were interested in the field of large-scale computational machines. The
documents outlined the technical aspects of the machine and placed Mark I,
its inventor, and the Harvard Computation Laboratory at the dawn of the
computer age.
With the conclusion of the war, Aiken encouraged dissemination of
information concerning his machine. Though he had forfeited any patent
rights to IBM in exchange for funding, Aiken was never one to focus on the
machine's commercial applications. Much like John von Neumann, Aiken
believed that "essentially the primary object is to promote science."66 In this
light, the commander of Mark I believed the spread of computing
technology to be a public good. His views were incorporated into the
postwar contract with the Navy Bureau of Ordnance, which stated that no
attempt would be made to restrict publication of results except in certain
instances involving national security. This included information concerning
the proposed Mark II and Mark III machines.67

To facilitate the flow of information, Aiken opened the doors of the
Computation Laboratory to interested visitors. "It was 1946," Hopper
recalled, "and we began to do more teaching. We had a little lecture room,
and we began to have more visitors." With her academic experience,
Hopper was the natural choice to lead private tours and give lectures. In the
postwar environment, Hopper found herself spending a significant amount
of time escorting important visitors and explaining to them how the new
computing machines could be applied to a variety of fields. By the fall of
1946, Hopper was more concerned with public relations and the
management than with writing code herself.68
OceanofPDF.com

6    THE 1947 HARVARD SYMPOSIUM ON LARGE-SCALE DIGITAL CALCULATING
MACHINERY
By the beginning of 1947, Howard Aiken had taken his place among the
elite of the budding computing community, and his staff, including Grace
Hopper, basked in his glow. The newly minted Harvard Ph.D. who in 1940
had been informed by President James Conant that he would not be able to
advance above faculty instructor was now a permanent fixture on the
Harvard campus.1 Aiken utilized the organizational and financial weight of
the Navy to push a reluctant university to the forefront of mechanical
computation and applied mathematics.
Harvard's heightened role within the computing community was
physically represented by the construction of a modern two-story brick-and-
glass building to house the new Computation Laboratory. The Laboratory
was envisioned as the first of a number of new buildings that would make
up Harvard's "Science City."2 Given the emergence of science and the
newfound relationship between universities and government in the postwar
era, the Harvard administration hoped to improve the school's reputation in
the sciences. In response to the new conditions, the Department of
Engineering Sciences and Applied Physics was formed in 1946.

The Harvard Computation Laboratory featured on the cover of the Journal of Applied Physics,
October 1946. Courtesy of Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian
Institution.
Aiken retired from active military duty on 1 January 1946, but retained
his position as head of the Computation Project at the insistence of the
Navy's Bureau of Ordnance. As a condition of Research and Development
Contract 8555 between Harvard University and the Navy, Harvard agreed to
make Aiken an associate professor of engineering mathematics within the
new department. The contract also gave Aiken authorization to reassign
wartime military staff members to the Harvard University research faculty.
Aiken chose Grace Hopper, Richard Bloch, and Robert Campbell as the
chief deputies of his growing Crimson fiefdom.3
SHARING KNOWLEDGE

In the years 1944-1947, the Harvard crew had demonstrated that a
calculating machine could produce timely, accurate mathematical solutions
on a continuous basis. Farther south, Presper Eckert, John Mauchly, and
their team of female operators proved the feasibility of calculation at the
speed of electricity. These early successes generated a wave of new projects
including BINAC and UNIVAC (Electronic Control Company), Mark II
and Mark III (Harvard Computation Laboratory), SSEC (IBM), Whirlwind
(MIT), EDVAC (University of Pennsylvania), MANIAC (Institute for
Advanced Study), and ERA (Engineering Research Associates). In England,
the National Physical Laboratory's ACE and the University of Manchester's
Mark I were under way, and at Cambridge University Maurice Wilkes was
beginning his plans for the EDSAC.
With most of these programs in the early design phase, Aiken decided to
magnanimously spread the knowledge gleaned at Harvard by hosting a
conference on "large-scale digital calculating machinery" (computers)
alongside the official opening of the Harvard Computation Laboratory.
"Aiken felt it was time—there was enough development to get together,"
Hopper recalled. "We'd all been isolated during the war, you see, classified
contracts and everything under the sun. It was time to get together and
exchange information on the state of the art, so that we could all go on from
there."4
Aside from getting together, Aiken saw the Symposium on Large-Scale
Digital Calculating Machinery as a forum to highlight the superb work that
was being done at Harvard. He believed himself and his loyal crew to be the
founders of the field, and he wanted to continue the effort to educate fellow
academics as well as industry and government officials about the lessons
learned at Harvard. In the words of the January 1947 edition of the
Harvard's alumni bulletin: "They came to see and hear what Professor
Howard Hathaway Aiken and his staff had accomplished. To this giant in
mathematics the pilgrims paid appropriate homage."5
Not only would the invitees be impressed with the new facility that
housed Mark I, but they would experience a fully operational and
automated data-processing center as well. By January 1947 the operation of
Mark I had been fine-tuned by Hopper and her staff to the point where the
machine ran flawlessly 23 hours in a given day. The machine's reliability
and speed were unmatched by any mechanical or human computation
facility, and a significant body of work—including multiple volumes of

valuable engineering tables—had been completed. Much of the machine's
output, however, was still couched in military secrecy, so few people were
aware of the Computation Laboratory's accomplishments.6
In typical Aiken fashion, nothing during the symposium would be left to
chance. He convened an organizing committee made up of Hopper,
Benjamin Moore, and Joseph Harrison.7 The committee identified experts in
academia, business, and government who would be interested in the
progress of calculating machinery. "Nobody realized it was an industry—it
was a branch of research of some kind," Hopper recalled. "There was
beginning to be more people; it was time to pull them together."8
The committee invited computing leaders from MIT, the University of
Pennsylvania, and Princeton to mix with executives from General Electric,
Prudential Insurance, National Cash Register, and IBM. The Navy Brass
from the Bureau of Ordnance and the Office of Naval Research sat side by
side with members of the National Research Council and the National
Bureau of Standards. In true fashion, Aiken reserved final judgment on who
attended and who spoke. "I made up my mind who was going to be on the
program, and I called him up on the telephone and told him he was going to
be on the program and what he was going to speak about," Aiken recalled.
"Now I didn't put words in his mouth, but I told him the subject about
which I wanted him to talk."9
BABBAGE IN THE FLESH
One of the initial people Aiken contacted was Richard Babbage, the great-
grandson of the famed mathematician and failed computer-maker Charles
Babbage. Aiken first contacted Babbage on 17 April 1946 to inform him
about Hopper's completed book concerning Mark I: "We have recently
delivered to the Harvard University Press a manuscript dealing with large-
scale calculating machines. This is a book of some six hundred pages, of
which the first chapter titled 'Historical Introduction' deals in large part
with Babbage's work."10
In the ensuing correspondence, Aiken discussed Richard Babbage's
great-grandfather's role in the evolution of calculating machines as
described by Hopper; he also inquired about any memorabilia or other
information of historical interest concerning his ancestor that Babbage
might have in his possession. Aiken explained that the material would be

included in an exhibit to be set up in the new Computation Laboratory. This
material would be reunited with a piece of Babbage's Difference Engine
that Richard's grandfather, Admiral H. P. Babbage, had donated to Harvard
in 1886.
Richard Babbage was thrilled that a Harvard professor had taken such
interest in his obscure and sometimes unappreciated ancestor, and was
willing to help Aiken in any way he could. Although the Analytical Engine
plans and other mathematical memoirs were part of a display in the Science
Museum of London, Babbage did his best to track down other valuable
memorabilia within the family. Over the next year, Aiken was supplied with
a stream of Charles Babbage's books, papers, essays, treaties, and tables.
The donations culminated with a rare engraving of the famous
mathematician made by Colghin of London in 1832 while Babbage was
Lucasian Professor at Cambridge University, the same position held by Sir
Isaac Newton. The younger Babbage offered the engraving to Aiken "with
the thought that it might hang in your office in proximity to the other
mementos and works which you already have." He believed Aiken to be the
intellectual successor of Charles Babbage, and thanked the Harvard
professor for providing him with the "unique opportunity to secure for my
ancestor a measure of appreciation that did not come his way in life." The
"unique opportunity" of which Richard Babbage spoke was his role as a
guest speaker at the Harvard Symposium on Large-Scale Digital
Calculating Machinery.11 During his speech Babbage praised Aiken and his
staff for persevering in their pursuit for automated computing. This was a
quest in which his ancestor fell short, partly because, in his opinion, "all
Englishmen [inherently] object to inventions."12
THE HARVARD SYMPOSIUM
On the morning of 7 January, the first day of the Symposium, the
distinguished guests were treated to the first public demonstration of the
Computation Laboratory's second creation, the Harvard Mark II. Unlike
Mark I, Mark II was designed and constructed entirely by the Harvard crew.
Aiken and Campbell were the chief designers, with periodic input from
Hopper and Bloch. "The early thinking about Mark II," Campbell recalled,
"was that it would have relay components, almost completely, both for
control and for computations. This would be a departure then from the

Mark I, which used electromechanical counters for simulation and for
storage."13
Relays had proven reliable in Mark I, and Aiken decided to extend the
technology as a solution for the problem of memory. The crew devised an
ingenious latching relay that could stay in a given position without the
continuous application of power. The more advanced relay system provided
200 words of memory, while an improved logical design made Mark II
twelve times as fast as its ancestor. "The big step forward in Mark II,"
Hopper recalled, "was the tremendous development of the multiprocessor
and the multi-programmer."14 Mark II was a dual processor, meaning the
machine could be split into two halves that could run independently, or
combined in parallel into one multiprocessor. The reason behind this
innovation was that one half of the machine could be run against the other
as a way to check output accuracy.15
Symposium guests were then escorted from the Gordon McKay
Laboratory that housed Mark II to the new Computation Laboratory.
Passing the exhibit dedicated to Charles Babbage, the visitors were led to a
specially designed gallery with windows two stories high overlooking the
Mark I operation. The efficient performance by the machine and its
operators was the culmination of years of machine debugging,
organizational design, and personnel training. Aiken liked to compare Mark
I's performance to that of a power generating plant. Instead of generating
electricity, Mark I and its crew of operators generated numbers.16
The Symposium formally commenced with opening remarks from the
administrative vice president of Harvard University, Edward Reynolds.
Harvard President James Conant had taken ill and could not attend, perhaps
an indication of lingering animosity between Aiken and the Harvard
administration. Along these same lines, Reynolds seemed to go out of his
way to point out that the developments in computing at Harvard could not
have been accomplished without help from IBM, and that the credit for the
Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator must be shared with IBM
engineers Clair Lake, Frank Hamilton, and Benjamin Durfee.17
Conversely, Rear Admiral C. Turner Joy, Commanding Officer of the
Naval Proving Grounds at Dahlgren, Virginia, highlighted Aiken's forceful
leadership in the new field and applauded the novel relations between
Harvard and the Navy. He noted that the modern tools of warfare were now
the domain of scientists like Aiken, and was relieved that he personally was

too old to have to learn about these new machines. More importantly to
many in the audience, Joy pledged that Navy calculators would be made
available to all scientists in the future after the backlog of work in guided
missiles and aerodynamic supersonic problems had been disposed of. His
most audacious statement, however, concerned the future impact of
computing machines, for he believed that "the new interest in mathematics
might appear more likely to usher in an age of reason than the new interest
in atomic energy."18
Aiken's comments mirrored the many lectures and presentations he had
given on automatic calculating machines since the end of the war. He began
with Hopper's computing history, introducing the audience to "the names of
some of the greatest mathematicians and physicists of all time associated
with the development of calculating machinery,"19 which led, of course, to
his office doorstep at Harvard. These remarks were amplified by the words
of Richard Babbage, who later admitted in a letter to Aiken, "I could not
help thinking how pleased Charles Babbage would be if he could come
alive now and meet the man who discovered how to build a machine that
would produce accurate answers to questions which only a genius can put
to it!"20
Aiken forcefully stated that the focus of the Symposium should be the
transmission of ideas concerning the design of calculating machines for
scientific applications. He outlined the growing demand for more powerful
calculating methods in the mathematical and physical sciences, including
the fact that many recent scientific and engineering developments were
based on nonlinear effects. Since the only methods available to solve
differential equations involved labor-intensive expansions of infinite series
and numerical integration, it was imperative that scientists and engineers
embrace the new field of calculating machinery in the name of progress.21
Aiken did admit, however, that there might be some room for
applications in quantitative social sciences such as economics. He invited
his Harvard colleague Wassily Leontief to comment on the applications of
Mark I in the field of economics. In his paper titled "Computational
Problems Arising in Connection with Economic Analysis of Inter-industrial
Relationships," Leontief described "input-output" economics, an early
example of econometrics in which segments of the economy are
mathematically represented by large systems of simultaneous linear

differential equations. These equations described the not so obvious
connections between industries as diverse as steel, textiles, and paper.22
Mathematical models, brought to life by large calculating machines,
would provide economists the ability to answer a variety of once
inconceivable questions: When a steel mill closes in Pennsylvania, how is
the output of textiles affected? When the price of steel goes up, how does
the price of automobiles change? With the help of Mark I, Leontief
demonstrated that a general wage rise of ten percent in the United States
would increase the cost of living by four percent. Leontief's work was the
first application of a calculating machine in the social sciences, and would
eventually lead to a Nobel Prize in economics.23
The first technical papers presented on the afternoon of the first day were
again focused on the Harvard Computation Laboratory. Richard Bloch
described the hardware and operating principles behind Mark I, and Robert
Campbell's discussion focused on Mark II. Grace Hopper was
conspicuously absent from the list of speakers. Hopper suggested that she
was passed over because the Symposium's focus was on hardware and
engineering, not programming. "There was nothing on software, yet—
nothing on programming. You'll find it was all hardware and engineering,
and specific [engineering] problems—not on the programming techniques
yet."24
For the most part, Hopper's observation was accurate; however, Bloch
did manage to inform his audience about some of the Mark I coding
practices and techniques developed by the duo. He explained the practice of
coding in rudimentary terms, and then highlighted certain changes made in
programming and hardware that augmented Mark I's processing speed.
Finally, Bloch described the introduction of branching to the main sequence
mechanism. Branching permitted Mark I to make decisions based on
intermediate output and to follow any of several calculation paths without
the need for human intervention. Branching was the first example of if-then
conditional commands, and made Mark I far more flexible and time
efficient.25
Aside from Bloch and Leontief , engineering problems dominated the
rest of the Symposium, and computer memory was at the forefront of the
technical talks. Though a lack of machine memory made Mark I tedious to
code and operate, the machine's slow processing speed allowed both
instructions and data to be mechanically fed into the machine in a

synchronous fashion. Conversely, electronic machines (such as the
ENIAC), which made calculations thousands of times as fast as Mark I or
Mark II, could not be coded in such a fashion, and therefore had to be
physically reconfigured for each problem. The reconfiguring process was so
time consuming that the ENIAC had little utility other than running the
same problem hundreds of times, such as in the creation of a specific
ballistics table with incremental variable changes.
In order to overcome the ENIAC's limitations, Presper Eckert, John
Mauchly, and John von Neumann concluded that one way to take full
advantage of the computational speed of an electronic calculating machine
was to hold both the instruction code and data in some form of internal
memory. Information would be accessed at electronic speeds, and both data
and instructions could be modified as a given problem progressed. The
stored-program concept, as it was later named, was first described in the
famous unpublished but highly circulated document von Neumann wrote in
June 1945 titled "First Draft of a Report on EDVAC."26
For the attendees of the conference who were contemplating building an
electronic computer with a stored-program capability, it was imperative to
solve the engineering issues surrounding memory. During the four-day
Symposium there were a variety of memory proposals discussed within the
corridors of the Computation Laboratory. Harvard's Benjamin Moore
presented on magnetic coated disks and drums, MIT's Jay Forrester spoke
on high-speed electrostatic storage, and T. Kite Sharpless of the University
of Pennsylvania lectured on mercury delay lines. Other options discussed
included optical and photographic storage techniques, and a variety of high-
speed transfer mechanisms between external and internal memory.27
The only apparent tarnish on a perfectly organized and executed
Symposium was the noticeable absence of two of the early community's
most notable members. Professor Norbert Wiener, the distinguished
mathematician and founder of the field of cybernetics, decided not to attend
for moral reasons. Even though Wiener had served during World War I as a
human computer for Army Ordnance at Aberdeen Proving Ground and
worked on antiaircraft defense systems during World War II, he refused to
attend the Symposium on the grounds that the Navy had been a joint
sponsor. Six months earlier, The Atlantic published a letter stating Wiener's
new position: he "would no longer cooperate in scientific research that
might result in improved guided missiles for bombing or poisoning of

defenseless peoples or otherwise do damage in the hands of irresponsible
militarists."28
Another noted mathematician, John von Neumann, had no such
reservations, but decided instead to take a well-needed vacation during the
Symposium. The famous mathematician was quite familiar with the
Harvard Mark I, as stated earlier, having run the crucial Los Alamos nuclear
implosion problem on the machine during the war. Furthermore, both von
Neumann and Aiken were recently named to an elite Committee on High
Speed Calculating Machines established by the National Research Council,
and they would see each other during a committee meeting after the
Symposium.29
Believing that he and Aiken represented the leadership of the budding
computing community, von Neumann unabashedly offered his colleague
some words of advice as they worked to construct the boundaries of the
new profession:
We are concerned with developing a relatively new subject—at least new as far as its impact on a
major sector of the mathematical community is concerned—and we should, therefore, be very jealous
of our standards of publications. It is very probable that we have not yet found our proper level, nor
the majority of the mathematical talent that will be ultimately interested in this subject (of this, I am
quite particularly strongly convinced), nor the literary form and style and vehicles for the expression
of our ideas. At this moment, we are going through a period of expansion and the unavoidable
accompanying confusion. We should not permit a low literary standard being established in our field,
and it seems to me that it would be a serious mistake to go too easy with neophytes.30
Von Neumann went on to recommend that the two of them should work to
establish publishing standards and regulatory mechanisms as customary to
more established fields in the exact sciences. Since he would not be in
attendance, his final recommendation was that "the speakers should be
encouraged to submit manuscripts but the full editorial and reviewing
authority should be retained by you."31
AFTER HOURS
For all of Aiken's attempts to control the agenda of the conference, what he
could not direct was what occurred between the Symposium's formalities.
"I don't think that any [of us] ever stopped talking the whole time," Hopper
recalled, "and everybody stayed up all night talking about things—it was
just a steady run of conversation." The dearth of computing publications

was a poor indication of the amount of knowledge already generated by the
evolving community of practice. Instead of being physically located in
books and journal articles, knowledge resided in the minds of the pioneers.
The symposium's most unexpected outcome was that the majority of
learning occurred in between and after the formalities of the day, aided by
the lubricating flow of alcohol.
The informal learning, according to Hopper, diverged considerably from
Aiken's planned program of events. Much of the discussion in the halls and
during meals centered on the potential uses for the machine. Aiken's
assertion that computers were primarily scientific instruments was obvious,
but the potential was there for so much more, including automated
command and control, aeronautical design, medicine, insurance, and a
variety of statistical applications in the social sciences. Another concern
centered on the need to attract more young people into the field in order to
fuel the envisioned growth. This included not only machine designers, but
also mathematically trained coders and operators. "The informal
conversations are all lost," Hopper lamented, "but, I dare say, that it gave
quite an impetus to the industry because everybody began getting ideas
from everybody else; they'd been living in isolation, and this brought them
all together."32
RAMIFICATIONS OF THE SYMPOSIUM
As the letters poured into the Harvard Computation Laboratory in the
following months, it became evident that the conference had been an
immense success. "I can't pinpoint any particular thing that occurred as a
result of it," Hopper later recalled, "but I think a great deal that happened in
the next few years were a result of it, because we began to get cross
fertilization and communication."33
The most obvious effect was the creation of a forum for dispersed people
to come together and exchange ideas concerning the new technology.
"People that hadn't seen each other in years, because one had been at Oak
Ridge, and one had been at Harvard, and one had been out on the Coast, got
together," Hopper recalled. For many invitees it was also the first time that
they were able to interact with people from abroad, particularly England.34
The need for personal communication was more pressing because of
limited publications. Apart from Hopper's Manual of Operation, her three

articles on Mark I, and von Neumann's unpublished "First Draft of a Report
on EDVAC," there was little else the computing community could turn to in
January 1947 other than a number of marginally informative newspaper
articles. The scarcity of publication was exacerbated by enforced secrecy
surrounding certain projects, such as MIT's Whirlwind, or fear that
disclosure would threaten patent positions, as was the case with Eckert and
Mauchly.35
Besides the cross-fertilization of ideas, the Symposium encouraged the
development of institutional connections. Business leaders were exposed to
university mathematicians and scientists who had a better understanding of
how the new technology could be applied. Military and government leaders
controlled funding that university scientists and mathematicians needed for
the next generation of machines. Business leaders identified potential
government and university customers. All groups realized that the field's
future depended on continued cooperation and support.36
For Aiken and the original crew (Hopper, Campbell, and Bloch), the
Symposium was a celebration of their hard-earned accomplishments and
long hours of labor. Harvard officialdom, fellow computing pioneers, and
leaders in government and the military were all in attendance to dedicate
the new Harvard Computation Laboratory, to see Mark I and Mark II, and
to pay homage, as the Harvard Alumni Bulletin proclaimed, to "what
Professor Howard Hathaway Aiken and his staff had accomplished."37
For Aiken, the event marked the end of his continuous battle for
legitimacy at the University. He had brazenly bypassed an unsupportive
Harvard administration and turned to industry and the military in order to
construct a calculating machine, and that machine had now shown its worth
as a scientific and mathematical tool. Rear Admiral Joy's opening remarks
praised Aiken's drive and perseverance and educated the audience on the
Harvard crew's work in support of the war effort. Richard Babbage spoke
of his great-grandfather's vision of automated calculation, proclaiming that
Aiken had fulfilled his ancestor's dream.
But not all those in attendance were in awe of Aiken and his
accomplishments. Aiken and his crew had demonstrated that computers
could produce useful solutions on a consistent basis. Reliability was
achieved, however, by way of conservative technical choices during
hardware design. The unveiled Mark II was a disappointment, for it did not
incorporate technologies that other members of the community took for

granted as the state of the art. "I think Mark II was neglected because it was
built out of relays and its slow speed," Hopper recalled. "Nobody paid any
attention to her because by the time anybody knew anything about her, she
was a dead duck, and everybody was going electronic."38
For a number of the younger attendees, their experience during the war
made them look at computing issues from a different technical perspective
than Aiken. As Maurice Wilkes recalled, wartime work in radar, ionospheric
research, and television made him very comfortable with electronics. "This
was the world in which I and others of my generation had grown up, and we
saw the possibilities of achieving, with these means, very high speeds with
elegant economy of equipment," he recalled. "Very few people of Aiken's
generation developed green fingers for electronics, but not all were afraid of
high speed electronics to the extent that he was."39
Paul Morton, representing the University of California and its budding
computer project, praised the Harvard crew for developing a reliable
machine, but rejected Aiken's technical choices on similar grounds. "I did
give him [Aiken] a great deal of respect for the fact that he didn't make any
compromises with reliability," Morton stated. "He knew everything really
worked, and it did work, even though it was brute force and everybody
made fun of it."40
Just as Aiken was criticized for choosing electromechanical relays over
electronic elements, with memory, too, he found himself on the wrong side
of the technical divide. His choice of latched relays for Mark II and his
penchant for drum memory for the proposed Mark III ran counter to the
developing consensus around the Williams tube and mercury delay lines.
Frederic Williams of the University of Manchester was developing a series
of cathode ray tubes that could hold electric charges that represented data.
The data could be accessed rapidly and randomly, a significant advantage
when working with a machine that operated at electronic speeds. Of the
machines that were developed in the 3 years after the Harvard Symposium,
the Manchester Mark I, Whirlwind, MANIAC, SEAC, and SWAC utilized
the Williams Tube, which was in fact the first example of random access
memory (RAM).
The other preferred storage technology, mercury delay lines, came by
way of radar technology during the war. Delay lines stored data by
converting it from an electric signal into an acoustic signal moving through
a mercury-filled tube. Upon reaching the far end of the tube, the signal

could be converted back to electric form, or else it could be amplified and
bounced back to the beginning of the tube indefinitely until ready for use.
Again, the mercury delay line's chief advantage comes in storing and
accessing information at high speeds, though the information must be
accessed sequentially. Mercury delay lines would be used successfully in
EDVAC, EDSAC, ACE, BINAC, UNIVAC, and RAYDAC.
For the most part, Hopper defended Aiken's choice of technology,
particularly for Mark II. Designing the second machine commenced in the
fall of 1944, and the wartime environment hindered the team from
exploring more exotic technological options. Hopper was even impressed
by the creativeness of the crew despite less then optimal work conditions.
"There weren't any relays that were fast enough to attain the speeds that
Mark II needed," she recalled, "and those fast latch relays and the other fast
relays were actually built for Mark II and Mark II only. And much of that
had to be invented under pressure."41 Bloch also backed Aiken's decisions
in the face of later criticism. "Howard Aiken accomplished a great deal at a
time when the tools were few and far between," he strongly asserted.42
For other members of the Harvard crew, however, the lack of innovative
technical design at Harvard was more systemic. Fred Miller, the electrical
engineer who supervised the construction of Mark II, believed that Aiken's
lone wolf attitude interfered with the process of innovation. "I'm afraid that
we have to blame him [Aiken] somewhere. He was so independent and the
industry grew so rapidly that one man couldn't do it all himself ."43
According to Miller, the only people who had influence during the design
process other than Aiken were Campbell and Hopper. Aiken's imposed
hierarchical structure within the Computation Laboratory, even after he and
his staff had become civilians, hindered the exchange of ideas.44
Despite their privileged position within the Harvard hierarchy, Campbell
and Bloch concurred that Aiken was not one to seek out advice from others,
especially people beyond his inner circle. "Aiken was the type of individual
who could devise many of these ideas on his own," Bloch recalled, "and
who also did not frequently bother to take the time to become completely
acquainted with everything going on at the time."45 If he got a concept stuck
in his brain, no amount of discussion would change his mind. For instance,
Aiken was convinced that the computational speeds generated by electronic
machines such as the ENIAC were superfluous. Bloch, Miller, and
Campbell recalled his typical argument that speed was ultimately limited by

input and output, and therefore what was the use of all of that
computational speed if one was limited by exogenous factors. Aiken's
personal defense of relay technology on the grounds that excess speed was
superfluous comes in stark contrast to Hopper's insistence that reliability
and expediency were Aiken's guiding design principles.46
Even Aiken's uncompromising insistence on reliability and punctuality
interfered at times with the design process. "Howard got to the point where
he says, 'You know, on April 1st we're going to stop designing and build it
anything from that time on will go into the book for our next machine,' "
Miller described. "And sure enough, if somebody tried to add a feature he
would stop them. I recall somebody trying to put something in on the next
day and he said, 'No. That's the date. We're going to build it.' "47 The same
virtue of discipline that permitted Aiken to succeed where less focused
inventors like Charles Babbage failed, had become a vice that interfered
with the ability of the Computation Laboratory to explore more exotic
technologies.
The Harvard Computation Laboratory at night. Courtesy of Harvard University Archives.
THE BEGINNING OF THE END: THE MIGRATION OF TALENT
In the days that followed the first Symposium on Large-Scale Digital
Calculating Machinery, the Christian Science Monitor, the New York Times,
and other newspapers praised the accomplishments of Howard Hathaway
Aiken and his staff. Aiken once again took full advantage of the wide reach

of the Harvard News Bureau to inform the world of their accomplishments.
And once again, Grace Hopper found herself adorning the cover of a major
newspaper. This time a well-dressed Hopper is pictured hobnobbing with
Navy brass, while another photograph had her reviewing printouts from the
Harvard Mark I.48 Aiken also took full advantage of Richard Babbage's
visit, and the two appeared in a photograph together inspecting the gears of
Babbage's Difference Engine.
In the eyes of the educated public, Aiken, Hopper, and the rest of the
Harvard Laboratory crew were situated at the forefront of a technical
revolution the likes of which were only beginning to be understood. They
had designed, constructed, and operated two machines before other groups
had assembled one. It was only prudent that others should travel to Harvard
and learn from the intellectual heir of Charles Babbage and his disciples.
For the members of the Harvard crew, the Symposium exposed them to a
new world of ideas, many of which contradicted much that they had learned
while working with Aiken. The Commander had created a closed system cut
off from the ideas of others. "The Harvard project was sort of self-
contained," Campbell recalled. "It didn't—at least through 1950—it pretty
much went its own way and there was not an awful lot of inter-change."49
Aiken justified the self-containment on the grounds that Harvard had a
monopoly on good ideas. "You worked with Howard," Miller recalled, "you
knew everything, you had the world in your fist, and everybody else must
be way out of line and out of base. In fact, I have a funny feeling that if I'd
asked to spend some time at MIT to see what they were doing, he'd have
seen to it that I got fired some way."50
But the Symposium had opened up the floodgates, and for some of the
crew, there was no turning back. Weeks after the Symposium, Robert
Campbell left Harvard to join Raytheon Manufacturing Company. The
company had decided to set up a computer group, headed by Andy Adelson,
formerly of the MIT Radiation Lab. Besides the financial incentive,
Campbell would be in charge of systems design with wide-ranging
authority.51 What shocked Campbell most upon arriving at Raytheon was
the collegial environment among his co-workers. "At Harvard," he recalled,
"the whole situation was dominated by Aiken. At Raytheon it was more the
group of us working together."52
After completing a study for the Bureau of Standards, Raytheon won a
contract to build a computer for the Naval Missile Test Center at Point

Mugu, California. The computer, designated RAYDAC, would be a binary,
electronic computer with a stored program, magnetic tape input and output,
and mercury delay line memory. Before the ink on the RAYDAC contract
was dry, Campbell convinced Richard Bloch to join him at Raytheon.
"Aiken felt that I really should get into the professional ranks there [at
Harvard] and remain in the academic environment," Bloch recalled. "I
tended to feel that I was destined to move into industry and that there may
be greater challenges there."53
Bloch left the Harvard Computation Laboratory in March 1947 to head
up the software side of the RAYDAC project. Bloch basked in his
newfound intellectual freedom, and soon made significant contributions to
the Raytheon project. "The thing I was proudest of was the fact that I came
up with the automatic error detection system," he recalled.54 Bloch's error
detection system was the first instance of an extended parity check. When
Robert Campbell took a more senior position at Burroughs in 1949, Bloch
was placed in charge of both hardware and software design.
THE FORMATION OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR COMPUTING MACHINERY
According to Hopper, the cross-fertilization and heightened communication
generated at the Harvard Symposium made many attendees aware that the
emerging computing community lacked the necessary institutions to permit
a broad dialogue to continue beyond Harvard.55 In particular, Edmund
Berkeley, a former Computation Laboratory crew member, believed that a
forum for sharing knowledge was needed for all those interested in
computers, not just a select few. "We felt that we were not so worthwhile in
the eyes of people who were making arbitrary decisions about what's
worthwhile," recalled Harry Goheen, another former Harvard crew member
and early supporter of Berkeley's vision.56 Edmund Berkeley was certain
that he was worthwhile and was willing to do something about it.
Berkeley received his bachelor's degree in mathematics from Harvard
University in 1930. Upon graduation he worked for New York Mutual Life
Insurance and then moved to Prudential Insurance. After the attack on Pearl
Harbor, Berkeley joined the Navy and was assigned to the Dahlgren
Ordnance Laboratory as a mathematician and a human computer. When the
Bureau of Ordnance contracted with Howard Aiken to build Mark II,

Lieutenant Commander Berkeley was sent to the Harvard Computation
Laboratory to monitor the development of the project.
From the start, Berkeley had a difficult time adjusting to the Computation
Laboratory's environment. Despite his rank, Hopper and the crew saw him
as a civilian computer. "He didn't know much about the Navy," Hopper
recalled. "He got scared to death of Aiken so he started sending me little
notes."57 When Hopper got tired of serving as an intermediary and Berkeley
finally gained the courage to face Aiken, he exhibited a nervous habit of
jotting down everything the commander was saying instead of looking at
him. "This drove Aiken crazy," Hopper recalled, "so Aiken wouldn't let him
take notes, and so he would go out to his desk and make notes as soon as he
finished talking to the commander."58
Berkeley's shy disposition and penchant for order did not go unnoticed
by the rest of the crew. "We used to plague the hell out of Berkeley,"
Hopper recalled. The crew's favorite activity was stealing Berkeley's trusty
date stamp. Berkeley date-stamped every document that came across his
desk, much to the amusement of some of the crew. "One day they very
carefully stole his date stamp, and went up and date-stamped the whole roll
of toilet paper in the men's room," Hopper recalled. "Berkeley threw a fit
when he found his precious date stamp."59
Practical jokes aside, both Berkeley and his co-worker Harry Goheen
eventually became fed up with the Computation Laboratory's "repressive"
atmosphere and went their separate ways.60 Berkeley was discharged from
the Navy and returned to Prudential Insurance as the chief research
consultant. During the Harvard Symposium in 1947 Berkeley and Goheen
were reunited with Robert Campbell and the three began making plans for a
forum for interchange between individuals and organizations at work in the
computing field. "He [Berkeley] and several of us had felt that since Aiken
handled most of the external contacts himself , other people in the
Computation Laboratory were isolated from the rest of the world,"
Campbell recalled. "That was one of the motivating influences in the
founding of ACM. Ed Berkeley, Harry Goheen and I from Harvard with
several other people helped get the thing organized." According to
Campbell, Berkeley served as the "principal instigator."61
It took Berkeley about 4 months after the Harvard Symposium to fashion
a proposal for the new organization, at which time he attempted to enlist the
support of the established members of the new field. "One day in April,

1947," Berkeley recalled, "I went to see Archibald and Lehmer on the
evening before a meeting of the National Research Council Committee on
Large Scale Calculation. I persuaded Lehmer and Archibald to take the
matter up at the meeting the next day, in which Stibitz and von Neumann
and Aiken were . . . to meet with them."62 Berkeley's proposal was brought
up, met significant resistance, and voted down.
Howard Aiken remembered the Berkeley proposal and his strong feelings
against it: "I said, 'No, we shouldn't do that because computation was a
universal thing.' That our best interest and the best interests of the scientific
community as a whole would be better served to assist everybody to use
machinery and to publish their work, . . . von Neumann agreed with that
completely, and so this proposal of Curtiss was voted down."63 Aiken
mentioned John Curtiss because he was the most ardent supporter of the
Berkeley proposal on the committee. Curtiss, who at the time was the
division chief of the National Bureau of Standards' Applied Mathematics
Division, broke ranks with Aiken and von Neumann and joined Berkeley's
quest for a computing association. That summer, Berkeley and Curtiss
organized a temporary planning committee, which included Robert
Campbell, Dick Bloch, and Harry Goheen. The group approached John
Mauchly who, along with Presper Eckert, had recently formed the first
private computer company, Electronic Control Company. Initially, Mauchly
did not see the need for the organization. "John Mauchly said that there was
complete freedom of interchange of information," remembered Goheen.
"Well hell, he was a director of the project that built the ENIAC. Of course,
for him there was complete freedom, and for people like von Neumann and
Aiken—I'm sure there was never any difficulty finding out what was going
on."64 Eventually the group convinced Mauchly of the organization's
potential utility, and the date was set for the initial gathering.
The first meeting of the Eastern Association for Computing Machinery
took place on 15 September 1947 in a small physics laboratory at Columbia
University. The majority of the meeting was spent on administrative issues,
although T. Kite Sharpless reported on the design of the University of
Pennsylvania's EDVAC computer. Foremost on the agenda was the
selection of the Executive Council, which proved more difficult than
anticipated. "There were," Goheen recalled, "people from IBM that felt that
this was a ploy . . . of some of Aiken's friends to form another self-
adulation society for the benefit of non-IBM people, and they were opposed

to that. I mean, they didn't realize that we were a bunch of outs, I'm sure.
But their attitude was: these are some of Aiken's boys." 65 According to
Goheen, it took considerable reassurances on the part of Berkeley to placate
the IBM crowd, and eventually all sides called for a vote. The 78 people in
attendance elected Edmund Berkeley as (Prudential Insurance) acting
secretary and Robert Campbell (Raytheon) as treasurer. The two most
prominent figures at the meeting, John Mauchly (Electronic Control
Company) and John Curtiss (Bureau of Standards), were elected vice
president and president respectively. Other appointments to the executive
council by the elected officials included Mina Rees (Office of Naval
Research), C. B. Tompkins (Engineering Research Associates), Richard
Taylor (MIT), T. Kite Sharpless (Technitrol, Inc.), E. G. Andrews (Bell
Laboratories), and Franz Alt (Ballistic Research Laboratory).66
The assembled group agreed that the purpose of the organization was to
"advance the science, development, construction, and application of the
new machinery for computing, reasoning, and other handling of
information." Initially, the organization would represent four geographic
areas—Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Washington—with each
elected official representing one of the four chief geographical sections. The
founding members agreed that the "Eastern" would be removed if and when
the association had ample representation from the Mid-West and West
Coast.67
National aspirations aside, the fact remained that other than John
Mauchly and John Curtiss, the majority of the computing elite were
conspicuously absent from the meeting, above all Howard Hathaway Aiken
and John von Neumann. "It would have been so much better," Berkeley
recalled, "if we could have gotten Howard Aiken, and John von Neumann,
and Herman Goldstine, and a few other people to work with us in the
society in the early days. It wasn't through a lack of trying."68 Berkeley, in
fact, sent von Neumann a letter one month before the meeting encouraging
the Princeton professor to participate. Von Neumann responded in the
negative, reminding Berkeley that although he felt that in theory a
computing association was desirable, he believed that the overall situation
had not matured sufficiently to support such an endeavor. Despite his
personal views, von Neumann did end the letter on a positive note,
indicating that "this does not mean, however, that I will not be very glad if

you succeed in furnishing the proof of the opposite, and I want to use this
occasion to wish you the best of luck in your efforts."69
Berkeley, through his persistence, was able to convince von Neumann to
present a paper at the Association's first general meeting held 11 and 12
December 1947, at the Ballistics Research Laboratories, Aberdeen Proving
Ground, Aberdeen, Maryland. Von Neumann accepted the invitation, but
Goheen noted, "he was willing to appear, but as von Neumann, not as a
lecturer for the ACM."70 The famed mathematician's paper, titled "General
Principles of Coding, with Application to the ENIAC," was the first
example of a conference paper dedicated to programming rather than
machine design.71
Von Neumann's presence at the Aberdeen meeting helped to legitimate
the nascent organization, and by January 1948 membership swelled to 350.
On 16 January 1948 the Executive Committee dropped the "Eastern" and
changed the name to Association for Computing Machinery. Moreover,
Curtiss arranged for the National Research Council journal, Mathematical
Tables and Other Aids to Computation, to reserve a section for articles and
papers generated by ACM members. But despite the success of the former
members of the Harvard Computation Laboratory just one year after the
Harvard Symposium, nothing could change the mind of their former boss.
"Aiken," Campbell recalled, "was always his own man. He went his own
way and he had his own idea of how to do things."72 Eventually Campbell
had to trick his former boss into joining the organization, "I asked him
when he was going to pay me back the five dollars he owed me. He didn't
remember, but he paid me back the five dollars. I used the five dollars to
enroll him in the ACM. I don't think he ever paid another dues."73
HOPPER'S PLACE IN THE COMPUTING COMMUNITY
While former Harvard crew members Edward Berkeley, Robert Campbell,
Harry Goheen, and Richard Bloch were off creating the Association for
Computing Machinery, Grace Hopper was back at Harvard managing the
operation of Mark I, training personnel from Dahlgren Ordnance
Laboratory, and entertaining and educating visitors to the Computation
Laboratory. Once again, Aiken took advantage of Hopper's writing ability
and had his diligent assistant write the manual for the Harvard Mark II; it
was published by the Harvard University Press in 1949, again with "Staff of

the Harvard Computation Laboratory" rather than "Grace Hopper" as the
author.
Despite the apparent injustice, Hopper was quite content, even thrilled,
with her place in life. She was skilled at programming and had full access to
not one but two of the only functioning large-scale calculating machines in
existence. She had a passion for teaching anyone who cared to learn about
her machines, and the Computation Laboratory provided an endless stream
of visitors and students. Finally, Hopper, more than most, had a special
bond with Aiken, especially after the departure of Campbell and Bloch.
Hopper enjoyed Aiken as a person, and respected him as a boss. In turn,
Aiken bestowed on Hopper unparalleled liberties in decision making, and a
healthy dose of responsibility for the day-to-day operation of the
Computation Laboratory. Within Aiken's microcosm, Hopper was a
somebody.
Hopper's hard work and dedication had convinced a once-skeptical
Aiken that a woman could do what he considered to be a man's job, but
eventually Hopper could not overcome the immovable rules of Harvard
University. With the expiration of the Navy contract in 1949, Aiken
continued on as a tenure track professor at Harvard. He remained director of
the Computation Laboratory until his retirement in 1961.74 Hopper, on the
other hand, was a faculty research fellow with a three-year contract. "They
didn't promote women at Harvard at that point, so at the end of three years
my time was up," she recalled.75
Fortunately for Hopper, by the start of 1949 the Association for
Computing Machinery had taken root as the primary organization for the
emerging computing community. Hopper's former co-workers Robert
Campbell and Edmund Berkeley were reelected in January to serve as
treasurer and secretary respectively, and the next significant meeting was
planned for 18-20 April at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in
Tennessee. Hopper traveled to Oak Ridge to reunite with old friends, but
also to test the job market. The talented programmer spoke with the heads
of a variety of computing projects and computer-related organizations and
was overwhelmed by the number of job offers she received.76
On the back of her conference program, Hopper jotted down her career
options. She received offers from the Ballistics Research Laboratories,
Aberdeen Proving Ground, Engineering Research Associates, the Eckert-
Mauchly Computer Corporation, and two separate offers from the Office of

Naval Research. Both Engineering Research Associates and the Eckert and
Mauchly offered the most money, a substantial salary of $7,200 per year.
Next to one of the ONR offers, Hopper jotted "and maybe this in uniform,"
followed by "they think maybe they can get me a waiver on a promotion."
It seems to reason that the ONR option called for Hopper to return to active
duty, a proposition that appeared to be of significant interest for the reserve
officer.77
After some deliberation, Hopper narrowed down her choices to two.
Option one reunited Hopper with her former Yale mathematics professor
Dr. Howard Engstrom. Engstrom and William Norris had founded
Engineering Research Associates (ERA) with financial backing from the
Navy after the war. During the war both Engstrom and Norris had been
commanders specializing in cryptography at the Navy's secretive
Communications 
Annex. 
Engstrom 
and 
Norris 
transferred 
their
development teams to St. Paul, Minnesota after the war and founded ERA
with the intent of designing computing machines for cryptological
purposes. The company had substantial expertise in magnetic drum memory
and in 1947 began to construct a digital computer called ATLAS for the
Navy.78 The second option was also a private venture. The Eckert-Mauchly
Computer Corporation was a computer start-up based in Philadelphia.
Hopper first met its founders during her visit to see the ENIAC at the
Moore School of Electrical Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania
in 1945. After a dispute concerning patent rights with the University, the
two ambitious inventors struck out on their own in the spring of 1946. By
the time of the Oak Ridge Conference, the Eckert-Mauchly Computer
Corporation had signed contracts with the Northrop Aviation to construct an
electronic digital computer, BINAC, as well as contracts with the Census
Bureau, National Bureau of Standards, and the Army Map Service to
construct a general-purpose electronic digital computer, UNIVAC.
What made both companies attractive was the fact that they were to have
working machines available within the year. Hopper thrived in the Harvard
Computation Laboratory's operational environment, and she hoped to find
this again at the two start-up companies. In fact, Hopper had applied for a
position at IBM, but walked out of the interview after experiencing what
she perceived as the suffocating environment of Thomas Watson Sr.'s
oversized corporation. "I couldn't take it," Hopper recalled, "because that
was back in the days when they still had flags, an IBM flag, and sang songs

about it."79 In the end, Hopper chose the Eckert-Mauchly Computer
Corporation. "The thing that finally tipped my decision," Hopper recalled,
"was the fact that they had BINAC running and UNIVAC I was well
underway and would be running within a year whereas it looked as though
the work out at St. Paul was going to be quite a bit longer. Plus the fact that
John Mauchly looked like a wonderful person to work for, and I would be
working for him."80
Hopper's time at Harvard was instrumental for her development as a
programmer, a manager, and a leader within the emergent computing
community. The pace of the war years catalyzed her transition from a
college professor to that of a computer programmer, a term that would not
be applied until 1949. During that time she helped to define what
programmers were, what they did, and how they did it. Along with Richard
Bloch she developed a methodical system of coding and batch processing
that turned the experimental Mark I from a mechanical curiosity into a
useful mechanical tool. This achievement was far from trivial, for it proved
that computation could be automated on a large scale.
After the war, Hopper was responsible for recording the Computation
Laboratory's tacit organizational knowledge so that it could be widely
disseminated. She authored the Mark I Manual of Operation and later the
Mark 
II 
manual 
that 
documented 
the 
laboratory's 
technical
accomplishments and placed the Harvard achievement within historical
context. Her three articles concerning hardware and programming
development at Harvard were widely distributed to those interested in the
new field. As interest in computers grew through the 1940s, Hopper gave
seminars and escorted hundreds of visitors through the Computation
Laboratory. Furthermore, her close association with Howard Aiken, coupled
with her growing expertise, afforded Hopper continued access to the elite of
the field at a time when many women were retiring from public life. But
despite her successes, Grace Hopper's career in computers had only just
begun.
OceanofPDF.com

7    STARING INTO THE ABYSS
On a cold night in November 1949, only 6 months after leaving Harvard
and joining the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation, Grace Murray
Hopper found herself behind bars at the central Philadelphia police station.
The programming pioneer was arrested at 3 a.m. for drunk and disorderly
conduct. She was eventually placed in the custody of Pennsylvania General
Hospital for treatment. Hopper's life was unraveling. At the age of 43 she
had accomplished much, yet her growing dependency on alcohol was
jeopardizing her career and her relationships. As winter approached, Hopper
even contemplated suicide by drowning herself in the Schuylkill River,
something she had supposedly tried unsuccessfully in Boston's Charles
River weeks before.1
Eight years had passed since Grace Hopper chose to reinvent herself.
During those years she left her husband, quit her secure teaching position at
Vassar College, joined the Navy, and aligned her future with the embryonic
computer industry. The long hours and late nights she endured at the
Harvard Computation Laboratory transformed the former mathematics
professor into the world's premier computer programmer. She helped to
prove both the viability and the utility of the new computing technology
during the war, and she wrote and lectured about the Harvard Computation
Laboratory's achievements after the war. Hopper's accomplishments during
her eight-year transformation, however, came at a considerable personal
cost. Pioneers such as Hopper are faced with far more than technical
conundrums. They must deal with a variety of social and psychological
pressures associated with the very act of exploring uncharted intellectual
waters. In the process of creating that which does not exist, the technical
pioneer must manage not only his or her own doubts but also the doubts of
colleagues, investors, managers, end users, and a skeptical public. Being an
inventor is in many respects an act of faith: faith in one's own technical
abilities, faith in those who work alongside, faith in the ultimate vision and
purpose of the project.
The pressures associated with inventing the computer age at the Harvard
Computational Laboratory were exacerbated by the special circumstances
associated with the wartime environment. The war weighed heavily on

Hopper and the Harvard crew, for they truly believed that their work was
instrumental to the successful conclusion of the conflict. Despite the
experimental nature of the Harvard machines, deadlines had to be met at an
accelerated pace. On a more personal level, the war interrupted the
peacetime rhythms of life: travel restrictions, food rationing, and material
shortages became the norm.
But even after August 1945 and the country's gradual return to normalcy,
the Computation Laboratory's overbearing director, Howard Aiken,
attempted to maintain the sense of urgency associated with the war. It was
during this period that Hopper's drinking problem worsened. No longer was
drinking a social diversion; now Hopper found herself drinking during the
week and even on the job. Flasks were hidden in closets and desks.
Hopper's drinking binges and periods of recovery eventually amounted to
two days per week wherein she could not function, thus undermining her
productivity and placing an ever growing strain on friends and family.2
According to her friend and former Harvard colleague Edmund Berkeley,
Hopper turned to alcohol during this period as a way to deal with the
compounding pressures at the Harvard Computation Laboratory. She had
dedicated herself fully to the overwhelming task of bringing Howard
Aiken's machines to life. She used the machines to solve critical military
problems, including one that resulted in an explosion over Nagasaki. As the
psychological strains became increasingly pronounced, alcohol seemed to
serve as an effective outlet, freeing Hopper to express emotions and to
temporarily forget obstacles real and imagined. According to Berkeley, the
expiration of Hopper's Harvard research contract was the best thing that
could have happened to her, although in the short term unemployment
added to the stress. During the last week of May 1949, the 43-year-old
programmer packed up her belongings, headed to Philadelphia, and bet her
future on two younger men who believed they could create the first
commercial computer company.3
THE ECKERT-MAUCHLY COMPUTER CORPORATION
Leaving the caustic environment of the Harvard Computation Laboratory
may have made sense to Edmund Berkeley in light of Grace Hopper's
growing dependency on alcohol, but the environment of the Eckert-
Mauchly Computer Corporation presented challenges too. The world of the

start-up company is not for the weak of heart. Lacking the organizational
constancy and financial stability of established firms, start-ups can only
guarantee employees grueling hours, scant benefits, marginal pay, and a
volatile future. As a rule they are the domain of the young and restless, for
the vast majority fail within the first year of inception.
Even so, as of 1 June 1949 the future looked bright for Eckert and
Mauchly's venture. Hopper's first days on the job were actually quite
pleasant, and Berkeley noted the positive change in his friend's mental
condition during her first 5 months in Philadelphia. Hopper had been
ardently recruited by the company's leadership, and her reputation as a
programmer, mathematician, and manager preceded her. Besides being one
of the most experienced programmers in the new field, Hopper came from
an operational environment. She had been instrumental in turning the
Harvard Computation Laboratory into a highly efficient data-processing
factory—a feat that Presper Eckert and John Mauchly had never matched
with the ENIAC, given their creation's temperamental vacuum-tube
technology and programming limitations.4
In contrast to her initial experience at Harvard, Hopper found EMCC to
be very accepting of women. In fact, the majority of the programming staff
as of June 1949 consisted of women. During the ENIAC project, Eckert and
Mauchly arranged to have six women transferred from the Ballistic
Research Laboratory (BRL) at Aberdeen to the Moore School of Electrical
Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania to serve as ENIAC operators.
The six had been members of a staff of about 200 mathematically inclined
women who computed firing tables for artillery and rockets with desktop
calculators. Three of the original six, Francis Elizabeth "Betty" Snyder
(later Holberton), Betty "Jean" Jennings (later Bartik), and John Mauchly's
future wife, Kathleen "Kay" McNulty, remained with Eckert and Mauchly
after the two left the Moore School to form their company.5
The same charm and charisma that persuaded Snyder, Jennings, and
McNulty to continue working with John Mauchly caught Hopper's attention
when she chose EMCC. "Mauchly was one of the grandest people I have
ever met," she recalled.

John Mauchly. Courtesy of John W. Mauchly Papers, Rare Book and Manuscript Laboratory,
University of Pennsylvania.
"He was very broadminded, very gentle, very alive, very interested, very
forward looking."6 The man who was about to become her new immediate
boss was quite different from Commander Howard Aiken. Where Aiken
was overbearing, Mauchly was accommodating. Where Aiken demanded,
Mauchly convinced.
The sharpest distinction between the two computing pioneers, however,
was between their visions of the future. While Aiken saw the computer
primarily as a scientific instrument, Mauchly's field of view was far more
expansive. "He was looking way ahead," said Hopper. "Even though he was
a college professor he was visualizing the use of these computers in the
business and industrial area." In fact, an inquiring customer could bring up
almost any field in business and Mauchly could ad-lib detailed application
descriptions, ranging from marketing research to industrial process control.
"He saw much more of the future of the computer than just as a scientific
tool or for the solution of mathematical problems," Hopper recalled. "I
think that's what was exciting."7

Hopper marveled at the extraordinary relationship between Mauchly and
his youthful partner, Eckert. The two had met in 1941 at the University of
Pennsylvania. At the time, Eckert was a talented graduate student in the
Moore School of Electrical Engineering and Mauchly was teaching a war-
related electronics course. Two years before they met, Mauchly had
experimented with the notion of an electronic calculating machine, partly
because of the intense calculating work he was involved with for the Army
Signal Corps concerning radiation patterns for antennas. The inventive
physicist shared his ideas with the young engineer and even demonstrated a
simple mechanical counter that he had constructed with gas tubes.
Eckert was drawn to the man and his computing ideas, and the two began
a dialogue concerning the feasibility of reckoning at the speed of electricity.
"Those conversations and things in 1941 gave me some confidence and
assurance that I wasn't just on a wild goose chase," Mauchly recalled.8
Eckert felt that Mauchly's theoretical concepts were plausible, but that
Mauchly's engineering acumen was marginal. Mauchly saw in Eckert a no-
nonsense practitioner who could turn his ideas into reality. Thus was formed
a partnership that would construct the first all-electronic digital computer
and establish the first commercial computer company.
According to Mauchly, the two did not expect to be business partners, for
they were first and foremost academics. But with the appointment of Irvin
Travis as the University of Pennsylvania's Dean of Research in January
1946, the inventors of ENIAC were forced to make a fateful decision.
Travis offered Mauchly and Eckert permanent positions at the university on
the condition that they sign a patent release. Travis believed that faculty and
staff should not be permitted to benefit financially from research generated
while working for the university. Given the potential of electronic
computers, both inventors refused to sign and submitted their resignations
effective 31 March 1946.9
Undeterred, the ambitious partners decided to build ENIAC's
replacement privately, and in the spring of 1946 they formed the Electronic
Control Company. "I think," Eckert recalled, "John and I wanted to get the
computer out there and being used by people of every type and description
for every way and every purpose, come hell or high water. We didn't care
whether you called it scientific or engineering or mathematical or non-
mathematical—we wanted to get this job done."10 Their Electronic Discrete
Variable Automatic Computer (EDVAC),11 later renamed the Statistical

EDVAC or Universal Automatic Computer (UNIVAC), followed the
theoretical design set out in John von Neumann's June 1945 report, "First
Draft of a Report on the EDVAC."
But according to both Eckert and Mauchly, the majority of the ideas in
von Neumann's paper were reiterations of concepts that Eckert and
Mauchly had fostered for years before the publication of the well-known
mathematician's report. Von Neumann, they said, had been a beneficial
sounding board because he quickly grasped concepts, and his prominence
within academic and government circles permitted him to effectively
broadcast ideas, but he had made few if any original contributions to the
theoretical design of the EDVAC. Mauchly maintained that Eckert had
written his own EDVAC report (dated January 1944), but because of
government security concerns he had not been permitted to publish or even
distribute it. "I was not allowed to make speeches about it, and he [von
Neumann] went out and made them anyway without clearance and got out
of it because nobody wanted to come down with the Espionage Act on a
prestigious guy," said Eckert. "If I had done it, they would have come down
on me with a ton of bricks."12
To add insult to injury, during the early spring of 1946 John von
Neumann and Herman Goldstine (Eckert and Mauchly's trusted Army
Ordnance representative to the ENIAC project, who had joined von
Neumann at Princeton after the war) attempted to wholly claim the patent
rights to the EDVAC. The two cited the "First Draft" as evidence of priority.
Eckert and Mauchly fought their claim intensely, but in the end, on the
technical grounds that one must apply for a patent within a year of
publishing the results, neither party was granted a patent. Since von
Neumann's "First Draft" had been distributed widely, it was considered to
have been published in the legal sense; thus, both parties had exceeded the
time limit.13
Despite the controversy surrounding the theoretical concepts for the
stored-program computer, the fact remained that Eckert and Mauchly were
the first Americans to bring those ideas to fruition. The UNIVAC design
called for vacuum-tube technology that counted thousands of times as fast
as Harvard's electro-mechanical relay machines, Mark I and Mark II. The
proposed computing circuits added directly, and they replaced the
subtraction operation with the addition of complements (the same numerical
technique used in today's computers). Multiplication and division were

achieved by successive additions—because of the tremendous speed of the
processor, there was apparently no perceived advantage to applying short-
cut multiplication and division methods.14
Similar to the architecture described in von Neumann's "First Draft," the
UNIVAC's electronic circuitry processed information in a serial fashion,
unlike the parallel design of the ENIAC. Since data and instructions passed
one after another through the system's logic gates, circuit design was
simplified and programming became less complicated. The serial flow of
data also made it easy to debug hardware, for all information and
instructions in a given operation had to pass through the same circuits.15
The UNIVAC had an experimental internal memory that could store
1,000 twelve-bit words. The technology, known as mercury delay line
memory, had first been used in wartime radar systems. Electrical data from
the UNIVAC was sent into a tube of mercury, where it generated small
waves that bounced indefinitely until the data was reacquired by comparing
the waves with a master clock. Despite the system's dependability, delay
line memory had significant drawbacks. In addition to the overall size and
cost, information could only be accessed sequentially, a loss of power
wiped the memories clean, and the mercury had to be maintained at an
uncomfortable 40 degrees Celsius for optimal performance.16
Electronic circuits combined with a relatively large internal memory that
held both operating instructions and data would make the UNIVAC the
most powerful calculating machine ever proposed. Its closest rival, the
Harvard Mark II, performed 30-40 operations per second and had an
internal memory of 200 words. The UNIVAC would perform more than
5,000 instructions per second with an internal memory of 1,000 words. Yet
all that computational speed meant little without efficient input-output (I/O)
mechanisms for entering data into internal memory. The ENIAC, for
instance, was limited by the mechanical speeds of its IBM punch-card input
system. Mark I and Mark II, despite their slow processors, achieved a
higher I/O rate by means of paper tape.
Taking the Harvard I/O system one step further, Eckert began
experimenting with a new technology initially developed by the audio
recording industry: magnetic tape. The experimental magnetic-tape I/O
device consisted of plate-size reels of magnetic tape, drive motors, and
magnetic recording and reading heads. The magnetic heads were designed
to record and read from the tape at a rate of about 400 words per second.

Moreover, each 10-inch reel could hold 2,000 feet of 8-millimeter-wide
tape and could store up to 2 million alphanumeric digits. High-speed drive
motors and a sophisticated electronic clutch would maximize the efficiency
of the tape and only 20 percent of the recording space would be wasted. The
speed of the magnetic-tape system complemented the electronic circuits,
permitting the user to take advantage of the hardware's calculating
potential.17
HOW TO SELL A COMPUTER?
Although the proposed UNIVAC sounded remarkable to Grace Hopper,
Eckert and Mauchly faced a considerable challenge in raising investment
capital. Seed money was hard to come by, given the absence of a structured
venture capital system in 1946. The only available avenue was to generate
cash flow by receiving partial payment on UNIVAC purchase contracts—a
difficult task with an unproven technology and an uninformed customer
base. It would take all of John Mauchly's proselytizing talents to sell the
vision of a computing future.18
Mauchly first turned to an organization with a history of supporting
radical calculating technology: the United States Census Bureau. The
Census Bureau was established in 1790 to track population demographics to
determine the allocation of congressional seats. By the 1880 census, the
population growth of the United States had outstripped the Census Bureau's
manual data-processing capability, taking 1,500 full-time clerks over 7
years to produce the 21,000-page report. The Census Bureau turned to
Herman Hollerith, a young engineer.
Hollerith's insight was that a person's identifying information (age,
geography, etc) could be represented by holes punched in cards, which
could then be processed mechanically. Hollerith's machines processed more
than 60 million cards during the 1890 census, thus allowing the Census
Bureau to complete the 27,000-page report 2 years early and $5 million
under budget. In 1896 Hollerith formed his own company, which in 1911
merged with two other small office equipment firms to form the
Computing-Tabulating-Recording (CTR) Company. In 1924 CTR's
president, Thomas Watson Sr., renamed the company the International
Business Machine Corporation (IBM) so that the firm's name would match
his ambition.19

Fifty-six years after the Census Bureau purchased Hollerith's
experimental punch-card machine, it signed a $300,000 contract for
delivery of a UNIVAC. The Census Bureau contract marked an early
victory for the fledgling Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation, but EMCC
could not receive advance payments—government regulations only
permitted the Census Bureau to award contracts for finished products.
Fortunately, the National Bureau of Standards was also interested in a
machine. It provided $75,000 up front to cover research costs for the
mercury memory and the magnetic-tape system. The total National Bureau
of Standards contract amounted to $300,000, which was to be paid in
installments as the machine approached completion. Mauchly lined up a
third contract with the Army Map Service, but once again money would not
be released until a significant portion of the project was completed.
Eckert-Mauchly's financial situation became more precarious as the costs
of developing UNIVAC crept ever higher. In October 1947, Eckert and
Mauchly were forced to sign a contract with the Northrop Aircraft
Company for a small Binary Automatic Computer (BINAC). The $100,000
price tag injected needed capital, but the 15 May 1948 delivery date for the
BINAC would hamper progress on UNIVAC.20
Eckert-Mauchly's financial standing was vastly improved by an unlikely
source: American Totalisator, a Baltimore-based company that supplied
racetracks with machines that calculated betting odds and recorded race
results. American Totalisator's senior management had heard about a new
type of commercial calculating machine through George Eltgroth, EMCC's
patent attorney. Eltgroth arranged for Eckert and Mauchly to meet with
Henry Straus, the vice president of Totalisator. Straus, who had invented
and patented the original totalisator machine, grasped the potential of the
UNIVAC immediately.21
On 6 August 1948, Straus decided to formalize his interest in Eckert and
Mauchly's start-up computing venture. Totalisator paid $500,000 for 40
percent control of EMCC, advancing the cash-strapped company $50,000
upon the closing of the contract. Straus was named chairman of EMCC's
board of directors (which also included three Totalisator executives, Presper
Eckert, and John Mauchly). Though outnumbered, the founding partners
retained 54 percent of the common stock, with the final 6 percent dispersed
among EMCC employees.22

Though Totalisator was formally represented on the EMCC board,
strategic decisions and operational business and engineering decisions were
left to Eckert and Mauchly. By 1 June 1949, when Grace Hopper arrived,
the once struggling company was a flourishing organization with more than
100 employees. It had signed contracts with the National Bureau of
Standards, the Census Bureau, the Army Map Service, and Northrop
Aviation, and it was in negotiations with two insurance companies
(Prudential and Metropolitan), with the marketing information company A.
C. Nielsen Inc., and with the General Electric Company. The BINAC was
close to completion, and the proposed UNIVAC (scheduled for delivery in
1951) had a technological "edge" unmatched by any potential competitor,
including the established office-equipment firms IBM and Remington
Rand.23
BETTY SNYDER (HOLBERTON)
Other than John Mauchly, Hopper spent most of her time working with
Betty Snyder24 during her transition from Harvard to EMCC. Hopper had
met Snyder previously at Harvard and through the Association of
Computing Machinery, but the first occasion that the two programmers had
to sit down and talk was at Edmund Berkeley's home a few months before
Hopper joined EMCC. Hopper was impressed with Snyder's intellect,
knowledge of programming, and overall personality, all of which factored
into her decision to go to EMCC.25

Betty Snyder (right) reconfiguring the ENIAC wiring in order to run a problem. Courtesy of U.S.
Army.
Betty Snyder and Grace Hopper were similar in many respects, though
Snyder was 12 years Hopper's junior. Both came from established middle-
class families that emphasized learning. "I was one of eight children,"
Snyder noted, "and had a very delightful home life—four boys and four
girls—and my father always felt that education was terribly important.26
Also like Hopper, Snyder was influenced by her grandfather, who was a
prominent astronomer. With the support of her family, Snyder attended a
prestigious Philadelphia prep school, the George School, and earned a
scholarship to the University of Pennsylvania, where she planned to study
mathematics.
Snyder's experience at the University of Pennsylvania, however,
diverged from the supportive environment Hopper found at Vassar. During
her freshman year, Snyder took analytical geometry with a well-known
Russian mathematician who told the women in class that their education
was a waste of time and resources. "Every day when he came into class,"
Snyder recalled, "he'd say 'You women should be home raising children.'
Well, after you have 4 months of that every day, and you find out the next
semester in mathematics is taught by the same fellow, with no alternatives, I
just gave up."27 Snyder transferred to the English Department and graduated
with a degree in journalism.
Upon graduation, Snyder took a job with the Farm Journal. After the
Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, she wanted to join the war effort. "All of
my family had joined the Service," she said. "I had two sisters in the Waves,
and I wanted to join the Waves, but I wasn't accepted because of my
eyes."28 Determined to help her country, Snyder answered an advertisement
in a Philadelphia newspaper for a position as a human computer for the
Army's Ballistic Research Laboratory. The human computers at the
laboratory spent much of their time calculating firing tables to be used by
artillery units on the front lines. The advertisement specifically asked for
woman with a penchant for mathematics, but added that training would be
provided for those lacking a mathematical background. Snyder was
interviewed by her future husband, John Holberton, who selected the young
journalist and arranged for her to get extra training in mathematics.
Though Betty Snyder found calculating firing tables eight hours a day
monotonous, she was motivated by the fact that she was contributing to the
war effort. "I always felt it was a terrific thing we were doing," she recalled.

"I really was just gung-ho on the whole thing." Gung-ho, that is, until her
brother returned from the European theater and informed her that he and his
men never used her tables. Instead, the gunners would shoot two or three
cursory shots, make the proper adjustments on the basis of tacit knowledge
and experience, and go from there. "It really burst my balloon," she
recalled.29
Not seeing a future in human computing, Snyder volunteered for a
special assignment to work on an experimental machine that supposedly
would make the work of the Ballistic Research Laboratory's computer
group obsolete. Snyder remembered that few people were interested in
applying for the assignment, suspecting that being an operator on a machine
was a demotion of sorts. "The first thing that Goldstine [said was] 'Your
grades won't be decreased because you are going to be working on a
machine,' " Snyder recalled. "The idea of a machine, you know, was a low
grade something or other."30
When Snyder reported for work at the Moore School, her experience was
identical in many respects to Hopper's first days at Harvard. She
remembered that no one in Philadelphia really knew what to do with her.
There were no training materials or classes to teach a person to be an
ENIAC operator, and from all appearances Eckert and Mauchly themselves
had put little thought in how to actually operate such a machine once built.
To make matters worse, Snyder's lack of numerical theory made it more
difficult to understand mathematical problems broken down into component
parts.31
The other women who arrived with Snyder recalled a similar feeling of
bewilderment. Betty Jean Jennings (later Jean Bartik) remembered those
first days alongside Snyder: "We knew we were supposed to run the
machine and set up problems for the machine, but no one had any
techniques or anything."32 Eventually, by studying block diagrams of
circuits and by taking part in long discussions with John Mauchly and with
an engineer named Bob Shaw, Bartik and Snyder became proficient at
running the machine. They also became quite familiar with the machine's
hardware, for two reasons. First, unlike Mark I, the ENIAC was
"programmed" via hardware manipulation. Much like the Moore School's
analog differential analyzer, the ENIAC was physically reconfigured to
correspond to the problem to be solved. Second, because of the unreliability

of the vacuumtube technology, much of their time was spent debugging the
hardware.
By the winter of 1946, Betty Snyder was a valuable member of the
ENIAC staff. She thoroughly enjoyed her new career, though there was no
name for it. In February, after Eckert and Mauchly decided to set up a
private company, she asked Mauchly if she could be a part of it. According
to Snyder, for ethical reasons Mauchly was not soliciting staff members of
the Moore School, even though he desperately needed trained people. "He
wasn't willing to offer me a job until I made the overture," Betty Snyder
Holberton later recalled.33
Through the spring of 1946, before the company received funding, Betty
Snyder met with the other founding members at John Mauchly's house.
"We used to go up there on weekends, I guess about five or six of us," she
recalled. "We would hold the meeting starting Friday evening . . . maybe
seven o'clock after dinner, and we worked until four in the morning." The
original members of the team defined their roles and responsibilities during
the design phase of the UNIVAC. Snyder and Mauchly assumed joint
responsibility for constructing the operating code. Snyder would also work
closely with Eckert to develop the magnetic-tape I/O system.34
LEARNING THE ROPES AT EMCC
After arriving in the early summer of 1949, Grace Hopper worked closely
with Betty Snyder, who exposed her to new techniques and procedures.
First and foremost was the practice of meticulously planning out the logic
of a program with flow charts. "We didn't use flow charts [at Harvard],
because everything was a perfectly simple sequence of operation because it
just rode right along that tape," said Hopper.35 BINAC and UNIVAC I were
stored-program computers with the ability to modify instructions during a
program run, and so the programmer could write much more complicated,
non-sequential algorithms. Without a flow chart, the programmer was apt to
lose her way when coding.
A flow chart, also called a flow diagram, is a graphical representation of
the steps involved in a program. It systematically breaks down the
algorithm and represents the flow of operations by means of geometric
symbols. Snyder standardized the symbols used in flow charts, such as a
rectangle for a process of action (e.g., Add a and b) and a diamond to

represent a decision (e.g., Is a greater than b?). Because there were no index
registers to allocate memory, memory locations had to be defined and
tracked within the chart. Arrowed lines indicated the path of computational
flow. The overall flow of the chart was from top to bottom and from left to
right.36
A flow chart represents the logical analysis of a problem separate from a
specific computer code or language. Hopper could draw up a single flow
chart for coding an inventory control program, and that same flow chart
then could be used as a guide to code two distinct computers with different
object programs. Moreover, flow charts were a useful form of
documentation. They permitted other programmers to quickly grasp or
check a colleague's work by tracking the states of variables at crucial points
during the flow of a program, thus helping to uncover errors in logic.
Ultimately, flow charts were a powerful tool that helped standardize the
process of program design.37
Although Grace Hopper emphasized that Betty Snyder developed the
system of flow-chart analysis for EMCC, the historical record is not as
clear. Herman Goldstine has credited himself and John von Neumann with
the invention and development of the programming tool:
In the spring of that year [1946] von Neumann and I evolved an exceedingly crude sort of
geometrical drawing to indicate in rough fashion the iterative nature of an induction. . . . I became
convinced that this type of flow diagram, as we named it, could be used as a logically complete and
precise notation for expressing a mathematical problem and that indeed this was essential to the task
of programming.38
In 1947, Goldstine and von Neumann published a paper on the subject titled
"Planning and Coding of Problems for an Electronic Computing
Instrument." Years later, when questioned why she did not publish her
original ideas at the time in order to receive the proper credit for them,
Betty Snyder Holberton replied: "I did not write for publication because I
wasn't out to push my name ever." Regardless, the practice of flow-charting
programs began in Philadelphia and was passed to Hopper by Snyder
during the summer of 1949. "She taught me that . . . and got me thinking in
another dimension because you see the Mark programs had all been linear,"
said Hopper.39
Snyder also taught Hopper C-10, the instruction code for the UNIVAC,
which she had developed with Mauchly over a two-year period. An

instruction code, or operational code, constitutes the most basic set of
commands that can be executed by the computer. In December 1947,
Mauchly wrote to Snyder suggesting that "the instruction code should use
symbols which are easily learned and identified with the operations by
already existing mental associations: 'a' for add, etc." By replacing a
sequence of binary numbers with a single letter to represent an operation,
Mauchly and Snyder were simplifying the coding process and making it
much more intuitive for users. The philosophy would have a tremendous
effect on Hopper's own breakthrough work during the 1950s. "I felt that
people couldn't understand what we were doing because we were using
such bizarre terminology," said Snyder. "I felt that we would never get
anywhere unless we could really make people understand . . . you would
see the word s and it meant subtract, and t meant test, and this kind of
thing." Snyder chose to have the code coincide with the 26 letters of the
alphabet so that the computer code paralleled concepts that all English-
speaking users were familiar with, regardless of their mathematical
background.40
Snyder thoughtfully created the code, constructing sample problems to
see what instructions appeared most often. She hoped to create a type of
language that a programmer could write fluently without constantly
referring to a code manual. Three digits that designated memory location
accompanied each code. The memory location, like the numbers entered as
data, were written in decimal rather than binary or octal, another attempt to
make the code adjust to the human instead of the other way around.41
Hopper was impressed by Snyder's C-10 code, combined with the
versatility of a stored-program computer, and she found the system far
easier to use than what she had experienced at Harvard. "After coming from
Mark I, I slipped into UNIVAC I like duck soup," she said. "I felt as if I'd
acquired all of the freedom and all of the pleasures of the world; the
instruction code was beautiful."42 (See table 7.1.)
Hopper was impressed by C-10's advantages over the other machine
codes. On both Mark I and Mark II she had to translate alphanumeric codes
into octal digits that the computer could understand. Likewise, storage
locations were written in octal.
TABLE 7.1
Examples of UNIVAC I's C-10 code instructions.

rA
Register used to store result of addition, subtraction, etc.
Am
Add (m) to (rA), result in rA
Mn
Multiply (rL) by (m), rounding off the product to 11 digits;
result in rA
Nm
Multiply (rL) by negative (m); result in rA
Tm
Test to determine if (rA) > (rL); if so, transfer control to m
The difficulty of coding in a computer-centric numeric code made
programming time-consuming, tedious, and prone to error. Furthermore, it
had detrimental effects on Hopper's personal accounting. Each month her
checkbook would be unbalanced because she would slip into octal addition
and subtraction when balancing her accounts. The C-10 code, on the other
hand, was much more intuitive. "We had decimal storage locations and it
was heaven," she recalled. "It was all the difference in the world."43
After Hopper quickly familiarized herself with flow charts and C-10 code
for UNIVAC, her main task during the summer and fall of 1949 was to
begin to prepare a library of useful applications for the UNIVAC. Hopper
brought to EMCC 5 years' operational experience that she applied to the
task of developing a series of useful subroutines and generic programs. Like
the relative code packages developed at Harvard, Hopper and her new team
of programmers first constructed subroutines that could generate square
roots, sine, cosine, tan, log and other transcendental functions. Each routine
had flexible addresses so it could be placed into any specific portion of
memory, and accuracy was made available up to eleven decimal places.
During this time Hopper also developed a unique package of programs to
solve Laplace boundary value problems that was ideal for solving heat and
wave equations in engineering.44
In order to validate the efficacy of programs written for a computer that
did not yet exist, Hopper employed the recently completed BINAC. The
small binary stored-program electronic digital computer was supposed to be
delivered to Northrop Aviation on 15 May 1948, but the machine was not
operational until a month after Hopper's arrival. The machine was smaller

but similar in design to the proposed UNIVAC, with a fast vacuum-tube
processor and 512 words of memory provided by mercury tanks. "I would
write in the C-10 code a subroutine to compute the sine and I'd transliterate
it into BINAC code and check it out on BINAC so that we would have
something ready to run when we got UNIVAC running," said Hopper.45
Although the machine calculated in binary and could not represent
alphabetic characters, UNIVAC I programs written in C-10 could be
translated into octal and thus processed.
As Hopper settled into her new position, she took it upon herself to
enhance the EMCC staff with talented programmers. "Some of the Harvard
people I managed to attract to come down there, like Dick Waltman and
Charles Katz," she said. "I brought a lot of people in down there." Other
key additions included Hugh Livingston who was one of the enlisted
operators assigned to Mark I, and most notably, Herb Mitchell, the first
person to receive a doctorate from Aiken's Computation Laboratory.46
Hopper soon realized, however, that as of 1949 the pool of competent
programmers was hardly larger then her immediate circle of friends, and
that in the immediate future EMCC would have to "create" programmers.
To make such a training program less hit or miss, Hopper and Mauchly
attempted to identify the traits and abilities that they should look for when
interviewing candidates. In the end they agreed on fifteen different
characteristics, with three of the fifteen highlighted as essential. These
included a systematic nature and methodical approach to new problems,
careful reasoning without jumping to conclusions which are unwarranted,
and imagination and creative ability. John Mauchly even devised an
"aptitude test" for candidate assessment, though the subjective nature of
some of the traits made personal interviews necessary. In the end, Hopper
and Mauchly's efforts helped to identify the aptitude boundaries for a new
profession, and EMCC began to make programmers, one at a time.47
Unbeknownst to Hopper, her efforts to build a team of programmers in
order to build libraries of applications and subroutines were being mirrored
by another group thousands of miles away at Cambridge University.
Maurice Wilkes was assembling Britain's first stored-program electronic
binary computer, the EDSAC, and in June 1949 he organized a group of
programmers headed by David Wheeler to construct a library of programs.
"We settled down to work on the library of subroutines and programming
research in real earnest," wrote Wilkes. "The group of programmers—for

they could now be called that—met regularly, and each member undertook
the production of one or two subroutines."48 Wilkes, Wheeler, and Stanley
Gill eventually published the first work on programming in 1951. Titled
The Preparation of Programs for an Electronic Digital Computer, it
recorded the fruits of their efforts. It became standard reading for the next
generation of computer programmers.
One year before the publication of their seminal work, Wilkes visited the
United States to get a sense of developments there. While visiting Eckert-
Mauchly, he noticed the similarities in work between EMCC's
programming group and his own. "I do remember some stimulating
discussions with the group, led by Grace Hopper, who were concerned with
programming." he recalled. "I found that they had a full appreciation of the
importance of programming and of the need to develop organized and
disciplined methods. I felt I was among people who looked at things in the
same way that I did myself ."49
Hopper's focus on the UNIVAC I's library of programs left Betty Snyder
time to develop another important yet unheralded contribution to early
programming advances. This was the sortmerge generator for a magnetic-
tape computer.50 In order for the UNIVAC I to be useful as a business
machine, it had to be able to sort through and order data as effectively as
existing punch-card technologies. Snyder first began working on the
problem during the summer of 1947. With no formal training in logic, she
applied common sense to figure out a binary method of sorting. "I
remember bringing a deck of cards to the office on 1215 Walnut Street and
turning them face down and making decisions and building piles," she
recalled. "I built the logic of binary sorting from a deck of cards without
ever having . . . anybody tell me anything about how it ought to be done."51
Once Snyder had developed the theory behind efficient binary sorting,
she created a program that she called a generator. The generator contained
the characteristics of the data to be sorted: number of items, length of items,
categories or fields of information within the data set, etc. When a specific
query was entered, the generator would "generate" another program, which
would instruct up to ten different tape drives to take certain data off several
reels and feed it back in a specific order onto another set of reels. The
process was continued until a final tape contained the desired information in
the proper order it was requested.

The coordination and automation of high-speed tape drives by means of a
computer program was a monumental task that required a variety of
technical problems to be solved. Working with the UNIVAC I engineers,
Snyder developed a series of "interlocks" that scheduled the operation of
input and output devices. Thus, only one magnetic-tape reel could function
at a time, and a reel could not function simultaneously as an input and an
output device. Like Hopper, Snyder took advantage of a functioning
BINAC to aid in the design of UNIVAC I's tape system, which represented
a new development itself in computer design. "The first time a computer
was used to design a computer," remarked Hopper.52
AN UNTIMELY DEATH
By the fall of 1949, the future of the Eckert-Mauchly Computer
Corporation looked bright. So did Grace Hopper's own future. Hopper had
found a new home among the diverse members of a start-up company with
the only functioning stored-program computer in America. She had a far-
sighted boss in John Mauchly, one of the finest engineers in Presper Eckert,
and around her a team of talented engineers and programmers. Betty Snyder
had helped her learn to program the first commercial stored-program
computer. In return, Hopper shared her 5 years of programming and
management experience, and helped build a strong programming team by
bringing in some of her former Harvard colleagues.
But just as the company was poised to become the first significant mover
in a new and potentially lucrative business sector, the unthinkable
happened. On 25 October 1949, a plane carrying Henry Straus, the
chairman of the EMCC's board of directors, crashed just outside of
Baltimore. As John Mauchly stated in his annual president's report to the
shareholders of EMCC, "Not only did the Corporation lose a wise and far-
sighted leader, but the entire personnel of the company felt keenly the loss
of an understanding and sympathetic friend."53
And sympathy was something EMCC's senior management needed as the
company moved into a new decade. Despite the technical successes
achieved in hardware development and programming, cost overruns, poorly
negotiated contracts, and production delays threatened the financial
solvency of the company. To make matters worse, the provisions of the
contract between Straus's company and EMCC were no longer adequate to

see through the construction of the first UNIVAC. "It is now apparent that,
even if the American Totalisator Company were to continue to supply
operating capital in return for preferred stock up to the limit contemplated
in their contract with us, we would not have adequate funds to carry
through the test period of the first UNIVAC," stated Mauchly in his report
to shareholders.54
Mauchly's appeal for more funding after Straus's death could not have
been more poorly timed. The accident killed the person at Totalisator who
believed most in the potential of the electronic computer. The Munn
brothers, the majority owners of Totalisator, had little interest in or
understanding of digital computers, and instead of answering Mauchly's
plea, immediately placed EMCC up for sale. To make matters worse,
Totalisator demanded repayment of a $62,000 advance by January 1950.55
Both Hopper and Snyder remembered the shock of losing such a
"marvelous man," as well as the malaise that came over the company.
Instead of concentrating on the UNIVAC, Eckert and Mauchly were now
forced to focus on the immediate need for an infusion of funding. They
initially turned to loan companies and research foundations, but with little
success. With their backs against the wall, the neophyte businessmen hoped
to sell EMCC to a major corporation that specialized in calculating
equipment (National Cash Register, IBM, Burroughs), or to a firm that had
a need for advanced calculating technology (Hughes Aircraft).
If there was any glimmer of hope, the successful demonstrations of
BINAC during the late summer were attended by executives and engineers
from many of these companies. Among the attendees were representatives
from International Business Machines Corporation, and soon after Straus's
death Eckert and Mauchly were invited to meet with the aging Thomas
Watson Sr. and his heir apparent, Thomas Watson Jr. In his memoirs Watson
Jr. vividly recalled his meeting with the two young inventors, and his
impression of them would stay with him from that point on:
I was curious about Mauchly, whom I'd never met. He turned out to be a lanky character who dressed
sloppily and like to flout convention. Eckert, by contrast, was very neat. When they came in,
Mauchly slumped down on the couch and put his feet up on the coffee table—damned if he was
going to show any respect for my father.56
Eckert explained the technology behind their work, while Mauchly shared
his vision of the computing future, a future that jeopardized the

technological monopoly held by mechanical punch-card machines. Because
of the slow speeds and limited storage of punch cards, they were not an
optimal input-output system for electronic computers. For instance, a
handful of UNIVAC's magnetic-tape discs could store the policy records of
an entire insurance company, while an individual punch card was needed
for each policyholder. Moreover, those individual punch cards could only
be sorted and processed at mechanical speeds. Electronic circuits, combined
with Betty Snyder's sort-merge system, could process, store, erase, move,
and save magnetic records quickly and securely.57
At the end of the meeting, Thomas Watson Sr. thanked Eckert and
Mauchly for their presentation, but frankly told them that, for anti-trust
reasons, IBM lawyers advised that IBM's purchasing the Eckert-Mauchly
Computer Corporation could have negative legal ramifications. According
to Thomas Watson Jr., the real reason that Watson Sr. rejected Eckert and
Mauchly's offer ran far deeper:
Having built his career on punch cards, Dad distrusted magnetic tape instinctively. On a punch card,
you had a piece of information that was permanent. You could see it and hold it in your hand. Even
the enormous files the insurance companies kept could always be sampled and hand-checked by
clerks. But with magnetic tape, your data were stored invisibly on a medium that was designed to be
erased and reused.58
An aging CEO had built his career and corporation on mechanical punch-
card systems, and he wholeheartedly believed that Eckert and Mauchly's
electronic computer was an interesting but unproven business machine
destined for the technological ash heap. IBM's engineers at Endicott,
Watson Sr. believed, should focus on building a better punch-card system,
not on experimenting with marginal technologies.
Up until the 1949 meeting with Eckert and Mauchly, Watson Jr. had
shared his father's sentiments. In fact, he had attended the formal
demonstration of the ENIAC in February 1946 with the number-two man at
IBM, Charles Kirk, and had walked away unimpressed by and unconcerned
with the temperamental monstrosity. "The truth," Watson Jr. recalled, "was
that I reacted to ENIAC the way some people probably reacted to the
Wright brothers' airplane: it didn't move me at all. I couldn't see this
gigantic, costly, unreliable device as a piece of business equipment. Kirk
felt the same way."59 But by 1949 the younger Watson had begun to
reconsider. Besides the increasing attention the popular press was giving to

computers and electronics, Watson Jr. acknowledged the unexpectedly
robust sales of a marginal IBM product. "It was the success of the 604
Electronic Calculator that convinced me that electronics was going to grow
much faster than anyone had anticipated," he recalled.60 The IBM 604 was
an electronic version of a popular IBM desk calculator. It had been
developed by a small group of electronics experts working in Poughkeepsie
rather than in IBM's main laboratory in Endicott. The group, headed up by
Ralph Palmer, had applied experience gained with radar during the war.
Standard IBM plug-in boards were mounted with vacuum tubes and
supporting circuitry in such a way that the new electronic innards could be
mass-produced at a reasonable cost. "Palmer and his men," Watson Jr.
recalled, "had produced an amazingly elegant design that made it easy to
cope with vacuum tubes, which were constantly burning out or otherwise
going haywire."61
Although the unexpected sales of the 604 were seen as an anomaly by
many of IBM 's top executives, Watson Jr. viewed it as a sign that, at the
least, IBM had to learn more about the new technology. He offered Presper
Eckert a prominent position at the Poughkeepsie laboratory, where he
would be able continue work on his envisioned computer. With so few
options, and with bankruptcy looming, Eckert seriously considered the
offer, but in the end he decided to remain with Mauchly. "I certainly was
influenced by him [Mauchly] and by my wife," Eckert recalled. "My own
feelings about doing it [alone] were much less stronger than his. . . . I don't
think Mauchly recognized the difficulties in doing it ourselves. I think I had
a better sense of that."62
Since EMCC was not joining the International Business Machines
Corporation, they were competitors. "The IBM Company," Mauchly
recalled, "was telling its customers that it's absolutely ridiculous for the
tape machines they're talking about down there, because you know you
can't sort data on tape. You can only sort it with cards because you move
the cards around." Watson Jr. confirmed Mauchly's suspicions in his
memoirs: "Dad told the marketing men to call on Prudential and persuade
them that the UNIVAC idea was not sound."63
A PERSONAL SHORT CIRCUIT

With the decision to keep EMCC intact for the time being, Eckert and
Mauchly spent the remaining months of 1949 seeking financing. Hopper
remembered the period as one of uncertainty, scarcity, and low morale. Not
only was the future in question; there was no money to pay the bills in the
present. Hopper and others accepted salary reductions, and purchases of
equipment for the UNIVAC were put on hold. Instead of dreaming about
the coming computer revolution, discussions now turned to what to do if
EMCC were to fold.64
Hopper had thrown herself wholeheartedly into Eckert and Mauchly's
business venture, and its deterioration sparked a crisis in her life. The 43-
year-old programmer's furtive addiction to alcohol resurfaced, and on a
cold Saturday night in November she was arrested for public drunk and
disorderly conduct. Released to Philadelphia General Hospital for
treatment, she was eventually placed into the custody of her friend Edmund
Berkeley. It was far from the first time Berkeley found himself covering up
his friend's growing addiction. The incident prompted Berkeley to write a
passionate "intervention letter" to Hopper, copies of which he sent to John
Mauchly and to other close friends and relatives. Berkeley emphasizes from
the onset that the letter was not written to hurt his friend's feelings, but
rather out of deep love and sincerity. He justifies distributing copies of the
letter under the pretext that there is nothing to hide, because so many people
know Hopper's "secret"—even marginal acquaintances who, according to
Berkeley, routinely ask "Has Grace stopped hitting the bottle?" Though
Berkeley emphasizes that "a person changes not for rational reasons but for
emotional reasons," the rest of the letter provides a detailed and rational
analysis of Hopper's worsening addiction.65
Grace Hopper's drinking, according to Berkeley, was the result of a
variety of factors, many of them shadow sides of her most admirable traits.
For instance, Hopper's ability to persevere in the face of obstacles, be they
intellectual, organizational, or cultural, was a characteristic that Berkeley
and others deeply admired. Her career thus far had been punctuated by
personal choices that demonstrated this trait: the first woman to graduate
with a doctorate in mathematics from Yale, one of the first women to
become an officer in the Navy, the third programmer of the first modern
computer, and now a senior manager at the first commercial computer start-
up company. Even her divorce could be seen as a break from the norm,
given the cultural climate of the 1940s. According to Berkeley, it was the

intensity of Hopper's strengths, such as her perseverance, that paradoxically
fueled her addiction:
What are the sources of these dammed-up emotions, worry prohibitions, and proud self-imposed
laws? These ways of behaving are chunks of immaturity, of infantile habits, baby ways of dealing
with grown-up situations. The biggest chunk of all the immaturities I think is your determination to
be your own boss, decide for yourself, and to hell with doing anything you don't choose to do. Oh, I
don't mean that you are consistently head-strong; of course you often do things you do not choose to
do, but you do them in cases where you have not involved all your personality, all of yourself. This
biggest chunk of immaturity I believe probably derives from revolt against family constraints while
you were young, coupled with your innate tendency to be stubborn.66
Berkeley truly believed that Hopper did not intend to become an
alcoholic, but that her potent intellect worked against her and kept her from
seeing her problem for what it was: a disease that was slowly destroying her
ability to work and to interact with family and friends. "Your alcoholic habit
however is of such long standing that it has warped most of the intellectual
processes that you would ordinarily use to attack your alcoholism," he
wrote. "Your fierce passion to reject authority has enlisted very many of
your intellectual capacities to defeat all intellectual approaches."67
Berkeley strongly condemned Hopper's growing tendency to use her
drinking as a means of manipulating friends and family for attention. After
one of her "episodes," Hopper was in such a desperate physical and
psychological state that she typically had to persuade friends to stay with
her until she recovered. Since most of her friends were also hard-working
people, her drinking problem began to interfere with their productivity.
What had started as a personal problem, according to Berkeley, had become
a community issue, and one that threatened the very thing that Hopper
craved most: love and attention from those around her.68
More disturbing, according to Berkeley, were Hopper's recent threats of
suicide, which he believed were cries for help and attention:
Committing suicide cannot solve the problem you have taken into your feelings, of more financing
for EMCC; but several hours of sober, resolute intellectual effort might result in your giving some
very useful suggestions to John [Mauchly]. To fill up one's head with vague pleasant ideas about
committing suicide and other people being sorry is also a lot easier, more childish, and more "ego-
stroking," than concentrated thinking right on the point of an objective problem.69
Berkeley truly believed that Hopper could cure herself. She needed to enlist
her powerful mind to overcome the addiction that gripped her more with

each passing day. She needed to find a different way to deal with her
emotions and her worries, openly communicate with her friends and family,
and maybe even find a less stressful job with more stability. "The EMCC
strain is building up greatly. I think it is wiser for you to avoid that strain,"
wrote Berkeley. "One definite and good possibility for you is another job
soon in some other company, where there will be less strain."70
Berkeley's motivations for helping Hopper to defeat her addiction went
beyond friendship. A pioneer in the computer industry himself, Berkeley
recognized Hopper's talent:
I and many other people know full well what a wonderful intellectual and emotional endowment you
have. Even when you function properly only 70 percent of the time, you are worth to Eckert-Mauchly
Computer Corporation all of the $6500 salary they pay you. . . . I can see in my mind's eye the
marvelous things you could accomplish with the 30 percent of the rest of your time (now wasted),
such as writing, teaching, living, and any other of the other things at which you are so competent.71
Grace Murray Hopper had played a pivotal role in the early years of the
computer industry. Edmund Berkeley sensed rightly, however, that her most
important contributions to the field were yet to come.
A POTENTIAL SAVIOR: THE REMINGTON RAND CORPORATION
As winter set in, the future looked bleak. While Hopper and other EMCC
employees fought their own personal demons, the company as a whole
headed steadily toward bankruptcy. With few options, Presper Eckert and
John Mauchly accepted a less than generous offer from James Rand, the
aging president of the Remington Rand Corporation. At the time of the
purchase, in February 1950, Remington Rand was an established leader in
the office equipment business, selling everything from file cabinets to
punch-card calculating machines. Rand reimbursed American Totalisator
$70,000 less than it had paid for its 40 percent share in 1948, even though
EMCC had already produced the BINAC, was in the process of
constructing the UNIVAC, and had six pending orders. Eckert and Mauchly
received another $100,000, which was promptly disbursed to employees
and suppliers for salary and back payments. Rand also agreed to pay EMCC
59 percent of monies received from its patents, with a minimum annual
guarantee of $5,000.72

Unlike Henry Straus, the aging James Rand had little interest in
computers. Though an inventor himself ,73 he had only a limited knowledge
of electronics. Rand's special assistant, Arthur Draper, had persuaded him to
purchase the struggling Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation, but Rand
viewed the acquisition as a niche product line to add to his company's
diverse product catalogue. Lou Wilson, an EMCC engineer, recalled Rand's
first visit to the laboratory. After being briefed on the technical aspects of
UNIVAC and the potential of computers, Rand responded "That's very
interesting, but why is that an IBM typewriter?" Rand was pointing at the
proposed UNITYPER, the output source for the UNIVAC. The UNITYPER
was a reconfigured IBM typewriter, and Wilson's new boss wanted to know
why he was not using a Remington Rand. "Take that label off that machine!
I don't want it seen here!" said Rand on his way out.74
In the reorganization that followed, the Eckert-Mauchly Computer
Corporation became a subsidiary of Remington Rand and was listed as a
separate division. The new EMCC division was far from autonomous,
however, and Remington Rand's management was grafted onto the
organization. "We were just peons," Betty Snyder Holberton recalled.
"When [Remington Rand] came in, they set up this hierarchy, and I finally
had a boss that I worked for. That was a disaster too, because I'd go to him
with decisions and he'd make the wrong decisions and I had to live with
them."75
Part of the problem, according to Hopper, was that the majority of the
Remington Rand management had little understanding of computing in
general and programming in particular. Hopper and Snyder found
themselves defending the technological choices made by EMCC in the face
of management schooled in mechanical punch-card machines. Typical
arguments that they had to deflect were "We don't think those tapes are ever
going to work" and "We didn't put tapes on our machines; the card is the
thing." Sadly, according to Hopper, Remington Rand management was
looking at information processing from a different mental paradigm. Theirs
was a world of specialized mechanical machines dedicated to a specific
processing task: one machine for accounting, another machine for
inventory, a third machine for billing. All the input and output used by these
machines could be found on paper punch cards. Punch-card information
was "real" because it could be seen and verified with one's own two eyes.
According to the experts, there was no place for bits, Boolean algebra, logic

gates, internal memory, subroutines, and machine code in the office
machine marketplace.76
A difference of opinion concerning UNIVAC's potential also existed
between Eckert and Mauchly and their new boss, General Leslie Groves.
Mauchly in particular had a vivid vision of a commercially viable general-
purpose machine that would help transform science and business. Groves,
the former head of the Manhattan Project, saw an unreliable, unproven, and
costly piece of equipment, which was now his headache as Remington
Rand's director of advanced research. As the man in charge of overall
operations of the Eckert-Mauchly division, Groves had the final say on
strategic business decisions and on funding for research and development.
For Groves, the first thing to do was clean up the financial mess that
Eckert and Mauchly created. The novice businessmen had gravely
underestimated the development costs of UNIVAC, which now approached
$1 million per unit, and Groves sent Remington Rand lawyers to
renegotiate the UNIVAC contracts. Even though the three government
agreements for $300,000 each could not be changed, Remington Rand
successfully broke contracts with Prudential Insurance and A. C. Nielsen
Inc., who expected to purchase UNIVACs at the implausible price of
$150,000 each.77
Next, Mauchly was transferred to the sales department when a
Remington Rand security check revealed that the co-founder of EMCC did
not have proper security clearance. According to Eckert, not only had
Mauchly attended Communist meetings during the 1930s; there was
evidence that his secretary had Communist affiliations as well. "[The
secretary] was sleeping with a guy who was a Communist," Eckert recalled.
"As a matter of fact, he would take her to Communist meetings. Therefore
they decided maybe she's a Communist, and maybe John's a Communist."78
Not only did EMCC's new bosses look unkindly on potential
Communists; it also appeared that Remington Rand was no place for
women. "Women, as far as I could see, had absolutely no future under
Remington Rand, absolutely none," Betty Snyder Holberton recalled.
EMCC's programming expert remembered how poorly Remington Rand
salesmen and management had treated her because her salary rivaled their
own: "You felt it. There was some resentment against a woman because you
had essentially moved up all the way from the bottom."79 Grace Hopper too
sensed the tide turning against women after the takeover: "There were not

the same opportunities for women in larger corporations like Remington
Rand. They were older companies, and the jobs had been stereotyped."
When Hopper had joined Eckert and Mauchly, the sky was the limit
because the field was new, the company was small and flexible, and there
were no gender-based roles. "Eckert and Mauchly were singularly
unprejudiced, but also they were trying to gather together a team to build
that first computer, which no one believed in," she said.80 Betty Snyder
Holberton also recalled a tolerant, flexible company with few traditions or
defined job classifications. "Some days," she said, "you would be
programming, sometimes you would be doing logic, sometimes you would
go out with Mauchly selling. In fact, I can't remember anybody really
telling me what to do. I just did what I felt had to be done and then went to
somebody with what I had done."81
But by the summer of 1950, Snyder was so disillusioned with her new
circumstances that she contemplated leaving Remington Rand and
computers for good. She felt that her new masters were milking her for
information, and that eventually she would be kicked to the curbside,
especially since she did not have a doctorate. That summer, she decided to
marry John Holberton, the man who in 1944 had interviewed her for the
ENIAC programming position. After an intimate ceremony with friends and
family, the couple went on an extended honeymoon to England, where they
visited Maurice Wilkes at Cambridge and inspected the EDSAC. Upon their
return, Betty Snyder Holberton decided to leave Remington Rand rather
than be transferred to New York. She eventually accepted a job at the
Navy's David Taylor Model Basin in Annapolis. (Her husband worked in
Washington.)82
Although Betty Snyder Holberton continued to work with computers at
the David Taylor Model Basin, her brilliant career at the first computer
start-up company had come to an unexpected end. During her time at
EMCC, she had worked with John Mauchly to develop C-10, the object
code for the world's first commercial computer, and her pioneering work
with sort generators would have important ramifications throughout the
1950s. Despite her accomplishments, the weight of Remington Rand's
misogynistic culture, combined with her newly perceived obligations as a
wife, tempered her enthusiasm for computing.
Betty Snyder Holberton's departure and John Mauchly's political
struggles put the new company's programming burdens on Grace Hopper's

shoulders. Hopper, however, had only recently recovered from her struggle
with alcohol addiction. The unexpected death of Henry Straus and the
resultant near bankruptcy of the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation had
thrown Hopper into a deep depression that nearly ended her career. But
sometimes a person's darkest moments in life serve as the catalyst for
change and establish a foundation for future success. Paradoxically, the
takeover of EMCC by Remington Rand would mark the beginning of the
most productive and creative chapter of Hopper's career.
OceanofPDF.com

8    THE EDUCATION OF A COMPUTER
One of the more difficult concepts for historians of technology to explain is
that of invention. From patents and other written evidence, it may be simple
to determine when and where a certain technology came into being. What
remains difficult for the historian is to determine how and why a certain
technology was created. Answering how requires insight into the process of
invention. If we believe Thomas Edison's maxim that invention is 99
percent perspiration and 1 percent inspiration, then it follows that invention
is not a completely serendipitous event. The inventor patiently prepares for
inspiration to strike in a variety of ways. These include being well versed in
the field of inquiry, having access to the essential equipment, and acquiring
skill in empirical learning through long hours of trial and error.
Even more difficult for the historian is determining the moment and
source of inspiration. Often the historian is left with just faint reflections of
the moment as it is recorded in memoirs and interviews after the event. The
accuracy of such reflections may be questionable, in view of the passage of
time between the event and its recording. Moreover, errors can be
magnified by the mind's ability to organize the past into a coherent
progression of events.
Tied to the question how is another question: Why was a certain
technology created by a particular person at a given time and place?
Understanding the motivations for why the inventor added her perspiration
to the process of invention goes beyond altruistic notions of improving
one's society. Personal impulses are conjoined with a variety of external
forces generated by a multitude of actors, be they individuals,
organizations, or social groups. Since these groups often provide the
knowledge, the funding, and the demand that propel the process of
invention forward, it is necessary to understand the underlying milieu in
which the inventor works.1
THE INVENTION OF THE COMPILER
It is generally accepted by historians of technology that Grace Hopper
wrote the first compiler during the winter of 1951-52. According to

interviews and speeches she gave years later, she began working in her
spare time on the programming invention in October 1951. Hopper's
recollections point to motivations ranging from an altruistic desire to allow
"plain, ordinary people" to program to dealing with her own laziness.
Naturally one must be skeptical of such claims, for they were made years
after the fact. In 1951 it was difficult for even a visionary like Hopper to
imagine the eventual ubiquity of computer technology, and one can be
pretty confident that Hopper was not a lazy person.2
Likewise, the inspiration leading to Hopper's compiler design seems to
be blurred by the passage of time. On occasion Hopper has credited Howard
Aiken's Mark III coding machine as the source of her inspiration; at other
times, Betty Snyder's sort generator has been mentioned as providing the
inventive spark. In one speech, Hopper went so far as to credit her
experience playing basketball in college as the inspiration for a program
that "passed" subroutines back and forth.3 To get a better sense of the
compiler's roots, let us first take a look at conditions at the Eckert-Mauchly
Computer Corporation just after the merger with Remington Rand in 1950.
We will then turn to the articles and papers Hopper wrote on compilers
during this same period.

"Captain Marvel and the Incredible Calculator." Courtesy of Archives Center, National Museum of
American History, Smithsonian Institution.
REMINGTON RAND AND THE CHALLENGE OF SALES AND CUSTOMER SUPPORT
As was discussed in the previous chapter, the purchase of EMCC by
Remington Rand brought with it a multitude of organizational challenges.
EMCC, a small computer start-up focused on innovation, did not mesh well
with the culture of a large, corporate organization concerned primarily with
quarterly revenue targets. To get a sense of the conditions at EMCC, let us
turn to Hopper's own assessment and to the views of more than 30
computing pioneers associated with UNIVAC computers during the 1950s.4
From their collective memories emerges a narrative that highlights
Remington Rand's difficulties with constructing a sales and customer
support structure for UNIVAC during the first half of the 1950s. These

difficulties weighed heavily on Hopper and her staff, and generated the
conditions that propelled Hopper to search for a radical technological
solution to ease EMCC's mounting programming crisis.
From the first days of the merger, Remington Rand senior management
was reluctant to invest heavily in what they viewed as an unproven
technology. Instead of embracing a strategy to increase UNIVAC sales in
order to bring down unit costs, the director of advanced research, General
Leslie Groves, decided to cut EMCC's costs and to reduce the production
quota from twelve units per year to six.
With such low sales expectations, there was little incentive to educate
Remington Rand's sizable sales force about the new technology. According
to Cecil Shuler, at the time a Remington Rand tabulating machine salesman
in Nashville, the company did not establish a training program for
tabulating machine salesmen who were interested in learning about the
UNIVAC.5 Moreover, Remington Rand failed to define a commission
policy for sales of UNIVACs, thus depriving salesmen of a financial
incentive to sell the computers. Hopper's former Harvard colleague Fred
Miller remembered the difficulty he had inquiring about purchasing a
UNIVAC for the Naval Proving Ground: "You had to find a salesman and
buy him a drink before he'd talk to you."6
Eventually, in the summer of 1950, Remington Rand's senior staff
established a UNIVAC sales training program. David Savage, referred to as
"the most brilliant person in the Remington Rand Sales organization" and
"comparable to Professor Eckert" in the company's internal newspaper, the
Remington Rand News, was placed in charge of training the sales staff and
preparing UNIVAC marketing materials. To the amazement of EMCC
personnel, Savage developed the programming and applications course
material and marketing handouts during the fall of 1950 without ever
contacting anyone familiar with the UNIVAC, and when Hopper and others
offered assistance, they were viewed as "meddlesome." In an angry memo
to senior Rand executives, John Mauchly wrote: "It is not to [Savage's]
discredit that he has had no previous experience in programming automatic
computers, but we are at a loss to understand how anyone, having accepted
a position demanding experience which he does not have, would fail to seek
all possible help in preparing himself to discharge his duties."7
Tensions between Remington Rand's sales force and the EMCC staff
continued to mount as Hopper and other EMCC programmers found

themselves filling the sales, marketing and customer service void left by a
sales department with neither the knowledge nor the motivation to sell the
expensive, unproven machines. When Rand salesmen did attempt to
represent UNIVAC, their incompetence did more harm than good,
prompting Herbert Mitchell, Hopper's former student at the Harvard
Computation Laboratory and a senior programmer at EMCC, to send a
venomous open letter to senior management:
November 16, 1950
Dear Sales Division,
Please allow me to congratulate you upon your vast knowledge of psychology. You were faced with
the task of convincing the EMCC technical people that they should be the ones to popularize the
UNIVAC System. However, knowing that they were loath to do a "selling" job, you conceived the
brilliant approach of preparing a presentation for customers that was so fantastic, bizarre, and
childish that the EMCC would be shocked into the position of demanding to undertake this
responsibility. . . . You have succeeded admirable.
We at EMCC are frantic. Faced with the alternative of being made the laughing stock of the entire
professional computer field, of losing all possibility of selling any of the computing systems, and
hence of being put out of business, we are eager-no, demanding to be given this job. We are
convinced and ready.
Very truly yours,
Herbert F. Mitchell Jr.8
In response to the new initiative, members of Hopper's staff were
distributed among regional sales offices in order to answer customers'
questions concerning UNIVAC. Jean Bartik, an original ENIAC
programmer, was sent to the Washington sales office in 1950 as the
UNIVAC representative. "They didn't know what to do with me," she
recalled. "Generally, the attitude in the Washington sales force was that
Eckert and Mauchly were a bunch of dreamers and didn't know what they
were talking about."9 Eventually the Rand salesmen got the idea to employ
Bartik and her fantastic machine as a ploy to gain entrée into government
agencies in hopes of selling other office equipment. "I used to got out and
describe UNIVAC and then they would hustle me out of the room, and then
the salesmen would sell them typewriters."10
Another Hopper programmer, Adele Mildred Koss, was assigned to
Commonwealth Edison when the utility approached the Chicago sales
office concerning a potential purchase of a UNIVAC for billing and payroll.

At the time, Koss was 7 months pregnant and working part time. Since her
pregnancy precluded travel, Commonwealth Edison management was
forced to come to Philadelphia in order to discuss their billing needs. In the
end, the utility did not buy a UNIVAC, but instead purchased an IBM 701
when it became available. Koss recalled: "I remember Grace Hopper's
memo to management saying 'This is a multi-million-dollar client and you
are not treating them like one. You have only assigned a part time
programmer to work with.' "11
The Commonwealth Edison fiasco was not the only matter that made
Hopper's blood boil over the lack of support from Remington Rand
management. Beginning with the delivery of the first operational UNIVAC
to the Census Bureau on 30 March 1951, the Eckert-Mauchly division was
now faced with the task of customer support. According to Hopper,
"nobody had realized what it was going to take to support the new user."12
Eckert-Mauchly's programmers scrambled to help the new customers in
any way they could. Besides developing subroutine packages, Hopper and
others visited installations in order to assess computational needs and plan
application programs. Much of their effort was spent educating the
personnel assigned to operate UNIVAC. Hopper once again relied on her
teaching experience, developing curriculum and writing lectures in order to
get UNIVAC customers up to speed. Her operational experience at Harvard
also served her well as she attempted to set standards and operating
procedures both for Eckert-Mauchly and for customers' installations. "We
had to introduce some kind of system and discipline to it," Hopper recalled,
"and that's how I eventually got put in charge of them. I realized the things
that had to be done and I pounded on management until they too accepted
the concepts."13 As the demand for programming and application software
increased with each installed UNIVAC, so too did the pressures on Hopper
and her programming staff .
THE EDUCATION OF A COMPUTER
For Hopper, the two years that followed the merger with Remington Rand
were some of the most trying of her career. The senior programmer's
abilities were stretched to the limit, not to mention the added pressures
associated with her managerial duties in the maturing company. But out of
crisis flowed resourcefulness, and starting in the fall of 1951 Hopper spent

what little spare time she had searching for a technical solution for her
predicament.
The 
mathematician-turned-inventor documented 
her 
seven-month
creative journey in a paper aptly titled "The Education of a Computer,"
which she presented on 3 May 1952 at the Pittsburgh meeting of the
Association of Computing Machinery.14 Though Hopper had been sharing
her thoughts and ideas with John Mauchly, Betty Holberton, and other close
colleagues, it was at the ACM meeting that "automatic programming" was
introduced to the greater computing community. Hopper claimed that many
in the audience that day were skeptical of her automated coding aspirations.
She also noted that about 100 copies of the paper that she had brought from
Philadelphia were distributed, which suggests that even those who were
skeptical about automatic programming had an interest in finding easier
ways to program computers.15 The paper itself represents Hopper's views
circa May 1952, which differ in some respects from her recollections in
later interviews and speeches. First and foremost, the central motivations
for automatic programming were far more personal in the 1952 paper. With
the construction of a functioning compiler, Hopper hoped, "the programmer
may return to being a mathematician." Though Hopper had sincerely
enjoyed the challenge of coding since first being introduced to computers 8
years earlier, she wrote, "the novelty of inventing programs wears off and
degenerates into the dull labor of writing and checking programs. The duty
now looms as an imposition on the human brain."16 By teaching computers
to program themselves, Hopper would be free to explore other intellectual
pursuits.
In accord with the first chapter in the Mark I Manual for Operation, the
paper begins with a historical narrative identifying the significant figures in
computing history. Pascal, Leibniz, Babbage, Aiken, Mauchly, and Wilkes
get special mention, while von Neumann, Eckert, Holberton, and Goldstine
are notably absent. Hopper writes that her time with Aiken was instrumental
in developing the earliest form of subroutines, and that the unique coding
machine developed for Mark III represented a hardware solution to the
concept of a library of subroutines that could be called upon by means of a
mechanical button. Once again she mentions Mauchly's influence
concerning symbolic programming solutions represented by short-order
code, and she praises Wilkes for his book, which gave the programming
community a shared vocabulary for the concepts of subroutines and

subroutine libraries.17 These computing pioneers, according to Hopper,
created machines and methods that removed the arithmetical chore from the
mathematician. This chore, however, was replaced by the new burden of
writing code, thus turning mathematicians into programmers. Hopper's
paper boldly offers the next step in the history of computing: shifting the
human-machine interface once again so as to free the mathematician from
this new burden, and making "the compiling routine be the programmer and
perform all those services necessary to the production of a finished
program."18
Hopper utilizes the metaphor of a factory to make abstract programming
concepts more concrete for her audience. On a production line, inputs were
raw materials that were acted upon by an assortment of instruments and
tools. Human beings dictated the controls that organized the process, and
the operation produced output ranging from automobiles to cans of
tomatoes. Solving mathematical problems, according to Hopper, was no
different. Inputs were alphanumerical data and tools consisted of formulas,
tables, pencil, paper, and the arithmetic processing power of the brain. The
controls of the process were provided by the mathematician, and the output
was the final result.19
The achievement of Aiken, Mauchly, and Wilkes replaced pencil, paper,
and the brain with mechanical hardware. But the human was still left to
analyze and break down a mathematical problem into its constituent parts,
provide step-by-step controls for the process via a program, write that
program in notation best understood by the machine, and coordinate the
introduction of input. The user was also faced with the significant problem
of identifying and correcting for errors. The more complicated the problem,
the greater the chance of error.
With the use of a compiler supported by a library of subroutines, Hopper
offered to fully automate the computing process:
He [the mathematician] is supplied with a catalogue of subroutines. No longer does he need to have
available formulas or tables of elementary functions. He does not even need to know the particular
instruction code used by the computer. He needs only to be able to use the catalogue to supply
information to the computer about his problem.20
The "catalogue of subroutines" was a menu that listed all the input
information needed by the compiler to look up subroutines in the library,
assemble them in the proper order, manage address assignments, allocate

memory, transcribe code, and create a final program in the computer's
specific machine code.21 A subroutine entry in the catalogue consisted of a
subroutine "call-number" and the order in which arguments, controls, and
results were to be stated. The call-number identified the type of subroutine
(t for trigonometric, x for exponential, etc.), specified transfer of control
(entrance and exit points in each subroutine), and set operating and memory
requirements. In fact, language such as "call-number" and "library"
compelled Hopper to name her program generator a "compiler," for it
compiled subroutines into a program in much the same way that historians
compile books into an organized bibliography.22
For Hopper, the benefits of such an automated programming system were
enormous. She describes a future in which programs could be written and
debugged in hours instead of weeks. The generated results would be
accurate, since all subroutines in the library would have been fully
debugged and tested. The greatest benefit, however, excited the imagination
of the most ardent skeptic. A program generated by a compiler could not
only be run as a stand alone program whenever desired; it also "may itself
be placed in the library as a more advanced subroutine." This suggested that
subroutine libraries could increase in size and complexity at an exponential
rate, thus enabling mathematicians to solve problems once deemed
impossible or impractical.23
Hopper ends the paper by establishing a short-term roadmap for the
future development of compilers. She describes a "type-B" compiler,
which, by means of multiple passes, could supplement computer
information provided by the programmer with self-generated information.
Such a compiler, she imagines, would be able to automate the process of
solving complex differential equations. To obtain a program to compute f(x)
and its first n derivatives, only f(x) and the value of n would have to be
given. The formulas for the derivatives of f(x) would be derived by repeated
application of the type-B compiler.24
Hopper also admits that the current version of her compiler did not have
the ability to produce efficient code. For example, if both sine and cosine
were called for in a routine, a smart programmer would figure out how to
have the program compute them simultaneously. Hopper's compiler would
embed both a sine subroutine and a cosine subroutine in sequence, thus
wasting valuable memory and processing time. Hopper states boldly that

the skills of an experienced programmer could eventually be distilled and
made available to the compiler. She concludes as follows:
With some specialized knowledge of more advanced topics, UNIVAC at present has a well-grounded
mathematical education fully equivalent to that of a college sophomore, and it does not forget and
does not make mistakes. It is hoped that its undergraduate course will be completed shortly and it
will be accepted as a candidate for a graduate degree.25
DISTRIBUTED INVENTION: COMPILER RESEARCH EXPANDS
After publicly announcing the compiler concept, Hopper asked members of
her programming staff to help turn her invention into something more
substantial. Since there was no formal support from Remington Rand
management at this time, those from Rand's Computation Analysis
Laboratory who joined Hopper did so on their spare time.
In the summer of 1952, Hopper's assembled team began to test the
programming aptitude of the compiler (aptly named A-0) against teams of
seasoned programmers. Richard Ridgway, a Hopper programmer who
joined Eckert-Mauchly in 1950, reported the results of one of these studies
on 8 September 1952 at a meeting of the Association of Computing
Machinery in Toronto. The equation tested was y = e−x sin(x/2). Given a set
of input parameters for x, the Computation Analysis Laboratory first solved
for y using what Ridgway referred to as the "conventional" method, which
was similar to the batch process method developed by Hopper and Bloch at
Harvard. First, a mathematician analyzed the equation and broke it down
into a series of arithmetic steps (20 minutes). A programmer then reduced
the steps to computer instruction code, utilizing a code manual, tables, and
formulas in the process (480 minutes). The completed program was
checked for errors (240 minutes), transcribed onto magnetic tape (45
minutes), and rechecked for errors (40 minutes) after printing out the tape's
content (20 minutes). Finally, an operator, following operation instructions,
fed the program into computer memory along with pertinent inputs (31
minutes). UNIVAC then ran the program and produced results (4 minutes).
In the end, Ridgway reported, the problem was solved from start to finish
by a team of three people in 860 minutes.26
The same problem was then solved with Hopper's A-0 compiler. Once
again a mathematician analyzed the problem and broke it down into
arithmetic steps. This time, however, the mathematician selected

corresponding subroutines from the subroutine library and wrote down the
appropriate information to describe these subroutines with the aid of the
subroutine library catalogue (20 minutes). The resultant information sheet
was transcribed on tape (10 minutes) and proofread (5 minutes) after
generating a printout of the tape's content (5 minutes). The tape was then
fed into the computer (2 minutes), which prompted the compiler to look up
the appropriate subroutines from the library tape, assemble them in the
proper order, manage addresses and memory, and generate a program in C-
10 UNIVAC machine code (90 seconds). UNIVAC ran the compiler-
generated program and produced the final results (5 minutes). In the case of
the A-0 compiler, one person, a mathematician, solved the problem in 48½
minutes.27 (See table 8.1.)
Although the test results appear to be a smashing endorsement of the A-0
compiler, Ridgway dedicates a substantial amount of his paper to the
inefficiency of run-programs. (A "run-program" was the final product of the
compiler process. Today, such a program is called object or machine code.)
During the 5 months since Hopper had introduced compilers, critics had
pointed out that run-programs generated by compilers were less efficient
than those created by seasoned programmers. Hopper's experience with
Richard Bloch at Harvard was evidence that a creative programmer could
use a variety of tricks and tactics to generate code that was 30-40 percent
more efficient than that produced by the A-0.
TABLE 8.1
Time preparation comparison: A-0 compiler vs. conventional programming.
Conventional
programming
Compiler
programming
Efficiency
ratio
Mathematician/programmer's
time
740 minutes
   20 minutes
   37 : 1
Mathematician/operator's
time
105 minutes
   20 minutes
  5.3 : 1
UNIVAC processing time
  35 minutes
  8.5 minutes
  4.1 : 1
Total preparation time
880 minutes
48.5 minutes
18.2 : 1

At first glance, program inefficiency did not appear to be significant in
Ridgway's example, for the more inefficient compiled program ran for 5
minutes whereas the programmer-generated code took only 4 minutes. But,
programmers argued, that extra minute was relevant if the same program
had to be run multiple times. In fact, the vast majority of problems solved
by data-processing facilities in the early 1950s were repeated computations.
If Ridgway's compiled program were to be run 1,000 times, 1,000 extra
minutes of computer time would be required.28 The extra computer time
generated by the 1,000 runs made the conventional method more time-
efficient overall. Furthermore, an hour of computer time was far more
costly in 1952 than an hour of programmer time. In most cases it was both
more efficient and more cost-effective to hire a team of programmers and
operators in order to limit computer use. (See table 8.2.)
TABLE 8.2
A-0 compiler vs. conventional programming method: 1,000 program runs.
Conventional
programming
Compiler
programming
Efficiency
ratio
Mathematician/programmer's
time
   740 minutes             20
minutes
 37 : 1
Mathematician/operator's
time
   105 minutes      20 minutes 5.3 : 1
UNIVAC processing time
4,000 minutes 5,000 minutes    4 : 5
Total preparation time
4,845 minutes 5,040 minutes 1 : 1.1
Ridgway acknowledged that using compilers took up more computer
time, both as a result of compiling a program and as a consequence of
inefficient code. But "in this case," he argued, "the compiler used was the
'antique,' or A-0, the first to be constructed and the most inefficient."
Ridgway was confident that Hopper and her team at the Computation
Analysis Laboratory would construct new compilers that "squeezed" coding
into "neat, efficient, and compact little packages of potential
computation."29

In the months that followed the presentation of Ridgway's paper, the
Computation Analysis Laboratory addressed the problem of compiler
efficiency. Hopper admitted that the A-0 compiler, despite its inherent logic,
was cumbersome to use.30 For instance, if the A-0 was processing a
subroutine and that subroutine required transfer of control to another
subroutine, the A-0 did not know where the second subroutine began. This
forced the compiler to transfer control from the first subroutine to a
temporary storage location while keeping track of the fact that a control
transfer to the unprocessed subroutine was still necessary. Since a
programmer could create a flow chart of the entire program before coding,
such intermediate steps could be avoided.
The group's research efforts were rewarded in the early winter of 1953.
The A-1 compiler was completed and tested by January, and much of the
cumbersomeness of A-0 had been refined and eliminated. By the spring of
1953, an even cleaner compiler, the A-2, was developed by Margaret
Harper, Frank Delaney, Mildred Koss, James McGarvey, and Richard
Ridgway under the direction of Herbert Mitchell and Richard Woltman.
Hopper had recruited Mitchell and Woltman from the Harvard Computation
Laboratory and felt comfortable turning over the day-to-day project
management of compiler development to them.31
A closer look at the manual for the A-2 compiler (produced by the
Computation Analysis Laboratory during the summer of 1953) suggests
that, despite the significant improvements over the A-0 compiler, automatic
programming had its limitations. Hopper's vision of intuitive, user-friendly,
hardware-independent pseudo-codes generating efficient running programs
was far from realization. The A-2 provided a three-address "pseudo-code"
specifically designed for the UNIVAC I 12-character standards. The manual
defined "pseudo-code" as "computer words other than the machine (C-10)
code, designed with regard to facilitating communications between
programmer and computer."32 Today we refer to it as source code. Since
pseudo-code could not be directly executed by the UNIVAC I, the A-2
compiler included a translator routine which converted the pseudo-code into
machine code. (See table 8.3.)
The manual states that the pseudo-code is "a new language which is
easier to learn and much shorter and quicker to write."33
TABLE 8.3
Examples of pseudo-codes from the A-2 compiler subroutine library.

Add
AA0004
F00001
Logarithm
LAU118
F00001
Subtract
AS0004
F00001
Root
RNA154
F00001
Multiply
AM0004
F00001
Exponential
X+A096
F00001
Divide
AD0004
F00001
Change sign
AN1002
F00001
Cosine
TC0100
F00001
Input generator
GMI000
F00001
Sine
TS0106 F00001 Test
QZ0004
F00001
Arctan
TAT118 F00001 Type in
BTI002 F00001
Raise to a power
APN048
F00001
Print out
YT0004
F00001
Indeed, it was easier compared to manually writing machine code. If the
user wanted to solve for the cosine of a, for instance, she would look up the
appropriate pseudo-code in the subroutine library catalogue.
The familiar notation
y = cosa
was written
TCO(A) 000(Y).
Note that the pseudo-code call-words conformed to UNIVAC I's twelve-
character structure, with parentheses in the first example signifying the
relative working storage address of the quantity called for. In most cases the

second character correlated with the subroutine operation it depicted, such
as S for sine and M for multiply. But Hopper admitted years later that her
team, at the time, could not see very far past the constraints of the UNIVAC
hardware:
I think we often forget how much our surroundings influence our research decisions. All those things
that we're aware of and yet are not aware of when we make decisions. And the fact was that we were
living in an environment which consisted of a 12 alpha-decimal word, and it became perfectly
obvious to us that the entire world operated in 12 alpha-decimal characters of which the first three
defined an operation, the next three one input, the next three another input, and the last three the
result.34
Despite the limitations of A-2 pseudo-code, Hopper and her team
incorporated innovations that made the compiler more user-friendly. Unlike
the A-0, the A-2 now made two sweeps of the pseudo-code. The first pass
generated a record to help the compiler make more efficient code on the
second pass. The record, which was a list of operations, could also be
printed out and serve as a general check of the compilation before the final
running program was completed. Normal printouts during compiling, such
as "end translation," "end sweep 1," and "end compile," informed the user
about the stage of the process. The most groundbreaking change was the A-
2's ability to debug pseudo-code and flag errors automatically. The
compiler generated twelve-character error codes that captured the nature of
the error, a miraculous innovation for any programmer who had
experienced the pain and monotony of debugging computer code. (See table
8.4.)
Although the A-2 compiler had been designed for novice programmers,
Hopper understood that in order for it to be more widely adopted her team
would have to add features that would be appreciated by skilled
programmers. The A-2 made it easier to modify compiled programs.
Entrances, exits, and references to working storage could be manipulated
manually, thus allowing parts of a program to be reused with other operands
in another section of the run program. For instance, if the A-2 generated the
same subroutine in two different segments of the run program, a skilled
programmer could now remove one, producing a more efficient final run
program. Furthermore, modifying programs was easier, and changes could
be made without the need to restructure the entire routine.35
TABLE 8.4
Examples of error messages generated by A-2 compiler.

RINFOΔ WORD?R
A word of information fails tests:
transcription error.
RTΔMCH ΔINFOR
The compiler can store no more than
60 
descriptive 
words: 
memory
exceeded.
RNOTΔI NΔLIBR
The word of information is a call
word for a subroutine not in the
library.
RFULLΔ TAPEΔR
The 1955 data blocks on the running
tape have been used.
ROPΔSE QΔOUTR
The information lists an operation
number that is not in the proper
sequence.
RNOTΔS TOREDΔ
The 
programmer 
called 
for 
a
generative routine that is not in the
library.
COMPILING ROUTINES
In the May 1953 issue of Computers and Automation, Grace Hopper
heralded the laboratory's successes in an article titled "Compiling
Routines." She predicted that the next generation of compilers, coupled
with efficient subroutines that had been tested and proved, would produce
machine code as efficiently as the average programmer. Subsequent tests
had shown that "the reduction in programming time for those classes of
problems upon which compilers have been tested is incredible, actually
little short of fantastic." Nonetheless, Hopper reminded the programming
community that these compilers were still in the prototype stage, with
limited availability of tested subroutine libraries."36
Hopper focused attention on another major benefit of compilers: pseudo-
code. Pseudo-code freed the user from the constraints of the machine's

hardware, for the compiler, not the user, was responsible for changing the
pseudo-code into machine-specific code that the computer could process. In
her first paper she had focused on the time benefits for the
mathematician/programmer, but by the time of the May 1953 paper Hopper
had realized that pseudo-code exhibited two revolutionary attributes.
First, the designer of the compiler now was a linguist. That is, the
compiler programmer had the ability to design the syntax of the pseudo-
code. Hopper noted that for mathematical problems this was comparatively
easy to do, since mathematical symbolism had become standardized over
the years. Therefore, a compiler designer could have the pseudo-code match
accepted mathematical terms: cos, add, sin, exp, and so on. Hopper
emphasized that what was relatively straightforward for mathematical
pseudo-code was problematic for the pseudo-code of other imagined
commercial compilers. For example, a logical, intuitive pseudo-code would
have to be planned out and standardized for accounting and payroll
compilers. "If 'cos' indicates cosine," Hopper writes, "why not use 'foa' for
'federal old age' or 'ssd' for social security deduction?"37A well-constructed
pseudo-code had the potential to make computers available to users other
than programmers and mathematicians. Not only would it be far easier to
learn than machine code; its intuitive logic would help users debug their
work. "I felt," Hopper recalled, "that sooner or later . . . our attitude should
be not that people should have to learn how to code for the computer but
rather the computer should learn how to respond to people because I figured
we weren't going to teach the whole population of the United States how to
write computer code, and that therefore there had to be an interface built
that would accept things which were people-oriented and then use the
computer to translate to machine code."38
The second benefit of pseudo-code, program portability, would have far
more meaningful ramifications for the future, though it appears that at the
time the article was written Hopper thought of the benefit more as a nicety.
She mentioned that compilers could be designed to program the machine
code of any computer. "A problem stated in a basic pseudo-code can thus be
prepared for running on one or more computers if the corresponding
compiler and subroutine library is available," she wrote. Just as the
compiler freed the user from knowing how to program in machine
language, pseudo-code was now liberated from a specific type of hardware.
A payroll pseudo-code could run on a UNIVAC or an IBM computer, so

long as the appropriate compiler was running on both. Hopper stated that as
of May 1952 such a benefit was theoretical, insofar as her laboratory had
tried it only once, with inconclusive results.39
In the same article, Hopper compared compilers to another example of
"automatic programming" that had gained momentum since her "Education
of a Computer" presentation: the interpreter. An interpreter is a program
that executes a pseudo-code much like a compiler. The difference lies in the
output of the execution. Whereas a compiler generates a program, an
interpreter "interprets" a pseudo-code that refers to a subroutine and
immediately performs the subroutine, thus generating intermediate results.
Therefore, no permanent set of machine instructions is produced. Hopper
listed the following steps as occurring during the interpreter process:
1.  Transfer arguments to the subroutine or to some standard location
2.  Mark position in the main routine
3.  Transfer control to the subroutine
4.  Carry out the subroutine
5.  Transfer control back to the main routine
6.  Retrieve results from the subroutine or standard location
Though interpreters were simpler to use than programming in machine
code, Hopper believed the approach was a step in the wrong direction.
Compiling the A-2 pseudo-code was time consuming in the short term, but
the resultant run-program eliminated these six interpretive steps and thus
could run more efficiently. In her final comparison of interpreters and
compilers, Hopper wrote: "In both cases, the advantage over manual
programming is very great, once the basic subroutines have been tested and
proved. The saving of time for a compiler is usually greater."40
DISTRIBUTED INVENTION: EXPANDING THE NETWORK OF INNOVATION
The A-2 compiler, though still cumbersome in many respects, was, in
Hopper's opinion, robust enough to be distributed to UNIVAC I
installations for evaluation. But convincing people to use the experimental
programming system turned out to be far more difficult than Hopper
anticipated, for the advantages of compiled programs were not readily
apparent to most: "We found that we had to change from being research and

development people and turn ourselves into salesmen and get out and sell
the idea of writing programs this way."41
On 16 July 1953, the Computation Analysis Laboratory turned its
attention from inventing to selling and sponsored the first automatic
programming workshop in Washington, D.C. With the Census Bureau as a
co-sponsor, Hopper invited about 90 programmers and technicians from the
various UNIVAC I installations to the one-day event. Hopper's staff
presented lectures on the A-2 compiler and provided demonstrations on the
Census Bureau's UNIVAC machine. Hopper believed the overall reaction to
be favorable, and many of the installations agreed to test the compilers
during actual day-to-day operations.
Through the fall and winter, installations with experienced UNIVAC
programmers fared better than those without, which suggested that the A-2
was not as simple to use as had first been believed. Betty Holberton, now a
senior programmer at the Navy's David Taylor Ship Basin in Annapolis,
had little difficulty applying the A-2 to problem solving. But Emil Schell,
the head of mathematical computation at the Air Force's Office of the Air
Comptroller, was less successful in applying the new technology. "The
writing of the pseudo-code words, the specifications for generating
subroutines, and the use of the modifying indicator in 'own codes' involve
decisions of a sort we are ill-equipped to make," wrote Schell. In order to
help his installation get up to speed, he requested that Hopper send more
and better expository materials and operating instructions.42
By December 1953, the Census Bureau, the Office of the Air
Comptroller, the Army Map Service, the David Taylor Model Basin,
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, New York University, and the Bureau of
Ships were experimenting with the A-2 compiler. The Computation
Analysis Laboratory gained valuable feedback from these installations,
including the identification of subroutine and pseudo-code errors and
suggestions concerning future iterations of the compiler system. Some
installations went as far as to rewrite code, which was then evaluated by
Hopper and incorporated into later versions of A-2. For example, during the
winter of 1954 Nora Moser of the Army Map Service sent Hopper a list of
innovations that the Army Map Service had incorporated into the A-2,
including more efficient input and output generators, rerun provisions, and
an editing subroutine library. Moser had also copied the changes onto

magnetic tape and sent them to Betty Holberton at the David Taylor Model
Basin for further evaluation.43
Hopper's constructed network of compiler developers was unique for a
variety of reasons. Whereas Howard Aiken had isolated the Harvard
Computation Laboratory from other computer projects, Hopper realized that
the process of invention could not be confined to the artificial boundaries of
her staff or even her company. Information flowed smoothly between
Remington Rand and other organizations, with Hopper serving as the
conductor of invention rather than its dictator. Though she insisted that
copies of all correspondence be passed through her, Hopper did this in order
to better orchestrate the efforts of others rather than to control the direction
of compiler development.44
Moreover, Hopper's network of invention attracted the enthusiastic
participation of many women in the programming field. Nora Moser (of the
Army Map Service), Betty Holberton (at the David Taylor Basin), Margaret
Harper (of the Remington Rand/ Naval Aviation Supply Office), and
Mildred Koss (of Remington Rand) viewed the compiler as more than just a
new programming concept. Indeed, they saw it as the centerpiece of an
innovative automated system of programming that they had a hand in
creating. Though posterity identifies Hopper as the leader of this
programming revolution, one must not forget the many men and women
who helped to transform Hopper's original prototype into a viable
commercial automated programming system.
Hopper nurtured her growing distributed network of invention by
arranging a second workshop on automatic programming, held on 1
December 1953 at the Pentagon and co-sponsored by the Air Force. Hopper
kicked off the workshop with a paper titled "Progress in Automatic
Programming." Once again her staff provided descriptive lectures and
demonstrations, but this time multiple UNIVAC installations reported on
the benefits and difficulties associated with applying compilers to real-
world computational situations.45
The audience of more than 100 also included many people not associated
with UNIVAC installations. Hopper recalled that representatives from
government agencies and businesses equipped with IBM machinery came
to learn more about the new concept in programming. In fact, the December
conference was not the first attempt by Hopper and her team to educate the
wider computing community about the A-2. At a September 1953 meeting

of the Association of Computing Machinery at MIT, Hopper organized a
panel that served as a "coming out" party for her automatic programming
faithful.
The fact that Hopper wholeheartedly welcomed non-UNIVAC personnel
to learn about the A-2 compiler sheds some light on her beliefs concerning
intellectual property. Hopper did not view software as a commodity to be
patented and sold. Rather, she took her cue from the mathematics
community. Like most other academics, mathematicians shared information
universally, in order to advance knowledge. Though individual efforts were
acknowledged by colleagues, advancement in the field was contingent on a
communal view of information, community validation, and evolutionary
advancement based on previous work. In the same way, software, according
to Hopper, was a public good to be shared freely among all users.
Complicating software development with secrecy would only inhibit
innovation. Learning from the Harvard Computation Laboratory's tendency
to isolate itself from other computer developments, Hopper came to realize
that a distributed network of inventors, each with his or her particular
technical perspective,46 could sustain a faster rate of innovation in the long
term compared to an individual inventor or even an isolated team of
inventors. The freeware and open source movements of the present day
preserve this doctrine. The roots, however, go back to Hopper and her team
of distributed inventors.
After Hopper's remarks concerning general compiler developments, two
of her protégés, Adele Mildred Koss and Harry Kahrimanian, presented
compiler-related papers. Koss discussed an "editing generator" that could
manipulate raw results into a form suitable for printing. That is, the editor
supplied titles, headings, and page numbers, suppressed unnecessary zeros,
and inserted decimal points and plus and minus signs. Koss's editor did this
by means of a special type of compiler called a generator. The generator
contained what Hopper referred to as "coded coding," which, on the basis
of specifications inserted by the user, expanded into a limited subroutine
containing the controls necessary to process the data.47
Kahrimanian's paper, titled "Analytical Differentiation by a Digital
Computer," described a differential compiler that represented the fulfillment
of the type-B compiler that Hopper had written about in "The Education of
a Computer."48 In view of the difficulty Hopper experienced solving for
differential equations on the Harvard Mark I, including von Neumann's

famous implosion problem, Kahrimanian's differentiator seemed too good
to be true. The user had only to provide a specific function in the pseudo-
code and indicate the number of n derivatives, either complete or partial, to
be generated. The operator routine of the differentiator would then guide the
computer to produce the subsequent formulas for the nth derivative. The
formulas derived by the operator routine could be immediately compiled to
construct a program for numerical evaluation. Comparing the work of Koss
and Kahrimanian with other papers presented at the ACM conference, and
considering the nature of the discussions that followed, Hopper came to this
conclusion: "It was evident that Remington Rand's Programming Research
Group had progressed considerably further in the development and
application of automatic programming techniques than had any other single
or combined effort in this field."49
MAKING CONVERTS
One of the non-Remington Rand participants impressed by the A-2 and the
differentiator was Carl Hammer. Hammer had first been exposed to data-
processing equipment as a research associate in the T. J. Watson Scientific
Computing Laboratory at Columbia University. During the fall of 1953 he
was employed by the Franklin Institute to study the industrial applications
of computers. Hammer successfully used the differentiator and the A-2
compiler to solve a difficult differential equation concerning roller bearings
and oil viscosity. Much to his amazement, he solved the problem in a day.
"I wrote twenty lines of coding for an A-2 compiler to solve the whole
problem," he recalled, "and here they'd been working for months and years
sometimes on these things."50
Hammer was so impressed, in fact, that he wrote an article for an
engineering magazine describing the A-2 compiler and its revolutionary
consequences for engineering and science. "I tried to point out to the people
that this was a remarkable thing," he recalled. "We could speed up industry,
science, all the applications we could learn more, and all that from the
power of this machine."51 In 1955, Hammer quit his job and joined
Remington Rand. From 1955 to 1957, he headed the European UNIVAC
Computing Center.
Not all programmers were as enthusiastic as Hammer about the potential
of automatic programming. Herb Grosch,52 a notable computer pioneer who

headed up computer operations at General Electric (a UNIVAC customer in
1953), became a vocal opponent of automatic programming. Grosch and his
fellow "Neanderthals" (as they came to be called as the debate intensified
during the 1950s) continued to argue that programming took far too much
creativity and dexterity for the human being to be replaced by the very
machine he was manipulating. Furthermore, most commercial programs
were task-specific or company-specific, so it made more sense for a team of
experienced programmers to design and implement handcrafted codes that
met the particular needs of the client.
Reflecting on the negative reactions of some of her fellow programmers,
Hopper expressed the belief that arguments focusing on "efficiency" and
"creativity" covered far baser motivations: "Well, you see, someone learns a
skill and works hard to learn that skill, and then if you come along and say,
'you don't need that, here's something else that's better,' they are going to
be quite indignant." In fact, Hopper felt that by the mid 1950s many
programmers viewed themselves as "high priests," for only they could
communicate with such sophisticated machines. They served as the
intermediaries between user and computer, and automatic programming
jeopardized their exclusive position.53
Hopper was not the only one who came to this conclusion. John Backus,
developer of Speedcode and later of FORTRAN, was conscious of the
programming community's reaction to his contributions: "Just as
freewheeling westerners developed a chauvinistic pride in their
frontiersmanship and a corresponding conservatism, so many programmers
of the freewheeling 1950s began to regard themselves as members of a
priesthood guarding skills and mysteries far too complex for ordinary
mortals."54 But the more the likes of Backus and Hopper preached the
benefits of automatic programming, the more concerned the programming
priesthood became about the spreading technology.
WINNING THE HEARTS AND SOULS OF MANAGEMENT
If convincing fellow programmers of the benefits of automatic
programming was challenging, persuading senior management at
Remington Rand to invest money in the new technology was nearly
impossible. For many executives in the 1950s, the very notion of the
computer as a business technology itself was hard to grasp, aside from the

question of how these machines worked. "It was totally hopeless," Hopper
recalled, "to explain to anybody that you thought computers could put
together programs because it was obvious to everyone that computers could
only do arithmetic; they couldn't write programs. And no matter how much
you explained they weren't really writing a program, they were only piecing
one together, people just didn't understand that."55
By December 1953, Hopper felt it was critical to make management
understand the importance of automatic programming Until then, Hopper
and her network of programmers had worked on compiler technology
during their spare time. But the success of the prototypes and the growing
demand required full-time resources and personnel. On 31 December 1953,
Hopper drew up a report aimed at convincing Remington Rand to invest in
her concept of automatic programming. Her "plea for a budget," as she
referred to it, not only chronicled the development of compiler technology
but also addressed the commercial potential and implications of automatic
programming in far more depth than any of her writing up to that point.56
Grace Hopper. Courtesy of Library of Congress.

Hopper's report highlights a growing reality that few in or out of the
computer industry comprehended as of 1953: the cost of programming,
operating, and maintaining computers was increasing and would continue to
do so at an alarming rate. These rising costs resulted from a variety of
factors. First and foremost, the accepted method for constructing programs
was labor-intensive. Creating a basic commercial application such as a
payroll routine required a team of mathematically trained programmers. By
1953 they were in short supply. Those with experience commanded high
salaries, and those without experience required expensive and time-
consuming training. As computer hardware proliferated, the shortage of
skilled labor would only intensify.
Worse, Hopper reminded her audience of executives, there was no such
thing as a static commercial program, for changing business conditions
required continuous modifications. "A change in government regulations,
city ordinances, union contracts, or requirements of company management,
even a simple change, such as income tax exemptions, may invalidate not
only parts of runs, but whole runs in such a base problem," she wrote.57 The
problem was exacerbated by the fact that most commercial program
rewrites had to be made on extremely short notice, thus requiring
companies that operated computers to maintain permanent teams of
programmers. The way out of this costly conundrum, according to Hopper,
was through the implementation of compiler techniques. A pseudo-code for
payroll could be updated quickly, and the run-program could be recompiled
at a moment's notice. The changes were checked automatically and human
error was eliminated, thus ensuring the accuracy of the computed results.
Hopper concluded that the reduction in staff would result in a significant
reduction in costs.
The most striking and innovative aspect of Hopper's report, however,
concerned a radically new way to think about executive decision making:
In any business or industry a large quantity of information exists on paper. This information in
random, unprocessed form is of little or no value to management as a basis for decision making.
When information is organized and processed, it becomes "intelligence." Effective management,
then, relies on the ability to process information to be used in decision making.58
Not only did the information have to be processed accurately; it had to be
processed quickly. Hopper noted that there existed a whole set of statistical
studies and tabulations—known to be useful to management—that were not

typically made. Even with the aid of a computer and a programming staff,
this set of problems could not be calculated rapidly enough to supply the
needed intelligence before a decision had to be made. Compiling routines,
combined with the speed of electronic circuits, opened unexplored
intellectual territory not only for scientists and engineers but also for
business leaders. Automatic programming could precipitate a revolution in
decision making.59
"A monumental effort," Hopper told Remington Rand management, "is
being expended by IBM, RCA, Raytheon, CPC (National Cash),
Consolidated Engineering, Burroughs and all their users and prospective
users, and by their affiliated university installations, to develop similar
[automated programming] techniques for use with their digital computers."
Though she did not reveal her sources, Hopper said: "Through personal
contacts, it has been determined that our closest competitors are making an
all-out effort to approach the level that Remington Rand has attained and to
surpass us."
In her final call to arms, Hopper demanded that "personnel be devoted
100% of their time to the development of the compiler techniques and
particularly to the development of the A-3 compiler."60 Risking her position
at Remington Rand, Hopper was ultimately successful in creating a separate
department to further explore automatic programming. In a letter to the
Army Map Service dated 10 February 1954, the new Director of Automatic
Programming thanked her distributed development team and shared with
them her success in institutionalizing automatic programming at Remington
Rand:
The fact that there is today some hope of building an automatic programming group is due to your
efforts on A-2. I cannot tell you how grateful I am. If I had not been able to report the success of your
efforts, automatic programming would have been a very dead duck in Remington Rand.61
On the eve of 1954, Hopper believed Remington Rand had the ability to
seize and maintain the lion's share of the computer industry, a market that
appeared to be on the verge of rapid expansion. Remington Rand held a
substantial lead in both hardware and software technology. But its closest
competitor, the International Business Machines Corporation, was
demonstrating a growing interest in computer technology.
OceanofPDF.com

9    IBM ANSWERS REMINGTON RAND'S CHALLENGE
In the summer of 1949, when Grace Hopper joined the Eckert-Mauchly
Computer Corporation, the International Business Machines Corporation
controlled 90 percent of the market for mechanical calculators and punch-
card machines, with annual revenues of $300 million. Apart from
experimental work on the Harvard Mark I and the Selective Sequence
Electronic Calculator, IBM leadership firmly believed that the company's
future growth would be driven by mechanical punch-card technology. But
within 10 years IBM was the undisputed leader in electronic computers,
with more than 70 percent of the global market. IBM's dominant position in
the marketplace helped to drive annual revenues to $1.8 billion by 1960.1
How IBM came to control the early computer industry has been
thoroughly explored by economists and historians. What is more important
here is how IBM's success, as well as Remington Rand's loss of market
share, affected the direction of programming's development during the
1950s. In particular, how did Remington Rand react to the IBM challenge,
and in what ways did this reaction influence Grace Hopper and her work?2
IBM: HARD-WORKING UNDERDOG, OR RUTHLESS MONOPOLIST?
On 17 January 1969, the U.S. Department of Justice filed an antitrust
lawsuit against International Business Machines. The IBM lawsuit became
the longest and most arduous court case in U.S. history, coming to a sudden
end in 1982 when the Reagan administration withdrew the antitrust charges.
In hindsight the case appeared to have wasted both IBM's and the
government's money and manpower, but for business historians the trial
offered a documented history of the computer industry. Secondary literature
published in the 1980s relied heavily on the thousands of papers made
public and the hundreds of testimonies generated during the 13-year trial.
These first attempts to capture the industry's early history tended to follow
closely the opposing positions outlined during the antitrust trial. Authors
aligned with the Justice Department's perspective depicted IBM as a
ruthless monopolist bent on controlling the computer industry. Cash flow
generated by the company's punch-card monopoly permitted it to

underprice the 700 series and other early computers. According to the
economist-turned-historian Richard Thomas DeLamarter, IBM's pricing
policies hurt Remington Rand's bottom line while expanding IBM's market
share: "Remington saw its share of the expanding market plunge
irretrievably during the next few years as customers flocked to the IBM 701
and 702."3 The economists Franklin Fisher, James McKie, and Richard
Mancke, on the other hand, asserted that IBM was just one of many
companies that had the potential to enter the new industry during the 1950s.
The knowledge needed to build computers was widely dispersed, thus
creating a level playing field on which IBM competed. According to Fisher,
McKie, and Mancke, IBM became dominant because the company's
leadership consciously committed more resources and personnel to the new
industry. This risky investment translated into better products and better
service, and ultimately IBM was rewarded with market leadership.4
REMINGTON RAND'S MARKETING COUP
Neither DeLamarter's account nor that of Fisher et al. pays much attention
to developments outside IBM. Interviews with Grace Hopper and with 30
other people associated with UNIVAC during the 1950s suggest that IBM
did not win the computer market so much as Remington Rand lost it. The
difficulties of merging Remington Rand with EMCC and ERA during the
first part of the 1950s kept Remington Rand from capitalizing on its
technological lead. As Remington Rand stumbled, IBM's far more
sophisticated sales and customer support system quickly came to dominate
the fertile market. This is a tidy summary, but further inspection reveals a
far more complicated story.
In November 1952, on the night of the Eisenhower-Stevenson
presidential election, Remington Rand seized the imagination of the country
and positioned itself to become, in the eyes of the American public, the
undisputed leader in computer technology. A mock-up of a UNIVAC
machine had been installed in the headquarters of the CBS television
network, next to the desk of CBS's anchorman, Walter Cronkite. In the days
leading up to the election, Hopper's programming team had entered
demographic and voting data from previous elections into a working
UNIVAC. On election night, these data were associated with real-time
voting results. With only 5 percent of the votes tallied, the UNIVAC

predicted an Eisenhower landslide and a final electoral-vote count of 438 to
93. Because UNIVAC's prediction differed so markedly from the findings
of the Gallup and Roper opinion polls, executives at CBS decided to inform
Americans that UNIVAC predicted a close race, with Eisenhower slightly in
the lead. In the end, Eisenhower defeated Stevenson soundly.5
The uncanny accuracy of UNIVAC's prediction during a major televised
event sent shock waves through the nation. At the conclusion of the election
coverage, a Remington Rand spokesman appeared on CBS and informed
viewers that UNIVAC's original prediction had been suppressed. As
Thomas Watson Jr. recalled, "millions of people were introduced to the
UNIVAC by Edward R. Murrow, Eric Sevareid, and Walter Cronkite, who
called it 'that marvelous electronic brain.' "6 In the months that followed,
"UNIVAC" gradually became the generic term for a computer.
J. Presper Eckert Jr. (center) discussing UNIVAC output with Walter Cronkite. U.S. Census Bureau.
UNIVAC's election-night heroics had significant ripple effects. Morale
was boosted within the Eckert-Mauchly division, and Remington Rand
management began to take the machine more seriously. Furthermore, the
demand for UNIVACs swelled considerably in the months after the
election, despite Remington Rand's lack of investment in sales and
marketing. More and more, members of Hopper's team found themselves
fielding sales inquiries from potential customers rather than programming.
In fact, one of the programmers (George Danehower) later recalled that the

vast majority of UNIVAC contracts were generated this way: "The
machines were not really sold. Certain companies had certain kinds of
problems . . . they heard about the computers, so they made inquiries."7 The
ultimate sale was actually made through the process of responding to
inquiries. In 1953 and 1954, Remington Rand received more than 40
UNIVAC orders.8
Two of the more significant commercial orders of this period came from
the General Electric Company and from the Pacific Mutual Life Insurance
Company. Both companies conducted feasibility studies and concluded that
the UNIVAC was superior to IBM's comparable machine, the 701/702.
Pacific Mutual's reasons were highlighted in a paper given by Wesley
Bagby, the company's controller, to the Controller's Institute of America in
November 1955:
There were three items of difference . . . which influenced our final decision. Remington Rand's
UNIVAC could be leased or purchased outright. IBM's 702, which they were competing against,
could only be rented. Second, UNIVAC, one of the specific models we were considering, had been
thoroughly field-tested. The other, IBM 702, had not yet been used by any customer. Third, it
appeared to us that UNIVAC had some technological advantages.9
According to Ken Garrison, a member of Pacific Mutual's evaluation team,
those technological advantages centered on the reliability of UNIVAC's
mercury delay memory and the machine's ability to buffer input and output,
which permitted offline tape processing and printing.10
The surging demand for UNIVACs in 1953 and 1954 added to
Remington Rand's growing customer support problems. Many talented
members of Grace Hopper's staff were assigned to clients or were hired
away by clients. Hopper asked John Mauchly to inform her superiors at
Remington Rand of her growing attrition problem. Mauchly put it this way:
Some of the members of Dr. Grace Hopper's staff have already left for positions with users of IBM
equipment, and those of her staff who still remain are now expecting attractive offers from outside
sources. . . . The Eckert-Mauchly Division has not, however, been able to make offers sufficiently
soon enough, or good enough, to prevent the depletion of her staff , because there is no budget
allowance in the Eckert-Mauchly Division for such personnel.11
Pressure from Mauchly, Hopper, and others prompted Remington Rand
to organize more structured UNIVAC customer support. During the summer
of 1953, a UNIVAC National Sales Headquarters was established in New

York, with a training office, a customer service bureau, and a maintenance
office. Paul Chinitz left Hopper's programming group to head up the
initiative. The training office offered an intensive two-week course on
computers that included an overview of UNIVAC I's capabilities and
seminars on programming and systems analysis. According to Chinitz, the
fee-based course attracted mostly middle and upper-middle managers who
were familiar with the data-processing requirements of their companies.12
The customer service bureau, under the direction of Arthur Katz, helped
potential clients determine their computing needs. The service bureau
conducted surveys, prepared proposals, and organized customer-specific
demonstrations. A demonstration usually involved a critical aspect of the
client's proposed need. Once defined, the problem was sent to Hopper's
team in Philadelphia, and two or three programmers worked on it for a
month or two. The finished program was then run for the potential
customer, either at the New York service bureau, at the Philadelphia factory
and laboratory, or at the Census Bureau in Washington. If the demonstration
was a success, the service bureau followed up to sign a contract.13
Eventually the maintenance department came under the direction of
engineers from the newly acquired Engineering Research Associates
(ERA). Remington Rand purchased the Minnesota-based company in early
1953 for a variety of reasons. First, ERA had 400 experienced technicians
and engineers who could be used to augment Remington Rand's customer
service staff. Second, ERA's president, John Parker, would be appointed
head of the National Sales Office, so Presper Eckert could remain in the
laboratory. Third, ERA's magnetic drum memory technology was the most
advanced in the industry. Finally, ERA's computers were scientific in their
orientation, thus augmenting Rand's product offering and complementing
UNIVAC I's more commercial slant.14
Though Remington Rand's efforts to reorient itself were commendable,
the 1950 decision to cut production capability came back to haunt the firm.
The UNIVAC engineer Lou Wilson later acknowledged the almost
impossible situation in which he and his fellow engineers had found
themselves during 1953 and 1954: "In spite of having the production
capability of only six machines a year, within 2 years they sold 42
machines. The result was they couldn't deliver the damn things."15 And if
Remington Rand did deliver on time, what showed up was not always a
fully functioning machine. Gene Delves recalled, for example, that a

UNIVAC was to be delivered to a General Electric facility in Louisville in
December 1953. With the delivery date quickly approaching, the machine
was still in production. "So December 15 they just crated it all up and
brought it to Louisville and delivered it along with all the engineers who
were still building it."16
Despite manufacturing challenges, in the winter of 1953-54 Grace
Hopper believed that the dearth of trained programmers was the chief limit
on the growth of the computer market. As has happened often in the history
of technology, labor scarcity became a central external driving force behind
technical innovation, prompting Hopper to ask Remington Rand
management to allow herself and her team to dedicate themselves full-time
to finding a way to automate the programming process.17 In light of
Remington Rand management's unwillingness to make the necessary
budget allowances to maintain an adequate programming workforce,
Hopper's 31 December 1953 proposal was approved and the Computation
Analysis 
Laboratory 
was 
renamed 
the 
Automatic 
Programming
Department. The new department shed its more mundane task of UNIVAC
customer support and focused entirely on automatic programming research
and development related to automatic programming. Hopper was named the
department's director.18
IBM BENEFITS FROM THE COLD WAR
The historical evidence shows that during the first half of the 1950s
Remington Rand competed successfully with IBM. Not only did UNIVAC
lead in sales; even such traditional IBM customers as General Electric and
Pacific Mutual picked the UNIVAC over the IBM 701/702 on technical
grounds. Furthermore, all competitors in the computer market were faced
with the same shortage of talented programmers. Unwillingness to pay a
premium to keep programming talent may have cost Remington Rand a
chance to build a commanding lead within the industry, but the firm's
efforts to build a customer training and support system were commendable,
and senior management's willingness to support Hopper's automatic
programming research was farsighted.
If Remington Rand held its own during the first half of the 1950s in an
area of relatively open competition in the nascent industry, what explains
IBM's sudden ascendancy? Paradoxically, government funding of private

research and development became a pivotal factor in IBM's rise to
dominance, for it subsidized IBM's computer investment and transferred
protected knowledge from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to
IBM's Poughkeepsie Laboratory. That funding came courtesy of the SAGE
(Semi-Automatic Ground Environment) early warning defense system.19
SAGE was a consequence of the growing tensions between the Soviet
Union and the United States. In 1949 the Soviet Union exploded its first
atomic bomb. The communist nation's newfound nuclear capability,
combined with its long-range bomber technology, threatened the North
American continent, and the Truman administration called upon America's
scientists and engineers to devise a counter to the perceived threat. The
associate director of MIT's Servomechanisms Laboratory, Jay Forrester,
proposed a network of radar installations across Northern Canada and
Alaska to track enemy bombers and provide real-time intercept information
to friendly fighter aircraft. The Forrester proposal mapped out a 15-year
research and development effort with a price tag exceeding that of the
Manhattan Project.20
The only way to deal with a mass attack of bombers was to fully
automate the tracking and intercept system—something that could be
accomplished, Forrester believed, with high-speed digital computers.
During World War II, Forrester had worked on a flight simulator for the
Navy. After the war, that project retained funding under a new name:
Project Whirlwind. With the continued backing of Mina Rees at the Office
of Naval Research, Whirlwind became the most elaborate, expensive
general-purpose computer project of its day. Forrester now saw a purpose
for the theoretical machine. The Whirlwind computer—a real-time
information-processing system capable of automating command and control
—would serve as the brain of the SAGE radar network.21
Late in 1952, Forrester received authorization to pick a subcontractor for
an unprecedented 50 Whirlwind computers. Forrester and his team spent the
early part of 1953 interviewing engineers, programmers, and management
from three prospective subcontractors: Remington Rand, the Raytheon
Manufacturing Company, and the International Business Machines
Corporation. Thomas Watson Jr. believed that the SAGE contract was the
answer to the UNIVAC challenge. "I thought it was absolutely essential to
IBM's future that we win it," Watson recalled. "The company that built

those computers was going to be way ahead of the game, because it would
learn the secrets of mass production."22
Unknown to Watson Jr. at the time, efficient computer mass production
was not the only secret to which the contract winner would be privy.
Between 1948 and 1951, at the cost of more than $1 million, Forrester and
his team had invented high capacity, real-time, random-access memory. Not
satisfied with mercury delay lines or electrostatic storage, Forrester's team
experimented with magnetic memory in 1949. Starting from the knowledge
that certain materials could be magnetized and demagnetized by pulses of
electricity, the MIT team constructed a matrix of small doughnut-shaped
magnetic ferrite cores that performed much like binary switches.23 Not only
could these switches hold more information than other memory
technologies; the information could be accessed far more rapidly in a non-
serial fashion.24
IBM executives were well aware that Remington Rand was the top
candidate for the SAGE contract. Not only had Remington Rand's machine
proven itself in the marketplace; Leslie Groves, the much-respected former
director of the Manhattan Project, was the head of advanced research at
Remington Rand. "I tried not to worry about Groves or the other
competitors," Thomas Watson Jr. remembered. "I took Forrester to see our
plants and introduce him to our most gifted people. He was under extreme
pressure to get the system into production as soon as possible, and I think
what impressed him was the fact that we were already building computers
in a factory."25
Though IBM's internal computer technology left something to be
desired, Forrester was impressed by the Poughkeepsie lab's integration of
research and production. Forrester also took note of IBM's "degree of
purposefulness, integration, and esprit de corps."26 Remington Rand's
superior technology and talented engineering and programming staff were
overshadowed by concerns about the company's production capabilities.
Forrester concluded that IBM was better equipped to manufacture, in a
limited period of time, 50 of the most complex machines ever produced. In
April 1953 he offered the contract to Thomas Watson Sr.27
The contract to build 50 Whirlwind computers was a technological
watershed for IBM, and Thomas Watson Jr. was the first to admit that
"SAGE saved the 702 design team."28 IBM immediately assigned more than
300 engineers and scientists to Poughkeepsie in order to design and

manufacture what would be called the AN/FSQ-7. During the first year
alone, MIT transferred more than 1,000 confidential technical documents to
Poughkeepsie, while IBM personnel spent upwards of 950 person-days at
MIT's Lincoln Laboratory learning about Whirlwind.29
Not only did IBM engineers take away knowledge about random-access
magnetic core memory; they also learned how the Whirlwind team had
pushed the technological envelope in a number of other areas. Forrester's
staff had figured out a variety of ways to lower the frequency of vacuum-
tube failure, thus increasing system reliability. Cathode-ray-tube displays
were ingeniously employed to display processed information, index
registers made programming easier, and real-time information from radar
sensors could be processed without the need for a slow input medium such
as punch cards.
Not surprisingly, Whirlwind technology quickly found its way into the
next generation of IBM's commercial computers.30 The IBM 704 was
announced on 7 May 1954. Its redesigned circuitry was twice as fast as its
701 predecessor and far more reliable. Although it was shipped with two
electrostatic and two magnetic drums for storage, the 704 was designed so
that core memory could be installed at a later date. Then, on 1 October
1954, the IBM 705 was announced. The 705 was manufactured with fully
integrated random-access magnetic core storage and a buffered magnetic
tape input/output (I/O) system that could read and write simultaneously.31
To appease disgruntled customers, IBM filled standing orders for 701s
and 702s with the superior 704s and 705s. The market quickly embraced the
new IBM machines, and there were far more new orders than had been
anticipated. "In a little over a year we started delivering those redesigned
computers," wrote Thomas Watson Jr. "They made the UNIVAC obsolete
and we soon left Remington Rand in the dust."32 By the start of 1957, IBM
had 87 computers in operation and 190 on order. Remington Rand, in
contrast, supported 41 operational UNIVACs and had back orders for 40
more.
In only 3 years IBM had met the Remington Rand challenge, mainly
because of the benefits accrued from winning the SAGE contract. Not only
did SAGE inject Whirlwind technology deep into IBM's DNA; the
magnitude of the contract permitted IBM to hire more than 8,000 more
engineers, programmers, and administrators. An astonishing 80 percent of
the company's revenues from stored-program computers were generated by

the SAGE contract, which amounted to more than $500 million by the
completion of the project.33 In view of the Justice Department's antitrust
case against IBM during the 1970s, it is paradoxical that a large government
contract appears to have been the basis for IBM's ability to dominate the
computer market by 1960.
Besides providing IBM with a market advantage, the SAGE contract
transmuted computer programming from an esoteric craft to a well-funded
profession. The massive programming task required hundreds of thousands
of lines of code, written by more than 800 programmers. Since resources
were not an issue, IBM subcontracted much of the programming work to
the RAND Corporation, a non-profit, military-sponsored research center.
RAND hired and trained so many programmers that the SAGE
development division soon outnumbered the rest of the RAND Corporation,
prompting RAND to spin off the division as the System Development
Corporation.34

The 28 March 1955 cover of Time.
The sharp increase in the number of programmers sparked by the SAGE
contract did not directly affect Grace Hopper and her work, but it did
indirectly make it more difficult to sell the idea of automatic programming.
Some of the most outspoken opponents of Hopper's automatic
programming vision through the 1950s were programmers. By automating
the programming process, Hopper was threatening to make programmers
redundant at a time when their numbers and importance within the
computing community were growing exponentially.
OceanofPDF.com

10    THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROBLEM-ORIENTED LANGUAGES
On 13 May 1954, a little-known moment in computer history significantly
affected programming development at both Remington Rand and IBM.
Charlie Adams, a long-time member of MIT's Project Whirlwind, presented
a paper at an Office of Naval Research (ONR) symposium on automatic
programming. Grace Hopper had organized the meeting in conjunction with
the Navy in order to assess the state of the programming field. Adams
described computer developments at MIT, including the work of J.
Halcombe Laning Jr. and Neal Zierler. Laning and Zierler had applied
emerging compiler techniques and had created what they called an algebraic
compiler. The compiler accepted standard mathematical symbols and
converted them into machine language. Thus, with a limited amount of
training, a first-time user could simply write an equation and its parameters,
and the computer would generate the answer.1
For the most part, Laning and Zierler's efforts were ignored. To many the
algebraic compiler sounded nothing short of chimerical. IBM programmer
John Backus captured this sentiment in a paper he presented at the same
conference, "IBM 701 Speedcoding and Other Automatic Programming
Systems." Backus stated that most programmers had at one time or another
thought about how nice it would be to write X + Y instead of a more
complicated code, but "no doubt if he were too insistent next week about
this sort of thing he would be subject to psychiatric observation."2 As of
1954, programmers in general were skeptical of most forms of automatic
programming, let alone ones that claimed to be capable of the direct
translation of mathematical equations. "To them," Backus later recalled, "it
was obviously a foolish and arrogant dream to imagine that any mechanical
process could possibly perform the mysterious feats of invention required to
write an efficient code."3 But in fact there were dreamers in the audience
that day, including the newly appointed director of automatic programming
at Remington Rand, Dr. Grace Hopper. Her own A-2 compiler, though a
milestone in the field, was difficult for even skilled programmers to use.
Laning's and Zierler's work demonstrated the possibility that computers
could be operated by laymen. Two years later, while serving as the keynote
speaker for the second ONR-sponsored Symposium on Advanced

Programming Methods, Hopper stated that the MIT compiler represented
the most comprehensive language ever developed, since it not only assisted
the original programming of the problem but even partially automated the
debugging process.4 MIT's achievements in the field of automatic
programming effectively changed the trajectory of Hopper's work in
automatic programming between 1954 and 1956, leading to her most
significant contributions to date.
THE AUTOMATIC PROGRAMMING DEPARTMENT AND MATH-MATIC
By 1954, "computer programmer" was a well-defined job description. Most
programmers were mathematically trained and knowledgeable about
computer hardware. The programming craft involved coaxing accurate
output out of a temperamental machine handicapped by input/output and
memory limitations. The complexities surrounding the "black art" of
programming translated into escalating computer costs that both users and
manufacturers of computer equipment hoped to lower with the
implementation of automatic programming. This mounting economic
quandary eventually moved Remington Rand management to back
Hopper's research efforts by forming the Automatic Programming
Department. The new department afforded Hopper the chance to implement
her own unique approach to management. Combining a sense of purpose
and direction from the Harvard Computation Laboratory with the flexibility
and freedom of the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation, Hopper
instituted a decentralized management style that unleashed a certain level of
self-direction, encouraged playfulness in the work environment, and
provided her subordinates with an overarching vision of the computing
future. Time and again people who worked with Grace Hopper during this
period spoke about how they loved what they were doing. "It was," Mildred
Koss recalled, "really a place where you felt a lot of loyalty to the people
who were there, wanted to make it work, wanted to be a part of that exciting
environment."5 Grace Hopper had somehow captured the unity and sense of
urgency that existed during the war and transferred it to Philadelphia in the
1950s.
Just before the May ONR symposium, the Automatic Programming
Department's efforts focused on improving the A-2 compiler. The resultant
A-3 wrote more efficient machine code, but it was far from user-friendly.

According to Hopper, Laning and Zierler's efforts opened her eyes to the
full potential of pseudo-code6 and confirmed in her mind that automatic
programming could bridge the gap between user and computer, thus
eliminating the need for programmers outside of research and development
laboratories.7
Hopper and her colleagues explored the possibility of an equation-based
programming language, and by 1956 they had modified A-3 to the point
where it could support a user-friendly source code. The resultant AT-3
compiler was later named MATH-MATIC. Hopper had finally freed
programmers from UNIVAC's awkward three-address coding format.
MATH-MATIC pseudo-code was quite natural to write and further
separated the user from the eccentricities of hardware.
MATH-MATIC also appeased more experienced programmers, for it had
the ability to handle lower-level languages. That is, the compiler could
process statements written in A-3 pseudo-code or even in C-10 machine
code alongside the new source code. This flexibility enabled experienced
programmers to manually modify compiler code output, thus ensuring the
production of the most efficient final code possible. This was feasible
because MATH-MATIC first translated its source code into A-3 pseudo-
code as an intermediate step. A-3 was then translated into machine code.
In many respects MATH-MATIC outstripped the capabilities of the
hardware for which it was designed. The 1,000-word internal memory was
so limited that Hopper was forced to create an elaborate system of "virtual"
memory. That is, MATH-MATIC made full use of the UNIVAC's ten
magnetic servo tapes, automatically orchestrating their use to make the
machine appear as if it had more internal memory. For instance, if a
generated object code was too large to fit into internal memory or on a
single magnetic tape, the compiler automatically inserted the necessary
control transfers and input/output statements to reload memory from other
tapes as often as required.8
Sadly, for all their creative efforts, MATH-MATIC's designers could not
overcome the programming language's one glaring shortcoming:
unbearably long run times when compiling. MATH-MATIC, like Laning
and Zierler's algebraic compiler, had identified the paradox associated with
automatic programming during much of the 1950s: the more user-friendly
the source code, the longer the run times. Until this was rectified, automatic

programming had no comparative advantage over teams of skilled
programmers writing machine code.
SOLVING THE EFFICIENCY PARADOX: JOHN BACKUS AND FORTRAN
Charlie Adams's short description of Laning and Zierler's algebraic
compiler did not go unnoticed by another ONR symposium attendee, John
Backus. The 29-year-old Backus had joined IBM as a programmer in 1950
and had spent his first years there developing Speedcode for the IBM 701.
An avid student of Hopper's automatic programming work, Backus was
impressed by the A-2 compiler's speed but frustrated by its awkwardness.
Part of the A-2's inefficiency, Backus believed, was attributable to the
limitations of the UNIVAC hardware. The 1,000-word memory and the lack
of an index register caused the A-2 to spend much of its processing time on
"housekeeping chores."9 If automatic programming was to be accepted on a
larger scale, Backus believed, the efficiency paradox had to be solved.
In January 1954, John Backus, Harlan Herrick, and Irving Ziller set out
to develop a more "streamlined" compiler for IBM's proposed 704
computer. The MIT-inspired hardware design, complete with core memory,
floating decimal processor, and index register, provided the IBM team with
unprecedented design flexibility. But despite these advantages, Backus
recalled, the group spent months debating the theoretical design limits of
automatic programming. Though he did not mention Hopper's name
directly, Backus suggested that one of the reasons the computing
community as a whole was skeptical of automatic programming in the mid
1950s "came from the energetic public relations efforts of some visionaries
to spread the word that their 'automatic programming' systems had almost
human abilities to understand the language and needs of the user."10 But, as
the case of the A-2, on further inspection most compiling systems proved to
be "complex, exception-ridden performers of clerical tasks."11
Laning and Zierler's algebraic compiler served as evidence that
prestigious institutions such as MIT were taking automatic programming
seriously, prompting Backus to write Laning a letter shortly after the May
symposium. In the letter, Backus informed Laning that his team at IBM was
working on a similar compiler, but that they had not yet done any
programming or even any detailed planning.12 To help formulate the
specifications for their proposed language, Backus requested a

demonstration of the algebraic compiler, which he and Ziller received in the
summer of 1954. Much to their dismay, the two experienced firsthand the
efficiency dilemma of compiler-based language design. The MIT source
code was commendable, but the compiler slowed down the Whirlwind
computer by a factor of 10. Since computer time was so dear a commodity,
Backus realized that only a compiler that maximized efficiency could hope
to compete with human programmers. Despite this initial disappointment,
Laning and Zierler's work inspired Backus to attempt to build a compiler
that could translate a rich mathematical language into a sufficiently
economical program at a relatively low cost.13
On 10 November 1954, Backus submitted a report titled "Preliminary
Report: Specifications for the IBM Mathematical Formula Translating
System, FORTRAN" to his boss, Cuthbert Hurd. The report stipulated that
FORTRAN would "comprise a large set of programs to enable the IBM 704
to accept a concise formulation of a problem in terms of a mathematical
notation and to produce automatically a high-speed 704 program for the
solution of the problem."14 The report also suggested that a novice
programmer would be able to manipulate FORTRAN's notation after a one-
hour course. In effect, Backus was promising ease of coding with
unprecedented speed of execution.
Backus initially thought the time from specifications to prototype would
be 6 months. It turned out to be 30 months. During that time, Backus and
his team of twelve programmers developed a variety of compiling
techniques that increased both the efficiency of the generated machine code
and decreased the computer time needed to compile. These advances
included separate compilation of commonly used subroutines, detection of
identical sub expressions (thus eliminating duplicate calculations), methods
to avoid recompilation during the debugging phase, and self-checking
mechanisms that flagged user-based errors when preparing source code.15
Though the FORTRAN operator's manual was completed by the fall of
1956, the compiler itself was not distributed to IBM 704 installations until
April 1957. Within a year after distribution, half of the IBM 704
installations were using FORTRAN to solve more than half of all
mathematical problems.16 Subsequently, compilers were produced for the
IBM 705 and the IBM 650, quickly making FORTRAN the most widely
used automatic program of its day. By 1961, UNIVAC users demanded a
compatible FORTRAN compiler and abandoned Hopper's MATH-MATIC.

Backus's focus on compiler efficiency, coupled with IBM's growing market
share in hardware, resulted in the first programming-language standard. For
the first time, programmers on different machines could speak the same
language.
Grace Hopper at a UNIVAC keyboard, 1960. Courtesy of Smithsonian Institution.
CREATING A BUSINESS LANGUAGE: B-0 AND FLOW-MATIC
FORTRAN, like MATH-MATIC, was designed to permit engineers and
mathematicians to write source code using standard mathematical symbols.
But in the winter of 1955-56, while these two languages were still being
developed, Grace Hopper was planning a far more radical programming
language. She believed that computers were more than just elaborate
calculators—that they were also data-processing and decision-making tools.
Therefore, she wanted her Automatic Programming Department to create a
unique compiler that would enable managers and administrators to write
business programs using standard business vocabulary.
On 31 January 1955, Hopper submitted to Remington Rand management
a report (titled "The Preliminary Definition of a Data Processing
Compiler") that outlined the original specifications for the first B-0
business language. The most significant concept outlined in this report
concerned the nature of the compiler's pseudo-code. The report stated that
both symbols and abbreviations should be replaced with understandable

English words. "Oh, I loved the symbols, but I saw there were a lot of
people that didn't, and I wanted them to be able to use the computer as
well," Hopper recalled.17 The typical business administrator or manager, she
argued, would rather use standard business vocabulary to delineate both
operations and data names. Therefore, A × B = C should be written as
MULTIPLY BASE-PRICE AND DISCOUNT-PERCENT GIVING DISCOUNT-PRICE
At first glance the latter description seems verbose, but Hopper defended
English source code on several counts. Mathematics utilized a widely
accepted set of symbols; business language did not. According to B-0 co-
developer Mary Hawes, Hopper first directed the design team to study
business expressions used by different UNIVAC users in order to generate a
suitable business vocabulary. "When we tried mnemonic abbreviations,"
Hawes recalled, "we found different abbreviations for the same term in
different departments of the same company, not to mention the differences
among companies."18 Instead of attempting to invent symbols and
abbreviations to represent basic business terms (e.g., tax, gross pay, and
price), Hopper came up with an elegant solution that would allow
programmers to define their own pseudo-code language by assigning
program variables to any desired English name. For example, X1, X2, and
X3 could be assigned "number of employees," "numbers of hours worked,"
and "hours at 1½ times pay."
Such unprecedented source-code flexibility created significant challenges
for the B-0 design team. First, the habit of using fixed word lengths had to
be broken, which was easier said then done after years of programming
with this constraint. Additionally, a single variable could now be defined by
more than one word. How would the computer know that "employee
number" was one rather than two variables? "The contingency was taken
care of by defining a word . . . as a group of letters preceded by a space
symbol and followed by another space symbol," Mary Hawes explained.19
Sometimes, shifts in perspective yielded simple, elegant solutions.
Hopper also noted some of the unintended positive byproducts of
pseudo-code. English-based programs were self-documenting, permitting a
second programmer or technician to pick up where a colleague left off .
This changed programming from an individualistic endeavor to a group
activity, thus setting the foundation for teams of programmers to work on

more complex projects. In addition, managers with limited computer skills
could understand the logic and purpose of a given program, making
administrative assessment possible (much to the chagrin of some
programmers).20
To help Remington Rand management accept the seemingly strange
concept that computers could translate and compile source code written in
English, the Automatic Programming Department prepared a series of small
demonstration programs. The first program, a simple inventory control
application, contained only 20 lines of English-based code. Upon
compilation, the English sentences were successfully expanded into
machine code. To make the demonstration more impressive, and thus to
increase the probability of funding, Hopper had her team rewrite the test
compiler so it could also translate pseudo-code written in either French or
German21:
IF GREATER GO TO OPERATION 1
OTHERWISE GO TO OPERATION 2
SI PLUS GRAND ALLEZ À OPÉRATION 1
AUTREMENT ALLEZ À OPÉRATION 2
WENN GRÖSSER GEHEN ZU BEDIENUNG 1
ANSONSTEN GEHEN ZU BEDIENUNG 2
Each of these three lines of pseudo-code generated the same machine code,
despite the language differences. Hopper had proved that compiler pseudo-
code could be designed to meet the needs of any business, even one in
another country. Surprisingly, Hopper's theoretical linguistic demonstration
was not well received. Management was concerned that Hopper's plans
were too ambitious, and that the Automatic Programming Department was
wasting time and energy exploring such marginal areas as multilingual
programming. "It was completely self-evident [to management] that an
American computer built in blue-belt Pennsylvania couldn't possibly be
programmed in French or German," she recalled.22 Hopper had to assure her
superiors that the proposed business language would only be in English.

B-0, as the business language compiler was designated, became available
to UNIVAC customers at the start of 1958. Before its completion,
Remington Rand merged with Sperry Gyroscope Corporation to form
Sperry Rand. The marketing department of the new company renamed the
business language FLOW-MATIC. (In addition, AT-3 was renamed MATH-
MATIC.) The completed version of FLOW-MATIC had a rich library of
operational verbs that appeared to meet the application needs of most
businesses.23 These verbs included editing commands so information could
be formatted before output. Furthermore, FLOW-MATIC provided
unparalleled flexibility in data designation, thus allowing file names to be
given complicated descriptions.
As they had had to do with previous UNIVAC compilers, Hopper and the
staff of the Automatic Programming Department had to "sell" FLOW-
MATIC to a skeptical programming and business community. "We finally
got it running," Hopper recalled, "and there we were, research and
development group, with a product, and nobody to use it. We had to go out
and sell the idea of writing programs in English."24 The group turned
immediately to dependable UNIVAC customers, and by the spring of 1958
US Steel, Westinghouse, the Air Force Comptroller, and the Navy Bureau of
Ships were writing payroll and inventory applications in FLOW-MATIC.
Once again, the harshest critics of the new programming language were
programmers. Many programmers believed FLOW-MATIC English
phraseology to be superfluous, especially when basic operations such as
MULTIPLY and SUBTRACT had to be written out. Moreover, the length of
commands increased the time needed to compile the pseudo-code into
machine code. Most important, the pseudo-code was so far removed from
the inner workings of the machine that even the most gifted programmer
could not express all needed operations. By making FLOW-MATIC
accessible to a wider group of users, its designers had sacrificed a certain
amount of flexibility and control.
Faced with a skeptical programming community, Hopper dedicated much
of her time to communicating the benefits of automatic programming.
Between 1955 and 1959 she published ten articles on the subject, with titles
such as "Programming Business-Data Processors," "Computer Programs in
English," and "From Programmer to Computer." Hopper emphasized that
automatic programming was economical, easy to learn, easy to debug, and
easy to maintain, and that it reduced the time needed to build applications

and solve problems. During this same period, Hopper gave dozens of papers
at various conferences and symposiums and encouraged members of her
staff to do the same. She continued to help organize programming
symposia.
Hopper remained active in the Association of Computing Machinery.
From 1956 to 1958 she served as on the association's council, and in 1957
and 1958 she was a member of the editorial board for the association's main
publication, Communications of the ACM. By 1960, Hopper had indeed
navigated her way to the center of the computer revolution. She would use
her prominent position to help guide the development of COBOL, which
remains to this day the most successful computer programming language.
OceanofPDF.com

11    DISTRIBUTED INVENTION MATURES: GRACE HOPPER AND THE DEVELOPMENT
OF COBOL
By the late 1950s, Grace Hopper's style of invention had taken full form.
Though she had created the original A-0 compiler on her own, subsequent
iterations of her prototype evolved out of a distributed process of invention
and development. A-1, A-2, A-3, MATH-MATIC, and FLOW-MATIC were
"invented" by Hopper in the sense that she coordinated the creative efforts
of a heterogeneous group of programmers and users. Many of the co-
inventors worked for her in Sperry Rand's Automatic Programming
Division, but Hopper did not limit her innovative alliances to her
company's borders.
Input from users was a essential component of the development process.
Hopper freely distributed code and provided user manuals. In return she
received feedback and suggestions for compiler improvement. Some users
went so far as to rewrite or expand the original code. Hopper would review
these changes and incorporate the best practices. The end result was a
computer language that continually improved in an organic fashion,
nourished by the collective insights of Hopper's group of innovators.
During the 1950s, maintaining and expanding that network became a
central activity for Hopper. The diversity of the expanding computing
industry called for a person who could bridge a variety of subgroups within
that community. Hopper moved freely in many of these disparate worlds,
and could speak about computers and programming in both technical and
nontechnical terms, depending on her audience. Her position as the director
of automatic programming development at the largest computer
manufacturer afforded her access to senior management throughout the
entire industry, while making her aware of the requirements of influential
customers. As a reserve officer in the Navy, she personified the growing
bond between industry and the military during the Cold War era, and she
spent 2 weeks per year on active duty assessing the Navy's computing
needs. And in 1958 she returned to her academic roots, taking a position as
an adjunct professor at the University of Pennsylvania, where she lectured
about programming to a new generation of computer enthusiasts.

Hopper also became a leading figure in the ever-growing Association of
Computing Machinery. She headed the association's Programming
Committee, which was tasked with keeping track of the latest developments
within the field and disseminating this information in the programming
community. Much to her credit, ACM conferences allocated a growing
number of panels and papers to issues related to programming. Hopper
chaired many of these panels, and she encouraged members of her
programming team at Remington Rand to speak about their latest work.
During 1953 and 1954, Hopper also headed up the ACM's Nomenclature
Committee and was responsible for publishing the first complete computer
glossary of terms. Though at first glance "Nomenclature Committee Chair"
is not the most striking title, the position gave Hopper an opportunity to
define a common language for the industry as a whole.
Every mature profession, such as medicine or law, has a shared language
that members have internalized. A common language serves a variety of
purposes. On the most basic level, it identifies and defines important terms
and concepts within the community of practitioners. These terms and
concepts locate the broad intellectual boundaries of the profession and
magnify the subtle details within the landscape. For instance, during her
time as the head of the ACM's Nomenclature Committee, Hopper attempted
to move the community away from "words of the magic brain class." While
she was working at Harvard in the 1940s, influential academics such as
Norbert Wiener and John von Neumann tended to describe computers as
"giant brains" and applied descriptive language that perpetuated this
metaphor. Hopper purged these words from computing in the 1950s,
replacing "memory" with "storage" and "thinking" with "processing."1
On a deeper level, a common language helps forge a sense of identity
among members of the profession. It facilitates coordination of effort,
defines roles, and sustains a feeling of cultural kinship. Hopper found
herself at that rare moment during the early years of a budding community
when language had not yet precipitated into a more solid, stable state.
Fittingly, the person most skilled at communicating with computers was
also the central figure in the effort to facilitate communication between
people within the maturing profession.
Any discussion of identity brings up questions of power, and Hopper
seemed to have been completely aware of that connection. Feminists have
long recognized that male-oriented, male-defined language has contributed

on some level to the subjugation of women. Hopper was less concerned
with gender dominance than with other types of bias built into the language.
She readily admitted that the 1954 glossary was UNIVAC oriented and
feared that others would reject it out of hand. With that in mind, Hopper
opened the language to scrutiny. "It is our earnest plea," she wrote to fellow
members of the Association for Computing Machinery, "that we receive
comments, both mild and violent, suggestions, and criticisms as soon as
possible." By broadening participation during the development phase,
Hopper increased the odds that the computing community would freely
adopt the resultant language.
INVENTION BY COMMITTEE
By 1959, Hopper had proved herself as a businesswoman, a programmer, a
naval officer, and an academic. Her multifaceted career, combined with an
inventive style that encouraged broad participation, made her the ideal
person to orchestrate the creation of a universal, standardized general
business language. Hopper's vigorous efforts to further the cause of
automatic programming led to the development of COBOL (Common
Business Oriented Language). Although some widely distributed
publications (including the New York Times and the Washington Post2) have
listed Hopper as COBOL's inventor, the development of the popular
business language is a far more complex story, involving a number of
individuals and organizations.
Besides Hopper, the person most cited as the creator of COBOL is
Charles Phillips, Director of Data Systems Research at the Department of
Defense between 1958 and 1962.3 Yet in a paper presented at the annual
conference of the ACM on 1 September 1959, Phillips himself admitted that
the idea for COBOL did not originate with him. "We were embarrassed,"
Phillips said, "that the idea for such a common language has not had its
origin by that time in Defense since we would benefit so greatly from the
success of such a project."4 Phillips credited Grace Hopper and her "idea
team" for coordinating the COBOL effort. Hopper, an adjunct professor at
the University of Pennsylvania in the spring of 1959, organized a meeting
of users, manufacturers, and teachers at the university's Computer Center
on 8 April 1959 to discuss the feasibility of co-developing a common
business language.5

Phillips's account coincides with Hopper's own recollection of the
event.6 According to Hopper, she, Robert Bemer of IBM, and Howard
Bromberg of the Radio Corporation of America had been discussing the
possibility of creating a common business language for industry. At the
time, Bemer was an assistant manager for programming research at IBM
and Bromberg was the head of automatic programming at RCA. Before
joining RCA, Bromberg had worked under Hopper as a programmer at
UNIVAC. "We all knew each other," Hopper recalled, "but we couldn't
work together and agree on anything because we were breaking antitrust
laws. The only way we could all work together and not throw our
companies into fits was under the jurisdiction of a university or the
government."7
In order to create a legal forum, Hopper, Bemer, and Bromberg asked Dr.
Saul Gorn, Director of Computing at the Moore School of Engineering, to
call a meeting to discuss the issue. Gorn, who had been attempting to write
a universal computer language himself , invited representatives from
industry, government, and academia to the Penn campus. Industry attendees
included representative of the main computer manufacturers, as well as the
primary users of computers. "We all were in agreement that we would like
to have one language for data processing," said Hopper.8
The chief concern that motivated both manufacturers and users was the
rising cost associated with programming. The expenditure for defining
business applications, writing, debugging, documenting, and maintaining
code, and transferring the program to a second computer accounted for an
ever-increasing percentage of total computer outlays. This growing
consensus was confirmed by a 1959 survey of prominent user
organizations, which concluded that the average programming cost for any
large data-processing installation exceeded $800,000. If programs had to be
translated in order to run on upgraded hardware, an additional investment of
$600,000 was needed. The study also estimated that if the original programs
had been constructed in a machine-independent common business language,
a full translation could be completed in 6 months (versus 2 years) at a cost
of $50,000.9
The daunting question Hopper and the other attendees faced at the 8
April meeting was how to go about crafting a common business language.
The group was well aware of the recent development of separate but similar
automatic 
programming 
languages 
(among 
them 
FLOW-MATIC,

COMTRAN, and AIMACO), and that the number of languages would
continue to increase if left to the whims of market forces. To avoid the
seemingly inevitable "Tower of Babel," Hopper insisted that users and
manufacturers should put aside their private agendas in the name of
collaboration. But developing a common, problem-oriented, hardware-
independent business language could take more than 10 years, and asking a
wide array of organizations to coordinate their efforts for such a long period
seemed naive at best.10
After the 8 April meeting, Hopper and the "idea group" searched for an
appropriate sponsor for such a formidable undertaking. In order to ensure
wide-ranging support from both users and manufacturers, an appropriate
sponsor would have to be neutral and would have to possess enough stature
to encourage participation. Hopper first solicited the advice of her long-time
friend Eugene Smith, a civilian employee of the Navy who had been the
Bureau of Ships' liaison to the Harvard Computation Laboratory during
World War II. Smith advised that the Navy was unable to support such an
ambitious endeavor, and eventually the group turned to the Department of
Defense.
Charles Phillips, who at the time was the DOD's director of data systems
research, recalled being approached by the delegation and being impressed
by the "dedicated naval reserve officer who thoroughly understood the
DOD problems."11 As of 1959, the DOD operated 225 internally
programmed computers and had ordered 175 more. More than $200
million, according to Phillips, had been spent on application design, flow
charting, programming, and debugging. Any means of speeding up software
development and reducing operation costs would be welcomed.12
Because the DOD operated a variety of computers from different
manufacturers, Phillips was also interested in the possibility of program
portability. In 1959, a program written for an IBM machine could not work
on a UNIVAC. Hence, each change in hardware necessitated the rewriting
of program libraries. Program portability would permit programs to run on
different computers, regardless of differences in hardware.
Program portability was well suited to the DOD's plan to streamline and
consolidate its archaic supply system. For example, in 1959 the military
was attempting to reduce costs by unifying its medical supply system across
service branches. The Navy had overall management responsibility and
coordinated ten major supply depots: four for the Army, five for the Navy

and the Marine Corps, and one for the Air Force. Five of the ten depots used
five different computers from two different manufacturers; the other five
were awaiting computer delivery to replace aging punch-card machines.
Since all ten depots used the same stock-distribution system, the savings
gained from using one computer program for all ten would be
considerable.13
Program portability also could generate other savings for the Department
of Defense. According to Hopper, the military's unique personnel policies
added to the costs of programming. Personnel, be they Navy pilots or Air
Force computer programmers, served two-to three-year tours of duty. When
a tour was completed, the person was sent to a new duty station. Owing to
the proliferation of various makes and models of computer hardware, the
military spent a considerable amount of money and time retraining
personnel. One solution would have been to standardize hardware
purchases, but this was impractical because of the dynamic state of the
industry. Grace Hopper and the "idea team" convinced Charles Phillips that
the best solution would be a portable, common business language that a
DOD programmer could learn once. Phillips agreed to put the weight of the
military behind the project.14
Phillips tasked Hopper and her colleagues with drafting the agenda for a
DOD-sponsored meeting to discuss the feasibility for such an
unprecedented approach to program development. Invitations to this
meeting were to be "restricted to a nucleus of well-qualified key people
who would provide adequate representation for both users and
manufacturers."15 For Hopper, this nucleus was easy to identify, for it
coincided with the same distributed group of users, manufacturers, and
programmers that she had helped to organize over the previous 8 years.
The more difficult task was to decide on an appropriate agenda. First and
foremost, general agreement had to be reached among the meeting's
participants in regard to both the desirability and feasibility of a common
business language. Desirability could probably be gauged at the 28 May
meeting, but study groups would have to be created in order to make an
educated decision concerning feasibility. These groups would have to
specify the requisite elements of a common business language and identify
the types of problems that such a general language would be able to
handle.16

The idea team also faced difficult organizational problems. If a variety of
subcommittees were formed to study feasibility issues, how would they be
organized to foster effective communication? Would the sub-committees'
responsibilities overlap? How would consensus be determined? These and
other questions would be answered at a two-day meeting in the spring of
1959.
On 28 and 29 May 1959, the Department of Defense hosted the
organizational meeting of the Conference on Data Systems and Languages
(CODASYL). Forty representatives from seven government agencies,
eleven companies (users), and ten computer manufacturers attended. The
computer manufacturers were Sperry Rand, IBM, Honeywell, RCA,
General Electric, Burroughs, National Cash Register, Philco, Sylvania, and
International Computers and Tabulators. Charles Phillips chaired the
meeting, and Grace Hopper attended as a representative of Sperry Rand and
as Phillips's technical advisor.17 Hopper was impressed by both the number
and the quality of the attendees: "I don't think ever before or ever since
have I seen in one room so much power to commit men and monies as I
saw that day."18
After discussing the feasibility of such an ambitious project, Phillips
hoped to gain a sense of the proposed business language's desired
characteristics. Betty Snyder Holberton, Hopper's longtime friend and
confidant, offered this recollection: "Phillips . . . asked each of us to make
some statement what we thought about the language plan. . . . I began to
hear exaggerated claims, many unrealistic hopes, and I wondered what I
would say."19 Holberton and other professional programmers in attendance
winced at the enthusiastic yet naive suggestions made by attendees with less
coding experience. The group imagined a straightforward language that
could be effectively applied to banking, utilities, insurance, production, and
inventory control, not to mention medical and government applications.20
But Hopper viewed the same relaxed forum as an essential preliminary
stage in the innovation process, a process that was consciously removed
from the hands of professional programmers and included users and
managers. The concerns of users differed considerably from those of
professional programmers, as listed in a 1959 paper by E. J. Albertson (a
member of CODASYL's executive committee and a representative of the
U.S. Steel Corporation):
•  The majority of the group favored maximum use of simple English language.

•  The majority preferred a language that was easy to use, even if somewhat less powerful.
•  The majority agreed that the language should be initially open-ended and capable of continuous
change.
•  The majority agreed that the language should be problem-oriented and machine independent.
•  All participants agreed that it was necessary to broaden the base of those who could state problems
to computers.
•   All agreed that the envisioned language characteristics should not be biased or limited by the
limitations of present compilers.
The most significant disagreement concerned the use of mathematical
symbols and algebraic expressions. Some participants believed that some
business concepts were better expressed with mathematical symbols than
with English words; other participants, including Hopper, felt that
maximizing English expressions broadened the set of potential users, served
a second role as program documentation, and made debugging easier.21
With some guiding principles in place, attendees focused their attention
on how to create such a language. Three committees were formed, each
with a defined set of objectives. The short-term committee, chaired by
Joseph Wegstein of the National Bureau of Standards, would study existing
business compilers, survey users about their experiences, and generate the
initial specifications for an interim language. The intermediate-term
committee, led by Hopper's close friend Eugene Smith of the Bureau of
Ships, would consist of two task groups; one would study the syntax of
language and the other would study trends in business language. At the time
of the May meeting it was believed that the more abstract knowledge
gleaned by the intermediate-term committee would be incorporated into the
final version of the language. The long-range committee, whose members
were not determined during the May meeting, would then explore the
fundamentals of all language and consider the merger of scientific and
business languages into a universal computer language. The work of the
three committees would be reviewed and approved by a CODASYL
executive committee consisting of Charles Phillips, Joseph Cunningham
(Air Force), E. J. Albertson (U.S. Steel), Gregory Dillon (Dupont), M.
Grosz (Standard Oil), and the three committee chairs. Grace Hopper
(Sperry Rand) and Robert Bemer (IBM) would serve as the executive
committee's chief technical advisors.22
THE SHORT -TERM COMMITTEE AND THE COBOL SPECIFICATIONS

The short-term committee was given a September deadline to come up with
the specifications for an interim language, a deadline that experienced
members of the committee knew was impractical from the onset. "To expect
the short-range committee to develop a language and write the report in 3
months was gross optimism on the part of the executive committee,"
recalled Betty Holberton (who had been a member of the committee). At
best, initial findings would be reported in September, and the executive
committee would have to accept the fact that it could not put such a strict
deadline on the process of invention.
Having developed programming tools and languages in the past,
Holberton instinctively knew that there was no such thing as an "interim"
language. Manufacturers and users alike would implement a language only
if they believed that it would be around for a while. To prove her point,
Holberton turned to her old friend to supply the necessary data. "I asked
Grace Hopper if she could send me a cost estimate for implementing the
compiler. She estimated that it would cost Sperry Rand $945,000 and 45½
man-years of effort," she recalled. "In no way was this language going to be
an interim solution. This language was it!"23 In the weeks after the initial
meeting at the Pentagon, it became readily apparent to most members of the
short-term committee that the burden of inventing the common business
language rested squarely on their shoulders, despite the stated roles of the
three committees.
The first round of meetings took place 7-9 July at a lakeside resort near
Battle Creek, Michigan. Nora Taylor, another member of the short-term
committee and a close colleague of Hopper's, thought it amusing that
committee members were instructed to bring bathing suits to the meeting.
Though the majority of the committee's time was spent wading through the
surveys sent out to a multitude of computer facilities, the group did find
time to enjoy the resort.
The survey of users verified that automatic programming had become
both an accepted and a desired method. Half of the users surveyed were
already employing Hopper's FLOW-MATIC business language. Companies
and organizations that used automatic programming reduced average
training time of new users from 2 months to 2 weeks, and applications were
up and running in 2-3 weeks rather than the more typical 2-3 months.
Users cited time savings in coding, debugging, and testing, and compiled
programs were considered about 80-90 percent as efficient as human-

generated programs. The complaints cited most often were lengthy compile
time, awkward language structure, and subroutine limitations. The most
common business application requests were for payroll, sales statistics,
pension plans, premium billing, inventory control, and production control.24
After confirming user's preferences, noting complaints, and identifying
the most common applications, the short-term committee assigned a smaller
statement language subcommittee to assess the strengths and weaknesses of
existing automatic business compilers. The three main candidates for
review were FLOW-MATIC, AIMACO, and COMTRAN, although
Autocoder III, SURGE, FORTRAN, RCA 501 Assembler, Report Generator
(GE), and APG-1 (Dupont) were also to be considered. As of July 1959,
FLOW-MATIC and AIMACO were operational, while IBM's Commercial
Translator (COMTRAN) existed only on paper. Jean Sammet, a former
UNIVAC programmer who supervised the advanced programming
department at Sylvania, prepared a comparative study of language functions
for FLOWMATIC I, FLOWMATIC II, COMTRAN, and AIMACO that
was presented at the 22 July meeting in Washington. The untiring efforts of
Sammet and others that summer earned the short-term committee the
nickname "The P.D.Q. [Pretty Damn Quick] Group."
The criteria the study used to judge the languages were naturalness of
language, effectiveness in structuring data-processing problems, and ease of
implementation. For example, when looking at language structure, the study
considered how many individual sentences could be combined, whether a
sentence could contain more than one function word, and to what extent the
language could tolerate extraneous words and misspellings. Data
management was also considered, especially data descriptions and the
movement of data (input, output, sorting).25
AIMACO was an Air Force derivative of FLOW-MATIC, so it differed
only marginally from the UNIVAC languages. COMTRAN's specifications,
on the other hand, included flexible GOTO and IF-THEN functions and a
search function, and permitted programmers to use mathematical symbols
instead of English when describing formulas. Roy Goldfinger, the author of
the COMTRAN manual and a member of the intermediate-term committee,
attended the statement language subcommittee's meeting (held 22-24 July
in Washington) to support his creation and to encourage the use of algebraic
expressions.26

When word of the direction of the committee discussions got back to
Grace Hopper, she responded with a heated memorandum to the short-term
committee (dated 28 July 1959). Hopper reiterated that since 1954 Sperry
Rand had led the industry in its effort to develop "problem-oriented, user-
oriented languages" that aimed to use basic English as the chief input. "It is
not the intention of Sperry Rand," Hopper wrote, "to progress backwards by
introducing mathematical symbols and banning adjectives, etc. etc."
Therefore, it was imperative that the committee focus on creating the
specifications for a compiler suitable for the commercial customer, not for
mathematicians and programmers. "If the language developed by the
statement language committee continues in the direction in which it is
headed," Hopper threatened, "Sperry Rand will not implement it." Instead,
Sperry Rand would break from the CODASYL effort and would "supply its
customers the first and the best use of English possible at any given stage of
the art." Hopper ended the memo with a caustic challenge to the short-term
committee: "Sperry Rand would like to support the development of a
common data-processing language, but suggests that such a language will
probably have to be developed by people familiar with business data-
processing problems and not by mathematicians and programmers."27
According to Hopper, throughout the fall of 1959 the short-term
committee took her advice to heart and used FLOW-MATIC as the
blueprint for the new language's specifications. In fact, Hopper asserted that
entire sections of the FLOW-MATIC manual itself had been copied because
of time constraints imposed by the executive committee and the DOD.28
The most significant concept that the short-term committee borrowed was
the application of basic English to describe both data and the procedures to
be executed.29 This meant that FLOW-MATIC-type operational verbs,
sentence structure, and full alphanumerical descriptions of data (no
abbreviations) found their way into COBOL. Jean Sammet, a member of
the short-term committee, concurred with Grace Hopper's claim that
COBOL was highly influenced by FLOW-MATIC, though she also
maintained that the languages were not one and the same.30
As for the other two languages reviewed by the short-term committee,
little could be gained from AIMACO, itself a derivative of FLOW-MATIC.
In 1958, Colonel Alfred Asch (a member of the short-term committee) and
his programming team at the Air Force Air Materiel Command in Dayton
had modified FLOW-MATIC to run on a UNIVAC 1105. At the time of the

first CODASYL meeting, Asch was attempting to improve on the original
by introducing limited portability. According to Sammet, the project was
never completed once COBOL was accepted as the DOD standard.31
IBM's Commercial Translator (COMTRAN), like many of the
company's other products, was "announced" to IBM customers and
potential customers well before it was close to completion. The technique
permitted the powerful firm to gauge the receptivity of the marketplace
while the potential product was still in the design phase. To the dismay of
IBM's competitors, many customers rejected rival products on the promise
that IBM would produce what it pledged.32 As of 1959, COMTRAN existed
only as a series of specifications, but the short-term committee regarded it
as a competitor to FLOW-MATIC. Much like FLOW-MATIC, COMTRAN
was to be an English-based language, but its specifications included some
notable differences, which were incorporated into COBOL's design. These
included a powerful conditional IF-THEN that enhanced the naturalness of
the language (by making it unnecessary to write multiple JUMP or GOTO
commands) and a more robust file-management system that included
suffixing, searching, and layered data description.33
FACT AND THE POLITICS OF LANGUAGE STANDARDIZATION
In the fall of 1959, another business programming language was much
farther along in the development process than IBM's COMTRAN, yet its
characteristics were not incorporated into the initial COBOL specifications.
The creative mind behind FACT (Fully Automatic Compiling Technique)
was Roy Nutt, who had developed the specifications for the language 5
months before the first CODASYL meetings. Nutt, who had worked on
FORTRAN's development while on loan to IBM from United Aircraft, was
an extraordinary programmer with an ability to anticipate errors just by
looking at the code.
Nutt and his associate Fletcher Jones (of the newly formed Computer
Science Corporation) approached Richard Clippinger, the head of software
development for the Honeywell 800 computer, concerning the construction
of a powerful business data-processing language. Nutt's design represented
the most complex and robust computer language to date, requiring several
hundred thousand instructions to complete.34

By October 1959 (according to Jack Strong, a member of the
intermediate-range CODASYL committee), Roy Nutt's FACT manual had
found its way into the hands of members of the short-range committee and
members of the intermediate-range committee. Serious programmers on
both committees admired FACT for its flexible input/output system and its
intuitive data-description and record-retrieval functionality. Built-in error-
checking 
and 
information-compression 
capabilities 
impressed 
the
intermediate-range committee to the extent that it passed the following
resolution on 14 October 1959 by a vote of 15 to 1, with two abstentions:
IRTF II recognizes that the Honeywell Business Compiler represents the most advanced compiler
specifications existent at this date, and recommends to the executive committee that the Honeywell
Business Compiler specifications be the basis for the first stage Common Business Language.35
After the resolution vote, Jack Strong recalled, "we all went home, secure in
our thoughts that significant improvements would be incorporated in the
design of COBOL."36 But much to Strong's surprise, supporters of a
FLOW-MATIC-based COBOL would overturn the intermediate-range
committee's resolution, leaving FACT, CSC, and Honeywell out in the cold.
Jean Sammet remembered that the intermediate-range committee
resolution "had the effect of a major bombing" on the spirits of the short-
term committee. The short-term committee was well along in defining its
specifications by October 1959, and to scrap the work done thus far and
make FACT the basis for COBOL was unthinkable. Sammet freely admitted
that FACT was indeed the technically superior language by the fall of 1959.
The language's advantages, however, were diminished by the fact that its
creators did not concern themselves with machine portability, nor did they
build consensus among manufacturers and users.37
But not all motivations for blocking FACT in favor of FLOW-MATIC
were so innocent. Howard Bromberg (RCA's representative and a member
of the original "idea team" that approached Charles Phillips) worked many
hours with Sammet and the short-term committee to create COBOL's
specifications. At the same time, Bromberg fed technical data to his RCA
team. "We kept about one week behind the committee," he stated later.
"RCA wanted to commercialize COBOL as a product to have a marketing
edge."38 By scrapping COBOL and starting over with FACT, RCA would
lose both its technical and its economic advantage.

As tensions mounted and Honeywell threatened to develop FACT on its
own, IBM's commitment to COBOL began to waver. On the one hand,
IBM, as the largest computer manufacturer, had much to gain from an easy-
to-use common business language. Expanding access to computers via
COBOL would increase the size of the hardware market. But because of
IBM's growing dominance within that market by 1959, there was a strong
chance that COMTRAN, once operational, would evolve into the standard
common business language. This hope was supported by the growing
popularity of FORTRAN by the end of the 1950s. FORTRAN was the most
widely used language on IBM equipment,39 and UNIVAC was planning a
FORTRAN compiler for its next generation of computers, signaling the
demise of Hopper's MATH-MATIC.40
Mounting tensions among the manufacturers prompted one of the more
colorful moments in the history of programming. Sometime during
November 1959, a depressed Howard Bromberg was driving in New Jersey
when he came across a place where cemetery monuments were sold. As he
slowed the car, a child's marble tombstone with the image of a lamb
engraved on it caught his eye. Bromberg stopped the car, purchased the
tombstone, and had the letters COBOL carved and gold-leafed below the
lamb. Bromberg took the tombstone home, built a crate for it, and shipped it
express to Phillips's office in the Pentagon. Grace Hopper recalled that the
tombstone was meant to remind Phillips of the precarious position in which
the infant common business language found itself during the late fall of
1959: "COBOL is about to die, do something."41 But according to Phillips,
the tombstone represented a much different message. "Obviously," Phillips
recalled, "someone did not wish the COBOL program well, and was very
kindly providing the chairman with a marker for the grave."42
As the December deadline for technical specifications approached, a
FLOW-MATIC-based COBOL had enough supporters to avoid an early
grave. For one thing, Howard Bromberg's connection to FLOW-MATIC ran
deeper than the economic advantage accrued by RCA. Bromberg—a former
member of Grace Hopper's Computation Analysis Laboratory—had
designed the RCA Automatic Programming Group in its image. "Having
worked for Grace Hopper, I worked for RCA carrying her banner and using
the techniques that she taught me," wrote Bromberg.43 A closer inspection
of the short-term committee's makeup reveals a substantial number of
Hopper protégés. Jean Sammet worked for Sperry Rand before going to

Sylvania. Betty Holberton, Nora Taylor, and Mary Hawes were longtime
colleagues of Hopper's, and in particular Holberton and Hopper worked
side by side to create the original programming department at the Eckert-
Mauchly Computer Corporation. Colonel Alfred Asch was responsible for
AIMACO, the Air Force language derived directly from FLOW-MATIC.
Finally, committee members E. F. Somers, William Finley, and Dan
Goldstein were all gainfully employed by Hopper at UNIVAC as of 1959.
The pro-FLOW-MATIC short-term committee approved the final
specifications despite objections from individuals and organizations inside
and outside CODASYL. The final report outlined the specifications for
COBOL and insisted that it be the only common business language
sponsored by CODASYL. No modifications of the language would be
permitted except through consultation with a permanent COBOL
maintenance committee whose initial membership, unsurprisingly, would be
made up of members of the short-term committee.44
The final report also contained a letter from Honeywell rejecting the
short-term committee's findings. C. H. Gaudette, manager of Honeywell's
Automatic Programming Department, praised the short-term committee's
efforts and admired the collaboration of traditional competitors. Ultimately,
however, the committee's findings could not fulfill the needs of
Honeywell's business customers. Gaudette noted these deficiencies:
(1)  The lack of a powerful output processor
(2)  The inability to process card input files directly
(3)  The absence of built-in sort routines
(4)  The weakness of handling records of a highly variable nature
Naturally, these deficiencies could be corrected by making FACT,
Honeywell's business language, the nucleus of a revised COBOL.45
On 17 December 1959, the COBOL report was sent to the CODASYL
executive committee for final approval. Much like the short-term
committee, the Executive Committee was made up of people who were
already familiar with FLOW-MATIC. E. J. Albertson (U.S. Steel) and
Gregory Dillon (Dupont) represented UNIVAC customers. Eugene Smith
(Navy) and Joseph Cunningham (Air Force) were friends of Hopper, who
herself was the committee's senior technical advisor. In January 1960, the
executive committee approved the report of the short-term committee and
assigned Betty Holberton to edit the document for publication. Changes that

were made to COBOL from that point on were reviewed by the newly
formed COBOL maintenance committee and approved by the executive
committee. In April the official COBOL report was published and
distributed by the Government Printing Office.
During the summer of 1960, RCA and the UNIVAC Division of Sperry
Rand turned the April report into a functioning language. The first complete
and accurate COBOL compilation (17 August 1960) was done on an RCA
501. By December 1960, RCA and Sperry Rand had confirmed the
portability potential of the new language. The two companies each wrote a
business application program in COBOL source code, interchanged the
programs, and ran them successfully on a UNIVAC II and an RCA 501.46
The executive committee's approval of COBOL (60) coupled with RCA
and RAND's efforts did not stop the controversy, and the battle over the
standard raged throughout the year, prompting Jean Sammet to author a
passionate plea for support. In a report dated 2 December 1960, Sammet
wrote:
The lack of completion of final and complete COBOL specifications is due primarily to certain
companies and individuals who have refused to work from the present language and prefer to "start
all over." These persons and their companies have done a great disservice to the COBOL effort by
refusing to face the fact that the present specifications do exist, are being implemented, and are being
used to write and run successful data processing problems.47
The main culprits were the manufacturers who had invested heavily in
developing other English-based business languages, hoping instead that
their own language would become the de facto standard. But according to
Sammet, some users were also undermining the COBOL effort. In
particular, companies and organizations that operated only one type of
machine were less concerned with portability and hoped to see the
establishment of a much more powerful language than that proposed by
CODASYL. For instance, D. A. Nelson of the Lockheed Aircraft
Corporation wrote to Charles Phillips shortly after the executive
committee's approval of COBOL to express "dissatisfaction with the
lifeless camel of a language which is to become . . . the programming
language for business data processing." Nelson echoed the concerns of
others, accusing the short-term committee of being "derelict in their duties"
in failing to define a truly revolutionary language and instead offered one
with a "scope barely wider than that of FLOW-MATIC."48 Through the

firestorm of opinions, Sammet expressed hope that "those who now oppose
COBOL—either actively or passively—will stop condemning it long
enough to give it a chance to succeed."49
Grace Hopper running COBOL on a UNIVAC II. Courtesy of Computer History Museum.
COBOL: THE SUCCESS OF A PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE
In the years that followed the publication of COBOL, scores of people
predicted the demise of the experimental common business language. Their
forecasts were not the unapprised views of a pessimistic few but rather the
sound, informed observations of computer community elite, ranging from
master programmers to computer industry executives. The critique of
COBOL included complaints about the language's semantic verbosity, its
syntactical redundancy, and its overall lack of linguistic elegance.
Mathematically inclined users cursed the upstart language's inability to
accept formulas and symbols. Astute programmers felt disconnected from

the hardware of the machine. What was supposed to empower the user
seemed to restrict programming creativity and hampered one's ability to
commune directly with the computer.
Even a few members of the short-range committee averred the claims of
COBOL skeptics. The first compilers had some serious limitations,
especially when conjoined with the available hardware of the day. State-of-
the-art processors had difficulty dealing with the verbose, high-level
language. Moreover, inefficient object code generated by the COBOL
compilers used up internal computer memory, a precious resource that in
1960 was measured in dollars per byte. (At 1960s rates, today's average
laptop computer contains millions of dollars of memory.)
More surprising, criticisms of COBOL were aimed at the very process of
its technical invention, a process that mirrored Hopper's own style of
distributed innovation. Many did not feel comfortable with the prospect of
"innovation by committee," including some who were part of that process.
As Howard Bromberg stated, "little control was exercised over the
development effort and the degree of guidance normally expected from a
group of top-level technical managers was not forthcoming." The COBOL
process of invention did not correlate well with preconceived notions of
invention. There was no heroic inventor like Thomas Edison or Elmer
Sperry who passed down a singular guiding vision. Instead, "the COBOL
committee was plagued by discontinuity of personnel and more often than
not by a lack of talent."50 Howard Bromberg's comment concerning talent is
particularly troubling, in view of the fact that committee members such as
Betty Holberton, Jean Sammet, Mary Hawes, and Nora Taylor were the
most experienced programmers in the business. None of them had a
traditional pedigree of the kind more commonly held by their male
counterparts in the industry, but few women of their generation did. Indeed,
some COBOL skeptics concluded that the fruits of such an unstructured,
female-dominated process could not be expected to survive, let alone
flourish.
But COBOL did flourish on an unprecedented scale, despite the warnings
of the experts. In the 10 years after its introduction, COBOL became the
most widely used programming language throughout the world. By the turn
of the millennium, it was estimated, 240 billion of the 300 billion lines of
computer code (about 80 percent of all code worldwide) was written in
COBOL. Because 95 percent of finance and insurance data was processed

in COBOL, the fear of computer glitches on a global scale mounted as the
year 2000 approached. "Y2K" anxieties were based on the fact that the
CODASYL committee, for reasons probably connected to memory
conservation, adopted a two-digit convention to represent that year. Hence,
as year fields worldwide switched from "99" to "00," the potential threat of
an array of arithmetic, comparison, and sorting errors emerged. The efforts
of thousands of COBOL programmers, may of whom came out of
retirement in the years leading up to 2000, fixed the vast majority of the
Y2K bugs, and the millennium began with little cyber-fanfare.51
As with all technologies that proliferate, COBOL's long-term success
was far from inevitable and rested on a combination of interrelated factors.
The most obvious were specific actions by Charles Phillips, chairman of the
CODASYL committee. In effect, Phillips used the economic weight of the
Department of Defense to put pressure on uncooperative companies. On 12
August 1960, Phillips wrote a personal letter to computer manufacturers
asking for a commitment to support, develop, and implement the common
business language created by the CODASYL committee. This request was
given financial gravity when Phillips required all future DOD computer
procurements to be bundled with a working COBOL compiler.
In view of the purchasing power of the Department of Defense in the
early 1960s, even the largest manufacturers were forced to fulfill the DOD's
requirement.52 This did not mean, however, that IBM put other initiatives on
hold. Shortly after Phillips's DOD policy announcement, a senior IBM
executive wrote to inform Phillips that IBM intended to complete COBOL
processors for its line of computers by the third quarter of 1961. He also
mentioned that IBM's customers were still interested in using COMTRAN,
and that IBM had distributed Commercial Translator manuals 3 months
earlier.
Phillips's actions may have created a temporary demand for COBOL
compilers, but, as IBM's actions proved, DOD policy in no way guaranteed
the sustained use and subsequent spread of the contentious language. For
Betty Holberton and its other creators, COBOL's successful proliferation
could be attributed in part to the design of the technology itself . For all of
the slights about COBOL's capabilities, Holberton was a true believer in the
language. She had attended the first CODASYL meeting, had been a
member of the short-term committee, and had edited the final COBOL
specifications. Her fondness for the language was personal as well as

professional. Having dedicated a year of her life to the creation of the
common business language, she was convinced that the committee had
done its best to find a technological solution to the future needs of users and
manufacturers.
Holberton's 15 years of programming experience, matched only by
Hopper's longevity in the field, contributed to her belief that COBOL's
positive design aspects outweighed the technical limitations identified by a
variety of other computer experts. She defended the English-based pseudo-
code (criticized by many as verbose and inefficient) on the ground that the
language had been developed for future users, not for present programming
experts. The next generation of computer users needed a language that
could be learned quickly. The self-documenting nature of the English
pseudo-code permitted a programmer to easily understand the work of
another and build upon it, which made COBOL ideal for collaborative
programming efforts in which multiple people worked on the same data-
processing problem. The flexible file nomenclature did not require the user
to change the definitions on preexisting data files, only the style of writing
the program. This was important when converting older programs to the
new COBOL format. Holberton's experience in managing data-processing
installations, combined with her deep knowledge of programming, helped
her to appreciate these more subtle COBOL design characteristics. During
the 1950s an elite of mathematics-oriented programmers dominated the
field, but with the exponential spread of computers during the 1960s others
gained access to computers. The new users, less interested in the "art" of
programming, just wanted to solve data-processing problems. They were
the first generation of programmers who knew little about the workings of
computer hardware and who therefore appreciated a computer language that
served as an intermediary between them and the machine.
GRACE HOPPER AND THE SPREAD OF COBOL
No matter how well designed a new technology appears to be, it cannot
spread spontaneously. A new technology spreads by means of the
continuous actions of hundreds and thousands of users, manufacturers, and
intermediaries. But not everyone associated with a new product or idea is
equal in his or her ability to influence the expanding technological system.
Some individuals are connected in special ways throughout the

technological system. They have the ability to influence both micro and
macro outcomes, and their actions have ripple effects. Despite Betty
Holberton's accolades for the technology itself , she and others continually
acknowledged Grace Hopper as the person most responsible for the success
of COBOL during the 1960s.
How can a single person influence widespread technical change? Modern
society appears too large and complex for individual actions to carry much
weight. This is especially true in the realm of technology, where new
products and practices seem to appear and proliferate of their own accord.
Technological progress is something that simply happens. It is the
inevitability of society focused on the future.
Hopper understood that technology did not exist apart from society. A
technology's logical design would not guarantee its ultimate acceptance. A
multitude of cultural, social, political, and economic factors figured in the
acceptance or rejection of a given technology, be it a car, a camera, or a
computer language. "Because of early difficulties . . . prejudices, inertia,
normal reluctance to change procedures, some remaining technological
imperfections," Hopper wrote in a detailed report to the Navy explaining
why the institution's leadership needed to make a concerted effort to push
COBOL as the service's business language standard, "it will be necessary to
supply motivation for the use of COBOL." COBOL would not sell itself;
the concerted efforts of a variety of people were needed. This brings up an
interesting point concerning the process of invention. Invention does not
stop with the creation of a prototype. Prototypes must be actively marketed
by their creators, or by proxies for their creators, in order to gain
acceptance. The marketing process, ideally, feeds back into the technology's
design, embedding in the physical artifact social, economic, and political
attributes that further its chance of survival. In effect, Hopper's support of
COBOL did not begin in 1960; it began in 1951 with the invention of the A-
0 compiler. Since then Grace Hopper had been automatic programming's
most energetic proponent, and COBOL was the next iteration of that
grander vision.53
What had changed by 1960 was Hopper's status within the maturing
computer industry. The prominent pioneer had levers that few within the
computing community possessed during the 1960s. Her position as director
of automated programming at the number-two computer manufacturer
conferred on her influence over senior management within Sperry Rand and

over other senior computer executives. She was also one of the most senior
women in the Naval Reserve, serving as a technical advisor to the largest
consumer of computers, the Department of Defense.54
Within the world of computers, Hopper was a connector, a role that few
people were capable of playing during the 1960s. Malcolm Gladwell, a
science writer for the Washington Post and The New Yorker, eloquently
describes the importance of "connectors" in technological revolutions in his
2002 book The Tipping Point. Gladwell employs the biological theory of
epidemics as his chief metaphor to relate how new technologies propagate
rapidly. Epidemics are a function of the particular attributes of the
infectious agent, of the behavior of the carriers of the infectious agents, and
of the environment in which the infectious agent is introduced. The three
elements interact to determine how quickly the epidemic spreads.
For instance, the AIDS virus spreads via exchange of fluids. Activities
that facilitate such exchange, such as unprotected sex and the sharing of
needles, are the chief vehicles for the virus. At the beginning of the
epidemic, it was not the actions of all those infected but the activities of a
handful of "connectors" who engaged repeatedly in high-risk behaviors that
influenced the early progression of the virus.
To shine a more positive light on the epidemic metaphor, Gladwell
substitutes for the spread of disease the flow of information, and tells the
story of the most honored "connector" of the American Revolution: Paul
Revere. During the night of 18 April 1775, America's famous equestrian
was not the only person riding into the Massachusetts night to warn that the
British were coming. William Dawes, Samuel Prescott, and more than 60
others also got on their horses to spread the word. Why then do we
remember Revere's name but not the names of the many others who rode?
According to Gladwell, it is because, like Grace Hopper, Paul Revere was a
connector. His prominence in local Bostonian politics and in various
revolutionary organizations allowed him to construct the groundwork for
spreading the message in the months and years leading up to the fateful
night.55
The epidemic metaphor is relevant to the dissemination of COBOL as
well as to Grace Hopper's role as a connector. Instead of a virus with
unique biological characteristics, there existed in 1960 a prototype of a
common business language with certain design attributes. In the post-
Sputnik, Cold War-era United States, the overall demand for computers was

on the rise, as was the need for programmers. Into this environment stepped
Hopper as a connector. With the ability to operate in a variety of different
subcultures, connecting users with programmers and industry executives
with senior military officers, she translated her computing vision into a
language that each of these groups understood, communicating complex
technology to technically savvy people and nontechnical people alike. Her
special gifts and unique position allowed her to drive the COBOL
"epidemic" forward.
COBOL STANDARDIZATION AND THE NAVY
On 1 January 1967, Commander Grace Hopper was placed on the Naval
Reserve's retirement list. Two years earlier she had stepped down as
Director of Automatic Programming in the UNIVAC Division of Sperry
Rand. Though she remained with UNIVAC as a senior staff scientist, from
all appearances the 60-year-old Hopper was slowly making the transition to
retirement.
Hopper's 1966 report to the Navy recommending the full implementation
of COBOL began with a two-page discussion of a general theory of
language. She explained that a primary characteristic of intelligent life is
the ability to communicate: "Man's brain enables him to learn an elaborate
system of rules both for communication with others and for control of his
own mental processes. Man, having created rules, added a generative
potential—rules can produce consistent but flexible (i.e., contingent)
systems—making languages possible." The elements of code that make up
a language, following a system of rules, combine in almost unlimited
combinations to creating meaning. But the key, according to Hopper, is to
have orators and listeners agree on both codes and rules. "Surely," she
writes, "the story of Babel is the lesson of the destruction of standards."56
For Hopper, computer languages were no different than any other human
language. COBOL, in particular, was an artificial dialect, made up of
English words and some parts of English syntax, that followed agreed-upon
rules. The artificial language permitted humans to communicate an exact
description of data and the algorithms or procedures to be followed in the
solution of business problems by computer. What made it unique was that
the language could also communicate by means of a compiler with a variety
of computer hardware and translate exact descriptions into machine

instructions.57 Linguistic history shows that over time languages tend to
standardize in order to increase the efficiency of communication between
people. Hopper put it this way: "Thus it seems that COBOL is but one of
many efforts in science and technology to standardize terminology and
syntax in order to provide better communications between men concerning
a particular class of activities."58
COBOL AND TECHNOLOGICAL CLOSURE
COBOL is distinctive within the history of technology, for it represents a
technological artifact consciously and deliberately designed and selected by
a number of social groups with competing interests. Although
manufacturers, users, administrators, and engineers typically participate in
what social constructivists refer to as the "closure" of artifact design,59
technological stabilization is usually a much more random process, with
standards organically emerging from the struggles between heterogeneous
organizations and individuals.
The story of COBOL has some elements of randomness, but the intention
of Hopper, Phillips, and the other CODASYL members was to create a
forum to rationalize the design process and generate consensus apart from
the marketplace. Not only was a standardized technology blueprint
produced and approved by January 1960; the intermediate-term and long-
term committees had grander visions. In effect, the intermediate-term
committee was charged with inventing the next generation following the
"state-of-the-art" design of the short-term committee. Even more ambitious,
the envisioned long-term committee was supposed to then design the
"ultimate" state of the art that would unify all programming languages into
one.
In the end, the short-term committee's design, which was meant to be
temporary, became the de facto COBOL standard. Though individual
manufacturers made changes to the language as the 1960s progressed,
COBOL did not degenerate into a large number of dialects, as occurred with
FORTRAN.60 The intermediate-term committee had little influence over
future COBOL developments, while the long-term committee was never
even established. By the late 1970s, COBOL was the most extensively used
computer language, and more than 80 percent of all business applications
were written in the FLOW-MATIC-based language.

OceanofPDF.com

12    INVENTING THE INFORMATION AGE
As the 1950s came to a close, Sperry Rand's director of programming
research Grace Hopper conducted an "experiment" to demonstrate how far
the field of software development had advanced in the 15 years since she
wrote her first code. Hopper would attempt to turn a "trim, attractive
blonde" into a computer programmer. Hopper's subject—Marilyn Mealey, a
19-year-old high school graduate from the Mayfair section of Philadelphia
—was "prettier than average" and liked to swim and listen to records.
According to Hopper, Marilyn was much like other young women who
"window shop during their lunch hours and look forward to the evening's
dates and dancing."1
The experiment's results were published in Popular Electronics, a
magazine with an overwhelmingly male audience of gadget lovers who
must have been amused at the thought of a young woman barely out of high
school programming a computer. Anyone with even a limited knowledge of
computers knew that communicating with multi-million-dollar mechanical
brains was a task best left to highly educated professionals. Only the
sharpest mathematical and scientific minds could write computer code, and
there was no place in the growing industry for pretty blondes from the
Mayfair section of Philadelphia.
Grace Hopper believed otherwise. In fact, Marilyn Mealey embodied
Hopper's 15-year crusade to democratize the computer industry. Hopper
invented the fundamental technologies that permitted humans to efficiently
communicate with complex calculating machines. Subroutine libraries,
pseudo-code (source code), decision branching, debugging routines, and
compilers were the building blocks for all future high-end computer
languages. But it was Hopper's relentless promotion of a "computer age"
that gave her technological creations contextual meaning. If computers
were merely a tool for the scientific elite, as her former boss Howard Aiken
believed, then there was no need for automatic programming. Hopper
envisioned a future wherein computers would be indispensable to a diverse
set of people and organizations. In such a world, both elite mathematicians
and high school graduates would need to converse with the machines.

Hopper's example runs counter to the well-known adage that necessity is
the mother of invention. Hopper "invented" not because of a glaring need in
her immediate present, but because of a "potential" need in a "possible"
future. To complicate matters, the probability of success of that possible
future was dependent on not only the technologies Hopper invented but also
on her relentless promotion of a particular future that incorporated those
technologies. An inventor not only invents a technology but also formulates
a future need for that technology. In this light, Hopper's skills in writing
and in oratory were as important as her technical and mathematical acumen.
Marilyn Mealey also represented Hopper's continued struggle to keep the
new technical field gender neutral. Computers were not only for men, nor
were they just for exceptional women such as Hopper. By purposefully
picking a young, attractive blonde, Hopper aimed to shatter stereotypes.
"New opportunities for women in electronics have been created by the wide
scale application of computers to business and scientific work," she wrote
in the Popular Electronics article.2 By connecting the growing electronics
industry with new opportunities for women, Hopper aimed to expand a
legacy that she had worked so hard to create.
HOPPER'S CAREER IN THE CONTEXT OF THE HISTORY OF PROGRAMMING
In many ways, Hopper's career mirrors the rise in prominence of the
programming profession. Howard Aiken and Presper Eckert did not foresee
the difficulties inherent in the operation of their machines. Fortunately,
Grace Hopper, Richard Bloch, Betty Snyder (Holberton), John Mauchly,
and others brought the hardware to life. Initially responding to wartime
necessity, these pioneers developed early coding techniques, debugging
practices, subroutine principles, and batch processing procedures that
confirmed the utility of the new technology at a time when the computer's
future success was far from inevitable.
As the technology was transferred from the laboratory to business and
government installations in the late 1940s and the early 1950s, Hopper
believed programming to be the chief technical bottleneck that hindered the
spread of electronic computers.3 The costs associated with defining an
application and writing and debugging the necessary programs began to
outstrip the price of the hardware. Hopper first attempted to deal with this
mounting programming crisis through better organization, training, and

maximum personal effort. At Harvard University and at the Eckert-Mauchly
Computer Corporation (and later at Remington Rand), her superior
managerial skills were employed to train and organize new programmers in
order to make the machines more productive.
But by the fall of 1951 Hopper was searching desperately for a technical
solution that would help computers "educate" themselves. Her eloquent
solution, which she named a compiler, was a master program that could call
on relevant subroutines and could manage address and memory allocation,
thus relieving the human programmer from the most difficult and menial
"housekeeping" tasks.
Compilers, Hopper believed, were the key to "democratizing" computers.
They would enable many more people—even the likes of Marilyn Mealey
—to communicate with the mechanical giants. Instead of forcing the human
to learn machine language, she made the computer learn English, French,
German, or any other human language. This concept was embedded into
Hopper's business language FLOW-MATIC, which would serve as the
blueprint for COBOL (still the most widely used computer language).
LESSONS OF TECHNICAL INNOVATION
There is much to learn from Grace Hopper's approach to invention and
innovation. Some lessons are apparent; others are quite unexpected. If we
view Hopper's early career as a case study in innovation, we can glean
some principles that help to explain her success in rapidly advancing the
field of computer programming while also providing compelling guidelines
for present-day innovators.
EMPOWER YOUTH
Hopper had the habit of assigning the most difficult technical problems to
the youngest and least experienced members of a team. Mildred Koss,
shortly after arriving at the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation, was
handed the task of having the UNIVAC automatically edit its data for
printing. The result was Koss's "editing generator," a sophisticated piece of
code that created margins, titles, headings, and page numbers on the fly and
represented the first attempt to use a computer for word processing. Harry
Kahrimanian, just out of college, got an even more daunting assignment: he
was asked to create a program that could automatically solve differential
equations. Kahrimanian's differentiator was a watershed in applied

mathematics. The user had merely to enter the equation and indicate the
number of n derivatives; the computer did the rest. Kahrimanian's
achievement was even more impressive in light of Hopper's own long and
arduous experience working alongside the famed mathematician John von
Neumann to solve differential equations on the Harvard Mark I. Had
Kahrimanian's differentiator been available to von Neumann and Hopper,
they could have solved the Manhattan Project's implosion problem in days
instead of months.
Common sense would dictate that the most experienced programmers
should have been assigned to these difficult tasks, but, as Hopper glibly
explained, young people did not know that they were supposed to fail. On a
deeper level, Hopper understood that "experts," be they senior engineers,
experienced programmers, or business executives, have difficulty seeing
beyond the borders of their specialty. Education, tradition, and community
culture create a stable mental framework that helps to explain reality yet
also hinders one's ability to see alternative approaches or adjust to ever-
changing 
circumstances. 
Hopper 
felt 
that 
young, 
inexperienced
programmers often had the ability to look beyond "what is" and grasp
"what could be."
LEARN FROM THE MARGINS
Since youth is fleeting, Hopper discovered that one could maintain a
"youthful," creative outlook by constantly broadening one's own
knowledge base. Her self-education began during her days as a professor at
Vassar College and continued through her stints at Harvard and Remington
Rand. At Vassar, Hopper stretched beyond mathematics and audited classes
in astronomy, physics, chemistry, geology, biology, zoology, economics,
architecture, philosophy, and the history of scientific thought. Besides
educating herself in computer hardware and programming while at Harvard,
Hopper became quite an expert in military affairs, and was one of the first
women to attend the prestigious Naval War College. During her lengthy
corporate career, the adaptable Hopper mastered the machinations of a
variety of diverse industries, ranging from insurance to aerospace
engineering. As a result, her mind was informed enough to transcend her
own intellectual discipline. She had freed herself from any particular
methodology, and could approach problems from a variety of angles. In a
sense, Hopper's flexible intellect mirrored that of a general computer, for

both could adapt to the changing needs of the customer. After learning how
a given business or other organization functioned, Hopper could outline
detailed computer applications to automate or streamline aspects of the
business, from payroll and accounting to industrial process control. Her
analysis was captured in code, which turned the general computer into one
specifically configured to meet the customer's needs. Herein lies the true
power of the computer revolution: generalized hardware that could be
specialized in a thousand different ways by software. Hopper not only
grasped this relationship; she helped to invent it.
DISTRIBUTED INVENTION: THE MORE MINDS, THE BETTER
Despite how developed and flexible her own mind had become, Hopper
recognized that the more brainpower working together on a given technical
problem, the better the outcome. I refer to Hopper's organizational
approach to innovation as distributed invention. Learning from the Harvard
Computation Laboratory's unconstructive tendency to isolate itself from
other computer research programs, Hopper understood that, in the long
term, a distributed network of inventors, each with his or her particular
technical perspective, could sustain a faster rate of innovation than an
individual inventor or an isolated team of inventors.
The development of the compiler serves as a case study in distributed
invention. Though Hopper created the original A-0 compiler on her own
between October 1952 and May 1953, she soon shared her prototype with a
number of programmers and users. Through the summer and fall of 1953,
personnel at the Census Bureau, the Air Force Air Comptroller, the Army
Map Service, the David Taylor Model Basin, Lawrence Livermore
Laboratory, New York University, and the Bureau of Ships were
experimenting with Hopper's compiler. This network generated a
continuous stream of feedback and rewritten code that led quickly to the
more advanced A-1 and A-2 versions of the program.
Hopper's system of invention differs substantially from the notion of the
inventor as a heroic genius working alone in a laboratory or a basement.
Such a vision is embedded deeply in the American sense of individualism,
and is institutionalized in the many awards and prizes that are bestowed on
individual inventors and scientists. Hopper believed that the process of
invention should not be confined to herself , her staff , or even her
company. Information flowed smoothly between her team and other

organizations, with Hopper serving as the conductor of invention rather
than its dictator. Today's freeware and open source movements preserve this
doctrine. The roots, however, go back to Hopper and her team of distributed
inventors.
PROACTIVE INVENTION: INVENTOR AS SALESMAN
It is important to note the two roles that Grace Hopper played during the
development of what she referred to as automatic programming. First, she
was the inventor. She wrote the first compiler, and she directed her
programming staff and others to improve and expand on her initial
invention. This led to A-0 through A-3, MATH-MATIC, and FLOW-
MATIC. Hopper's second role, however, was as important as the first. She
applied her collaborative skills and became the chief marketer of the
automatic programming concept. During the 1950s, much of her energy was
spent spreading the gospel of automatic programming through lectures,
articles, and conference presentations. She was responsible for setting up a
series of conferences and workshops dedicated to teaching others how to
apply her inventions. Hopper's example confirms the theories of the
historians Thomas Hughes and W. Bernard Carlson, who have proposed that
famous innovators such as Elmer Sperry, Thomas Edison, and Elihu
Thomson were responsible not only for the invention of new technologies
but also for the integration of those technologies into the economic,
political, and social fabric of society. Proactive invention extends well
beyond the initial moments of creative inspiration; it involves the patient,
time-intensive construction of a sustainable infrastructure that supports the
new technology. Hopper, like other elite inventors, successfully nurtured
her creations through the precarious early stages of technological
development. Eventually they became self-sustaining technological systems
that influenced the development of the whole computer industry.
HOPPER'S PLACE WITHIN THE PROGRAMMING COMMUNITY
Paradoxically, Hopper's drive to automate programming threatened to make
the very profession she had pioneered obsolete. Back in 1944, when Hopper
joined Robert Campbell and Richard Bloch as a "coder" on the Harvard
Mark I, what a programmer was, what one did, and how one did it had not
yet been defined. Through their efforts during and after the war, Hopper and
Bloch in particular created the framework for the profession. They defined

the techniques (subroutines), invented the language (debugging), and
contributed to the culture (midnight "hacking") that would be the
foundations of the budding profession.
By training others to be programmers, Hopper expanded the community
one person at a time. Though she left Vassar to join the Navy in 1943,
Hopper never abandoned her calling as a teacher. She conducted classes on
programming at the Harvard Computation Laboratory, at the Eckert-
Mauchly Computer Corporation, at the University of Pennsylvania through
the 1950s and the 1960s, and at George Washington University from 1971
to 1978. Much of her time was also spent lecturing potential users, and her
more than 50 papers and articles on programming and computer
applications served as the literary foundation for the field.4
Hopper also helped to establish the premier organization for computer
professionals: the Association for Computing Machinery, which today has
80,000 members in more than 100 countries. Founded in 1947 by the
crewmembers of the Harvard Computation Laboratory, the ACM fostered
lateral communication within the nascent industry through conferences,
newsletters, and journals. Hopper headed the ACM's nomenclature
committee in 1953 and 1954, served from 1956 to 1958 as an ACM council
member, and in 1957 and 1958 was a member of the editorial board of the
association's main publication, Communications of the ACM.
Finally, Hopper organized many of the early formal meetings of
programmers. After the "hardware-oriented" 1947 Harvard Symposium on
Large-Scale Digital Calculating Machinery, Hopper took it upon herself to
create forums for the discussion of issues and concerns relevant to
programmers. After leaving Harvard, she maintained her connections with
the Navy and co-sponsored a series of conferences during the 1950s
centered on programming rather than hardware. Hopper also saw the need
to educate business leaders and managers about the utility of computers,
and she created a series of workshops in the 1950s that explained how
general hardware coupled with automatic programming had become an
essential business and decision-making tool. Computers, combined with
automatic programming, would usher in an information age that allowed
humans to make better, more timely decisions.
COBOL: THE QUINTESSENCE OF DISTRIBUTED INVENTION

Hopper's boldest organizational feat involved creating the groundwork for
the 28 May 1959 meeting of the Committee on Data Systems and
Languages (CODASYL). Hopper's efforts helped 40 representatives from
seven government agencies, eleven companies (users), and ten computer
manufacturers put aside their differences in the name of creating a common
business language. "I don't think ever before or ever since have I seen in
one room so much power to commit men and monies as I saw that day,"
said Hopper, reflecting on the first organizational meeting that led to the
COBOL programming language.5
CODASYL was the physical embodiment of Hopper's inventive style.
Her collaborative nature predictably led her to a distributed view of
invention that transcended organizational boundaries. In 1951 Hopper
created the A-0 compiler on her own, but she immediately released it to an
ever-growing community programmers, users, and managers. Throughout
the 1950s she played the role of facilitator, gathering technical, economic,
and social feedback about automatic programming and embedded what she
learned in the next iteration of design. For her, the invention of a computer
language was an ongoing, organic process that was always adapting to the
changing needs of the computing profession.
Such an open system of innovation seems foreign today, when large,
competitive software firms race to patent and protect technology. With the
unbundling of software from computer hardware by IBM in 1969, the
software industry flourished, but so too did a proprietary form of
innovation. In comparison, Hopper's inventive style echoes her academic
sensibilities: 
collegial 
collaboration, 
an 
openness 
to 
knowledge
dissemination, a healthy skepticism (even of one's own work), and the
belief that the advancement of knowledge can come from a variety of
people and sources. In this light, today's open source movement is less a
revolution than a return to the past. Though the Internet offers the
programming community a far more powerful collaborative tool, the
current open source community's goals of distributed peer review reflect
the outlook of Grace Hopper and her colleagues half a century before.
AMAZING GRACE 2.0
On 1 January 1967, Commander Grace Hopper was placed on the Naval
Reserve's retirement list. Two years earlier, she had stepped down as

Director of Automatic Programming Development in the UNIVAC Division
of Sperry Rand. Though she remained with UNIVAC as a senior staff
scientist and served as a visiting associate professor at the University of
Pennsylvania, from all appearances the 60-year-old Hopper was slowly
making the transition to retirement. Not surprisingly, 25 years on the cutting
edge of the information revolution led to numerous awards. In 1962, she
had been elected a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers, and in 1964 she had received an achievement award from the
Society of Women Engineers. The highlight of these tributes came in 1969
when the Data Processing Management Association named Hopper the first
ever Computer Sciences "Man of the Year."6
But to the surprise of everyone except probably Hopper, "retirement"
merely signaled the beginning of a new productive phase in her life. The
Navy was experiencing difficulties fully implementing COBOL, and
Hopper was once again called upon to develop a COBOL certifier program.
What began as a 6-month active duty appointment extended for 20 years.
Hopper was named director of the Navy Programming Languages Group,
and she remained in that position until 1977. She officially retired from
Sperry Rand in 1971, and in 1973 she was promoted to the rank of captain.
She also served as an associate professor in management science at George
Washington University starting in 1971.7
From 1977 to 1983, Hopper was assigned to the Naval Data Automation
Headquarters (NAVDAC) in Washington, where she onitored the state of
the art in computing and recommended which technologies should be
applied to the Navy's existing systems. It was during this period that
Hopper developed the fleet-wide tactical data system for nuclear
submarines, an effort for which she was awarded the Navy's Meritorious
Service Medal. She spent her final three years in the service touring and
lecturing, and in 1986 she retired as the oldest active officer in the Navy.
Hopper was immediately hired as a senior consultant by the Digital
Equipment Corporation. She worked for Digital until her death in 1992 at
the age of 86.8

Rear Admiral Grace Hopper, 1983. Courtesy of Harvard University Archives.
Today, with the computer industry dominated by Bill Gates and Steve
Jobs, it is easy to overlook the role that pioneering woman like Grace
Hopper played in shaping the information age. Her ability to transcend
organizational gender bias and to elevate her career to uncharted heights
was a combination of ability, serendipity, and force of will. Like any career
woman during this period, Hopper had to face discrimination. In fact, by
constantly placing herself in male-dominated environments, she courted
conflict to some extent. Yet she found the strength of character to overcome,
turning harassment into self-motivation. Hopper's confidence in her
abilities, in her leadership skills, in her sense of humor, and (most
important) in her collaborative skills enabled her to garner respect from
even the toughest critics. Moreover, she created a safe work environment
for other young, aspiring female programmers, thus tapping into an
intellectual talent pool that was overlooked in other more mature industries.
Grace Hopper was many things to many people. She was an inventor, an
academic, a naval officer, and a business leader. In her later years, she
became a tireless public speaker who inspired a new generation of women

and men in the computer industry to carry on her vision of a democratic
information age.
OceanofPDF.com

NOTES
ABBREVIATIONS USED FOR ARCHIVAL COLLECTIONS
CHP
Carl Hammer Papers, Charles Babbage Institute, Center for the
History of Information Technology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis
COH-SI
Computer Oral History Collection, Smithsonian Institution,
Archive Center, National Museum of American History,
Washington
EBP
Edmund Berkeley Papers, Charles Babbage Institute, Center
for the History of Information Technology, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis
GHP
Grace Murray Hopper Collection, Archive Center on the
History of Technology, Invention, and Innovation, Archive
Center, National Museum of American History, Washington
HAP
Howard Aiken Papers, Harvard University Archives, Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
HCL
Harvard Computational Laboratory, Harvard University
Archives, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
HOL
Francis Holberton Papers, Charles Babbage Institute, Center
for the History of Information Technology, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis
HPL
History of Programming Languages Conference Records,
Charles Babbage Institute, Center for the History of
Information 
Technology, 
University 
of 
Minnesota,
Minneapolis

ISP
Isaac Auerbach Papers: Charles Babbage Institute, Center for
the History of Information Technology, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis
JCPP
James Conant Presidental Papers, Harvard University
Archives, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
JMP
John Mauchly Papers, Van Pelt Library, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
MFP
Margaret Fox Papers, Charles Babbage Institute, Center for the
History of Information Technology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis
NBS
National Bureau of Standards Collection, Charles Babbage
Institute, Center for the History of Information Technology,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
OHC-CB
Oral History Collection, Charles Babbage Institute, Center for
the History of Information Technology, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis
WFGP
Women in the Federal Government Oral History Project,
Schlesinger 
Library, 
Radcliffe 
College, 
Cambridge,
Massachusetts
NOTES TO CHAPTER 1
1.   John Mauchly received 65,000 hits, J. Presper Eckert Jr. 29,000, John von Neumann 750,000,
Howard Aiken 35,000, and Bill Gates 13 million.
2.   Margaret A. M. Murray, Women Becoming Mathematicians: Creating a Professional Identity in
Post-World War II America (MIT Press, 2000), 4-5.
3.   Though the historian Jennifer Light charges that the differences in status between early hardware
and software developers on the ENIAC project exemplify women's discounted value in the
history of science and technology, Hopper's experiences at Harvard and at the Eckert-Mauchly
Computer Corporation do not support her thesis. See Light, "When Computers Were Women,"
Technology and Culture 40, no. 3 (July 1999): 6.

4.   Holberton and Bartik, interview, 27 April 1973 (COH-SI), 118; Holberton, interview, 14 April 1983
(OHC-CB, OH-50), 204-206;John Backus, "Programming in America in the 1950s—Some
Personal Impressions," in A History of Computing in the Twentieth Century, ed. N. Metropolis, J.
Howlett, and G.-C. Rota (Academic, 1980), 127-128.
5.   William Aspray, John von Neumann and the Origins of Modern Computing (MIT Press, 1990);
Nancy Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC: An Appraisal of the Eckert-Mauchly Computers (Digital,
1981); Paul Ceruzzi, Reckoners: The Prehistory of the Digital Computer (Greenwood, 1983);
Michael S. Mahoney, "The History of Computing in the History of Technology," Annals of the
History of Computing 10, no. 2 (April 1988): 113-125.
6.     Michael S. Mahoney, "Software: The Self-Programming Machine," in From 0 to 1: An
Authoritative History of Modern Computing, ed. A. Akera and F. Nebeker (Oxford University
Press, 2002).
7.    It took place in Palo Alto and was sponsored by the Charles Babbage Institute (located at the
University of Minnesota), an archive and a research center dedicated to preserving the history of
information technology and promoting and conducting research in the field. As a conference
participant, I noted that historians of technology and computers were well represented, but
pioneers in the field once again presented many of the papers.
8.   Most early programmers were formally trained in mathematics. Furthermore, a number of these
programmers were women. See Light, "When Computers Were Women," 455-483.
9.     Grace Hopper and John Mauchly, "Influence of Programming Techniques on the Design of
Computers," Proceedings of the I.R.E. 41, no. 10 (October 1953): 1250-1254.
0.   Aiken, interview, 26-27 February, 1973 (COH-SI), 107.
1.   EMCC was purchased by Remington Rand in 1950 and functioned from 1950 to 1955 as a semi-
autonomous division of the parent company. Remington Rand merged with Sperry Gyroscope in
1956, and EMCC division was renamed the UNIVAC division of Sperry Rand.
2.   Grace Hopper, "The Education of a Computer," Symposium of Industrial Applications of Automatic
Computing Equipment (January 1953); Grace Hopper, "Compiling Routines," Computers and
Automation (May 1953); Grace Hopper and John Mauchly, "Influence of Programming
Techniques on the Design of Computers," Proceedings of the I.R.E. 41 (1953), no. 10: 1250-
1254.
3.   These advances include the use of pseudo-code, iterative routines, editing routines, interpreters, and
compilers.
4.     Thomas Hughes's term "reverse salient" describes the critical lag point that hinders a given
technological system from advancing. "Salient" is a military term for a bulge that occurs when, in
the advance of a battle line, a segment of the army moves more rapidly than the surrounding units.

5.   Jean Sammet, "Conference Chairman's Opening Remarks: Organization of the Conference," in
History of Programming Languages I, ed. R. Wexelblat (ACM Press, 1981), xvii-xx.
6. 
 
 
A 
finding 
aid 
for 
the 
Computer 
Oral 
History 
Collection 
is 
available 
at
http://invention.smithsonian.org.
7.   See Francis Trevelyan Miller, Thomas A. Edison, Benefactor of Mankind: The Romantic Life Story
of the World's Greatest Inventor (John Winston, 1931); Mervyn Kaufman, Thomas Alva Edison,
Miracle Maker (Garrad, 1962); H. Gordon Garbedian, Thomas Alva Edison, Builder of
Civilization (J. Messner, 1947); John McMahon, The Wright Brothers: Fathers of Flight (Little,
Brown, 1930).
8.   Hugh G.J. Aitken, Syntony and Spark: The Origins of the Radio (Wiley, 1976, 1985); Thomas P.
Hughes, Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880-1930 (Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1983).
9.    Among them were David Nye's Electrifying America: Social Meanings of a New Technology,
1880-1940 (MIT Press, 1990), Claude Fischer's America Calling: A Social History of the
Telephone to 1940 (University of California Press, 1992), John Law's "The Olympus 320 Engine:
A Case Study in Design, Development, and Organizational Control," Technology and Culture 33
(1992), 409-440, and Gabrielle Hecht's "Political Designs: Nuclear Reactors and National Policy
in Postwar France," Technology and Culture 35 (1994), 657-685.
0.   David Nye, The Invented Self: An Anti-Biography, from Documents of Thomas A. Edison (Odense
University Press, 1983).
1.   Donald Reid, Paris Sewers and Sewermen (Harvard University Press, 1991).
2.   For more on Grace Hopper's military career from 1967 to 1985, see Kathleen Broome Williams,
Grace Hopper: Admiral of the Cyber Sea (Naval Institute Press, 2004). Kathy and I worked
closely through the years, sharing resources and insights as we uncovered the story of this
remarkable woman, and I am happy with how we divided the historical terrain.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 2
1.   Grace Hopper, interview by Uta Merzbach, 15 July 1968 (COH-SI), 24.
2.   Murray, Women Becoming Mathematicians, 1-17.
3.   Hopper, interview, 15 July 1968 (COH-SI), 7-8.
4.   Murray, Women Becoming Mathematicians, 110-111.
5.   Ibid., 5, 111. According to statistics gathered by the mathematician Margaret Murray, only 15.7%
of the doctoral degrees awarded in mathematics between 1930 and 1934 went to women. More

troubling, the percentage of women receiving doctorates in mathematics decreased for the next 60
years, not reaching 1934 levels until 1989 (16.7%).
6.   Williams, Grace Hopper: Admiral of the Cyber Sea, 11-12. Williams shared details via e-mail of
her conversation with Grace Hopper's sister, Mary Murray Westcote, before Westcote's passing.
7.   Hopper, interview, 15 July 1968 (COH-SI), 23.
8.   Ibid, 16.
9.   Ibid., 18-19.
0.   Ibid., 19-20.
1.   Murray, Women Becoming Mathematicians, 100.
2.   Hopper, interview, 15 July 1968 (COH-SI), 21.
3.   Ibid., 21-22.
4.   Constance Reid, Courant in Göttingen and New York: The Story of an Improbable Mathematician
(Springer-Verlag, 1976); Alan D. Beyerchen, Scientists Under Hitler: Politics and the Physics
Community in the Third Reich (Yale University Press, 1977). During the late 1930s, Courant also
helped other mathematicians who were fleeing Nazi Germany to obtain positions in the United
States.
5.   Hopper, interview, 15 July 1968 (COH-SI), 28.
6.   Ibid., 24-25.
7.   Ibid.; Williams, Admiral of the Cyber Sea, 20.
8.   Ibid.
9.   Grace Hopper, interview by Beth Luebbert and Henry Tropp, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 9-10.
0.   Elizabeth Allen Butler, Navy Waves (Wayside, 1988).
1.   Hopper, interview, 15 July 1968 (COH-SI), 25.
2.   Ibid., 25-26.
3.   Ibid.

4.   Ibid., 26-27.
5.   Ibid., 27-28.
6.   Ibid.
7.   For more on Aiken, see I. Bernard Cohen, Howard Aiken: Portrait of a Computer Pioneer (MIT
Press, 1999).
8.     Grace Hopper, interview by Christopher Evans, 1976, 2 (OHC-CB); Anthony G. Oettinger,
"Retiring Computer Pioneer—Howard Aiken," Communications of the ACM 5, no. 6 (1962):
298-299.
9.   Cohen, Howard Aiken, 146, During the dedication ceremony, on 7 August 1944, a rift developed
between Aiken and IBM CEO Thomas Watson Sr., which would persist for the rest of their lives.
For more on the strained relationship between IBM and Aiken, see Cohen, Howard Aiken.
0.   Traditionally, ships are referred to as feminine. Aiken considered the Mark I to be a ship and thus
used feminine pronouns when referring to it.
1.   Grace Hopper, interview by Uta Merzbach, 27 July 1968 (COH-SI), 29.
2.   Ibid.
3.   Robert Campbell, interview by Henry Tropp, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 66.
4.     Grace Hopper, "Keynote Address" (speech given at the History of Programming Languages
Conference, Seattle, WA, 1-3 June 1978) (HPL, 3/8), 41-42; Hopper, interview, 27 July 1968
(COH-SI), 29.
5.     In the summer of 1944 other computing projects were underway, namely the ENIAC at the
University of Pennsylvania and the Colossus in Britain, but as of July 1944 these projects were
classified and Lieutenant (j.g.) Hopper did not have clearance.
6.   Maurice Wilkes, director of the Mathematical Laboratory at Cambridge University, is credited with
coining the term "programmer" in the late 1940s.
7.   Hopper, interview, 1976 (OHC-CB), 6; Hopper, interview, 27 July 1968 (COH-SI), 29.
8.   Campbell, interview, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 13-16.
9.   All problems were given letter designations for security reasons.
0.   Cohen, Howard Aiken, 112. As it turned out, King was unable to gain access to the generated
results—the problem was completed after the machine came under the Navy's jurisdiction, and

King lacked the necessary security clearance.
1.   Campbell, interview, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 11-13.
2.   Grace Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 8.
3.   Richard Bloch, interview by William Aspray, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 15.
4.   Ibid., 7.
5.   Ibid., 8.
6.   Ibid.; Richard Bloch, interview by Henry Tropp, 12 April 1972, 3-5.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 3
1.   "Technical style" is a concept developed by Thomas Hughes to describe the mental framework that
a particular inventor operates from when creating new technical artifacts. Evidence of the
inventor's style is embedded within the artifact itself. See Hughes, Elmer Sperry: Engineer and
Inventor (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1971).
2.   Richard Bloch, interview by Henry Tropp, 12 April 1972 (COH-SI), 5-7.
3.   For more on this, see Ceruzzi, Reckoners: The Prehistory of the Digital Computer.
4.   IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator (GHP, 1-3); Volta Torrey, "Robot Mathematician
Knows All the Answers," Popular Science, October 1944: 87-89.
5.     Grace Hopper and Howard Aiken, "The Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator, Part I,"
Electrical Engineering 65 (1946): 384-391.
6.   Bloch, interview, 12 April 1972 (COH-SI), 13.
7.   Ibid., 15.
8.   Grace Hopper, interview by Uta Merzbach, November 1968 (COH-SI), 2-3.
9.   Jennifer Light, examining the ENIAC project at the University of Pennsylvania from 1942 to 1946,
has argued: "The ENIAC project made a fundamental distinction between hardware and software:
designing hardware was a man's job; programming was a woman's job. Each of these gendered
parts of the project had its own clear status classification. Software, a secondary, clerical task, did
not match the importance of constructing the ENIAC and getting it to work." Light does well to
highlight the important contributions the ENIAC women made, but she overstates the gendered
nature of computing and reads it into the difference in status between early hardware and software
designations. See Light, "When Computers Were Women," 6.

0.   Note that the ENIAC was constructed before the concept of the stored program was invented.
1.   Robert Campbell, interview by Henry Tropp, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 83.
2.   Hopper, interview, November 1968 (COH-SI), 4.
3.   Hopper, interview, 1976 (OHC-CB), 10.
4.   Ibid., 11.
5.   Hopper, Interview, November 1968 (COH-SI), 7.
6.     Generally it is not possible to solve differential equations with exactitude. Courant's method
demonstrated that differential equations could be solved numerically by solving a related
approximate problem.
7.   Harry Goheen, interview by Henry Tropp, 1972 (COH-SI), 9.
8.   Grace Hopper, interview by Beth Luebbert and Henry Tropp, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 46.
9.   In his 1999 book Howard Aiken, I. B. Cohen dedicates an entire chapter to "the mystery of the
number 23." In this chapter he speculates why Aiken insisted on designing a machine capable of
accuracy to 23 decimal places, suggesting that he intended to compute planetary orbits. Hopper's
simple explanation is that such accuracy is generally necessary when working with partial
differentials. Hence, the mystery is a matter of mathematical practicality.
0.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 46.
1.   Bloch, interview, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 9.
2.   The Harvard Computation Laboratory staff included four enlisted personnel who were familiar with
IBM punch-card machines. These "I" specialists were an official navy "rate" during the war and
wore an "I" embroidered on their uniforms. A "rate" constitutes the job specialization of an
enlisted person in the Navy.
3.     The difference between officers and enlisted personnel runs deeper than dress and etiquette
protocol. A Lieutenant (O-3) earns about three times more than a Seaman First class (E-3).
4.   Sometimes the six women associated with the ENIAC are referred to as the first "programmers."
Not only is the term "programmers" anachronistic; on the basis of the descriptions in this chapter,
the work done by the original "ENIAC Girls" correlates more with the "operators" at Harvard
than with the coding work of Hopper and Bloch.
5.   Robert Burns, interview by Henry Tropp, 2 August 1972 (COH-SI), 57.

6.   Grace Hopper, Problem L Operating Instruction, 1944 (GHP, 1-9).
7.   The "starting tape" could be thought of as the most rudimentary form of a "boot disk."
8.   Hopper, interview, November 1968 (COH-SI), 2.
9.   Ibid.
0.     Time sharing, which originated at MIT, permits multiple users to use the same computer
simultaneously.
1.     Frederick Miller, interview by Henry Tropp, 14 April 1972 (COH-SI), 5; Miller notes that
reliability of the ENIAC was about 20%. Robert Campbell also highlights the efficiency of Aiken
machines as compared to the operational problems surrounding ENIAC; Campbell, interview, 11
April 1972 (COH-SI), 60.
2.   Hopper, "Keynote Address" (HPL, 3-8), 15.
3.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 10.
4.   Because of how "hackers" have been depicted in recent movies and fiction, many equate the term
with computer crime. In proper usage, however, "hacker" refers to a person who enjoys exploring
the details of programmable systems and how to stretch their capabilities.
5.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 5.
6.   Ibid., 4.
7.   Hopper, interview, November 1968 (COH-SI), 6.
8.   Maurice Wilkes, Memoirs of a Computer Pioneer (MIT Press, 1985), 145.
9.   Campbell, interview, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 29.
0.   Hopper, interview, November 1968 (COH-SI), 2.
1.   Ibid.
2.   Bloch, interview, 12 April 1972 (OHC-CB), 11.
3.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 22.
4.   Miller, interview, 14 April 1972 (COH-SI), 38.

5.   Scott McCartney, ENIAC: The Triumphs and Tragedies of the World's First Computer (Walker,
1999), 23-25.
6.   Eckert discovered that reducing the voltage below the amount for which the tube was designed
significantly prolonged its life. In the end he ended up running tubes at less than 10% of the
standard voltage.
7.   Campbell, interview, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 30.
8.   Hopper claimed that Bloch could write code in ink and it would run the first time.
9.   Campbell, interview, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 59. Both Campbell and Bloch would go on to make
significant contributions to the practice of automated checking at Raytheon in the late 1940s.
Bloch's major contribution was the original concept of the parity check.
0.   Robert Burns, interview by Henry Tropp, 2 August 1972 (COH-SI), 21.
1.   Ibid., 15.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 4
1.   Aiken to Weaver, 5 September 1940 (HAP). For a more complete depiction of Aiken's journey, see
Cohen, Howard Aiken. This book, however, contains new material about Aiken that is not covered
in Cohen's book.
2.   Aiken to Weaver, 5 September 1940 (HAP).
3.   Cohen, Howard Aiken, 17.
4.     Aiken to Weaver, 5 September 1940 (HAP); Cohen, Howard Aiken, 18-19; Robert Burns,
interview by Henry Tropp and I. Bernard Cohen, 2 August 1972 (COH-SI), 6-8.
5.   Saunders to Conant, 8 December 1939 (JCPP 165).
6.   Calculating Machine Committee, 18 December 1939 (JCPP 165), 2.
7.   Van Vleck to Chase, 19 March 1940 (JCPP 165).
8.   Saunders to Chase, memorandum, 5 March 1940 (JCPP 165).
9.   Chase to Conant, memorandum, 20 April 1940 (JCPP 165).
0.   Ibid.
1.   Conant to Aiken, 26 April 1940 (JCPP 165).

2.   Aiken to Conant, 2 May 1940 (JCPP 165); Aiken, interview, 26-27 February 1973 (COH-SI), 7.
3.   Aiken to Weaver, 5 September 1940 (JCPP 165); Cohen, Howard Aiken, 14.
4.   "Problem of Dr. Aiken's Future," 12 March 1940 (JCPP 165).
5.   Cohen, Howard Aiken, 119.
6.   Robert Campbell, interview by Henry Tropp, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 32.
7.   Cohen, Howard Aiken, 119-120.
8.   Grace Hopper, interview by Beth Luebbert and Henry Tropp, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 16.
9.   Burns, interview, 2 August 1972 (COH-SI), 22.
0.   Ibid., 18-19.
1.   Frederick Miller, interview by Henry Tropp, 14 April 1972 (COH-SI), 62; Aiken, interview, 26-27
February 1973 (COH-SI), 55.
2.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 18-19.
3.   Cohen, Howard Aiken, 238-239.
4.   Hopper, interview, 7 January 1969 (COH-SI), 18.
5.   Miller, interview, 14 April 1972 (COH-SI), 23-24.
6.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 8-9.
7.   Wilkes, Memoirs of a Computer Pioneer, 129.
8.   Miller, interview, 14 April 1972 (COH-SI), 46-47.
9.   Burns, interview, 2 August 1972 (COH-SI), 56.
0.   Ibid., 20-21.
1.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 26.
2.   Burns, interview, 2 August 1972 (COH-SI), 42.
3.   Cohen, Howard Aiken, 162-163.

4.   Thomas J. Watson Jr. and Peter Petre, Father, Son & Co.: My Life at IBM and Beyond (Bantam,
1990), 190.
5.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 24.
6.   Ibid., 23-24.
7.   Ibid.
8.   Grace Hopper, interview by Uta Merzbach, July 1968 (COH-SI), 33-34.
9.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 25.
0.   Hopper, interview, July 1968 (COH-SI), 34.
1.   Burns, interview, 2 August 1972 (COH-SI), 42.
2.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 47.
3.   Aiken, interview, 26-27 February 1973 (COH-SI), 44.
4.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 27-28.
5.   Ibid., 26.
6.   Ibid., 9.
7.   Ibid., 15.
8.   Report, Berkeley to U.S. Naval Proving Ground, 27 May 1946 (EBP, 76-2).
9.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 20.
0.   Ibid., 10.
1.   Aiken to Wood, 24 August 1944 (HAP).
2.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 29.
3.   Aiken, interview, 26-27 February 1973 (COH-SI), 62.
4.   Aiken also signed many of his patent rights away when contracting with IBM on the Mark I. Such
was not the case with the Mark II.

5.   USN Ordnance Contract NORD-8555 (HAP); Williams, Hopper, 58.
6.   Ibid.; Cohen, Howard Aiken, 201.
7.   Harry Goheen, interview by Henry Tropp, 1972 (COH-SI), 1-2.
8.   Ibid., 3-4.
9.   Ibid., 7-8.
0.   Confidential Memorandum U.S. Naval Proving Ground from Lt. Cdr. Edmund Berkeley, 27 May
1946 (EBP, 76-2).
1.   Ibid.
2.   Goheen, interview, 1972 (COH-SI), 18-19.
3.   Ibid.
4.   Grace Hopper, "Keynote Address" (at the History of Programming Languages Conference, Seattle,
1-3 June 1978) (HPL, 3/8), 14.
5.     Maurice V. Wilkes, David J. Wheeler, and Stanley Gill, The Preparation of Programs for an
Electronic Digital Computer, with Special Reference to the EDSAC and the Use of a Library of
Subroutines (Addison-Wesley, 1951).
6.   John von Neumann, "First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC, Contract No. W-670-ORD-4926, 23
June 1945," in The Origins of Digital Computers: Selected Papers, ed. B. Randell, third edition
(Springer-Verlag, 1982).
7.   Wilkes, Memoirs of a Computer Pioneer, 108-109, 116-126.
8.   Ibid., 127-142.
9.   Ibid., 143-153; Hopper, "Keynote Address" (HPL 3/8), 15.
0.   Ibid. Hopper acknowledges in an internal UNIVAC report dated November 1958 that Wilkes and
the EDSAC crew should be given credit for consolidating and formally systematizing subroutine
concepts. See Grace Hopper, "Automatic Programming: Present Status and Future Trends" (NBS,
32/717/1).
1.   Grace Hopper, interview by Christopher Evans, 1976 (OHC-CB), 13.
2.   Ibid.

3.   Grace Hopper, interview by Uta Merzbach, November 1968 (COH-SI), 1.
4.   Richard Bloch, interview by Henry Tropp, 12 April 1972 (COH-SI), 20-21.
5.   Richard Bloch, interview by William Aspray, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 9.
6.   Human computers at Los Alamos also solved the implosion problem during the fall of 1944, but
they computed values to six decimal places, while the Mark I produced results out to 18 decimal
places and a smaller interval size (Cohen, Howard Aiken, 164-166).
7.   Bloch, interview, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 10.
8.   Hopper, interview, 1976 (OHC-CB), 14.
9.   John A. N. Lee, "Howard Aiken's Third Machine: The Harvard Mark III Calculator or Aiken-
Dahlgren Electronic Calculator," IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 22, no. 1 (January
2000): 62-81.
0.   The Mark III was the first of a series of early machines to use magnetic drums as primary storage.
Among the others were SWAC, MADDIDA, Manchester Mark I, and ERA. Those members of
the computing community with RADAR experience during the war turned to mercury acoustic
delay lines as their primary storage technology (BINAC, UNIVAC, EDSAC, EDVAC, ACE).
Eventually magnetic core memory developed by Jay Forrester while working on the Whirlwind
project at MIT would become the standard memory technology.
1.   Hopper, interview, November 1968, 3-4.
2.   The Mark III's "stored-program" concept was different from that associated with the von Neumann
computer architecture. First, the Mark III had one drum for instructions and a separate drum for
data, whereas von Neumann architecture stores instructions along with data and treats the two in a
like manner. Even though separate instructions and data made debugging less problematical, the
Mark III lacked the flexibility to take an instruction from memory, manipulate it, and execute the
changed instruction. With the success of EDSAC, UNIVAC, and the IAS computer (at Princeton),
the von Neumann architecture became the standard within the industry.
3.   Lee, "Howard Aiken's Third Machine," 68.
4.   Ibid.
5.   Tom Standage, The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the Nineteenth
Century's On-Line Pioneers (Walker, 1998); Hughes, Networks of Power; Edward W. Constant,
The Origins of the Turbojet Revolution (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980).
6.     Trevor Pinch and Wiebe Bijker explore the concept of "technological closure" with their
noteworthy discussion of how the modern form of the bicycle came to being. See Trevor Pinch

and Wiebe Bijker, "The Social Construction of Facts and Artifacts," in The Social Construction of
Technological Systems, ed. W. Bijker, T. Hughes, and T. Pinch (MIT Press, 1987).
7.   Bijker et al., eds., The Social Construction of Technological Systems, 12-13.
8.   The invitation was arranged by Aiken's colleague and friend Douglas Hartree. Hartree, a British
professor of physics, trained a generation of British mathematicians and scientists, including
Maurice Wilkes, on the use of differential analyzers. Hartree maintained active lines of
communication between Harvard and Cambridge during the 1940s.
9.   Wilkes, Memoirs of a Computer Pioneer, 124-125.
0.   Hopper, interview, November 1968 (COH-SI), 4.
1.   James W. Cortada, Historical Dictionary of Data Processing: Biographies (Greenwood, 1987), 62.
2.   Ibid.
3.   Leslie J. Comrie, "Babbage's Dream Comes True," Nature 158 (October 1946): 567-568.
4.   Wilkes, Memoirs of a Computer Pioneer, 167.
5.   In the preface, Aiken thanks Hopper for being the author, even though authorship is attributed to
"Staff of the Computation Laboratory."
6.   Ibid., 1.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 5
1.   For a general discussion of technical communities of practice, see John Seely Brown and Paul
Duguid, The Social Life of Information (Harvard Business School Press, 2000).
2.   Robert Campbell, interview by Henry Tropp, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 49.
3.     Grace Hopper, interview by Beth Luebbert and Henry Tropp, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 11, 31;
President of MIT to President of Harvard, confidential memorandum, 7 February 1940 (JCPP,
165).
4.   Ibid.
5.   For more on the tensions between Thomas Watson Sr. and Howard Aiken, see Cohen, Howard
Aiken.
6.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 39-40.

7.   Von Neumann, "First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC."
8.   For more on the von Neumann/Eckert-Mauchly controversy, see Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC;
McCartney, ENIAC; Herman H. Goldstine, The Computer from Pascal to von Neumann
(Princeton University Press, 1972), 191.
9.   Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC; McCartney, ENIAC, 196. The paper was not distributed widely,
for it was deemed "Confidential" by the US Army. The historical controversy over the "First
Draft" had real-world ramifications during the summer of 1971, for the document was
successfully held up as evidence against Eckert's and Mauchly's bid for a computer patent.
0.   Cohen, Howard Aiken, 164.
1.   Howard Aiken, interview by Henry Tropp and I. B. Cohen, 26-27 February 1973 (COH-SI), 33,
183.
2.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 13.
3.   Richard Bloch, interview by William Aspray, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 12.
4.   Grace Hopper, interview by Uta Merzbach, 7 January 1969 (COH-SI), 9-10.
5.   Cohen, Howard Aiken, 165; Bloch, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 18.
6.   Ibid.,16.
7.   Hopper, 7 January 1969 (COH-SI), 10.
8.   Bloch, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 12.
9.   Goldstine, The Computer from Pascal to Von Neumann, 182.
0.   Ibid., 138.
1.   Ibid., 141-149; McCartney, ENIAC, 61.
2.   Goldstine, The Computer from Pascal to Von Neumann, 182.
3.   Ibid., 111.
4.   Ibid., 192.
5.   Ibid., 198-200.

6.   Ibid.
7.   Ibid.
8.     Mark I's sequential mode of operation,, as with all "von Neumann architecture" computers,
inspects one instruction at a time before execution. The ENIAC performed many activities in
parallel.
9.   Von Neumann, "First Draft of a Report on the EDSAC."
0.   Ibid.
1.   Aiken, interview, 26-27 February 1973 (COH-SI), 34.
2.   Grace Hopper, interview with Linda Calvert, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 138; Hopper, interview, 5
July 1972 (COH-SI), 1.
3.   Harvard University Press, Fall Releases 1946 (GHP).
4.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 1.
5.   Ibid.
6.   Ibid., 6. It appears that Hopper relied heavily on the following works: J. A. V. Turck, Origin of
Modern Calculating Machines (Arno, [1921] 1972); Philbert Maurice d'Ocagne, Le calcul
simplifié par les procédés mécaniques et graphiques, second edition (Gauthier-Villars, 1905),
Philbert Maurice d'Ocagne, Vue d'ensemble sur les machines á calculer (Gauthier-Villars, 1922);
Charles Babbage, Passages from the Life of a Philosopher (Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts,
& Green, 1864).
7.   [Grace Hopper], A Manual of Operation for the Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator. Annals
of the Computation Laboratory of Harvard University, volume 1 (Harvard University Press, 1946;
reprint, MIT Press, 1985); Grace Hopper and Howard Aiken, "The Automatic Sequence
Controlled Calculator," Electrical Engineering 65 (1946), 384-391, 449-554.
8.   Ibid.
9.   Ibid. Aiken would use a similar system of separating data from operational commands in all of his
machines, a technique that was discarded in the von Neumann stored-program architecture.
0.   [Hopper], A Manual of Operation; Cohen, Howard Aiken, 64.
1.   On the relationship between Aiken and Babbage, see Cohen, Howard Aiken.

2.   One copy of this book was inscribed "From one admirer of Babbage to another." L. J. Comrie to
Howard H. Aiken. 8 March 1946. Comrie reinforced the Babbage-Aiken connection with his 1946
review of the Manual of Operation entitled "Babbage's Dream, Comes True."
3.   Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982, 139-140.
4.   IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator (GHP, 1-3).
5.   Ibid.
6.   Ibid.
7.   Ibid. T. H. Brown had been a consulting member of the IBM Department of Education since 1928.
8.   Ibid.
9.   Ibid.
0.   At the dedication, IBM freely donated a machine which cost the company $259,000 to build and
four years to construct. Moreover, Watson personally dedicated another $100,000 to Harvard to
help defray the costs of the machine's operation.
1.   Ibid.
2.   Ibid.
3.   See Cohen, Howard Aiken; Cohen, "Howard H. Aiken, Harvard University, and IBM: Cooperation
and Conflict," in Science at Harvard University: Historical Perspectives, ed. C. Elliot and M.
Rossiter (Lehigh University Press, 1992).
4.   Watson, Father, Son & Co. On the shift from independent inventor/engineer approach to a more
corporate approach to technological innovation, see Noble, America by Design: Science,
Technology, and the Rise of Corporate Capitalism (Knopf, 1977).
5.   IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator (GHP, 1-3).
6.   Ibid.
7.   For more on this version of technological advancement, see the writings of Joseph Schumpeter.
8.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972, 2.
9.   See I. B. Cohen, "Babbage and Aiken," Annals of the History of Computing 10 (1988): 171-193.

0.   The steps Aiken took to turn his ideas into a functioning computing machine are well documented
and will not be reviewed here. See Cohen, Howard Aiken.
1.     Headlines from this period, from HCL: "Automatic Brain for Harvard: Navy Man Inventor
ofWorld's Greatest Calculator"; "Harvard Told Robot Brain Just a Starter"; "Robot Works
Problems Never Before Solved"; "Highbrow Harvard Bows to a Robot Brain"; "Mechanical
Einstein Calculator Has Mathematical World in Palm."
2.   In President Conant's foreword, the machine is referred to as the "I.B.M. Automatic Sequence
Controlled Calculator." See [Hopper], A Manual of Operation; L. J. Comrie, "Babbage's Dream
Comes True," Nature 158 (26 October 1946), 567.
3.   Comrie, "Babbage's Dream Comes True," 567. Comrie's comments suggest that he may not have
been aware of the top secret British computer work at Bletchley Park during WWII that produced
the Colossus.
4.   Hopper's name appeared with Aiken's as co-author.
5.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972, 35-36.
6.   Howard Aiken to Hubert Livingston, 18 July 1946 (HAP).
7.   Howard Aiken to Mr. W. H. Claflin, 1 October 1945 (HAP).
8.   Hopper, interview, 7 January 1969 (COH-SI), 11.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 6
1.   James Conant to Howard Aiken, 26 April 1940 (JCPP, 165).
2.   According to I. B. Cohen, this grander vision never materialized. See Cohen, Howard Aiken, 201-
202. For more on the modernization of Harvard, see Morton Keller, Making Harvard Modern:
The Rise of America's University (Oxford University Press, 2001).
3.   Bureau of Ordnance Contract, 27 August 1945 (HAP); Cohen, Howard Aiken, 201-202.
4.   Grace Hopper, interview by Uta Merzbach, 7 January 1969, 6 (COH-SI). The Harvard Symposium
of 1947 was the third postwar conference devoted to large-scale computing machinery. The first
took place at MIT from October 31 to November 2, 1945. The second was a six-week course
during the summer of 1946 at the Moore School of Electrical Engineering in Philadelphia. The
Harvard Symposium far outstripped the first two meetings in attendance.
5.   "Day of Triumph," Harvard Alumni Bulletin (January 1947): 337-339 (HAP).

6.   Edmund Berkeley, "Report on the Symposium of Large Scale Digital Calculating Machinery at the
Harvard Computation Laboratory," 13 January 1947 (EBP, 8-52).
7.   Joseph Harrison to Commander J. H. Carmichael, 14 November 1946 (HAP).
8.   Hopper, interview, 7 January 1969 (COH-SI), 6.
9.   Conference List (HAP); Howard Aiken, interview by Henry Tropp and I. Bernard Cohen, 26-27
February 1973 (COH-SI), 37.
0.   Howard Aiken to Richard Babbage, 17 April 1946 (HAP).
1.   Ibid.; Babbage to Aiken, 25 April 1946; Babbage to Aiken, 19 June 1946; Aiken to Babbage, 24
December 1946; Babbage to Aiken, 14 January 1947; Aiken to Babbage, 22 January 1947;
Babbage to Aiken, 31 January 1947; Babbage to James Conant, 15 February 1947; Babbage to
Aiken, 15 February 1947; Babbage to Aiken, 27 February 1947; Babbage to Aiken, 22 March
1947; Babbage to Aiken, 11 December 1947; Babbage to Aiken, 6 April 1948; Aiken to Babbage,
13 April 1948 (HAP).
2.   Berkeley, "Report on the Symposium," 13January 1947 (EBP, 8-52).
3.   Robert Campbell, interview by Henry Tropp, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 35.
4.   Grace Hopper, interview by Uta Merzbach, November 1968 (COH-SI), 5.
5.   [Grace Hopper], Description of a Relay Calculator, 1-41.
6.   Harvard Symposium program, 7 January 1947 (HAP).
7.   Berkeley, "Report on the Symposium," 13 January 1947 (EBP, 8-52).
8.   Ibid.; William Blair, "Harvard Unveils Huge Calculator," New York Times, 8 January 1947.
9.     Howard Aiken, "Opening Remarks," Harvard Symposium on Large-Scale Digital Calculating
Machinery, January 1947 (HAP).
0.   Babbage to Aiken, 11 December 1947 (HAP).
1.   Howard Aiken, "Opening Remarks," 4-5; Berkeley, "Report on the Symposium," 13 January 1947
(EBP, 50-8-52).
2.   Cohen, Howard Aiken, 205-207.
3.   Ibid.; "Harvard's New 'Brain' Permits Social Studies," Boston Herald, 10 January 1947; Cohen,
Howard Aiken, 207.

4.   Hopper, interview, 7 January 1969 (COH-SI), 6.
5.   Berkeley, "Report on the Symposium," 13 January 1947 (EBP, 8-52).
6.   There has been much historical debate concerning who was responsible for the stored-program
concept. See Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC.
7.   Harvard Symposium program, 7 January 1947 (HAP).
8.     "Calculation ad Infinitum," Newsweek, 20 January 1947, 58; Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics, or
Control and Communication in the Animal and Machine (Cambridge. Mass.: MIT Press, 1948);
Norbert Wiener, "A Scientist Rebels", The Atlantic, January 1947, 46.
9.   R. C. Gibbs, Chairman, Division of Physical Sciences, National Research Council, to Members of
the Committee on High Speed Calculating Machines, 18 November 1946 (HAP). Other members
of the committee included Walter Bartky (Division of Physical Sciences, University of Chicago),
S. H. Caldwell (Department of Electrical Engineering, MIT), E. U. Condon (National Bureau of
Standards), J. H. Curtis (National Bureau of Standards), G. R. Stibitz (Bell Telephone
Laboratories), and Warren Weaver (Rockefeller Foundation).
0.   John von Neumann to Howard Aiken, 25 November 1946 (HAP).
1.   Ibid.
2.   Hopper, interview, 7 January 1969 (COH-SI), 7.
3.   Ibid.; Aiken to Babbage, 22 January 1947 (HAP).
4.   Hopper, interview, 7 January 1969 (COH-SI), 6-7.
5.   Isaac Auerbach, interview by Henry Tropp, 17 February 1972 (COH-SI), 11.
6.   On the interaction of government, academia, and business in the early history of the computing
field, see James W. Cortada, The Computer in the United States: From Laboratory to Market
(Sharpe, 1993).
7.   "Day of Triumph," Harvard Alumni Bulletin (January 1947): 337-339.
8.   Hopper, interview, November 1968 (COH-SI), 5.
9.   Wilkes, Memoirs of a Computer Pioneer, 175.
0.   Paul Morton, interview by Robina Mapstone, 12 October 1972 (COH-SI), 14.
1.   Hopper, interview, November 1968 (COH-SI), 4.

2.   Richard Bloch, interview by William Aspray, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 18.
3.   Frederick Miller, interview by Henry Tropp, 14 April 1972 (COH-SI), 61.
4.   Ibid., 24.
5.   Richard Bloch, interview by Henry Tropp, 12 April 1972 (COH-SI), 11-12.
6.   It also runs counter to I. B. Cohen's account of Aiken's selection of relay technology over vacuum
tubes (Howard Aiken, 40-44). Cohen expresses astonishment that, in a 1973 interview, Aiken
declared that he had never been "wedded" to any particular technology. As Hopper, Wilkes,
Miller, Campbell, and Bloch recalled it, this does not seem to have been Aiken's position in 1947.
7.   Miller, interview, 14 April 1972 (COH-SI), 24.
8.   William Blair, "Harvard Unveils Huge Calculator," New York Times, 8 January 1947.
9.   Campbell, interview, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 49.
0.   Miller, interview, 14 April 1972 (COH-SI), 45.
1.   Campbell, interview, 11 April 1972 (COH-SI), 57-58.
2.   Ibid., 66.
3.   Bloch, interview, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 20.
4.   Ibid.
5.   Hopper, interview, 7 January 1969 (COH-SI), 5-6.
6.   Goheen, interview, 1972 (COH-SI), 20.
7.   Grace Hopper, interview by Beth Luebbert and Henry Tropp, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 24.
8.   Hopper, interview, 7 January 1969 (COH-SI), 2.
9.   Hopper, interview, 5 July 1972 (COH-SI), 24.
0.   Goheen, interview, 1972 (COH-SI), 11.
1.   Robert Campbell, interview by William Aspray, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 55-56.

2.   Henry Tropp, "The 20th Anniversary Meeting of the Association for Computing Machinery: 30
August 1967," Annals of the History of Computing 9 (1988), no. 3: 251.
3.   Aiken, interview, 26-27 February 1973 (COH-SI), 32-33.
4.   Goheen, interview, 1972 (COH-SI), 14-15.
5.   Ibid., 19.
6.   Goheen's account states that the election was very close between Berkeley and an IBM man for
secretary ("Memorandum for the Eastern Association for Computing Machinery," Report No. 2,
30 September 1947, MFP, 4-41).
7.   Ibid.
8.   Tropp, "The 20th Anniversary Meeting of the Association for Computing Machinery: 30 August
1967," 251.
9.   John von Neumann to Edmund Berkeley, 15 September 1947 (MFP, 4-41).
0.   Goheen, interview, 1972 (COH-SI), 16.
1.   "Report to the Association for Computing Machinery," Report No. 4, 30 January 1948 (MFP, 4-
41).
2.   Campbell, interview, 22 February 1984 (OHC-CB), 57.
3.   Ibid.
4.     Upon his retirement, the Computation Laboratory was renamed the Howard Hathaway Aiken
Laboratory of Computer Science.
5.   Hopper, interview, January 1969 (COH-SI), 15.
6.   Ibid.; Hopper, interview, 4 February 1969 (COH-SI), 1-2.
7.   Conference Program, Association for Computing Machinery, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, 18-20 April
1949 (GHP, 5-5).
8.   Hopper, interview, January 1969 (COH-SI), 16.
9.   Ibid., 15-16.
0.   Ibid.

NOTES TO CHAPTER 7
1.     Edmund Berkeley to Grace Hopper, 20 November 1949 (JMP, 3: B: 1-4). This four-page
"intervention letter" was sent to Grace Hopper and to her closest friends and relatives, including
her new boss at EMCC, John Mauchly.
2.   Ibid.
3.   Ibid.
4.   In 1946, apparently borrowing from the Harvard Mark I, von Neumann, with the assistance of
ENIAC operator Jean Bartik, developed a paper tape/mechanical relay input system for ENIAC
that alleviated some of the programming difficulties.
5.     Mary, Mauchly's first wife of 16 years and the mother of their two children, drowned in a
swimming accident on 8 September 1946. McNulty and Mauchly began to date about a year later.
6.   Grace Hopper, interview by Linda Calvert, 3 September to 28 February 1982 (WFGP), 42.
7.   "Brief List of Devices and Fields of Application of Devices" (memo, EMCC) (JMP, 3: C: 3-60);
Hopper, interview by Uta Merzbach, 4 February 1969 (COH-SI), 2.
8.   John Mauchly, interview by Uta Merzbach, 22 June 1970 (COH-SI), 96.
9.   Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC, 90-91.
0.   J. Presper Eckert Jr., Kathleen Mauchly, William Cleaver, and Jim McNulty, interview by Nancy
Stern, 23 January 1980 (OHC-CB, OH11), 62.
1.   A stored-program computer named EDVAC, built by the Moore School of Engineering after Eckert
and Mauchly's departure, was completed after the UNIVAC.
2.   Eckert, interview by Nancy Stern, 28 October 1977 (OHC-CB, OH13), 20; Eckert, interview, 23
January 1980 (OHC-CB, OH11), 98; John Mauchly, interview by Henry Tropp, 6 February 1973
(COH-SI), 2. Nancy Stern does not directly address von Neumann's apparent ability to bypass
security restrictions because of his prominent position in government circles, though she does
note "that even after the security classification was lifted, Eckert and Mauchly failed to publish
any report on the ENIAC" (From ENIAC to UNIVAC, 54).
3.   See Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC, 96-99.
4.   Maurice Wilkes's EDSAC at Cambridge University, inspired by the "First Draft," was operational
before UNIVAC. See Electronic Control Company, Plan for a Statistical EDVAC, 13 May 1947
(MFP, 4-10).

5.   Ibid. The laptop computer used to write this book, like the vast majority of computers today, uses
the same serial fetch-and-execute architecture.
6.   "An Introduction to The UNIVAC System" (GHP, 5-6).
7.   Ibid. The system could read or write at 20,000 pulses per second, and each word required roughly
fifty pulses.
8.   For another interpretation of Eckert and Mauchly's fund-raising challenges, see Martin Campbell-
Kelly and William Aspray, Computer: A History of the Information Machine (Basic Books, 1996),
108-110.
9.   Ibid., 20-26, 47.
0.   Ibid., 107-109; Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC, 102-106, 115.
1.   Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC, 137.
2.   Ibid., 137.
3.   Raytheon's RAYDAC, under development by Hopper's former colleagues Robert Campbell and
Richard Bloch, appeared to be the only competing commercial system. However, it was a one-of-
a-kind machine, much like the BINAC (Hopper, interview, 4 February 1969, COH-SI, 5, 10).
4.   Her name does not appear in the general works of Campbell-Kelly, Aspray, and Ceruzzi; more
surprisingly, Stern references her only once. See Campbell-Kelly and Aspray, Computer; Paul
Ceruzzi, A History of Modern Computing (MIT Press, 2003); Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC.
5.   Hopper, interview, 4 February 1969 (COH-SI), 1, 3.
6.   Betty Snyder Holberton, interview by James Baker Ross, 14 April 1983 (OHC-CB, OH-50), 4.
7.   Ibid., 3. Margaret Murray's book Women Becoming Mathematicians also highlights the prejudice
faced by the majority of the women who received degrees in mathematics as they attempted to
create a professional identity in postwar America. Murray, however, only covers the success
stories. Betty Snyder's experience reminds the reader that for every Winifred Asprey or Susan
Hahn, there were other women who were discouraged from becoming mathematicians.
8.   Francis E. Holberton and Jean Bartik, interview by Henry Tropp, 27 April 1973 (COH-SI), 2.
9.   Ibid., 11-12.
0.   Ibid., 2. Snyder's perspective differs significantly from that of Jennifer Light, who suggests that the
six women selected for the ENIAC project were the best and brightest of the 200 BRL computers
("When Computers Were Women"), Light may have reflexively augmented the status of the

ENIAC women in order to defend her thesis that the women and their accomplishments were
systematically overlooked by a gender-biased society.
1.   Holberton and Bartik, interview, 27 April 1973 (COH-SI), 15.
2.   Ibid.
3.     Holberton and Bartik, interview, 27 April 1973 (COH-SI), 109-110. Holberton's remarks shed
some light on Mauchly's behavior during the less-than-cordial break between Eckert, Mauchly,
and the Moore School administration. See Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC.
4.   Ibid., 114.
5.   Hopper, interview, 4 February 1969 (COH-SI), 3.
6.   Arthur Katz, "Flow Chart Symbols," 15 June 1950 (GHP, 5-7).
7.   "Outline for Second Lecture: Programming Course for EMCC's Engineers," 11 April 1950 (GHP,
5-7).
8.   Goldstine, The Computer from Pascal to Von Neumann, 266-268.
9.   Holberton, interview, 14 April 1983 (OHC-CB, OH-50), 9; Goldstine, The Computer from Pascal
to Von Neumann, 166-167; Hopper, interview, 4 February 1969 (COH-SI), 3-4.
0.   The "10" in the name C-10 stood for the tenth iteration of the UNIVAC operational code (UNIVAC
Conference Transcript, 17-18 May 1990, OHC-CB, OH-200, 86; Holberton, interview, 14 April
1983, OHC-CB, OH-50, 23).
1.   Frances Elizabeth Snyder, "UNIVAC Instructions Code C-10," 6 May 1949 (GHP, 5-6).
2.   Hopper, interview, 4 February 1969 (COH-SI), 10.
3.   Ibid., 10-11.
4.   Ibid., 7-8.
5.   Ibid., 8.
6.   Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 32.
7.   "EMCC Request for Comments on Traits and Abilities which Coding and Programming Personnel
Should Have," 28 September 1949 (JMP, 3:C:1, 1).
8.   Wilkes, Memoirs of a Computer Pioneer, 146.

9.   Ibid., 167.
0.   Snyder's sort-merge generator contributed to Hopper's concept of compilers.
1.   Holberton and Bartik, interview, 27 April 1973 (COH-SI), 122.
2.   Frances Elizabeth Snyder, "UNIVAC Instructions Code C-10," 6 May 1949 (GHP 5-6); Hopper,
interview, 4 February 1969 (COH-SI), 8.
3.   John Mauchly, "President's Report to the Shareholders," 15 December 1949 (JMP, 3: C: 1, 1)
4.   Ibid.
5.   Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC, 146.
6.   Watson, Father and Son Inc., 198.
7.   Ibid., 192-193.
8.   Ibid.
9.   Ibid., 134-135.
0.   Ibid., 199.
1.   Ibid., 198-199.
2.   Eckert further explained that, besides the emotional attachment to each other, the two held patents
jointly, which made it difficult to separate at that point in time (interview by Nancy Stern, 28
October 1977, OHC-CB, OH-13).
3.   John Mauchly, interview by Uta Merzbach, 22 June 1970, 75 (OHC-SI); Watson, Father and Son,
Inc., 194.
4.   Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 131-133; Hopper, interview, 4 February 1969 (COH-
SI), 12-13.
5.   Berkeley to Hopper, 20 November 1949 (PENN, 3: B: 1, 4)
6.   Ibid.
7.   Ibid.
8.   Ibid.

9.   Ibid.
0.   Ibid.
1.   Ibid.
2.   John Mauchly, "Recent Events," 14 May 1953 (JMP, 3: C: 3, 57); Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC,
46.
3.   In the 1890s, as a young bank clerk, Rand invented and patented an index system of dividers and
tabs that enabled documents to be placed in vertical file cabinets and located rapidly.
4.   UNIVAC Conference Transcript, 17-18 May 1990 (OHC-CB, OH-200), 13.
5.   75. Holberton, interview, 14 April 1983 (OHC-CB, OH-50), 14.
6.   UNIVAC Conference Transcript, 17-18 May 1990 (OHC-CB, OH-200), 89-90; Hopper, interview,
1 October 1982 (WFGP), 7-9.
7.   Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC, 149.
8.   Ibid.; Eckert, K. Mauchly, Cleaver, and McNulty, interview, 23 January 1980 (OHC-CB, OH11),
122.
9.   UNIVAC Conference Transcript, 17-18 May 1990 (OHC-CB, OH-200), 61.
0.   Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 41; Hopper, interview by Christopher Evans, 1976
(OHC-CB), 22-23. Hopper's claim concerning tolerance of "color" did not appear to apply to
EMCC personnel as of 1949, although Bob Shaw was an albino.
1.   Holberton and Bartik, interview, 27 April 1973 (COH-SI), 135; Holberton, interview, 14 April 1983
(OHC-CB, OH-50), 20. A similar organizational atmosphere existed in the early Ford Motor
Company, according to Thomas Hughes. See Thomas P. Hughes, American Genesis: A Century of
Invention and Technological Enthusiasm (Penguin, 1989).
2.   Holberton and Bartik, interview, 27 April 1973 (COH-SI), 205-209; Holberton, interview, 14 April
1983 (OHC-CB, OH-50), 11-12.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 8
1.    The nature of invention has been considered by Thomas Hughes, W. Bernard Carlson, Wiebe
Bijker, Trevor Pinch, Janet Abbate, Stewart Leslie, and John Law.
2.     See Ceruzzi, A History of Modern Computing; Campbell-Kelly and Aspray, Computer; Grace
Hopper, interview by Christopher Evans, 1976 (OHC-CB, OH-81), 14; Hopper, "Keynote

Address," 1-3 June 1978 (HPL, 3-8), 21.
3.   Hopper, interview by Uta Merzbach, 11 February 1969, 13 (COH-SI); Hopper, "Keynote Address"
(HPL, 3-8).
4.     On 17-19 May 1990, a three-day conference on the UNIVAC computer was held under the
sponsorship of the Smithsonian Institution. The conference brought together 30 computer
pioneers to discuss their UNIVAC experiences. The historians of technology Michael Mahoney
and Paul Ceruzzi moderated the discussions.
5.   Shuler had to take personal leave in order to visit Eckert-Mauchly and see the machine firsthand.
UNIVAC Conference, 17 May 1990 (OHC-CB, OH-200), 8.
6.   Frederick Miller, interview by Henry Tropp, 14 April 1972 (COH-SI).
7.   John Mauchly to Al Seares, December 1950 (John Mauchly Papers, 3:C:1); Mauchly, "Recent
Events," 14 May 1953 (JMP, 3:C:3, 57).
8.   Mitchell to Sales Division, Remington Rand, 16 November 1950 (HOL, 94-23)
9.   Jean Bartik and Frances Holberton, interview by Henry Tropp, 27 April 1973 (COH-SI), 138-139.
0.   Ibid., 138; UNIVAC Conference, 17 May 1990 (OHC-CB, OH-200), 13.
1.   Adele Mildred Koss, interview by Kathy Kleiman, 19 May 1993 (WFGP), 25.
2.   Grace Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 42.
3.   Grace Hopper, interview by Christopher Evans, 1976 (OHC-CB, OH-81), 19.
4.   Hopper appears to have learned from the mistakes of Mauchly and Eckert, and to have vigorously
documented the development of automatic programming from its inception. Her primary
motivation, however, was to spread her ideas to the programming community rapidly.
5.   Grace Hopper, "Keynote Address," (HPL, 3-8), 24.
6.   Grace Hopper, "The Education of a Computer," presented at meeting of Association of Computing
Machinery, 2-3 May 1952 (GHP, 5-10).
7.   Ibid.
8.   Ibid.
9.   It seems reasonable to speculate that the factory metaphor was a direct result of her experiences at
the Harvard Computation Laboratory. Aiken (who had worked in the electric-power industry)

often stated that the process of "makin' numbers" was no different than generating electricity.
0.   Hopper, "The Education of a Computer" (GHP, 5-10).
1.   In the case of UNIVAC I, the compiler produced Holberton's C-10 machine code.
2.     The word "catalogue" most likely comes from Wilkes. On page 25 of The Preparation of
Programs, Wilkes describes a loose-leaf binder that his team used to keep track of subroutine
information. A loose-leaf binder was used so that new sheets could be inserted as subroutines
were added to the library.
3.   Hopper, "The Education of a Computer" (GHP, 5-10).
4.   Ibid.
5.   Hopper, "The Education of a Computer" (GHP, 5-10).
6.     Richard Ridgway, "Compiling Routines," presented at meeting of Association of Computing
Machinery, 8-9 September 1952 (GHP, 6-1).
7.   Ibid.
8.   Ibid.
9.   Ibid.
0.   Grace Hopper, "Developments in Compiling Techniques to 31 December 1953," memorandum, 31
December 1953 (GHP, 6-1).
1.   Hopper, "Keynote Address," 1-3 June 1978 (HPL, 3-8), 24.
2.   "The A-2 Computer System Operating Manual," 15 November 1953 (GHP, 6-1), 53.
3.   Ibid.
4.   Hopper, "Keynote Address," 1-3 June 1978 (HPL, 3-8), 25.
5.   "The A-2 Computer System Operating Manual," 15 November 1953 (GHP 6-1); Nora Moser to
Margaret Harper, 22 January 1954 (HOL, 94-13)
6.   Grace Hopper, "Compiling Routines," Computers and Automation 2, no. 4 (May 1953) (GHP, 5-
11), 1-5.
7.   Ibid.

8.   Grace Hopper, interview by Christopher Evans, 1976, 14 (OHC-CB, OH-81). Though this quote
comes from an interview during the 1970s, Hopper's vision that programming had to become
more democratic, that is, available to more users, was a central theme in most of her writing
during the 1950s.
9.   Hopper, "Compiling Routines."
0.   Ibid., 3.
1.   Hopper, "Keynote Address," 1-3 June 1978 (HPL, 3-8), 27.
2.   Emil Schell to Grace Hopper, 14 December 1953 (GHP, 6-1).
3.   Nora Moser to Grace Hopper, 15 February 1954 (HOL, 94-13).
4.   Margaret Harper to Nora Moser, 10 February 1954 (HOL, 94-13).
5.   "Second Workshop on UNIVAC Automatic Programming," 1 December 1953 (GHP, 6-1).
6.     On the concept of "technological framework," see The Social Construction of Technological
Systems, ed. Bijker et al.
7.   Adele Mildred Koss, interview by Kathy Kleiman, 19 May 1993, 23 (WIC); Hopper, "Compiling
Routines," 4; Grace Hopper and John Mauchly, "Influence of Programming Techniques on the
Design of Computers" Proceedings of the I.R.E. 41, no. 10 (October 1953): 1253.
8.   The differentiator was Kahrimanian's doctoral thesis at Temple University.
9.     Hopper, "Developments in Compiling Techniques to 31 December 1953" (internal Remington
Rand report; GHP, 6-1).
0.   Carl Hammer, interview by James Ross, 15 April 1983 (OHC-CB, OH-56), 16.
1.   Ibid.
2.   Herb Grosch is best known for "Grosch's Law," which states that computer power increases at the
square of the cost. In business terms, this means that in order to perform a computation twice as
cheaply one must do it four times as fast.
3.   Hopper, interview, 1976, 16, 19 (OHC-CB, OH-81). On technological momentum, see Thomas P.
Hughes, "The Evolution of Large Technological Systems," in The Social Construction of
Technological Systems, ed. Bijker et al.
4.   John Backus, "Programming in America in the 1950s—Some Personal Impressions," in A History
of Computing in the Twentieth Century, ed. Metropolis et al., 127-128.

5.   Hopper, interview, 1976 (OHC-CB, OH-81), 14.
6.   Hopper, "Developments in Compiling Techniques to 31 December 1953" (GHP, 6-1).
7.   Ibid.
8.   Ibid.
9.   Ibid.
0.   Ibid.
1.   Hopper to Nora Moser, 10 February 1954 (HOL, 94-13).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 9
1.   Richard Thomas DeLamarter, Big Blue: IBM's Use and Abuse of Power (Dodd, Mead, 1986), 36.
2.   See Delamarter, Big Blue; Franklin M. Fisher, James W. McKie, and Richard B. Mancke, IBM and
the U.S. Data Processing Industry: An Economic History (Praeger, 1983); Charles Bashe et al.,
IBM's Early Computers (MIT Press, 1986); Cortada, The Computer in the United States; Emerson
W. Pugh, Building IBM: Shaping an Industry and Its Technology (MIT Press, 1995).
3.   DeLamarter, Big Blue, 34. DeLamarter, an economist by training, worked for the antitrust division
of the U.S. Department of Justice from 1974 to 1982. In the book's introduction he openly admits
his frustration with the government's decision to dismiss the case against IBM. Also note that in
reality the sales of the 701/702 were modest.
4.   See Fisher, McKie, and Mancke, IBM and the U.S. Data Processing Industry.
5.   Campbell-Kelly and Aspray, Computer, 122-123.
6.   Watson, Father, Son & Co., 228.
7.   UNIVAC Conference, 17 May 1990 (OHC-CB, OH-200), 116.
8.   Cortada, The Computer in the United States, 92.
9.   Ibid., 13.
0.   Ken Garrison, interview by Robina Mapstone, 28 June 1973 (COH-SI), 7.
1.   Fisher, McKie, and Mancke, IBM and the U. S. Data Processing Industry, 44-45.

2.   UNIVAC Conference, 17 May 1990 (OHC-CB, OH-200), 9-11.
3.   Ibid., 9.
4.   Ibid., 42-43.
5.   Ibid., 90.
6.   Ibid., 81.
7.     On the connection between labor scarcity and technology, see Cowan, A Social History of
American Technology; Hopper, "Developments in Compiling Techniques to 31 December 1953"
(GHP, 6-1).
8.   Grace Hopper, Reflections on the History of Computer Programming, audio tape of lecture by G.
Hopper presented at U.S. Military Academy, West Point, 1971, transcribed by Kurt Beyer (GHP).
9.     During the 1990s, historians of technology studying the computer industry arrived at similar
conclusions. See Pugh, Building IBM; Cortada, The Computer in the United States; Thomas P.
Hughes, Rescuing Prometheus (Pantheon, 1998).
0.   Hughes, Rescuing Prometheus, 16-17.
1.   Ibid., 30-32; Pugh, Building IBM, 199-207.
2.   Watson, Father, Son & Co., 232.
3.     During World War II, German engineers experimented with ferrite cores (Hughes, Rescuing
Prometheus, 35-36).
4.     Robert R. Everett, "Whirlwind," in A History of Computing in the Twentieth Century, ed.
Metropolis et al.
5.   Watson, Father, Son & Co., 231. Emerson Pugh's research suggests that Watson Jr.'s assessment
was correct. See Pugh, Building IBM, 207-209.
6.   Ibid., 208.
7.   Ibid., 208-209; Hughes, Rescuing Prometheus, 49.
8.   Watson, Father, Son & Co., 243.
9.   Hughes, Rescuing Prometheus, 51.

0.     IBM's commercial success with computers incorporating Whirlwind technology led almost
inevitably to litigation concerning patent rights. In the end, IBM paid MIT a lump-sum licensing
fee of $13 million. Even though this constituted a substantial amount of money in the late 1950s,
it represented a fraction of the value of magnetic core memory to IBM and the computer industry
in the next 20 years (Hughes, Rescuing Prometheus, 38).
1.   Cuthbert C. Hurd, "Computer Developments at IBM," in Metropolis, A History of Computing, 411-
414.
2.   Watson, Father, Son & Co., 243.
3.   Pugh, Building IBM, 209-210.
4.   Hughes, Rescuing Prometheus, 55-57.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 10
1.   Donald Knuth and Luis Pardo, "The Early Development of Programming Languages," in A History
of Computing in the Twentieth Century, ed. Metropolis et al. (Academic, 1980), 237.
2.   Ibid., 241.
3.   John Backus, "Programming in America in the 1950s—Some Personal Impressions," in A History
of Computing in the Twentieth Century, ed. Metropolis et al., 128.
4.   Grace Hopper, "Keynote Speech," Symposium on Advanced Programming Methods for Digital
Computers, Washington, 28-29 June 1956. (NBS), 32, 65-66.
5.   Adele Mildred Koss, interview by Kathy Kleiman, 19 May 1993 (WFGP), 25.
6.   Pseudo-code, as used by Hopper and other programmers during the 1950s, is equivalent to what is
referred to today as source code.
7.   Grace Hopper, "The Interlude 1954-1956," in Symposium on Advanced Programming Methods for
Digital Computers (Office of Naval Research, 1956) (HOL, 94-2), 1-2.
8.   Sammet, Programming Languages, 310; Hopper, Reflections.
9.   John Backus, "Paper: The History of FORTRAN" 1978 (HPL), 26-27.
0.   Ibid., 26.
1.   Ibid.
2.   Knuth and Pardo, "The Early Development of Programming Languages," 241.

3.   Ibid., 30.
4.   Ibid., 241.
5.   Backus had discovered that more than 50 percent of compiler computer time was spent testing and
debugging.
6.   Campbell-Kelly and Aspray, Computer, 190.
7.   Grace Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 15.
8.   Mary Hawes, "Automatic Routines for Commercial Installations" (NBS, 94-23)
9.   Ibid.
0.   Hopper, Reflections.
1.   Ibid.
2.   Ibid. Hopper's quote serves more to highlight her sense of the dramatic rather than to represent
management's position.
3.   The development of FLOW-MATIC pseudo-code appears to be one of the first instances of the
intersection between programming and linguistic theory. Hopper and her team had to define and
construct a standardized data-processing language from scratch.
4.   Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 16.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 11
1.   Grace Hopper, "Glossary of Computer Terminology: Memo to ACM Members," 10 February 1954
(EBP, 50-19)
2.   John Markoff, "Rear Adm. Grace M. Hopper Dies; Innovator in Computers Was 85," New York
Times, 3 January 1992; Richard Pearson, "Adm. Hopper Dies; Pioneer in Computers,"
Washington Post, 4 January 1992.
3.     Campbell-Kelly and Aspray, Computer, 191-192;Jean Sammet, "Brief Summary of the Early
History of COBOL," Annals of the History of Computing 7, no. 4 (October 1985): 288-301; Jack
Strong, "The Tale of the Near Demise of COBOL at Birth," Annals of the History of Computing 7,
no. 4 (October 1985): 327.
4.     "Common Business Languages for ADP: A Progress Report," John Diebold and Associates
Newsletter 4, no. 10 (1959): 1-3 (GHP, 5-12); Charles Phillips, "Report from Committee on Data
Systems Languages," 1 September 1959 (HOL, 94-2).

5.   Hopper's Navy service record and obituary verify Phillips's assertion that she was associated with
the University of Pennsylvania during 1959. Hopper's position as "Visiting Lecturer to Adjunct
Professor, Moore School of Electrical Engineering, University of Pennsylvania," was held for one
year. During that time, Hopper remained the director of UNIVAC's automatic programming
division. See Elizabeth Dickason, "Remembering Grace Murray Hopper: A Legend in Her Own
Time," CHIPS 7, no. 2 (April 1992): 4-8; Charles Phillips, "Reminiscences (Plus a Few Facts),"
Annals of the History of Computing 7, no. 4 (October 1985): 304-308; Phillips, "Report from the
Committee on Data Systems Languages," 1 September 1959 (HOL, 94-2).
6.     Contrary to Phillips's and Hopper's recollection of events, Jean Sammet, a programmer who
represented Sylvania on the CODASYL short-range committee, has written that Mary Hawes of
the Burroughs Corporation requested the 8 April 1959 meeting. See Jean Sammet, "Brief
Summary of the Early History of COBOL," Annals of the History of Computing 7, no. 4 (October
1985): 288-301.
7.   Grace Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 18.
8.   Hopper, Reflections.
9.   Mary Hawes and Benjamin Cheydleur, "Suggestions for Consideration at the Washington CBL
Conference," 22 May 1959 (HOL, 94-2).
0.   Ibid., 306; Hopper, Reflections.
1.   Phillips, "Reminiscences (Plus a Few Facts)," 306.
2.   Ibid.; Phillips, "Report from Committee on Data Systems Languages," 1 September 1959 (HOL,
94-2).
3.   Phillips, "Reminiscences (Plus a Few Facts)," 305.
4.   Hopper, Reflections; "Common Business Languages for ADP: A Progress Report" (GHP, 5-12), 1-
3.
5.     Phillips, "Report from Committee on Data Systems Languages"; Phillips to Mr. Benjamin
Cheydleur, 18 May 1959 (HOL, 94-2).
6.   Agenda for CODASYL meeting, 28-29 May 1959 (HOL, 94-2).
7.   Ibid.
8.   Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 19.
9.   Francis Holberton, handwritten notes from 28-29 May 1959 (HOL, 94-2).

0.   Ibid.
1.   E. J. Albertson, "Current Developments in Common Language Programming for Business Data
Systems" (paper presented at the Computer Applications Symposium, Chicago, Illinois, 28
October 1959) (GHP, 5-12), 3-6. Hopper supported words over symbols for business languages.
2.   At the time, the efficiency of machine language was difficult to quantify. See Jean Sammet, "The
Early History of COBOL," in History of Programming Languages, ed. Wexelblat; Charles A.
Phillips, "Report from Committee on Data Systems Languages," Oral presentation to Association
for Computing Machinery, Boston, September 1, 1959.
3.   Francis Holberton, handwritten notes (HOL, 94-2).
4.     "Results on Questionnaire on Programming Languages" (HOL, 94-2); Albertson, "Current
Developments" (GHP, 5-12).
5.   Jean Sammet, "Report #1: Task Group on Statement Language," 29 June 1959 (HOL, 94-2).
6.    Alfred Asch, "Minutes of Committee Meeting on Data Systems Languages Held at Bureau of
Standards, June 23-24 1959" (HOL, 94-2); Nora Taylor to Dr. Larry Polachek, 24 July 1959
(HOL, 94-2)
7.     Grace Hopper, Sperry Rand Statement on Common Data Processing Language, 28 July 1959
(HOL, 94-2)
8.   Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 20-22.
9.   Programmers of the von Neumann-type stored program computer got used to treating operations
and data equally in memory. Returning to a method used at the Harvard Computation Laboratory,
Hopper's FLOW-MATIC differentiated between the two types of information in order to make
debugging easier.
0.   Jean Sammet, "Answers to Written Questions from the ACM History of Programming Languages
Conference," 1 February 1979 (HPL, 19-3), 16.
1.   His programmers were writing an AIMACO compiler for the IBM 705, which allowed AIMACO
source code to run on either the UNIVAC 1105 or the IBM 705; Sammet, Programming
Languages, 324.
2.   The Justice Department cited "product pre-announcement" as an abuse of market power in its 1952
lawsuit against IBM.
3.   Sammet, Programming Languages, 325.
4.   CSC, one of the first "software" companies, has become one of the largest companies in the world.

5.     Jack Strong, "The Tale of the Near Demise of COBOL at Birth," Annals of the History of
Computing 7, no. 4 (October 1985): 327.
6.   Ibid.
7.   Sammet, "Paper: The Early History of COBOL," 209.
8.     Howard Bromberg, "Howard Bromberg Tells the Story of Sending the COBOL Tombstone to
Charlie Phillips," Annals of the History of Computing 7, no. 4 (October 1985): 309.
9.     IBM's technique of bundling software with hardware products came under attack by the U.S.
Department of Justice in the 1960s, prompting IBM to "unbundle" in December 1968. IBM's
action decoupled software from hardware, thus transforming it into a commodity. This
transformation ignited the explosive growth of the software industry. See Campbell-Kelly and
Aspray, Computer.
0.   Hopper admitted in an interview years later that one of her motivations for supporting a COBOL
standard was to block IBM from developing the business language standard. Aside from Jean
Sammet's opinion that there was a certain amount of anti-IBM sentiment within the CODASYL
organization, documents from the period do not confirm Hopper's later beliefs; Hopper, interview,
1 October 1982 (WFGP), 23.
1.   Hopper, Reflections; Bromberg, "COBOL Tombstone," 309.
2.   Phillips, "Reminiscences," 307.
3.     Bromberg, "Howard Bromberg Tells the Story of Sending the COBOL Tombstone to Charlie
Phillips," 309.
4.   Wegstein to Phillips, 20 November 1959 (HOL, 94-2).
5.   Gaudette to Phillips, 30 November 1959 (HOL, 94-2).
6.     Howard Bromberg, "The COBOL Conclusion: End of the Beginning"; Sammet, Programming
Languages, 332.
7.   Jean Sammet, "General Views on COBOL," 2 December 1960 (GHP, 5-12). Since Hopper had a
copy of Sammet's report in her possession, and based on the intended audience for the document,
one can only assume that it was distributed among CODASYL members as well as represented
users and manufacturers.
8.   Nelson to Phillips, January 26 1960 (HOL, 94-2).
9.   Ibid.

0.   Howard Bromberg, "Report to NBS," 1967.
1.   Edmund C. Arranga et al., "In COBOL's Defense: Roundtable Discussion," IEEE Software 17, no.
2 (March-April 2000): 70-72.
2.   Francis Holberton, handwritten notes from 28-29 May 1959 (HOL 94-2).
3.   See The Social Construction of Technological Systems, ed. Bijker et al.
4.   "Computer Science" was not a term used to describe computer-oriented education until the late
1960s.
5.     Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference (Little,
Brown, 2000), 56-59; David Hackett Fischer, Paul Revere's Ride (Oxford University Press,
1995). Fischer confirms Gladwell's interpretation of Revere.
6.   Grace Hopper, "Draft Report on COBOL," 1966 (HOL, 94-2).
7.   Ibid.
8.   Ibid.
9.   "Closure" is the term used to describe the stabilization of an artifact and the disappearance of
technological problems that the artifact addresses. According to the social constructivists, a
technological standard does not emerge because the artifact is the most logical way to solve a
given problem, but rather the influential social groups believe the problem to be solved. See
Trevor Pinch and Wiebe Bijker, "The Social Construction of Facts and Artifacts: Or How the
Sociology of Technology Might Benefit Each Other," in The Social Construction of Technological
Systems, ed. Bijker et al.
0.   This can be attributed in part to Hopper's work with the Department of Defense in the late 1960s.
Her assignment was to standardize COBOL for the military.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 12
1.   Grace Hopper, "We Teach Computers to Think," Popular Electronics, 1959.
2.   Ibid.
3.   See Hughes, Networks of Power.
4.   Naval Service Record Biography, "Captain Grace Murray Hopper, July 1981" (OBC).
5.   Hopper, interview, 1 October 1982 (WFGP), 19.

6.   Naval Service Record Biography, "Captain Grace Murray Hopper, July 1981" (OBC).
7.   Ibid.
8.   Kathleen Williams, Improbable Warriors (Naval Insititute Press, 2001), 209-212.
OceanofPDF.com

INDEX
Adams, Charlie, 263
Aiken, Howard, 73-75
and AMC, 169
and Babbage, 130, 136
and Bloch, 86
and computer community, 141-143
and Harvard Computation Laboratory, 74-88, 92-95
and Harvard Symposium, 143-145, 149, 150, 156-163
and Hopper, 4, 84, 85, 95, 170
and IBM, 109
leadership style, 73, 80-86, 94
and Mark I, 36-43, 55, 63, 64, 68, 74-79, 90, 109, 133, 134, 139,
140
and Mark II, 157-159
and Mark III, 100-103
and Watson, 135
AIMACO, 290, 292
Alcoholism, Hopper's, 6, 175-177, 204-207
American Totalisator, 186, 187, 200
Analytical Engine, 128, 129
Arnold, Hubert, 86, 87
Asch, Alfred, 292
Asprey, Winifred, 28

Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), 7, 163-171, 278,
279, 319, 320
ATLAS, 172
Automatic programming, 234-246, 261-268
acceptance, 289
benefits, 223, 224, 275
Hopper and, 10, 221-225, 242-246
Automatic Programming Department, 265-267
Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator. See Mark I
Automatic sequential control, 121
B-0 language, 270-274
Babbage, Charles, 127-130, 135, 136, 145-147
Babbage, Richard, 145-149, 157, 162
Backus, John, 5, 242, 263, 264, 267-270
Ballistics Research Laboratory (BRL), 117, 118, 189
Barnard College, 31
Bartik, Betty "Jean" Jennings, 5, 190, 191, 218, 219
Bemer, Robert, 281
Berkeley, Edmund, 94, 164-169, 177, 204-207
Binary Automatic Computer (BINAC), 172, 186, 196
Biography, 18-22
Bloch, Richard
and Aiken, 81, 86, 160
and coding innovations, 97-100
at Harvard Computation Laboratory, 7, 8, 40-43
and Harvard Symposium, 150, 151
and Mark I, 49, 53, 56-63, 72

at Raytheon, 163
and von Neumann, 115, 116
Branching, 99, 100, 151
Bromberg, Howard, 281, 294, 295, 301
Bugs, 64-72
Burns, Robert, 80, 84
Bush, Vannevar, 51, 108, 119
Cambridge University
Mathematics Laboratory, 96, 97, 103, 197, 198
Campbell, Robert, 7, 8
and Aiken, 160
and Mark I, 40, 41, 53, 66, 123, 124
at Raytheon, 162, 163
Census Bureau, 185, 186, 219
Chaffee, Emory L., 114
Charles Babbage Institute, 12, 14
Circuits, 201, 202
COBOL (Common Business Oriented Language)
Hopper and, 303-309
invention, 280-292, 320, 321
specifications, 288-292
spread, 304-307
standardization, 292-300, 307-310
success, 300-304
Code
C-10, 193-196, 212
documentation, 16, 63

machine, 193-196, 266, 267
pseudo-, 233-235, 265, 266, 271-275
source, 266, 267, 270-272
Coding, relative, 98-101
Coding sheets, 70, 71
Cold War, 255-261
Columbia University Statistical Bureau, 132, 133
Commonwealth Edison, 219
Compilers, 11, 16, 314
A-0, 225-229
A-1, 229
A-2, 229-242, 264, 267
A-3, 265, 266
automatic programming and, 221-225, 263, 264
business language, 270-275
distribution, 235-242
gaining support for, 240-246
invention, 214-216, 317, 318
research on, 225-232
subroutines and, 228-235
Type B, 224, 239, 240
"Compiling Routines" (Hopper), 232-235
Compton, Karl Taylor, 108
Computer industry, 11, 12, 247-261
Computer Oral History Collection, 13, 14
Computers, potential uses of, 154, 155, 180
Computing community

Aiken and, 141-143
emerging, 107
expansion, 278-280
Hopper's place in, 169-173, 319, 320
knowledge sharing in, 143-145, 154-156, 164, 237-239, 277, 278
Computing-Tabulating-Recording (CTR) Company, 185
Comrie, Leslie, 105
COMTRAN, 290, 292, 295
Conant, James Bryant, 108
Conference on Data Systems and Languages (CODASYSL), 285-
296, 320, 321
Courant, Richard, 29, 30
Crane, Philip, 2
Curtiss, John, 166
Customer support, 219, 220, 252-253
Data-processing centers, 61
D-Day, 52, 53
Debugging, 64-67, 70-72
Department of Defense, 283-285, 302, 303
Difference Engine, 127, 128
Differential analyzer, 51, 52, 239, 240, 315
Differential equations, 149, 150, 239, 240, 315
Eckert, J. Presper, Jr., 15, 51, 52, 111, 112, 118, 180-187, 200-202
Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation (EMCC), 4, 10, 172, 173
financial difficulties, 184-187, 199-204, 208
Hopper at, 177-184, 191-199

programmer training at, 196, 197
purchased by Remington Rand, 208-212, 216-220
Editing generator, 239, 314
EDSAC (Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Computer), 65, 66,
97, 105, 197
"Education of a Computer, The" (Hopper), 220-225
EDVAC (Electronic Discrete Variable Automatic Computer), 121,
181, 182
Electronic Control Company, 166, 181
Emergency Price Control Act and Stabilization Act, 24
Engineering Research Associates (ERA), 171, 172, 253
Engstrom, Howard, 35, 171, 172
ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer), 8, 9, 15,
51, 52, 61, 69, 108, 118-122, 151, 152, 190, 191, 202, 203
Errors
computational, 55, 56
round-off, 55, 56
FACT (Fully Automatic Compiling Technique), 293-297
"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC" (von Neumann), 111-113,
116-122, 152, 181, 182
Flow charts, 192, 193
FLOW-MATIC, 274, 275, 291-296
Forrester, Jay, 256-258
FORTRAN, 267-270, 295
Gender issues, 211, 212
Giddens, Anthony, 21
Gladwell, Malcolm, 306, 307

Goheen, Harry, 93-95, 165-167
Goldstine, Herman, 111-113, 117-120, 182, 193
Gorn, Saul, 281
Grace Murray Hopper Center, 2
Grosch, Herbert, 241
Groves, Leslie, 210, 216, 217, 257
Hacking, 63
Hammer, Carl, 240, 241
Harvard Computation Laboratory, 4, 9, 10, 17, 39-43, 53
Aiken and, 73-88, 92-95
Berkeley and, 164, 165
computer community and, 141-143
Hopper at, 81, 87, 88, 95, 169-177
humor at, 84, 85
isolation, 107-111
postwar environment, 92-95
pressures, 176, 177
public relations, 140
talent migration from, 161-163
wartime culture and, 89-91, 176
Harvard 
Symposium 
on 
Large-Scale 
Digital 
Calculating
Machinery, 143-163
Harvard University, 12, 141
Hawkings, Bob, 45
History of Programming Languages Conference, 7, 12, 13
Holberton, Betty (Snyder), 5, 187-194, 199, 209-212, 236, 288,
303, 304. See also Snyder, Betty

Holberton, John, 211, 212
Hollerith, Herman, 185
Honeywell, 293-297
Hopper, Vincent, 25, 26, 30, 31
Hughes, Thomas, 19
IBM (International Business Machines), 185
Aiken and, 109
antitrust lawsuit against, 248, 249
COBOL and, 292-295, 302, 303
computers, 258, 259
culture at, 5, 172
early computer industry and, 247-261
EMCC and, 201-204
Mark I and, 132-137, 148
SAGE and, 255-261
Seeber and, 85
Implosion, 99, 114-116, 239, 240
Innovation, 90, 91, 95-106
Input/output mechanisms, 184
Instructional Tape Preparation Table, 101, 103
Internal memory, 9, 100, 101, 121, 152, 183, 184, 266
Interpreters, 234, 235
Interviews, 16-18
Invention, 213, 214, 314-319
distributed, 11, 225-232, 317, 318
simultaneous, 103-106
Investment capital, 184-187

Jacquard, Joseph, 128
Joy, C. Turner, 148, 149
Kahrimanian, Harry, 239, 240, 315
Koss, Adele Mildred, 219, 239, 314, 315
Laniung, J. Halcombe, Jr., 263, 264
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von, 126, 127
Leontief, Wassily, 150
Livingston, Hugh, 196
Lovelace, Ada, 128-130
Manhattan Project, 113, 114
Manual of Operation for the Automatic Sequence Controlled
Calculator (Hopper), 123-130, 137-140
Mark I (Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator), 7, 9
Aiken and, 36-43, 55, 63, 64, 68, 74-79, 90, 109, 133, 134, 139,
140
bugs, 66-72
commercial potential, 90, 91
design, 45-51, 90
Hopper and, 87, 88
IBM narrative, 132-137
manual for, 123-130, 137-140
operating instructions, 57, 58
output, 60, 61
performance, 144, 148
postwar environment and, 92-95
processing speed, 62-64, 115

programming, 47-49, 53-62, 70-72
subroutines, 96
testing, 59, 60
von Neumann and, 111-116
Mark II, 7, 53, 90, 93, 147, 148, 157-159, 184
Mark III, 93, 100-103, 214, 221, 222
Marriage, 25, 26, 31
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 108, 109, 255-258
Mathematical functions, 50
Mathematical models, 150
Mathematics, 15, 16, 25, 28
MATH-MATIC, 266, 267
Mauchly, John
and ACM, 166, 167
and EDVAC, 181-183
and EMCC, 173, 177-181, 199-201
and ENIAC, 51, 52, 69, 118
and "First Draft," 111, 112
and IBM, 201-204
and Remington Rand, 210-212, 217
and UNIVAC, 184-187
McAfee, Mildred, 32
Mealey, Marilyn, 311-313
Memory, 151, 158, 257
Mercury delay lines, 158, 159, 183
Microsoft, 6
Midshipmen's School, 32-34

Mitchell, Herbert, 196, 218
Mitchell, Maria, 26
Morton, Paul, 158
Moser, Nora, 237
Murray, Roger, 31
National Bureau of Standards, 186
National Museum of American History, 12, 13, 16
Naval Data Automation Headquarters (NAVDAC), 322-324
Navy, 3, 4, 32-43, 322-324
Navy Communications Annex, 35
Navy Programming Languages Group, 322
Navy Women's Reserve Act, 31
Nelson, D. A., 298
Nomenclature Committee, 278, 279, 320
Nutt, Roy, 293
Nye, David, 20
Operating instructions, 57, 58, 71, 102
Operators, 56, 57
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 73
Oral histories, 13-18
Pacific Mutual Insurance Company, 251, 252
Palmer, Ralph, 203
Partial differential equations, 30, 55
Pascal, Blaise, 126
Pearl Harbor, 3, 23, 24, 31

Personal difficulties, Hopper's, 5, 6, 31, 175, 176, 204-207
Phillips, Charles, 280-284, 302, 303
Primary sources, 12-14
Problem-oriented languages, 263-275
Professor, Hopper as, 25-32
Programmers
shortage, 254, 255
training, 196, 197, 264, 265, 319
Programming, 62
costs, 244, 245, 265, 282, 284
history, 313, 314
innovations, 90, 91, 95-106
as invention, 6-12
Mark I, 47-49, 53-66, 70-72
techniques, 7, 8
Programs, portability of, 283, 284
Project Whirlwind, 256-259, 263
Punch cards, 201, 202, 209
RAND Corporation, 261
Rand, James, 208, 209
Random-access memory (RAM), 158, 257, 258
RAYDAC, 163
Raytheon Manufacturing Company, 162, 163
RCA, 294-296
Relay technology, 68, 69, 90, 147, 158-160
Remington Rand Corporation, 5
Hopper and, 11, 219, 220, 254

IBM and, 247-261
management, 242-246
purchase of EMCC by, 208-212, 216-220
sales and support for UNIVAC at, 216-220, 252-254
UNIVAC and, 249-254
Retirement, Hopper in, 322-324
Reynolds, Edward, 148
Richards, Ellen Swallow, 26
Ridgway, Richard, 225-229
Run-programs, 226
60 Minutes interview, of Hopper, 1, 2
604 Electronic Calculator, 203
SAGE (Semi-Automatic Ground Environment), 255-261
Sammet, Jean, 7, 289, 290, 294
Saunders, Frederick, 75, 76
Savage, David, 217
Schell, Emil, 236
Seeber, Robert, 85
Selective Sequence Electronic Calculator, 85
Shapley, Harlow, 76, 78
Smith, Eugene, 283
Smith, Gertrude, 28—39
Smithsonian Institution, 12, 13, 16
Snyder, Betty, 5, 187-194, 199, 209-212, 236, 288, 303, 304. See
also Holberton, Betty (Snyder)
Social constructivism, 19-21
Software development, 6

Sorting, binary, 198, 199
Sort-merge generator, 198-202
Sperry Rand, 274, 290, 291
Stibitz, George, 69
Storage technology, 158, 159
Stored-program architecture, 120, 121, 152, 192, 193
Straus, Henry, 186, 187, 199-201
Subroutines, 96-106, 195, 196, 222, 223, 228-235
Suicide threats, Hopper's, 206, 207
Tapes
data, 59
magnetic, 184, 198-204
sequence, 59
Teaching career, Hopper's, 26-30
Technology, history of, 18-22
Travis, Irvin, 181
Turing, Alan, 107
UNIVAC, 105, 172, 181-184
C-10 code and, 193-196
demand for, 251-254
design, 183-184, 198, 199
and Eisenhower-Stevenson election, 249-251
investment capital for, 184-187, 200-204
Remington Rand and, 208-212
sales and support for, 216-220, 252-254
University of Pennsylvania, 8
USS Grace Hopper, 2

Vacuum tubes, 69, 90
Vassar College, 25-32
von Neumann architecture, 9
von Neumann, John, 8, 9, 96, 104
and AMC, 168, 169
and "First Draft," 111-113, 116-122, 152, 181, 182
and flow charts, 193
and Harvard Symposium, 153, 154
and Mark I, 111-116
War Powers Act, 24
Watson, Thomas, Jr., 201-203, 256-259
Watson, Thomas, Sr., 109, 135, 172, 185, 201, 202
WAVES (Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service), 31,
32
Weaver, Warren, 77
Wheeler, David, 97
Wiener, Norbert, 152, 153
Wilkes, Maurice, 64, 65, 83, 84, 96, 97, 104-106, 157, 197, 198
Women, career opportunities for, 3-5
World War II, 3, 4, 23, 24, 30-34, 52, 53, 89-91, 107
Zierler, Neal, 263, 264
OceanofPDF.com

