
Introduction to Calculus and Analysis 
Volume I 


Richard Courant Fritz John 
Introduction to 
Calculus and Analysis 
Volume I 
With 204111ustrations 
Springer-Verlag 
New York Berlin Heidelberg 
London Paris Tokyo Hong Kong 

Richard Courant (1888 - 1972) 
Fritz John 
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences 
New York University 
New York, NY 10012 
Originally published in 1965 by Interscience Publishers, a division of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Mathematical Subject Qassification: 26xx, 26-01 
Printed on acid-free paper. 
Copyright 1989 Springer-Verlag New York, Inc. 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1989 
All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without the 
written permission of the publisher (Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 175 Fifth Avenue, New 
York, NY 10010, USA), except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly 
analysis. Use in connection with any form of information storage and retrieval, electronic 
adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or 
hereafter developed is forbidden. 
The use of general descriptive names, trade names, trademarks, etc., in this publication, even if 
the former are not especially identified, is not to be taken as a sign that such names, as 
understood by the Trade Marks and Merchandise Act, may accordingly be used freely by 
anyone. 
987654321 
ISBN-13:978-1-4613-8957-6 
e-ISBN-13:978-1-4613-8955-2 
DOl: 10.10071978-1-4613-8955-2 

Preface 
During the latter part of the seventeenth century the new mathe-
matical analysis emerged as the dominating force in mathematics. 
It is characterized by the amazingly successful operation with infinite 
processes or limits. Two of these processes, differentiation and inte-
gration, became the core of the systematic Differential and Integral 
Calculus, often simply called "Calculus," basic for all of analysis. 
The importance of the new discoveries and methods was immediately 
felt and caused profound intellectual excitement. Yet, to gain mastery 
of the powerful art appeared at first a formidable task, for the avail-
able publications were scanty, unsystematic, and often lacking in 
clarity. Thus, it was fortunate indeed for mathematics and science 
in general that leaders in the new movement soon recognized the 
vital need for writing textbooks aimed at making the subject ac-
cessible to a public much larger than the very small intellectual elite of 
the early days. One of the greatest mathematicians of modern times, 
Leonard Euler, established in introductory books a firm tradition and 
these books of the eighteenth century have remained sources of in spira-
tion until today, even though much progress has been made in the 
clarification and simplification of the material. 
After Euler, one author after the other adhered to the separation of 
differential calculus from integral calculus, thereby obscuring a key 
point, the reciprocity between differentiation and integration. Only in 
1927 when the first edition of R. Courant's German Vorlesungen iiber 
Differential und Integralrechnung, appeared in the Springer-Verlag 
was this separation eliminated and the calculus presented as a unified 
subject. 
From that German book and its subsequent editions the present 
work originated. With the cooperation of James and Virginia McShaue 
a greatly expanded and modified English edition of the "Calculus" WRS 
prepared and published by Blackie and Sons in Glasgow since 1934, and 
v 

vi Preface 
distributed in the United States in numerous reprintings by Inter-
science-Wiley. 
During the years it became apparent that the need of college and uni-
versity instruction in the United States made a rewriting of this work 
desirable. Yet, it seemed unwise to tamper with the original versions 
which have remained and still are viable. 
Instead of trying to remodel the existing work it seemed preferable to 
supplement it by an essentially new book in many ways related to the 
European originals but more specifically directed at the needs of the 
present and future students in the United States. Such a plan became 
feasible when Fritz John, who had already greatly helped in the prepara-
tion of the first English edition, agreed to write the new book together 
with R. Courant. 
While it differs markedly in form and content from the original, it is 
animated by the same intention: To lead the student directly to the 
heart of the subject and to prepare him for active application of his 
knowledge. It avoids the dogmatic style which conceals the motivation 
and the roots of the calculus in intuitive reality. To exhibit the interac-
tion between mathematical analysis and its various applications and to 
emphasize the role of intuition remains an important aim of this new 
book. Somewhat strengthened precision does not, as we hope, inter-
fere with this aim. 
Mathematics presented as a closed, linearly ordered, system of truths 
without reference to origin and purpose has its charm and satisfies a 
philosophical need. But the attitude of introverted science is unsuitable 
for students who seek intellectual independence rather than indoctrina-
tion; disregard for applications and intuition leads to isolation and 
atrophy of mathematics. It seems extremely important that students 
and instructors should be protected from smug purism. 
The book is addressed to students on various levels, to mathema-
ticians, scientists, engineers. It does not pretend to make the subject 
easy by glossing over difficulties, but rather tries to help the genuinely 
interested reader by throwing light on the interconnections and purposes 
of the whole. 
Instead of obstructing the access to the wealth of facts by lengthy 
discussions of a fundamental nature we have sometimes postponed such 
discussions to appendices in the various chapters. 
Numerous examples and problems are given at the end of various 
chapters. Some are challenging, some are even difficult; most of them 
supplement the material in the text. In an additional pamphlet more 

Preface vii 
problems and exercises of a routine character will be collected, and 
moreover, answers or hints for the solutions will be given. 
Many colleagues and friends have been helpful. Albert A. Blank 
not only greatly contributed incisive and constructive criticism, but he 
also played a major role in ordering, augmenting, and sifting of the 
problems and exercises, and moreover he assumed the main responsi-
bility for the pamphlet. Alan Solomon helped most unselfishly and 
effectively in all phases of the preparation of the book. Thanks is also 
due to Charlotte John, Anneli Lax, R. Richtmyer, and other friends, 
including James and Virginia McShane. 
The first volume is concerned primarily with functions of a single 
variable, whereas the second volume will discuss the more ramified 
theories of calculus for functions of several variables. 
A final remark should be addressed to the student reader. It might 
prove frustrating to attempt mastery of the subject by studying such a 
book page by page following an even path. Only by selecting shortcuts 
first and returning time and again to the same questions and difficulties 
can one gradually attain a better understanding from a more elevated 
point. 
An attempt was made to assist users of the book by marking with an 
asterisk some passages which might impede the reader at his first at-
tempt. Also some of the more difficult problems are marked by an 
asterisk. 
We hope that the work in the present new form will be useful to the 
young generation of scientists. We are aware of many imperfections 
and we sincerely invite critical comment which might be helpful for later 
improvements. 
June 1965 
Richard Courant 
Fritz John 


Contents 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.1 The Continuum of Numbers 
a. The System of Natural Numbers and Its 
Extension. Counting and Measuring, 1 
b. Real Numbers and Nested Intervals, 7 
c. Decimal Fractions. Bases Other Than 
Ten, 9 
d. Definition of Neighborhood, 12 
e. Inequalities, 12 
1 
1 
1.2 The Concept of Function 
17 
a. Mapping-Graph, 18 
b. Definition of the 
Concept of Functions of a Continuous 
Variable. Domain and Range of a Function, 21 
c. Graphical Representation. Monotonic 
Functions, 24 
d. Continuity, 31 
e. The 
Intermediate Value Theorem. Inverse 
Functions, 44 
1.3 The Elementary Functions 
47 
a. Rational Functions, 47 
b. Algebraic 
Functions, 49 
c. Trigonometric Functions, 49 
d. The Exponential Function and the 
Logarithm, 51 
e. Compound Functions, 
Symbolic Products, Inverse Functions, 52 
1.4 Sequences 
55 
1.5 Mathematical Induction 
57 
ix 

x Contents 
1.6 The Limit of a Sequence 
60 
1 
1 
1 
a. an = ~, 61 
b. a2m = ;;; a2m-l = 2m' 62 
c. an = n ~ 1 ' 63 
d. an = ~ 
64 
e. an = at',6S 
f. Geometrical Illustration of the Limits of 
at' and {fj, 6S 
g. The Geometric Series, 67 
h. an = ~ 
69 
i. an = Vn+1 - v;;: 69 
1.7 Further Discussion of the Concept of Limit 
70 
a. Definition of Convergence and Divergence, 70 
b. Rational Operations with Limits, 71 
c. Intrinsic Convergence Tests. Monotone 
Sequences, 73 
d. Infinite Series and the 
Summation Symbol, 75 
e. The Number e, 77 
f. The Number 7r as a Limit, 80 
1.8 The Concept of Limit for Functions of a Con-
tinuous Variable 
82 
a. Some Remarks about the Elementary 
Functions, 86 
Supplements 
87 
S.l Limits and the Number Concept 
89 
a. The Rational Numbers, 89 
b. Real 
Numbers Determined by Nested Sequences of 
Rational Intervals, 90 
c. Order, Limits, and 
Arithmetic Operations for Real Numbers, 92 
d. Completeness of the Number Continuum. 
Compactness of Closed Intervals. Convergence 
Criteria,94 
e. Least Upper Bound and 
Greatest Lower Bound, 97 
f. Denumerability 
of the Rational Numbers, 98 
S.2 Theorems on Continuous Functions 
S.3 Polar Coordinates 
S.4 Remarks on Complex Numbers 
PROBLEMS 
99 
101 
103 
106 

Contents xi 
Chapter 2 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral 
and Differential Calculus 
119 
2.1 The Integral 
120 
a. Introduction, 120 
b. The Integral as an 
Area, 121 
c. Analytic Definition of the 
Integral. Notations, 122 
2.2 Elementary Examples of Integration 
128 
a. Integration of Linear Function, 128 
b. Integration of x2, 130 
c. Integration of 
XX for Integers a ¢ -1, 131 
d. Integration of 
XX for Rational a Other Than -1,134 
e. Integration of sin x and cos x, 135 
2.3 Fundamental Rules of Integration 
136 
a. Additivity, 136 
b. Integral of a Sum of a 
Product with a Constant, 137 
c. Estimating 
Integrals,138, 
d. The Mean Value Theorem 
for IntegralS, 139 
2.4 The Integral as a Function of the Upper Limit 
(Indefinite Integral) 
143 
2.5 Logarithm Defined by an Integral 
145 
a. Definition of the Logarithm Function, 145 
b. The Addition Theorem for Logarithms, 147 
2.6 Exponential Function and Powers 
149 
a. The Logarithm of the Number e, 149 
b. The Inverse Function of the Logarithm. 
The Exponential Function, 150 
c. The Exponential Function as Limit of 
Powers, 152 
d. Definition of Arbitrary 
Powers of Positive Numbers, 152 
e. Logarithms to Any Base, 153 
2.7 The Integral of an Arbitrary Power of x 
154 
2.8 The De';vative 
155 
a. The Derivative and the Tangent, 156 
b. The Derivative as a Velocity, 162 

xii Contents 
c. Examples of Differentiation, 163 
d. Some 
Fundamental Rules for Differentiation, 165 
e. Differentiability and Continuity of Functions, 
166 
f. Higher Derivatives and Their 
Significance, 169 
g. Derivative and Difference 
Quotient. Leibnitz's Notation, 171 
h. The 
Mean Value Theorem of Differential Calculus, 173 
i. Proof of the Theorem, 175 
j. The 
Approximation of Functions by Linear 
Functions. Definition of Differentials, 179 
k. Remarks on Applications to the Natural 
Sciences, 183 
2.9 The Integral, the Primitive Function, and the 
Fundamental Theorems of the Calculus 
184 
a. The Derivative of the Integral, 184 
b. The 
Primitive Function and Its Relation to the 
Integral, 186 
c. The Use of the Primitive 
Function for Evaluation of Definite Integrals, 189 
d. Examples, 191 
Supplement The Existence of the Definite Integral 
of a Continuous Function 
192 
PROBLEMS 
196 
Chapter 3 The Techniques of Calculus 
201 
Part A Differentiation and Integration of the 
Elementary Functions 
201 
3.1 The Simplest Rules for Differentiation and 
Their Applications 
201 
a. Rules for Differentiation, 201 
b. Differentiation of the Rational Functions, 204 
c. Differentiation of the Trigonometric 
Functions, 205 
3.2 The Derivative of the Inverse Function 
206 
a. General Formula, 206 
b. The Inverse of 
the nth Power; the nth Root, 210 
c. The 
Inverse Trigonometric Functions-

Contents xiii 
Multivaluedness, 210 
d. The Corresponding 
Integral Formulas, 215 
e. Derivative and 
Integral of the Exponential Function, 216 
3.3 Differentiation of Composite Functions 
217 
a. Definitions, 217 
b. The Chain Rule, 218 
c. The Generalized Mean Value Theorem of the 
Differential Calculus, 222 
3.4 Some Applications of the Exponential 
Function 
223 
a. Definition of the Exponential Function by 
Means of a Differential Equation, 223 
b. Interest Compounded Continuously. 
Radioactive Disintegration, 224 
c. Cooling 
or Heating of a Body by a Surrounding 
Medium,225 
d. Variation of the 
Atmospheric Pressure with the Height above 
the Surface of the Earth, 226 
e. Progress of a 
Chemical Reaction, 227 
f. Switching an 
Electric Circuit on or off, 228 
3.5 The Hyperbolic Functions 
228 
a. Analytical Definition, 228 
b. Addition 
Theorems and Formulas for Differentiation 231 
c. The Inverse Hyperbolic Functions, 232 
d. Further Analogies, 234 
3.6 Maxima and Minima 
a. Convexity and Concavity of Curves, 236 
b. Maxima and Minima-Relative Extrema. 
Stationary Points, 238 
236 
3.7 The Order of Magnitude of Functions 
248 
a. The Concept of Order of Magnitude. The 
Simplest Cases, 248 
b. The Order of 
Magnitude of the Exponential Function and of 
the Logarithm, 249 
c. General Remarks, 251 
d. The Order of Magnitude of a Function in the 
Neighborhood of an Arbitrary Point, 252 
e. The Order of Magnitude (or Smallness) of a 
Function Tending to Zero, 252 
f. The "0" 
and "0" Notation for Orders of Magnitude, 253 

xiv Contents 
APPENDIX 
255 
A.l Some Special Functions 
255 
a. The Function y = e1/x2, 255 
b. The 
Function y = ellx, 256 
c. The Function 
y = tanh l/x, 257 
d. The Function 
y = x tanh l/x, 258 
e. The Function 
y = x sin l/x, y(O) = 0, 259 
A.2 Remarks on the Differentiability of Functions 259 
Part B 
Techniques of Integration 
3.8 Table of Elementary Integrals 
3.9 The Method of Substitution 
a. The Substitution Formula. Integral of a 
Composite Function, 263 
b. A Second 
Derivation of the Substitution Formula, 268 
c. Examples. Integration Formulas, 270 
261 
263 
263 
3.10 Further Examples of the Substitution Method 271 
3.11 Integration by Parts 
274 
a. General Formula, 274 
b. Further Examples 
of Integration by Parts, 276 
c. Integral 
Formula for (b) + /(a), 278 
d. Recursive 
Formulas, 278 
"'e. Wallis's Infinite Product 
for 71",280 
3.12 Integration of Rational Functions 
282 
a. The Fundamental Types, 283 
b. Integration 
of the Fundamental Types, 284 
c. Partial 
Fractions, 286 
d. Examples of Resolution 
into Partial Fractions. Method of 
Undetermined Coefficients, 288 
3.13 Integration of Some Other Classes of 
Functions 
290 
a. Preliminary Remarks on the Rational 
Representation of the Circle and the 
Hyperbola,290 
b. Integration of 
R(cos x, sin x), 293 
c. Integration of 

Contents xv 
R(cosh x, sinh x), 294 
d. Integration of 
R(x, ~), 
294 
e. Integration of 
R(x, ~), 
295 
f. Integration of 
R(x, ~), 
295 
g. Integration of 
R(x, .J ax2 + 2bx + c), 295 
h. Further 
Examples of Reduction to Integrals of Rational 
Functions, 296 
i. Remarks on the Examples, 
297 
Part C Further Steps in the Theory of Integral 
Calculus 
298 
3.14 Integrals of Elementary Functions 
298 
8. Definition of Functions by Integrals. Elliptic 
Integrals and Functions, 298 
b. On 
Differentiation and Integration, 300 
3.15 Extension of the Concept of Integral 
301 
8. Introduction. Definition of "Improper" 
Integrals, 301 
b. Functions with Infinite 
Discontinuities, 303 
c. Interpretation as 
Areas,304 
d. Tests for Convergence, 305 
e. Infinite Interval of Integration, 306 
f. The 
Gamma Function, 308 
g. The Dirichlet 
Integral, 309 
h. Substitution. Fresnel 
Integrals, 310 
3.16 The Differential Equations of the 
Trigonometric Functions 
312 
8. Introductory Remarks on Differential 
Equations, 312 
b. Sin x and cos x defined by 
a Differential Equation and Initial Conditions, 
312 
PROBLEMS 
314 
Chapter 4 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
324 
4.1 Theory of Plane Curves 
324 
a. Parametric Representation, 324 
b. Change 
of Parameters, 326 
c. Motion along a Curve. 
Time as the Parameter. Example of the 

xvi 
Contents 
Cycloid, 328 
d. Classifications of Curves. 
Orientation, 333 
e. Derivatives. Tangent and 
Normal, in Parametric Representation, 343 
f. The Length of a Curve, 348 
g. The Arc 
Length as a Parameter, 352 
h. Curvature, 
354 
i. Change of Coordinate Axes. 
Invariance, 360 
j. Uniform Motion in the 
Special Theory of Relativity, 363 
k. Integrals 
Expressing Area within Closed Curves, 365 
I. Center of Mass and Moment of a Curve, 373 
m. Area and Volume of a Surface of 
Revolution, 374 
n. Moment of Inertia, 375 
4.2 Examples 
376 
a. The Common Cycloid, 376 
b. The 
Catenary, 378 
c. The Ellipse and the 
Lemniscate, 378 
4.3 Vectors in Two Dimensions 
379 
a. Definition of Vectors by Translation. 
Notations, 380 
b. Addition and Multiplication 
of Vectors, 384 
c. Variable Vectors, Their 
Derivatives, and Integrals, 392 
d. Application 
to Plane Curves. Direction, Speed, and 
Acceleration, 394 
4.4 Motion of a Particle under Given Forces 
397 
a. Newton's Law of Motion, 397 
b. Motion 
of Falling Bodies, 398 
c. Motion of a Particle 
Constrained to a Given Curve, 400 
4.5 Free Fall of a Body Resisted by Air 
402 
4.6 The Simplest Type of Elastic Vibration 
404 
4.7 Motion on a Given Curve 
405 
a. The Differential Equation and Its Solution, 
405 
b. Particle Sliding down a Curve, 407 
c. Discussion of the Motion, 409 
d. The 
Ordinary Pendulum, 410 
e. The Cycloidal 
Pendulum, 411 

Contents xvii 
4.8 Motion in a Gravitational Field 
413 
a. Newton's Universal Law of Gravitation, 413 
b. Circular Motion about the Center of 
Attraction, 415 
c. Radial Motion-Escape 
Velocity, 416 
4.9 Work and Energy 
418 
a. Work Done by Forces during a Motion, 418 
b. Work and Kinetic Energy. Conservation of 
Energy,420 
c. The Mutual Attraction of 
Two Masses, 421 
d. The Stretching of a 
Spring, 423 
e. The Charging of a Condenser, 
423 
APPENDIX 
424 
A.1 Properties of the Evolute 
424 
A.2 Areas Bounded by Closed Curves. Indices 
430 
PROBLEMS 
435 
Chapter 5 Taylor's Expansion 
440 
5.1 Introduction: Power Series 
440 
5.2 Expansion of the Logarithm and the Inverse 
Tangent 
442 
a. The Logarithm, 442 
b. The Inverse 
Tangent, 444 
5.3 Taylor's Theorem 
445 
a. Taylor's Representation of Polynomials, 445 
b. Taylor's Formula for NonpolynomiaJ 
Functions, 446 
5.4 Expression and Estimates for the Remainder 447 
a. Cauchy's and Lagrange's Expressions, 447 
b. An Alternative Derivation of Taylor's 
Formula, 450 
5.5 Expansions of the Elementary Functions 
453 
a. The Exponential Function, 453 

xviii Contents 
b. Expansion of sin x, cos x, sinh x, cosh x, 454 
c. The Binomial Series, 456 
5.6 Geometrical Applications 
457 
a. Contact of Curves, 458 
b. On the Theory 
of Relative Maxima and Minima, 461 
APPENDIX I 
462 
A.I.l Example of a Function Which Cannot Be 
Expanded in a Taylor Series 
462 
A.I.2 Zeros and Infinites of Functions 
463 
a. zeros of Order n, 463 
b. Infinity of Order 
v,463 
A.I.3 Indeterminate Expressions 
A.I.4 The Convergence of the Taylor Series of a 
Function with Nonnegative Derivatives of 
464 
all Orders 
467 
APPENDIX II INTERPOLATION 
470 
A.II.I The Problem of Interpolation. Uniqueness 470 
A.II.2 Construction of the Solution. Newton's 
Interpolation Formula 
471 
A.II.3 The Estimate of the Remainder 
474 
A.II.4 The Lagrange Interpolation Formula 
476 
PROBLEMS 
477 
Chapter 6 Numerical Methods 
481 
6.1 Computation of Integrals 
482 
a. Approximation by Rectangles, 482 
b. Refined Approximations-Simpson's Rule, 
483 

Contents xix 
6.2 Other Examples of Numerical Methods 
490 
a. The "Calculus of Errors", 490 
b. Calculation of 7r, 492 
c. Calculation of 
Logarithms, 493 
6.3 Numerical Solution of Equations 
494 
a. Newton's Method, 495 
b. The Rule of False 
Position, 497 
c. The Method of Iteration, 499 
d. Iterations and Newton's Procedure, 502 
APPENDIX 
A.l Stirling's Formula 
PROBLEMS 
Chapter 7 Infinite Sums and Products 
504 
504 
507 
510 
7.1 The Concepts of Convergence and Divergence 511 
a. Basic Concepts, 511 
b. Absolute 
Convergence and Conditional Convergence, 513 
c. Rearrangement of Terms, 517 
d. Operations with Infinite Series, 520 
7.2 Tests for Absolute Convergence and 
Divergence 
520 
a. The Comparison Test. Majorants, 520 
b. Convergence Tested by Comparison with the 
Geometric Series, 521 
c. Comparison with 
an Integral, 524 
7.3 Sequences of Functions 
526 
a. Limiting Processes with Functions and 
Curves, 527 
7.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Convergence 
529 
a. General Remarks and Definitions, 529 
b. A Test for Uniform Convergence, 534 
c. Continuity of the Sum of a Uniformly 
Convergent Series of Continuous Functions, 535 
d. Integration of Uniformly Convergent 
Series, 536 
e. Differentiation of Infinite 
Series, 538 

xx Contents 
7.5 Power Series 
a. Convergence Properties of Power Series-
Interval of Convergence, 540 
b. Integration 
and Differentiation of Power Series, 542 
c. Operations with Power Series, 543 
d. Uniqueness of Expansion, 544 
e. Analytic 
Functions, 545 
7.6 Expansion of Given Functions in Power Series. 
Method 
of 
Undetermined 
Coefficients. 
540 
Examples 
546 
a. The Exponential Function, 546 
b. The 
Binomial Series, 546 
c. The Series for arc 
sin x, 549 
d. The Series for 
ar sinh x = log [x + vi (1 + x2)], 549 
e. Example of Multiplication of Series, 550 
f. Example of Term-by-Term Integration 
(Elliptic Integral), 550 
7.7 Power Series with Complex Terms 
551 
a. Introduction of Complex Terms into Power 
Series. Complex Representations of the 
Trigonometric Function, 551 
b. A Glance at 
the General Theory of Functions of a Complex 
Variable, 553 
APPENDIX 
555 
A.l Multiplication and Division of Series 
555 
a. Multiplication of Absolutely Convergent 
Series, 555 
b. Multiplication and Division of 
Power Series, 556 
A.2 Infinite Series and Improper Integrals 
557 
A.3 Infinite Products 
559 
A.4 Series Involving Bernoulli Numbers 
562 
PROBLEMS 
564 

Contents xxi 
Chapter 8 Trigonometric Series 
8.1 Periodic Functions 
a. General Remarks. Periodic Extension of a 
Function, 572 
b. Integrals Over a Period, 573 
c. Harmonic Vibrations, 574 
571 
572 
8.2 Superposition of Harmonic Vibrations 
576 
a. Harmonics. Trigonometric Polynomials, 576 
b. Beats, 577 
8.3 Complex Notation 
582 
a. General Remarks, 582 
b. Application to 
Alternating Currents, 583 
c. Complex 
Notation for Trigonometrical Polynomials, 585 
d. A Trigonometric Formula, 586 
8.4 Fourier Series 
587 
a. Fourier Coefficients, 587 
b. Basic Lemma, 
588 
c. Proof of -- dz = -, 589 
/0'" sin Z 
7r 
o 
z 
2 
d. Fourier Expansion for the 
Function cf> (x) = x,591 
e. The Main 
Theorem on Fourier Expansion, 593 
8.5 Examples of Fourier Series 
598 
a. Preliminary Remarks, 598 
b. Expansion of 
the Function cf> (x) = x2, 598 
c. Expansion 
of x cos x, 598 
d. The 
Function/(x) = lxi, 600 
e. A Piecewise 
Constant Function, 600 
f. The Function 
sin lxi, 601 
g. Expansion of cos J.i.X. 
Resolution of the Cotangent into Partial 
Fractions. The Infinite Product for the 
Sine, 602 
h. Further Examples, 603 
8.6 Further Discussion of Convergence 
604 
a. Results, 604 
b. Bessel's Inequality, 604 

xxii Contents 
c. Proof of Corollaries (a), (b), and (c), 605 
d. Order of Magnitude of the Fourier 
Coefficients Differentiation of Fourier 
Series, 607 
8.7 Approximation by Trigonometric and Rational 
Polynomials 
608 
a. General Remark on Representations of 
Functions, 608 
b. Weierstrass Approximation 
Theorem, 608 
c. Fejers Trigonometric 
Approximation of Fourier Polynomials by 
Arithmetical Means, 610 
d. Approximation 
in the Mean and Parseval's Relation, 612 
APPENDIX I 
614 
A.I.1 Stretching of the Period Interval. Fourier's 
Integral Theorem 
614 
A.I.2 Gibb's Phenomenon at Points of 
Discontinuity 
616 
A.I.3 Integration of Fourier Series 
618 
APPENDIX n 
619 
A.II.1 Bernoulli Polynomials and Their 
Applications 
619 
a. Definition and Fourier Expansion, 619 
b. Generating Functions and the Taylor Series 
of the Trigonometric and Hyperbolic 
Cotangent,621 
c. The Euler-Maclaurin 
Summation Formula, 624 
d. Applications. 
Asymptotic Expressions, 626 
e. Sums of 
Power Recursion Formula for Bernoulli 
Numbers, 628 
f. Euler's Constant and 
Stirling's Series, 629 
PROBLEMS 
631 

Contents xxiii 
Chapter 9 Differential Equations jor the Simplest 
Types of Vibration 
633 
9.1 Vibration Problems of Mechanics and Physics 634 
a. The Simplest Mechanical Vibrations, 634 
b. Electrical Oscillations, 63S 
9.2 Solution of the Homogeneous Equation. Free 
Oscillations 
636 
a. The Fomai Solution, 636 
b. Physical 
Interpretation of the Solution, 638 
c. Fulfilment of Given Initial Conditio'ns. 
Uniqueness of the Solution, 639 
9.3 The Nonhomogeneous Equation. 
Forced 
Oscillations 
a. General Remarks. Superposition, 640 
b. Solution of the Nonhomogeneous 
Equation, 642 
c. The Resonance Curve, 643 
d. Further Discussion of the Oscillation, 646 
e. Remarks on the Construction of Recording 
Instruments, 647 
640 
List of Biographical Dates 
650 
Index 
653 


1 
Introduction 
Since antiquity the intuitive notions of continuous change, growth, 
and motion, have challenged scientific minds. Yet, the way to the 
understanding of continuous variation was opened only in the seven-
teenth century when modern science emerged and rapidly developed in 
close conjunction with integral and differential calculus, briefly called 
calculus, and mathematical analysis. 
The basic notions of Calculus are derivative and integral: the 
derivative is a measure for the rate of change, the integral a measure 
for the total effect of a process of continuous change. A precise under-
standing of these concepts and their overwhelming fruitfulness rests 
upon the concepts of limit and of function which in turn depend upon 
an understanding of the continuum of numbers. Only gradually, by 
penetrating more and more into the substance of Calculus, can one 
appreciate its power and beauty. In this introductory chapter we shall 
explain the basic concepts of number, function, and limit, at first 
simply and intuitively, and then with careful argument. 
1.1 The Continuum of Numbers 
The positive integers or natural numbers 1,2, 3, ... are abstract 
symbols for indicating "how many" objects there are in a collection or 
set of discrete elements. 
These symbols are stripped of all reference to the concrete qualities 
of the objects counted, whether they are persons, atoms, houses, or 
any objects whatever. 
The natural numbers are the adequate instrument for counting 
elements of a collection or "set." However, they do not suffice for 
another equally important objective: to measure quantities such as the 
length of a curve and the volume or weight of a body. The question, 

2 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
"how much ?", cannot be answered immediately in terms of the natural 
numbers. The profound need for expressing measures of quantities 
in terms of what we would like to call numbers forces us to extend the 
number concept so that we may describe a continuous gradation of 
measures. This extension is called the number continuum or the system 
of "real numbers" (a nondescriptive but generally accepted name). 
The extension of the number concept to that of the continuum is so 
convincingly natural that it was used by all the great mathematicians 
and scientists of earlier times without probing questions. Not until the 
nineteenth century did mathematicians feel compelled to seek a firmer 
logical foundation for the real number system. 
The ensuing precise 
formulation of the concepts, in turn, led to further progress in mathe-
matics. We shall begin with an unencumbered intuitive approach, and 
later on we shall give a deeper analysis of the system of real numbers.l 
a. The System of Natural Numbers and Its 
Extension. Counting and Measuring 
The Natural and the Rational Numbers. The sequence of "natural" 
numbers 1,2,3, ... is considered as given to us. We need not discuss 
how these abstract entities, the numbers, may be categorized from a 
philosophical point of view. For the mathematician, and for anybody 
working with numbers, it is important merely to know the rules or laws 
by which they may be combined to yield other natural numbers. These 
laws form the basis of the familiar rules for adding and multiplying 
numbers in the decimal system; they include the commutative laws 
(l + b = b + a and ab = ba, the associative laws a + (b + c) = 
(a + b) + c and a(bc) = (ab)c, the distributive law a(b + c) = ab + ac, 
the cancellation law that a + c = b + c implies a = b, etc. 
The inverse operations, subtraction and division, are not always 
possible within the set of natural numbers; we cannot subtract 2 
from 1 or divide 1 by 2 and stay within that set. To make these 
operations possible without restriction we are forced to extend the 
concept of number by inventing the number 0, the "negative" integers, 
and the fractions. The totality of all these numbers is called the class or 
set of rational numbers; they are all obtained from unity by using the 
"rational operations" of calculation, namely, addition, subtraction, 
multiplication, and division.2 
A rational number can always be written in the form p/q, where p 
1 A more complete exposition is given in What Is Mathematics? by Courant and 
Robbins, Oxford University Press, 1962. 
I The word "rational" here does not mean reasonable or logical but is derived from 
the word "ratio" meaning the relative proportion of two magnitudes. 

Sec. 1.1 
The Continuum of Numbers 3 
and q are integers and q ¥: O. We can make this representation unique 
by requiring that q is positive and that p and q have no common factor 
larger than 1. 
Within the domain of rational numbers all the rational operations, 
addition, multiplication, subtraction, and division (except division by 
zero), can be performed and produce again rational numbers. As we 
know from elementary arithmetic, operations with rational numbers 
obey the same laws as operations with natural numbers: thus the 
rational numbers extend the system of positive integers in a com-
pletely straightforward way. 
Graphical Representation of Rational Numbers. 
Rational numbers 
are usually represented graphically by points on a straight line L, 
the number axis. Taking an arbitrary point of L as the origin or point 0 
x 
/ 
\ 
--------------~I--rl--~I---------L 
o 
1 
P 
f----
-x 
f~-~---.\ 
---------~I------_rI~I-------------L 
POI 
------l 
Figure 1.1 The number axis. 
and another arbitrary point as the point 1, we use the distance between 
these two points to serve as a scale or unit of measurement and define the 
direction from 0 to 1 as "positive." The line with a direction thus 
imposed is called a directed line. It is customary to depict L so that 
the point 1 is to the right of the point 0 (Fig. 1.1). The location of any 
point P on L is completely determined by two pieces of information: 
the distance of P from the origin 0 and the direction from 0 to P (to the 
right or left of 0). The point P on L representing a positive rational 
number lies at distance x units to the right of O. A negative rational 
number x is represented by the point -x units to the left of O. In either 
case the distance from 0 to the point which represents x is called the 
absolute value of x, written lxi, and we have 
{
X, 
Ixl = -x, 
if x is negative. 
if x is positive or zero, 
We note that Ixl is never negative and equals zero only when x = O. 

4 Introduction 
Ch. I 
From elementary geometry we recall that with ruler and compass it 
is possible to construct a subdivision of the unit length into any number 
of equal parts. It follows that any rational length can be constructed 
and hence that the point representing a rational number x can be 
found by purely geometrical methods. 
In this way we obtain a geometrical representation of rational 
numbers by points on L, the rational points. Consistent with our 
notation for the points 0 and 1, we take the liberty of denoting both the 
rational number and the corresponding point on L by the same symbol x. 
The relation x < y for two rational numbers means geometrically 
that the point x lies to the left of the point y. In that case the distance 
between the points is y -
x units. If x > y, the distance is x -
y units. 
In either case the distance between two rational points x, y of L is 
Iy - xl units and is again a rational number. 
p 
I 
I 
II I 
L 
0 
1 1. 
P p+ 1 
q 
q 
q-q-
Figure 1.2 
A segment on L with end points a, b where a < b will be called an 
interval. The particular segment with end points 0, I is called the unit 
interval. If the end points are included in the interval, we say the interval 
is closed; if the end points are excluded, the interval is called open. 
The open interval, denoted by (a, b), consists of those points x for which 
a < x < b, that is, of those points that lie "between" a and b. The 
closed interval, denoted by [a, b], consists of the points x for which 
a ~ x ~ b. I In either case the length of the interval is b -
a. 
The points corresponding to the integers 0, ± I, ± 2, ... subdivide the 
number axis into intervals of unit length. Every point on L is either 
an end point or interior point of one of the intervals of the subdivision. 
If we further subdivide every interval into q equal parts, we obtain a 
subdivision of L into intervals of length llq by rational points of the 
form plq. Every point P of L is then either a rational point of the form 
plq or lies between two successive rational points plq and (p + 1)lq 
(see Fig. 1.2). Since successive points of subdivision are llq units 
apart, it follows that we can find a rational point plq whose distance 
from P does not exceed llq units. The number llq can be made as small 
as we please by choosing q as a sufficiently large positive integer. For 
example, choosing q = IOn (where n is any natural number) we can 
1 The relation a ;S; x (read "a less than or equal to x") is interpreted as "either 
a < x, or a = x." We interpret the double signs ~ and ± in similar fashion. 

Sec. 1.1 
The Continuum of Numbers 5 
find a "decimal fraction" x = pilOn whose distance from P is less than 
IlIon. Although we do not assert that every point of L is a rational 
point we see at least that rational points can be found arbitrarily close 
to any point P of L. 
Density 
The arbitrary closeness of rational points to a given point P of L is 
expressed by saying: The rational points are dense on the number axis. 
It is clear that even smaller sets of rational numbers are dense, for 
example, the points x = pilOn, for all natural numbers n and integers p. 
Density implies that between any two distinct rational points a and 
b there are infinitely many other rational points. In particular, the 
point halfway between a and b, c = i(a + b), corresponding to the 
arithmetic mean of the numbers a and b, is again rational. Taking the 
midpoints of a and c, of band c, and continuing in this manner, we can 
obtain any number of rational points between a and b. 
An arbitrary point P on L can be located to any degree of precision 
by using rational points. At first glance it might then seem that the 
task of locating P by a number has been achieved by introducing the 
rational numbers. After all, in physical reality quantities are never 
given or known with absolute precision but always only with a degree 
of uncertainty and therefore might just as well be considered as measured 
by rational numbers. 
Incommensurable Quantities. Dense as the rational numbers are, 
they do not suffice as a theoretical basis of measurement by numbers. 
Two quantities whose ratio is a rational number are called commen-
surable because they can be expressed as integral multiples of a common 
unit. As early as in the fifth or sixth century B.C. Greek mathematicians 
and philosophers made the surprising and profoundly exciting dis-
covery that there exist quantities which are not commensurable with 
a given unit. In particular, line segments exist which are not rational 
multiples of a given unit segment. 
It is easy to give an example of a length incommensurable with the 
unit length: the diagonall of a square with the sides of unit length. For, 
by the theorem of Pythagoras, the square of this length I must be equal 
to 2. Therefore, if I were a rational number and consequently equal to 
plq, where p and q are positive integers, we should have p2 = 2q2, We 
can assume that p and q have no common factors, for such common 
factors could be canceled out to begin with. According to the above 
equation, p2 is an even number; hence p itself must be even, say p = 2p', 
Substituting 2p' for p gives us 4p'2 = 2q2, or q2 = 2p'2; consequently, q2 

6 Introduction 
Ch.I 
is even and so q is also even. This proves that p and q both have the 
factor 2. However, this contradicts our hypothesis that p and q have 
no common factor. Since the assumption that the diagonal can be 
represented by a fraction plq leads to a contradiction, it is false. 
This reasoning, a characteristic example of indirect proof, shows that 
the symbol J2 cannot correspond to any rational number. Another 
example is 7T, the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter. 
The proof that 7T is not rational is much more complicated and was 
obtained only in modern times (Lambert, 1761). It is easy to find many 
incommensurable quantities (see Problem 1, p. 106); in fact, incom-
mensurable quantities are in a sense far more common than the 
commensurable ones (see p. 99). 
Irrational Numbers 
Because the system of rational numbers is not sufficient for geom-
etry, it is necessary to invent new numbers as measures of incommen-
surable quantities: these new numbers are called "irrational." The 
ancient Greeks did not emphasize the abstract number concept, but 
considered geometric entities, such as line segments, as the basic 
elements. In a purely geometrical way, they developed a logical 
system for dealing and operating with incommensurable quantities 
as well as commensurable (rational) ones. This important achieve-
ment, initiated by the Pythagoreans, was greatly advanced by Eudoxus 
and is expressed at length in Euclid's famous Elements. In modern 
times mathematics was recreated and vastly expanded on a foundation 
of number concepts rather than geometrical ones. With the introduction 
of analytic geometry a reversal of emphasis developed in the ancient 
relationship between numbers and geometrical quantities and the 
classical theory of incommensurables was all but forgotten or disre-
garded. It was assumed as a matter of course that to every point 
on the number axis there corresponds a rational or irrational number 
and that this totality of "real" numbers obeys the same arithmetical 
laws as the rational numbers do. Only later, in the nineteenth century, 
was the need for justifying such an assumption felt and was eventually 
completely satisfied in a remarkable booklet by Dedekind which makes 
fascinating reading even today.! 
1 R. Dedekind, "Nature and Meaning of Number" in Essays on Number, London 
and Chicago, 1901. (The first of these essays, "Continuity and Irrational Numbers," 
supplies a detailed account of the definition and laws of operation with real num-
bers.) Reprinted under title Essays on the Theory of Numbers, Dover, New York, 
1964. The original of these translations appeared in 1887 under the title "Was sind 
und wass sollen die Zahlen 7" 

Sec. 1.1 
The Continuum of Numbers 7 
In effect, Dedekind showed that the "naive" approach practiced 
by all the great mathematicians from Fermat and Newton to Gauss 
and Riemann was on the right track: That the system of real numbers 
(as symbols for the lengths of segments, or otherwise defined) is a 
consistent and complete instrument for scientific measurement, and that 
in this system the rules of computation of the rational number system 
remain valid. 
Without harm, one could leave it at that and turn directly to 
the substance of calculus. However, for a deeper understanding of the 
concept of real number, which is necessary for our later work, the 
following account as well as the Supplement to this chapter should be 
studied. 
b. Real Numbers and Nested Intervals 
For the moment let us think of the points on a line L as the basic 
elements of the continuum. We postulate that to each point on L 
there corresponds a "real number" x, its coordinate, and that for these 
numbers x, y the relationships just described for the rational numbers 
retain their meaning. In particular, the relationship x < y indicates 
order on L and the expression Iy - xl means the distance between the 
point x and the point y. The basic problem is to relate these numbers 
(or measurements on the geometrically given continuum of points) to 
the rational numbers considered originally and hence ultimately to 
the integers. In addition, we have to explain how to operate with the 
elements of this "number-continuum" in the same way as with the 
rational numbers. Eventually, we shall formulate the concept of the 
continuum of numbers independently of the intuitive geometric con-
cepts, but for the present we postpone some of the more abstract 
discussion to the Supplement. 
How can we describe an irrational real number? For some numbers 
such as .J2 or 1T, we can give a simple geometric characterization, but 
that is not always feasible. A method flexible enough to yield every real 
point consists in describing the value x by a sequence of rational 
approximations of greater and greater precision. Specifically, we shall 
approximate x simultaneously from the right and from the left with 
successively increasing accuracy and in such a way that the margin 
of error approaches zero. In other words, we use a "sequence" of 
rational intervals containing x, with each interval of the sequence 
containing the next one, such that the length of the interval, and with 
it the error of the approximation, can be made smaller than any specified 
positive number by taking intervals sufficiently far along in the sequence. 

8 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
To begin, let x be confined to a closed interval II = [aI' bI], that is, 
al S x S bI , 
where al and bI are rational (see Fig. 1.3). Within II we consider a 
"subinterval" 12 = [a2, b2] containing x, that is, 
al S a2 S x S b2 S bI , 
where a2 and b2 are rational. For example, we may choose for 12 one 
of the halves of II' for x must lie in one or both of the half-intervals. 
Within 12 we consider a subinterval 13 = [a3, b3] which also contains x: 
a l S a2 S a3 S x S b3 S b2 S bI, 
where a3 and b3 are rational, etc. We require that the length of the 
interval In tends to zero with increasing n; that is, that the length of 
In is less than any preassigned positive number for all sufficiently 
large n. A set of closed intervals 11,12,13, ... each containing the 
x 
I 
I 
I 
I 
L 
al a2 
an an+1 
bn+1 bn 
b2 
b1 
Figure 1.3 A nested sequence of intervals. 
next one and such that the lengths tend to zero will be called a "nested 
sequence of intervals." The point x is uniquely determined by the 
nested sequence; that is, no other point y can lie in all In> since the 
distance between x and y would exceed the length of In once n is suffi-
ciently large. Since here we always choose rational points for the end 
points of the In and since every interval with rational end points is 
described by two rational numbers, we see that every point x of L, 
that is, every real number, can be precisely described with the help of 
infinitely many rational numbers. The converse statement is not so 
obvious; we shall accept it as a basic axiom. 
POSTULATE OF NESTED INTERVALS. If II, 12, 13 , ••• form a nested 
sequence of intervals with rational end points, there is a point x contained 
in all In-I 
As we shall see, this is an axiom of continuity: it guarantees that no 
gaps exist on the real axis. We shall use the axiom to characterize 
the real continuum and to justify all operations with limits which are 
1 It is important to emphasize for a nested sequence that the intervals In are closed. 
If, for example, In denotes the open interval 0 < x < lin, then each In contains the 
following one and the lengths of the intervals tend to zero; but there is no x 
contained in all In. 

Sec. 1.1 
The Continuum of Numbers 9 
basic for calculus and analysis. (There also are many other ways of 
formulating this axiom as we shall see later.) 
c. Decimal Fractions. Bases Other than Ten 
Infinite Decimal Fractions. One of the many ways of defining real 
numbers is the familiar description in terms of infinite decimals. It is 
entirely possible to take the infinite decimals as the basic objects rather 
than the points of the number axis, but we would rather proceed in a 
more suggestive geometrical way by defining the infinite decimal repre-
sentation of real numbers in terms of nested sequences of intervals. 
Let the number axis be subdivided into unit intervals by the points 
corresponding to integers. A point x either lies between two successive 
points of subdivision or is itself one of the dividing points. In either 
case there is at least one integer Co such that 
Co ~ x ~ Co + 1, 
so that x belongs to the closed interval 10 = [co, Co + 1]. We divide 
10 into ten equal parts by points Co + lo, 
Co + lo, ... , Co + lao. 
The point x must then belong to at least one of the closed subintervals 
of 10 (possibly to two adjacent ones if x is one of the points of subdi-
vision). In other words, there is a digit C1 (that is, one of the integers 0,1, 
2, ... , 9) such that x belongs to the closed interval II given by 
Dividing h in turn into ten equal parts, we find a digit C2 such that x 
lies in the interval 12 given by 
We repeat this process. After n steps x is confined to an interval In 
given by 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
c +-c +"'+-c <x<c +-c +"'+-c +-
o 
10 1 
10n n -
-
0 
10 1 
tOn n 
tOn ' 
where c1, c2, ••• are all digits. The interval In has length IlIOn, which 
tends to zero for increasing n. It is clear that the In form a nested set of 
intervals, and hence that x is determined uniquely by the In. Since the 
In are lmown, once the numbers Co, cl , C2, ••• are given we find that an 
arbitrary real number can be described completely by an infinite 
sequence of integers Co, Cl> C2, ••• , where all except the first are digits, 

10 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
having values from zero to nine only. In ordinary decimal notation the 
connection between x and co, Cl' C2, ... is indicated by writing 
x = Co + 0,C1C2CS' ... 
(Usually, the integer Co itself is also written in decimal notation if Co 
is positive.) Conversely, by the axiom of continuity, every such 
expression denoting an infinite decimal fraction represents a real number. 
It is possible that there are two different decimal representations of 
the same number; for example, 
1 = 0.99999 ... = 1.00000' ... 
In our construction the integer Co is determined uniquely by x unless x 
itself is an integer. In that case we could choose either Co = x or 
Co = x-I. Once a choice has been made the digit C1 is unique unless 
x is one of the new points subdividing 10 into ten equal parts. Con-
tinuing we find that Co and all ck are determined uniquely by x unless x 
occurs as a point of subdivision at some stage. If this should happen 
for the first time at the nth stage, then 
1 
1 
x=c +-c +"'+-c 
o 
10 1 
IOn 
no 
where C1, C2' •.. 'Cn are digits and where cn > 0, since otherwise x 
would have been a point of subdivision at an earlier stage. It follows 
that In+l is either the interval [x, x + I/IonH] or the interval 
[x -
I/IOn+!, x]. In the first case x will be the left-hand end point of 
all later intervals I n+2, I n+s, ••. , and in the second case, the right-hand 
end point. We are then led either to the decimal representation 
x = Co + 0,C1C2 •.• cnOoo ... 
or the representation 
x = Co + 0.C1C2• .. (cn -
1)99999' ... 
Hence the only case in which an ambiguity can arise is for a rational 
number x which can be written as a fraction having a power of ten 
for its denominator. We can eliminate even this ambiguity by excluding 
decimal representations in which all digits from a certain point on are 
nines. 
In the decimal representation of real numbers the special role played 
by the number ten is purely incidental. The only evident reason for 
the widespread use of the decimal system is the ease of counting by 
tens on our fingers (digits). Any integer p greater than one can serve 
equally well. We could use p equal subdivisions at each stage. A real 

Sec. 1.1 
The Continuum of Numbers 
11 
number x would then be represented in the form 
where Co is an integer, and now c1, c2, • •• have one of the values 
0, 1, 2, ... ,p -
1. This representation again characterizes x by a 
nested set of intervals, namely 
If x is positive or zero, the integer Co is also positive or zero and Co 
itself has a finite expansion of the form 
Co = do + pd1 + p2d2 + ... + pkdk, 
where do, db' .. ,dk take one of the values 0, 1, ... ,p -
1. The 
complete representation of x "to the base p" takes the form 
x = dkdk_ 1 ... d1do.C1C2Ca .... 
If x is negative, we may use this kind of representation for -x. 
~ 
--~I----~----+I----~I~---+I-----rI~I-r1 ~I----L 
o 
10 
11 
100 
101 IOU' 1ll 
Figure 1.4 The fraction 2 .. 1 in the binary system. 
Bases other than 10 have actually been used extensively. Following 
the lead of the ancient Babylonians, astronomers for many centuries 
consistently represented numbers as "sexagesima1" fractions with 
p = 60 as the base. 
Binary Representation. The "binary" system with the base p = 2 
has special theoretical interest and is useful in the logical design of 
computing machines. In the binary system the digits have only two 
possible values, zero and one. The number ~l-, for example, would be 
written 101.01 corresponding to the formula 
21 
1 
1 
- = 22 . 1 + 21 . 0 + 1 . 1 + - . 0 + - . 1 
4 
2 
22 
(see Fig. 1.4). 
Calculating with Real Numbers. Although the definition of real 
numbers and their infinite decimal or binary representations, etc., are 
straightforward, it may not seem obvious that one can operate with the 

12 Introduction 
Ch.I 
number continuum exactly as with rational numbers, performing 
the rational operations and retaining the laws of arithmetic, such as the 
associative, the commutative, and the distributive laws. The proof is 
simple, although somewhat tedious. Instead of impeding the way to the 
live substance of analysis by taking up the question here, we shall 
accept temporarily the possibility of ordinary arithmetic calculation 
with the real numbers. A deeper understanding of the logical structure 
underlying the number concept will come when we discover the idea of 
limit and its implications. (See the Supplement to this chapter, p. 89.) 
d. Definition of Neighborhood 
Not only the rational operations but also order relations or in-
equalities for real numbers obey the same rules as for the rational 
numbers. 
Pairs of real numbers a and b with a < b again give rise to closed 
intervals [a, b) (given by a:::;; x :::;; b) and open intervals (a, b) (given by 
a < x < b). Frequently we shall be led to associate with a point Xo the 
various open intervals that contain that point or specifically have it as 
center, which we shall call neighborhoods of the point. More precisely, 
for any positive E the E-neighborhood of the point Xo consists of the 
values x for which Xo -
E < X < Xo + E, that is, it is the interval 
(xo -
E, Xo + E). Any open interval (a, b) containing a point Xo always 
also contains a whole neighborhood of Xo. 
Having defined intervals with real end points we can now form nested 
sequences of intervals using the same definition as in the case of rational 
end points. It is most important for the logical consistency of calculus 
that for any nested sequence of intervals with real end points there is a 
real number contained in all of them. (See Supplement, p. 95.) 
e. Inequalities 
Basic Rules 
Inequalities play a far larger role in higher mathematics than in 
elementary mathematics. Often the precise value of a quantity x is 
difficult to determine, whereas it may be easy to make an estimate of x, 
that is, to show that x is greater than some known quantity a and less 
than some other quantity b. For many purposes, only the information 
contained in such an estimate of x is significant. We shall therefore 
briefly recall some of the elementary rules about inequalities. 
The basic fact is that the sum and product of two positive real 
numbers are again positive; that is, if a > ° 
and b > 0, then a + b > ° 

See. 1.1 
The Continuum of Numbers 13 
and ab > O. Moreover, we rely on the fact that the inequality a > b is 
equivalent to a -
b > O. Consequently, two inequalities a> band 
e > d can be added to yield the inequality a + e > b + d since 
(a + c) -
(b + d) = (a -
b) + (e -
d) 
is positive as the sum of two positive numbers. (Subtracting the 
inequalities to obtain a -
e > b -
d is not legitimate. Why?) An 
inequality can be multiplied by a positive number; that is, if a > band 
e> 0, then ae > be. For the proof, we observe that 
ae -
be = (a - b)e 
is positive since it is the product of positive numbers. If e is negative, 
we can conclude from a > b that ae < be. More generally, it follows 
from a > b > 0 and e > d > 0 that ae > bd. 
lt is geometrically obvious that inequality is transitive; that is, if 
a > band b > e, then a > e. Transitivity! also follows immediately 
from the positivity of the sum 
(a -
b) + (b -
c) = a-c. 
The preceding rules also hold if we replace the sign> by ~ everywhere. 
Let a and b be positive numbers and observe that 
a2 -
b2 = (a + b)(a -
b). 
Since a + b is positive, we conclude that a2 > b2 follows from a > b. 
Thus an inequality between positive numbers can be "squared." 
Similarly, a2 ~ b2 whenever a ~ b ~ O. From the equation 
1 
a -
b = -- (a 2 -
b2), 
a+b 
valid for all positive a and b, it follows that the converse is also true; 
that is, for positive a and b, a2 > b2 implies a > b. Applying this 
result to the numbers a = './~, b = .Jy, for arbitrary positive real 
numbers x, y, we find2 that .J~ > .Jy when x > y. More generally, 
.J; ~ .Jy whenever x ~ y ~ O. Hence it is legitimate to take the 
1 Transitivity justifies the use of the compound formula "a < b < e . .. " to express 
"a < band b < e, etc." Avoid nontransitive arrangements like x < y > z; these 
are confusing and misleading. 
2 Here and hereafter the symbol v; for z ~ 0 denotes that nonnegative number 
whose square is z. With this convention lei = v~ for any real e since lei ~ 0 and 
Icll = c'. From this we obtain the important identity Ixyl = Ixl 'Iyl since 
Ixyll = (xy)2 = X'y2 = (Ixl ·lyD". 

14 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
square root of both sides of an inequality between nonnegative real 
numbers. 
Suppose that a and b are positive and n is a positive integer. In the 
factorization 
an _ bn = (a _ b) (an- 1 + an- 2b + ... + bn- 1) 
the second factor is positive. Thus an - bn has the same sign as a - b; 
if an> bn , then a> b and if an < bn, then a < b. 
Most inequalities we shall encounter occur in the form of estimates 
for the absolute value of a number. We recall that Ixl is defined to be 
x for x 2 0 and -x for x < O. We may also say that Ixl is the larger 
of the two numbers x and -x when x is not zero and is equal to both 
of them when x is zero. The inequality Ixl ~ a then states that neither 
x nor -x exceeds a, that is, that x ~ a and -x ~ a. Since -x ~ a is 
equivalent to x 2 -a, we see that the inequality Ixl ~ a means that x 
----------~--------+_------~------------L 
:ro-a 
xo 
xo+a 
Figure 1.5 The interval Ix - x.1 ~ a. 
lies in the closed interval -a ~ x ~ a with center 0 and length 2a. 
The inequality Ix -
xol ~ a then states that -a ~ x -
Xo ~ a or that 
Xo - a ~ x ~ Xo + a, thus, that x lies in the closed interval with center Xo 
and length 2a (see Fig. 1.5). Similarly, the ,,-neighborhood (xo -
E, 
Xo + E) of a point xo, that is, the open interval Xo -
E < X < Xo + E, 
can be described by the inequality Ix -
xol < E. 
Triangle Inequality 
One of the most important inequalities involving absolute values is 
the so-called triangle inequality 
la + bl ~ lal + Ibl 
for any real a, b. The name "triangle inequality" is more appropriate 
for the equivalent statement 
lex -
,81 ~ lex - yl + Iy -
,81 
for which we have set a = ex -
y, b = y -,8. The geometrical inter-
pretation of this statement is that the direct distance from ex to ,8 is 
less than or equal to the sum of the distances via a third point y; (this 
also corresponds to the fact that in any triangle the sum of the two 
sides exceeds the third side). 
A formal proof of the triangle inequality is easily given. We dis-
tinguish the cases a + b 2 0 and a + b < O. In the first case the 

Sec. 1.1 
The Continuum of Numbers 
15 
inequality states that a + b ~ lal + Ibl: but this follows trivially by 
addition of the inequalities a ~ lal and b ~ Ibl. In the second case 
the triangle inequality reduces to -(a + b) ~ lal + Ibl, which again 
follows by addition from -a :::;; lal, -b :::;; Ibl. 
We immediately derive an analogous inequality for three quantities: 
la + b + cl ~ lal + Ibl + Icl; 
for, by applying the triangle inequality twice, 
la + b + cl = I(a + b) + cl ~ la + bl + lei ~ lal + Ibl + lei· 
In the same way, the more general inequality 
is derived. 
Occasion!illy we need estimates for la + bl from below. We observe 
that 
lal = I(a + b) + (-b)1 ~ la + bl + I-bl = la + bl + Ibl 
and hence that the inequality 
la + bl ~ lal -
Ibl 
holds. 
The Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality 
Some of the most important inequalities exploit the obvious fact 
that the square of a real number is never negative and that conse-
quently a sum of squares also cannot be negative. One of the most 
frequently used results obtained in this way is the Cauchy-Schwarz 
inequality 
(albl + a2b2 + ... + anbn)2 
~ (al2 + a22 + ... + an2)(bl2 + b22 + ... + bn2). 
Putting 
A = al2 + a22 + ... + an2, 
B = albl + a2b2 + ... + anbn , 
C = bl2 + b22 + ... + bn2, 
the inequality becomes AC ~ B2. To prove it we observe that for any 
real t 
since the right-hand side is a sum of squares. Expanding each square 

16 Introduction 
Ch. I 
and arranging according to powers of t, we find that 
o :::;; A + 2Bt + Ct2 
for all t, where A, B, C have the same meaning as before. Here C ~ O. 
We may assume that C> 0, since certainly B2 = AC = 0 when 
C = O. Substituting then for t the special value t = -BjC [corre-
sponding to the minimum of the quadratic expression 
A + 2Bt + Ct 2 = C (t + ~r + (A - ~) ] ' 
we find 
2B2 
B2 
AC _ B2 
O<A--+-=---
-
C 
C 
C 
and hence AC -
B2 ~ O. 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
-{XJ 
~~~/\~----------_,~----------J 
x 
y 
Figure 1.6 Geometric and arithmetic means of x and y. 
In the special case n = 2 we can choose 
where x and yare positive numbers. The inequality then takes the 
form (2J xy)2 :::;; (x + y)2 or 
;- < x + y 
\/xy --. 
-
2 
This inequality states that the geometric mean J xy of two positive 
numbers x, y never exceeds their arithmetic mean (x + y)j2. The 
geometric mean of two numbers x, y can be interpreted as the length 
of the altitude of a right triangle dividing the hypotenuse into seg-
ments of length x and y respectively. The inequality then states that 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 17 
in a right triangle the altitude does not exceed half the hypotenuse (see 
Fig. 1.6).1 
1.2 The Concept of Function 
From the beginning of modern mathematics in the 17th century the 
concept offunction has been at the very center of mathematical thought. 
(Leibnitz appears to have been the first to Use the word "function".) 
Although the idea of functional relationships is significant far beyond 
the mathematical domain, we shall naturally focus our attention on 
functions in the mathematical sense, that is, on the connection of 
mathematical quantities by mathematical relations or prescriptions or 
"operations." A very large part of mathematics and the natural sciences 
is dominated by functional relationships, for they occur everywhere in 
analysis, geometry, mechanics, and other fields. For example, the 
pressure in an ideal gas is a function of density and temperature; the 
position of a moving molecule is a function of the time; the volume 
and surface of a cylinder are functions of its radius and height. When-
ever the values of certain quantities a, b, c, ... are determined by those 
of certain others x, Y, z, ... , we say that a, b, c, ... depend on x, Y, z, ... 
or are functions of x, y, z, . . .. 
Examples of functional relations are 
given by formal expressions such as the following. 
(a) The formula A = a2 defines A as a function of a. 
can interpret A as the area of a square of side a. 
(b) The formula 
Y = ../1 - x2 
For a> 0 we 
defines y as a function of x for all x for which -1 ~ x ~ 1. For 
x > 0 this function expresses the side y of a right triangle with hypot-
enuse 1 in terms of the other side x. 
(c) The equations 
x = t, 
y = -t2 
assign values of x and y to each t and thus define x and y as functions 
of t. If we interpret x and y as the rectangular coordinates of a point P 
in the plane and t as the time, then our equations describe the location 
of P at the time t; in other words, they describe the motion of the 
point P. 
(d) The equations 
x 
a----
-X2+y2' 
1 The interested relder will find more material in An Introduction to Inequalities, 
by E. F. Beckenbach and R. Bellman, Random House, 1961, and Geometric 
Inequalities, by N. Kazarinoff, Random House, 1961. 

18 
Introduction 
Ch. I 
define a and b as functions of x and y for x2 + y2 =;l: 0. Interpreting the 
pairs of values x, y and a, b as rectangular coordinates of two points, 
we see that the equations assign to each point (x, y) [with the exception 
of the origin (0, 0)] an "image" (a, b). The reader can verify easily that 
the image (a, b) always lies on the same ray from the origin as the 
"original" or "antecedent" (x, y) and has the reciprocal distance from 
the origin. We speak of "mapping" (x, y) onto (a, b) by means of 
the equations expressing a, b in terms of x, y. 
In the preceding examples the functional law is expressed by simple 
formulas which determine certain quantities in terms of certain others.l 
The quantities appearing on the left-hand sides, the "dependent 
variables," are expressed in terms of the "independent variables" on 
the right. The mathematical law assigning unique values of the 
dependent variables to given values of the independent variables is 
called a function. It is unaffected by the names x, y, etc., for these 
variables. In Example c we have an independent variable t and two 
dependent variables x, y, whereas in Example d there are two independ-
ent variables x, y and two dependent variables a, b. 
The dependence of y on x by a functional relation is frequently 
indicated by the brief expression "y is a function of X."2 
a. Mapping-Graph 
Domain and Range of a Function 
We usually interpret the independent variables geometrically as 
coordinates of a point in one or more dimensions. In Example b this 
would be a point on the x-axis, in Example d a point in the x,y-plane. 
Sometimes the independent variables are free to take all values, as in 
examples a and c. Often, however, there is some restriction, inherent 
or imposed, and our functions are not defined for all values. The set 
of values or the points for which a function is defined form the 
"domain" of the function. In Example a the domain is the whole 
a-axis, in b the interval -1 ~ x ~ 1, in c the whole t-axis, and in d 
the points of the x,y-plane different from the origin. 
To each point P in the domain our functions assign definite values 
1 Later we shall gradually realize the need for considering functions not capable of 
such representation by simple formulas. (See, for example, p. 25.) 
2 This locution is used freely in the sciences, but some of the more pedantic texts 
avoid it. There is no point in hampering ourselves by an undue concern for hair-
splitting "precision" when it has no relation to the substance. 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 
19 
for the dependent variables. These values also can be interpreted as 
coordinates of a point Q, the image of P. We say that P is "mapped" 
by our functions onto the point Q. Thus in Example d the point 
P = (1,2) of the x,y-plane is mapped onto the point Q = (t, !) of the 
a,b-plane. The image points Q form the range of the function.! Each 
Q in the range is the image of one (or more) points in the domain of 
the function. 
In Example c points of the t-axis have as their images points in 
the x,y-plane. The t-axis is mapped into the x,y-plane. But not every 
point of the x,y-plane occurs as image, only those for which y = -x2• 
Thus the range of the mapping is the parabola y = -x2• We say, 
the t-axis is mapped onto the parabola y = _X2, in the sense that the 
image points fill this parabola. 
In Example d the range consists of the points (a, b) in the a,b-plane 
whose coordinates can be written in the form a = x/(x2 + y2), b = 
y/(x2 + y2) with suitable x, y for which x2 + y2 ¥: O. In other words, 
the range consists of those points (a, b) for which the preceding equations 
have a solution (x, y). As seen immediately the range consists of the 
points (a, b) for which a and b do not both vanish; each such point 
(a, b) is image of the point x = a/(a2 + b2), y = b/(a2 + b2). Every 
geometrical figure in the x,y-plane is then mapped onto a corresponding 
figure in the a,b-plane which consists of the images of the points of the 
first figure. For example, a circle x2 + y2 = r2 about the origin is 
mapped onto the circle a2 + b2 = l/r2 in the a,b-plane. 
In this and the following chapters we shall deal almost exclusively 
with a single independent variable, say x, and a single dependent vari-
able, say y, as indicated in Example b.2 Ordinarily we represent such 
a function in the standard way by its graph in the x,y-plane, that is, 
by the curve consisting of those points (x, y) whose ordinate is in the 
specified functional relationship to the abscissa x (see Fig. 1.7). For 
Example b the graph is the upper half of a circle of radius one about the 
origin. 
The interpretation of the function as a mapping of a domain on the 
x-axis onto a range on the y-axis leads to a different visualization of 
functions. We interpret x and y not as coordinates of the same point 
in the x,y-plane, but as points on two different, independent number 
1 It is often convenient to talk of the point Q as "a function" of P, although in the 
analytic representation several functions expressing the different coordinates of Q 
appear. 
2 However, it should be emphasized from the beginning that functions of several 
variables occur just as naturally in many instances. They will be discussed systemat-
ically in Volume II. 

20 Introduction 
y 
y --------~ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
--~----------------~--------~x 
o 
x 
Figure 1.7 Graph of function. 
Ch. I 
axes. Then the function maps a point x on the x-axis into a point y 
on the y-axis. Such mappings arise frequently in geometry, such as the 
"affine" mapping which originates by projecting a point x on the x-axis 
onto a point y on a parallel y-axis from a center 0 located in the plane 
of the two axes (see Fig. 1.8). This mapping can be expressed analyt-
ically, as easily ascertained, by the linear function y = ax + b with 
o 
----------~----~--------~~y 
b 
ax + b 
y=CX+"d 
y 
x 
----------~--------~----~--~y 
y 
Figure 1.8 Mappings. 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 
21 
constants a and b. Obviously, it is a "one-to-one" mapping in which 
inversely to the image y, there corresponds a unique originalx. Another, 
more general, example is the "perspective mapping" defined by the same 
sort of projection, only with the two axes not necessarily parallel. 
Here the analytical expression is given by a rational linear function of 
the form y = (ax + b)/(cx + d), with constants a, b, c, d. 
Any projection of a surface S in space into another surface S' from 
some center N can be viewed as a mapping whose domain is Sand 
whose range lies on S'. For example, we can map a sphere onto an 
equatorial plane by projecting each point P of the sphere onto a point 
P' of the plane by rays from the North Pole (see Fig. 1.9). This mapping 
N 
P' 
Figure 1.9 Stereographic projection. 
is the "stereo graphic projection" used frequently for maps of the earth. 
The interpretation of functions as "maps" is suggested by examples of 
this type. 
When more independent or dependent variables are involved, the 
definition offunctions by mapping provides a more flexible and suitable 
interpretation than that by graphs. This fact will become fully apparent 
in the second volume. 
b. Definition of the Concept of Functions of a Continuous 
Variable. Domain and Range of a Function 
A function of a single independent variable x assigns values y to 
values x. The domain of the function is the totality of values x for 
which the function is defined. In the cases that concern us most the 
domain of the function consists of one or several intervals (see Fig. 
1.10). We say then that y is a function of a continuous variable (in 
contrast to other cases where, for example, the function might only be 
defined for rational or for integral values of x). Here the "intervals" 

22 Introduction 
Ch. I 
forming the domain mayor may not contain their end points and may 
also extend to infinity in one or both directions.! Thus the function 
y = ~ 1 -
x2 is defined in the closed interval -1 :s;; x :s;; + 1, the 
function y = IJx in the two semi-infinite open intervals x < ° and 
x > 0, the function y = x2 in the infinite "interval" -
00 < x < + 00 
y 
Range 
------ ---------, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
------+-------
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
~ort_--------\======y~======t-~x 
Domain 
Figure 1.10 Domain and range of a function in graphical representation. 
consisting of all x, the function y = ~(X2 -
1)(4 -
x2) in the two 
separate intervals 1 :s;; x :s;; 2 and - 2 :s;; x :s;; -1. 
Functions are denoted by symbols such as f, F, g, etc. The corre-
sponding relations between x and the associated y-values are written in 
the form y = f(x) or y = F(x) or y = g(x), etc., or also sometimes 
y = y(x) to indicate2 that y depends on x. If, for example, f(x) is 
defined by the expression x2 + 1 we havef(3) = 32 + 1 = 10,f( -1) = 
(_1)2 + 1 = 2. 
1 Ordinarily we will reserve the word "interval" for "bounded," that is, "finite" 
intervals, that have definite finite end points; then one might indicate the more 
comprehensive concept as used in the text, by the word "convex sets," meaning 
sets which when containing two points must contain all intermediate ones. 
2 In this notation we try to emphasize the variables and do not explicitly indicate 
the functional operation by a symbol such as f The notation 
f: 
x-->- y 
for the function f mapping x into y is also sometimes encountered. 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 23 
Nature of Functional Relation 
In the general definition of a function f(x) nothing is said about 
the nature of the relation by which the dependent variable is found 
when the independent variable is given. As said before, often the 
function is given in "closed form" by a simple expression like f(x) = 
x2 + I or f(x) = -J 1 + sin2 x, and in the early days of the calculus 
such explicit expressions were mostly what mathematicians meant by 
functions. Often mechanical devices generate geometric curves or 
y 
Figure 1.11 
graphs which then define functions. A striking example is the cycloid, 
a curve described by a point fixed on a circle which rolls along the 
x-axis (see Fig. 1.11). Its functional analytical expression by formulas 
will be given later (see p. 328). 
Logically, we are not restricted to such geometrically or mechanically 
generated functions. Any rule by which a value of y is assigned to 
values of x constitutes a function. In some theoretical investigations 
the wide generality or vagueness of the function concept is, in fact, 
an advantage. However, for applications, particularly in the calculus, 
the general concept of function is unnecessarily wide. To make 
meaningful mathematical developments possible, the "arbitrary" laws 
of correspondence by which a value of y is assigned to x must be 
subjected to radical restrictions. During the past century and a half 
mathematicians have recognized and formulated in precise terms the 
essential restrictions that have to be imposed on the overly general 
concept in order to obtain functions that indeed have the useful 
properties one would expect intuitively. 

24 Introduction 
Ch.I 
* Extended or Restricted Domains of Functions 
Even for functions given by explicit formulas, it is important to realize 
that any complete description of a function must include a definition of the 
domain of the function. For us the "function" f described by "f(x) = x2 for 
o < x < 2" is not strictly the same function as the function g given by 
"g(x) = x2 in the larger domain -2 < x < 2," although f(x) and g(x) have 
the same values in the interval 0 < x < 2 where both are defined. Generally, 
we call a function f a "restriction" of a fUIiction g (or g an "extension" of n, 
if, wherever f is defined, g is also defined and assumes the same values. Of 
course, the same function f can arise by restriction from many different 
fUnctions. In our example above f is also a restriction of the function h 
defined by h(x) = x 2 for 0 < x < 2, h(x) = _x2 for -2 < x ~ O. As a 
matter of fact this example illustrates the process inverse to that of forming 
restrictions of a function which might be called "piecing together"; we can 
generate new functions by simply defining them by different explicit expres-
sions in different portions of the domain. 
c. Graphical Representation. Monotonic Functions 
The fundamental idea of analytical geometry is to give an analytical 
representation to a curve originally defined by some geometrical 
property. This is done usually by regarding one of the rectangular 
coordinates, say y, as a function y = f(x) of the other coordinate x; 
for example, a parabola is represented by the function y = X2, the 
circle with radius I about the origin by the two functions y = .J I -
x2 
and y = -.J I -
x2• In the first example we may think of the function 
as defined in the infinite interval -
00 < x < 00; in the second we 
must restrict ourselves to the interval -1 ~ x ~ 1, since outside this 
interval the function has no meaning. 1 
Conversely, if instead of starting with a curve defined geometrically 
we consider a function y = f(x) given analytically, we can represent 
the functional dependence of y on x graphically, using a rectangular 
coordinate system in the usual way (cf. Fig. 1.7). Iffor each abscissa 
x we take the corresponding ordinate y = f(x), we obtain the geo-
metrical representation of the function. The restrictions to be imposed 
on the function concept should secure for its geometrical representation 
the shape of a "reasonable" geometrical curve. This, it is true, expresses 
an intuitive feeling rather than a strict mathematical condition. How-
ever, we shall soon formulate conditions, such as continuity, differenti-
ability, etc., which insure that the graph of a function is a curve capable 
1 We do not ordinarily consider imaginary or complex values of x and y. 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 25 
of being visualized geometrically. This would not be the case if we 
admitted "pathological" functions such as the following: For every 
rational value of x, the function y has the value 1; for every irrational 
value of x, the value of y is O. This functional prescription assigns a 
definite value of y to each x; but in every interval of x, no matter how 
small, the value of y jumps from 0 to I and back an infinite number of 
times. This example demonstrates that the general unrestricted func-
tion concept may lead to graphs which we would not consider as curves. 
Multivalued Functions 
We consider only functions y = f(x) assigning a unique value of y 
to each value of x in the domain, as, for example, y = x2 or y = sin x. 
Yet, for a curve described geometrically, it may happen, as for the 
circle x2 + y2 = I, that the whole course of the curve is not given by 
just one (single-valued) function, but requires several functions-in the 
case of the circle, the two functions y = .J I - x2 and y = -.J 1 - x2• 
The same is true for the hyperbola y2 -
x2 = 1, which is represented 
by the two functions y = .J 1 + x2 and y = -.J 1 + x2• Such curves 
therefore do not determine unambiguously the corresponding functions. 
It is sometimes said that the curve is represented by a multivalued 
function; the separate functions representing it are then called the 
single-valued branches of the multi valued function belonging to the 
curve. For the sake of clarity we shall always use the word "function" 
to mean a single-valued function. For example, the symbol .J-; (for 
x ~ 0) will always denote the nonnegative number whose square 
is x. 
If a curve is the graph of one function, it is intersected by any parallel 
to the y-axis in at most one point, since to each point x in the interval 
of definition there corresponds just one value of y. The unit circle 
represented by the two functions 
y=.Jl-x2 
and y = -.Jl -
X2, 
is intersected by such parallels to the y-axis in more than one point. 
The portions of a curve corresponding to different single-valued 
branches are sometimes connected with each other so that the complete 
curve is a single figure which can be drawn with one stroke of the pen, 
for example, the circle (cf. Fig. 1.12); on the other hand, these portions 
may be completely separated, as for the hyperbola (cf. Fig. 1.13). 
Examples. Let us consider some further examples of the graphical 
representation of functions. 

26 Introduction 
Ch. I 
y 
y 
o 
Figure 1.12 
Figure 1.13 
(a) y is proportional to x, 
y = ax. 
The graph (see Fig. 1.14) is a straight line through the origin of the 
coordinate system. 
(b) y is a "linear function" of x, 
y = ax + b. 
y 
--------------~~------------~x 
Figure 1.14 Linear functions. 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 27 
The graph is a straight line through the point x = 0, y = b, which, 
if a ¥= 0, also passes through the point x = - bfa, y = 0, and if a = 0 
is horizontal. 
(c) y is inversely proportional to x, 
In particular, for a = 1 
so that 
a 
y=-. 
x 
1 
y =-, 
x 
y = 1 for x = 1, 
y = 2 for x =!, 
y = t for x = 2. 
The graph (cf. Fig. 1.15) is a rectangular hyperbola, a curve 
symmetrical with respect to the bisectors of the angles between the 
coordinate axes. 
This function is obviously not defined for the value x = 0 since 
division by zero has no meaning. In the neighborhood of the exceptional 
point x = 0, the function has arbitrarily large values, both positive 
and negative; this is the simplest example of an infinite discontinuity, 
a concept which we shall discuss later (see p. 35). 
1 
y=;& 
y 
2 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
--+--
I 
1 
: 
I 
y=t 
2' --r--r---- r, -~'------
I 
I 
I 
1 
2" 
2 
Figure 1.15 Infinite discontinuity. 
x 

28 Introduction 
y 
y=x 2 
----------~Wo~--------~x 
Figure 1.16 Parabola. 
(d) y is the square of x, 
y = x2• 
Ch. 1 
As is well known, this function is represented by a parabola (see 
Fig. 1.16). 
Similarly, the function y = x3 is represented by the so-called cubical 
parabola (see Fig. 1.17). 
y 
__________ ~~~--------~x 
Figure 1.17 Cubical parabola. 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 29 
Monotone Functions 
A function which for all values of x in an interval has the same value 
y = a is called a constant; it is represented graphically by a horizontal 
straight line. A function y = f(x) for which an increase in the value of 
x always results in an increase in the value of y that is, for which 
f(x) < f(x') whenever x < x') is called a monotonic increasing function; 
if, on the other hand, an increase in the value of x always implies a 
decrease in the value of y, the function is called a monotonic decreasing 
function. Such functions are represented graphically by curves which 
always rise or always fall as x traverses the interval of definition toward 
y 
y 
-------r----~---------x 
-----------+~----~--~x 
Figure 1.18 Monotone functions. 
increasing values (see Fig. 1.18). A monotone function always maps 
different values of x into different y; that is, the mapping is one-to-one. 
Even and Odd Functions 
If the curve represented by y = f(x) is symmetrical with respect to 
the y-axis, that is, if x = -a and x = a yield the same function value 
f(-x) = f(x) 
we call the function an even function. For example, the function 
y = x2 is even (see Fig. 1.16). If, on the other hand, the curve is 
symmetrical with respect to the origin; that is, if 
f( -x) = -f(x) , 
we say the function is an odd function; thus the functions y = x, 
y = x3 (see Fig. 1.17) and y = IJx (see Fig. 1.15) are odd. 

30 Introduction 
Ch. I 
y 
----------~~~~------~% 
o 
Figure 1.19 Graph of y > xt. 
It is frequently helpful to consider the geometrical representation of 
an inequality. For example, the inequality y > x2 is represented by 
the domain above the parabola y = x2 (Fig. 1.19). The interior of the 
unit circle centered at the origin (Fig. 1.20) is described by the inequality 
x2 + y2 < 1. 
Often several inequalities describe more complicated regions with 
boundaries consisting of different pieces. Thus the "first" quadrant 
of the unit circle is described by the system of simultaneous inequalities: 
x> 0, 
y > 0. 
(See Fig. 1.21.) 
Figure 1.20 Graph of x' + y. < I. 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 
31 
y 
Figure 1.21 Graph of Zl + y' < 1, z > 0, y > o. 
d. Continuity 
Intuitive and Precise Explanation 
The functions and graphs just considered exhibit a property of 
greatest importance in the calculus, that of continuity. Intuitively, 
continuity means that a small change in the independent variable x 
implies only a small change in the dependent variable y = f(x) and 
excludes a jump in the value of y: thus the graph consists of one 
piece. In contrast, a graph y = f(x) consisting of pieces separated by a 
gap at an abscissa Xo exhibits there a jump discontinuity. For example, 
the function1 f(x) = sgn x defined by f(x) = + 1 for x > 0, by f(x) = 
-1 for x < 0, and f(O) = 0 has a "jump discontinuity"2 at Xo = 0 
(see Fig. 1.22). 
The idea of continuity is implicit in the everyday use of elementary 
mathematics. Whenever a function y = f(x) is described by tables, 
such as the logarithmic or trigonometric tables, the values of y can be 
listed only for a "discrete" set of values of the independent variable 
x, say at intervals of 1/1000 or 1/100,000. Yet, unlisted values of the 
function may be needed for intermediate x. Then we tacitly assume 
that an unlisted value f(xo) is approximately the same as that of f(x) 
1 Pronounced "signum" or "sign" of x. 
2 Technically, the word "jump" refers only to the particular kind of discontinuity 
in which the function approaches values from the right and left that do not both 
agree with f(xo}. An "infinite" discontinuity is exhibited by the function y = l/x 
for x '" 0 and y = 0 for x = O. Still other types of discontinuities will be discussed 
later. 

32 Introduction 
Ch.l 
Y 
------------o~----------~x 
--------l-l 
Figure 1.22 The function f(x) = sgn x. 
for a neighboring x which appears in the table and that f(xo) can be 
approximated as precisely as we want if only the x-values in the table 
are spaced sufficiently close to each other. 
Continuity of the function f(x) for a value Xo just means that f(x) 
differs arbitrarily little from the value f(xo) once x is sufficiently close 
to Xo. The words "differs arbitrarily little" and "sufficiently close" are 
somewhat vague and must be explained precisely in quantitative terms. 
Prescribe any "margin of precision" or "tolerance," that is, any 
positive real number E (however small). For continuity off at Xo we 
require that the difference between f(x) and f(xo) stay within this 
margin, that is, that If(x) - f(xo) I < E, for all values x which are 
sufficiently close to Xo (or for all values x lying within some distance !5 
from xo). 
We can visualize most easily what continuity means if we interpret f 
as a mapping assigning to points x on the x-axis images on the y-axis. 
Take any point Xo on the x-axis and its image Yo = f(xo) (see Fig. 1.23). 
I 
Yo- E 
J . 
Yo 
%0-0 
xo xo+o 
,'----.:-_...J1 
i 
\ 
yo+ E 
Figure 1.23 Continuity of the mapping y = f(x) at the point Xo. 
Y 
% 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept o[ Function 33 
We mark off an arbitrary open interval J on the y-axis having the point 
Yo as center. If 2E is the length of J, then the points y of J are those 
whose distance from Yo is less than E or for which Iy -
Yol < E. The 
condition for continuity of f(x) at Xo is: All points x close enough to 
Xo have images lying in J; or: It is possible to mark off an interval I 
on the x-axis with center xo, say the interval Xo -
15 < x < Xo + 15 such 
that every point x of I has an image f(x) which lies in J and thus 
If(x) - f(xo) I < E. Continuity of f(x) at the point Xo means that for 
an arbitrary E-neighborhood J of the point Yo = f(xo) on the y-axis a 
!5-neighborhood I of the point Xo on the x-axis can be found, all of whose 
points are mapped into points of J.1 Of course, this makes sense only 
for points on the x-axis at which the mapping is defined, that is, which 
belong to the domain of f Thus we are led to the following precise 
definition of continuity. 
The function f(x) is continuous at a point Xo of its domain if for every 
positive E we can find a positive number 15 such that 
If(x) - f(xo) I < E 
for all values x in the domain off for which Ix -
xol < 15. 
Most useful is the geometric interpretation of continuity when we 
represent the function f by its graph in the xy-plane (see Fig. 1.24). 
Let Po = (xo, Yo) be a point on the graph. The points (x, y) with 
Yo -
E < y < Yo + E now form a horizontal "strip" J containing Po. 
Continuity of f at Xo means that given any such horizontal strip J, 
however thin, we can find a vertical strip I given by Xo -
15 < x < 
Xo + 15 so thin that every point of the graph lying in I also falls 
into J. 
As an illustration we consider the linear function f(x) = 5x + 3; 
we have 
If(x) - f(xo) I = 1(5x + 3) - (5xo + 3)1 = 5 Ix - xol, 
which expresses that the mapping y = 5x + 3 magnifies distances by 
the factor 5. Here obviously If(x) - f(xo) I < E for all x for which 
1 In this definition of continuity I and J are intervals having their centers respectively 
at the points Xo and Yo. This is convenient for the analytic definition of continuity 
at Xo which refers to the distances Ix - xol and Iy - Yol, but it is somewhat 
artificial if we interpret [ geometrically as a mapping. We could instead define 
continuity of Y = [(x) at a point Xo just as well by the requirement that for every 
open interval J on the y-axis which contains the point Yo = [(xo) we can find an open 
interval I on the x-axis containing the point Xo such that the y-image of any point x 
in I for which the mapping is defined lies in J. The proof of the equivalence of the 
two definitions is lef~ to the reader as a simple exerc!se. 

34 Introduction 
Ch. I 
Ix -
xol < £/5. Consequently, the condition for continuity of f(x) 
at the point Xo is satisfied if we choose 15 = £/5 (but, of course, any 
positive number 15 < £/5 is also a possible choice); the image of any 
point of the interval Xo -
15 < x < Xo + 15 will then lie in the interval 
Yo -
£ < Y < Yo + £. In this example the statement that the distance 
Iy - Yol is "arbitrarily small" for "sufficiently small" Ix -
xol can be 
given a quite specific meaning; indeed Ix -
xol is sufficiently small if it 
does not exceed one-fifth of the value of Iy - Yol. 
y 
Xo-o xo xo+o 
x 
Figure 1.24 Continuity of y = f(x) at the point Xo. 
Another example is furnished by the function f(x) = X2. Here we 
have for Ix -
xol < 15 
II(x) - l(xo)1 = IX2 -
x:1 = Ix -
xol12xo + (x -
xo)1 
::;; Ix -
xol (2lxol + Ix -
xoJ) ::;; 15(2 IXol + 15). 
We verify immediately that the condition If(x) - f(xo) I < £ is satis-
fied if we choose 15 = -
IXol + .J £ + IXoI2. 
Intuitively, the idea of continuity seems obvious without explanation, 
but the precise formulation may initially be somewhat difficult to 
grasp because of the permissiveness of words such as "one can find" or 
"arbitrarily chosen." Yet the reader who may at first be well satisfied 
with some intuitive notion of continuity will gradually learn to 
appreciate the logical precision and generality of the analytic definition, 
the outcome of a long and persistent struggle for reconciliation of the 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 
3S 
need for intuitive understanding with that of logical clarity. In the long 
run a precise meaning for the word "continuity" is indispensable; the 
analytic definition given here is the compelling formulation of an 
important property of functions. 
For the beginner it should be emphasized again that "small" is not 
an absolute designation of a number; rather the term "arbitrarily 
small" refers to a number that is not fixed at the outset but for which 
then any positive value may be chosen, and which is subject to a subse-
quent smaller choice for a refined approximation off(xo). "Sufficiently 
small" refers to a number !5 that must be adjusted to suit a margin of 
tolerance set previously by another number E. 
Continuity and Discontinuity Explained by Examples. We can illumi-
nate the definition of continuity by contrast with examples of dis-
continuity, examples which do not fit the definition above. Recall the 
simple example of the functionf(x) = sgn x on p. 31. Obviously, for 
any Xo :p 0 this function is continuous according to the E, !5-definition 
above, in fact, with a constant !5 = IXol no matter how small E is 
chosen. But for Xo = 0 no !5 at all can be found if E is less than 1 since 
If(x) - f(O) 1 = If(x) 1 = 1 > E for every x unequal to zero, however 
close x might be to zero. 
The function sgn x illustrates the simple type of discontinuity at a 
point ~ known as jump-discontinuity, in whichf(x) approaches limiting 
values from the right and left as x approaches ~-limiting values, 
however, that differ either from each other or from the value off at 
the point ~.l The graph at x = ~ then has a gap. Other curves with 
jump discontinuities are sketched in Fig. 1.25a and b; the definition 
of these functions should be clear from the figures. 2 
In discontinuities of this kind the limits from the right a,nd the left 
both exist. We turn to discontinuities in which this is not the case. 
The most important of these are the infinite discontinuities or infinities. 
1 The precise definition of limit will be given in Section 1.7; an intuitive idea is 
sufficient for the descriptive remarks made here. 
S In all these examples of jump discontinuities the limits of the function at the point 
of discontinuity from the right and left have different values. The trivial example 
of the function f(x) defined by 
f(X) = 0 
for x "" 0, 
f(x) = 1 
for x = 0 
illustrates a jump discontinuity in which the limits from both sides are equal to 
each other but differ from the value off at the point of discontinuity ~ itself. We 
have then a removable singularity. Here.f can be made continuous by merely 
changing the value of.f at ~ so as to agree with the limits from both sides. 

36 Introduction 
y 
o 
o 
(a) 
y 
o 
(b) 
Figure 1.25 
y 
Figure 1.26 Graph of function with infinite 
discontinuity. 
Ch.I 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 
37 
These are discontinuities like those exhibited by the functions I/x or 
I/x2 at the point x = 0; as x ---+ 0 the absolute value If(x) I of the 
function increases beyond all bounds. The function I/x increases 
numerically beyond all bounds through positive and negative values, 
respectively, as x approaches the origin from the right and from the 
left. On the other hand, the function I/x2 has for x = 0 an infinite 
discontinuity at which the value of the function increases beyond any 
positive bound as x approaches the origin from both sides (cf. Fig. 1.26 
y 
-------------+--~~--~------------~% 
Figure 1.27 Function with infinite discontinuities. 
and Fig. 1.27). The function I/(x2 -
1) shown in Fig. l.27 has infinite 
discontinuities both at x = 1 and at x = -1. 
An example of another type of discontinuity in which no limit from 
the right or from the left exists is the "piecewise linear" even function 
y = f(x) illustrated in Fig. 1.28, which is defined as follows for all nonzero 
values of x. This function alternately takes the values + 1 and -1 for the 
x-values of the form ± I/2n, where n is any integer: f(± I/2n) = (_l)n. 
In every intervall/2n+l < x < I/2n or -I/2n < x < -I/2n+l the func-
tion f (x) is linear and ranges over all values between -1 and + l. 
Therefore the function swings backward and forward more and more 
rapidly between the values -1 and + I as x approaches nearer and 
nearer to the point x = 0, and in the immediate neighborhood of that 

38 Introduction 
y 
-1 
Figure 1.28 Piecewise linear oscillating function with discontinuity. 
y 
1 
o 
-1 
. 
1 
y=sm-Z 
----------.~-----==------
2 
11" 
Figure 1.29 Oscillating function with discontinuity. 
Ch. 1 
x 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 39 
point an infinite number of such oscillations occur. A similar behavior 
is exhibited by the smooth curve (Fig. 1.29). [Here f(x) actually is given 
by an expression in closed form, namely, f(x) = sin (l/x), with the 
sine-function defined appropriately as on p. 51]. 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
y 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Figure 1.30 Continuous oscillating function. 
2 
A contrast to this example is the piecewise linear function y = f(x) 
that takes the valuesf(± 1/2n) = (_t)n for all integers n (see Fig. 1.30) 
and is linear for intermediate values of x. Here f(x) remains continuous 
at the point x = 0 if we assign to it the value 0 at that point. In the 
neighborhood of the origin the function oscillates backward and 
forward an infinite number of times, but the magnitude of these 
oscillations becomes arbitrarily small as the origin is approached. The 
situation is the same for the function y = x sin (l/x) (see Fig. 1.31). 

40 Introduction 
Ch. I 
These examples show that continuity permits all sorts of remark-
able possibilities foreign to our naive intuition. 
* Removable Discontinuities 
As noted it may happen that at a certain point say x = 0, a function 
is not defined by the original law, as, for example, in the last examples 
discussed. We are then free to extend the definition of the function by 
y 
x 
Figure 1.31 Continuous oscillating function. 
assigning to it any desired value at such a point. In the last example 
we can choose the definition in such a way that the function becomes 
continuous at that point also, namely, by choosing y = ° at x = 0. A 
similar continuous extension can be defined whenever the limits from 
the left and from the right both exist and are equal to one another; 
then we need only make the value of the function at the point in question 
equal to these limits in order to make the function continuous there. 
Whatever discontinuity may be imposed by definition at x = 0, this 
discontinuity is "removable" by assigning a suitable value j(O). For 
the function y = sin l/x or for the function in Fig. 1.28, this is, however, 
not possible: whatever value we assign to the function at x = 0, the 
extended function is discontinuous. 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 
41 
Modulus of Continuity. Uniform Continuity. Our definition of con-
tinuity of the function f(x) at Xo requires that for every degree of 
precision E > 0 there exist quantities 0 > 0 (so-called moduli of con-
tinuity) such that If(x) - f(xo) I < E for all x in the domain off for 
which Ix - xol < o. A modulus of continuity expresses information 
about the sensitivity off to changes in x. A modulus of continuity 0 
is never unique; it can always be replaced (for the same Xo and E) by 
any smaller positive quantity 0' since Ix - xol < 0' implies Ix - xol < 0 
and thereby If(x) - f(xo) I < E. For practical purposes, as in numer-
ical computations, we may be interested in a particular choice of 0; 
for example, in the largest value for O. On the other hand, if we 
merely want to establish the fact thatfis continuous at xo, then we need 
only to exhibit anyone modulus of continuity for every positive E. 
In general, as our examples show, this 0 = O(E) depends not only on E 
but also on the value of Xo. Of course, we need not consider all positive 
values E. We can always restrict considerations to sufficiently small E, 
say to E :s;; EO for an arbitrarily chosen EO, since for E > EO we can use 
the same modulus of continuity as for E = EO' Similarly, we only have 
to take into account the points x of the domain of flying in an arbitrary 
neighborhood of Xo, say those with Ix - xol < 00, since we can always 
replace any modulus of continuity 0 by a smaller one which does not 
exceed 00, Continuity off at Xo is a local property, meaning a property 
which only depends on the values of f in some neighborhood of Xo 
however small. 
As we have seen, the functionfmay be continuous for some Xo and 
discontinuous for others. A function is called continuous in an interval 
if it is continuous at each point of the interval. For each Xo of the 
interval we have then a modulus of continuity b = beE) which can be 
expected to vary with Xo reflecting the different rates at which y changes 
with changing x near different points Xo' 
We call f uniformly continuous in an interval if we can find a uniform 
modulus of continuity 0 = o( E) for that interval, that is, one not depend-
ent on the particular point Xo of the interval. Thus f(x) is uniformly 
continuous in an intervaP if for each positive E there exists a positive 
number 0 such that If(x) - f(Xo) I < E for any two points x and Xo of 
the interval for which Ix -
xol < O. 
For a uniformly continuous function y = f(x) the values of y differ 
"arbitrarily little" from each other for any values of x that are "suffi-
ciently close" regardless of their location in the interval. In some respects 
1 In this definition the word interval can refer either to closed or open or infinite 
intervals. 

42 Introduction 
Ch. I 
uniform continuity comes closer to intuitive notions than the mere local 
property of continuity. 
For example, the function f(x) = 5x + 3 is uniformly continuous 
for all values of the independent variable since here If(x) - f(xo) I = 
5 Ix -
xol < E for Ix -
xol < Ej5, and thus t5(E) = E/5 represents a 
uniform modulus of continuity. 
The function f(x) = x2 for an infinite x-interval is definitely not 
uniformly continuous. It is clear that small changes in x can produce 
arbitrarily large changes in x2 if only x is large enough. A glance at a 
table of squares of integers x shows how successive squares are spaced 
further and further apart as x increases. If, however, we only consider 
pairs of values x and Xo belonging to a fixed finite closed interval [a, b], 
we can find a uniform modulus of continuity. Indeed, for Ix -
xol < t5 
we have 
If(x) - f(xo) I = IX2 -
x~1 = Ix -
xollx + xol ~ 2 Ix -
xol(lbl + lal) 
< 2t5(lbl + lal) = E 
if we take t5 = E/2(1bl + lal). 
A similar situation prevails for the function f(x) = l/x for x =F 0, 
f(O) = O. Consider a closed bounded interval a ~ x ~ b throughout 
which the function is continuous. Such an interval cannot include the 
origin, which is a point of discontinuity, so that a and b must have the 
same sign. Suppose a and b are both positive. Then for x and Xo 
belonging to the interval and for Ix -
xol < t5 we have 
for t5 = a2E. Thus the function is uniformly continuous in the interval 
[a, b]. Of course, this proves also that the functionf(x) = l/x is con-
tinuous at every point Xo > O. For every such value Xo can be enclosed 
in some interval a < Xo < b with positive a,b. The expression t5 = a2E 
is then a modulus of continuity for the function at xo, if we restrict x 
to a neighborhood of Xo lying completely in the interval. 
The continuous functions of the preceding examples turn out to be 
uniformly continuous in any closed bounded interval belonging to 
their domain. They illustrate a general fact which will be proved in 
the Supplement, p. 100. 
Any function, continuous in a closed and bounded interval, automatically 
is uniformly continuous in that interval. 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 43 
The restriction to bounded intervals is essential as the example of the 
function X2 shows. Similarly, we must stipulate that the interval he 
closed; for example, the function y = lJx is continuous in the open 
interval 0 < x < I but is not uniformly continuous there; arbitrarily 
large changes in y can be produced by arbitrarily small changes in x 
if only x is sufficiently close to the origin. If there existed a uniform 
modulus of continuity d(e) for the interval (0, 1), we could take, for 
example, Xo < 15, x = lxo; obviously then IlJx -
IJxol = IJxo is greater 
than any preassigned e whenever Xo is sufficiently small, so that the 
assumption of a uniform d(e) leads to a contradiction. 
Lipschitz-Continuity-Holder-Continuity. In the preceding examples 
of functions uniformly continuous in an interval [a, b] we found a 
particularly simple modulus of continuity, namely d(e) proportional 
to e. 
This most common situation is presented by the so-called 
Lipschitz-continuous functions, that is, by the functions f(x) which 
satisfy an inequality of the form 
(a so-called Lipschitz condition) for all Xl' x2 in the interval with a fixed 
value L. Lipschitz-continuity means that the "difference quotient" 
formed for any two distinct points of the interval never exceeds a fixed 
finite value L in absolute value or that the mapping y = f(x) magnifies 
distances of points on the x-axis at most by the factor L. Clearly, for a 
Lipschitz-continuous function the expression d(e) = eJL is a modulus of 
continuity since 1/(x2) - f(xl ) I < e for IX2 -
XII < eJL. Conversely, 
any function with a modulus of continuity proportional to e, say 
d(e) = ce, is Lipschitz-continuous, with L = IJc. 
As we shall see in Chapter 2 most of the functions encountered are 
Lipschitz-continuous except at isolated points, as a consequence of the 
fact that their derivatives are bounded in any closed interval which excludes 
these points. However, Lipschitz-continuity is only sufficient but not nec-
essary for uniform continuity. The simplest example of a function which is 
continuous without being Lipschitz-continuous is given by /(x) = v; for 
x ~ 0 and Xo = O. Here the difference quotient 
[(x) - [(0) 
x - 0 
= v;; 

44 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
becomes arbitrarily large for sufficiently small x and hence cannot be bounded 
by a fixed constant L. Thus it is not possible to choose 15(,,) proportional to 
,,; but there exist other, nonlinear, moduli of continuity for this function, for 
example, 15(,,) = ,,2. 
The function v; belongs to the general class of functions called "Hi:i1der-
continuous," satisfying a "Holder-condition" 
for all Xl' x 2 of an interval, where L and IX are fixed constants, the "Holder-
exponent" IX being restricted to values 0 < IX S 1. The Lipschitz-continuous 
functions arise for the special Holder-exponent IX = 1. 
Obviously, 15 = L-I/a"l/a is a possible modulus of continuity for a Hi:i1der-
continuous function I; here 15 is proportional to Ella, and not to E itself. 
The function I(x) = v; is Holder-continuous with exponent IX = t. This 
follows from the inequality 
I vX2 -
vxll S IX2 - xl l\-4, 
which we obtain by observing 
I vX2 -
v;;' I s I vX; + vxll 
and multiplying by I vX; - vX;:l. This yields the modulus of continuity 
15(,,) = ,,2 for v; as mentioned before. 
More generally, the fractional powers I(x) = xa for 0 < IX S 1 are Holder-
continuous with Holder-exponent IX. 
The HOlder-continuous functions still do not exhaust the class of all 
uniformly continuous functions. It is not difficult to construct examples 
of continuous functions for which powers of " do not suffice as moduli of 
continuity. (See Problem 13, p. 118.) 
e. The Intermediate Value Theorem. Inverse Functions 
Intuitively there is no doubt that a function which is continuous, and 
hence has no "jumps," cannot vary from one value to another without 
passing through all intermediate values. This fact is expressed by the 
so-called intermediate value theorem (its precise proof is given in the 
Supplement, p. 100). 
INTERMEDIATE VALUE THEOREM. 
Consider a function f(x) contin-
uous at every point of an interval. Let a and b be any two points of the 
interval and let 'Y) be any number betweenf(a) andf(b). Then there exists 
a value ~ between a and b for which fm = 'Y). 
Interpreted geometrically, the theorem states that if two points 
(a,f(a)) and (b,f(b)) of the graph of a continuous function f lie on 

Sec. 1.2 
The Concept of Function 45 
different sides of a parallel y = 'fJ to the x-axis, then the parallel 
intersects the graph at some intermediate point (see Fig. 1.32). There 
may, of course, be several intersections. In the important case where the 
functionf(x) is monotonic increasing or monotonic decreasing through-
out the interval, there can be only one intersection for then f cannot 
have the same value 'fJ for two different values of ;. 
As an example we take the function f(x) = x 2 which is monotonic 
increasing and continuous in the interval 1 ~ x ~ 2. Here f(l) = 1, 
f(2) = 4. Taking for 'fJ the value 2 intermediate between 1 and 4 we find 
y 
y =f(x) 
ff~~------~~----~-----------
1/ 
ffb)r--------r------~--~~---
o 
a 
b 
x 
Figure 1.32 The intermediate value theorem. 
that there exists a unique; between 1 and 2 for which ;2 = 2. This is, 
of course, the number denoted by .Ji 
Continuity of the Inverse Function 
For any monotonic increasing continuous functionf(x) defined in an 
interval a ~ x ~ b, we found that for every 'fJ withf(a) ~ 'fJ ~/(b) 
there is exactly one ; with a ~ ; ~ b for which 1(;) = 'fJ.l 
Let 
IX = I(a), f3 = feb). Since; is determined uniquely by 'fJ, it represents 
a function ; = g('fJ) defined for arguments 'fJ in the closed interval 
[IX, f3]. We call this functiong the inverse off Since larger; correspond 
to larger 'fJ = f( ;), the function g is again monotonic increasing. It is 
easy to show that the inverse function g is also continuous. 
1 The intermediate value theorem as stated assigns ~ for 1) in the open interval 
f(x) < 1) <f(b). However, of course, for 11 = f(a) or 1) = f(b) we have only to 
take; = a or ~ = b. 

46 Introduction 
y 
~~----------------~ 
B 
1'/+0 
1'/~------------~ 
1'/-0 
A 
a 1-------0 
Ch. I 
x 
Figure 1.33 Continuity of the inverse of a monotonic continuous function. 
y 
1 
--.,I'o-=----------..L1---.. x 
Figure 1.34 Inverse functions. 

Sec. 1.3 
The Elementary Functions 47 
Indeed, let 7J be any value between or. and fJ (see Fig. 1.33). Then g = g(7J) 
must lie between a = g(or.) and b = g({J). Let £ be a given positive number 
which we can assume to be so small that a < g -
£ < g + £ < b. We must 
show that Ig(y) - g(7J)1 < £ for all y sufficiently close to 7J. Since f is in-
creasing, 7J = fm lies between the values fa - £) = A and f(g + £) = B 
and we can find a (j so small that 
A < 7J -
(j < 7J + (j < B. 
If y is any value with 7J -
(j < y < 7J + (j and x =g(y), we have A < 
y < B and hence g(A) < g(y) < g(B), that is, g -
£ < g(y) < g + £ or 
Ig(y) - g(7J)1 < £. The same proof, modified slightly, applies when TJ is one 
of the end points or. or (J of the interval of definition of g. 
The relations y = f(x) and x = g(y) are equivalent and are repre-
sented by the same graph in the x,y-plane; the points (x, y) in the plane 
for which y = f(x) are the same as those points for which x = g(y). 
If we represent the function g in the customary way by y = g(x), we 
must interchange x and y; then the graph ofy = g(x) is obtained from 
the graph of y = f(x) by taking the mirror image with respect to the 
line y = x. An example is given by the graphs of the functionf(x) = x2 
for x ~ 0 and of the inverse function g(x) = J;; for x ~ 0 (see Fig. 
1.34). 
1.3 The Elementary Functions 
a. Rational Functions 
We turn ~o a brief review of the familiar elementary functions. The 
simplest types of function are constructed by repeated application of 
the elementary operations, addition and multiplication. If we apply 
these operations to an independent variable x and to a set of real 
numbers a1> ... , an we obtain the polynomials 
Polynomials are the simplest functions of analysis and in a sense the 
basic ones. 
Quotients of such polynomials, of the form 
a + a x + ... + a xn 
y= 
0 
1 
n 
, 
bo + b1x + ... + bmxm 
are the general rational functions; these are defined at all points where 
the denominator differs from zero. 

48 Introduction 
The simplest polynomial, the linear function 
y = ax + b, 
Ch. 1 
is represented graphically by a straight line. Every quadratic function 
y=ax2 +bx+c 
is represented by a parabola. The graphs of polynomials of the third 
degree 
y = ax3 + bx2 + CX + d, 
are occasionally called parabolas of the third order, etc. 
y 
Figure 1.35 Powers of x. 
The graphs of the function y = xn for the exponents n = 1, 2, 3, 4 
are given in Fig. 1.35. For even values of n the function y = xn satisfies 
the equationf( -x) = f(x), and is therefore an even function, whereas 
for odd values of n the function satisfies the condition f( -x) = - f(x), 
and is therefore odd. 
The simplest example of a rational function which is not a polynomial 
is the function y = 1 Ix mentioned on p. 27; its graph is a rectangular 
hyperbola. Another example is the function y = l/x2 (cf. Fig. 1.26, 
p. 36). 

Sec. 1.3 
The Elementary Functions 49 
b. Algebraic Functions 
We are at once forced out of the set of rational functions by the 
problem of forming their inverses. The typical example of this is the 
function ~ 
the inverse of xn. The function y = xn for x ~ 0 is 
easily seen to be monotonic increasing and continuous. It therefore 
has a single-valued inverse, which we denote by the symbol x = fly, 
or, interchanging the letters used for the dependent and independent 
variables, 
y = fI;; = xl/n. 
By definition this root is always nonnegative. For odd values of n the 
function xn is monotonic for all values of x, including negative values. 
Consequently, for odd values of n we may extend the definition of fI; 
uniquely to all values of x; in this case fI;; is negative for negative 
values of x. 
More generally, we may consider 
y = flR(x) , 
where R(x) is a rational function. Further functions of similar type 
are formed by applying rational operations to one or more of these 
special functions. Thus, for example, we may form the functions 
y=x+.Jx2 + 1. 
These functions are special cases of algebraic functions. (The general 
concept of an algebraic function will be defined in Volume II.) 
c. Trigonometric Functions 
The rational functions and the algebraic functions are defined directly 
by the elementary operations of calculation, but geometry is the source 
from which we first draw examples of other functions, the so-called 
transcendental functions. l 
Of these we consider here the elementary 
transcendental functions, namely, the trigonometric functions, the 
exponential function, and the logarithm. 
In analytical investigations angles are not measured in degrees, 
minutes, and seconds, but in radians. We place the angle to be measured 
1 The word "transcendental" does not mean anything particularly deep or myste-
rious; it merely suggests that the definition of these functions transcends the 
elementary operations of calculations, "quod algebrae vires transcendit." 

50 Introduction 
B 
cotx~ 
I 
I 
I 
t--- cos x ~ 
I 
Figure 1.36 The trigonometric functions. 
Ch. I 
c 
with its vertex at the center of a circle of radius 1, and measure the size 
of the angle by the length of the arc of the circumference cut out by the 
angle. 1 Thus an angle of 1800 is the same as an angle of TT radians 
(has radian measure TT), an angle of 900 has radian measure TTj2, an 
angle of 45 0 has radian measure TTj4, an angle of 3600 has radian measure 
2TT. Conversely, an angle of 1 radian expressed in degrees is 
or approximately 57° 17' 45". 
TT 
Henceforth, whenever we speak of an angle x, we shaH mean an 
angle whose radian measure is x. 
y 
Figure 1.37 
1 The radian measure of an angle can also be defined as twice the area of the corre-
sponding sector of the circle of radius one. 

Sec. 1.3 
The Elementary Functions 51 
We briefly recall the meaning of the trigonometric functions sin x, 
cos x, tan x, cot X.I They are shown in Fig. 1.36, in which the angle x 
is measured from the segment OC (of length 1), angles being reckoned 
positive in the counterclockwise direction. The functions cos x and 
sin x are the rectangular coordinates of the point A. The graphs of 
the functions sin x, cos x, tan x, cot x are given in Figs. 1.37 and 1.38. 
Later (see p. 215) we will be able to replace the geometrical definitions 
by analytical ones. 
1 
1 
1 , , , 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
. " 
y 
HI 
0 1 
01 
II , 
.." , 
Figure 1.38 
\ 
\ 
\ 
d. The Exponential Function and the Logarithm 
, 
\ 
\ 
In addition to the trigonometric functions, the exponential function 
with the positive base a, 
y = aZ, 
and its inverse, the logarithm to the base a, 
x = log.,y, 
1 It is also sometimes convenient to introduce the functions sec x = l/cos x, 
cosec x = l/sin x. 

52 Introduction 
Ch. I 
are also included among the elementary transcendental functions. In 
elementary mathematics it is customary to pass over certain inherent 
difficulties in their definition, and we too shall postpone the detailed 
discussion of them until we have better methods at our disposal 
(cf. Section 2.5, p. 145). We can, however, at least indicate here one 
"elementary" way of defining these functions. If x = p/q is a rational 
number (where p and q are positive integers), then-the number a being 
assumed positive-we define if as {j aP = aP1q, where the root, accord-
ing to convention, is to be taken as positive. Since the rational values 
of x are everywhere dense, it is natural to extend this function aX to a 
continuous function defined for irrational values of x as well, giving 
to if when x is irrational, values which are continuous with the values 
already defined when x is rational. This defines a continuous function 
y = if, the "exponential function," which for all rational values of x 
gives the value of aX found above. That this extension is actually 
possible and can be carried out in only one way we take for granted at 
the moment; but it must be borne in mind that we still have to prove 
that this is SO.1 
The function 
x = loga Y 
can then be defined for y > 0 as the inverse of the exponential function: 
x = loga y is that number for which y = aX. 
e. Compound Functions, Symbolic Products, Inverse Functions 
New functions are frequently formed not only by combining known 
functions by rational operations but by the more general and basic 
process of forming functions of functions or compound functions. 
Let u = c/>(x) be a function whose domain is in the interval a ~ x ~ b 
and whose range lies in the interval ex ~ u ~ (J. Moreover, let y = g(u) 
be a function defined for ex ~ u ~ (J. Then g(c/>(x» = f(x) defines a 
functionffor a ~ x ~ b which is "compounded" or "composed" from 
g and c/>. For example,f(x) = 1/(1 + x2n) is composed of the functions 
c/>(x) = 1 + x2n and g(u) = l/u. Similarly, the function f(x) = sin(1/x) 
is composed of c/>(x) = l/x and g(u) = sin u. 
It is useful to interpret the compound functions in terms of mappings. 
The mapping c/> takes every point x of the interval [a, b] into a point u 
in the interval [ex, {J]; the mapping g takes' any value u in [ex, {J] into a 
point y. The mappingfis the "symbolic product" gc/> of the mappings 
1 This is done on p. 152. 

Sec. 1.3 
The Elementary Functions 
53 
g and 4>, that is, the mapping carrying out 4> and g successively, in that 
order; for any x in [a, b] we form its map u under the mapping 4>, and 
then apply g to the image u = 4>(x), obtaining g(4)(x)) = f(x) = y (see 
Fig. 1.39). Such a symbolic product g4> is natural and meaningful 
for any type of operation; it signifies that we first perform 4>, and 
then, on the result, perform g.1 We must not confuse the symbolic 
product g4> = g( 4» of two functions with the ordinary algebraic product 
g(x) . 4>(x) of the functions, in which both g(x) and 4>(x) are formed 
for the same argument x (the mappings applied to the same point) 
and the product of the values of the functions is formed. 
Naturally, symbolic products cannot be expected to be commutative. 
In general, g(4)) and 4>(g) are not the same, even where both are defined; 
u 
x 
Figure 1.39 Symbolic product g.p = [of two mappings. 
the order in which operations are performed matters very much. If, 
for example, 4> stands for the operation of "adding 1 to a number" 
and g for the operation of "multiplying a number by 2," then 
g(4)(x)) = 2(x + 1) = 2x + 2, 
4>(g(x» = (2x) + 1 = 2x + 1. 
(See Fig. 1.40.) 
In order to be able to form the symbolic product g4> of two mappings, 
the "factors" g and 4> must fit together in the sense that the domain of 
g must include the range of 4>; thus we cannot form g4> when 
g(u) = .J~, 
and 
4>(x) = -1 -
x2• 
1 That the product g.p corresponds to first carrying out .p and then g (in that order) 
seems unnatural at first glance, but actually corresponds to the convention always 
adopted in mathematics of writing the argument x of a function [(x) to the right of 
the symbol [for the function. Thus, for example, in sin (log x) it is always under-
stood that we first form the logarithm of x and then take the sine of that, and not the 
other way around. 

54 Introduction 
Ch. I 
It is useful to consider functions which are compounded more than 
once. Such a function is 
I(x) = -.J 1 + tan (x2), 
which can be built up by successive compositions 
c/>(x) = X2, 
1p(c/» = I + tan C/>, 
g(1p) = -.J; = I(x). 
We would write symbolically 1= g1pc/>. 
2x+ 1 
2(x+ 1) 
o 
o 
o 
x 
Figure 1.40 Noncommutativity of mappings. 
Inverse Functions 
The notion of "inverse function" becomes clearer in the context of 
product of mappings. Consider the mapping c/> associating with a 
point x of the domain of c/> the image u = c/>(x). Assume that our 
mapping c/> is such that different x are always mapped into different u. 
The mapping is then called "one to one." Then a value u is the image 
of at most one value x. We can associate with every u in the range of c/> 
the value x = g(u) of which u is the image under the mapping c/>. 
In this way we have defined a mapping g whose domain is the range of 
c/> and which when applied to an image u = c/>(x) of the c/>-mapping 
reproduces the original value x, that is, g(c/>(x» = x. We call g the 
inverse of rP' It is characterized by the symbolic equation grPx = x. 
The Identity Mapping 
We define the identity mapping I as the one that maps every x into 
itself; for the inverse g of rP then, gc/> = 1.1 The mapping I plays the same 
role for symbolic multiplication as the number I in ordinary multiplica-
tion; multiplication by I does not change a mapping. Accordingly, 
the equation grP = I suggests the notation g = c/>-1 for the inverse of c/>. 
For example, the inverse x = arc sin u of the function u = sin x is 
often denoted by x = sin-1 u. 2 
1 More precisely g</> agrees with I, in the domain of </>. 
2 This must not be confused with the algebraic reciprocall/(sin u). 

Sec. 1.4 
Sequences 55 
From the definition of the inverse g of cf> it follows immediately that 
also cf> is the inverse of g so that not only g( cf» = x but also cf>(g(u» = u. 
* A monotone function u = </>(x) defined in an interval a ~ x ~ b clearly 
defines a 1-1 mapping of that interval. If, in addition, </> is continuous, then 
as we saw earlier as a consequence of the intermediate value theorem (p. 44), 
the range of </> is the interval with end points </>(a) and </>(b). In that case the 
inverse g of </> exists and is again monotone and continuous in that latter 
interval. As a matter of fact the monotone continuous functions are the only 
continuous functions that have inverses or define one-to-one mappings. Indeed, 
let u = </>(x) be a continuous function in the closed interval [a, b] mapping 
different x of the interval into different u. Then in particular the values 
</>(a) = ex. and </>(b) = {3 are distinct. We assume, say, that ex. < (3. Then we 
can show that </>(x) is monotonic increasing throughout the interval. For if 
that were not the case we could find two values c and d with a ~ c < d ~ b 
for which </>(d) < </>(c). If here also </>(d) ~ </>(a) it would follow from the 
intermediate value theorem that there exists a; in the interval [a, c] for which 
</>m = </>(d). This; would be different from d and our mapping could not 
be 1-1. If, on the other hand, </>(d) < </>(a) = ex. it would follow that </>(a) is 
intermediate between </>(d) and </>(b); there would then be a ; intermediate 
between d and b for which </>m = </>(a), and this also contradicts the 1-1 
nature of </>. 
An important, almost obvious property of compound functions, is 
thatg(cf>(x» = I(x) is continuous (where defined) if g and cf> are. Indeed, 
for given positive E" we have 
as a consequence of the continuity of the function g. Since, however, 
cf> is also continuous, we certainly have IC/>(x) -
c/>(xo) I < 15 for all x 
satisfying Ix -
xol < 15' with some suitable positive 15'. Hence 
IJ(x) - f(xo) I < € 
for 
Ix -
xol < 15' 
which shows the continuity off 
It is much easier to appeal to this general theorem in proving con-
tinuity of compound functions like ~ I -
x 2 than to try to construct 
directly a modulus of continuity for the function. 
1.4 Sequences 
Hitherto we have considered functions of a continuous variable, 
or functions whose domains consist of one or more intervals. How-
ever, numerous cases occur in mathematics in which a quantity a 

56 Introduction 
Ch. I 
depends on a positive integer n. Such a function a(n) associates a 
value with every natural number n. The function a(n) is called a 
sequence, specifically, an infinite sequence, if n ranges over all positive 
integers. Usually, we write a/ instead of a(n) for the "nth element" of 
the sequence, and think of the elements forming a sequence arranged 
in order of increasing subscripts n: 
Here the dependence of the numbers an on n may be defined by any 
law whatsoever, and, in particular, the values an need not all be distinct 
from each other. The idea of a sequence will most easily be grasped 
by examples. 
1. The sum of the first n integers 
Sen) = 1 + 2 + 3 + ... + n = 1n(n + 1) 
is a function of n, giving rise to the sequence 
1,3,6,10,15, .... 
2. Another simple function of n is the expression "n-factorial," 
the product of the first n integers. 
n! = I . 2 . 3 ..... n. 
3. Every integer n > 1 which is not a prime number is divisible by 
more than two positive integers, whereas the prime numbers are 
divisible only by themselves and by 1. We can obviously consider the 
number T(n) of divisors of n as a function of n itself. For the first few 
numbers it is given by the table: 
11 = 1 
T(n) = 1 
2 3 4 5 678 9 
2 2 3 242 4 3 
10 
11 
4 
2 
12 
6 
4. A sequence of great importance in the Theory of Numbers is 
7T(n) , the number of primes less than the number n. Its detailed 
investigation is one of the most fascinating problems. The principal 
result is: The number 7T(n) is given asymptotically,2 for large values of n, 
by the function n/log n, where by log n we mean the logarithm to the 
"natural base" e, to be defined later (p. 77). 
1 Pronounced "a-sub-n." 
2 That is, the quotient of the number 7T(n) by the number n/log n differs arbitrarily 
little from one, provided only that n is large enough. 

Sec. 1.5 
Mathematical Induction 57 
1.5 Mathematical Induction 
We insert here a discussion of a very important type of reasoning 
which permeates much of mathematical thought. 
The fact that the whole sequence of natural numbers is generated by 
starting with the number 1 and passing from n to n + 1 leads to the 
fundamental "principle of mathematical induction." In the natural 
sciences we derive by "empirical induction" from a large number of 
samples, a law which is expected to hold generally. The degree of 
certainty of the law depends then on the number of times a sample 
or an "event" has been observed and the law confirmed. This type of 
induction can be overwhelmingly convincing, although it does not 
carry with it the logical certainty of a mathematical proof. 
Mathematical induction is used to establish with logical certainty the 
correctness of a theorem for an infinite sequence of cases. Let A 
denote a statement referring to an arbitrary natural number n. For 
example, A might be the statement "The sum of the interior angles in a 
simple polygon of n + 2 sides is n times 180°" or mT. To prove a 
statement of this type it is not sufficient to prove it for the first 10 or 
the first 100 or even the first 1000 values of n. Instead, we have to 
apply a mathematical method which we explain first for this example. 
For n = 1 the polygon reduces to a triangle, for which the sum of the 
angles is known to be 180°. For a quadrangle corresponding to 
n = 2 we draw a diagonal dividing the quadrangle into two triangles. 
This shows that the sum of the angles of the quadrangle is equal to the 
combined sum of the angles of the two triangles, that is, 180° + 180° = 
2· 180°. Proceeding to the example of a pentagon we can divide this 
into a quadrangle and a triangle by drawing a suitable diagonal. This 
yields for the sum of the angles of the pentagon the value 2· 180° + 
1 . 180° = 3· 180°. We can go on in this manner and prove the 
general theorem successively for n = 4, 5, etc. The correctness of the 
statement A for any n follows from its correctness for the preceding n; 
in this way its general validity is established for all n. 
General Formulation 
What is essential in the proof of statement A in our example is that A 
is proved successively for the special cases AI> A 2, ••• An' . . .. The 
possibility of doing this depends on two factors: (1) a general proof 
has to be given showing that the statement Ar+! is correct whenever Ar 
is correct and (2) the statement Al must be proved. That these two 
conditions are sufficient to prove the correctness of all Al , A 2, Aa, ..• 

58 
Introduction 
Ch. I 
constitutes the principle of mathematical induction. In what follows we 
accept the validity of this principle as a basic fact of logic. 
The principle can be formulated in a more general abstract form. "Let S 
be any set consisting of natural numbers which has the following two 
properties: (1) whenever S contains a number r, then it also contains the 
number r + 1 and (2) S contains the number 1. Then it is true that S is the 
set of all natural numbers." The previous formulation of the principle of 
mathematical induction follows if we take for S the set of all natural numbers 
for which statement A is correct. 
Often the principle is applied without specific mention or its use is indicated 
only by the expression, "etc." This happens particularly often in elementary 
mathematics. However, in more complicated situations an explicit appeal to 
the principle is preferable. 
Examples. Two applications follow as illustrations. 
First we prove a formula for the sum of the first n squares. By some 
trial we find for small n, (say n < 5), that the following formula,l 
denoted by An> holds: 
12 + 22 + 32 + ... + n2 = n(n + 1)(2n + 1) . 
6 
We conjecture that this formula is correct for all n. For the proof we 
assume that r is any number for which the formula Ar is correct, that 
is, that 
12 + 22 + 32 + ... + r2 = r(r + 1)(2' + 1) ; 
6 
adding (r + 1)2 to both sides, we obtain 
12 + 22 + ... + ,2 + (r + 1)2 = ,(r + 1)(2r + 1) + (, + 1)2 
6 
= ("'-'---,+,------,-1 )-'-( r---,+,------,,2 )..::....[ 2-,-( r_+'----'1 ),-+-,---,1 ] 
6 
This, however, is just the statement Ar+l obtained by substituting 
r + I for n in An" Thus the truth of Ar implies that of Ar+1' To 
complete the proof of An for general n we need only to verify the 
correctness of AI> that is, of 
2 
1 ·2·3 
1 =--. 
6 
1 Incidentally, this result was used by the Greek mathematician Archimedes in 
his work on spirals. 

Sec. 1.5 
Mathematical Induction 
S9 
Since this is obviously correct, the formula An is established for all 
natural n. 
The reader should prove by a similar argument that 
13 + 23 + 33 + ... + n3 = [n(n : 1)r 
As a further illustration for the principle of induction we prove 
THE BINOMIAL THEOREM. The statement An of the theorem is repre-
sented by the formula 
(a + b)n = an + ~ an-lb + n(n -
1) an-2b2 
1 
1·2 
+ n(n -
1)(n -
2) an- 3b3 + ... + n(n -
1)(n - 2)· ... ·2·1 b n• 
1 . 2 . 3 
1 . 2 . 3· .... (n -
1) . n 
It is customary to write the formula in the form 
(a + bt = (~)an + (~)an-lb + (~)an-2b2 + ... + (:)bn 
where the binomial coefficient (~) is defined by 
(n) = n(n -
1)(n -
2)· .. (n -
k + 1) = 
n! 
\k 
k! 
k!(n -
k)! 
for k = 1, 2, ... , n -
1 and 
(~) = (:) = 1. 
(If we define O! = 1, the general formula for C) applies also to the 
cases k = 0 and k = n.) 
k 
If An holds for a certain n, we find by multiplying both sides with 
(a + b) that 
(a + b)n+l = (a + b)[ (~)an + (~)an-lb + ... + (:)bnJ 
= (~)an+l + [(~) + (;) Janb + [(~) + (~) Jan-lbz 
+ ... + [C ~ 1) + (:) Jabn + (:)bn+l. 

60 Introduction 
Ch.I 
Now 
= n(n -
1) ... (n -
k + 1) + n(n -
1) ... (n -
k + 1)(n -
k) 
k! 
(k + 1)! 
= n(n -
1)(n -
2) ... (n - k + 1) (1 + n - k) 
k! 
k + 1 
= (n + 1)n(n -
1) ... (n -
k + 1) = (n + 1). 
(k + 1)! 
k + 1 
Since (~) = (n ~ 1) = 1 and (:) = (: ! ~~ = 1, we have 
(a + b)n+l = (n ~ 1)an+1 + (n ~ 1)anb + (n; 1)an-1b2 + ... 
+ (n ~ 1)abn + (: ! ~)bn+t, 
which is the formula An+!' Since also for n = 1 
(a + W = G)a + G)b = a + b, 
the binomial theorem holds for all natural numbers n. 
1.6 The Limit of a Sequence 
The fundamental concept on which the whole of mathematical 
analysis ultimately rests is that of the limit of an infinite sequence an' 
A number a is often described by an infinite sequence an of approxi-
mations; that is, the value a is given by the value an with any desired 
degree of precision if we choose the index n sufficiently large. We have 
already encountered such representations of numbers a as "limits" of 
sequences in their representations as infinite decimal fractions; the 
real numbers then appeared as limits for increasing n of the sequences 
of ordinary decimal fractions with n digits. In Section 1.7 we shall 
give a precise general discussion of the limit concept; at this point we 
illustrate the idea of limit by some significant examples. 
Sequences aI' a2, ... can be depicted conveniently by a succession of 
"blocks," the element an corresponding to the rectangle in the xy-plane 
bounded by the lines x = n -
1, x = n, y = an' y = 0, having lanl 

Sec. 1.6 
The Limit of a Sequence 61 
as area,l or equivalently, by the graph of a piecewise constant function 
a(x) of a continuous variable x with jump discontinuities at the 
points x = n. 
a. an =-n 
We consider the sequence 
1 1 
1 
1, -, -, . . . , -, ... 
2 3 
n 
(See Fig. 1.41.) No number of this sequence is zero; but as the number 
n grows larger, an approaches zero. Furthermore, if we take any 
4 
5 
1 
Figure 1.41 The sequence aft = - . 
n 
interval centered at the origin, no matter how small, then from a 
definite index onward all numbers an will be in this interval. This 
situation is expressed by saying that as n increases the numbers an 
tend to zero or that they possess the limit zero or that the sequence 
a1> a2, a3, ••• converges to zero. 
If the numbers are represented as points on a line, this means that 
the points lin crowd closer and closer to the point zero as n increases. 
The situation is similar for the sequence 
1 1 
1 
(_l)n-l 
1, -
- , - , -
- , ... , -'----'--
2 3 
4 
n 
(See Fig. 1.42.) Here too, the numbers an tend to zero as n increases; 
the only difference is that the numbers an are sometimes greater and 
sometimes less than the limit zero; as we say, the sequence oscillates 
about the limit. 
1 We might just as well have chosen the rectangle bounded by the lines x = n, 
x = n + 1, y = an, Y = 0 to represent an. 

62 Introduction 
- 11-
( _1).- 1 
Figure 1.42 The sequence a. = -- . 
n 
Ch. I 
The convergence of the sequence to zero is usually expressed sym-
bolically by the equation 
lima n = 0, 
n-+oo 
or occasionally by the abbreviation 
I 
h. a2m = m ; a2m-l = 2m 
In the preceding examples, the absolute value of the difference 
between an and the limit steadily becomes smaller as n increases. This 
is not necessarily the case, as is shown by the sequence 
11111 
11 
- , 1, - , - , - , - , ... , -
, -
, . . . ; 
2 
4 2 6 3 
2m m 
(see Fig. 1.43) given for even values n = 2m by an = a2m = 11m; 
for odd values n = 2m -
I by an = a 2m- 1 = 112m. This sequence 
Figure 1.43 
1 
I 
The sequence a .. = - . a •• _1 = - . 
n 
2n 

Sec. 1.6 
The Limit of a Sequence 63 
also has the limit zero; for every interval about the origin, no matter 
how small, contains all the numbers a.. from a certain value of n 
onward; but it is not true that every number lies nearer to the limit 
zero than the preceding one. 
n 
c. a .. =--
n + 1 
We consider the sequence 
1 
2 
n 
a1 = - , a2 = - , ... , a .. = -- , ... 
2 
3 
n + 1 
Writing a .. = 1 -
I/(n + 1), we see that as n increases the number 
a .. will approach the number 1, in the sense that if we mark off any 
interval about the point 1 all the numbers a .. following a certain aN 
must fall in that interval. We write 
lim a .. = 1. 
..... 00 
The sequence 
n2 -
1 
a =-----
.. 
n2 + n + 1 
behaves in a similar way. This sequence also tends to a limit as n 
increases, in fact to the limit one; lim a .. = 1. We see this most 
readily if we write 
..... co 
n+2 
a =1-
=1-r· 
.. 
n2 + n + 1 
'" 
we need only show that the numbers r .. tend to zero as n increases. For 
all values ofn greater than 2 we have n + 2 < 2n and n2 + n + 1 > n2• 
Hence for the remainder r .. , we have 
2n 
2 
0< r .. <- =-
n2 
n 
(n > 2), 
from which we see that r .. tends to zero as n increases. Our discussion 
at the same time gives an estimate of the largest amount by which the 
number a .. (for n > 2) can differ from the limit one; this difference 
cannot exceed 21n. 
This example illustrates the fact, that for large values of n the terms 
with the highest exponents in the numerator and denominator of the 
fraction for a .. predominate and determine the limit. 

64 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
d. an = -\Ii 
Let p be any fixed positive number. We consider the sequence 
where 
an = -\Ii· 
We assert that 
lim an = lim -\lp = 1. 
n-co 
n-oo 
We shall prove this by using a lemma that we shall also find useful 
for other purposes. 
LEMMA. If h is a positive number and n a positive integer, then 
(1) 
(1 + h)n ~ 1 + nh. 
This inequality is a trivial consequence of the binomial theorem 
(see p. 59) according to which 
(1 + ht = 1 + nh + n(n;- 1) h2 + ... + hn, 
if we observe that all terms in the expansion of (1 + h)n are non-
negative. The same argument yields the stronger inequality 
(1 + h)n ~ 1 + nh + n(n;- 1) h2• 
Returning to our sequence, we distinguish between the cases p > 1 
and p < 1 (if P = 1, then -\lp is equal to 1 for every n, and our statement 
is certainly true). 
If p > 1, then -\lp also is greater than 1; we set -\lp = 1 + hn, 
where hn is a positive quantity depending on n; by the inequality (1) 
we have 
implying 
p = (1 + hn)n ~ 1 + nhn, 
0< hn ~ p - 1. 
n 
As n increases the number hn must tend to 0, which proves that an 
converges to the limit one, as stated. At the same time we have a 
means for estimating how close any an is to the limit one, since the 
difference hn between an and one is not greater than (p -
1)ln. 
Ifp < 1, then lip> 1 and -\l11p converges to thelimit one. However, 
-\1-
1 
n p = -\ll/p . 
As the r.eciprocal of a quantity tending to one -\lp itself tends to one. 

Sec. 1.6 
The Limit of a Sequence 65 
We consider the sequence an = ex.n, where ex. is fixed and n runs through 
the sequence of positive integers. 
First, let ex. be a positive number less than one. We then put 
ex. = 1/(1 + h), where h is positive, and the inequality (1) gives 
1 
1 
1 
a -
<--<-
n -
(1 + hr -
1 + nh 
nh· 
Since h, and consequently l/h, depends only on ex. and does not change 
as n increases, we see that ex.n tends to zero as n increases: 
(0 < ex. < 1). 
The same relationship holds when ex. is zero, or negative but greater 
than -1. This is immediately obvious, since in any case lim Jex.Jn = o. 
n-+OO 
If ex. = 1, then ex.n always is equal to one and we shall have to regard 
the number one as the limit of ex.n• 
If ex. > 1, we put ex. = 1 + h, where h is positive, and at once see 
from our inequality that as n increases ex.n does not tend to any definite 
limit, but increases beyond all bounds. We say that ex.n tends to infinity 
as n increases or that ex.n becomes infinite; in symbols, 
(ex. > 1). 
n~oo 
We explicitly emphasize that the symbol cp 40es not denote a numbp 
and that we cannot calculate with it according to the usual rules; state-
ments asserting that a quantity is or becomes ipfinitl! never have tpe 
same sense as an assertion involving definite quaQtities. In spite of 
this, such modes of expression and the use of the sYl11]:>ol 00 are 
extremely convenient, as we shall often see in the followin~ pages. 
If ex. = -1, the value of ex.n does not tend to any limit, but as n ~uns 
through the sequence of positive integers ex.n takes the values + 1 and 
-1 alternately. Similarly, if ex. < -1 the value of ex.n increases 
numerically beyond all bounds, but its sign is alternately positive and 
negative. 
f. Geometrical Illustration of the Limits of ex.n and ~p 
Ifwe consider the graphs ofthe functions y = xn and y = xl/n = ~ 
and restrict ourselves for the sake of convenience to nonnegative values 
of x, the preceding limits are illustrated by Figs. 1.44 and 1.45 respec-
tively. We see that in the interval from 0 to 1 the curves y = xn come 

66 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
y 
co 
~ 
I " 
.... 
! 
I .... 
I ~ 
I" 
I , 
.... 
, , 
I , 
, . I 
Ii' 
: , 
ii' 
: , 
, I , 
UI 
,iI 
Iii 
if 
'iJ 
----~~~--~--~--------------------------~x 
Figure 1.44 x" as n increases. 
closer and closer to the x-axis as n increases, whereas outside that 
interval they climb more and more steeply and approach a line parallel 
to the y-axis. All the curves pass through the point with coordinates 
x = 1, y = 1 and the origin. 
The graphs of the functions y = xlln = +~, come closer and 
closer to the line parallel to the x-axis and at a distance 1 above it; 
again all the curves must pass through the origin and the point (1, 1). 
Hence in the limit the curves approach the broken line consisting of 
the part of the y-axis between the points y = 0 and y = 1 and of the 
parallel to the x-axis y = 1. Moreover, it is clear that the two figures 
are closely related, as one would expect from the fact that the functions 
y = -{Y; are the inverse functions of the nth powers, from which we 
infer that for each n the graph of y = xn is transformed into that of 
y = -{Y'X by reflection in the line y = x. 

Sec. 1.6 
The Limit of a Sequence 67 
y 
y=-Vx 
---
_-------
=.!!'x 
___ 
.................... y 
_·v."., 
-:--.:-::.:::: . 
.:.::::.::::.:=~.=.-- -- --
----7f-~------------------------------------------~x 
Figure 1.45 
xl/n as n increases. 
g. The Geometric Series 
An example of a limit familiar from elementary mathematics is 
furnished by the geometric series 
1 + q + q2 + ... + qn-1 = Sn; 
the number q is called the common ratio or quotient of the series. The 
value of this sum may, as is well known, be expressed in the form 
1 _ qn 
Sn= ---
l-q 
provided that q ¥= 1; we can derive this expression by multiplying the 
sum Sn by q and subtracting the equation thus obtained from the 
original equation or we may verify the formula by division. 
What becomes of the sum Sn when n increases indefinitely? The 
answer is: The sequence of sums Sn has a definite limit S if q lies 

68 Introduction 
Ch. I 
between -1 and + 1, these end values being excluded, and 
S =limSn = _1_. 
n-+oo 
1 - q 
In order to verify this st!ttement we write Sn as (1 - qn)/(1 - q) 
= 1/(1 - q) -
qn/(1 -
q). We have already shown that provided 
Iql < 1 the quantity qn tends to zero as n increases; hence under this 
assumption qn/(l - q) also tends to zero and Sn tends to the limit 
1/(1 - q) as n increases. 
The passage to the limit lim (1 + q + q2 + ... + qn-l) = 1/(1 - q) 
n---+OO 
is usually expressed by saying that when Iql < 1 the sum of the infinite 
geometric series is the expression 1/(1 - q). 
The sums Sn of the finite geometric series are also called the partial 
sums of the infinite geometric series 1 + q + q2 + . . .. (We must 
draw a distinction between the sequence of numbers qn and the partial 
sums of the geometric series.) 
The fact that the partial sums Sn of the geometric series tend to the 
limit S = 1/(1 -
q) as n increases is also expressed by saying that 
the infinite geometric series 1 + q + q2 + . . . converges to the sum 
S = 1/(1 - q) when Iql < 1. 
In passing it should be noted if q is rational, for example, q = t or 
q = 1, then the sum of the infinite geometric series has a rational value 
(in the cases mentioned the values are 2 and t, respectively). This 
observation is behind the well-known fact that periodic decimal fractions 
always represent rational numbers.l The general proof of this fact will 
be clear from the example of the number 
x = 0.343434 ... 
which can be evaluated by writing 
34 
1 
34 
=-
=-
100 1 -
1/100 
99 
1 See Courant and Robbins, What Is Mathematics ?, p. 66. 

Sec. 1.6 
The Limit of a Sequence 69 
We show that the sequence of numbers 
.3/-
a3 = ·V 3, ... , 
tends to 1 as n increases: 
lim yin = 1. 
Since an exceeds the value 1, we set an = 1 + hm with hn positive. 
Then (see p. 64) 
n = (an)n = (1 + hnt 
> 1 + nh + n(n - 1) h 2 > n(n -
1) h 2. 
-
n 
2 
n_ 
2 
" 
It follows for n > 1 that 
hence 
We now have 
h 2 < _2_. 
n-n_l' 
h < .j2 
n - .jn - 1 
.j2 
1 ~ an = 1 + hn ~ 1 + .jn _ 1 
The right-hand side of this inequality obviously tends to one, and 
therefore so does an' 
In this example the an are differences of two terms, each of which 
increases beyond all bounds. Attempting to pass to the limit separately 
with each of the two terms, we obtain the meaningless symbolic 
expression 00 -
00. In such a case the existence of a limit and what 
its value may be depends completely on the special case. We assert 
that in our example 
lim (.jn + 1 -
/~) = o. 
n--+ GO 
For the proof we need only write the expression in the form 
.jn + 1 _ /n = (.jn+1 - .jn)(.jn+1 + .jn) = 
1 
.jn + 1 + .jn 
.jn + 1 + .jn 
and see at once that it tends to zero as n increases. 

70 Introduction 
n 
j. an = - , for IX > 1 
IXn 
Ch. I 
Formally, the limit of the an is of the indeterminate type 00/00 already 
encountered in Example c. We assert that in this example the sequence 
of numbers an = n/lXn tends to the limit zero. 
For the proof we put IX = 1 + h, where h > 0, and again make use 
of the inequality 
(1 + h)n > 1 + nh + n(n -
1) h2 > n(n -
1) h2. 
-
2 
2 
Hence for n > 1 
a = 
n 
< 
2 
n 
(1 + h)n 
(n _ l)h2 
Since an IS positive and the right-hand side of this inequality tends to 
zero, an must also tend to zero. 
1.7 Discussion of the Concept of Limit 
a. Definition of Convergence and Divergence 
From the examples discussed in Section 1.6 we abstract the following 
general concept of limit: 
Suppose that for a given infinite sequence of points aI' a2• aa •... there 
is a number I such that every open interval, no matter how small, marked 
off about the point I, contains all the points an except for at most' a 
finite number. The number I is then called the limit of the sequence 
al. a2, . . .• or we say that the sequence a1• a2. . . . is convergent and 
converges to I,· in symbols, lim an = I. 
n~OO 
The following definition of limit is equivalent: 
To any positive number E, no matter how small. we can assign a 
sufficiently large integer N = N( E) such that from the index N onward 
[that is,for n > N(E)] we always have Ian - II < E. 
Of course, it is true as a rule that N( E) will have to be chosen larger 
and larger for ,smaller and smaller values of the tolerance E; in other 
words, N(E) will usually increase beyond all bounds as E tends to zero:. 
The vague intuitive notion of limit suggests a picture of the an moving 
closer and closer to I. This picture is replaced here by the precise "static" 

Sec. 1.7 
Discussion of the Concept of Limit 71 
definition: Any neighborhood of I contains all an with at most a finite 
number of exceptions. I 
Obviously, a sequence aI' a2' ... cannot have more than one limit 1. If on 
the contrary two distinct numbers [ and [' were limits of the same sequence 
at, a2' ... , we could mark off open intervals about each of the points 1 and I' 
which do not overlap. Since each interval contains all but a finite number of 
the an> the sequence could not be infinite. The limit of a convergent sequence 
is therefore uniquely determined. 
Another obvious but useful remark is: If from a convergent sequence we 
omit any number of terms the resulting sequence converges to the same limit 
as the original sequence. 
A sequence which does not converge is said to be divergent. If as n 
increases the numbers an increase beyond all positive bounds, we say 
that the sequence diverges to + 00; as we have already done occasionally, 
we write then lim an = 00. Similarly, we write lim an = - 00 if, as n 
n~OO 
n-OO 
increases, the numbers -an increase beyond all bounds in the positive 
direction. But divergence may manifest itself in other ways, as for the 
sequence at = -I, a2 = +1, aa = -I, a4 = +1, ... , whose terms 
swing back and forth between two different values. 
Clearly, neither divergence nor convergence of a sequence is affected 
by removing finitely many terms. 
A sequence at, a2, ... is bounded if there is a finite interval containing 
all points of the sequence. Any finite interval is contained in some 
finite interval that has the origin as center. Hence the requirement 
that the sequence is bounded means that there exists a number M such 
that lanl ~ M for all n. 
A convergent sequence at> a2, ... necessarily is also bounded. For 
let I be the limit of the sequence. Taking e = 1 we find from the 
definition of convergence that all an from a certain N onward lie in the 
interval of length 2 centered at I. The only terms an of the sequence that 
may lie outside that interval are at, ... ,aN-I' We can then, however, 
find a larger finite interval that also includes aI' ... , aN-I' 
h. Rational Operations with Limits 
From the definition of limit it follows at once that we can perform 
the elementary operations of addition, multiplication, subtraction, and 
division of limits according to the following rules. 
1 The reader will notice the analogy with the definition of continuity of a function f(x) 
at a point Xo. The role played there by the sufficiently small quantity t5(e) is played 
here by the sufficiently large integer N(e). We shall see indeed on p. 82 that con-
tinuity of a function at a point can be formulated in terms of limits of sequences. 

72 Introduction 
Ch. I 
If a1> a2, ... is a sequence with the limit a and bI , b2, ... is a sequence 
with the limit b, then the sequence of numbers Cn = an + bn also has a 
limit c, and 
C = lim Cn = a + b. 
n .... oo 
The sequence of numbers Cn = anbn likewise converges and 
lim Cn = abo 
n .... oo 
Similarly, the sequence Cn = an - bn converges and 
lim Cn = a-b. 
n .... oo 
Provided the limit b differs from zero, the numbers Cn = an/bn like-
wise converge and have the limit 
I. 
a 
Imcn = -. 
n .... oo 
b 
In words: We can interchange the rational operations of calculation 
with the process of forming the limit; we obtain the same result 
whether we first perform a passage to the limit and then a rational 
operation or vice versa. 
The proofs of all these rules become clear if one of them is carried out. 
We consider the multiplication of limits. If the relations an -+- a and 
bn -+- b hold, then for any positive number e, we can insure both 
and Ib - bnl < e 
by choosing n sufficiently large, say n > N( e). If we write 
ab - anbn = b(a - an) + an(b - bn) 
and recall that there is a positive bound M, independent of n, such that 
lanl < M, we obtain 
Since the quantity (lbl + M)e can be made arbitrarily small by choosing 
e small enough, the difference between ab and anbn actually becomes 
as small as we please for all sufficiently large values of n; this is 
precisely the statement made in the equation 
ab = lim anbn • 
n .... oo 

Sec. 1.7 
Discussion of the Concept of Limit 73 
Using this example as a model, the reader can prove the rules for 
the remaining rational operations. 
By means of these rules many limits can be evaluated easily; thus, 
we have 
1-~ 
1· 
n2 -
1 
I' 
n2 
1 
1m 
2 
= 1m 
= , 
n .... oo n + n + 1 
n .... oo 1 + ~+...!.. 
n 
n2 
since in the second expression we can pass directly to the limit in the 
numerator and denominator. 
The following simple rule is frequently useful: If lim an = a and 
lim bn = b, and if in addition an> bnfor every n, then a ~ b. We are, 
however, by no means entitled to expect that a will always be greater 
than b, as is shown by the sequences an = lIn, bn = 1/2n, for which 
a = b = O. 
c. Intrinsic Convergence Tests. Monotone Sequences 
In all the examples given the limit of the sequence considered was a 
known number. In fact, to apply the above definition of limit of a se-
quence we must know the limit before we can verify convergence. If the 
concept of limit of a sequence yielded nothing more than the recognition 
that some known numbers can be approximated by certain sequences 
of other known numbers, we should have gained very little from it. 
The advantage of the concept of limit in analysis lies essentially on the 
fact that important problems often have numerical solutions which may 
not otherwise be directly known or expressible, but can be described 
as limits. The whole of higher analysis consists of a succession of 
examples of this fact which will become steadily clearer in the following 
chapters. The representation of the irrational numbers as limits of 
rational numbers may be regarded as the first and typical example. 
Any convergent sequence of known numbers aI' a2, • •• defines a 
number I, its limit. However, the only test for convergence that arises 
from the definition of convergence consists in estimating the differences 
Ian - II, and this is applicable only if the number I is known already. 
It is essential to have "intrinsic" tests for convergence that do not 
require an a priori knowledge of the value of the limit but only involve 
the terms of the sequence themselves. The simplest such test applies 
to a special class of sequences, the monotone sequences, and includes 
most of the important examples. 

74 
Infroduction 
Ch. 1 
Limits of Monotone Sequences 
A sequence aI' a2, ••• is called monotonically increasing if each term 
an is larger, or at least not smaller than the preceding one; that is, 
Similarly, the sequence is monotonically decreasing if an ::;;; an- 1 for 
all n. A monotone sequence is one that is either monotonically increas-
ing or decreasing. With this definition we have the basic principle: 
A sequence that is both monotone and bounded converges.1 
This principle is convincingly suggested, but not proved, by intuition; 
it is intimately related to the properties of real numbers and in fact is 
equivalent to the continuity axiom for real numbers. 
The axio~ (see Section lb) that every nested sequence of intervals 
contains a point.is easily seen to be a consequence of the convergence 
of bounded monotone sequences. For let [aI' b1], [a2, b2], ••• be a 
sequence of nested intervals. By the definition of nested sequences we 
have 
Obviously, the infinite sequence a1> a2, ••• is monotonically increasing. 
It is also bounded since a1 ::;;; an ::;;; b1 for all n. Hence I = lim an 
n--+ 00 
exists. Moreover, for any m and for any number n > m we have 
am::;;; an::;;; bm· 
Hence also 
am ::;;; lim an = I ::;;; bm. 
n-+oo 
Thus all intervals of the nested sequence contain one and the same 
point I. (That they have no other point in common follows from the 
further property lim (bn - an) = 0 of nested sequences of intervals.) 
Cauchy's Criteria for Convergence 
A convergent sequence is automatically bounded but need not be 
monotone (see Example b, p. 62). Hence, in dealing with general 
sequences, it is desirable to have a test for convergence that is also 
1 The assumption of boundedness is essential since no unbounded sequence can 
converge. Oberve that a monotonically increasing sequence ah as. ... is always 
"bounded from below": a,. ~ a1 for all n. In order to prove that a monotonically 
increasing sequence converges it is sufficient then to find a number M such that 
a,,:::;;; Mfor all n. 

Sec. 1.7 
Discussion of the Concept of Limit 7S 
applicable to nonmonotone sequences. This need is satisfied by a 
simple condition, the Cauchy test for convergence; this criterion 
characterizes sequences of real numbers which have a limit; most 
importantly it does not require a priori knowledge of the value of the 
limit: Necessary and sufficient for convergence of a sequence aI' a2' ... 
is that the elements an of the sequence with sufficiently large index n 
differ arbitrarily little from each other. 
Formulated precisely: a 
sequence an is convergent if for every € > 0 there exists a natural 
number N = N( €) such that I an -
am I < € whenever n > Nand m > N. 
Geometrically, the Cauchy condition states that a sequence converges 
if there exist arbitrarily small intervals outside of which there lie only 
a finite number of points of the sequence. The correctness of Cauchy's 
test for convergence will be proved and its significance discussed in the 
Supplement. 
d. Infinite Series and the Summation Symbol 
A sequence is just an ordered infinite array of numbers a1> a2, •••• 
An infinite series 
requires the terms to be added in the order in which they appear. To 
arrive at a precise meaning of the sum of an infinite series we consider 
the nth partial sum that is, the sum of the first n terms of the series 
The partial sums Sn for different n form a sequence 
and so on. The sum s of the infinite series is then defined as 
s = lim Sn' 
n"'OO 
provided this limit exists. In that case we call the infinite series con-
vergent. If the sequence Sn diverges, the infinite series is called divergent,· 
For example, the sequence 1, q, q2, q3, ... gives rise to the infinite 
geometric series 
whose partial sums are 

76 Introduction 
Ch. I 
For Iql < 1 the sequence sn converges toward the limit 
1 
S=--, 
l-q 
which then represents the sum of the infinite series. For Iql ;;:: 1 the 
partial sums Sn have no limit and the series diverges (see p. 67). 
It is customary to use for a1 + a2 + ... + an the symbol 
n Iak 
k=l 
which indicates that the sum of the ak is to be taken with k running 
through the integers from k = 1 to k = n. For example, 
4 
1 
1 
I 
I 
1 
'!:lk! stands for TI + 2! + 3! + 4!' 
whereas 
n I akb2k stands for a1b2 + a2b4 + a3b6 + ... + anb2n• 
k=l 
n 
More generally, I ak means the sum of all ak obtained by giving k the 
k=m 
values m, m + 1, m + 2, ... ,n. Thus 
In these examples we have used the letter k for the index of sum-
mation. Of course, the sum is independent of the letter denoting this 
index. Thus 
n 
n 
Sn = I ak = I ai · 
k=l 
i=l 
We use the symbol 
OC! 
to denote the sum of the whole infinite series. Similarly, I ak would 
k=O 
stand for the sum of the infinite series ao + a1 + a2 + ... , whose nth 
partial sum is Sn = ao + a1 + a2 + ... + an- 1. 
Many of our earlier results can be written more concisely in this 
summation notation. The formula of p. 58, for the sum of the first 
n squares becomes 
ik2 = n(n + 1)(2n + 1) . 
k=l 
6 

Sec. 1.7 
Discussion of the Concept of Limit 77 
The formula for the sum of a geometric series is 
00 
1 
Iqk = --
for Iql < 1. 
k=O 
1 - q 
Finally, the binomial theorem is expressed by 
(a + b)n =:i (n)an-kbk. 
k=O k 
Since an infinite series is merely the limit of a sequence s no convergence 
can be decided on the basis of the convergence tests for sequences. 
For example, the convergence of the series 
00 1 
1 
1 
1 
k~1 kk = 11 + 22 + 33 + ... 
follows immediately from the fact that the partial sums 
n 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Sn = k~1 kk = 11 + 22 + 33 + ... + nn 
increase monotonically with n and are bounded since 
l<s <1+1-+1-+1-+···+1. 
-
n -
22 
23 
24 
2n 
= 1 + ! 1 -
1j2n- 1 = 1 + ! _ 1.. < ~ . 
4 
1 -1 
2 
2n 
2 
Later, in Chapter 7, we shall study infinite series more system-
atically. 
e. The Number e 
As a first example of a number which is generated as the limit of a 
sequence, we consider 
e=l+1-+1-+1-+· ... 
1! 
2! 
3! 
Thus e stands for lim Sn' where 
n-+oo 
1 
1 
1 1 
S =1+-+-+···+-. 
n 
1! 
2! 
n! 
1 Remembering the convention defining O! as 1, we can write the first term of the 
series as I/O! in agreement with the law of formation of the following terms. Notice 
that in our notation SrI is really the (n + l)st partial sum of the infinite series, 
instead of the nth. This is, however, of no significance. 

78 
Introduction 
Ch. I 
The numbers e and 7T are the most widely used transcendental constants 
in mathematical analysis. In order to prove the existence of the limit e 
we need only prove that the sequence Sn is bounded since the numbers 
Sn increase monotonically. For all values of n we have 
Sn = 1 + 1 + ! + _1_ + _1_ + ... + 
1 
2 
2·3 
2'3·4 
2·3·4· .. ··n 
< 1 + 1 +!+l+l+ ... +_1_ 
-
2 
22 
23 
2n- 1 
= 1 + 1 -
1/2n < 3. 
1 -! 
The numbers Sn therefore have the upper bound 3, and since they 
form a monotonic increasing sequence, they possess a limit which we 
denote bye. 
The expression for e as a series permits us to compute e rapidly 
with great accuracy. The error committed in approximating e by a 
partial sum Sm can be estimated by the same method of comparison 
with a geometric series that furnished the upper bound 3 for e. We 
have for any n > m 
S =S + __ 1_+ 
1 
+ ... +1. 
n 
m 
(m+1)! 
(m+2)! 
n! 
< S + 
1 
[1 + _1_ + 
1 
+ ... J 
-
m 
(m + 1)! 
m + 2 
(m + 2)(m + 3) 
< S + 
1 
[1 + _1_ + 
1 
+ ... J 
-
m 
(m + 1)! 
m + 1 
(m + 1)2 
= S + 
1 
1 
= S + l_1 . 
m 
(m + 1)! 1 __ 1_ 
m 
m m! 
m + 1 
Hence for n > m 
Letting n increase beyond all bounds while holding m fixed we find 
also that 
1 1 
Sm < e ::::;; Sm + - - . 
mm! 
Hence e differs from Sm by at most (l/m)(l/m!). Since m! increases 
extremely rapidly with m, the number Sm is a good approximation for 
e already for fairly small m; for example, S10 differs from e by less 
than 10-'. In this way we find that e = 2.718281 .... 

Sec. 1.7 
Discussion of the Concept of Limit 79 
e is an irrational number. The estimate for e in terms of Sm can also 
be used to establish this fact. Indeed, if e were rational, we could 
write e in the form p/m with positive integers p, m; here, m ~ 2, since 
e, lying between 2 and 3, cannot be an integer. Comparing e with the 
partial sum Sm' we would have 
S <!!..<S +1.~. 
m 
_ 
m 
, 
m 
mm. 
If we here multiply both sides by m!, we find that 
1 
m! Sm < p(m -
1)! ~ m! Sm + - < m! Sm + 1. 
m 
But 
m' 
m' 
m' 
m! S = m! + m! + -' + --= + ... +-' 
m 
2! 
3! 
m! 
is an integer since each term in the sum is. Thus, if e were rational, the 
integer p(m -
I)! would lie between two successive integers, which is 
impossible.l 
e As Limit of (1 + l/n)n. The number e that was defined here as 
the sum of an infinite series can also be obtained as the limit of the 
sequence 
The proof is simple and at the same time an instructive example of 
operations with limits. According to the binomial theorem, 
Tn = (1 + ~r 
= 1 + n! + n(n -
1) 1. + ... + n(n -
l)(n -
2) ... 1 ..!.. 
n 
2! 
n2 
n! 
nn 
= 1 + 1 + 1-(1 - !) + ... 
2! 
n 
+ : J 1 - ~)( 1 - ~) ... (1 _ n ~ 1) 
1 The irrationality of the number e means that there is no linear equation ax + b = 0 
with rational coefficients a, b and a :F 0 having e as a. solution. A much stronger 
statement has been proved (by Hermite), that there exists no polynomial equation 
aoX" + alxn-l + ... + an_lX + an = 0 of any degree n whatsoever and with rational 
coefficients ao, at. ... ,an (with ao :F 0) with x = e as a root. One says that e is a 
transcendental number in contrast to "algebraic" numbers like v'2 or ~ 10 that are 
roots of certain polynomial equations with rational coefficients. 

80 Introduction 
Ch. I 
From this we see at once that Tn ~ Sn <3. Furthermore, since we 
obtain Tn+! from Tn by replacing the factors 1 -
lin, 1 -
21n, ..• by 
the larger factors 1 -
I/(n + 1), 1 - 2/(n + 1), ... and finally adding 
a positive term we see that the Tn's also form a monotonic increasing 
sequence, from which the existence of the limit lim Tn = T follows. 
To prove that T = e, we observe that for m > n 
1 ( 
1 ) 
1 ( 
1 ) 
( 
n -
1) 
Tm> 1 + 1 + ~ 1 -
- + ... + -
1 - -
... 1 - -- . 
2! 
m 
n! 
m 
m 
If we now keep n fixed and let m increase beyond all bounds, we obtain 
on the left the number T and on the right the expression Sn, so that 
T;;:::: S1;" Thus T;;:::: Sn ;;:::: Tn for every value of n. We now let n 
increase, so that Tn tends to T; from the double inequality it follows 
that T = lim Sn = e. This was the statement to be proved. 
n~OO 
We shall later (Section 2.6, p. 149) be led to this number e again from 
still another point of view. 
f. The Number TT as a Limit 
A limiting process which in essence goes back to classical antiquity 
(Archimedes) is that by which the number TT is defined. Geometrically, 
TT means the area of the circle of radius one. We regard it as obvious 
that this area can be expressed by a (rational or irrational) number, 
denoted by TT. However, this definition is not of much help to us if we 
wish to calculate the number with any accuracy. We then have no 
choice but to represent the number by means of a limiting process, 
namely, as the limit of a sequence of known and easily calculated 
numbers. Archimedes already used this process in his method of 
exhaustion, which consists of approximating the circle by means of 
regular polygons with an increasing number of sides fitting it more and 
more closely. Ifwe letfm denote the area of the regular m-gon (polygon 
of m sides) inscribed in the circle, the area of the inscribed 2m-gon is 
given by the formula [proved by elementary geometry or from the 
expressionfn = (nI2) sin (2TT/n) (see Fig. 1.46)] 
12m = ~J2 -2J1 - (2fm/m)2. 
We now let m range, not through the sequence of all positive integers but 
through the sequence of powers of 2, that is, m = 2n; in other words, 
we form those regular polygons whose vertices are obtained by repeated 

Sec. 1.7 
Discussion of the Concept of Limit 81 
bisection of the circumference. It is clear from the geometric interpre-
tation that the /2n form an increasing and bounded sequence and thus 
have a limit which is the area of the circle: 
This representation of 7T as a limit serves actually as a basis for 
numerical computations; for, starting with the value 14 = 2, we can 
calculate in order the terms of our 
sequence tending to 7T. An estimate 
of the accuracy with which any term 
f2n represents 7T can be obtained by 
constructing the lines touching the 
circle and parallel to the sides of the 
inscribed 2n-gon. These lines form a 
circumscribed polygoh similar to the 
inscribed 2n-gon and having larger 
dimensions in the ratio 1 :cos (7T/2n). 
Hence the area F2n of the circum-
scribed polygon may be found from 
the ratio given by 
f2n = (cos 7T)2. 
F2n 
2n 
Figure 1.46 
Since the area of the circumscribed polygon is greater than that of the 
circle, we have 
For example,f8 = 2"/2, so that we have the estimate 
-
4../2 
2../2 < 7T < 
/ 
1 + tv2 
These are matters with which the reader will be more or less familiar. 
What we wish to point out, however, is that the calculation of areas 
by means of exhaustion by rectilinear figures whose areas can be 
calculated easily forms the basis for the concept of integral, to be 
introduced in Chapter 2. For the actual numerical computation of 
7T much more efficient methods are available, as we shall see in 
Section 6.26. 

82 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
1.8 The Concept of Limit for Functions of a Continuous Variable 
Hitherto we have considered limits of sequences, that is, of functions 
of an integral variable n. The notion of limit, however, frequently 
occurs in connection with a function I(x) that is defined for all x in 
some interval. 
We say that the value of the function f(x) tends to a limit 'YJ as x 
tends to ~, or in symbols, 
limf(x) = 'YJ 
x-I; 
if f(x) differs arbitrarily little from 'YJ for all x for which f(x) is defined 
and which lie sufficiently near to e Expressed more precisely the 
definition of lim/(x) is as follows. 
Whenever an arbitrary positive quantity € is assigped, we can mark 
off an interval Ix -
~I < b so small that for any x which belongs both 
to the domain of I and to that interval the inequality I/(x) -
'YJI < € 
holds, then lim/(x) = 'YJ. 
x~1; 
There is a close connection between the concepts oflimit of a function 
and continuity. If ~ belongs to the domain of f, that is, if fm is 
defined, then lim f(x) , if it exists at all, must have the value f(~). 
x~1; 
Indeed, the definition of'YJ = limf(x) implies in particular 11m -
'YJI < € 
x~1i 
for every positive € and hence 'YJ = fen Now, comparing the definitions 
of limit and of continuity, we see that the relation lim f(x) = f(~) 
x-~ 
just expresses the continuity of the functionfat the point~. Hence for ~ 
in the domain off the existence of lim f(x) just signifies that f is con-
x~1; 
tinuous at~. More generally, if fex) is not defined at ~ but lim f(x) 
x-~ 
exists and has the value 'YJ, we can assign to I at the point ~ the value 'YJ 
and the function f, thus completed, will be continuous at~. (Removable 
Singularity. See p. 35.) 
The limit of a function can also be described completely in terms of limits 
of sequences. The statement 
limf(x) = 1J 
x-I; 
means that 
for every sequence Xn with limit ~ (where it is assumed, of course, that the Xn 
belong to the domain of [). For if lim [(x) = 1J and if lim Xn = ~, then [(x) 
x-~ 
n-oo 
1 It is assumed here that arbitrarily close to ~ there are points where f is defined. 

Sec. 1.8 
The Concept of Limit for Functions of a Continuous Variable 
83 
is arbitrarily close to 1} for x sufficiently close to ~; but Xn is sufficiently close 
to ~ if only n is large enough, and consequently, lim f(xn) = 1}. If, on the 
other hand, lim f(xn) = 1} whenever Xn --+ ~, we must have lim f(x) = 1}. 
n---+oo 
x-; 
Otherwise there would exist a positive E such that If(x) -
1}1 ;::: E for some 
x arbitrarily close to~; there would then also exist a sequence Xn converging 
to ~ for which If(xn) -
1}1 ;::: E, but then lim f(xn) could not be 1}. 
n~ro 
Continuity of the functionf(x) at the point ~implies then: lim f(xn) = fm, 
for every sequence Xn in the domain of fthat converges to~. More generally, 
for a function continuous in an interval the relation 
n---+oo 
n---+oo 
is valid for any sequence in the domain off which converges to a point of the 
intervaL We see that for a continuous function the limit symbol can be 
interchanged (or, as one says, "commutes") with the symbols for the function. 
Limits of sums, products, and quotients of functions are found by 
the same rules as for sequences (see p. 71): If lim f(x) = 'YJ and 
lim g(x) = " exist, then 
x~~ 
x~~ 
lim (f(x) + g(x» = 'YJ + " 
lim (f(x)g(x» = 'YJ' 
x-->~ 
and for' ¥= 0 also 
limf(x) = ~. 
x-->sg(x) 
, 
The proofs are the same as for sequences. (The rules would also 
follow from those for sequences by writing limits of functions as 
limits of sequences.) Consequently, when ~ belongs to the domain of 
f and g, the sum, product, and quotient of two functions f(x) and g(x) 
which are continuous at a point ~ are again continuous (where for quo-
tients we have to assume that g(~) ~ 0). 
The cases where ~ does not belong to the domain off will turn out to 
be of particular importance for differential calculus. As a first example 
we consider the relation 
n 
tn 
1· 
x -
<; 
tn-l 
1m 
= n<; 
, 
x-~ x -
; 
for n a posItIve integer. Of course, f(x) = (xn -
~n)/(x -
~) is a 
function defined only for x ¥=~. But for x ¥= ~ the algebraic identity 

84 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
is valid as a consequence of the summation formula for the geometric 
series. To find the limit we only have to let x tend to e and to evaluate 
the limit of the right-hand side by the rules for limits of sums and 
quotients. 
Less obvious is the formula 
1· sin x 
1 
Im--= 
"' .... 0 
x 
(where, of course, the angle x is measured in "radians," as explained 
on p. 50). Again the quotient (sin x)/x is defined only for x :;1= O. 
c 
D 
Figure 1.47 
But, if we define (sin x)/x = 1 for x = 0 we complete the quotient as 
a function which is continuous also at x = O. For the proof of the 
limit formula we appeal here to a geometric argument. 
From Fig. 1.47 we find by comparing the areas of the triangles 0 AB 
and OAC and the sector OAB! of the unit circle that if 0 < x < 1T/2 
I sin x < ix < t tan x. 
From this it follows that if 0 < Ixl < 1T/2, 
x 
1 
1<-<-. 
sin x 
cos x 
Hence the quotient (sin x)/x lies between the numbers 1 and cos x. We 
know that cos x tends to 1 as x _ 0, and from this it follows that the 
quotient (sin x)/x can differ only arbitrarily little from 1, provided that 
1 Of course, we could have defined the angle x in the first place as twice the area of 
sector DAB. 

Sec. 1.8 
The Concept of Limit for Functions of a Continuous Variable 85 
x is near enough to O. This is exactly what is meant by the equation 
which was to be proved. 
From the result just proved it follows that 
and also 
I· tan x 
I· 
sin x I· 
1 
1 
Im--= Im-- Im--= , 
","'0 
X 
", .... 0 
X 
"' .... 0 cos x 
I· 1 - cos x 
0 
1m 
= 
. 
"' .... 0 
x 
This last follows from the formula, valid for 0 < Ixl < 7Tj2, 
I - cos x 
(l - cos x){l + cos x) 
1 - cos2 X 
x 
= 
= 
x(1 + cos x) 
sin x 
I 
= -_. 
. sin x. 
x 
1 + cos x 
x(1 + cos x) 
For x -+ 0 the first factor on the right tends to I, the second to t, and the 
third to 0; the product therefore tends to 0, as was stated. 
Dividing the same formula by x, we obtain 
I -
cos x = (Sin X)2 
I 
, 
x2 
X 
I + cos x 
from which 
I. 1 - cos x 
I 
1m 
2 
=-. 
",""0 
x 
2 
Limits for x -+ 00. Finally we remark that it is just as well possible 
to consider limiting processes in which the continuous variable x 
increases beyond all bounds. For example, the meaning of the equation 
lim x2 + 1 = lim I + Ijx2 = I 
"'''''00 x2 -
1 
"'''''00 I -
Ijx 2 
is clear. It signifies that the function on the left differs arbitrarily little 
from one, provided only that x is sufficiently large. The rules for 
forming the limits of this kind for sums, products, and quotients are 
the same as before. 
* There is one further result which is frequently useful in the calculation 
of limits, the rule for obtaining the limit of a compound function. 
The compound functionJ(g(z» is defined for those values of z for which 
x = g(z) lies in the domain ofJ(x). The functiong(z) may be a function 
of a continuous variable or an integer variable, but f(x) must be a 
function of a continuous variable. 

86 Introduction 
Ch.I 
Iflim g(z) = ~ where ~ lies within an open interval of the domain of 
z-, 
jand iflimj(x) = 'Yj, then limj(g(z)) = 'Yj. As a corollary we observe 
"'-~ 
z-, 
that a continuous function of a continuous function is itself continuous 
(as already mentioned on p. 55). 
The result is obvious from the fact that we can makej(x) arbitrarily 
close to 'Yj by taking x sufficiently close to ~ and to make x = g(z) close 
enough to ~ we have only to take z sufficiently close to ,. With slight 
modifications, the same statements apply when any of the variables is 
allowed to increase beyond all bounds. 
a. Some Remarks about the Elementary Functions 
So far we tacitly assumed that the elementary functions are con-
tinuous. The proof of this fact is very simple. First, the function 
I(x) = x is continuous; therefore x2 = X' x is continuous, as the 
product of two continuous functions, and every power of x is likewise 
continuous. Thus every polynomial is continuous, being the sum of 
continuous functions. Every rational function, as a quotient of con-
tinuous functions, is likewise continuous in every interval in which the 
denominator does not vanish. 
The function xn is continuous and monotonic for x ~ O. Hence the 
nth root, being the inverse function of the nth power, is continuous. 
From this fact it is easy to conclude that the nth root of a rational 
function is continuous (except where the denominator vanishes). 
The continuity of the trigonometric functions could now be proved, 
using the concepts already developed. However, we omit the dis-
cussion here, since in Chapter 2 (p. 166), the continuity of all these 
functions will be seen to follow simply as a consequence of their 
differentiability. 
We merely make a few remarks about the definition and continuity of the 
exponential function a"', the general power function XII, and the logarithm. 
We assume, as in Section 1.3 (p. 51), that a is a positive number, say greater 
than one, and, = p/q is a positive rational number (p and q being integers); 
then ar = apjq is the positive number whose qth power is aP• If ex is any 
irrational number and '1> '2' .. '>n' ... is a sequence of rational numbers 
approaching ex, we assert that lim arm exists; we then call this limit all. 
m-+OO 
In order to prove the existence of this limit by Cauchy's test, we need show 
only that larn - arml is arbitrary small, provided that nand m are sufficiently 
large. We suppose, for example, that 'n > 'm, or that 'n - 'm = <5, where 
<5 > O. Then 

Supplement 87 
Since the r m converge to IX, they are bounded and so are the arm; thus it 
suffices to show that 
laa -
11 = all - 1 
is arbitrarily small when the values of nand m are sufficiently large. However, 
the rational number 6 certainly may be made as small as we please provided 
the values of nand m are sufficiently large. Hence if I is an arbitrarily large 
positive integer, 6 < 1/1 if nand m are large enough. Now the relations 
6 < 1// and a > 1 givel 
1 < aa < alii, 
and since all! tends to one as I increases to infinity (cf. p. 64), our assertion 
follows immediately. 
It can be shown that the function a"' extended to irrational values in this 
way is also continuous everywhere, and, moreover, that it is monotonic. 
For negative values of x this function is naturally defined by the equation 
1 
a"'=-. 
a-"' 
As x runs from -
00 to + 00, a"' takes all values between zero and + 00. 
Consequently, it possesses a continuous and monotonic inverse function, 
which we call the logarithm to the base a. In like manner we can prove that 
the general power Xlll is a continuous function of x, where IX is any fixed rational 
or irrational number and x varies over the interval 0 < x < 00, and is 
monotonic if IX "" O. 
The "elementary" discussion of the exponential function, the logarithm, 
and the power Xlll outlined here will later (p. 149) be replaced by another 
discussion which in principle is much simpler. 
Supplement 
One of the great achievements of Greek mathematics was the 
reducticn of mathematical statements and theorems in a logically 
coherent way to a small number of very simple postulates or axioms, 
the well-known axioms of geometry or the rules of arithmetic governing 
relations among a few basic objects, such as integers or geometrical 
points. The basic objects originate as abstractions or idealizations 
from physical reality. The axioms, whether considered as "evident" 
from a philosophical point of view or merely as overwhelmingly 
plausible, are accepted without proof; on them the crystalized structure 
of mathematics rests. For many centuries the axiomatic Euclidean 
1 This statement follows from the fact that for a > 1 the power am/fl is greater than 
one if mIn is positive. For a = (a1/fl)m is the product of m factors all greater than 
one, and so is greater than one. 

88 Introduction 
Ch.I 
mathematics was accepted as a model for mathematical style and even 
imitated for other intellectual endeavors. (For example, philosophers, 
such as Descartes and Spinoza, tried to make their speculations more 
convincing by presenting them axiomatically or, as they said, "more 
geometrico. ") 
The axiomatic method was discarded when after the stagnation during 
the Middle Ages mathematics in union with natural science started an 
explosively vigorous development based on the new calculus. Ingenious 
pioneers vastly extending the scope of mathematics could not be 
hampered by having to subject the new discoveries to consistent 
logical analysis and thus in the seventeenth century an invocation of 
intuitive evidence became a widely used substitute for deductive proof. 
Mathematicians of first rank operated with the new concepts guided 
by an unerring feeling for the correctness of the results, sometimes 
even with mystical assoCiations as in references to "infinitesimals" or 
"infiriitely small quantities." Faith in the sweeping power of the new 
manijmiations of calculus carried the investigators far along paths 
impossible to travel if subjected to the limitations of complete rigor. 
Only the sure instinct of great masters could guard against gross errors. 
The uncritical but enormously fruitful enthusiasm of the early period 
gradually met with countercurrents which rose to full strength in the 
nineteenth century but did not impede the development of constructive 
analysis initiated earlier. Many of the great mathematicians of the 
nineteenth century, in particular Cauchy and Weierstrass, played a role 
in the effort toward critical reappraisal. The result was not only a 
new and firm foundation of analysis, but also increased lucidity and 
simplicity as a basis for further remarkable progress. 
An important goal was to replace indiscriminate reliance on imprecise 
"intuition" by precise reasoning based on operations with numbers; for 
naive geometric thinking leaves an undesirable margin of vagueness as 
we shall see time and again in the following chapters. For example, 
the general concept of a continuous curve eludes geometrical intuition. 
A continuous curve, representing a continuous function, as defined 
earlier, need not have a definite direction at every point; we can even 
construct continuous functions whose graphs nowhere have a direction, 
or to which no length can be assigned. 
Yet one must never forget that abstract deductive reasoning is 
merely one aspect of mathematics while the driving motivation and the 
great universal scope of analysis stem from physical reaiity and 
intuitive geometry. 
This supplement will provide a rigorous buttressing (with some 
repetitions) for basic concepts treated intuitively earlier in this chapter. 

Sec. S.l 
Limits and the Number Concept 89 
S.l Limits and the Number Concept 
We start with the ideas of Section 1.1, analyzing fully the concept of 
real number and its connection with that of limit. We define the 
number continuum by a constructive procedure based on the natural 
numbers. We then prove that the extended number concept satisfies 
the rules of arithmetic and the other requirements, making it the 
adequate tool for measurement. 
Since a complete exposition would require a separate book,l we 
shall indicate only the main steps. In struggling through the somewhat 
tedious material the student will marvel at the fact that on the basis of 
the natural numbers the human mind could erect a logically consistent 
number system superbly suited to the task of scientific measurement.2 
a. The Rational Numbers 
Limits Defined by Rational Intervals. 
We begin by accepting the 
system of rational numbers with all its usual properties, derived from 
the basic properties of natural numbers. Thus the rational numbers 
are ordered by magnitude, permitting us to define "rational" intervals 
as sets of rational numbers lying between two given rational numbers 
(intervals including the end points are called closed). The length of the 
interval with end points a, b is Ib - aI. As observed in Section la the 
rational numbers are dense and every rational interval contains infinitely 
many rational numbers. For the time being, all quantities occurring 
are assumed to be rational numbers. 
Within the domain of rational numbers we define sequences and 
limits (see p. 70). Given an infinite sequence of rational numbers 
aI' a2, ••• and a rational number r we say that 
lim an = r 
n .... oo 
1 See for example, E. Landau, Foundations of Analysis, 2nd Ed., Chelsea, New York, 
1960. 
2 Real numbers can also be introduced purely axiomatically, with all their basic 
properties accepted as axioms. In the approach we shall take here we accept, in 
principle, only the axioms for natural numbers (including the principle of mathe-
matical induction). The rational numbers and real numbers are then constructed 
on that basis. The "axioms" for real numbers are then, in principle, merely theorems 
about natural numbers for which proofs are required. Actually, we shall start 
already with the rational numbers as known elements, since the construction of the 
rational from the natural numbers and the derivation of the basic properties of 
rational numbers present no difficulties at all. 

90 Introduction 
Ch. I 
if every rational interval containing r in its interior also contains 
"almost all" a .. , that is, all a .. with at most afinite number of exceptions. 
It follows immediately that a sequence of rational numbers cannot have 
more than one rational limit and that the usual rules for limits of sums, 
differences, products, and quotients (see p. 71) are valid for sequences 
of rational numbers with rational limits. 
An entirely obvious consequence of this definition is that passing to 
the limit preserves order: if lim a .. = a, lim b .. = b and for every n, 
a .. ~ b .. , then a ~ b. Note that even assuming a .. < b .. strictly, we 
cannot say more than a ~ b, or exclude possible equality of the limits 
(for example, both sequences a .. = 1 -
21n and bn = 1 - lin> an 
have the limit 1). 
Statements about limits can be expressed in terms of rational nul/-
sequences, that is, sequences aI' a2' ... of rational numbers for which 
lima .. = O . 
..... 00 
One says a .. "becomes arbitrarily small as n tends to infinity," meaning 
that for any positive rational E, no matter how small, the inequality 
lanl < E holds for almost all n. Obviously the sequence an = lin is 
a null-sequence. 
Thus a sequence of rational numbers an has the rational limit r if 
and only if the numbers r -
a .. form a null-sequence. 
b. Real Numbers Determined by Nested 
Sequences of Rational Intervals 
We observed on p. 5 that intuitively the rational points are dense 
on the real axis and that there are always rational numbers between 
any two real numbers. This suggests the possibility of rigorously 
defining a real number entirely in terms of order relations with respect 
to the rationals, a procedure we shall now follow. 
A nested sequence of rational intervals (see p. 8) is a sequence of 
closed intervals J .. with rational end points am b .. , with each interval 
contained in the preceding one, whose lengths form a null-sequence 
an-l ~ a .. ~ b .. ~ b .. _1 
and 
""'00 
Since each interval J .. = [a .. , b .. l of a nested sequence contains all 
succeeding intervals, a rational number r lying outside any J .. also lies 
outside and on the same side of all succeeding intervals. Thus a nested 

Sec. S.l 
Limits and the Number Concept 91 
sequence of rational intervals gives rise to a separation of all rational 
numbers into three classes.1 The first class consists of the rational 
numbers r lying to the left of the intervals I n for sufficiently large n, or 
for which r < an for almost all n. The second class consists of the 
rational numbers r contained in all intervals I n• This class contains 
at most one number, since the length of the interval I n shrinks to zero 
with increasing n. The third class consists of the rational numbers r 
for which r > bn for almost all n. It is clear that any number of the 
first class is less than any of the second class, and any number of the 
second class is less than any of the third class. The points an themselves 
are either in the first or second class, and the numbers bn either in the 
second or third class. 
If the second class is not empty, it consists of a single rational 
number r. In this case the first class consists of the rational numbers less 
than r, the third class of the rational numbers greater than r. We say 
then that the nested sequence of intervals J n represents the rational 
number r. For example, the nested sequence of intervals [r -
lIn, 
r + lIn] represents the number r. 
If the second class is empty, then the nested sequence does not 
represent a rational number; these nested sequences then serve to 
represent irrational numbers. The individual intervals [an> bn] of the 
sequence are for this purpose unimportant; only the separation of the 
rational numbers into three classes generated by this sequence is 
essential, telling us where the irrational number fits in among the 
rational ones. 
Thus we call two nested sequences of rational intervals [an> bn] and 
[an', bn'] equivalent if they give rise to the same separation of the 
rational numbers into three classes. The reader should prove as an 
exercise that necessary and sufficient for equivalence is: an' - an is a 
null-sequence, or also: the inequalities 
hold for all n. 
We assign a real number to a nested sequence of rational intervals 
[an> bnl. The real numbers determined by two different nested sequences 
will be considered to be equal if the sequences are equivalent. A real 
number then is represented by the separation of the rational numbers 
into three classes generated by equivalent nested sequences of rational 
intervals. If the second class consists of a rational number r, we con-
sider the real number represented by this separation into classes as. 
identical with the rational number r. 
1 A so-called "Dedekind Cut." 

92 Introduction 
Ch.l 
*c. Order, Limits, and Arithmetic Operations for Real Numbers 
Having defined real numbers, we can now define the notions of order, 
sum, difference, product, limit, etc., for them and prove that they have 
the usual properties. To be consistent any definition concerning real 
numbers must: (I) have the ordinary meaning in case the real numbers 
are rational and (2) be independent of the individual nested sequences 
intervals used to represent the real numbers. 
* Intervals with Real End Points 
Although so far, even for the definition of irrational numbers, the 
end points of nested intervals were assumed to be rational, we must 
now remove such restrictions and show that we can operate with real 
numbers exactly as we do with rational numbers. In carrying out this 
program we have to be careful at each step to avoid reliance on facts 
not yet proved by logical deduction from our basis of departure, the 
rational numbers. 
We shall denote real numbers by letters x, y, .... If the real number 
x is given by the nested sequence of rational intervals [an, bnJ, we write 
x I"oo.J {[an, bnJ}. From our definition of real number we draw a natural 
definition of order for a real number x I"oo.J {[an> bnJ} relative to a rational 
number r. We say that r < x, r = x, r > x according as r belongs to 
the first, second, or third class of the separation of the rational numbers 
generated by the sequence of nested intervals. This definition is obvi-
ously independent of the special nested sequence {[an> bnJ} defining x 
and has the ordinary meaning when x is rational. Equivalently, we 
say that.r < x if r < an for almost all n, r = x if an ::5: r ::5: bn for all n, 
and r > x if r > bn for almost all n. 
By comparing real numbers with rational numbers we can compare 
real numbers with each other. Let x I"oo.J {[an, bn]}, Y I"oo.J {[cxn> Pn]}. We 
say x < y if there is a rational number r such that x < r < y. Clearly, 
this definition does not depend on the particular representations of 
x and y by nested sequences since comparisons with rational rare 
independent of such representations. Thus we say that x < y if there 
exists a rational r such that bn < r < CXn for almost all n, or simply 
if bn < CXn , for almost all n. The relation x < y precludes the possibility 
that y < x or x = y. Obviously x < y and y < z implies x < z. 
For any two real numbers x and y, one of the relations x < y, 
x = y, y < x must hold. For if x :F y and either number, say y, is 
rational, then y must be in the first or third class of the separation 
generated by x, that is, either y < x or x < y. If neither x nor y is 

Sec. S.l 
Limits and the Number Concept 93 
rational, the second classes of the corresponding subdivisions are 
empty, and there must be a rational number r in the first class with 
respect to one of the numbers and in the third class with respect to the 
other. Thus either x < y or y < x. 
Density. An immediate consequence of these definitions is the 
density of the rational numbers in the sense that between any two real 
numbers x, y there is always a rational number r. We also observe that 
if a real number x is represented by a nested sequence of rational 
intervals [an> bn1, then an ~ x ~ bn for all n. For if x < am for some 
m, then bn < am for almost all n, contradicting the inequality am < bn 
which holds for all n. Hence every real number can be confined to a 
rational interval [an, bn1 of arbitrarily small length. 
Once the real numbers are ordered we can talk of intervals with real 
end points. The density of the rational numbers guarantees that every 
such interval includes rational numbers. 
Limits. A real number x is called the limit of a sequence Xl> x2, ••• 
of real numbers if every open interval with real end points containing x 
also contains Xn for almost all n. This definition is consistent with the 
definition in terms of rational intervals given earlier, in the sense that 
a rational limit of a rational sequence is a limit of the same sequence 
of numbers in the more general sense of a real limit. As a consequence 
of the definition of limit we find that for a real number x represented 
by a nested sequence of rational intervals [an> bn1 
x = lim an = lim bn. 
n---+OO 
n---+OO 
* Arithmetic. We next define the arithmetic operations for real 
numbers x f"'ooJ {[an> bn]} and y f"'ooJ {[1Xn> fin]}: This is achieved most easily 
for the operations of addition and subtraction. We define 
x + y f"'ooJ {[an + 1Xn> bn + fin]}, 
X -
y,...., {[an -
fin, bn -
IXn]}. 
To prove these definitions meaningful is a simple exercise whose details 
are left to the reader (see Problem 3, p. 116). For example, for x -
y it 
is necessary only to verify the intervals [an -
fin' bn -
IX] form a nested 
sequence with lengths tending to zero, and hence that they represent 
a real number z. The fact that z does not depend on the special repre-
sentations of x and y is proved by characterizing the separation of 
rational numbers into three classes generated by z directly in terms of 
x and y; for instance, the first class consists of the rational numbers 
r < z, or of the r which are exceeded by an -
fin for some n; these r 
are easily seen to be the rational numbers of the form s -
t, where s 
and t are rational numbers for which s < x and t > y. 

94 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
The product of the two real numbers x, y is for y > 0 defined by 
x . Y f"'Ooo.J {[anan> bnfJnJ}, 
where we have assumed that all an > 0; it is obvious what nested 
sequences are proper to use for xy in the case y < 0 and y = O. When-
ever y is a positive rational number, the product X· Y also is representable 
in the form 
For a natural number y = m, the product X· Y = mx also can be 
obtained by repeated addition of x, that is, mx = x + (m -
l)x = 
x + x + ... + x. 
The arithmetic operations obey the usual laws. In particular, the 
relation x < y is equivalent to 0 < y -
x. We can introduce the 
absolute value of a real number and prove the triangle inequality 
Ix + yl s Ixl + Iyl. The notion of limit of a sequence of real numbers 
defined above in terms of order relations can then be given the equivalent 
formulation: x = lim Xn if for every real positive E the relation 
n~OO 
Ix - xnl < E holds for almost all n. 
We now verify the so-called 
AXIOM OF ARCHIMEDES. If x and yare real numbers and x is positive, 
then there exists a natural number m such that mx > y. 
In essence this means a real number cannot be "infinitely small" or 
"infinitely large" compared with another (except if one of them is zero). 
To prove the Axiom of Archimedes (which in our context is really a 
theorem) we observe that for rational numbers it is a consequence of 
the common properties of integers. If now x f"'Ooo.J {[an> bnJ} and y f"'Ooo.J 
{[an> fJn]} are real numbers and x is positive, then an > 0 for almost all 
n. Since an and fJn are rational numbers, we can then find an m so large 
that man> fJn' whence mx > fJn ~ y. 
d. Completeness of the Number Continuum. Compactness 
of Closed Intervals. Convergence Criteria 
Real numbers make possible limit operations with rational numbers, 
but they would be of little value if the corresponding limit operations 
carried out with them necessitated the introduction of some further 
kind of "unreal" numbers which would have to be fitted in between 
the real ones, and so on ad infinitum. Fortunately, the definition of 
real number is so comprehensive that no further extension of the 

Sec. S.l 
Limits and the Number Concept 9S 
number system is possible without discarding one of its essential 
properties (as "order" must be discarded for complex numbers). 
Principle of Continuity 
This completeness of the real number continuum is expressed by 
the basic continuity principle (cf. p. 8): Every nested sequence of 
intervals with real end points contains a real number. To prove this, 
consider closed intervals [xn' Yn), each interval contained in the preceding 
one, whose lengths Yn -
Xn form a null-sequence. We claim there is a 
real x contained in all [xn> Yn): The sequences Xn and Yn will then have 
x as limit. To prove this we replace the nested sequence [xn> Yn) by a 
nested sequence of rational intervals [an, bn), containing the [xn> Yn). 
This rational sequence will then define the desired real number x. For 
each n let an be the largest rational number of the form p/2n less than 
Xn> and bn the smallest rational number of the form q/2n greater than 
Yn' where p and q are integers. Clearly, the intervals [an> bn) form a 
nested sequence representing a real number x. If x lay outside one of 
the intervals [xm' Ym), say x < Xm, there would exist a rational r with 
x < r < X m , whence for all sufficiently large n we would have 
Yn :::;; bn < r < Xm :::;; Xn, 
which is impossible. Hence all intervals [xm' Ym) contain the point x. 
Weierstrass' Principle-Compactness 
Several other versions of this principle of continuity are important. 
The first is the Weierstrass principle of existence of limit points or 
accumulation points of bounded sequences. A point x is a limit point of 
a sequence Xl' X 2, ••• if every open interval containing x also contains 
points Xn for infinitely many n. Notice the difference between this 
definition and the definition of limit, where the Xn for almost all n must 
lie in the open interval, or for all n with at most a finite number of 
exceptions or for all sufficiently large n. If a sequence has a limit, then 
this limit is also a limit point of the sequence and is in fact the only one. 
There may be no limit point (as in the example of the sequence 1,2,3, 
4, ... ) or a single limit point (as in a convergent sequence) or several 
limit points (for example, the sequence 1, -1, 1, -1, ... has the two 
limit points + 1 and -1). The Weierstrass principle asserts: Every 
bounded sequence has at least one limit point. 
To prove this we observe that since the sequence Xl' X 2, ••• is bounded, 
there exists an interval [Yl> Zl] containing all X n • Starting with [YI> Zl] 
we construct by induction over n a nested sequence of intervals [Yn> zn] 
each containing points Xm for infinitely many m. If [Yn' zn] contains 

96 Introduction 
Ch.I 
infinitely many Xm , we divide [Yn> zn] into two equal parts by its mid-
point. At least one of the two resulting closed intervals must again 
contain infinitely many Xm and can be taken as the interval [Yn+1' zn+1]' 
It is clear that the [Yn> zn] form a nested sequence representing a real 
number x. Every open interval containing x will contain the intervals 
[y n' zn] for sufficiently large n and hence must contain infinitely many xm • 
Limit points can also be defined as limits of subsequences of the given 
infinite sequence Xl> X 2, • • •• A subsequence is any infinite sequence 
extracted from the given sequence, or of the form x n1' x n2 ' x n3' ••• , 
where nl < n2 < n3 < .. '. Obviously, a point x is a limit point of the 
sequence Xl' X2, ••• if it is limit of some subsequence. Conversely, 
for any limit point X we can, by induction, construct a subsequence 
xn1' xn2' ••• converging to x. If xn1' ••• , X nk_1 are defined already we 
take for nk one of the infinitely many integers n for which n > nk - l 
and IXn -
xl < 2-k • 
We restate the Weierstrass principle in the form: 
THEOREM. 
Every bounded infinite sequence of real numbers has a 
convergent subsequence. 
A set is called compact if every sequence of its elements contains a 
subsequence converging to an element of the set. Rephrasing our 
theorem we say that closed intervals of real numbers are compact sets. 
Monotone Sequences 
A special consequence of this theorem is that every bounded 
monotone sequence converges. Indeed, let the sequence Xl' X2, ••• be 
monotone, say monotonic increasing. If the sequence is also bounded, 
it has a limit point x. Arbitrarily close to X there must be points Xn of 
the sequence, none exceeding x, since the subsequent terms increase, 
and if Xn > X then Xm ~ Xn > X for m > n. It follows that every 
inte,rval containing X contains almost all Xn> or x is the limit of the 
sequence. 
Cauchy's Convergence Criterion 
The condition that a sequence is bounded and monotone is sufficient 
for convergence. The significance of this statement is that it often 
permits us to prove existence of the limit of a sequence without 
requiring a priori knowledge of the value of the limit; in addition, 
boundedness and monotonicity of a sequence are properties usually 
easy to check in concrete applications. However, not every convergent 
sequence need be monotone (although it has to be bounded) and it is 
important to have a more generally applicable criterion for convergence. 

Sec. S.l 
Limits and the Number Concept 97 
Such is the intrinsic convergence test of Cauchy which is a necessary 
and sufficient condition for the existence of the limit of a sequence. 
The sequence Xl' X 2, X 3, ••• converges if and only if for every positive £ 
there exists an N such that IXn - xml < £for all nand m exceeding N. 
In other words, a sequence converges if any two of its elements with 
sufficiently large indices differ by less than £ from each other. 
We claim that the condition is necessary for convergence. If 
X = lim Xn then every Xn with sufficiently large n differs from X by less 
than £/2, and hence by the triangle inequality every two such values Xn 
and Xm will differ from each other by less than £. Conversely, consider 
a sequence for which IXn -
xml < £ for any £ > 0, for all sufficiently 
large nand m. Then there exists a value N such that almost all Xn differ 
from XN by less than 1. This means that almost all Xn can be enclosed 
in an interval of length 2. We can then find an interval so large that it 
includes also the finite number of Xn which may lie outside the interval 
about xN • Thus the sequence is bounded and hence has a limit point x. 
Every open interval containing X will also contain some points Xm with 
arbitrarily large m. 
Since points Xn differ arbitrarily little from 
each other for sufficiently large n, it follows that the open interval 
about x must contain almost all Xm and so x is the limit of the sequence. 
e. Least Upper Bound and Greatest Lower Bound 
It is of great importance that a bounded set of real numbers has 
"best possible" upper and lower bounds. A set S of real numbers x is 
bounded, if all numbers of S can be enclosed in one and the same finite 
interval. There are then upper bounds of S, numbers B which are not 
exceeded by any number x of S: 
for all x in S. 
Similarly, there are lower bounds A of S: 
for all x in S. 
Thus for the set of reciprocals of natural numbers 1, t, t, t, ... , any 
number B ~ 1 is an upper bound, any number A ~ 0, a lower bound; 
here the number 1, a member of the set is the least upper bound, and 
the number 0, a limit point of the elements of the set although not a 
member, is the greatest lower bound. The least upper bound of a set 
of real numbers is often called its supremum, the greatest lower bound 
its infimum. In general the supremum and infimum of a set are either 
members of the set or at least limits of sequences of members of the 

98 Introduction 
Ch.I 
set. For, if the least upper bound b of S does not belong to S, there 
must be some members of S lying arbitrarily close to b, since otherwise 
we could find upper bounds of S smaller than b; thus we can select 
successively a sequence of numbers Xl> X2, ••• from S which lie closer 
and closer to b and converge to b. 
The existence of a least upper bound of a bounded set S follows 
immediately from the convergence of monotone bounded sequences. 
For any n we define Bn as the smallest rational upper bound of S with 
denominator 2n. Clearly, for any x in S and any n 
x :5: Bn+! :5: Bn :5: B1• 
Thus the Bn form a monotonically decreasing and bounded sequence 
which must have a limit b. It is easy to see that b is an upper bound of 
S and that there exists no smaller upper bound. The existence of the 
greatest lower bound is proved in the same way. 
f. Denumerability of the Rational Numbers 
A surprising discovery concerning the rational numbers was made 
late in the nineteenth century and stimulated the creation by Georg 
Cantor of the Theory of Sets after 1872. Although the rational numbers 
are dense and cannot be ordered by size, they can be arranged never-
theless as an infinite sequence r1, r2, ... , r ... ... in which every rational 
number appears once. In this way the rational numbers can be 
enumerated, or counted off, as a first, second, ... , nth, . . . rational 
number, where, of course, the order of the numbers in the sequence 
does not correspond at all to their order by magnitude. This result, 
which holds just as well for the rational numpers in any interval, is 
expressed by the statement: The rational numbers are denumerable, or 
they form a denumerable set. 
To prove this result we simply give a prescription for arranging 
the positive rational numbers as a sequence. Every such number can 
be written in the form p/q, where p and q are natural numbers. For 
each positive integer k there are exactly k -
1 fractions p/q for which 
p + q = k. These are arranged in order of increasing p. Writing the 
different arrays of numbers for k = 2, 3, 4, ... successively, we obtain 
(see Fig. I.S.1) a sequence which contains all positive rational numbers. 
Omitting fractions, in which numerator and denominator have a 
common factor greater than 1, and thus represent the same rational 
number as a previous fraction, we obtain the sequence 
~ 1 
~ 1 
~ 1 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 
1, 'I, 1, 3' 1, 4' a, 2, 1, 5, 1, 6, 5, .•• 

Sec. S.2 
Theorems on Continuous Functions 99 
in which every positive rational number occurs exactly once. A 
similar sequence containing all rational numbers or all rational numbers 
in some particular interval is easily constructed. 
This result is seen in proper perspective only in the light of another 
basic fact: that the set of all real numbers is not denumerable.l This 
· . . 
· . . 
· . . 
· . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Figure 1.S.1 Denumerability of the positive rationals. 
is an indication that the set of real numbers contains "many more" 
elements than that of the rational numbers, although both sets are infi-
nite; thus denumerability is indeed a highly restrictive property of a set. 
The Theory of Sets plays an important clarifying role in mathe-
matics, although its use in unrestricted generality has led to paradoxical 
results and controversies. Such paradoxes, however, do not affect the 
substance of constructive mathematics and are absent from the theory 
of sets of real numbers. 
S.2 Theorems on Continuous Functions 
Important properties of continuous functions are established on the 
basis of the completeness property for real numbers. We recall the 
definition of continuity: the functionf(x) is continuous at the point ~ 
if for any given positive E the inequality If(x) -
f(~)1 < E holds for 
1 For proof and a brief general discussion of the basic facts of set theory see 
What is Mathematics? by Courant and Robbins, p. 81. 

100 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
all x sufficiently close to ~, or, for all x differing from ~ by less than a 
suitable quantity 15, which generally depends on the choice of E and ~. 
It is understood in this definition that only values of x and ~ for which 
f is defined are considered. 
A more concise definition of continuity in terms of convergence of 
sequences is: f(x) is continuous at the point ~ if limf(xn) = f(~) for 
,,~ro 
every sequence Xl' x2, ••• with limit ~ (where again the values Xn and ~ 
are in the domain of f). The equivalence of the two definitions was 
proved in Section 1.8, p. 82. 
We call f continuous in an interval iff is continuous at each point of 
the interval. f(x) is uniformly continuous if for given E > 0 we have 
I/(x) -
I(~)I < E whenever x and ~ are sufficiently close regardless of 
their location in the interval; thus I is uniformly continuous if the 
quantity 15 appearing in the definition of continuity can be chosen in-
dependently of~: For every E > 0 there exists a 15 = 15(E) > 0 such 
that I/(x) - Iml < E whenever Ix -
~I < 15. For practical purposes 
this means that if we subdivide the interval in which I is defined into a 
sufficiently large number of equal subintervals, then I will vary by less 
than a prescribed amount E in each subinterval: At any point, I will 
then differ by less than E from its value at any other point of the same 
subinterval. 
We now prove: Every function continuous in a closed interval [a, b] 
is uniformly continuous in that interval. 
Iffwere not uniformly continuous in [a, b], there would exist a fixed 
E > 0 and points x, ~ in [a, b] arbitrarily close to each other for which 
I/(x) -
f(~}1 ;::: E. It would then be possible for every n to choose 
points x'" ~n in [a, b] for which I/(xn} -
f(~n)1 ;::: E and IXn -
~nl < lin. 
Since the Xn form a bounded sequence of numbers we could find a 
subsequence converging to a point 'YJ of the interval (using the compact-
ness of closed intervals). The corresponding values ~n would then also 
converge to 'YJ: since f is continuous at 'YJ, we would find that 'YJ = 
limf(xn) = limfan) for n tending to infinity in the subsequence, which 
is impossible if I/(xn) -
f(~n)1 ;::: E for all n. 
The intermediate value theorem asserts: If for a function f(x) con-
tinuous in an interval a ::;; x ::;; b, y is any value betweenf(a) and feb), 
thenf(~) = y for some suitable ~ between a and b. Thus the existence 
of a solution ~ of the equation f(~) = y is certain if one exhibits two 
values a and b for which f(a) < y and feb) > y respectively. This 
immediately implies the existence of a uniquely determined inverse 
function if f is continuous and monotonic, as we have seen (p. 44). 

Sec. S.3 
Polar Coordinates 
101 
To prove the intermediate value theorem let a < b, f(a) = IX, 
feb) = {3, and IX < y < (3. Let S be the set of points x of the interval 
[a, b) for whichf(x) < y. S is bounded and has a least upper bound; 
also belonging to the closed interval [a, b). Then f(x) Z y for 
; < x :::;; b. The point; either belongs to S or is the limit of a sequence 
of points Xn of S. In the first case f(;) < y; hence ; < b, since 
feb) > y, and there are points x between; and b, arbitrarily close to ; 
for which f(x) Z y. This is impossible if f is continuous at ; and 
fm < y. In the second case, fm z y, we find from f(x n) < y and 
lim Xn = ; that f(;) :::;; y; since we saw already that fm < y is 
n--+OO 
impossible, we must havefm = y. 
A third basic property of a continuous function f(x) in a closed 
interval [a, b) is the existence of a largest value (maximum), meaning 
that there exists a point; in the interval [a, b) such thatf(x) :::;;fm for 
all x in the interval. Similarly,fwill assume its least value (minimum) 
at some point 'f) of the interval: f(x) zf('f) for all x in the interval. It 
is essential to have the interval closed: for example, the functions 
f(x) = x or f(x) = IJx are continuous, but they do not have a largest 
value in the open interval 0 < x < I; the maximum may just occur 
at one of the end points or not exist at all iff is not continuous at the 
end points. 
To prove this principle we observe that a function f continuous in 
[a, b) is necessarily bounded: that is, the valuesf(x) forming the "range" 
S off lie in some finite interval. Indeed by the uniform continuity off 
we can find a finite number of points Xl, x 2, ••• , Xn in the interval such 
thatf(x) at any x of the interval differs by less than one from one of the 
numbers f(x l ), f(x 2), ••• , f(x n ) which can all be fitted into a finite 
interval. Since then the set S of valuesf(x) is bounded, it has a least 
upper bound M. This M is the smallest number such thatf(x) :::;; M 
for all x in [a, b). Either M belongs to S or is the limit of a sequence of 
points of S. In the first case, there exists a ; in [a, b) with fm = M. 
In the second case, there exists a sequence of points Xn in [a, b) with 
limf(xn) = M; thus we can find a subsequence of the Xn which con-
n--+ 00 
verges to a point; of [a, b) and againfm = M by continuity offat ;. 
Clearly, fm is the maximum off 
S.3 Polar Coordinates 
In Chapter 1 we have represented functions geometrically by curves. 
Analytical geometry follows the reverse procedure, beginning with a 
curve and representing it by a function, for example, by a function 

102 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
expressing one of the coordinates of a point of the curve in terms of 
the other. This point of view naturally leads us to consider, in addition 
to the rectangular coordinates to which we restricted ourselves, other 
systems of coordinates possibly better suited for the representation of 
curves given geometrically. The most important example is that of 
polar coordinates r, () connected with the rectangular coordinates x, y 
of a point P by the equations 
x = r cos (), 
y = r sin (), 
r2 = x2 + y2, tan () = 'Ii , 
x 
whose geometrical interpretation is made clear in Fig. I.S.2.1 
y 
~------~----~~p 
y 
~o~--------~------~--~x 
Figure 1.8.2 Polar coordinates. 
We consider, for example, the lemniscate. This is geometrically 
defined as the locus of all points P for which the product of the distances 
'1 and'2 from the fixed points Fl and F2 with the rectangular coordinates 
x = a, y = 0 and x = -a, Y = 0 respectively, has the constant value 
a2 (cf. Fig. 1.S.3). Since 
a simple calculation gives us the equation of the lemniscate in the form 
Introducing polar coordinates, we obtain 
1 The polar coordinates are not completely determined by the point P. In addition 
to 8, any of the angles 8 ± 21T, 8 ± 41T, ••• can be considered a polar angle of P. 

Sec. S.4 
Remarks on Complex Numbers 
103 
y 
Figure 1.S.3 Lemniscate. 
dividing by r2 and using a simple trigonometrical formula this becomes 
r2 = 2a2 cos 2(J. 
Thus the equation of the lemniscate is simpler in polar coordinates 
than in rectangular. 
S.4 Remarks on Complex Numbers 
Our studies will be based chiefly on the continuum of real numbers. 
Nevertheless, with a view to discussions in Chapters 7, 8, and 9, 
we remind the reader that the problems of algebra have led to a still 
wider extension of the concept of number, the complex numbers. The 
advance from the natural numbers to the real numbers arose from the 
desire to eliminate exceptional phenomena and to make certain 
operations, such as subtraction, division, and correspondence between 
points and numbers, always possible. Similarly, we are compelled by 
the requirement that every quadratic equation and in fact every algebraic 
equation shall have a solution, to introduce the complex numbers. If, 
for example, we wish the equation 
x2+I=O 
to have roots, we are obliged to introduce new symbols i and -i as 
the roots. (As is shown in the theory of functions of a complex variable, 
this is sufficient to insure that every algebraic equation shall have a 
solution. I) 
1 An algebraic equation is of the form P(x) = 0, where P is a polynomial with 
complex coefficients. 

104 Introduction 
Ch. I 
If a and b are ordinary real numbers, the complex number c = a + ib 
denotes a pair of numbers (a, b) with which calculations are performed 
according to the following general rule: We add, multiply, and divide 
complex numbers (among which the real numbers are included as the 
special case b = 0), treating the symbol i as an undetermined quantity, 
and simplify all expressions using the equation i2 = -1 to remove all 
powers of i higher than the first, leaving only an expression of the form 
a + ib. 
We assume that the reader already has a certain degree of familiarity 
with the complex numbers. We nevertheless emphasize a particularly 
x+yi=c 
yi 
-1 
x 
-i 
-yi 
x-yi=c 
Figure 1.8.4 Geometric representation of a complex number x + yi and of its 
conjugate. 
important relationship which we shall explain in connection with the 
geometrical or trigonometrical representation of the complex numbers. 
If c = x + iy is such a number, we represent it in a rectangular co-
ordinate system by the point P with coordinates x and y. By means of 
the eql!ations x = r cos 0, y = r sin 0, we introduce the polar coordinates 
rand 0 (cf. p. 101) instead of the rectangular coordinates x and y. Then 
r = .J x2 + y2 is the distance of the point P from the origin, and 0 the 
angle between the positive x-axis and the segment OP. The complex 
number c is represented in the form 
c = r(cos 0 + i sin 0). 
The angle 0 is called the amplitude of the complex number c, the 
quantity r its absolute value or modulus, for which we also write lei. 
To the "conjugate" complex number c = x - iy there obviously 
corresponds the same absolute value, but the amplitude -0 (Fig. l.S.4). 

Sec. S.4 
Remarks on Complex Numbers lOS 
Clearly, 
If we use this trigonometrical representation, the multiplication of 
complex numbers takes a particularly simple form, for then 
c· c' = r(cos 0 + i sin 0) . r'(cos 0' + i sin 0') 
= rr'[(cos 0 cos 0' - sin 0 sin 0') + i(cos 0 sin 0' + sin 0 cos 0')]. 
If we use the addition theorems for the trigonometric functions, this 
becomes 
c . c' = rr'(cos (0 + 0') + i sin (0 + 0'». 
Figure 1.S.5 The nth roots of unity (for n = 16). 
We therefore multiply complex numbers by multiplying their absolute 
values and adding their amplitudes. The remarkable formula 
(cos 0 + i sin O)(cos 0' + i sin 0') = cos (0 + 0') + i sin (0 + 0') 
is usually called De Moivre's theorem. It leads us to the relation 
(cos 0 + i sin o)n = cos nO + i sin nO, 
which, for example, at once enables us to solve the equation xn = 1 for 
positive integers n; the roots (the so-called roots of unity) are 
27T 
0 
0 
27T 
£1 = £ = cos - + I sm -
, 
2 
47T. 
0 
47T 
£2 = £ = cos - + I sm -
, . 0 .0, 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n-l 
2(n -
1)7T + . 0 
2(n -
1)7T 
£n-l = £ 
= cos 
I sm 
, 
n 
n 
(Fig. l.S.5). 

106 Introduction 
Ch. I 
Geometrically, the points corresponding to the roots of unity form 
the vertices of a regular n-gon inscribed in the circle of radius 1 about 
the origin. 
Finally, if we imagine the expression on the left-hand side of the 
equation (cos 0 + i sin o)n = cos nO + i sin nO expanded by the bi-
nomial theorem, we need only separate real and imaginary parts in 
order to obtain expressions for cos nO and sin nO in terms of powers and 
products of powers of sin 0 and cos 0: 
cos nO = cosn 0 - G) cosn-2 0 sin2 0 
+ (:) cosn-4 0 sin' 0 + - ... , 
sin nO = G) cosn- 1 0 sin 0 - G) cosn-3 0 sin3 0 
+ G) cosn-5 0 sin5 0 + - . .. . 
PROBLEMS 
SECTION 1.1 a, page 2 
1. (a) If a is rational and if x is irrational, prove that a + x is irrational, 
and if a ~ 0, that ax is irrational. 
(b) Show that between any two rational numbers there exists at least one 
irrational number and, consequently, infinitely many. 
2. Prove that the following numbers are not rational: (a) vi (b) v;;, 
where the integer n is not a perfect square, that is, not the square of an 
integer. (c) -tY2. (d) ~n, where n is not a perfect pth power. 
*3. (a) Prove for any rational root of a polynomial with integer coefficients, 
if written in lowest terms as p/q, that the numerator p is a factor of ao and 
the denominator q is a factor of an. (This criterion permits us to obtain all 
rational real roots and hence to demonstrate the irrationality of any other 
real roots.) 
(b) Prove the irrationality of v2 + -tY2 and v3 + -tY2. 

Problems 
107 
SECTION l.lc, page 9 
1. Let [x] denote the integer part of x; that is, [x] is the integer satisfying 
x-I < [x] !5: x. 
Set Co = [x], and Cn = [lon(x -
co) -
10n- ICI -
lOn-2c2 - •.. -
lOCn-I] 
for n = 1, 2, 3, . . .. Verify that the decimal representation if x is 
x = Co + 0 . clc2ca ... 
and that this construction excludes the possibility of an infinite string of 9's. 
2. Define inequality x > y for two real numbers in terms of their decimal 
representations (see Supplement, p. 92). 
*3. Prove if p and q are integers, q > 0, that the expansion of plq as a 
decimal either terminates (all the digits following the last place are zeros) 
or is periodic; that is, from a certain point on the decimal expansion consists 
of the sequential repetition of a given string of digits. For example,! = 0.25 
is terminating, II = 0.090909 ... is periodic. The length of the repeated 
string is called the period of the decimal; for II the period is 2. In general, 
how large may the period of plq be? 
SECTION l.le, page 12 
1. Using signs of inequality alone (not using signs of absolute value) 
specify the values of x which satisfy the following relations. Discuss all cases. 
(a) Ix - al < Ix - bl. 
(b) Ix - al < x-b. 
(c) Ix2 - al < b. 
2. An interval (see definitions in text) may be defined as any connected 
part of the real continuum. A subset S of the real continuum is said to be 
connected if with every pair of points a, b in S, the set S contains the entire 
closed interval [a, b]. Aside from the open and closed intervals already 
mentioned, there are the "half-open" intervals a !5: x < b and a < x !5: b 
(sometimes denoted by [a, b) and (a, b], respectively) and the unbounded 
intervals that may be either the whole real line or a ray, that is, a "half-line" 
x !5: a, x < a, x > a, x ~ a (sometimes denoted by ( - 00, 00)] and ( - 00, a], 
(- 00, a), (a, 00), [a, 00), respectively) (see also footnote, p. 22). 
*(a) Prove that the cases of intervals specified above exhaust all possibilities 
for connected subsets of the number axis. 
(b) Determine the intervals in which the following inequalities are satisfied. 
(i) x 2 -
3x + 2 < O. 
(ii) (x - a)(x - b)(x - c) > 0, for a < b < c. 
(iii) 11 - xl - x ~ O. 
x-a 
(iv) -- ~o. 
x +a 
(v) I 
x + ~ I ~ 6. 
(vi) [x] !5: x12. See Problem 1 of this page. 
(vii) sin x ~ 1/2/2. 
(c) Prove if a !5: x !5: b, then Ixl !5: lal + Ibl. 

108 Introduction 
3. Derive the inequalities 
1 
(a) x + - ~ 2, for x > 0, 
x 
1 
(b) x + -
~ -2, for x < 0, 
x 
(c) 
+ ! I 
~ 2, for x ", O. 
x 
4. The harmonic mean ~ of two positive numbers a, b is defined by 
1 
= ~ (~ + ~). 
Ch. I 
Prove that the harmonic mean does not exceed the geometric mean; that is, 
that ~ ~ v abo When are the two means equal? 
5. Derive the following inequalities: 
(a) x2 + xy + y2 ~ 0, 
*(b) x2n + x2n-Ly + x2n-2y2 + ... + y2n ~ 0, 
*(c) x4 - 3x3 + 4x2 -
3x + 1 ~ O. 
When does equality hold? 
*6. What is the geometrical interpretation of Cauchy's inequality for 
n = 2, 3? 
7. Show that the equality sign holds in Cauchy's inequality if and only 
if the a. are proportional to the b.: that is, ca. + db. = 0 for all " where c 
and d do not depend on " and are not both zero. 
8. (a) Ix - all + Ix - a21 + Ix - aal ~ a3 - aI' for a1 < a2 < as. 
For what value of x does equality hold? 
*(b) Find the largest value of y for which for all x 
Ix - all + Ix - a21 + ... + Ix - ani ~ y, 
where a1 < a2 < ... < an. Under what conditions does equality hold? 
9. Show that the following inequalities hold for positive a, b, c. 
(a) a2 + b2 + c2 ~ ab + be + ca. 
(b) (a + b)(b + c)(c + a) ~ 8abc. 
(c) a2b2 + b2c2 + c2a2 ~ abc(a + b + c). 
10. Assume that the numbers Xl' x2, xa and aik (i, k = 1,2,3) are all 
positive, and in addition, aik ~ M and x 12 + X22 + xa2 ~ l. Prove that 
allx12 + a12x1x2 + ... + a33xa2 ~ 3M. 
*11. Prove the following inequality and give its geometrical interpretation 
for n ~ 3, 
V(a1 - b1)2 + ... + (an - bn)2 ~ v(a12 + ... + an2) + V(b12 + ... + bn2). 
12. Prove, and interpret geometrically for n ~ 3, 
v (a1 + b1 + ... + Zl)2 + . . . + (an + bn + . . . + zn)2 
~ Va12 + ... + an 2 + V b12 + . . . + bn 2 + ... + V Z-1"'"2 -+-. ·-·-+-Zn-':2. 

Problems 109 
13. Show that the geometric mean of n positive numbers is not greater 
than the arithmetic mean; that is, if ai > ° (i = 1, ... ,n), then 
1 
,,'" ala2 ... an ~ - (al + a2 + ... + an). 
n 
(Hint: Suppose al ~ a2 ~ ... ~ an' For the first step replace an by the 
geometric mean and adjust al so that the geometric mean is left unchanged.) 
SECTION 1.2d, page 31 
1. If f{x) is continuous at x = a and f{a) > 0, show that the domain of 
f contains an open interval about a where f{x) > 0. 
2. In the definition of continuity show that the centered intervals 
If{x) - f{xo) I < E 
and Ix - xol < d 
may be replaced by an arbitrary open interval containing f{xol and a suffi-
ciently small open interval containing xo. as indicated on p. 33. 
3. Let f{x) be continuous for ° 
~ x ~ 1. Suppose further that f{x) 
assumes rational values only and that f{x) = t when x = t. Prove that 
f{x) = t everywhere. 
4. (a) Let f{x) be defined for all values of x in the following manner: 
f{x) = { 0, 
1, 
x irrational 
x rational. 
Prove thatf{x) is everywhere discontinuous. 
(b) On the other hand, consider 
{o, 
g(x) = 
~. 
x irrational 
x = e. rational in lowest terms. 
q 
(The rational number p/q is said to be in lowest terms if the integers p and 
q have no common factor larger than 1, and q > 0. Thusf(l6/29) = 1/29.) 
Prove that g(x) is continuous for all irrational values and discontinuous for 
all rational values. 
*5. If f{x) satisfies the functional equation 
f{x + y) = f{x) + f{y) 
for all values of x and y, find the values of f{x) for rational values of x and 
prove if f{x) is continuous that f{x) = ex where e is a constant. 
6. (a) Iff{x) = xn, find a d which may depend on ~ such that 
If{x) - fWI < E 
whenever 
Ix -
~I < d. 
*(b) Do the same iff{x) is any polynomial 
f{x) = anxn + an_Ixn- 1 + ... + a1x + ao. 
where an "" 0. 

110 Introduction 
Ch. I 
SECTION 1.2e, page 44 
1. Prove that if f(x) is monotonic on [a, b] and satisfies the intermediate 
value property, then/(x) is continuous. Can you draw the same conclusion 
if f is not monotonic? 
2. (a) Show that xn is monotonic for x > O. As a consequence, show for 
a > 0 that xn = a has a unique positive solution -v'a. 
(b) Letf(x) be a polynomial 
Show (i) if n is odd, then f(x) has at least one real root, (ii) if an and ao have 
opposite signs, then f(x) has at least one positive root, and, in addition, if 
n is even, n ~ 0, thenf(x) has a negative root as well. 
*3. (a) Prove that there exists a line in each direction which bisects any 
given triangle, that is, divides the triangle into two parts of equal area. 
(b) For any pair of triangles prove that there exists a line which bisects 
them simultaneously. 
SECTION 1.3b, page 49 
1. (a) Prove that vx is not a rational function. (Hint: Examine the 
possibility of representing vx as a rational function for x = y2. Use the 
fact that a nonzero polynomial can have at most finitely many roots.) 
(b) Prove -v'x is not a rational function. 
SECTION 1.3c, page 49 
1. (a) Show that a straight line may intersect the graph of a polynomial 
higher than first degree in at most finitely many points. 
(b) Obtain the same result for general rational functions. 
(c) Verify that the trigonometric functions are not rational. 
SECTION 1.5, page 57 
1. Prove the following properties of the binomial coefficients. 
(a) 1 + (7) + (~) + ... + (n ~ 1) + (~) = 2n. 
(b) 1 -
(~) + (;) - (;) + ... + (_1)n (~) = O. 
(c) (~) + 2(;) + 3(;) + ... + n (~) = n(2n-l). 
(Hint: Represent 
the binomial coefficients in terms of factorials.) 
(d) 1.2(;) + 2.3(;) + ... + (n -
l)n (~) = n(n -
1)2n- 2• 
1 (n) 
1 (n) 
1 (n) 
2n+I -
1 
(e) 1 + 2 1 +"3 2 + ... + n + 1 n = n + 1 . 

Problems 111 
*(f) (~y + (~y + ... + (:Y = e:)· (Hint: Consider the coefficient 
of x" in (1 + x)2 ... ) 
*(g) 8 .. = -(~) - ~ (~) + ~ (~) - ~ (;) + ... + 2~-~~ (:) 
(Hint: Prove ~: : ~ 8 .. = 8n+l.) 
2. Prove (1 + x)" ~ 1 + nx, for x> -1. 
3. Prove by induction that 1 + 2 + ... + n = in(n + 1). 
*4. Prove by induction the following: 
_ 
4"(n!)2 
- (2n + I)!' 
1 - (n + l)q" + nq .. +l 
(a) 1 + 2q + 3q2 + ... + nq .. -l = 
. 
(1 _ q)2 
- 1 _ 
2"+1 
(b) (1 + q)(1 + q2) ... (1 + q2f1) 
-
q 
• 
1 -q 
S. Prove for all natural numbers n greater than 1 that n is either a prime 
or can be expressed as a product of primes. (Hint: Let An-I be the assertion 
for all integers k with k ~ n that k is either prime or a product of primes.) 
*6. Consider the sequence of fractions 
1 3 7 
p .. 
l' 2'5"'" q .. "'" 
where Pn+l = p .. + 2q .. and q"+1 = p .. + q ... 
(a) Prove for all n that p../q .. is in lowest terms. 
(b) Show that the absolute difference between P .. /q .. and V2 can be made 
arbitrarily small. Prove also that the error of approximation to v2 alternates 
in sign. 
7. Let a, b, a .. and b .. be integers such that 
(a + bV2)" = a .. + b .. V2, 
where a is the integer closest to b vi Prove that a .. is the integer closest to 
b .. vi 
*8. Let a .. and b .. be defined by 
and b1 = 9, 
For each value of n, determine the minimum value m such that am ~ b ... 
9. If n is a natural number, show that 
is a natural number. 
(1 + V5)" - (1 - V5)" 
2"v5 

112 Introduction 
Ch. 1 
10. Determine the maximum number of pieces into which a plane may 
be cut by n straight lines. Show that the maximum occurs when no two of 
the lines are parallel and no three meet in a common point, and determine 
the number of pieces when concurrences and parallelisms are permitted. 
11. Prove for each natural number n that there exists a natural number k 
such that 
(V2 -
l)n = vic - Vk -
1. 
12. Prove Cauchy's inequality inductively. 
SECTION 1.6, page 60 
1. Prove that lim (V-n-+----:"I--- V~)(V n + t) = t. 
n~OO 
2. Prove that lim ({I n + 1 -
{I~) = o. 
n~OO 
3. Letan = IOn/n!. (a) To what limit does an converge? (b)Isthesequence 
monotonic? (c) Is it monotonic from a certain n onward? (d) Give an 
estimate of the difference between an and the limit. (e) From what value of 
n onward is this difference less than 1/100? 
4. Prove that lim n! = O. 
n __ oo nn 
5. (a) Prove that lim (~ + ~ + ... + ~) = t. 
n~oo' n 
n 
n 
(b) Prove that}~~ (:2 + (~ 11)2 + ... + (2~)2) = O. (Hint: Compare 
the sum with its largest term.) 
(c) Prove that lim (. ~_ + v 1 
n~ooV n 
n + 1 
. 
1 
1 
] 
) 
*(d) Prove that lim (v . 
+ v 
+ . . . + V 2 
= 1. 
, 
n~oo 
n~ + 1 
n2 + 2 
n + n 
6. Prove that every perjodic decimal represents a rational number. 
(Compare Section l.lc, Problem 3.) 
100 
7. Prove that lim In01n exists and determine its value. 
n_oo 
. 
8. Prove that if a and b ::::;; a are positive, the sequence '\Y an + bn converges 
to a. Similarly, for any k fixed positive numbers ai' a2' ... , ak prove that 
vialn + a2n + ... + akn converges and find its limit. 
9. Prove that the sequence v2, vi 2 \/2, J 2vi 2 v2, ... ,converges. Find 
its limit. 
10. If )I(n} is the number of prime factors of II, prove that 
lim )I(n) = O. 
n_oo n 

Problems 113 
11. Prove that if lim an = ;, then lim an = ;, where an is the arithmetic 
n--+OO 
n_OO 
mean (al + a2 + ... + an)/n. 
12. Find 
(a) n~ (1 ~ 2 + /3 + ... + n(n ~ 1)). 
(Hint: k(k 1+ 1) = r -k ~ 1 .) 
(b) !~~ (1 . ~. 3 + 2'!' 4 + ... + n(n+ 1;(n + 2»)· 
13. If ao + al + . . . + ap = 0, prove that 
lim (ao v;; + al V n + 1 + ... + an v n + p) = O. 
n~oo 
(Hint: Take v;; out as a factor.) 
14. Prove that lim (2n+l) V (n2 + n) = 1. 
n~OO 
*15. Let an be a given sequence such that the sequence bn = pan + qan-tl, 
where Ipl < q, is convergent. Prove that an converges. If Ipl ~ q > 0, 
show that an need not converge. 
16. Prove the relation 
I. 
1 {-
1m 
k+l "" 
n ___ oo n 
i=l 
'k 
1 
1=--
k + 1 
for any nonnegative integer k. (Hint: Use induction with respect to k and 
use the relation 
n 2 [jk+1 - (i -
l)k+l] = nk+l, 
i=l 
expanding (i -
1)k+1 in powers of i.) 
SECTION 1.7, page 70 
*1. Let a1 and bi be any two positive numbers, and let a1 < bl . Let a2 
and b2 be defined by the equations 
Similarly, let 
and, in general, 
b3 = a2 + b2 
2 
' 
b - an_ 1 + bn- I 
n -
2 
Prove (a) that the sequence al• a2 • •••• converges, (b) that the sequence 
bl • b2 • •••• converges, and (c) that the two sequences have the same limit. 
(This limit is called the arithmetic-geometric mean of al and bl .) 

114 Introduction 
*2. Prove that the limit of the sequence 
v"2, J 2 + V 2, J 2 + J 2 + v"2, ... 
(a) exists and (b) it is equal to 2. 
*3. Prove that the limit of the sequence 
1 
1 
1 
a =-+--+ ... +-
11 
n 
n+l 
2n 
exists. Show that the limit is less than 1 but not less than t. 
4. Prove that the limit of the sequence 
b =_1_+ ... +~ 
n 
n+l 
2n 
exists, is equal to the limit of the previous example. 
Ch. I 
5. Obtain the following bounds for the limit L in the two previous 
examples: 37/60 < L < 57/60. 
*6. Let aI' b1 be any two positive numbers, and let a1 .,;; bl . Let 
and in general 
Prove that the sequences aI' a2, ... and b1, b2, ... converge and have the 
same limit. 
1 
1 
(_1)n 
. 
*7. Show that l/e = 1 - 1 + 2! - 3! + ... + -----nr- + .. '. (Hmt: 
Consider the product ofthe nth partial sums of the expansions for e and l/e.) 
8. (a) Without reference to the binomialtheorem show that an = (1 + l/n)n 
is monotone increasing and bn = (1 + l/n)lI+1 is monotone decreasing. 
(Hint: Consider an+1/an and bn/bn+1' Use the result of Section 1.5, Problem 
2.) 
(b) Which is the larger number (1,000,000)1.000.000 or (1,000,001)999.999? 
9. (a) From the results of Problem 8a show that 
(~r < n! < e(n + l)(~r 
(b) For n > 6 derive the sharper inequality 
n! < n(~r 
*10. If an > 0, and lim an+1 = L, then lim V" an = L. 
n- 00 an 
n--+ co 

Problems 11S 
11. Use Problem 10 to evaluate the limits of the following sequences: 
(a) \Yii, 
(b) \yn6 + n4, 
(e) n --= 
~' 
nn 
12. Use Problem lle to show 
n! = nne-flam 
where an is a number whose nth root tends to 1. (See Appendix, Chapter 7.) 
13. (a) Evaluate 
1 
1 
1 
N + 2 . 4 + ... + n(n + 2) . 
(Hint: Compare Section 1.6, Problem 12a.) 
<Xl 
1 
(b) From the result above, prove that! 2" converges. 
k=l n 
14. Let P and q be arbitrary natural numbers. Evaluate 
n 
1 
(a) k~1 (k + p)(k + P + q) • 
(b) i 
1 
k=dk + p)(k + P + q) . 
15. Evaluate 
1 
1 
1 
(a) ~ 
+ 2 . 3 . 4 + ... + n(n + l)(n + 2) . 
n 
1 
(b) k~l k(k + l)(k + 3) . 
(c) Evaluate the limit on each of the above expressions as n -+ 00. 
*(d) Let aI' a2' ..• , am be nonnegative integers with al < a2 < ... < am. 
Show how to obtain a formula for 
n 
1 
S. -
'" ~~~---,--~--,-
n -
k~1 (k + a1)(k + aJ ... (k + am> 
and how to find lim Sn. 
<Xl 
16. If ak is monotone and! ak converges, show that lim kak = O. 
k=1 
k-><Xl 
17. If akis monotone decreasing with limit 0 and bk =ak -2ak+! + ak+2 ~ 0 
<Xl 
for all k, then show! kbk = a1• 
k=1 
SECTION 1.8, page 82 
1. Prove that lim (cos 7TX)2m exists for each value of x and is equal to 1 
m-><Xl 
or 0 according to whether x is an integer or not. 
2. (a) Prove that lim [lim (cos n! 7TX)2m] exists for each value of x and 
n-+oo ffl-+OO 
is equal to 1 or 0 according to whether x is rational or irrational. 
(b) Discuss the continuity of these limit functions. 

116 Introduction 
Ch. I 
3. Let f{x) be continuous for ° 
~ x ~ 1. Suppose further that f{x) 
assumes rational values only, and that f{x) = t when x = t. Prove that 
f{x) = t everywhere. 
SECTION I.S.1, page 89 
1. Let r = plq, s = mIn be arbitrary rational numbers where p, q, m, n 
are integers and q, n are positive. In terms of the integers p, q, m, n, define 
(a) r + s, 
(b) r - s, 
(c) rs, 
(d) :, 
(e) r < s. 
s 
2. Prove for nested sequences of rational numbers [am bn1 and [an', bn'1 
that each of the following conditions is necessary and sufficient for equiv-
alence: 
(a) an' - an is a null sequence, 
(b) an ~ bn' and an' ~ bn. 
3. Given x ~ {[an, bnJ}, y ~ {[Otm .an]}, (a) verify that the definitions of 
addition and subtraction, 
are meaningful. Specifically, verify that 
(i) the given representations are, in fact, nested sets for x + y and x -
y 
when x and yare rational; 
(ii) if x < y, then x + z < y + z, where z is an arbitrary real number. 
(b) Define the product xy and verify specifically that your definition of 
product is meaningful. 
(i) that the given nested set is, in fact, a nested set for xy when x and y 
are rational. 
(ii) that if x < y and z > 0, then xz < yz. 
4. Prove that the following principles are equivalent in the sense that any 
one can be derived as a consequence of any other. 
(a) Every nested sequence of intervals with real end points contains a 
real number. 
(b) Every bounded monotone sequence converges. 
(c) Every bounded infinite sequence has at least one accumulation or 
limit point. 
(d) Every Cauchy sequence converges. 
(e) Every bounded set of real numbers has an infimum and a supremum. 
Miscellaneous Problems 
1. If WI' W 2, ••• , Wn > 0, prove that the weighted average 
WIXI + W2X 2 + ... + WnXn 
WI + W2 + ... W2 
lies between the greatest and the least of the x's. 
2. Prove --
1 
1 
1-
2( V n + 1 -
1) < 1 + v2 + v3 + . . . + v;; < 2 V n • 

3. Prove for x, Y > 0 
x"+y" 
(X+Y)" 
2 
~ 
2 
. 
Interpret this result geometrically in terms of the graph of x". 
4. If 01 ~ 02 ~ ••• ~ a" and b1 ~ bi ~ ... ~ b", prove 
Problems 117 
5. (a) Show that the sequence aI' O2, aa, ... can be written as the sequence 
of partial sums of the series Ul' U2' Ua, ••• where u" = a" - an-I for n ~ 1 
and Ul = 01' 
(b) Write the sequence an = n3 as the sequence of partial sums of a series. 
(c) From the result obtain a formula for the nth partial sum of the series 
1 +4+9+ .. ·+n2 + .... 
(d) From the formula for 12 + 22 + ... + n2, find a formula for 
12 + 32 + 52 + ... + (2n + 1)2. 
6. A sequence is called an arithmetic' progression of the first order if the 
differences of successive terms are constant. It is called an arithmetic 
progression of the second order if the differences of successive terms form 
an arithmetic progression of the first order; and, in general, it is called an 
arithmetic progression of order k if the differences of successive terms form 
an arithmetic progression of order (k - 1). 
The numbers 4, 6, 13, 27, 50, 84 are the first six terms of an arithmetic 
progression. What is its least possible order? What is the eighth term of 
the progression of smallest order with these initial terms? 
7. Prove that the nth term of an arithmetic progression of the second 
order can be written in the form an'/, + bn + c, where a, b, c are independent 
ofn. 
*8. Prove that the nth term of an arithmetic progression of order k can 
be written in the form ank + bnk - 1 + ... + pn + q, where a, b, ... , p, q 
are independent of n. 
Find the nth term of the progression of smallest order in Problem 6. 
9. Find a formula for the nth term of the arithmetic progressions of 
smallest order for which the following are the initial terms: 
(a) 1,2,4, 7, 11, 16, .... 
(b) -7, -10, -9, 1,25,68, .... 
*10. Show that the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic progression 
of order k is 
akSk + ak-ISk-l + ... + al SI + arl', 
where S. represents the sum of the first nvth powers and the ai are independent 
of n. Use this result to evaluate the sums for the arithmetic progressions of 
Problem 9. 
11. By summing 
v(v + 1)(v + 2) ... (v + k + 1) -
(v -
l)v(v + 1) ... (v + k) 

118 Introduction 
from 11 = 1 to 11 = n, show that 
i 11(11 + 1)(11 + 2) ... (11 + k) = n(n + 1) ... (n + k + 1) . 
y=1 
k + 2 
12. Evaluate 13 + 23 + . . . + n3 by using the relation 
113 = 11(11 + 1)(11 + 2) -
311(11 + 1) + 11. 
13. Show that the function 
f(X) = {10~ lxi' 
0, 
x =0 
Ch. 1 
is continuous but not HOlder-continuous. (Hint: Show HOlder continuity 
with exponent IX fails at the origin by considering the values x = 1/2n1a..) 
14. Let an be a monotone decreasing sequence of nonnegative numbers. 
co 
co 
Show that ~ an converges if and only if ~ 2Yaay does. 
n=1 
y=o 
15. Investigate for convergence and determine the limit when possible, 
(a) n! e -
[n! e] 
(b) an/an+!, where a1 = 0, aa = 1, and akra = ak+! + ak' 

2 
The Fundamental Ideas of the 
Integral and Differential Calculus 
The fundamental limiting processes of calculus are integration and 
differentiation. Isolated instances of these processes of calculus were 
considered even in antiquity (culminating in the work of Archimedes), 
and with increasing frequency in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 
However, the systematic development of calculus, started only in the 
seventeenth century, is usually credited to the two great pioneers of 
science, Newton and Leibnitz. The key to this systematic development 
is the insight that the two processes of differentiation and integration, 
which had been treated separately, are intimately related by being 
reciprocal to each other. 1 
A fair historical assessment of the merits cannot attribute the 
invention of calculus to sudden unexplainable flashes of genius on the 
part of one or two individuals. Many people, such as Fermat, Galileo, 
and Kepler, stimulated by the revolutionary new ideas in science, 
contributed to the foundations of calculus. In fact, Newton's teacher, 
Barrow, was almost in full possession of the basic insight into the 
reciprocity between differentiation and integration, the cornerstone of 
the systematic calculus of Newton and Leibnitz. Newton has stated 
the concepts somewhat more clearly; on the other hand, Leibnitz's 
ingenious notation and methods of calculation are highly suggestive 
and remain indispensable. The work of these two men immediately 
stimulated the higher branches of analysis including the calculus of 
variations and the theory of differential equations, and led to innumer~ 
able applications in science. Curiously enough, although Newton, 
1 This fact constitutes the "fundamental theorem of calculus." 
119 

120 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
Leibnitz, and their immediate successors made such varied uses of the 
powerful tool put into their hands, none succeeded in completely 
clarifying the basic concepts involved in their work. Their arguments 
employed "infinitely small quantities" in ways which are logically 
indefensible and unconvincing. Clarification came at last in the nine-
teenth century with the careful formulation of the concept of limit and 
with the analysis of the number continuum as explained in Chapter 1.1 
We begin with a discussion of the fundamental concepts. They can 
be fully appreciated only through concrete illustrations and examples; 
it is therefore recommended here, as at many places in this book, that 
theoretical and general sections be carefully studied again after the 
reader has absorbed more specific and concrete material in subsequent 
sections. 
2.1 The Integral 
a. Introduction 
Only after a lengthly development the systematic procedures of 
integration and differentiation met the need for precise mathematical 
descriptions of intuitive notions arising in geometry and natural 
science. Differentiation is the concept needed for describing the notions 
of tangents to curves and of velocity of moving particles, or more 
generally, the concept of rate of change. The intuitive concept of area 
of a region with curved boundaries, finds its precise mathematical 
formulation in the process of integration. Many other related concepts 
in geometry and physics also require integration, as we shall see later. 
In this section we introduce the concept of integral, in connection with 
the problem of measuring the area of a plane region bounded by curves. 
Areas. We have an intuitive feeling that a region contained in a 
closed curve has an "area" which measures the number of square 
units inside the curve. Yet, the question, of how this measure for the 
area can be described in precise terms, necessitates a chain of mathe-
matical steps. The basic properties of area which intuition suggests 
are: area is a (positive) number (depending on the choice of the unit 
of length); this number is the same for congruent figures; for all 
1 The emergence of calculus extending over more than 2000 years represents one of 
the most fascinating chapters in the history of scientific discovery. Interested 
readers are referred to Carl B. Boyer, Concept of the Calculus, Hafner Publishing 
Company, 1949. See also O. Toeplitz, Calculus, A Genetic Approach, University of 
Chicago, 1963. 

Sec. 2.1 
The Integral 
121 
rectangles it is the product of the lengths of two adjacent sides; and 
finally, for a region decomposed into parts, the area of the whole is 
equal to the sum of the areas of the parts. 
An immediate consequence is the fact: for a region A which is part 
of a region B, the area of A cannot exceed the area of B. 
These properties permit the direct computation of the area of any 
figure that can be decomposed into a finite number of rectangles. 
More generally, to assign a value Fto the area of a region R we consider 
two other regions R' (inscribed) and R" (circumscribed) decomposable 
V 
R 
""'" 
RH 
/ 
R' 
\ 
J 
~ 
V 
\ 
/ 
'\~ 
V 
Figure 2.1 Approximation of an area. 
into rectangles, where R" contains Rand R' is contained in R (cf. 
Fig. 2.1). We know then at least that F has to lie between the areas of 
R' and R". The value of F is completely determined if we find sequences 
of circumscribed regions Rn" and inscribed regions Rn' which are both 
decomposable into rectangles and such that the areas of Rn" and 
Rn' have the same limit as n tends to infinity. This is the method of 
"exhaustion", going back to antiquity which is used in elementary 
geometry to describe the area of a circle.1 The precise formulation of 
this intuitive idea now leads to the notion of integration. 
h. The Integral as an Area 
Area under a Curve 
The analytic notion of integral arises when we associate areas with 
functions: We consider the area of a region bounded on the left and 
1 Of course, we may use any kind of inscribed and circumscribed polygon, since a 
polygon can be decomposed into right triangles and the area of a right triangle 
clearly is half that of a rectangle with the same sides. 

122 
The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Dilferential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
right by vertical lines x = a and x = b, below by the x-axis and above 
by the graph of a positive continuous functionf(x) (Fig. 2.2). This is 
referred to in brief as the area "under the curve." For the moment we 
accept as intuitive the idea th~t the area of such a region is a definite 
number. We call this area Fab the integral of the function fbetween the 
Figure 2.2 
limitsl a and b. In seeking the numerical value of Fab we make use of 
approximations by sums of areas of rectangles. For that purpose we 
divide the interval (a, b) of the x-axis into n (small) parts, not necessarily 
of the same size, which we shall call cells. At each point of division we 
draw the line perpendicular to the x-axis up to the curve. The region 
with area Fab is thus divided into n strips, each bounded by a portion of 
y 
Figure 2.3 
the graph of the function f(x) and by three straight line segments 
(Fig. 2.3). 
Area or Integral as Limit of a Sum. Calculating the area of such 
strips precisely is not easier than calculating that of the original region. 
it is a step forward, however, to approximate the area of each strip 
from above and from below by the areas of the circumscribed and 
1 No confusion should arise from the use of the word "limit" for boundary points of 
the interval of in.egration. 

Sec. 2.1 
The Integral 123 
inscribed rectangles with the same base, where the curved boundary of 
the strip is replaced by a horizontal line at a distance from the x-axis 
which is either the greatest or the smallest value of f(x) in the cell 
(Fig. 2.4). More generally, we obtain an intermediate approximation 
if we replace the strip by a rectangle of the same base and bounded on 
y 
Figure 2.4 
top by any horizontal line which intersects the curved boundary of the 
strip (see Fig. 2.5). Analytically, this amounts to replacing the function 
f(x) in each of the cells by some intermediate constant value. We 
denote by Fn the sum of the n rectangular areas. Intuition tells us that 
the values Fn tend to Fab if we make the subdivision finer and finer, that 
is, if we let n increase without limit while the largest length of the 
y 
a 
Figure 2.5 
individual cells tends to zero. In this way Fab is represented as a limit of 
areas consisting of rectangles. 
c. AlUllytic Definition of the Integral. Notations 
Definition and Existence of Integrals 
In the last paragraph we accepted the area under a curve as a quantity 
given intuitively and subsequently we represented it as a limiting 
value. Now we shall reverse the procedure. We no longer invoke 

124 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
intuition to assign an area to the region under a continuous curve; 
on the contrary, we shall begin in a purely analytic way with the sums 
Fn defined previously, and we shall prove that these sums tend to a 
definite limit. This limit is then the precise definition of the integral 
and of the area. 
Let the function f(x) be continuous (but not necessarily positive) in 
the closed interval a :::;; x :::;; b. We divide the interval by (n -
1) 
y 
f(~ i ) - --------
~F'" 
I 
! 
~~f(%) 
V"! 
I 
I 
W I 
I 
I 
IT I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
I 
I 
, 
1 
I 
I 
1 
I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
I 
1 
1 
, 
I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
1 
, 
I 
1 
1 
, 
1 
I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
: 1 
I 
, 
1 
1 I 
I 1 
i 
I 
1 
1 
0 
a = %0 El Xl 
%i- l 
Ei 
Xi 
X,.-1 E,. b =%,. 
% 
Figure 2.6 To illustrate the analytical definition of integral. 
points Xl' X 2, ••• , X n- l into n equal or unequal cells with the lengths 
(i = I, 2, ... , n)1, 
where in addition we put Xo = a, Xn = b (cf. Fig. 2.6). In each closed 
subinterval [Xi-l' Xi] or cell we choose any point ~ i whatever. We 
form the sum 
Fn = f(~l)(XI -
xo) + f(~2)(X2 -
Xl) + ... + f(~n)(xn -
xn- l) 
= f(~l) ~xl + f(~2) ~X2 + ... + f(~n) ~xn· 
1 The symbol ,l must not be interpreted as a factor but only as indicating a difference 
in values of the variable which follows. Thus the symbol ,lXi means the difference 
Xi -
X i_l of consecutive values of x. 

Sec. 2.1 
The Integral 125 
Using the summation symbol we write more concisely 
n 
Fn = ! f(~i)(Xi -
Xi_I) 
i=l 
or 
n 
F n = ! f(~i) ~Xi· 
i=l 
If f(x) is positive, the value Fn represents the area under the curve 
obtained by replacing f in each subinterval by the constant value 
f(~i). Of course, the sums Fn can be formed without assumingf to be 
positive. It appears intuitively plausible that the sums Fn must tend to 
a limit Fab as the number n of intervals increases indefinitely and at the 
same time the length of the largest subinterval tends to zero. This 
would imply that the value of the limit Fab is independent of the 
particular manner in which the points of division Xl' X 2, ••• , Xn- l and 
the intermediate points ~l' ~2' ••• , ~n are chosen. We call Fab the 
integral of f(x) between the limits a and b. 
Geometric intuition, no matter how convincing, can only serve as a 
guide to our analytical limiting process; 
therefore an analytic 
justification is needed, and we must furnish a proof for the existence 
of the integral as the limit described above. Furthermore, as already 
said, we need not at all insist on the assumption that the function f is 
positive in the interval. 
Thus we assert 
THEOREM OF EXISTENCE. For any continuousfunctionf(x) in a closed 
interval [a, b] the integral over this interval exists as the limit of the 
sums Fn described above (independently of the choice of the points of 
subdivision Xl, ••• ,Xn- l and of the intermediate points ~l'· •• , ~n as 
long as the largest of the lengths ~Xi tends to zero). 
We shall first gain some experience and insight before considering 
the existence proof for the integral in the Supplement (p. 192). 
Leibnitz's Notation for the Integral 
The definition of the integral as the limit of a sum led Leibnitz to 
express the integral by the following symbol: 
ff(X) dx. 
The integral sign is a modification of the summation sign in the shape 
of a long S used at Leibnitz's time. The passage to the limit from a 
finite subdivision into portions ~Xi is indicated by the use of the letter 
d in place of~. In using this notation, however, we must not tolerate 

126 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
the eighteenth century mysticism of considering dx as an "infinitely 
small" or "infinitesimal quantity," or considering the integral as a "sum 
of an infinite number of infinitely small quantities." Such a conception 
is devoid of clear meaning and obscures what we have previously formu-
lated with precision. From our present viewpoint the individual symbol 
dx has not been defined at all. The suggestive combination of symbols 
1/(X) dx is defined for a functionf(x) in the interval [a, b] by forming 
the ordinary sums Fn and passing to the limit as n -+ 00. 
The particular symbol we use for the variable of integration is a 
matter of complete indifference (just as in the notation for sums it 
y 
x 
Figure 2.7 
did not matter what we called the index of summation); instead of 
1/(X) dx we can equally well write LI(t) dt or I/(U) duo The 
integrand denoted by fis a function of an independent variable over the 
interval [a, b] and the name of the variable is irrelevant. Only the end 
points of the interval of integration a and b affect the value of the 
integral for givenf. Expressions like f'f(X) dx or Lbf(a) da in which 
the same letter is used for the variable of integration and an end"point 
of the interval are misleading under our definition and should, at first, 
be avoided. 
If the 
integrand f(x) is positive in the interval [a, b], we can 
immediately identify 1/(X) dx with the area bounded by the graph off 
and the lines x = a, x = b, and y = O. The integral of J, however,.is 
defined analytically as the limit of sums Fn independent of any assump-
tion on the sign off Iff(x) is negative in all or part of our interval, the 
only effect is to make the corresponding factors f(~i) in our sum 

Sec. 2.1 
The Integral 127 
Figure 1.8 
negative instead of positive. To the region bounded by the part of the 
curve below the x-axis we shall then naturally assign a negative area. 
The integral will thus be the sum of positive and negative terms, 
corresponding respectively to portions of the curve above and below the 
x-axis1 (see Fig. 2.7). 
It is intuitively convincing that our limit process converges even if 
the function f(x) is not everywhere continuous, but has jump discon-
tinuities at one or several points like the function indicated by the curve 
in Fig. 2.8, where clearly an area under the curve exists.s 
y 
+ 
______ -~l--~O~--~--------~X 
1 
1 
Figure 2.9 (1 sgn x dx = O. 
1-1 
1 Areas of regions bounded by arbitrary closed curves will be considered in Chapter4. 
2 As another example consider f(x) = sgn x on [-1, 1]. We have f(x) = -1 for 
1
+1 
x < 0 and f(x) = + 1 for x > 0 (see Fig. 2.9). Then 
f(x) dx = O. 
-1 

128 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
Thus the preceding limit process may well result in a definite limit 
of the sum Fn for functions having some discontinuities; we indicate this 
possibility by calling such functions integrable. In the middle of the 
nineteenth century, the great Bernhard Riemann first analyzed the 
applicability of the process of integration to general functions. More 
recently, various extensions of the concept of integration itself have 
been introduced. Yet such refinements have less immediate importance 
for the calculus aimed at intuitively accessible phenomena, and it 
will not be necessary for us always to emphasize the integrability of 
our functions as a reminder that nonintegrable functions can be 
defined. 
In advanced courses the integral we have defined here is called the 
Riemann integral to distinguish it from various generalized concepts 
of integral; the approximating sums Fn are called Riemann sums. 
2.2 Elementary Examples of Integration 
In a number of significant cases we are now able to calculate the 
integral of a function by carrying out the prescribed limiting process. 
This we shall do by an explicit evaluation of the sums Fn for a suitable 
choice of intermediate points ~i (usually the left or right end point of 
the cells). The theorem on the existence of the integral of a continuous 
function assures that the limit of the Fn is the same for any other 
choice of the intermediate points ~i and for any method of subdivision. 
a. Integration of a Linear Function 
First we verify that the integral indeed gives the correct value of the 
area for some simple figures we know from geometry. 
Letf(x) = constant = 'Y. To calculate the integral ofJ(x) between 
the limits of a and b we form the sums Fn (see Fig. 2.10). Since here 
J(~i) = 'Y, we find 
n 
n 
Fn = I'Y~Xi = 'YI~Xi = r(b -
a). 
i=1 
1=1 
Hence, likewise 
lim Fn =J.br dx = r(b -
a). 
"-+00 
a 
This is just the formula for the area of a rectangle of height 'Y and base 
b - a. 

Sec. 2.2 
Elementary Examples of Integration 
129 
f(x) 
f(x) = 'Y 
~O+---~a~--~~-----Ob--~x 
Figure 2.10 Integral of a constant. 
The integral of the function/(x) = x, 
ibX dx, 
(Fig. 2.11), as we know from elementary geometry, has the value 
t(b -
a)(b + a) = tcb2 -
a2). 
To confirm that our limiting process leads analytically to the same 
result, we subdivide the interval from a to b into n equal parts by means 
of the points of division 
a + h, a + 2h, ... , a + (n -
l)h, 
Figure 2.11 

130 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
where h = (b - a)/n. Taking for ~i the right-hand end point of each 
interval we find the integral as the limit as n __ 00 of the sum 
Fn = (a + h)h + (a + 2h)h + ... + (a + nh)h 
= nah + (1 + 2 + 3 + ... + n)h2 = nah + In(n + 1)h2, 
where we have used the well-known formula for the sum of an arith-
metic progression (see p. 111, Problem 3). Substituting h = (b - a)/n, 
we see that 
F n = a(b - a) + HI + ~)(b -
a)2, 
from which it follows immediately that 
limFn = a(b -
a) + l(b -
a)2 = t(b2 - a2). 
n-+oo 
b. Integration of x2 
Elementary geometry does not so easily lead to the integration of the 
function I(x) = X2, that is, to the determination of the area of the 
region! bounded by a segment of a parabola, a segment of the x-axis, 
and two coordinates. A gelluine limit process is needed. Assuming 
a < b we choose the same points of division and the same intermediate 
points as in the previous example (see Fig. 2.12). It follows then that 
the integral of x 2 between the limits a and b is the limit of the sums 
Fn = (a + h)2h + (a + 2h)2h + ... + (a + nh)2h 
= na2h + 2ah2(1 + 2 + 3 + ... + n) 
+ h3(12 + 22 + 32 + ... + n2); 
by using the known values of the sums enclosed in parentheses we 
find (see p. 58) 
F n = na 2h + n(n + l)ah2 + ! [n(n + 1)(2n + 1)]h3 
6 
= a2(b - a) + (1 + ~)a(b -
a)2 + HI + ~)(2 + ~)(b -
a)3. 
Since lim ~ = 0, we have 
n_C() n 
1 Sometimes referred to as "squaring" the region. 

Sec. 2.2 
y 
Elementary Examples of Integration 131 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Figure 2.12 Area under a parabolic arc by arithmetic subdivision. 
Thus, for a < b, 
*c. Integration of xa. for Integers at :F -I 
The next examples of this section are instructive illustrations showing 
that in some cases the integration can be carried out by special ele-
mentary devices. Later in Section 2.9d (p. 191) we shall achieve the 
same results more simply by using general methods. 
The same kind of argument as used for x and X2, applied to the 
functions x3, X4, ••• , results in the relation 
(1) 
f.
b x'" dx = _1_ (b,,+1 _ a,,+1), 
a 
at + 1 
where at is any positive integer; this can be proved by finding appro-
priate formulas for the sums I a. + 2a. + ... + na., such as the relation 
lim [(1a. + 2a. + ... + na.)_I_] = _I_ 
n ..... 00 
na.+1 
at + 1 
which can be proved by induction over at (see Problem 16, p. 113). 
In the following section, formula (1) will be proved in a different way, 

132 
The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
with greater generality and simplicity, indicating the power of the 
methods that we will develop. Its validity will be extended to all real 
values of ct except IX = -1. 
Fortunately, the definition of the integral leaves us a great deal of 
latitude in the choice of subdivisions and furnishes a much simpler way 
to evaluate the integral. We do not have to use sums based on equi-
distant points of division. Instead, with the "quotient" ~ 
= q we 
y 
I 
I 
I 
I 
--~O+-~a~~~-L--~----~b~----~X 
Figure 2.13 Area under a parabolic arc by geometric subdivision. 
subdivide the interval [a, b] by the points of a geometric progression 
(Fig. 2.13), 
a, aq, aq2, ... , aqn-l, aqn = b; 
we then need only to evaluate the sum of a geometric series. Given the 
points of division Xi = at the length of the ith cell is given by 
. 
. 1 
aqi(q -
1) 
aXi = aq' - aq'- = 
, 
. 
The largest ax. is the last: 
aXn = b(q -
1). 
q 
q 
For n -
00 the number q tends toward the value one (see Example d, 
p. 64), and hence the length aXn of the largest cell, and then also the 

Sec. 2.2 
Elementary Examples of Integration 
133 
lengths of all cells tend to zero. For the intermediate points ~i we choose 
again the right-hand end points Xi of each cell. The sum 
n 
n 
_ 1 
(2) 
Fn = 1(~iYAxi = 1 (aqi)"aqiq-_ 
i=1 
i=1 
q 
= aa+1 q -
1 i (q1+a)i 
q 
i=1 
is known explicitly from the sum of the geometric progression with 
ratio q1+a. Applying the well-known formula (p. 67), we find 
q 
1 
qn(a+1) 
1 
F n = aa+l -=-- qa+l 
-
q 
qa+l _ 1 
(b/a)a+1 
1 
q 
1 
= aaH(q _ l)qa 
-
= (baH _ aaH)qa 
-
. 
qaH _ 1 
qaH -
1 
Since q -:;6 1, we can use once more the formula for the sum of a geo-
metric progression and write 
q -
1 
1 
q1+a _ 1 
qa + qa-l + ... + 1 . 
For n -- 00 all powers of q tend to one and it follows that 
limFn = _1_ (b1+a _ a1+a). 
n-+oo 
1 + IX 
In this way we have verified the formula (1) for the integral of X(1. for 
o < a < b and any positive integer IX. 
The same method applies also for negative integers IX, provided that 
IX :F -1. For the sum Fn we obtain as before 
F = (baH _ aa+1)qa q -
1 
n 
qaH _ 1 
= (baH _ aaH) 
q -
1 
, 
q(1 _ q-a-1) 
where we recall that -IX is positive and greater than one. Applying the 
formula for a geometric progression, we obtain 
1( q - 1 ) 
1 
~ q-a-l _ 1 = q-a-l + q-a-2 + ... + q 
which tends to l/( -IX -
1) as n -- 00. Consequently, as before, 
lim F n = _1_ (baH -
aaH), 
n-+oo 
IX + 1 

134 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and DiJlerential Calculus 
Ch.2 
The integral formula is meaningless for ct = -I, since both numer-
ator and denominator on the right-hand side would then be zero. 
We find instead from our original expression (2) for Fn for the case 
ct = -I that Fn = n(q -
I)/q. Consequently, observing that q = 
~b/a tends to one as n -
00, we find 
(3) 
fb !. dx = lim n(V'b/ti -
1). 
Ja x 
11.-+00 
Here the limit on the right-hand side cannot be expressed in terms of 
powers of a and b but can be expressed in terms of logarithms of those 
quantities as we shall see later (p. 145). 
*d. Integration of x« for Rational ct Other Than -I 
The result obtained previously may be generalized considerably 
without essentially complicating the proof. Let ct = r/s be a positive 
rational number, rand s being positive integers: then in the evaluation 
of the integral given above nothing is changed except the evaluation of 
the limit (q -
1)/(tf+1 -
I) as q approaches one. This expression is 
now simply (q -
I)/(q(r+.)/. -
I). Let us put ql/' = 'dT ¢ I): Then 
as q tends to one, T also tends to one. We have therefore to find the 
limiting value of (7' -
I)/(Tr+' -
I) as T approaches one. If we 
divide both numerator and denominator by T -
1 and transform them 
as before by the formula for geometric progressions, the limit simply 
becomes 
. 
Ts-1 + T·-2 + ... + 1 
hm ----'----'------'--
,-+1 Tr+s-1 + r+s-2 + ... + 1 
Since both numerator and denominator are continuous in T, this limit 
is at once obtained by substituting T = I, and thus equals s/(r + s) = 
1/(ct + 1); hence for every positive rational value of ct we obtain the 
integral formula 
fb x" dx = _1_ (b"+1 _ a,,+1), 
Ja 
ct + 1 
just as with positive integers. 
This formula remains valid for negative rational values of ct = 
-r/s as well, provided we exclude the value ct = -I (for which the 
formula used above for the sum of the geometric progression loses its 
meaning). 
For negative ct we again evaluate the limit of (q -
1)/(q"'+1 -
1) by 
putting '11/' = T for ct = - r/s; this is left as an exercise for the reader. 

Sec. 2.2 
Elementary Examples of Integration 
135 
It is natural to guess that the range of validity of our last formula extends 
also to irrational values of 0(. We shall actually establish our integral formula 
for all real values of 0( (except 0( = -1) in Section 2.7 (p. 154) in a quite 
simple way as a consequence of the general theory. 
*e. Integration of sin x and cos x 
The last elementary example to be treated here by means of a special device 
is the integral of f(x) = sin x. The integral 
ibsinxdx 
clearly is the limit of the sum 
Sh = h[sin (a + h) + sin (a + 2h) + ... + sin (a + nh)], 
arising from division of the interval of integration into cells of size h = 
(b - a)/n. We multiply the right-hand expression by 2 sin h/2 and recall the 
well-known trigonometrical formula 
2 sin u sin v = cos (u -
v) - cos (u + v). 
Provided h is not a multiple of 27T, we obtain the formula 
Sh = ~ 
[cos (a + ~) - cos ( a + ~ h) + cos (a + ~ h) 
2sm 2 
( 5) 
(2n - 1 ) 
(2n + 1 )] 
- cos a + 2 h + ... + cos a + -2- h 
- cos a + -2- h 
= ~ 
[cos (a +~) - cos (a + 2n 2+ 1 h) 1 
2sm 2 
Since a + nh = b, the integral becomes the limit of 
~[cos(a+~) -COS(b+~)J ash-+O. 
2sm 2 
Now we know from Chapter 1 (p. 84) that for h -+ 0, the expression 
(h/2)/(sin h/2) approaches the limit one. The desired limit is then simply 
cos a - cos b, and we arrive at the integral 
ibsin x dx = -(cos b - cos a). 
Similarly, i
b cos x dx = sin b -
sin a 
(see Problem 3, p. 196). 

136 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
Each of the preceding examples was treated with a special device. 
Yet the essential point of the systematic integral and differential 
calculus is the very fact that, instead of such special devices, we use 
general considerations which lead directly to the result. We shall 
arrive at these methods by first discussing some general rules concerning 
integrals and then introducing the concept of the derivative, and finally 
establishing the connection between integral and derivative. 
2.3 Fundamental Rules of Integration 
The basic properties of the integral follow directly from its definition 
as the limit of a sum: 
ffex) dx = !~~ i~1 fe~i) ~Xi' 
where the interval [a, b] is broken up into subintervals or cells of 
length ~Xi' the number ~, stands for any value in the ith subinterval, 
and the largest ~Xi is required to tend to zero for n -
00. 
a. Additivity 
Let c be any value between a and b. If we interpret integrals as areas 
and remember that the area of a region consisting of several parts is 
the sum of the areas of the parts (Fig. 2.14), we are led to the rule 
(4) 
ff(X) dx = ffex) dx + ffex) dx. 
For an analytical proof we choose our subdivisions in such a manner 
that the point c appears as a point of division, say c = Xm ewhere m 
varies with n). Then 
n 
m 
n 
I fe~i) ~Xi = I fe~i) ~Xi + I 
fe~i) ~Xi' 
i=1 
i=1 
i=m+l 
where the first sum on the right-hand side corresponds to a subdivision 
of the interval [a, c] in m cells and the second sum to a subdivision of the 
interval [c, b]. Now for n _ 
00 we obtain our rule for integrals. 
So far we have only defined f:fex) fix when a < b. For a = b or 
a> b we define the integral in such a way that the rule of additivity is 
preserved. Therefore for c = a we must define 
(5) 

Sec. 2.3 
Fundamental Rules of Integration 137 
and then for b = a it follows that 
ff(X) dx + iaf(X) dx = ff(X) dx = O. 
This leads us to define iCf(X) dx for c < a by the formula 
(6) 
ff(X) dx = - iaf(X) dx, 
where the right side has the meaning originally established. Its geo-
metric meaning is that the area under the curve y = f(x) is to be counted 
y 
/ 
I 
--~O~---&a-----------&c----~br-----~x 
Figure 2.14 
as negative if the direction of moving from the lower limit of integration 
to the upper limit is that of decreasing x. A glance at the previous exam-
ples of integrals confirms that indeed an interchange in the limits of inte-
gration a and b results in changing the sign in the value of the integral. 
h. Integral of a Sum and of a Product with a Constant 
If f(x) and g(x) are any two (integrable) functions, the b~sic laws of 
operating with limits imply 
ff(X) dx + fg(X) dx = !~~L~/(~i)~XiJ + !~~[tg(~i)~XiJ 
= !~~ [~l f(~i) ~Xi + i~ gai) ~XiJ 
= !~~ t~ [j(~i) + g(~i)] ~Xi} j 

138 
The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
and hence the important rule for the sum of two functions 
(7) 
f/(X) dx + fg(X) dx = f[f(X) + g(x)] dx; 
similarly for the difference 
f/(X) dx - fg(X) dx = f[J(X) -
g(x)] dx. 
Furthermore, with any constant IX 
fIX/(X) dx = l~~ i~IX/(~i) ~Xi 
n 
= IX lim ! I(~i) ~Xi' 
n--' 00 i=l 
and so 
(8) 
fIX/(X) dx = IX f/(X) dx. 
The last two rules enable us to integrate "linear combinations" of 
two or more functions that can be integrated individually. Thus for 
any quadratic function y = AX2 + Bx + C with any constants A, B, C, 
we have 
i b(AX2 + Bx + C) dx =fAX2 dx + ibBX dx + fc dx 
= A Ib X2 dx + B f x dx + C f 1 dx 
= ~(b3 -
a3) + !!.(b2 -
a2) + C(b -
a). 
3 
2 
In the same way we integrate the general polynomial 
y = Aoxn + A1x n- 1 + ... + An_Ix + An: 
(by dx = _1_ Ao(bn+! _ an+!) + ! A1(bn _ an) + ... 
Ja 
n + 1 
n 
+ !An_l (b2 -
a2) + An(b -
a). 
c. Estimating Integrals 
Another obvious observation concerning integrals is basic. Consider 
for a < b a function/(x) which is positive or zero at each point of the 
interval [a. b]. Then 
(9) 
f/(X) dx ~ O. 

Sec. 2.3 
Fundamental Rules of Integration 139 
This follows immediately if we write the integral as limit of a sum and 
notice that the sums contain only nonnegative terms. 
More generally, if we have two functions f and g with the property 
thatf(x) ~ g(x) for all x in the interval [a, b], then 
(10) 
ff(X) dx ~ fg(X) dx. 
For we have 
ff(X)dX -fg(X)dX = f[J(X) - g(x)]dx ~ 0, 
since f(x) -
g(x) is never negative. 
We apply this result to a function f(x) which is continuous in the 
interval [a, b). Let M be the greatest value and m the least value off 
in that interval. Since 
m ~f(x) ~ M 
for all x in [a, b], we have 
fm dx ~fl(X)dX ~ fM dx. 
Recalling that for any constant C 
f C dx = C i\ dx = C(b -
a), 
we obtain the inequality 
(11) 
m(b -
a) ~ fl(X) dx ~ M(b -
a), 
which gives simple upper and lower bounds for the definite integral of 
any continuous function. 
Again this estimate is intuitively obvious. If we think of the integral 
interpreted as an area, the quantities M(b -
a) and m(b -
a) represent 
areas of a circumscribed and an inscribed rectangle on the common 
base of length b -
a (see Fig. 2.15). 
d. The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals 
Integral as a Mean Value 
Significant is a slightly different interpretation of our inequalities 
in terms of the average of the function f in an interval [a, b]. For a 
finite number of quantities f1.!2' ... .!n the average or arithmetic mean 
is the number 
n 

140 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
y 
M ----.,.-----:--....,----.,-
m 
1+--- b - a --~ 
---+-----6----------------~------~x 
o 
a 
b 
Figure 2.1S 
y 
p, ----
m 
/ 
Figure 2.16 The mean value p. of a function. 

Sec. 2.3 
Fundamental Rules o[ Integration 
141 
If we want to assign a meaning to the average value of the infinitely 
many quantities f(x) corresponding to arbitrary x in the interval 
[a, b], it is natural to pick out first a finite number n of values of J, 
say f(XI),J(X2), ... ,J(xn), to form their average 
[(Xl) + ... + [(xn) 
n 
and then to take the limit as n increases beyond all bounds. The value 
of this limit, if it exists at all, will depend very much on how the points 
Xi are spaced in the interval [a, b]. A definite value for the average off 
is attained if we take for the Xi the points obtained when we divide the 
interval [a, b] into n equal parts of length ~Xi = (b -
a)Jn. We have 
then 
[(Xl) + ... + [(xn) = -l-i[(Xi)~Xi' 
n 
b -
ai~l 
and it is clear that in the limit for n -+ 00 the nth averages converge 
towards the value 
b 
(bf(X) dx 
1 1 
Ja 
p. = --
f(x) dx = 
b 
b -
a a 
L 
dx 
We shall call p. the "arithmetic average" or the mean value of f in the 
interval [a, b]. Our inequalities then simply state that the mean value 
of a continuous function cannot be larger than the greatest value or 
less than the least value of the function (Fig. 2.16). 
Since the function f(x) is continuous in the interval [a, b], there 
must be points in the interval where f has the value M or the value m. 
By the intermediate value theorem for continuous functions there must 
then also be a point ~ in the interval where f actually assumes the 
intermediate value fl. We have proved then: 
MEAN VALUE THEOREM. 
For a continuous function I(x) in the 
interval [a, b] there exists a value ~ in the interval such that 
(12) 
ff(X) dx = f(~)(b -
a). 
This is the simple but very important mean value theorem of integral 
calculus. In words, it states that the mean value of a continuous 
function in an interval belongs to the range of the function. 
The theorem asserts only the existence of at least one ~ in the interval 
for which fW is equal to the average value off but gives no further 
information about the location of ~. 

142 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differenial Calculus 
Ch. 2 
Note that the formula expressing the mean value theorem stays 
valid if the limits a and b are interchanged; hence the mean value 
theorem is correct also when a > b. 
The Generalized Mean Value Theorem. Instead of the simple arithmetic 
average we often have to consider "weighted averages" of n quantities 
fl" .. ,fn given by 
Pt!l + P2f2 + ... + pnfn = p, 
Pl + P2 + ... + pn 
where the "weight factors" Pi are any positive quantities. If, for example, 
Pl' P2' ... ,pn are actually the weights of particles located respectively at the 
points fl' f2' ... ,fn of the x-axis, then fl will represent the location of 
the center of gravity. If all weights Pi are equal, the quantity fl is just the 
arithmetic average defined above. 
For a functionf(x) we can form analogously the weighted average 
(13) 
ii(x)p(x) dx 
fl,= 
fp(X)dX 
over the interval [a, b] where p(x), the weight function, is any positive function 
in the interval. The assumption that p is positive guarantees that the 
denominator does not vanish. 
The weighted average fl also lies between the largest value M and the smallest 
value m of the function f in the interval. 
For multiplying the inequality 
m ~f(x) ~ M, 
by the positive number p(x), we find that 
mp(x) ~ f(x)p(x) ~ Mp(x). 
Integration then yields 
m i~(X) dx ~ ii(x)p(x) dx ~ M ibp(X) dx. 
Dividing by the positive quantity ibp(X) dx, we indeed obtain the result 
m~fl~M. 
If here f(x) is continuous, we conclude from the intermediate value 
theorem (p. 44) that fl = fm, where ~ is a suitable value in the interval 
a ~ ~ ~ b. This leads to the following generalized mean value theorem of 
integral calculus: 

Sec. 2.4 
The Integral as Function of the Upper Limit (Indefinite Integral) 143 
if f(x) and p(x) are continuous in the interval [a, b) and moreover p(x) is 
positive in that interval, then there exists a value ~ in the interval such that 
(14) 
ff(X)P(X) dx = fm Lbp(X) dx. 
The special case p(x) = 1 leads to our earlier mean value theorem. 
2.4 The Integral as a Function of 
the Upper Limit (Indefinite Integral) 
Definition and Basic Formula 
The value of the integral of a functionf(x) depends on the limits of 
integration a and b: The integral is a function of the two limits a and b. 
In order to study this dependence on the limits more closely we imagine 
the lower limit to be a fixed number, say 0(, denote the variable of 
integration no longer by x but by u (see p. 126), and denote the upper 
limit by x instead of by b in order to indicate that we shall consider the 
upper limit as the variable and that we wish to investigate the value of 
the integral as a function of this upper limit. Accordingly, we write 
4>(x) = li(U) du. 
We call the function 4>(x) an indefinite integral of the function f(x). 
When we speak of an and not of the indefinite integral, we suggest that 
instead of the lower limit oc any other could be chosen, in which case we 
should ordinarily obtain a different value for the integral. Geometri-
cally, the indefinite integral ¢(x) is given by the area (shown by shading 
in Fig. 2.17) under the curve y = feu) and bounded by the u-axis, 
the ordinate u = 0( and the variable ordinate u = x, the sign being 
determined by the rules discussed earlier (p. 126). 
Any particular definite integral is found from the indefinite integral 
4>(x). Indeed, by our basic rules for integrals, 
ff(U) du = fr(U) du + ff(U) du 
= -lieu) du + ff(U) du = 4>(b) -
4>(a). 
In particular, we can express any other indefinite integral with a lower 
limit oc' i!: terms of 4>(x): 
l~f(U) du = 4>(x) -
4>(oc'). 

144 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
y 
Figure 2.17 The indefinite integral as an area. 
As we see, any indefinite integral differs from the special indefinite 
integral4>(x) only by a constant. 
Continuity of the Indefinite Integral 
If the function f(x) is continuous in the interval [a, b] and IX is a 
point of that interval, then the indefinite integral 
4>(x) = Li(u) du 
represents a function of x which is again defined in the same interval. 
As easily seen: The indefinite integral 4>(x) of a continuous function 
f(x) is likewise continuous. For if x and yare any two values in the 
interval we have by the mean value theorem that 
(15) 
4>(y) -
4>(x) = L"f(U) du = f(E)(y -
x) 
where E is some value in the interval with end points x and y. From the 
continuity off we have then 
lim 4>(y) = lim [4>(x) + f(E)(y -
x)] = 4>(x) + f(x) . 0 = 4>(x), 
v .... z 
tI-+~ 
which shows that 4> is continuous. More specifically, in any closed 
interval we have I!I>(Y) -
4>(x) I ~ M Iy - xl, where M is the maximum 
of 1/1 in the interval, so that 4> is eVj::n Lipschitz-eontinuous. 

Sec. 2.5 
Logarithm Defined by an Integral 145 
Formula (IS) for cp(y) -
cp(x) shows: that cp(x) is an increasing func-
tion of x in case f is positive throughout the interval, namely, for y > x 
cp(y) = cp(x) + f(~)(y -
x) > cp(x). 
Forming the indefinite integral of a function is an important way of 
generating new types of functions. In Section 2.5 we shall apply this 
method to introduce the logarithm function. This will also give us a 
first glimpse of the fact that general theorems of mathematical analysis 
lead to the most remarkable specific formulas. 
As we shall see in Section 3.14a (p. 298), the definition of new 
functions by means of integrals of already defined functions is a 
satisfactory procedure if we wish to put definitions (for example, of the 
trigonometric functions) on a purely analytical basis instead of relying 
on intuitive geometrical explanations. 
2.5 Logarithm Defined by an Integral 
a. Definition of the Logarithm Function 
In Section 2.2 we had succeeded in expressing i b xa. dx for any rational 
IX ¥= -1 in terms of powers of a and b. For IX = -1 we were only 
able to represent the integral as limit of a sequence 
(b !du =limn({Ybja _ 1). 
Ja u 
n-+oo 
Independently of the discussions of Section 2.2 we now introduce the 
function represented by the indefinite integral 
f"'! du/ 
J1 u 
or, geometrically, by the area under a hyperbola as indicated in Fig. 
2.18. We call it the logarithm of x, or more accurately the natural 
logarithm of x, and write 
(16) 
1
"'1 
log x = 
- duo 
1 U 
Since y = l/u is a continuous and positive function for all Ii > 0, 
the function log x is defined for all x > 0, is moreover continuous, and 
also is monotonically ihcreasing. The choice of I as the lower limit in 
1 In this section we again freely use the fact that the integral of a continuous function 
(here the function 1/u) exists; the general proof is given in the Supplement. 

146 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
y 
1 , 
\ Iy= l 
\ 
u 
I 
\ 
\ 
\ , , 
------
--0-+-----< """""""""'''"'''''"'''''x:r-------- u 
Figure 2.18 Log x represented by an area. 
the indefinite integral for log x is a matter of convenience. It implies that 
(17) 
log 1 = 0, 
and that log x is positive for x > 1 and negative for x between zero and 
1 (Fig. 2.19). Any definite integral of l/u between positive limits a 
and b can be expressed in terms oflogarithms by the formula (see p. 143) 
(18) 
fbi 
- du = log b -
log a. 
n U 
y 
2 
--+--~--~-~o--~~-~--~x 
o 
- 1 
- 2 
Figure 2.19 The natural logarithm. 

Sec. 2.5 
Logarithm Defined by an Integral 147 
Geometrically, this integral represents the area under the hyperbola 
y = IJx between the ordinates x = a and x = b. 
h. The Addition Theorem for Logarithms 
The fundamental property which justifies the traditional name for 
log x is expressed by the 
ADDITION THEOREM. 
For any positive x and y 
(19) 
log (xy) = log x + log y. 
PROOF. 
We write the addition theorem in the form 
log (xy) - log y = log x 
or-
f·'1'1 
1'" 1 
-dv = 
- du, 
'Y 
V 
1 U 
where we have deliberately chosen different letters for the variables of 
integration in the two integrals. The equality of the two integrals will 
follow from the fact that the approximating sums have the same value 
for suitable choices of subdivisions and of intermediate points. Assume 
at first x > 1. Then 
1'" 1 
n 
1 
- du = lim ! - dui , 
1 U 
n-+ooi=1~i 
where Uo = 1, u1, u2, ••• , Un = x represent the points arising in a sub-
division of the interval [1, x] and ~i lies in the ith cell. Putting Vi = yui , 
'YJi = y~i we see that the points Vo, Vi> ••• ,Vn correspond to a sub-
division of the interval [y, xy] with intermediate points 'YJi = ~iY' 
Obviously, 
so that 
n 1 
n 1 
! -dvi =! -dui • 
i=1 'YJi 
i=1 ~i 
For n tending to infinity we obtain the desired identity between integrals 
for the case x > 1. 
For x = 1 the addition theorem holds trivially, since log 1 = O. 
To prove the theorem also for the case 0 < x < 1, we observe that then 

148 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
IJx > 1, and hence 
log x + log y = log x + log (; xy) 
1 
= log x + log - + log (xy) 
x 
1 
= log - + log x + log (xy) 
x 
= log (; x) + log (xy) 
= log 1 + log (xy) = log (xy). 
This completes the proof of the addition theorem. 
A proof of the addition theorem can also be based on formula (3) 
(p. 134), according to which 
log x = lim n( '\'Y;;; -
1). 
Then 
log (xy) = lim n( <Y xy -
1) 
= lim [n('\'Y;;; -
1)'\'Yy + n('\'Yy - 1)] 
= [lim n('\'Y;;; - 1)](lim '\'Yy) + lim n('\'Yy - 1) 
= log x + logy, 
since lim '\'Yy = 1 (see p. 64). 
Applying the addition theorem to the special case y = IJx leads to 
or 
(20) 
1 
log 1 = log x + log-x 
1 
log - = -log x. 
x 
More generally then 
(21) 
log '!f.. = log y + log! = log y -
log x. 
x 
x 
Repeated application of the addition theorem to a product of n 
factors yields 
log (XI X2 ••• xn) = log Xl + log X 2 + ... + log xn • 

Sec. 2.6 
Exponential Function and Powers 149 
In particular, we find that for any positive integer n 
(22) 
log (xn) = n log x. 
This identity also holds for n = 0, since XO = 1, and can be extended 
to negative integers n by observing that 
log (xn) = log C~n) = -log (x-n) = -( -n) log x = n log x. 
For any rational at = min and any positive a we can form alZ = 
am / n = x. We have then 
11m 
log x = -log xn = -log am = -log a = at log a. 
n 
n 
n 
Thus the identity 
(23) 
holds for any positive real a and any rational at. 
2.6 Exponential Function and Powers 
a. The Logarithm of the Number e 
The constant e obtained on p. 79 as the limit of (l + I/n)n plays a 
distinguished role for the function log x. Indeed, the number e is 
characterized by the equationl 
log e = 1. 
For the proof we observe that the continuity of the function log x 
implies 
log e = log [lim (1 + ! \nJ = lim log [(1 + !)nJ 
n-"oo 
nl 
n~oo 
n 
= lim n log (1 + .!). 
n-+- 00 
n 
Now by the mean value theorem of integral calculus 
( 
1) il+l1n 1 
1 1 
log 1 + - = 
- du = - - , 
n 
1 
u 
~ n 
1 This means geometrically that the area bounded by the hyperbola y = l/x and the 
lines y = 0, x = 1, and x = e has the value one (see Fig. 2.18). 

150 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
where ~ is some number between I and I + lin which depends on the 
choice of n. Obviously, lim ~ = I so that 
n->CO 
(24) 
log e = lim 1 = 1. 
n~CX) ~ 
b. The Inverse Function of the Logarithm. The Exponential Function 
From the relation log e = I it follows that for any rational IX 
log (eO!) = IX log e = IX. 
This shows that every rational number IX occurs as a value of log x 
for some positive x. Since log x is continuous, it assumes then any value 
intermediate between two rational values; this means all real values. 
It follows that for x varying over all positive values the values of 
y = log x range over all numbers y. Since log x is monotonically 
increasing, there exists for any real y exactly one positive x such that 
log x = y. The solution x of the equation y = log x is given by the 
inverse function of the logarithm which we shall denote by x = E(y). 
We know then that E(y) (Fig. 2.20) is defined and positive for all y, 
and again continuous and increasing (see p. 45) 
y 
--~~----~--~r---~----~2~----·% 
Figure 2.20 The exponential function. 

Sec. 2.6 
Exponential Function and Powers 
151 
Since the equations y = log x and x = E(y) stand for the same relation 
between x and y, we can write the equation at = log (e"), which is valid 
for rational at, also in the form 
E(at) = elZ• 
We see: for any rational at the value of E(at) is the atth power of the 
number e. For rational at = min the power elZ is defined directly as 
Cm. For irrational at the expression elZ is defined most naturally by 
representing at as the limit of a sequence of rational numbers atn and 
putting elZ = lim (elZ .. ). Since elZ .. = E(atn) and since the function E(y) 
depends continuously on y, we can be sure that the limit of the elZ .. 
exists and that it has the value E(at) independently of the special 
sequence used to approximate at. This proves that the equation 
E(at) = e" holds for irrational at as well. For all real at we can now 
write e" instead of E(at). We call e" the exponential junction. This 
function is defined and continuous for all x, is increasing, and positive 
everywhere. 
Since the equations y = log x and x = e!l are two ways of expressing 
the same relation between the numbers x and y, we see that log x, the 
"natural logarithm" of x (as defined here by an integral) stands for 
the logarithm to the base e, as that term would be used in elementary 
mathematics; that is, log x is the exponent of that power of e which is 
equal to x or 
(25) 
e!Ogx = x. 
We can writel log x = log. x. 
Similarly, x = e!l is that number whose logarithm is y, or 
(26) 
loge!l = y. 
From the point of view of calculus it is really easier to introduce 
natural logarithms first as integrals of the simple function y = llx, as 
we did here, and to define powers of e by taking the inverse of the 
logarithm function. In this way the continuity and monotonicity of the 
functions log x and eX arise just as consequences of general theorems 
and require no special arguments. 
1 The reader may feel that the name "natural logarithm" should have been reserved 
rather for logarithms to the base 10. However, historically the first table of log-
arithms published by Napier in 1614 essentially gave logarithms to the base e. 
Logarithms to the base 10 were introduced only subsequently by Briggs because of 
their obvious computational advantages. 

152 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
c. The Exponential Function as Limit of Powers 
Originally we obtained the number e as the limit 
e = lim (1 + !)n. 
n .... oo 
n 
A more general formula represents e~ for any x as a limit 
(27) 
e~ = lim (1 + ~)n. 
n .... oo 
n 
For the proof it is sufficient to show that the sequence 
Sn = log (1 + ;r 
has the limit x. For then the sequence of values 
e'R = (1 +;r 
must tend to r since the exponential function is continuous. Now 
sn = n log (1 + ;) = n i1+~/n ~ d~. 
By the mean value theorem of integral calculus we have 
Sn = n 1..[(1 + ~) - IJ = ~, 
~n 
n 
~n 
where ~n is some value between one and 1 + x/no Since obviously 
~n tends to one for n tending to 00, we have indeed lim Sn = x. 
n-+OO 
d. Definition of Arbitrary Powers of Positive Numbers 
Arbitrary powers of any positive numbers can now be expressed in 
terms of the exponential and logarithmic functions. 1 
We found for rational at and any positive x that the relation 
log (XII) = at log x 
holds. We write this equation in the form 
XII = elllOgz. 
1 This obviates the more clumsy "elementary" definition and justification of these 
processes by passage to the limit from rational exponents indicated on p. 86. 

Sec. 2.6 
Exponential Function and Powers 153 
For irrational ex. we again represent ex. as limit of a sequence of rational 
numbers ex.n and define 
x" = lim x"n = lim e"n log x • 
1'1-+00 
n-+oo 
The continuity of the exponential function implies again that the 
limit exists and that it has the value e" log x, since 
e" log x = elim ("n log X) = lim e"n log x. 
Hence the equation 
(28) 
holds quite generally for any ex. and any positive x. Putting log x = {3 
or, what is the same, x = efJ we infer 
(29) 
and more generally then for any positive x 
(x")fJ = (e" log X)fJ = e"fJ log x = x"fJ. 
Another rule for working with powers which is easily established in 
complete generality, is the multiplication law 
where x is a positive number and ex. and (3 are arbitrary. It is sufficient 
to prove the corresponding formula obtained by taking the logarithms 
of both sides: 
Now by the rules (19), (26), and (28) already established it follows that 
log (x"xfJ) = log x" + log xfJ = log (e" log X) + log (efJ log X) 
= ex. log x + {3 log x = (ex. + (3) log x 
= log (e("+fJ) log X) = log (x"+fJ). 
e. Logarithms to Any Base 
It is easy to express logarithms to a base other than e in terms of 
natural logarithms. If for a positive number a the equation x = all is 
satisfied, we write 
y = 10~x. 
Now all == ell log a, SO that x = ell log a or y log a = log x. It follows that 
log x 
loga x = --, 
log a 
(30) 

154 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
where log x is the natural logarithm to the base e. In particular, the 
common logarithms to the base 10 are given by 
log x 
loglox = --. 
log 10 
Since logarithms to any base a are proportional to natural log-
arithms, they satisfy the same addition theorem: 
log, x + log, y = log, (xy). 
2.7 The Integral of an Arbitrary Power of x 
In Section 2.2 we obtained the formula 
for any rational tI. ¥= -1. (The case tI. = -1 was seen to lead to the 
logarithm.) To evaluate the integral when tI. is an irrational number, it 
is sufficient to discuss the indefinite integral 
1>(x) = f'uo: du 
from which all definite integrals with positive limits a and b can be 
obtained. Assume x > 1 (the case x < 1 can be handled in the same 
fashion after interchanging the limits). We have then by (28) 
where log u ~ 0 for u in the interval of integration. Let fJ and y be any 
two rational numbers different from -1 for which 
fJ ::;; tI. ::;; y. 
Then also 
fJ log u ::;; tI. log u ::;; y log u. 
Since the exponential function is increasing, this implies 
i
10gu < e"IOgu < eylOgu. 
-
-
, 
that is, 
We have then 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 155 
The integrals of uP and uY were evaluated before, leading to 
_1_ (xP+1 _ 1) :::;; cp(x) :::;; _1_ (xHl -
1). 
/'1+1 
y+l 
If we now let the rational numbers /'1 and y converge to (x, we obtain in 
the limit 
cp(x) = _1_ (xa+1 _ 1), 
(X + 1 
since xPH = e(P+l)log., and xHl = e(y+l)log., tend to e(a+l)log., = xaH 
because of the continuity of the exponential function. The same result 
follows for x between zero and one. Thus generally for positive a, b 
(bua du = cp(b) _ cp(a) = _1_ (baH _ aH1) 
Ja 
(X + 1 
just as for rational (x. 
When (X is a positive integer, the formula remains valid even when the 
limits a or b become zero or negative; it is easy to extend the formula 
directly to those cases. 
2.8 The Derivative 
The concept of the derivative, like that of the integral, has an 
immediate intuitive origin and is easy to grasp. Yet it opens the door 
to an enormous wealth of mathematical facts and insights; the student 
will only gradually become aware of the variety of significant appli-
cations and of the power of the techniques which we shall develop in 
this book. 
The concept of derivative is first suggested by the intuitive notion of 
the tangent to a smooth curve y = f(x) at a point P with the coordinates 
x and y. This tangent is characterized by the angle (X between its 
direction and the positive x-axis. But how does one obtain this angle 
from the analytical description of the functionf(x)? The knowledge of 
the values of x and y at the point P does not suffice to determine the 
angle (X since there are infinitely many different lines besides the tangent 
passing through P. On the other hand, to determine (X one does not 
need to know the function f(x) in its total over-all behavior; the 
knowledge of the function in an arbitrary neighborhood of the point P 
must be sufficient to determine the direction (x, no matter how tiny a 
neighborhood is chosen. This indicates that we should define the 
direction of the tangent to a curve y = f(x) by a limiting process, as 
we shall presently do. 

156 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
The problem of calculating the direction of tangents, or of "differen-
tiation," was impressed on mathematicians as early as the sixteenth 
century by optimization problems, that is, questions of maxima and 
minima arising in geometry, mechanics and optics. (See the discussion 
in Section 3.6.) 
Another problem of paramount importance which leads to differen-
tiation is that of giving a precise mathematical meaning to the intuitive 
notion of velocity in an arbitrary nonuniform motion (see p. 162). 
We shall start with the problem of describing the tangent to a curve 
analytically by a limit process. 
a. The Derivative and the Tangent 
Geometric Definition. In conformity with naive intuition, we define 
the tangent to the given curve y = f(x) at one of its points P by means 
y 
--~ot-----------------------------------~x 
Figure 2.21 Secant and tangent. 
of the following geometrical limiting process (Fig. 2.21). We consider a 
second point PI near P on the curve. Through the two points P, PI 
we draw a straight line, a secant ofthe curve. If now the point PI moves 
along the curve towards the point P, then the secant is expected to 
approach a limiting position which is independent of the side from 
which PI tends to P. This limiting position of the secant is the tangent; 
the statement that such a limiting position of the secant exists is 
equivalent to the assumption that the curve has a definite tangent or a 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 157 
definite direction at the point P. (We have used the word "assumption" 
because we have actually made one. The hypothesis that the tangent 
exists at every point is by no means true for all curves representing 
simple functions. For example, any curve with a comer or vertex at a 
point P does not have a uniquely determined direction there, such as the 
curve defined by y = Ixl at (0, 0). (See the discussion on p. 166.) 
y 
--ftOr-----~%--------------~%~l--------~% 
Figure 2.22 
Since our curve is represented by means of a function y = J(x), 
we must formulate the geometric limiting process analytically, with 
reference to J(x). This analytical limit process is called differentiation 
ofJ(x). 
Consider the angle which a straight line makes with the x-axis as 
the one through which the positive x-axis must be turned in the positive 
direction or counterclockwisel in order to become for the first time 
parallel to the line. (This would be an angle ot in the interval 0 :5: ot < ?T.) 
Let otl be the angle which the secant PPl forms with the positive x-axis 
(cf. Fig. 2.22) and ot the angle which the tangent forms with the positive 
x-axis. Then 
1 That is, in such a direction that a rotation of 7T/2 brings it into coincidence with the 
positive y-axis. 

158 
The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
where the meaning of the symbols is obvious. Let x, y and Xl> Yl be the 
coordinates of the points P and PI respectively. Then we immediately 
havel 
Yl -
Y 
f(x l ) -
f(x) 
tan 0(1 = --- = 
; 
Xl -
X 
Xl -
X 
thus our limiting process (disregarding the case 0( = 1T/2 of a perpen-
dicular tangent) is represented by the equation 
lim f(xl ) - f(x) = lim tan 0(1 = tan 0(. 
"'1--+'" 
Xl -
X 
"'1--+'" 
Notation. The expression 
f(Xl ) -
f(x) 
Yl -
Y 
fly 
=---=-
Xl -
X 
Xl -
X 
flx 
we call the difference quotient of the function Y = f(x) where the symbols 
fly and flx denote the differences of the function Y = f(x) and of the 
independent variable x. (Here, as on p. 124, the symbol fl is an 
abbreviation for difference, and is not a factor.) The trigonometric 
tangent of 0(, the "slope" of the curve,2 is therefore equal to the limit 
to which the difference quotient of our function tends when Xl tends 
to x. 
We call this limit of the difference quotient the derivativeS of the 
function Y = f(x) at the point x. We shall generally use either the 
notation of Lagrange, Y' = f'(x), to denote the derivative, or, as 
Leibnitz did, the symbol' dyJdx or df(x)/dx or (d/dx)f(x). On p. 171 
we shall discuss the meaning of Leibnitz's notation in more detail; 
here we point out: The notation f'(x) indicates the fact that the 
derivative is itself a function of X since a value of f'ex) corresponds to 
each value of X in the interval considered. This fact is sometimes 
emphasized by the use of the terms derived function, derived curve. The 
definition of the derivative appears in several different forms: 
f'(x) = lim f(xl ) -
f(x) = limf(x + h) - f(x) , 
"'1--+'" 
Xl -
X 
h--+O 
h 
1 In order that this equation may have a meaning, we must assume that both x and 
Xl lie in the domain of f 
In what follows, corresponding assumptions will often 
be made tacitly in the steps leading up to limiting processes. 
2 The word gradient or direction coefficient is used occasionally. 
3 The term differential coefficient is also used in older textbooks. 
4 Cauchy's notation Df(x) and Newton's notation yare also used. 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 159 
where in the second expression Xl is replaced by X + h, or in 
Leibnitz's notation, 
dy = df(x) = f'(x) = lim f(xl) - f(x) = lim !l.y . 
dx 
dx 
11:,-+11: 
Xl -
X 
411:-+0!l.X 
If f is defined in a neighborhood of the point X, then the quotient 
[f(x + h) - f(x)]/h is defined as a function of h for all values h :;I:. 0 
for which Ihl is sufficiently small to ensure that X + h is in the interval 
under consideration. The definition of I'(x) as a limit requires that 
I f(x + i -f(x) - f'ex) I is arbitrarily small for all h :;I:. 0 (positive 
or negative) for which Ihl is sufficiently small. 
Analytic Calculation of Derivatives. The intuitive concept and the 
general analytic notion of derivative are simple and straightforward. 
Less obvious is the procedure of actually carrying out such limiting 
processes. 
It is impossible to find the derivative merely by putting Xl = X in 
the expression for the difference quotient, for then the numerator and 
denominator would both be equal to zero and we would be led to the 
meaningless expression 0/0. Thus the passage to the limit in each case 
depends on certain preliminary steps (transformation of the difference 
quotient). 
For example, for the functionf(x) = x2 we have 
This function Xl + X does not have exactly the same domain as 
(X12 -
X2)/(Xl - x): The function Xl + X is defined at the one poiht 
Xl = X, where the quotient (X12 -
X2)/(Xl - x) is undefined. For all 
other values of Xl the two functions are equal to one another; hence in 
the passage to the limit, for which we specifically require that Xl :;I:. X, 
we obtain the same value for lim (X12 -
X2)/(Xl - x) as for lim (Xl + X). 
all-+X 
Xl-+a:I 
However, since the function Xl + X is defined and continuous at the 
point Xl = X, we can do with it what we could. not do with the quotient, 
namely, pass to the limit by simply putting Xl = x. For the derivative 
we then obtain 
f'(X) = d(X2) = 2x. 
dx 

160 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
As another example we differentiate, that is, calculate the derivative 
of the function y = J; for x > o. We have for Xl ¥: X 
f(xl ) -
f(x) _ J~ -
J-; _ (J~ -
/x)(J~ + J-;) 
Xl -
X 
-
Xl -
X 
-
(Xl -
x)( J Xl + J X) 
Xl -
X 
1 
Hence (for X > 0) 
= 
= 
(Xl -
X)(JXI + Jx) 
JXI + Jx· 
dJ-;. 
1 
1 
-- =hm 
---
dx 
"'1--'" JXI + Jx -
2J-;· 
For X = 0 we have a singularity: The derivative is infinite, since 
(JxI -
O)j(XI -
0) = IjJ~ -- 00 for Xl --0. 
Analytic Definition 
It is extremely significant that the process of differentiating a function 
has a definite analytic meaning quite apart from the geometric intuitive 
conception of the tarigent. The analytic definition of the integral, freed 
from the geometric visualization of area, allowed us to base the notion 
of area on that of integral. In a similar spirit, independently of the 
geometrical representation of a function y = I(x) by means of a curve, 
we define the derivative of the function y = I(x) as the new function 
y' = f'(x) given by the limit of the difference quotient byj bx provided 
that the limit exists. 
Here the differences by = YI -
Y = I(xl ) - I(x) and bx = Xl -
X 
are "corresponding changes" in the variables Y and x. The ratio 
by/bx can be called the "average rate of change" of y with respect to X 
in the interval (x, X + bx). The limitf'(x) = dyjdx represents then the 
"instantaneous rate of change" or simply the "rate of change" of y 
with respect to x. 
If this limit exists, we say that the function f(x) is differentiable. 
We shall always assume that every function dealt with is differentiable 
unless specific mention is made to the contrary.1 We emphasize that 
if the function f(x) is to be differentiable at the point X the limit as 
h -- 0 of the quotient [f(x + h) - f(x»)jh must exist, where h can 
have any value ¥: 0 for which X + h belongs to the domain of f 
If, 
in particular, f is defined in a whole interval containing the point X 
in its interior, then the limit must exist independently of the manner in 
1 Examples in which this assumption is not satisfied will be given later (see p. 167). 
Such examples justify mentioning differentiability as an assumption if the context 
warrants it. 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 161 
which h tends to zero, whether it be through positive values or through 
negative values, without restriction upon sign. 
Having now an analytic definition for the derivative f'(x), we take 
the direction angle at to the positive x-axis given by the equation 
tan at = f'(x) as the direction of the tangent to the curve at the point 
(x, y).l By thus basing the geometric definition on the analytic one we 
avoid the difficulties which might arise from the vagueness of the 
geometric visualization. In fact, we have now defined precisely what 
we mean by a tangent to the graph of y = f(x) ~t a point (x, y), and 
we have an analytic criterion for deciding whether or not a curve has a 
tangent at a given point (x, y). 
Monotone Functions 
Nevertheless, the visual interpretation of the derivative as the slope 
of the tangent to the curve is a highly useful aid to understanding, even 
in purely analytic discussions. A case in question is the following 
statement based on geometric intuition: 
Thefunctionf(x) is monotonically increasing whenf'(x) > 0 and mono-
tonically decreasing whenf'(x) < O. 
y 
y 
~--{(:JC) 
{(x) 
P Jr--......... ----,~ 
--~o+-----------------~x 
--o~------------------~x 
Figure 2.23 Tangents to graphs of increasing and decreasing functions. 
Indeed, if f'(x) is positive and the curve is traversed in the direction of 
increasing x, then the tangent slants upwards, that is, toward increasing 
y (at is an "acute angle"); therefore at the point in question the curve 
1 The angle oc. is not determined quite uniquely but can be replaced by oc. ± 1T, 
oc. ± 21T, etc., unless we specify as above that 0 ~ oc. < 1T. 

162 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
rises as x increases; if, on the other hand,!,(x) is negative, the tangent 
slants downwards (ex is an "obtuse angle") and the curve falls as x 
increases (see Fig. 2.23). Analytically this will be proved on p. 177. 
h. The Derivative as a Velocity 
The need to replace the intuitive concept of velocity or speed by a 
precise definition leads once again to exactly the same limiting process 
we have already called differentiation. 
Consider the example of a point moving on a straight line, the 
directed y-axis, the position of the point being determined by a single 
coordinate y. This coordinate y is the distance, with its proper sign, of 
our moving point from a fixed initial point on the line. The motion is 
given if we know y as a function of the time t: y = f(t). If this function 
is a linear function f(t) = ct + b, we speak of a uniform motion with 
the velocity c, and for every pair of distinct values t and tl we can obtain 
the velocity by dividing the distance traversed in a time interval by the 
length of that time interval: 
J(tl) - J(t) 
c= 
. 
tl -
t 
The velocity is therefore the difference quotient of the function ct + b 
and this difference quotient is independent of the particular pair of 
instants which we fix upon. But what are we to understand by the 
velocity of motion at an instant t if the motion is no longer uniform? 
To answer this question we consider the difference quotient 
[/(tl) - f(t)]/(tl -
t), 
which we shall call the average velocity in the time interval between 
tl and t. Now if this average velocity tends to a definite limit when we 
let tl tend to t, we shall define this limit as the velocity at the time t. 
In other words: the velocity, that is, the instantaneous rate of change of 
distance with respect to time at the time t, is the derivative 
f'(t) = lim J (tl) - J(t) . 
tl~t 
tl -
t 
Newton emphasized the interpretation of derivatives1 as velocity, and 
wrote 'Ii orj(x) instead off'(t), a notation which we shall occasionally 
use. Again, the differentiability of the function is a necessary assump-
tion if the notion of velocity is' to have a meaning. 
~ Called by him "fluxions." 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 163 
A simple example is the motion of freely falling bodies. We start 
from the experimentally established law that the distance traversed in 
time t by a freely falling body starting from rest at t = ° 
is proportional 
to t2 ; it is therefore represented by a function of the form 
y = f(t) = at2 
with constant a. As on p. 159, the velocity then is given by the expression 
f'(t) = 2at; thus: the velocity of a freely falling body increases in 
proportion to the time. 
c. Examples of Differentiation 
We now illustrate the technique of differentiation by a number of 
typical examples. 
Linear Functions 
For the function y = f(x) = c with constant c we see for all x, 
f(x + h) - f(x) = c -
c = 0, so that lim [f(x + h) - f(x)]fh = 0; 
h~O 
that is, the derivative of a constant function is zero. 
For a linear function y = f(x) = cx + b, we find 
f'(x) = limf(x + h) - f(x) = lim ch = c. 
h-->O 
h 
h-->O h 
The derivative of a linear function is constant. 
Powers of x 
Next, we differentiate the power function 
y =f(x) = x«, 
at first assuming that IX is a positive integer. Provided Xl ::;f= X, we have 
where we divide directly or use the formula for the sum of a geometric 
progression. This simple algebraic manipulation is the key to the 
passage to the limit; for the last expression on the right-hand side of 
the equation is a continuous function of Xl' in particular for Xl = X, 
and so we can carry out the passage to the limit Xl ~ 
X for this expres-
sion simply by replacing Xl everywhere by x. Each term then takes the 
value x<X-I, and since the number of terms is exactly IX, we obtain 
d(x«) 
y' = f'(x) = -- = IXX«-l. 
dx 

164 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Di.lferential Calculus 
Ch.2 
We arrive at the same result if at is a negative integer -fJ; we must, 
however, assume that x is not zero. We then find 
1 
1 
f(xl) -f(x) = xl 
xII = _ xll- x/ ._1_ 
x -
Xl 
xflxl 
Once again we can carry out the passage to the limit simply by sub-
stituting x for Xl' Then just as before we obtain for the limit 
, 
xll- l 
_ -1 
Y = -
fJ 2ii = -fJx II 
• 
X 
Hence for negative integral values at = - fJ the derivative is again 
given by the formula 
Finally, we shall prove the same formula where x is positive and oc 
any rational number. We suppose that at = p/q, where p and q are 
both integers and, moreover, positive. (If one of them were negative, 
no essential changes in the proof would be needed; for at = 0 the result 
is already known, since x" is then constant.) We now have 
f(xl) - f(x) 
xf/a.- x'D/a 
= 
If we now put xl/a = ~ and x~/a = ~l' we obtain 
f(xl) - f(x) _ 
~1'D -
~'D _ ~il + ~f-2~ + ... + ~'D-l 
Xl -
X 
-
~l a _ ~ -
~-l + ~2~ + ... + ~-1 • 
After this last transformation we can immediately perform the passage 
to the limit Xl -- X (or what amounts to the same thing, ~l -- ~), and 
thus obtain for the limiting value the expression 
~'D-l 
Y = !!. _ 
= !!. ~'D-a = !!. x(']1-al/a = !!. x('Dlal-t, 
q ~a-l 
q 
q 
q 
or finally, 
f'(x) = y' = atX"-t, 
which is formally the same result as before. We leave it for the reader 
to prove for himself that the same differentiation formula holds also 
for negative rational exponents. 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 165 
We shall come back (p. 186) to the differentiation of powers and 
prove the general validity of the preceding formula for arbitrary 
exponents at. 
Trigonometric Functions 
As a last example we consider the differentiation of the trigonometric 
functions sin x and cos x. We use the elementary trigonometric addition 
formula to transform the difference quotient 
sin (x + h) - sin x 
sin x cos h + cos x sin h - sin x 
--~~~~----=--------~--------------
h 
h 
. 
cos h -
1 + 
sin h 
= sm x 
cos x --- . 
h 
h 
Recalling the relations of Section 1.8, pp. 84-85, 
1· sin h 
1 
Im--- = , 
11 .... 0 
h 
1· cos h -
1 
0 
1m 
= 
, 
11 .... 0 
h 
we immediately obtain 
, 
d(sin x) 
Y = ---- = cos x. 
dx 
The function y = cos x can be differentiated in exactly the same way. 
Starting with 
cos (x + h) - cos x 
cos h -
1 
. 
sin h 
------'------'------- = cos x 
- sm x ---
h 
h 
h 
and taking the limit as h -- 0, we obtain the derivativel 
, 
d(cos x) 
. 
y = 
= - sm x. 
dx 
d. Some Fundamental Rules for Differentiation 
Just as in the case of the integral, there exist certain basic rules for 
differentiation that follow immediately from the definition and suffice 
for forming the derivative for many functions. 
1. If cfo(x) = f(x) + g(x), then cfo'(x) = f'(x) + g'(x). 
2. If 1p(x) = cf(x) (where c is a constant), then 1p'(x) = cf'(x). 
1 If x is interpreted as an angle, then these simple formulas for the derivatives of 
sin x and cos x presupposes, of course, that the angle x is measured in radians. 

166 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
We have 
cp(x + h) -
cp(X) 
f(x + h) - f(x) 
g(x + h) -
g(x) 
h 
= 
h 
+ 
h 
and 
1p(x + h) -
1p(x) 
f(x + h) - f(x) 
...:....:..--'-----=-....:......:. = C :""":"'---'--=-:""":'" 
h 
h 
and our statements follow directly by passage to the limit. 
Thus, for example, the derivative of the function cp(x) = f(x) + 
ax + b (where a and b are constants) is given by the equation 
cp'(x) = f'(x) + a. 
With the help of these rules and of the formula for the derivative of a 
power we can immediately differentiate any polynomial y = aoXn + 
alXn- l + ... + an and find 
y' = naoXn-l + (n -
1)alxn- 2 + ... + 2an_2X + an-l. 
e. Differentiability and Continuity of Functions 
It is useful to know that differentiability is a stronger condition than 
continuity: 
If a function is differentiable it is automatically continuous. 
For if the difference quotient [f(x + h) - f(x)]fh approaches a 
definite limit as h tends to zero, the numerator of the fraction, that is, 
f(x + h) - f(x) mustl tend to zero with h; this just expresses the 
continuity of the functionf(x) at the point x. Hence, separate cumber-
some continuity proofs are unnecessary for functions that can be shown 
to be differentiable (that is, for most functions we shall encounter). 
Discontinuities of the Derivative-Corners 
The converse, however, is false; it is not true that every continuous 
function has a derivative at every point. The simplest counter-example 
is the function f(x) = lxi, that is, f(x) = -x for x ::;;; 0 and f(x) = x 
for x ~ 0; its graph is shown in Fig. 2.24. At the point x = 0 this 
function is continuous, but has no derivative. 
The limit of 
[f(x + h) - f(x)]fh is equal to 1 if h tends to zero through positive 
1 Since then 
. 
u. f(x + h) - f(X)] 
. 
11m [f(x + h) - f(x)] = hm 
(hm h) = ['(x) . 0 = O. 
11-0 
-0 
h 
11-0 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 167 
values, and is equal to -1 if h tends to zero through negative values; 
if we do not restrict the sign of h, no limit exists. We say that our 
function has different forward and backward derivatives at the point 
x = 0, where by forward derivative and backward derivative we mean 
respectively the limiting values of [f(x + h) - f(x)]/h as h approaches 
zero through positive values only and negative values only. The 
differentiability of a function defined in an interval about the point 
y 
------------~~------------~x 
Figure 2.24 f(x) = Ixl. 
considered thus requires not merely that the forward and backward 
derivatives exist, but that they are equal. Geometrically the inequality 
of the two derivatives means that the curve has a corner. Differenti-
ability expresses in a precise way what intuitively would be called 
smoothness of the graph of the function. 
Infinite Discontinuities 
As further examples of points where a continuous function is not 
differentiable we consider the points where the derivative becomes 
infinite, that is, the points at which there exists neither a forward nor a 
backward derivative, the difference quotient [f(x + h) - f(x)]/h 
increasing beyond all bounds as h -
O. For example, the function 
y = f(x) = iY; = x~ is defined and continuous for all values of x. 
For all nonzero values of x its derivative is given (p. 164) by the formula 
y' = lx-%. At the point x = 0 we have [f(x + h) - f(x)]/h = 
h~/h = h-%, and we see at once that as h -
0 the expression has no 
limiting value, but, on the contrary, tends to infinity. This state of 
affairs is often briefly described by saying that the function possesses an 
infinite derivative, or the derivative infinity, at the point in question; 
as we should remember, however, this merely means that as h tends to 
zero the difference quotient increases beyond all bounds, and that the 

168 
The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
Y 
y = xls 
-------------r.~--------~x 
Figure 2.25 
derivative in the sense in which we have defined it really does not exist. 
The geometrical meaning of an infinite derivative is that the tangent 
to the curve is vertical (cf. Fig. 2.25). 
The function y = f(x) = .J-;, which is defined and continuous for 
x ~ 0, is also not differentiable at the point x = o. Since y is not defined 
for negative values of x, we here consider the right-hand derivative 
only. The equation [f(h) - f(O)]lh = I/.Jh shows that this derivative 
is infinite; the curve touches the y-axis at the origin (Fig. 2.26). 
Finally, in the function y = {I x2 = x% we have a case in which the 
right-hand derivative at the point x = 0 is positive and infinite, whereas 
the left-hand derivative is negative and infinite, as follows from the 
relation 
l(h) - 1(0) = ---
{Iii . 
1 
h 
As a matter of fact, the continuous curve y = x%, the so-called semi-
cubical parabola or Neil's parabola, has at the origin a cusp with a tangent 
perpendicular to the x-axis (cf. Fig. 2.27). 
y 
y = xli 
--~----------------------~x 
Figure 2.26 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 169 
y 
------------~o-------------x 
Figure 2.27 
f. Higher Derivatives and Their Significance 
The graph of the derivative f'ex) of a function is called the derived 
curve of the grapp. of f(x). For example, the derived curve of the 
parabola y = x2 is a straight line, represented by the function y = 2x. 
The derived curve of the sine curve y = sin x is the cosine curve y = 
cos x; similarly, the derived curve of the curve y = cos x is the curve 
y = -sin x. (These latter curves can be obtained from each other 
by translation in the direction of the x-axis, as is shown in Fig. 2.28.) 
It is quite natural to form the derived curves of the derived curves, 
that is, to form the derivative of the function f'ex) = cp(x). This 
derivative 
..I.I( ) _ I' r(x + h) - f'ex) 
'I' X 
-
1m 
, 
h-+O 
h 
provided that it exists, is called the second derivative of the function 
f(x); we shall denote it by f"(x). 
Similarly, we may attempt to form the derivative of fl/(x) , the so-
called third derivative of f(x) , which we then denote by fll/(x). For most 
functions that concern us there is nothing to hinder us from repeating the 
process of differentiation as many times as we like, thus defining an 
nth derivative f(n)(x).l Occasionally, it will be convenient to call the 
functionf(x) its own Oth derivative. 
If the independent variable is interpreted as the time t and the motion 
of a point is represented as previously by the functionf(t), the physical 
meaning of the second derivative is the rate of change of the velocity 
/,(t) with respect to time, or, as it is usually called, the acceleration. 
In the example of the freely falling body the distance traveled in the 
time t was given by the function y = f(t) = at2• We foundf'(t) = 2at 
for the velocity at the time t. The acceleration has then the constant 
1 The terms second, third, ... , nth differential coefficient are also used, or D"j, .•• , 
D1(cf. footnote 3, p. 158). 

170 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
value f"(t) = 2a (which is usually identified with the gravitational 
constant g). Later (p. 236), we shall discuss the geometrical interpre-
tation of the second derivative in detail. Here, however, we take note of 
the following facts: At a point where rex) is positive,f'(x) increases 
y 
f(x) = sin x 
/ 
/ 
/ 
{' (x) = cos x 
/ ............ , 
/ 
/ 
------~----~r.-----~------~------d_------~x 
y 
f(x) = cos x 
{,(x) = -sin x 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
.... -, 
/ 
, 
Figure 2.28 Derived curves of sin x and cos x. 
as x increases; if here f'ex) is positive, the curve becomes steeper for 
increasing x. If, on the other hand,r(x) is negative,j'(x) decreases as 
x increases, and if j'(x) is positive, the curve becomes less steep as x 
increases. 
Finally, we observe that the higher derivatives may be used to 
define a function. Thus one can characterize the trigonometric func-
tions by a so-called differential equation involving the function 
and its second derivative. From the formulas (d cos x)Jdx = -sin x, 
(d sin x)Jdx = cos x we obtain immediately by differentiating again, 
d2 
-
cos X = -cos x, 
dx2 
d2 
• 
• 
-2smx= -smx. 
dx 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 171 
Hence if the symbol u stands for either of the functions sin x or cos x, 
we have the relation (differential equation) 
" 
u = -u. 
This differential equation is also clearly satisfied by any linear com-
bination u = a cos x + b sin x with constant coefficients a, b. We shall 
see on p. 312 that such linear combinations, with arbitrary constants 
a and b, are the only functions u for which u" = -u. 
In all types of applications involving oscillations or wave phenomena, 
such as motions of springs or waves on the surface of water, we are led 
directly from physical considerations to a differential equation of the 
type u" = -u for the physically significant variable u (usually the 
independent variable is time). It is therefore important to recognize 
that u can be represented simply in terms of trigonometric functions 
(see Chapter 9). 
g. Derivative and Difference Quotient. Leihnitz's Notation 
In Leibnitz's notation the passage to the limit in the process of 
differentiation is symbolically expressed by replacing the symbol ~ 
by the symbol d, motivating Leibnitz's symbol for the derivative 
defined by the equation 
dy = lim ~y. 
dx 
A"'-+O~X 
If we wish to obtain a clear grasp of the meaning of the differential 
calculus, we must beware of the old fallacy of imagining the derivative 
as the quotient of two "quantities" dy and dx which are actually 
"infinitely small." The difference quotient ~y/~x has a meaning only 
for differences ~x which are not equal to zero. After forming this 
genuine difference quotient we must perform the passage to the limit by 
means of a transformation or some other device which also in the limit 
avoids division by zero. It does not make sense to suppose that first 
~x and ~y go through something like a limiting process and reach 
values which are infinitesimally small but still not zero, so that ~x and 
~y are replaced by "infinitely small quantities" or "infinitesimals" 
dx and dy, and that the quotient of these quantities is then formed. 
Such a conception of the derivative is incompatible with mathematical 
clarity; in fact, it is entirely meaningless. For many people it un-
doubtedly has a certain charm of mystery, always associated with the 
word "infinite"; in the early days of the differential calculus even 
Leibnitz himself was capable of combining these vague mystical ideas 

172 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
with a thoroughly clear handling of the limiting process. But today the 
mysticism of infinitely small quantities has no place in the calculus. 
The notation of Leibnitz, however, is not merely suggestive in itself, 
but it is actually extremely flexible and useful. The reason is that in 
many calculations and formal transformations we can deal with the 
symbols dy and dx exactly as if they were ordinary numbers. By 
treating dx and dy like numbers we can give neater expression to many 
calculations which can admittedly be carried out without their use. In 
the following chapters we shall see this fact verified over and over 
again and shall find ourselves justified in making free and repeated use 
of it, provided we do not lose sight of the symbolical character of the 
signs dy and dx. 
·For the second and higher derivatives too, Leibnitz devised a sugges-
tive notation. He considered the second derivative as the limit of the 
"second difference quotient" in the following manner: In addition 
to the variable x we consider Xl = X + hand X2 = X + 2h. We then 
take the second difference quotient, meaning the first difference quotient 
of the first difference quotient, that is, the expression 
!(Y2 -
Yl _ Yl - Y) = 1. (y _ 2y + y) 
h 
h 
h 
h2 
2 
1 
, 
where y = f(x), YI = f(xl), and Y2 = f(xJ. Writing h = !1x, Y2 -
Yl = 
!1Yl' and Yl - Y = !1y, we may appropriately call the expression in the 
last parentheses the difference of the difference of Y or the second 
difference of Y and write symbolicallyl 
Y2 -
2Yl + Y = !1Yl - !1y = !1(!1y) = !12y. 
In this symbolic notation the second difference quotient is then written 
!12y/(!1X)2, where the denominator is really the square of !1x, whereas 
in the numerator the superscript 2 symbolically denotes the repetition 
of the difference process. The second derivative is then expressed by 
!12f 
f"(x) = lim --2 • 
Cl:l-+CI: (!1x) 
This symbolism for the difference quotient2 led Leibnitz to introduce 
1 Here l:!.l:!. = l:!.2 is merely a symbol for "difference of difference" or "second 
difference. " 
a As we must emphasize, the statement that the second derivative may be represented 
as the limit of the second difference quotient requires proof. We previously defined 
the second derivative, not in this way, but as the limit of the first difference quotient 
of the first derivative. The two definitions are equivalent, provided the second 
derivative is continuous; the proof, however, will be given only later (see Chapter 
5, Appendix II since we have no particular need of the result. 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 173 
the notation 
y" = f"(x) = ~~ , 
y'" = f"'(x) = ~~, etc., 
for the second and higher derivatives, and we shall find that this 
notation also stands the test of usefulness.l 
h. The Mean Value Theorem of Differential Calculus 
The difference quotient involves the values of a function for distinct 
values of x, whereas the derivative at a point tells us nothing about the 
function at any other point; the difference quotient reflects properties of 
the function "in-the-Iarge," while the derivative reflects a local property 
or a property "in-the-small." We shall often need to derive over-all or 
"global" properties of a function from the local properties given by its 
derivative. For this purpose we utilize a fundamental relation between 
the difference quotient and derivative known as "the mean value 
theorem of differential calculus." 
The mean value theorem is easily appreciated intuitively. We 
consider the difference quotient 
of a function f(x) , and assume that the derivative exists everywhere in 
the closed interval Xl ::::;; X ::::;; X 2, so that the graph of the curve has a 
tangent everywhere. The difference quotient is the tangent of the 
angle IX of inclination of the secant, shown in Fig. 2.29. Imagine this 
secant shifted parallel to itself. At least once it will reach a position in 
which it is a tangent to the curve at a point between Xl and X 2, certainly 
at that point X = ~ of the curve which is at the greatest distance from 
the secant say at X =~. Hence there exists an intermediate value ~ in 
the interval such that 
f(XI) - f(x2} = f'(~). 
Xl -
X 2 
This statement is called the mean value theorem of the differential 
calculus.2 We can also express it somewhat differently by noticing that 
1 This is the customary notation. 
Writing y" = d"y/(dx)2, y" = d 3y/(dx)3 with 
parentheses, would be somewhat clearer, but is not done ordinarily. 
2 A more appropriate name would be the intermediate value theorem of differential 
calculus. 

174 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
the number ~ may be written in the form 
~ = Xl + 0(X2 -
Xl), 
where all we know about 0 is that it lies between 0 and 1. Although 0 
(or ~) generally cannot be specified more exactly, the theorem is 
extremely powerful in application. 
Consider, for example, the case where X is the time and y = f(x) the 
distance of a car from its starting point along a certain road. Then 
y 
o 
Figure 2.29 
f'ex) is the velocity of the car at the time x. If, say, during the first two 
hours (~x = 2) the driver has covered a distance ~f = 120 miles, we 
can conclude from the mean value theorem that at least at one moment 
~ during those two hours the driver had a speed of exactly 60 miles 
per hour (provided the velocity exists at every moment). The driver 
cannot claim, for instance, to have traveled all the time at less than 50 
miles per hour. On the other hand, there is nothing to indicate what 
the time ~ was at which the precise speed of 60 miles per hour was 
attained; it might have been at some time during the first hour or 
during the second hour or on several occasions. 
A precise statement of the mean value theorem is the following: 
Iff(x) is continuous in the closed interval xl :::;; X :::;; X 2 and differentiable 
at every point of the open interval Xl < X < X2, then there exists at 
least one value 0, where 0 < 0 < 1, such that 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 175 
If we replace Xl by X and X2 by x + h, we can express the mean 
value theorem by the formula 
f(x + h) - f(x) = f'U;) = f'(x + ()h), 
h 
x < ~ < x + h. 
Although it is essential thatf(x) should be continuous for all points 
of the interval, including the end points, we need not assume that the 
derivative exists at the end points. 
If at any point in the interior of the interval the derivative fails to 
exist, the mean value theorem is not necessarily true. It is easy to see 
this from the example of f(x) = Ixl. 
i. Proof of the Theorem 
The mean value theorem is usually derived by reduction to a special 
case which we establish first. 
ROLLE'S THEOREM. If a function 4>(x) is continuous in the closed 
interval Xl ~ X ~ X 2 and differentiable in the open interval Xl < X < x2, 
and if in addition 4>(xl ) = 0 and 4>(x2) = 0, then there exists at least one 
point ~ in the interior of the interval at which fa) = O. 
Interpreted geometrically, this means that if a curve reaches the 
x-axis at two points, then it must have a horizontal tangent at some 
intermediate point (Fig. 2.30). 
<I> (x) 
Mr-------~~-------------------
--~--~~---o----------------;_--~--~x 
o 
mr-----------------------------"'"'~ 
Figure 2.30 

176 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
Indeed, since cp(x) is continuous in the closed interval [Xl' x2] there 
exists a greatest value M of cp(x) and a smallest value m in that interval 
(see p. 101). Since cp v~ishes in the end points, we plust have m ~ 0 ~ 
M. If these greatest and le~st values should be equal, then Q.ecessarily 
m = M = 0 and cp(x) == 0 at all points of th(! interval; then also 
cp'(x) = 0 in the interval, ap.d hence cp'(~) = 0 for every ~ in the interval. 
Thus we only have to consider the case where m and M are not both 
zero. If, in particular, M is not zero, then M must be positive. There 
exists a point ~ of the interval [Xl' X2] where cp(~) = M. Since cp vanishes 
in the end points of the interval, the point ~ must be an interior point. 
Furthermore, cp(x) ~ cp(~) = M for all X in [Xl' x2]. Consequently, for 
every number h whose absolute value Ihl is small enough, the inequality 
Cp~~ + h) -
cp(~) ~ 0 holds. This implies that the quotient 
cp(~ + h) -
cp(~) 
h 
is negative or zero for h > 0 and positive or zero for h < O. If we 
let h tend to zero through positive values, we find that cp'(~) ~ 0, 
whereas for h tending to zero through negative values it follows that 
cp'(~) ~ O. tience cp'(~) = 0 and we have proved Rolle's theorem in the 
case M :yI: o. The same argument holds for m :yI: O. 
To prove the mean value theorem we apply Rolle's theorem to a 
function which represents the vertical distance between the point 
(x, f(x» of the graph and its secant: 
cp(x) = f(x) - f(xl ) - f(x2) - f(xl ) (x -
Xl). 
x2 -
Xl 
This function! obviously satisfies the condition cp(xl ) = cp(x2) = 0, and 
is of the form cp(x) = f(x) + ax + b with constant coefficients a = 
- [j(xJ - f(xI)]/(X2 -
Xl) and b. From p. 166 we know that 
cp'(x) = f'(x) + a, 
and thus by Rolle's theorem 
o = cp'(~) = f'(~) + a 
1 This function also is proportional to the distance of the point (x,f(x)) of the curve 
from the secant; the reader can easily verify this for himself, for example, by using 
the fact from elementary analytical geometry that the expression (y -
mx -
b)! 
V 1 + m" represents the (signed) distance of the point (x, y) from the line with the 
equation y - mx - b = O. In this way we find that indeed at the points of the curve 
having greatest distance from the secant the tangent is parallel to the secant. 

Sec. 2.8 
for a suitably chosen intermediate value ~; hence 
f'(~) = -a =f(x2) - f(xl ) ; 
X 2 -
Xl 
thus the mean value theorem is proved. 
Significance of the Theorem 
The Derivative 177 
The derivative of a function had been defined as the limit of difference 
quotients for an interval as the end points approach each other. The 
mean value theorem establishes a connection between difference 
quotients and derivatives of a differentiable function which does not 
involve the shrinking of the interval. Each difference quotient is equal 
to the derivative at a suitable intermediate point ~. 
Examples. Just as in the mean value theorem of integral calculus 
there is nothing specific asserted in the intermediate value theorem 
about the location of ~ beyond the fact that ~ lies in the interior of the 
interval. For the example of the quadratic function y = f(x) = X2 
with derivative f'(x) = 2x we find 
f(X2) - f(x l ) = Xl + X2 = f'(~), 
X 2 -
Xl 
where ~ = (xl + x2)/2 is the midpoint of the interval [Xl' X 2]. In 
general, however, ~ might lie anywhere else between Xl and X 2• For 
example, if f(x) = x3, we have [f(l) - f(O)]/(1 - 0) = 1 = f'(~) = 
3~2, where ~ = l/.Ji 
Monotonic Functions. As one of many applications of the mean 
value theorem of differential ~alculus we prove that if the derivative of 
f(x) has a constant sign, thenfis monotonic. Specifically, we assume 
f(x) to be continuous in the closed interval [a, b] and differentiable 
at each point of the open interval (a, b). If then f'(x) > 0 for X in 
(a, b), then the function f(x) is monotonic increasing; similarly, if 
f'(x) < 0, the function is monotonic decreasing. The proof is obvious: 
Let Xl and X 2 be any two values in the closed interval [a, b]. Then there 
exists a ~ between Xl and x2, and hence also between a and b, such that 
f(xJ - f(xl ) = f'(~)(X2 - xl)· 
If f'(x) > 0 everywhere in (a, b) we have in particular f'(~) > O. 
Hence f(x2) - f(xl ) is positive for X2 > xl; that is, f(x) is increasing. 
Similarly,fis decreasing iff'(x) < 0 in (a, b). 
In the same way we show that a function f(x) continuous in [a, b] 

178 
The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
and differentiable in the open interval (a, b) must be a constant iff'(x) = 0 
everywhere in (a, b). For then 
f(x2) - f(xl ) = f'(~)(X2 -
Xl) = O. 
This important statement corresponds to the intuitively obvious fact 
that a curve whose tangent at every point is parallel to the x-axis must 
be a straight line which is parallel to the x-axis. 
Lipschitz-Continuity of Differentiable Functions. It was mentioned 
earlier that a functionf(x) having a derivative is necessarily continuous. 
The mean value theorem of differential calculus furnishes much more 
precise quantitative information, namely, a modulus of continuity. We 
consider a function f(x) which is defined in the closed interval [a, b] 
and has a derivative f'(x) at each point of that interval. Assume that 
f'(x) is bounded in the interval (this is certainly the case providedf'(x) 
is defined and continuous in the closed interval [a, b]); there exists 
then a number M such that If'(x) I :::;; M. For any two values Xl' x2 
in (a, b) we infer from the mean value theorem 
If(x2) - f(x l ) I = If'(~)(X2 - xl)1 :::;; M IX2 - XII. 
For given € > 0 we have thus produced a simple modulus of con-
tinuity b = €IM such that 
If(x2) - f(x l ) I :::;: € 
for 
IX2 -
xII:::;: b. 
Take, for example, the functionf(x) = x2 in the interval -a :::;; x:::;; +a. 
Since 
If'(X)I = 12xl :::;; 2a 
we see that here 
We said that a function f(x) "satisfies a Lipschitz-condition" or 
is "Lipschitz-continuous" if there is a constant M such that 
If(x2) - f(x l ) I :::;; M IX2 - XII 
for all Xl' x2 in question. This means that all difference quotients 
f(x 2) - f(xl ) 
have the same upper bound M for their absolute value. We see that 
every function f with continuous derivative f' on a closed interval is 
Lipschitz-continuous. However, even functions that do not have a 
derivative at every point can be Lipschitz-continuous, as the example 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 179 
f(x) = Ixl shows. The reader can verify for himself that for this 
function always If(xJ - f(xl ) I ~ IX2 - xII. 
On the other hand, not every continuous function is Lipschitz-
continuous. This is shown by the example of f(x) = xl-§; here 
f(x) - f(O) = x-% 
x-O 
is not bounded for small x; hence f(x) is not Lipschitz-continuous at 
x = O. This is consistent with the fact that the derivative f'(x) = 1/3x% 
does not remain bounded as x tends to zero. The functions which are 
Lipschitz-continuous form an important class intermediate between 
those that are merely continuous and those that have a continuous 
derivative. 
j. rhe ,Approximation of Functions by Linear Functions. 
Definition of Differentials 
Definition. The derivative of a function y = f(x) was defined by 
f'(x) = lim f(x + h) - f(x) = lim !:J.y , 
10-+0 
h 
&",-+0 !:J.x 
where !:J.x = h. If for a fixed x and a variable h, we define a quantity 
£ by 
£(h) =f(x + h~ - f(x) - f'(x) = ~~ - f'(x), 
then the fact that f'(x) is the derivative off at the point x amounts to 
the equation 
lim £(h) = o. 
10-+0 
The quantity !:J.y = f(x + h) - f(x) represents the change or increment 
in the value of the dependent variable y that results when the value x 
of the independent variable is changed by the amount !:J.x = h. Since 
!:J.y = f'(x) !:J.x + £ !:J.x, 
the quantity !:J.y appears as the sum of two parts, namely, a part 
f'(x) !:J.x which is proportional to !:J.x and a part £ !:J.x which can be made 
as small as we please compared to !:J.x by making !:J.x itself small enough. 
The dominant, linear part in the expression for !:J.y we shall call the 
differential dy of y and write for it 
dy = df(x) = f'(x) !:J.x. 

180 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
For any differentiable function f and for a fixed x this differential is 
a well-defined linear function of h = ~x. For example, for the function 
y = x2 we have dy = d(x2) = 2x ~x = 2xh. For the particular function 
y = x whose derivative has the constant value one, we simply have 
dx = ~x. It is then consistent with our definition to write dx for ~x 
when x is the independent variable; hence the differential of any 
function y = f(x) can also be written as 
dy = df(x) = f'(x) dx. 
The increment of the dependent variable 
~y =f'(x)dx + €dx = dy + €dx 
differs from the differential dy by the amount € dx, which in general is 
not zero. In the example of the function y = x2 we have dy = 2x dx, 
whereas 
~y = (x + dX)2 -
x2 = 2x dx + (dX)2 = dy + € dx, 
where € = dx. 
Earlier we used the symbol dy/dx purely symbolically to denote the 
limit of the quotient ~y/~x for ~x tending to zero. With our present 
definition of the differentials dy and dx the derivative dy/dx can actually 
be considered as the ordinary quotient of dy and dx. Here, however, 
dy and dx are now not in any sense "infinitely small" quantities or 
"infinitesimals;" such an interpretation would be devoid of meaning. 
Instead dy and dx are well-defined linear functions of h = ~x which for 
large ~x may have large numerical values. There is nothing remarkable 
in the fact that the quotient dy/dx of those quantities has the same value 
as the derivativef'(x). This is merely a tautology restating the definition 
of dy asf'(x) dx.1 
Rewriting the relation between increment and differential of f in 
the form 
f(x + h) = f(x) + hf'(x) + €h, 
we see that the expression f(x + h) considered as a function of h is 
represented by the linear functionf(x) + hf'(x) wth an error €h which 
is arbitrarily small compared to h if h is sufficiently small. This approxi-
mate representation of f(x + h) by the linear function f(x) + hf'(x) 
means geometrically that we replace the curve by its tangent at the 
point x (see Fig. 2.31). 
1 Similarly, higher-order differentials could be defined by d'y = [,,(xW =.f"(X)(dX)2. 
d'y = r(x)(dx)3, etc., in agreement with Leibnitz' notation for the higher derivatives. 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 181 
y 
--~-------------o--------~~------~x 
o 
x 
x+dx 
Figure 2.31 Increment!J.y and differential dy. 
tinear Approximation 
A more precise estimate of the magnitude of the "error," that is, 
ofthe deviation of the functionf(x) from the linear function representing 
the tangent, is given by the mean value theorem of differential calculus. 
We have for a suitable ~ between x and x + h 
so that 
f(x + h) - f(x) = hf'a), 
e =f(x + h) - f(x) _ f'(x) =f'(~) - f'(x). 
h 
If, as usually in applications, the function f'(x) itself has a derivative 
f"(x), we find by applying the mean value theorem a second time that 
f'(~) - f'(x) = a - x)f"('Y}), 
where 'Y} is a value intermediate between x and ~ and hence also between 
x and x + h. It follows that 
lei = I(~ - x)f"('Y})I = I~ - xl 1f"('Y}) I ~ hM, 
where M is any upper bound for the absolute value of the second 
derivative offin the interval [x, x + h]. Then lehl, which measures the 
deviation of f(x + h) from the linear function f(x) + hf'(x), is at 
most Mh2. For sufficiently small h the expression Mh2 is, of course, 
much smaller thanf'(x)h, unlessf'(x) happens to have the value zero. 
This approximation of a function in a small interval by a linear function 

182 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
is of greatest significance both for practical applications and for 
advanced mathematical analysis. We shall return to this topic in later 
chapters, and incidentally derive then the better estimate I€hl ::;;; tMh2. 
Interpolation 
*When a function I(x) is described numerically by a table of values, 
I is ordinarily determined by linear interpolation for arguments x 
intermediate between those for which I is listed. This procedure also 
corresponds to replacing the function I by a linear function in an 
interval. In this case the graph of the linear function is given by a 
y 
~O~------~a--------~b~----~X 
Figure 2.32 Linear interpolation. 
secant rather than by a tangent to the curve representing! If, say, the 
values of I are known at two points a and b, we replace I(x) for inter-
mediate x by the expression 
rf>(x) = f(a) + (x _ a/(b) - f(a) , 
b-a 
which is linear in x and gives the correct values of I at the end points 
x = a and x = b of the interval (see Fig. 2.32). Here again by use of 
the mean value theorem we can estimate the error in this approximation. 
We have 
f(x) -
rf>(x) = (x -
a)[f(X) - f(a) _ feb) - f(a)] 
x-a 
b-a 
= (x -
a)[f'(~l) -
f'(~2)]. 
Since ~1 lies between a and x, it also lies between a and b, as does 
~2' A second application of the mean value theorem of differential 

Sec. 2.8 
The Derivative 183 
calculus then yields 
f(x) -
cf>(x) = (x -
a)f"('YJ)(~l -
~2)' 
where 'YJ is between ~l and ~2 and hence also between a and b. Con-
sequently, denoting by M an upper bound for 11"1 in the interval 
[a, b], we find that 
If(x) -
cf>(x) I :::;; Ix -
all~l -
~21If"('YJ)1 :::;; M(b -
a)2. 
Once again the deviation of f from its linear approximation can be 
estimated by the square of the length of the interval. 
As a numerical example we take from a table of trigonometric 
functions in radian measure the values 
sin 0.75 = 0.6816, 
sin 0.76 = 0.6889, 
where the errors do not exceed 0.00005. If we want to deduce the value 
of the sine function for the intermediate argument 0.754, we find by 
linear interpolation that 
sin 0.754 R:1 0.6816 + i~(0.6889 -
0.6816) R:1 0.6845. 
For the function f(x) = sin x the first derivative is f'(x) = cos x, the 
second derivativef"(x) = -
sin x. Obviously, If"(x) I :::;; 1, so that the 
error in the value found for sin 0.754 as a result of the linear inter-
polation procedure does not exceed 1 X (0.01)2 = 0.0001. To this 
error estimate we must add possible errors due to round-off in the 
tabulated values and in the interpolation. 
We can compare this value obtained by linear interpolation with the 
value we would obtain by replacing the sine curve by its tangent at 
the point x = 0.75. Taking 1'(0.75) = cos 0.75 = 0.7317 from the 
table, we find 
sin 0.754 R:1 f(0.75) + f'(0.75)(0.004) = sin 0.75 + 0.004 cos 0.75 
R:1 0.6845. 
Incidentally, the true value of sin 0.754 correct to six significant digits 
is 0.684560. 
k. Remarks on Applications to the Natural Sciences 
In applying mathematics to natural phenomena we never deal with 
precisely known quantities. Whether a length is exactly a meter is a 
question which cannot be decided by any experiment and which con-
sequently has no physical meaning. Moreover, there is no immediate 
physical meaning in saying that the length of a material rod is rational 
or irrational; we can always measure it with any desired degree of 

184 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and DifIerential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
accuracy by rational numbers, and the only meaningful question is 
whether we can manage to perform such a measurement using rational 
numbers with relatively small denominators. Just as the question of 
rationality or irtationality in the rigorous s~.rise of "exact matHematics" 
has no physical meaning, carrying out limitirlg processes in applications 
is usually not more than a mathematical idealization. 
The ptactical-and overwhelming-significance of such idealizations 
lies in, the fact that through the idealizations analytical expressions 
become essentially simpler and more manageable. For example, it is 
vastly simpler and more convenient to work with the notion of in-
stantaneous velocity, which is a function of only one definite instant of 
time, than with the notion of average velocity between two different 
instants. Without such idealization every scientific investigation of 
nature would be condemned to hopeless complications and would 
bog down at the outset. 
We do not intend to enter into a philosophical discussion of the 
relationship of mathematics to reality. For the sake of better under-
standing of the theory, it should be emphasized that in applications we 
have the right to replace a derivative by a difference quotient and vice 
versa, provided only that the differences are small enough to guarantee 
a sufficiently close approximation. The physicist, the biologist, the 
engineer, or anyone else who has to deal with these ideas in practice will 
therefore have the right to identify the difference quotient with the 
derivative within his limits of accuracy. The smaller the increment 
h = dx of the independent variable, the more accurately can he 
represent the increment l1y = f(x + h) - f(x) by the differential 
dy = hf'(x). As long as he keeps knowingly within the limits of accu-
racy required by the problem, he might even be permitted to speak of the 
quantities dx = hand dy = hf'(x) as "infinitesimals." These "physi-
cally infinitesimal" quantities have a precise meaning. They are 
variables with values which are finite, unequal to zero, and chosen 
small enough for the given investigation, for example, smaller than a 
fractional part of a wavelength or smaller than the distance between 
two electrons in an atom; in general, smaller than the degree of 
accuracy required. 
2.9 The Integral, the Primitive Function, and 
the Fundamental Theorems of the Calculus 
a. The Derivative of the Integral 
As already stated, the connection between integration and differen-
tiation is the cornerstone of the differential and integral calculus. 

Sec. 2.9 
Fundamental Theorems of the Calculus 185 
We recall from Section 2.4 that an indefinite integral of a con-
tinuous function f(x) is defined as a function cp(x) of the upper end 
point of integration by the formula 
cp(x) = J.."'f(U) du, 
where ex was any point in the domain off We shall now prove 
FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS (Part One). 
The indefinite 
integral cp(x) of a continuous function f(x) always possesses a derivative 
cp'(x), and moreover 
cp'(x) = f(x). 
That is, differentiation of the indefinite integral of a continuous 
function always reproduces the integrand 
d f'" 
-
feu) du = f(x). 
dx 
IX 
This inverse character of the operations of differentiation and integration 
is the basic fact of calculus. The proof is an immediate consequence of 
the mean value theorem of integral calculus. According to that 
theorem we have for any values x and x + h of the domain off 
f"'+" 
cp(x + h) -
cp(x) = '" 
feu) du = hf(~), 
where ~ is some value in the interval with end points x and x + h. 
For h tending to zero the value ~ must tend to x so that 
lim cp(x + h) -
cp(x) = limf(~) = f(x), 
" .... 0 
h 
" .... 0 
since f is continuous. Hence cp'(x) = f(x) as stated by the theorem. 
Applications. (a) We can use the theorem to find derivatives for 
some of the functions introduced earlier. The natural logarithm was 
defined for x > 0 by the indefinite integral 
1"'1 
logx= 
-duo 
1 u 
It follows immediately that 
d log x 
1 
--=-
dx 
x 

186 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
(b) More general logarithms to an arbitrary base a were expressible 
in the form 
log x 
loga x = --. 
log a 
Applying the rule for the derivative of the product of a constant and of 
a function we find that 
d 
1 
-loga x = --- . 
dx 
x log a 
(c) We found that 
.!!. x" = ocx,.-1 
dx 
in the case where the exponent oc is an integer or more generally a 
rational number. We can now extend this formula to arbitrary oc. 
For that purpose we recall the integration formula 
fb uP du = _1_ (bP+1 _ aP+1), 
Ja 
f3 + 1 
which we had proved for any positive numbers a, b, and any f3 ¥: -l. 
If we replace here the upper limit b by the variable x and differentiate 
both sides with respect to x, it follows that for x > 0 
d 
1 
xP = - -- (xP+1 _ aP+1). 
dx f3 + 1 
Using the rules for the derivative of a sum and of a constant times a 
function, we can write this result in the form 
xP = _1_ .!!. xP+1. 
f3 + 1 dx 
Substituting oc for f3 + 1, we obtain the formula 
d -It 
,.-1 
-;c = ocx 
dx 
for any f3 ¥: -1, that is, for oc ¥: O. However, the formula also holds 
trivially for oc = 0 since then xCI. = 1 and the derivative of a constant 
is zero. 
b. The Primitive Function and Its Relation to the Integral 
Inverting Differentiation 
The fundamental theorem shows that the indefinite integral 1>(x), 
that is, the integral with a variable upper limit x, of a function j(x), 

Sec. 2.9 
Fundamental Theorems of the Calculus 187 
is a solution of the following problem: Given f(x) , determine a function 
F(x) such that 
F'(x) = f(x). 
This problem requires us to reverse the process of differentiation. It is 
typical of the inverse problems that occur in many parts of mathe-
matics and that we have already found to be a fruitful mathematical 
method for generating new concepts. (For example, the first extension 
of the idea of natural numbers is suggested by the desire to invert 
certain elementary processes of arithmetic. Again new kinds of func-
tions were obtained from the inverses of known functions.) 
Any function F(x) such that F'(X) = f(x) is called a primitive function 
of f(x) or simply a primitive of f(x); this terminology suggests that the 
functionf(x) is derived from F(x). 
This problem of the inversion of differentiation or of the finding of a 
primitive function at first sight is of quite different character from the 
problem of integration. The first part of the fundamental theorem 
asserts, however: 
Every indefinite integral 4>( x) of the function f( x) is a primitive of f( x). 
Yet this result does not completely solve the problem of finding the 
primitive functions. For we do not yet know if we have found all the 
solutions of the problem. The question about the set of all primitive 
functions is answered by the following theorem, sometimes referred to 
as the second part of the fundamental theorem of the differential and 
integral calculus 
The difference of two primitive functions Fl(X) and F2(x) of the same 
function f(x) is always a constant 
Thus from anyone primitive function F(x) we can obtain all the others 
in the form 
F(x) + c 
by suitable choice of the constant c. Conversely, for every value of the 
constant c the expression Fl(x) = F(x) + c represents a primitive func-
tion of f(x). 
It is clear that for any value of the constant c the function F(x) + c 
is a primitive function, provided that F(x) itself is. For we have 
(cf. p. 166) 
d 
d 
d 
-
[F(x) + c] = -
F(x) + -
c = F'(x) = f(x). 
dx 
dx 
dx 

188 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
Thus to complete the proof of our theorem it remains only to show that 
the difference of two primitive functions Ft(x) and F2(x) is always 
constant. For this purpose we consider the difference 
Fl(x) -
F2(x) = G(x). 
Clearly, 
G'(x) = Fl'(x) -
F2'(x) = f(x) - f(x) = O. 
However we had proved on p. 178 from the mean value theorem of 
differential calculus that a function whose derivative vanishes every-
where in an interval is a constant. Hence G(x) is a constant c, and the 
theorem follows. 
Combining the two parts just proved we can now formulate the 
FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS. 
Every primitive function 
F(x) of a given function f(x) continuous on an interval can be repre-
sented in the form 
F(x) = c + cp(x) = c + L:I;f(U) du, 
where c and a are constants, and conversely, for any constant values of 
a and c chosen arbitrarilyl this expression always represents a primitive 
function. 
Notations 
It may be surmised that the constant c can as a rule be omitted 
because by changing the lower limit a we change the primitive function 
by an additive constant; that is, that all primitive functions are 
indefinite integrals. Frequently, however, we cannot obtain all the 
primitive functions if we omit the c, as the example f<x) = 0 shows. 
For this function the indefinite integral will always be zero, independ-
ently of the lower limit; yet any arbitrary constant is a primitive 
function of f(x) = o. A second example is the function f(x) = ";;, 
which is defined for nonnegative values of x only. The indefinite 
integral is 
cp(x) = ix% -
ia%, 
and we see that no matter how we choose the lower limit a the in-
definite integral cp(x) is always obtained from i(x)% by addition of a 
constant -ia% which is less than or equal to zero; yet such a function 
as ix% + 1 is also a primitive function for ..;;. Thus in the general 
expression for the primitive function we cannot dispense with the 
arbitrary additive constant. 
1 As long as a lies in the domain off. 

Sec. 2.9 
Fundamental Theorems of the Calculus 189 
The relationship which we have found suggests extending the 
notion of the indefinite integral so as to include all primitive functions. 
We shall henceforth call every expression of the form c + cp(x) = 
c + Li(u) du an indefinite integral of f(x), ar.d we shall no longer 
distinguish between the primitive function and the indefinite integral. 
Nevertheless, if the reader is to have a proper understanding of the 
interrelations of these concepts, it is absolutely necessary to bear in 
mind that in the first instance integration and inversion of differen-
tiation are two different things, and that it is only the knowledge of the 
relationship between them that gives us the right to apply the term 
"indefinite integral" to the primitive function also. 
It is quite customary to use a notation which is not perfectly clear 
without comment: we write 
F(x) = J f(x) dx, 
when we mean that the function F(x) is of the form 
F(x) = c + f'f(U) du 
for suitable constants c and a, that is, we omit the upper limit x, the 
lower limit a and the additive constant c and use the letter x for the 
variable of integration. Strictly speaking, of course, there is a slight 
inconsistency in using the same letter for the variable of integration and 
the upper limit x which is the independent variable in F(x). In using 
the notation S f(x) dx we must never lose sight of the indeterminacy 
connected with it, that is, the fact that the symbol always denotes one 
of the primitive functions off only. The formula F(x) = S f(x) dx is 
just a symbolic way of writing the relation 
d 
dx F(x) = f(x). 
c. The Use of the Primitive Function for 
Evaluation of Definite Integrals 
Suppose that we know anyone primitive function F(x) for the func-
tionf(x) and that we wish to evaluate the definite integral f feu) duo 
We know that the indefinite integral 
cp(x) = f'f(U) du, 

190 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
being also a primitive off(x), can only differ from F(x) by an additive 
constant. Therefore 
¢(x) = F(x) + c, 
and the additive constant c is determined at once because the indefinite 
integral ¢(x) = ii(u) du must take the value zero when x = .a. We 
thus obtain 0 = ¢(a) = F(a) + c, from which c = -F(a) and ¢(x) = 
F(x) -
F(a). In particular, for the value x = b we have the basic 
formula 
if 
ff(U) du = F(b) -
F(a), 
F'(u) = f(u). 
Therefore, 
If F(x) is any primitive function of the continuous function f(x) what-
soever, the definite integral of f(x) between the limits a and b is equal to 
the difference F(b) -
F(a). 
If we use the relation F'(x) = f(x), this consequence of the funda-
mental theorem may be written in the form 
(31) 
Jb 
Jb dF(x) 
Jb 
F(b) -
F(a) = 
F'(x) dx = -- dx = 
dF(x), 
a 
a 
dx 
a 
where now F(x) can be any function with a continuous derivative 
F'(x), and where we use the suggestive symbolic notation dF(x) = 
F'(x) dx of Leibnitz. 
In applying our rule we often use a vertical bar to denote the 
difference of values at the end points, writing 
Jb dF(x) 
Ib 
-- dx = F(b) -
F(a) = F(x) . 
a 
dx 
a 
We can write (31) in the form 
(32) 
F(b) -
F(a) = _1_ ibF'(X) dx. 
b-a 
b-a a 
Recalling the definition of the average of a function in an interval 
from p. 141, the rule states then that the difference quotient of the 
function F(x) formed for the points a and b is equal to the arithmetic 
mean or average of the derivative of F(x) in the interval with end points 
a and b. When we considered the motion of a particle on a straight 
line, we called the change in distance s divided by the change in time t 

Sec. 2.9 
Fundamental Theorems of the Calculus 191 
the "average velocity." We see now that indeed As/At is precisely the 
average of the velocities ds/dt for the given time interval if t is the 
independent variable used in forming the average. 
RELATION BETWEEN THE MEAN VALUE THEOREMS 
The formula 
(33) 
F(b) -
F(a) = ff(X) dx 
which holds for any continuous function I and one of its primitives F 
also makes evident tne relation between the mean value theorems of 
integral calculus (p. 141) and of differential calculus (p. 173). By the 
mean value theorem of integral calculus we conclude from (33) that 
F(b) -
F(a) = (b -
a)f($). 
Since F is a primitive of J, we can replace IW by F'W and obtain the 
mean value theorem of differential calculus for the function F. Of 
course, the requirement that F have a continuous derivative is stronger 
than the requirement of the mean value theorem of differential calculus, 
that the derivative merely exist. 
d. Examples 
In Chapter 3 we shall make extensive use of the fundamental theorem 
in evaluating integrals. For the moment we illustrate the method that is 
based on the use of the formula 
by some examples. 
(b dF(x) = F(b) _ F(a) 
Ja 
dx 
On p. 163 we derived the formula 
~ xn = nxn- 1 
dx 
for positive integers n. This formula is really a trivial consequence of the 
binomial theorem since 
~ xn = lim! [(x + h)n _ xn] 
dx 
h-+O h 
= lim !(xn + nhxn- 1 + n(n -
1) h 2x n- 2 + ... + hn _ xn) 
h-+O h 
2 
= hm nxn- 1 + 
hxn- 2 + ... + hn- 1 = nxn- 1• 
. 
( 
n(n -
1) 
) 
h-+O 
2 

192 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
Integrating between the limits a and b we find that 
Writing m for n -
1 we obtain the formula 
J
bxm ax = _1_ (bm+! _ am+!) 
a 
m + 1 
for integers m ~ O. This derivation of the expression for the integral 
of xm is much simpler than the one given on p. 131 which was based on a 
geometric subdivision of the interval [a, b]; moreover, the result is 
now actually more general since we can dispense with the assumption 
that a and b are positive. 
The formulas 
d sin x 
d cos x 
. 
-- =cosx 
dx 
' 
---= -smx 
dx 
were obtained on p. 165 by applying the addition theorems for trigono-
. f' 
d' l' 
(Sin h) 
1 I 
. 
. 
d' 
metnc unctIOns an usmg ~~o -h-
= . 
ntegratmg we Imme l-
ately obtain 
Lb cos x dx = sin b -
sin a, 
ibsin x dx = cos a - cos b. 
Again this derivation of the integration formulas from the fundamental 
theorem is simpler than the one based on the definition of the definite 
integral as limit of a sum. 
Supplement. The Existence of the Definite Integral 
of a Continuous Function 
We have yet to prove the fact that the integral of a function f(x) 
between the limits a and b (a < b) exists whenever f(x) is continuous in 
the closed interval [a, b]. The proof will be based mainly on the uniform 
continuity of f(x) (see p. 41): for any given positive € the values of f 
at any two points ~ and 'YJ of the interval differ by less than € if ~ and 'YJ 
are sufficiently close to each other, the degree of closeness dependent 
solely upon € and independent of ~, 'YJ; in other words, there exists a 
uniform modulus of continuity b(€) such that 11m - I('YJ) I < € for 
any values ~, 'YJ in [a, b] for which I~ -
'YJI < b. 

Existence of the Integral 193 
The definition of integral as a limit of sums requires that we subdivide 
the interval [a, b] into n parts by successive points xO' Xl> ••• 'Xn> where 
Xo = a, Xn = band Xo < Xl < ... < Xn. Let Sn be a name for a 
particular subdivision of [a, b] of this type into n cells. The coarseness 
of the subdivision will be measured by the length of the largest of the 
resulting cells, that is, the largest of the quantities AXi = Xi -
Xi-I, 
which we shall call the "span" of Sn. Because ofthe uniform continuity 
of f the values off in any two points of the same cell differ by less than 
E as soon as the span of Sn is less than 1J = 1J(E). An approximating 
sum based on the subdivision Sn is obtained by choosing a value ~i in 
each cell [Xi-I, Xi] and forming 
n 
F n = "2,f(~i) Axi • 
i=l 
We have to prove that for a sequence of subdivisions Sn with span 
tending to zero the sums Fn converge toward a limit, which we shall 
denote by Sa/(X) dx, and that the value of this limit does not depend on 
the particular choice of subdivisions and of intermediate points ~i. 
To carry out the proof we first compare the values Fn and FN belonging 
to two subdivisions Sn and SN where the span of Sn is less than 1J and 
where the subdivision SN is a "refinement" of Sn; that is, all points of 
subdivision of Sn occur among those of SN. We have in appropriately 
modified notation 
N 
FN = "2, f('f};) Ay;, 
;=1 
where the values Y; are the points of subdivision of SN' where Ay; = 
YI - YI-l. and 111 lies in the interval [YI-l, Y/]. Two successive sub-
division points Xi _ 1 and Xi of Sn also occur among the values Yi' say 
Xi _ 1 = Yr-l, Xi = Y •• In SN the cell [Xi-I> Xi] is broken up into intervals, 
say [Yr-I> yr], [Yr, Y,.+1]' ... , [Y.-l, Y.], making the tolal contribution 
• 
"2, f('f}i)(Y; -
Yi-l) 
;=r 
to FN • We compare this to the contribution of the cell [Xi-I. Xi] to Fn 
given by f(~i)(xi - xt-t), which can be written as 
• 
"2, f(~i)(Yi - Yi-l) 
i=r 
(see Fig. 2.33) and find for the absolute value of the difference of the 
contributions 
/ i U('f};) - f(~i)](Y; -
Y;-l)/ ~ i E· (y; -
Y;-l) = E(Xi -
xt-t). 
;=r 
;-r 

194 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and DiJferential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
Hence, adding up the differences of the contributions to Fn and FN for 
all cells [Xi-I, Xi] of Sm we find the estimate 
n 
IFN -
Fnl =:;;! €(Xi -
Xi-I) = €(b -
a), 
i=1 
whenever Sn has span less than 15(~) and SN is a refinement of Sn. 
If now Sn and Sm are any two subdivisions, we can consider the 
subdivision S N formed by all the points of subdivision Sn together with 
Yr-l 
Yj-l 
y. 
y. 
I I 
I 
I 1/. IJ 
I 
II 
I I I 
SN 
1 1 
I' 
Sn 
a 
Xi-l 
~i 
Xi 
b 
Figure 2.33 
all those of Sm. 
T~len SN will be a refinement of both Sn and Sm. 
Assume that both Sn and Sm have span less than 15( E). Choosing any 
intermediate points 'YJi of the cells of S N to define F N' we find 
IFn -
Fml = I(Fn - FN) + (FN -
Fm)1 =:;; IFn -
FNI + IFm -
FNI 
=:;; 2€(b -
a). 
We see then that any two approximating sums differ arbitrarily 
little from each other, if the spans of the corresponding subdivisions 
are sufficiently small. Consider now any sequence of subdivisions Sn 
whose spans tend to zero for n ---* 00. Let Fn be the corresponding 
approximating sums. For any € > 0 the span of Sn is less than 15( €) 
for all sufficiently large n. Hence 
IFn -
Fml < 2€(b -
a) 
for both nand m sufficiently large. It follows that the sequence Fn 
satisfies the Cauchy convergence criterion (see p. 97); consequently, 
limFn = F 
exists. 
It remains to show that the value of lim Fn does not depend on the 
n~ao 
particular subdivisions and intermediate points. If then Sn' denotes 
any other sequence of subdivisions with spans tending to zero, then the 
corresponding sum Fn' has a limit F'. Since 
IFn' -
Fnl < 2€(b -
a) 
as soon as the spans of Sn and Sn' are less than 15(€), we find for n ---* 00 
that also IF - F'I =:;; 2€(b -
a). Since here € is an arbitrary positive 

Existence of the Integral 195 
number, it follows that F = F'. Hence the limit F, which we denote 
by li(X) dx, is uniquely determined. 
The proof of the existence of the definite integral of a continuous 
function is thus complete. 
More General Approximating Sums. 
Our proof indicates more 
clearly what is essential in the approximation of an integral by a sum. 
It makes evident the fact that a somewhat more general limiting process 
could be formulated, leading also to the integral, and that the following 
more general form of the theorem is true: h need not be a function 
value in order that the sums F .. = 'f.h aXi converge to the integral; it 
suffices instead that Ih -
f(~i)1 < c5(E) for some point ~i in the interval 
[Xi_l, Xi], where c5(E) -- 0 for E -- O. 
This general statement is often useful. If, for example, f(x) = 
cfo(x)tp(x), then instead of the sum 'f.f(~v) ax. we may consider the more 
general sum 
where ~.' and ~." are two not necessarily coincident points of the cell. 
This sum also tends to the integral 
ff(X) dx = f cfo(x)"P(x) dx 
as n increases, provided that the length of the longest cell tends to zero. 
A corresponding statement holds for other sums formed in an 
analogous way; for example, the sum 
.. !.J cfo(~.')2 + "P(~.")2 axv 
,=1 
tends to the integral 
To prove these statements we only have to show that the change D in the 
approximating sums due to the deviation of ;/ from ;: tends to zero in the 
limit. This is obvious in the first example where the change in the approxi-
mating sum is 
n 
D = ! 4>a:)['Pa,w) - 'P(;:)] ~xv· 
v=1 
Since 4> is bounded and 'P uniformly continuous, D can be made arbitrarily 
small by choosing sufficiently small cells. 

196 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
The change in the second sum is represented by 
n 
D =!(v</>(;:)2 +'1'(;/)2 -
V</>(;:)2 +'I'(;.')2)~x •. 
• =1 
Using the triangle inequality applied to the triangle with vertices (a,O), (O,h), 
(O,c) in the form 1 v~ 
-
var:t'C21 ::;; Ih - cl , we find that 
1 v </>(;:)2 + '1'(;/)2 -
v </>(;:)2 + '1'(;:)21 ::;; 1'1'(;/) - '1'(;:)1 
from which follows immediately that D tends to zero. 
PROBLEMS 
SECTION 2.1, Page 120 
1. Let [be a positive monotone function defined on [a, h], where 0 < a < h. 
Let</> be the inverse of [and set 01: = [(a), (1 = [(h). Using the interpretation 
of integral as area show that 
J:</>(y) dy = h{1 -
aOl: - f[(X) dx . 
SECTION 2.2, Page 128 
1. Prove for any natural number p that 
[ bxp dx = _1_ (h11+1 _ a11+1) 
.a 
p + 1 
using a subdivision of [a, h] into cells of equal length. Employ the techniques 
in Chapter 1, miscellaneous Problems 5 to 12, to evaluate the approximating 
sums Fn· 
b 
2. Derive the formula for i x tz dx, a, h > 0, when 
01: is rational and 
negative, say 01: = -rls, where rand s are natural numbers. (Hint: Set 
q-l/s = T, where q = ,nl hla.) 
3. By the method used to find the integral of sin x, derive the formula 
LbcOSXdX = sinh - sina. 
4. Make a general statement about fa [(x) dx when [(x) is (a) an odd 
function and (h) an even function. 
-a 
s. Calculate L'rl2sin x dx and L"/2cos x dx. Explain on geometrical grounds 
why these should be the same. Furthermore, explain why 
ra+211 
fb+2" 
J 
a 
sin x dx = 
b 
cos x dx 
for all values of a and h. 

Problems 197 
6. (a) Evaluate In = (ax1/n dx. What is lim In? Interpret geometrically. 
Jo 
",-+00 
(b) Do the same for In = foaxn dx. 
7. Evaluate 
lim .~- (1 + .~- + ... + .~-). 
n~oo y n 
·V 2 
Y n 
SECfION 2.3, Page 136 
*1. Cauchy's inequality for integrals. Prove that for all continuous functions 
f(x),g(x) 
*2. Prove that if f(x) is continuous and 
f(x) = L"'f(t) dt , 
then f(x) is identically zero. 
*3. Letf(x) be Lipschitz-continuous on [0,1]; that is, 
If(x) - f(y) I < Mix - yl 
for all x, y in the interval. Prove that 
I 
(If(x)dx -! i f(~)1 < M 
Jo 
n k=l 
n 
2n 
SECfION 2.5, Page 145 
1. Prove 
loge ~ p - q 
q 
Vpq 
(q ~ p). 
(Hint: Apply Cauchy's inequality, Problem 1.) 
J'" 
1 
2. (a) Verify that log (l + x) = 
-1 -
du, where x > -1. 
(b) Show for x > 0 that 
0 
+ u 
x2 
X - 2" < log (1 + x) < x. 
*(c) More generally, show for 0 < x < 1 that 
x 2 
xli 
x2n 
x 2 
x 3 
x2n+l 
x - "2 + "'3 - ... - 2n < log (1 + x) < x - "2 + "'3 - ... + 2n + 1 . 
(Hint: Compare 1/(1 + u) with a geometric progression.) 

198 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch.2 
SECTION 2.6, Page 149 
1. (a) Prove 
using a subdivision of 
lim n( \,1;; -
1)]. 
,,-->-00 
ibe"' dx = eb -
e" 
[a, b] into equal cells. 
(b) Find flog x dx. (See Section 2.1, Problem 1.) 
(c) Show for x ~ 0 that 
[Hint: Apply log ex = 
x2 
x" 
x2 
x" 
e"'x,,+l 
l+x+-+"'+-~e"'~I+x+-+"'+-+ 
. 
2! 
n! 
2! 
n! 
(n + 1)! 
(Hint: Obtain upper and lower estimates for rille" du and integrate 
repeatedly.) 
Jo 
Obtain estimates of the same type for elll when x < O. 
SECTION 2.8c, Page 163 
Calculate the derivatives of the following functions wherever defined 
directly as the limits of their difference quotients. 
1. tanx. 
2. sec2 x. 
3. sin v;;;. 
4. Vsin x. 
1 
5.-.-
smx 
6 
. 1 
• SIn-x 
7. x", where ex is rational and negative. 
SECTION 2.8i, Page 175 
1. Show x > sin x for positive x and x < tan x for x in (O,~). 
2. If f(x) is continuous and differentiable for a ~ x ~ b, show that if 
f'(x) ~ 0 for a ~ x < g and f'(x) ~ 0 for g < x ~ b, the function is never 
less than fm. 
·3. If the continuous function f(x) has a derivative f'(x) at each point x in 
the neighborhood of x = g, and if f'(x) approaches a limit L as x ...... g, then 
I'm exists and is equal to L. 
·4. Let f(x) be defined and differentiable on the entire x-axis. Show that 
iff(O) = 0 and everywhere If'(x) I ~ I f(x) I , thenf(x) = 0 identically. 
SECTION 2.9, Page 184 
.1. If a particle traverses distance 1 in time 1, beginning and ending at 
rest, then at some point in the interval it must have been subjected to an 
acceleration equal to 4 or more. 

Problems 199 
SUPPLEMENT, Page 192. Existence of the Definite Integral 
1. Letf(x) be defined and bounded on [a, b]. We define the upper sum L 
and lower sum a for the subdivision 
a = Xo < Xl < X2 • • • < Xn = b 
to be 
i=l 
n 
a = L mi.:lxi, 
i=1 
where Mi is the least upper bound, mi the greatest lower bound of f(x) in 
the cell [xi-I> Xi]' 
(a) Show that in any refinement of a subdivision the upper sum either 
decreases or remains unchanged and, similarly. the lower sum increases or 
remains unchanged. 
(b) Prove that each upper sum is greater than or equal to every lower sum. 
(e) The upper Darboux integral F+ is defined as the greatest lower bound of 
the upper sums and the lower Darboux integral F- as the least upper bound 
of the lower sums over all subdivisions. From (b), F+ ~ F-. If F+ = F- we 
call the common value the Darboux integral of f Prove that the Darboux 
integral of f is actually the ordinary Riemann integral; furthermore, show 
that the Riemann integral exists if and only if the upper and lower Darboux 
integrals exist and are equal. 
2. Let f(x) be a monotone function defined on [a, b]. 
(a) Show that the difference between the upper and lower sums for a 
subdivision into n equal cells is given exactly by 
L -
a = If(b) - f(a) I (b - a)jn. 
and explain this result geometrically. 
(b) Use the result of (a) to prove that the Darboux integral exists. 
(e) Estimate L - a in terms off(a),f(b) and the span of the subdivision 
if the cells of the subdivision may be unequal. 
(d) Mostly f(x), if not monotone, can be written as the sum of monotone 
functions,f(x) = </>(x) + 'P(x) where </> is nonincreasing and 'P is nondecreasing. 
Estimate the difference between the upper and lower sums in that case. 
3. Show that if f(x) has a continuous derivative in the closed interval 
[a, b], then f(x) can be written as the sum of monotone functions as in Problem 
2d. 
MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEMS 
1. Prove that 
(a)I 1 (x2 -
1)2dx = !~; 
(b) (_1)n 
(x2-1)ndx= 
n.,. 
I
I 
22n+1( ')2 
-1 
(2n + 1). 
-1 
2. Prove for the binomial coefficient (;) that 
(;) = [en + 1) fXk(1 - x)n-k dx r1. 
*3. If f(x) possesses a derivative ('(x) (not necessarily continuous) at each 
point X of a ~ x ~ b, and if rex) assumes the values m and M it also assumes 
every value p, between m and M. 

200 The Fundamental Ideas of the Integral and Differential Calculus 
Ch. 2 
4. ~f ["(x) ~ 0 for all values of x in a :s; x :s; b, the graph of y = f(x) lies 
on or above the tangent line at any point x = ~, y = fm of the graph. 
5. If ["(x) ~ 0 for all values of x in u :s; x :s; b, the graph of y = f(x) in 
the interval xl :s; x :s; x2 lies below the line segment joining the two points of 
the graph for which x = Xl> X = x2• 
6. If["(x) ~ 0, thenfel 1 
X2) :s; f(xl) ; f(x2) . 
*7. Let f(x) be a function such that ["(x) ~ 0 for all values of x and let 
u = u(t) be an arbitrary continuous function. Then 
~ Laf[U(t)] dt ~f(~ Lau(t) dt). 
8. (a) Differentiate directly and write down the corresponding integration 
formulas: (i) x!4; (i0 tan x. 
(b) Evaluate 
lim ! (1 + sec2 ~ + sec2 21T + ... + sec2 n1T) . 
n~<Xl n 
4n 
4n 
4n 
9. Let f(x) have first and second derivatives for all real values of x. Prove 
that iff(x) is everywhere positive and concave, thenf(x) is constant. 

3 
The Techniques of Calculus 
Part A 
Differentiation and Integration of the Elementary 
Functions 
3.1 The Simplest Rules for Differentiation and Their Applications 
Although problems of integration are usually of greater importance 
than those of differentiation, the latter offer less formal difficulty than 
the former. Therefore it is a natural procedure first to master the art 
of differentiating the widest possible classes of functions; then by the 
fundamental theorem (Section 2.9) the results of differentiation are 
available for evaluating integrals. In the following sections we shall 
pursue such applications of the fundamental theorem. To a certain 
extent we shall make a fresh start and develop techniques of integration 
systematically on the basis of certain general rules for differentiation. 
a. Rules for I)iffere~tiation 
We assume that in the interval under consideration the functions 
f(x) and g{x) are differentiable; then the following rules are basic. 
Rule 1. Multiplication by a Constant. For any constant c, the 
function cfo{x) = cf(x) is differentiable, and 
(1) 
cfo'{x) = cf'{x). 
The obvious proof was given in Chapter 2, p. 165. 
201 

202 The Techniqu£!s of Calculus 
Ch.3 
Rule 2. Derivative of a Sum. If cp(x) = f(x) + g(x), then cp(x) is 
differentiable and 
(2) 
cp'(x) = f'(x) + g'(x); 
that is, the operations of differentiation and addition are interchange-
able. The same holds for the sum of a finite number n of differentiable 
functions 
n 
cp(x) = ~ fv(x), 
v=l 
for which we obtain 
n 
cp'(x) = ~ fv'(x). 
v=l 
The proof is obvious from the definition of derivative. 
Rule 3. Derivative of a Product. If cp(x) = f(x)g(x), then cp(x) is 
differentiable and 
(3) 
cp'(x) = f(x)g'(x) + g(x)f'(x). 
The proof follows from the equation 
cp(x + h) -
cp(x) = f(x + h)g(x + h) - f(x)g(x) 
h 
h 
=f(x + h)g(x + h) -
g(x) + g(x/(x + h) - f(x). 
h 
h 
Taking the limit in this expression as h -
0 yields Eq. (3). 
This formula becomes more elegant if we divide1 by cp(x) = 
f(x)g(x). We then obtain 
cp'(x) =f'(x) + g'(x) . 
cp(x) 
f(x) 
g(x) 
Using the notation of differentials (Chapter 2, p. 179) we may also 
rewrite Eq. (3) as 
d(fg) = fdg + gdf. 
By induction we obtain for the derivative of a product of n factors 
an expression consisting of n terms, each of which consists of the 
derivative of one factor multiplied by all the other factors of the 
1 We must, of course, assume that ¢>(x) is nowhere equal to zero. 

Sec. 3.1 
The Simplest Rules for Differentiation and Their Applications 203 
original product: 
d 
rp'(x) = dx [f1(x)f2(X) ... fn(x)] 
= JI'(X)f2(X) ... fn(x) + fl(X)N(x)fa(x) ... fn(x) 
+ ... + fl(X)f2(X) ... fn'(x) 
= i fv'(x) rp(x) , 
v=l 
fv(x) 
or on division by rp(x) = fl(X)!2(X) ... fn(x) 
rp'(x) =JI'(x) +N(x) + ... +fn'(x) = i fv'(x) , 
rp(x) 
fleX) 
f2(X) 
fn(x) 
v=lfv(x) 
which is valid where rp(x) =F O. 
By repeated application of the rule for the derivative of a product we 
can obtain formulas for the second and higher derivatives as well. We 
have for the second derivative 
d2fg = ~(dfg) = ~(f dg + df g) 
dx2 
dx dx 
dx 
dx 
dx 
= ~(fdg) + ~( df g) 
dx 
dx 
dx dx 
=fd2g + 2 dfdg + d'1 g. 
dx2 
dx dx 
dx2 
Leibnitz's Rule. The reader should prove by induction that the nth 
derivative of a product may be found according to the following rule 
(Leihnitz's rule): 
dn 
dng 
(n) df dn-lg 
dxn (fg) = f dxn + 1 dx dxn- l 
(n) d'1 dn- 2g 
( n ) dn-y dg 
dnf 
+ 2 dx2 dxn- 2 + . . . + n -
1 dxn- l dx + dxn g. 
Here (~) = n, (;) = [n(n -
1)]/2!, etc., denote the binomial co-
efficients. 
Rule 4. 
Derivative of a Quotient. For a quotient 
rp(x) = f(x) 
g(x) 

204 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
the following rule holds: The function 4>(x) is differentiable at every 
point at which g(x) does not vanish, and 
(4) 
4>'(x) = g(x)f'(x) -
g'(x)f(x) . 
[g(X)]2 
If 4>(x) :;!: 0, this can be written as 
4>'(x) 
f'(x) 
g'(x) 
--=----
4>(x) 
f(x) 
g(x) 
PROOF. If we assume the differentiability of 4>(x), we can apply the 
product rule to f(x) = 4>(x)g(x) and conclude 
J'(x) = 4>(x)g'(x) + g(x)4>'(x). 
By substituting J(x)/g(x) for 4>(x) on the right and solving for 4>'(x), 
we obtain Rule 4. 
We can prove the differentiability of 4>(x) as well as the rule if we 
write 
f(x + h) _ f(x) 
4>(x + h) -
4>(x) = g(x + h) 
g(x) 
h 
h 
g(x)f(x + h) - f(x) _ g(x + h) -
g(x)f(x) 
h 
h 
=--------------------------------
g(x)g(x + h) 
If we now let h tend to zero we arrive at the result stated; for by 
hypothesis the denominator does not tend to zero but to the limit 
[g(X)]2, and the two terms of the numerator have limits g(x)f'(x) and 
g'(x)f(x), respectively. This proves both the existence of the limit 
on the left side and the differentiation formula. 
h. Differentiation of the Rational Functions 
First, we derive once more the formula 
.!!.. xn = nxn- 1 
dx 
for every positive integer n, invoking the rule for differentiating a prod-
uct. We think of xn as a product of n factors, xn = X' •• x, and thus 
obtain 
.!!.. xn = 1 . xn- 1 + 1 . xn- 1 + ... + 1 . xn- 1 = nxn- 1. 
dx 

Sec. 3.1 
The Simplest Rules for Difj'erentiation and Their Applications 205 
The second derivative of the function xn follows from this formula and 
eq. (1) 
d2 
-
xn = n(n _ 1)xn-2. 
dx2 
Continuing, we obtain the higher derivatives 
d3 
-
xn = n(n -
l)(n -
2)xn- 3 
dx3 
dn 
-
xn = 1 . 2 ... n = n!. 
dxn 
From the last of these formulas it is clear that the nth derivative of 
xn is a constant, whereas the (n + l)th derivative vanishes everywhere. 
By using our first two rules and the rule for differentiating powers we 
can differentiate any polynomial y = ao + a1x + a2x2 + ... + anxn , 
obtaining 
furthermore, 
y" = 2a2 + 3· 2a3x + 4· 3a4x2 + ... + n(n -
l)anx n- 2, 
and so on. 
The derivative of any rational function can now be found with the 
help of the quotient rule. In particular, we again deduce the differen-
tiation formula for the function x n , where n = -m is a negative integer. 
Application of the quotient rule, together with the fact that the derivative 
of a constant is equal to zero, gives the result 
(djdx)(ljxm) = _mxm- 1jx2m = -mjxm+I, 
or, if we take m = -n, 
~ xn = nxn- 1 
dx 
' 
which agrees formally with the result for positive values of n and with 
the results given earlier (p. 164). 
c. Differentiation of the Trigonometric Functions 
For the trigonometric functions sin x and cos x we have already 
obtained (p. 165) the differentiation formulas 
d . 
d 
d 
. 
-
sm x = cos x 
an 
-
cos x = -sm x. 
dx 
dx 

206 The Techniques of Calculus 
The quotient rule now enables us to differentiate the functions 
sin x 
y=tanx=--
cos x 
and 
cos x 
y = cot x = -.- . 
sm x 
Ch . .3 
According to the rule, the derivative of the first of these functions is 
, 
cos2 X + sin2 x 
1 
y = 
=--, 
cos2 X 
cos2 X 
so that 
d 
1 
-
tan x = -- = sec2 x = 1 + tan2 x. 
dx 
cos2 x 
Similarly, we obtain 
d 
1 
-
cot x = - -- = - cosec2 x = -(1 + cot2 x). 
dx 
sin2 x 
To the differentiation formulas for sin x, cos x, tan x, and cot x 
correspond the following integration formulas: 
fcos x dx = sin x, 
fSin x dx = - cos x, 
f+ dx = tan x, f+ dx = - cot x. 
cos x 
sm x 
From these formulas we obtain by way of the fundamental rule of 
Section 2.9, p. 190 the value of the definite integral between any 
limits, the only restriction being that when the last two formulas are 
used, the interval of integration must not contain any point of dis-
continuity of the integrand such as an odd multiple of 7T/2 in the first 
case, and an even multiple of 7T/2 in the second. For example, 
ibCOS x dx = sin x I: = sin b - sin a. 
3.2 The Derivative of the Inverse Function 
a. General Formula 
We have seen on p. 45 that a continuous function y = f(x) has a 
continuous inverse in every interval in which it is monotonic. Precisely: 
If a :=:;; x :=:;; b is an interval in which the continuous function y = f(x) 
is monotonic, and iff(a) = a. andf(b) = p, thenfhas an inverse function-
which in the interval between a. and p is continuous and monotonic. 
As pointed out on p. 177, the sign of the derivative provides a simple 
test for seeing when a function is monotonic and therefore has an 
inverse. A differentiable function is continuous, and is monotonic 

Sec. 3.2 
The Derivative of the Inverse Function 207 
increasing in an interval wheref'(x) is greater than zero, and monotonic 
decreasing in an interval for which f'(x) is everywhere less than zero. 
We shall now characterize the derivative of the inverse function by 
proving the following theorem. 
THEOREM. If the function y = f(x) is differentiable in the interval 
a < x < b, and either f'(x) > 0 or f'(x) < 0 throughout the interval, 
then the inverse function x = 4>(y) also possesses a derivative at every 
interior point of its interval of definition: the derivatives of y = f(x) 
and of its inverse x = 4>(Y) satisfy the relation f'(x) . 4>'(Y) = 1 at 
corresponding values x, y. 
This relation can also be put in the form 
dy 
1 
-=-
(5) 
dx 
dx 
dy 
This last formula again illustrates the suitability of Leibnitz's notation: 
the symbolic quotient dy/dx can be treated in formulas as if it were 
an actual fraction. 
PROOF. 
The proof of the theorem is simple. Writing the derivative 
as the limit of a difference quotient, we have 
y' = f'(x) = lim fly = lim YI -
Y, 
AX-+O flx 
Xl-+X Xl -
X 
where x and y = f(x), and Xl and YI = f(x l ), respectively deno~e pairs 
of corresponding values. By hypothesis the first of these limiting values 
is not equal to zero. Because of the continuity of Y = f(x) and x = 4>(y), 
the relations YI ~ y and Xl ~ 
X are equivalent. Therefore the limiting 
value 
lim Xl -
X = lim Xl -
X 
Xl-+X YI -
Y 
111-+11 YI -
Y 
exists and is equal to l/f'(x). On the other hand, the limiting value on 
the right-hand side is by definition the derivative 4>'(y) of the inverse 
function 4>(Y), and our formula is proved. 
The simple geometrical meaning of the formula is clearly shown in 
Fig. 3.1. The tangent to the curve y = f(x) or X = 4>(y) makes an 
angle IX with the positive x-axis, and an angle (J with the positive y-axis; 
from the geometrical interpretation of the derivative of a function as 
the slope of the tangent 
f'(x) = tan IX, 
4>'(y) = tan {J. 
Since the sum of the angles IX and {J is 1T/2, tan IX tan {J = 1, and this 
relationship is exactly equivalent to our differentiation formula. 

208 
The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch. 3 
y 
y 
------~----~--~o~------~x--------~x 
Figure 3.1 Differentiation of the inverse function. 
Critical Points 
We have hitherto expressly assumed that either f'ex) > 0 or 
f'ex) < 0, that is, that f'ex) is never zero. What, then, happens if 
f'(x) = O? If f'(x) = 0 everywhere in an interval, then f is constant 
there, and consequently has no inverse because the same value of y 
corresponds to all values of x in the interval. If f'(x) = 0 only at 
isolated "critical" points (and if f'(x) is assumed continuous), then we 
have two t;ases, according to whether on passing through these points 
f'(x) changes sign, or not. In the first case this point separates a point 
where the function is monotonic increasing from another where it is 
monotonic decreasing. In the neighborhood of such a point there 
can be no single-valued inverse function. In the second case the 
vanishing of the derivative does not contradict the monotonic character 
of the function y = f(x) , so that a single-valued inverse exists. How-
ever, the inverse function is no longer differentiable at the corre-
sponding point; in fact, its derivative is infinite there. The functions 
y = x2 and y = x3 at the point x = 0 offer examples of the two types. 
Figure 3.2 and Fig. 3.3 illustrate the behavior of the two functions 
upon passing through the origin and at the same time show that the 
function y = x3 has a single-valued inverse, whereas the other function 
y = x2 does not. 

Sec. 3.2 
The Derivative of the Inverse Function 209 

210 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
h. The Inverse of the nth Power: the nth Root 
The simplest example is the inverse of the function y = xn for 
positive integers n; at first we assume positive values of x, hence also 
y > 0. Under these conditions y' is always positive, so that for all 
positive values of y we can form the unique inverse function 
x = '\Y"ij = yl/n. 
The derivative of this inverse function is immediately obtained by the 
above general rule as follows: 
d(yl/n) = dx = _1_ = _1_ = 1: _1 __ = 1: y(l/nl-l. 
dy 
dy 
dy/dx 
nxn- 1 
n y(n-ll/n 
n 
If we now change the notation and denote again the independent 
variable by x, we may finally write 
d'\Y7;; = ~ 
(xl/n) = 1: x(l/n)-l, 
dx 
dx 
n 
which agrees with the result obtained on p. 164. 
For n> 1, the point x = ° requires special consideration. If x 
approaches zero through positive values, d(xl/n)/dx will obviously 
increase beyond all bounds; this corresponds to the fact that for 
n > 1 the derivative of the nth power f(x) = xn vanishes at the origin. 
Geometrically, this means that the curves y = xl/n for n > 1 touch the 
y-axis at the origin (cf. Fig. 1.35, p. 48). 
It should be noted that for odd values of n the assumption x > ° 
can be omitted and the function y = xn is monotonic and has an 
inverse over the entire domain of real numbers. The formula 
d( '\Yy) = (l/n)y(l/nl-l 
dy 
still holds for negative values of y, but for x = 0, n > 1, we have 
d(xn)jdx = 0, which corresponds to an infinite derivative dx/dy of the 
inverse function at the point y = 0. 
c. The Inverse Trigonometric Functions-Multivaluedness 
To form the inverses of the trigonometric functions we once again 
consider the graphs! of sin x, cos x, tan x, and cot x. We see at once 
from Figs. 1.37, p. 50 and 1.38, p. 51, that for each of these functions it 
1 The graphical representation will help the reader to overcome the slight difficulties 
inherent in the discussion of the "multivaluedness" of the inverse functions. 

Sec. 3.2 
The Derivative of the Inverse Function 211 
is necessary to select a definite interval if we are to speak of a unique 
inverse; for the lines y = c parallel to the x-axis cut the curves in an 
infinite number of points, if at all. 
The Inverse Sine and Cosine 
For the function y = sin x, for example (Fig. 3.4), the derivative 
y' = cos x is positive in the interval -7T/2 < x < 7T/2. In this interval 
y = sin x has an inverse function which we denote by! 
x = arc sin y 
y 
y= sin x 
..... , x = arc sin y 
---\---------7 
\ 
I 
,,-..... 
1 
/ 
, 
---r---~--------
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
\ 
I 
-.~----------~----~----~~--~----~-----o~--~~~x 
7r/2 
7r \ 
37r/2 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
\ 
/ 
, 
/ 
..... _"" 
Figure 3.4 Graph of y = sin x (principal value indicated by solid curve). 
(read arc sine y; this means the angle whose sine has the value y). 
This function increases monotonically from -7T/2 to +7T/2 as y 
traverses the interval -1 to + 1. If we wish to emphasize that we are 
considering the inverse function of the sine in this particular interval, 
we speak of the principal value of the arc sine. For some other interval 
in which sin x is monotonic, for example, the interval +7T/2 < x < 37T/2, 
we obtain another inverse or "branch" of the arc sine; without the 
exact statement of the interval in which the values of the inverse 
function should lie, the symbol arc sine means not one well-defined 
function but, in fact, denotes an infinite number of values. 2 
The multivaluedness of arc sin y is described by the statement: To 
anyone value y of the sine there corresponds not only a specific angle x 
but also any angle of the form 2k7T + x or (2k + 1)7T - x, where k is 
any integer (cf. Fig. 3.4). 
1 The symbolic notation x = sin-1 y is also used where there is no danger of con-
fusion with the reciprocal function l/sin x. 
2 Sometimes loosely called a multiple-valued function. 

212 The Techniques of Calculus 
./ 
/ 
y 
/ 
/ 
I 
\ , 
-1 
\ , 
, , , 
7r/2 
, , 
..... 
-7r 
-27r 
/ 
/ 
1 
I 
I 
1 
1 
1 
I 
1 
, 
I 
'". 
1 
' 
y = arc sin x 
I \ x = sin y 
I 
x 
I 
I 
-7r/21 
1 
1 
I 
, 
I 
'i-I' 
I ) 
1/ 
y 
//1 
./ 
I 
1 
1 
Ch.3 
Figure 3.5 Graph of y = arc sin x (principal value indicated by solid curve). 
The derivative of the function x = arc sin y is obtained from Eq. (5) 
as follows: 
dx 
1 
1 
1 
1 
- = - = -- = --;==== = --=== 
dy 
y' 
cos x 
±vll - sin2 x 
±vll _ y2' 
where the square root is to be taken as positive if we confine ourselves 
to the first interval mentioned, that is, -1T/2 < x < 1T/2.1 
Finally, we change the name of the independent variable from y to 
the commonly used x (Fig. 3.5); then the derivative of arc sin x is 
1 If instead of this we had chosen the interval 7T/2 < x < 37T/2, corresponding to the 
substitution of x + 7T for x, we should have had to use the negative square root 
since cos x is negative in this interval. 

Sec. 3.2 
The Derivative of the Inverse Function 213 
expressed by 
d. 
1 
-arcsmx= / 
. 
dx 
v 1 -
x2 
Here it is assumed that arc sine is the principal value which lies between 
-'1T/2 and +'1T/2, and the square root sign is chosen positive. 
y 
37r/2 
7r 
---------~O~-----I+---~x 
/ 
"""" 
-7r/2 
Figure 3.6 Graph of y = arc cos x (principal value indicated by solid curve). 
For the inverse function of y = cos x, denoted (after again inter-
changing the names x and y) by arc cos x, we obtain the formula 
d 
1 
-arccos x = T / 
dx 
v1 -
x2 
in exactly the same way. Here we take the negative sign of the root if the 
value of arc cos x is taken in the interval between 0 and '1T (not, as in the 
case of arc sin x, between -'1T/2 and +'1T/2) (cf. Fig. 3.6). 

214 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
The derivatives become infinite on approaching the end points 
x = -1 and x = + 1, corresponding to the fact that the graphs of the 
inverse sine and inverse cosine have vertical tangents at these points. 
Inverse Tangent and Cotangent 
We treat the inverse functions of the tangent and cotangent in an 
analogous way. 
The function y = tan x, having an everywhere 
positive derivative l/cos2 x for x :;I: 11'/2 + k11', has a unique inverse 
y 
,.,-...---------
/ 
--------
----------------------~~----------------------~x 
--------
/ 
---------_/ 
Figure 3.7 Graph of y = arc tan x (solid curve for principal value). 
in the interval -11'/2 < x < 11'/2. We call this inverse function (the 
Principal Branch of) x = arc tan y. We see at once from Fig. 3.7 that 
for each x we could have chosen instead of y any of the values y + k11' 
(where k is an integer). Similarly, the function y = cot x has an inverse 
x = arc cot y which is uniquely determined if we require that its value 
shall lie in the interval from 0 to 11'; otherwise the many-valuedness of 
arc cot x is the same as for arc tan x. 
The differentiation formulas are as follows: 
dx 
1 
2 
1 
1 
-- = -- = cos x = 
= -----
dy 
dy/dx 
1 + tan2 x 
1 + y2 
x = arc tan y, 
x = arc cot y, 
dx 
. 2 
1 
1 
dy = - sm x = -
1 + cot2 x = - 1 + y2 

Sec. 3.2 
The Derivative of the Inverse Function 215 
or finally, if we denote again the independent variable by x, 
d 
1 
-
arctan x = ---, 
dx 
1 + x2 
d 
1 
-
arc cot x = - --- . 
dx 
1 + x 2 
d. The Corresponding Integral Formulas 
Expressed in terms of indefinite integrals, the formulas which we 
have just derived are written as follows: 
f.j 1 
dx = arc sin x, f.j 1 
dx = - arc cos x, 
1 -
x 2 
1 _ x 2 
f --1-2 dx = arc tan x, 
1+x 
f __ 1_ dx = - arc cot x. 
1 + x2 
Although the two formulas on each line express different functions by 
identical indefinite integrals, they do not contradict each other. In 
fact, they illustrate what we learned earlier (see Section 2.9), that all 
indefinite integrals of the same function differ only by constants; here 
the constants are 7T/2 since arc cos x + arc sin x = 7T/2, arc tan x + 
arc cot x = 7T/2. 
The formulas for indefinite integrals may immediately be put to use 
for finding definite integrals, as on p. 143. In particular, 
l b dx 
/b 
---2 = arc tan x = arc tan b -
arc tan a. 
a 1 + X 
a 
If we put a = 0, b = 1 and recall that tan ° = ° 
and tan 7T/4 = 1, we 
obtain the remarkable formula 
(6) 
~ = f 1 ~ X2dx. 
The number 7T, which originally arose from the consideration of the 
circle, is brought by this formula into a very simple relationship with 
the rational function 1/(1 + X2), and represents the area indicated in 
Fig. 3.8. This formula for 7T, to which we shall return later (p. 445), 
constitutes one of the early triumphs of the power of calculus. 
More generally, the integral formulas of this section permit us to 
define the trigonometric functions purely analytically, without any 
reference to geometric objects such as triangles or circles. For example, 

216 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch. 3 
the relation between an angle y and its tangent x = tan y is com-
pletely described by the equation 1
(1) 
du 
y- --
-
01 + u2 
(at least for -17/2 < y < 17/2). With this relation we may now define 
without appeal to intuition a numerical value for the angle y in a right 
triangle with sides a (adjacent) and b (opposite) for which b/a = x. 
Figure 3.8 
1rf2 illustrated by an area. 
Such an analytic definition in terms of numerical quantities makes the 
use of angles and trigonometric functions legitimate in higher analysis 
irrespective of a definition by geometrical construction. 
e. Derivative and Integral of the Exponential Function 
In Chapter 2, p. 150, we introduced the exponential function as the 
inverse of the logarithm. Precisely speaking the relations y = ~ and 
x = log y were thus defined to be equivalent. Consequently their 
derivatives satisfy the relation [see (5) p. 207] 
de(1) 
dy 
1 
1 
1 
(1) 
-=-=-=---=-=y=e. 
dx 
dx 
dx 
d log y 
! 
dy 
dy 
y 
Hence the exponential function is equal to its derivative: 

Sec. 3.3 
Differentiation of Composite Functions 217 
More generally, for any positive a the function y = a"' has as its 
inverse 
x = loga y = log y , 
log a 
and the derivative of a"' is 
da"' 
1 
-
= 
= (log a)y = (log a)a"'. 
dx 
d loga y 
dy 
Thus for any positive constant a the derivative of the function y = a"' 
is proportional to the function itself. The factor of proportionality 
log a is 1 when a is the number e. On p. 223 we shall show conversely 
that any function which is proportional to its derivative must be of the 
form y = ce"', where c denotes a constant factor. 
By the fundamental theorem of calculus we can again translate the 
formulas for the derivatives of e"' and of a"' into formulas for indefinite 
integrals: 
fe", dx = e"', 
fa"' dx = _1_ a"'. 
log a 
3.3 Differentiation of Composite Functions 
a. Definitions 
The preceding rules allow us ~o find the derivatives of functions that 
are obtained as rational expressions in terms of functions with already 
known derivatives. To find explicit expressions for the derivatives of 
other functions occurring in analysis we must go further by deriving a 
general rule for the differentiation of composite or compound functions. 
We are confronted quite often with functions I(x) built by the process 
of composition of simpler ones (see Chapter 1, p. 52): I(x) = g(~(x)), 
where ~(x) is defined in a closed interval a ~ x ~ b and has there the 
range (I ~ ~ ~ p, and where g(~) is defined in this latter interval. 
In this connection it is useful to remember the interpretation of 
functions as "operators" or mappings. As in Chapter 1, we write 
the composite function simply as 
f=g~ 
and call g~ the (symbolic) "product" of the operators or mappings 
g and~. 

218 
The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
h. The Chain Rule 
For functions g and cp which are continuous in their respective 
intervals of definition the compound function f(x) = g[cp(x)] is con-
tinuous as well (see Chapter 1, p. 55). 
The functions cp(x) and g(cp) are now assumed to be not only contin-
uous but differentiable. We then have the following fundamental 
theorem, the chain rule of differentiation: 
The functionf(x) = g[cp(x)] is differentiable, and its derivative is given 
by the equation 
(7) 
f'(x) = g'(cp) . cp'(x), 
or, in Leibnitz's notation, 
df 
df dcp 
-=--
dx 
dcp dx 
Therefore the derivative of a compound function is the product of the 
derivatives of its constituent functions. Or: The derivative of the symbolic 
product of functions is the actual product of their derivatives with respect 
to their corresponding independent variables. 
Intuitively, this chain rule is very plausible. The quantity cp'(x) = 
lim IlcpJllx is the local ratio in which small intervals are magnified by 
the mapping cpo Similarly, g'(cp) is the magnification given by the 
mapping g. Applying first cp and then g results in magnifying an 
x-interval first cp'fold"and then enlarging the resulting cp-interval g'fold, 
resulting in a total magnification ratio of g' cp' which must be the mag-
nification ratio for the composite mappingf = gcp. 
The theorem follows very easily from the definition of the derivative. 
In fact, it becomes intuitively almost obvious if we assume cp'(x) ~ 0 
in the closed x-interval under consideration. Then for Ilx = X2 -
Xl ~ 0 
we have by the mean value theorem 
Ilcp = CP2 -
CPI = cp(x2) -
cp(xl ) = cp'(~)llx ~ 0 with 
Xl ~ ~ ~ x2, 
and, with Ilg = g(CP2) -
g(CPI) and Ilf= f(x2) - f(xl ), we may write 
Ilf 
Ilg Ilcp 
-=--
Ilx 
Ilcp Ilx 
which is a meaningful identity because Ilcp ~ O. Now Ilcp ---+ 0 for 
Ilx ---+ 0, that is, for X2 ---+ Xl; therefore for Ilx ---+ 0 the difference 
quotients tend to the respective derivatives and the theorem is proved. 

Sec. 3.3 
Differentiation of Composite Functions 219 
To avoid the explicit assumption ~'(x) ~ 0 we can dispense with the 
division by t:J.~ in the following slightly more subtle manner: 
From the assumption of differentiability of g(~) at the point ~ we 
know that the quantity E = t:J.g/t:J.~ -
g'(~) as a function of t:J.~ for 
fixed ~ and t:J.~ ~ 0 has the limit zero for t:J.~ ~ O. If we define E = 0 
for t:J.~ = 0, we have without restriction on t:J.~ 
t:J.g = [g'(~) + E] t:J.~. 
Similarly for fixed x, 
t:J.~ = ~(x + t:J.x) -
~(x) = W(x) + 1J] t:J.x, 
where lim 1J = O. Then for t:J.x ~ 0 and ~ = ~(x), 
t:J.g = [g'(~) + E] t:J.~ = [g'(~) + E][~'(X) + 1J]. 
t:J.x 
t:J.x 
For t:J.x tending to zero through nonzero values we have lim t:J.~ = 0 and 
hence lim E = 0, so that 
aar-+o 
lim t:J.g = lim [g'(~) + E]lim [~'(x) + 1J] = g'(~)f(x), 
4","'0 t:J.x 
4","'0 
4", ... 0 
which proves the chain rule. 
By successive application of our rule we immediately extend it to 
functions arising from the composition of more than two functions. 
If, for example, 
y = g(u), 
u = ~(v), 
v = 1p(x), 
then y = f(x) = g[~(1p(x»] is a compound function of x; its derivative 
is given by the rule 
dy = y' = g'(u)f(v)1p'(x) = dy . du . dv ; 
dx 
du 
dv dx 
similar relations are true for functions that are compounded of an 
arbitrary number of functions. 
Higher Derivatives of a Composite Function. y = g[</>(x)] can be found 
easily by repeated application of the chain rule and the preceding rules: 
, 
dyd</> 
'.I.' 
y = d</>dx =g'f', 
y. = g.</>'2 + g'</>', 
y'" = g",</>'3 + 3g"</>'</>· + g'</>"'. 
Analogous formulas for yR. etc., can be derived successively. 

220 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
Finally, let us examine the composition of two functions inverse to each 
other. The function g(y) is the inverse of y = c/>(x) iff(x) = g[c/>(x)] = 
x. It follows that 
f'(x) = g'(y)c/>'(x) = 1 
which is exactly the result of Section 3.2, p. 207. 
Examples. As a simple but important example of an application of 
the chain rule we differentiate x« (x > 0) for an arbitrary real power IX. 
In Chapter 2, p. 152, we defined 
x« = e«lOglll; 
we also proved for c/>(x) = log x, 1jJ{u) = IXU, g(y) = e'll that 
c/>'(x) =!, 
'Ip'(u) = IX, 
g'(y) = e'll. 
x 
Now x« is the compound function g{'Ip[c/>(x)]}. Applying the chain rule 
we obtain the general formula 
hence 
d 
-
(x«) = g'(y)'Ip'(u)c/>'(x) 
dx 
1 
=e'll·IX·-
x 
IXe"lOg .. 
=--
x 
~ (x«) = IXX«-\ 
dx 
a result we could prove only with some difficulty had we attempted 
to proceed directly from the definition of x« for irrational IX as the limit 
of powers with rational exponents. 
An immediate consequence of this differentiation is, again, the 
integral formula f 
X«+l 
x«dx= --
IX+1 
As a second example, we consider 
(IX :;f: -1). 
or y = #, 

Sec. 3.3 
Dijjerentiation of Composite Functions 221 
where 1> = 1 -
x 2 and -1 < x < 1. The chain rule yields 
Y'=~.(-2x)=-
x 
. 
2J1> 
Jl -
x2 
Further examples are given by the following brief calculations. 
1. y = arc sin J 1 -
x 2, 
(-1 ~ x ~ 1, x =F: 0). 
dy 
1 
dJ~ 
-=--;==== 
dx 
J 1 -
(1 -
x 2) 
dx 
/ 
sgn (x). 
y 1 -
x 2 
-1 
J~ 
2. y= --, 
1 -
x 
(-I<x<I). 
d(~) 
dy 
1 
1 -
x 
-=--=== 
dx 
2Jl + x 
dx 
I-x 
_Jl="X. 
2 
_ 
1 
- 2Jl + x (1 -
X)2 -
(1 + x)IA (1 -
x)"A. 
3. y = log Ixl. This function! can be expressed as log x for x > 0 
and as log ( -x) for x < o. For x > 0 
d log Ixl 
d log x 
1 
=--=-
dx 
dx 
x 
For x < 0 we obtain from the chain rule that 
d log Ixl 
d log (-x) = _1_d(-x) 
1 
= 
-
dx 
dx 
-x dx 
x 
Hence generally for x =F: 0 
d log Ixl 
1 
dx 
x 
4. y = aX. By definition of aX (see p. 152) we have 
1 The function log x is defined only for x > 0, whereas log Ixl is defined everywhere 
except for x = o. 

222 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
where rp(x) = (log a)x. Then 
da'" 
de'" drp 
-
= -
-
= e"'(log a) = (log a)a"'. 
dx 
drp dx 
The same result was obtained already on p. 217 from the rule for 
the derivative of the inverse function. 
5. y = [f(x)]g(",). Since 
[f(x)]g(",) = e"'("') 
with rp(x) = g(x) log [f(x)], we find 
..!!.- [f(x)]u(",) = e"'(gl log 1+ g! 1') 
dx 
I 
= [/(x)]g(",) (gl(X) log [/(x)] + g(X)I'(X»). 
I(x) 
For example, when g(x) = f(x) = x we have 
dx'" 
-
= x"'(log x + 1). 
dx 
c. The Generalized Mean Value Theorem 
of the Differential Calculus 
As an application of the chain rule we derive the generalized mean value 
theorem of differential calculus. Consider two functions F(x) and G(x), 
continuous on a closed interval [a, b] of the x-axis, and differentiable on the 
interior of that interval. We assume that G'(x) is positive. The ordinary 
mean value theorem of differential calculus applied separately to F and G 
F(b) -
F(a) 
furnishes an expression for the difference quotient G(b) 
G(a) : 
F(b) - F(a) 
G(b) -
G(a) 
F'W(b - a) 
F'W 
G'(fJ)(b - a) = G'(fJ) , 
where ~ and fJ are suitable intermediate values in the open interval (a, b). 
The generalized mean value theorem states that we can write the difference 
quotient in the simpler form 
F(b) -
F(a) 
F'W 
G(b) -
G(a) = G'm' 
where F' and G' are evaluated at the same intermediate value ~. 
For the proof we introduce u = G(x) as an independent variable in F. 
From the assumption G' > 0 we conclude that the function u = G(x) is 
monotonic in the interval [a, b], and hence that it has an inverse x = g(u) 
defined in the interval [IX, P], where IX = G(a), P = G(b). The compound 

Sec. 3.4 
Some Applications of the Exponential Function 223 
function F[g(u)] = feu) is therefore defined for u in the interval [IX, 13]. From 
the ordinary mean value theorem we find that 
F(b) -
F(a) = f(fJ) - f(lX) = f'(y)(f3 -
IX) = f'(y)[G(b) -
G(a)], 
where y is a suitable value between IX and fJ. By the chain rule, we infer 
d 
F'(x) 
f'(u) = du F[g(u)] = F'[g(u)]g'(u) = G'(x). 
To the value u = y there corresponds a value x = g(y) = , in the interval 
(a, b). Then f'(Y) = F'WIG'W, and the generalized mean value theorem 
follows. 
3.4 Some Applications of the Exponential Function 
Some miscellaneous problems involving the exponential function will 
illustrate the fundamental importance of this function in all sorts of 
applications. 
a. Definition of the Exponential Function 
by Means of a Differential Equation 
We can define the exponential function by a simple property, whose 
use obviates many detailed arguments in particular cases. 
If a function y = f(x) satisfies an equation of the form 
y' = rxy, 
where rx is a constant, then y has the form 
(8) 
y = f(x) = cea"" 
where c is also a constant; conversely, every function of the form ceao: 
satisfies the equation y' = rxy. 
Since Eq. (8) expresses a relation between the function and its de-
rivative, it is called the differential equation of the exponential function. 
It is clear that y = ce"X satisfies this equation for any arbitrary 
constant c. Conversely, no other function satisfies the differential 
equation y' -
rxy = O. For if y is such a function, we consider the 
function u = ye-ax. We then have 
u' = y' e-ax -
rxye-a", = e-a",(y' -
rxy). 
However, the right-hand side vanishes, since we have assumed that 
y' = rxy; hence u' = 0, so that by p. 178 u is a constant c and y = 
ceax as we wished to prove. 
We shall now apply this theorem to a number of examples. 

224 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
h. Interest Compounded Continuously. 
Radioactive Disintegration 
A capital sum, or principal, augmented by its interest at regular 
periods of time, increases by jumps at these interest periods in the 
following manner. If 1001X is the percent of interest, and further-
more, if the interest accrued is added to the principal at the end of each 
year, after x years the accumulated amount of an original principal of 1 
will be 
(1 + IX)"'. 
If, however, the principal had the interest added to it not at the end of 
each year, but at the end of each nth part of a year, after x years the 
principal would amount to 
( 
1X)1l'" 
1 + -
. 
n 
Taking x = 1 for the sake of simplicity, we find that the principal 1 has 
increased after one year to 
If we now let n increase beyond all bounds, that is, if we let the interest 
be credited at shorter and shorter intervals, the limiting case will mean 
in a sense that the compound interest is credited at each instant; then 
the total amount after one year will be ea times the original principal 
(see p. 153). Similarly, if the interest is calculated in this manner, an 
original principal of 1 will have grown after x years to an amount 
ea",; here x may be any number, integral or otherwise, 
The discussion in Section 3.4a forms a framework into which examples 
of this type are readily fitted. We consider a quantity, given by the 
number y, which increases (or decreases) with time so that the rate at 
which this quantity increases or decreases is proportional to the total 
quantity. Then with time as the independent variable x, we obtain a 
law of the form y' = lXy for the rate of increase, where IX, the factor of 
proportionality, is positive or negative depending on whether the 
quantity is increasing or decreasing. Then in accordance with Section 
3.4a the quantity y itself is represented by a formula 
where the meaning of the constant c is immediately obvious if we 
consider the instant x = O. At that instant eax = 1, and we find that 

Sec. 3.4 
Some Applications of the Exponential Function 225 
c = Yo is the quantity at the beginning of the time considered, so that 
we may write 
y = yoea",. 
A characteristic example is that of radioactive disintegration. The 
rate at which the total quantity y of the radioactive substance is 
diminishing is proportional at any instant to the total quantity present 
at that instant; this is a priori plausible, for each portion of the sub-
stance decreases as rapidly as every other portion. Therefore the 
quantity y of the substance expressed as a function of time satisfies a 
relation of the form y' = -ky, where k is to be taken as positive since 
we are dealing with a diminishing quantity. The quantity of substance 
is thus expressed as a function of the time by y = yorkX, where Yo 
is the amount of the substance at the beginning of the time considered 
(time x = 0). 
After a certain time T the radioactive substance will have diminished 
to half its original quantity. This so-called half-life is given by the 
equation 
tyo = yoe-kr, 
from which we immediately obtain T = (log 2)Jk. 
c. Cooling or Heating of a Body by a Surrounding Medium 
Another typical example of the occurrence of the exponential function 
is the cooling of a body, for example, a metal plate of uniform temper-
ature which is immersed in a very large bath of lower temperature. We 
assume that the surrounding bath is so large that its temperature is 
unaffected by the cooling process. We further assume that at each 
instant all parts of the immersed pody are at the same temperature, 
and that the rate at which the temperature changes is proportional to 
the difference of the temperature of the body and that of the surrounding 
medium (Newton's law of cooling). 
If we denote the time by x and the temperat4re difference betwet(n 
the body and the bath by y = y(x) , this law of cooling is expressed by 
the equation 
y' = -ky, 
where k is a positive constant (whose value is a physical characteristic 
of the substance of the body). From this differential equation, which 
expresses the effect of the cooling process at a given instant, we obtain 
by means ofEq. (8), p. 223, an "integral law" giving us the temperature 
at any arbitrary time x in the form 
y = ce-k"'. 

226 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
This shows that the temperature decreases "exponentially" and tends 
to become equal to the external temperature. The rapidity with which 
this happens is expressed by the number k. As before, the meaning of 
the constant ~ is that of the initial temperature at the instant x = 0, 
Yo = c, so that our law of cooling can be written in the form 
y = yoe-krIJ• 
Obviously, the same discussion applies also to the heating of a body. 
The only difference is that the initial difference of temperature Yo is 
in this case negative instead of positive. 
d. Variation of the Atmospheric Pressure with 
the Height above the Surface of the Earth 
A further example of the occurrence of the exponential formula is in 
the variation of atmospheric pressure with height: We make use of (1) 
the physical fact that the atmospheric pressure is equal to the weight 
of the column of air vertically above a surface of area one, and (2) of 
Boyle's law, according to which the pressure p of the air at a given 
constant temperature is proportional to the density a of the air. Boyle's 
law, expressed in symbols, is p = aa, where a is a constant depending 
on a specific physical property of the air. Our problem is to determine 
p = f(h) as a function of the height h above the surface of the earth. 
If by Po we denote the atmospheric pressure at the surface of the 
earth, that is, the total weight of the air column supported by a unit 
area, by g the gravitational constant, and by a(A) the density of the air 
at the height A above the earth, the weightl of the column up to the 
height h is given by the integral g (" a(A) dA. The pressure at height h 
is therefore 
Jo 
P =f(h) = Po -
g L"a(A) dA. 
By differentiation this yields the following relation between the pressure 
p =f(h) and the density a(h): 
ga(h) = -f'(h) = _p'. 
We now use Boyle's law to eliminate the quantity a from this equation, 
thus obtaining an equation p' = -(g/a)p which involves the unknown 
pressure function only. From Eq. (8) p. 223, it follows that 
p = f(h) = ce-gh/a. 
1 ga().) is the weight of the air per unit volume at the height ).. 

Sec. 3.4 
Some Applications of the Exponential Function 227 
If as above we denote the pressure 1(0) at the earth's surface by Po, it 
follows immediately that c = Po, and consequently 
p = f(h) = poe-gh/a. 
Taking the logarithms yields 
h
al 
Po 
= - og-. 
g 
P 
These two formulas are applied frequently. For example, if the constant 
a is known, they enable us to find the height of a place from the baro-
metric pressure or to find the difference in height of two places by 
measuring the atmospheric pressure at each place. Again, if the atmo-
spheric pressure and the height h are known, we can determine the 
constant a, which is of great importance in gas theory. 
e. Progress of a Chemical Reaction 
We now consider an example from chemistry, the so-called uni-
molecular reaction. We suppose that a substance is dissolved in a 
large amount of solvent, say a quantity of cane sugar in water. If a 
chemical reaction occurs, the chemical law of mass action in this case 
states that the rate of reaction is proportional to the quantity of 
reacting substance present. We suppose that the cane sugar is being 
transformed by catalytic action into invert sugar, and we denote by 
u(x) the quantity of cane sugar which at time x is. still unchanged. 
The velocity of reaction is then -du/dx, and in accordance with the 
law of mass action an equation of the form 
du 
-= -ku 
dx 
holds, where k is a constant depending on the substance reacting. 
From this instantaneous or differential law we immediately obtain, as 
on p. 223, an integral law, which gives us the amount of cane sugar as 
a function of the time: 
u(x) = ae-k3:. 
This formula shows us clearly how the chemical reaction tends asymp-
totically to its final state u = 0, that is, complete transformation of the 
reacting substance. The constant a is obviously the quantity of cane 
sugar present at time x = O. 

228 
The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
f. Switching an Electric Circuit On or Off 
As a final example we consider the growth of a direct electric current 
when a circuit is completed, or its decay when the circuit is broken. 
If R is the resistance of the circuit and E the electromotive force (volt-
age), the current I gradually increases from its original value zero 
to the steady final value EIR. We have therefore to consider I as a 
function of the time x. The growth of the current depends on the self-
induction of the circuit; the circuit has a characteristic constant L, 
the coefficient of self-induction, of such a nature that, as the current 
increases, an electromotive force of magnitude L dIldx, opposed to the 
external electromotive force E, is developed. From Ohm's law, as-
serting that the product of the resistance and the current is at each 
instant equal to the actual effective voltage, we obtain the relation 
'For 
dl 
lR =E -L-. 
dx 
E 
f(x) = lex) - -
R 
we immediately find f'(x) = -(RIL)f(x), so that by Eq. (8), p. 223, 
f(x) = f(O)e-R",/L. Recalling 1(0) = 0, we find f(O) = -EIR; thus 
we obtain the expression 
I =f(x) + ~ = ~(1 -
e-R.,/L) 
R 
R 
for the current as a function of the time. 
This expression shows how the current tends asymptotically to its 
steady value EIR when the circuit is closed. 
3.5 The Hyperbolic Functions 
a. Analytical Definition 
In many applications the exponential function enters in combinations 
of the form 
l(e'" + e-"') 
or tee'" _ e-"'). 
It is convenient to introduce these and similar combinations as special 
functions; we denote them as follows: 
(9a) 
(9b) 
. 
e'" - e-'" 
SInh x = =---.::....-. 
2 
e'" + e-'" 
cosh x = 
, 
2 

Sec. 3.5 
The Hyperbolic Functions 229 
y 
Figure 3.9 
and we call them the hyperbolic sine, hyperbolic cosine, hyperbolic 
tangent, and hyperbolic cotangent respectively. The functions sinh x, 
cosh x, and tanh x are defined for all values of x, whereas for coth x the 
point x = 0 must be excluded. The names are chosen to express a certain 
analogy with the trigonometric functions; it is this analogy, which we 
are about to study in detail, that justifies special consideration of our 
new functions. In Figs. 3.9, 3.10, and 3.11 the graphs of the hyperbolic 
functions are shown; the dotted lines in Fig. 3.9 are the graphs of 
y = (t)e X and y = (!)e-x, from which the graphs of sinh x and cosh x 
may easily be constructed. 
Cosh x obviously is an even/unction, that is, a function which remains 
unchanged when x is replaced by -x, whereas sinh x is an odd/unction, 
that is, a function that changes sign when x is replaced by -x (cf. 
p.29). 

230 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
y 
--_~2~------~~------~~--------~--------02--~x 
-I 
Figure 3.10 
y 
1 -----------
--_~2-----OI---0~--~Ir---~2----~ x 
... 1 
Figure 3.11 

Sec. 3.5 
The Hyperbolic Functions 231 
By its definition, the function 
eX + e-x 
cosh x = ---
2 
is positive and not less than one for all values of x. It has its least 
value when x = 0: cosh 0 = 1. 
The fundamental relation between cosh x and sinh x 
cosh2 X -
sinh2 x = 1, 
follows immediately from the definitions. If we now denote the inde-
pendent variable by t instead of x and write 
x = cosh t, 
y = sinh t, 
we have 
x2 -
y2 = 1; 
that is, the point with the coordinates x = cosh t, y = sinh t moves 
along the rectangular hyperbola x 2 -
y2 = 1 as t ranges over the whole 
scale of values from -
00 to + 00. According to the defining equation, 
x ~ 1, and our formulas make it evident that y runs through the whole 
scale of values -
00 to + 00 as t does; for if t tends to infinity so does 
et, whereas e-t tends to zero. We may therefore state more exactly: 
As t runs from -
00 to + 00, the equations x = cosh t, y = sinh t give 
us one branch, namely, the right-hand one, of the rectangular hyper-
bola. 
b. Addition Theorems and Formulas for Differentiation 
From their definition we obtain the addition theorems for the hyper-
bolic functions: 
cosh (a + b) = cosh a cosh b + sinh a sinh b, 
(10) 
sinh (a + b) = sinh a cosh b + cosh a sinh b. 
The proofs are obtained at once if we write 
and insert in these equations 
ea = cosh a + sinh a, 
eb = cosh b + sinh b, 
e-a = cosh a -
sinh a, 
e-b = cosh b - sinh b. 
Between these formulas and the corresponding trigonometrical formulas 
there is a striking analogy. The only difference in the addition theorems 
is one sign in the first formula. 

232 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
A corresponding analogy holds for the differentiation formulas. 
Remembering that d(eX)jdx = eX, we readily find that 
(11) 
!!:..- cosh x = sinh x, 
dx 
d 
1 
-tanh x = ---, 
dx 
cosh2 X 
d . h 
-sm x = cosh x, 
dx 
d 
1 
-
coth x = - --- . 
dx 
sinh2 x 
From the first two equations it follows immediately that y = cosh x 
and y = sinh x are solutions of the differential equation 
(12) 
d2y 
dx 2 = y, 
which again only differs in sign from the analogous equation satisfied 
by the trigonometric functions cos x and sin x (see p. 171). 
c. The Inver3e Hyperbolic Functions 
To the hyperbolic functions x = cosh t, y = sinh t, there correspond 
inverse functions, which we denote! by 
t = ar cosh x, 
t = ar sinh y. 
Since the function sinh t is monotonic increasing2 throughout the 
interval -
00 < t < + 00, its inverse function is uniquely determined 
for all values of y; on the other hand, a glance at the graph (see 
Fig. 3.9, p. 229) shows that t = ar cosh x is not uniquely determined, 
but has an ambiguity of sign, because to a given value of x there 
corresponds not only the number t but also the number -to Since 
cosh t ~ 1 for all values of t, its inverse ar cosh x is defined only for 
x ~ 1. 
We can easily express these inverse functions in terms of the logarithm 
by regarding the quantity e t = u in the definitigns 
et + e-t 
x = --'---
2 
2 
as unknown and solving these (quadratic) equations for u: 
u = x ± vi x2 -
1, 
u = y + vi y2 + 1; 
since u = et can have only positive values, the square root in the 
second equation must be taken with the positive sign, whereas in the 
1 The symbolic notation cosh-1 x, etc., is also used; cf. footnote, p. 54. 
2 (d/dt) sinh t = cosh t > O. 

Sec. 3.5 
The Hyperbolic Functions 233 
first either sign is possible (which corresponds to the ambiguity men-
tioned above). In the logarithmic form, t = log u, and hence 
t = log (x ± .JX2 -
1) = ar cosh x, 
t = log (y + .Jy2 + 1) = ar sinh y. 
(13) 
In the case of ar cosh x the variable x is restricted to the interval 
x ;;::: 1, whereas ar sinh y is defined for all values of y. 
Equation (13) gives us two values, 
log (x + .JX2 -
I) 
and 
log (x -
.JX2 -
1) 
for ar cosh x, corresponding to the two branches of ar cosh x. Since 
(x + ~)(x 
-
.JX2 -
1) = I, 
the sum of these two values of ar cosh x is zero, which agrees with the 
ambiguity in the sign of t mentioned before. 
The inverses of the hyperbolic tangent and hyperbolic cotangent can 
be defined analogously, and can also be expressed in terms of loga-
rithms. These functions we denote by ar tanh x and ar coth x; ex-
pressing the independent variable everywhere by x, we readily obtain 
1 
1 + x 
ar tanh x = -log --
2 
1- x 
(14) 
1 
x + 1 
ar coth x = -log--
2 
x-I 
in the interval -1 < x < 1, 
in the intervals x < -1, x > 1. 
The differentiation of these inverse functions may be carried out by 
the reader himself; he may make use of either the rule for differen-
tiating an inverse function or the chain rule in conjunction with these 
expressions for the inverse functions in terms of logarithms. If x is the 
independent variable, the results are 
d 
1 
-
ar cosh x = ± / 
' 
dx 
'\IX2 -
1 
(15) 
d 
1 
-
ar tanh x = ---2 ' 
dx 
1 -
x 
d 
. h 
1 
-arsm x= 
, 
dx 
.JX2 + 1 
d 
1 
-arcothx = --2' 
dx 
1- x 
The last two formulas do not contradict each other, since the first holds 
only for -1 < x < 1 and the second only for x < -1 and 1 < x. 
The two values of the derivative d(ar cosh x)/dx, expressed by the sign 
± in the first formula, correspond to the two different branches of the 
curve y = ar cosh x = log (x ± .J x2 -
1). 

234 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
d. Further Analogies 
The similarities between the hyperbolic and the trigonometric 
functions are no accident. The deeper source of these analogies 
becomes apparent when we consider these functions for imaginary 
arguments, as we shall do later in Section 7.7a. We shall then be able 
to identify cosh x with cos (ix) and sinh x with (IIi) sin (ix), where 
i = J -1. This fact makes it evident that every relation involving 
trigonometric functions has its counterpart for hyperbolic functions. 
Many of those analogies have interesting geometrical or physical 
interpretations. (See also Chapter 4, p. 363.) 
In the above representation of the rectangular hyperbola by the 
quantity t, we did not ascribe any geometrical meaning to the "param-
eter" t itself. We shall now return to this subject, and encounter a 
further analogy between the trigonometric and the hyperbolic functions. 
If we represent the circle with equation x2 + y2 = 1 by means of a 
parameter t in the form x = cos t, Y = sin t, we can interpret the 
quantity t as an angle or as a length of arc measured along the cir-
cumference; we may, however, also regard t as twice the area of the 
circular sector corresponding to that angle, the area being reckoned 
positive or negative depending on whether the angle is positive or 
negative. 
We now state analogously that for the hyperbolic functions the 
quantity t is twice the area of the hyperbolic sector for x2 -
y2 = 1 
shown shaded in Fig. 3.12.1 It is this interpretation of t in terms of 
areas that accounts for the names t = ar cosh x and t = ar sinh y 
given to the inverse hyperbolic functions.s The proof is obtained 
without difficulty if we refer the hyperbola to its asymptotes as axes by 
m~ans of the transformation of coordinates 
x + y = J2'Y/, 
or 
with these new coordinates the equation of the hyperbola is ~'Y/ = t. 
Hence the two right triangles OPQ and OAB both have area 1, for the 
lengths of OQ and QP are, respectively, 'Y/ and 1/2'Y/, and the area in 
1 For a different proof, see p. 372. 
2 Just as the notation t = arc cos x refers to an arc of the unit circle, so 
t = ar cosh x refers to an area connected with a rectangular hyperbola x2 -
y2 = 1. 
Incidentally, t is not the length of the hyperbolic arc. 

1/ 
~ 
,.x 
~ 
Figure 3.12 
~"" """,,'1 
)JL x 
Figure 3.13 To illustrate the hyperbolic 
functions. 
f<l 
:> .... 
i.., 
~ 
<I> 
~ I 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~. 
N .., 
VI 

236 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
question is equal to that of the figure ABQP. Obviously the coordinates 
of the points A and Bare 
and 
respectively, and for double the area of our figure we thus obtain 
1
("+11)/ V2 
---
2 
_ 
(1/2n) dn = log (x + y) = log (x ± J x2 -
1), 
I/ V 2 
but by Eq. (13), p. 233, this is equal to t, proving our assertion. 
In conclusion, it may be pointed out that, as shown in Fig. 3.13, the 
hyperbolic functions can be graphically represented on the hyperbola, 
just as the trigonometric functions can be represented on the circle. 
3.6 Maxima and Minima 
As the first of a great variety of applications we consider the theory of 
maxima and minima of a function, in conjunction with a geometrical 
discussion of the second derivative. 
a. Convexity and Concavity of Curves 
By definition the derivative f'(x) = df(x)/dx represents the slope of 
the curve y = I(x). The derivative of the function f'(x) or of the 
slope of the curve y = I(x) is given by the derivative dj'(x)/dx = 
d2f(x)/dx2 = f"(x), the second derivative of I(x), and so on. If the 
second derivative I"(x) is positive at a point x-so that owing to con-
tinuity (which we assume) it is positive in some neighborhood1 of this 
point x-then throughout this neighborhood the derivative f'(x) in-
creases with Increasing values of x. Hence the curve y = I(x) turns its 
convex side downwards or is "open" upwards. We call the function 
I(x) or the curve y = I(x) convex. If f"(x) is negative, the curve and 
the function are concave. Therefore whenf"(x) > 0, the curve in the 
neighborhood of the point lies above the tangent while when rex) < 0, 
1 We make use here of the intuitively obvious observation: a continuous function 
g(x) which is positive at a point Xo also is positive for all points of a sufficiently 
small neighborhood of Xo (as far as they belong to the domain of g). The formal 
proof is simple. From the continuity of g at Xo we know that for every positive € 
the inequality Ig(x) - g(xo)1 < € holds for all x in a sufficiently small neighborhood 
Ix -
xol < <5 of the point Xo. Since g(xo) > 0, we are free to choose for € the value 
!g(xo), so that Ig(x) - g(xo)1 < !g(xo) in some neighborhood. Since then g(xo) -
g(x) ::5: Ig(x) - g(xo)1 < !g(xo), it follows that g(x) > !g(xo) > O. 

Sec. 3.6 
Maxima and Minima 237 
y 
y 
--o~--------~x~----~x 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3.14 (a) r(x) > O. (b) r(x) < O. 
it lies below the tangent (see Figs. 3.14a and 3. 14b) (cf. Problem 4, p. 200 
and Section 5.6). 
Point of Inflection 
Special consideration is required only in points where f"(x) = O. 
On passing through such a point the second derivative j"(x) will gen-
erally change its sign. Such a point will then be a point of transition 
between the two cases just indicated; that is, on one side the tangent is 
above the curve and on the other side below it, whereas at this point it 
crosses the curve (see Fig. 3.15). Such a point is called a point of in-
flection of the curve, and the corresponding tangent is called an in-
flectional tangent. 
y 
~o+---------------------~X 
Figure 3.15 Point of inflection. 

238 
The Techniques 0/ Calculus 
Ch.3 
The simplest example is given by the function y = x3, the cubical 
parabola, for which the x-axis itself is an inflectional tangent at the 
inflection point x = 0 (see Fig. 3.3, p. 209). Another example is given 
by the function/(x) = sin x, for which 
f'(x) = d(sin x)Jdx = cos x 
and 
f"(x) = d2(sin x)Jdx2 = -
sin x. 
Consequently,f'(O) = 1 andf"(O) = 0; since the sign off"(x) changes 
at x = 0, the sine curve has at the origin an inflectional tangent in-
clined at an angle of 45 degrees to the x-axis. 
It must, however, be noted that points can exist where ["(x) = 0 and 
the sign of ["(x) does not change with increasing x, while the tangent 
does not cut the curve but remains entirely on one side of it. For 
example, the curve y = X4 lies entirely above the x-axis, although the 
second derivative ["(x) = 12x2 vanishes for x = O. 
b. Maxima and Minima-Relative Extrema. Stationary Points 
A functionf(x) has a maximum at a point ~ if the value off at the 
point ~ is not exceeded by the value of f at any other point x of the 
domain off; that is,Ja) ~ f(x) for all x wherefis defined.1 
Similarly, 
fhas a minimum at ~ iffa) '5:.f(x) for all x in the domain. The word 
extrema is used to cover both maxima and minima. 
The function f(x) = J1 -
X2, for example, which is defined for 
-1 '5:. x '5:. 1, has minima at x = ±1 and a maximum at x = O. It is 
easy to give examples of continuous functions which have no maxima 
or no minima. Thus the function/(x) = 1/(1 + x 2) (Fig. 3.8, p. 216) in 
the domain -
00 < x < + 00 has no minimum; the function I(x) = 
l/x defined for 0 < x < 00 has no extremum points at all. We recall, 
however, from Chapter 1, p. 101 the theorem of Weierstrass, according 
to which a continuous function defined in a closed finite interval always 
has a maximum (and similarly a minimum) there. 
Our object is to find a means of locating the extrema of a function or 
curve. This problem which is encountered very frequently in geometry, 
mechanics, physics, and other fields was one of the principal incentives 
for the development of the calculus in the seventeenth century. 
Calculus does not furnish a direct method for picking out the 
extrema of a function f(x), but it permits us to locate the so-called 
relative extremum points, among which the actual maxima and minima 
have to occur. The point ~ is a relative maximum (minimum) offiff 
1 We talk of a strict maximum point ; if/(~) > /(x) for all x in the domain of/that 
are different from ~. 

Sec. 3.6 
Maxima and Minima 239 
has its greatest (least) value at ~ when compared not with all possible 
values ofJ(x) but just with the values ofJ(x) for x in some neighborhood 
of~. By a neighborhood of the point ~ we mean here any open interval 
ex < x < {3 which contains the point ~ but may be arbitrarily small. 
A relative extremum point ~ of J is then a point which is an extremum 
point when f is restricted to all those points of its domain lying suf-
ficiently close to ~.l Obviously, the extrema of the function are in-
cluded among the relative extrema. To avoid confusion we shall use 
y 
x 
Figure 3.16 Graph of function defined on the interval [a, b 1 with relative minima at 
III = a, XI, X" xs, relative maxima at Xl> Xa, X 5, b, absolute maximum at b, and absolute 
minimum at X,. 
the terms absolute maxima (minima) for the maxima and minima of 
f in its entire domain (see Fig. 3.16). 
Geometrically speaking, relative maxima and minima, if not located 
in the end points of the interval of definition, are respectively the wave 
crests and troughs of the curve. A glance at Fig. 3.16 shows that the 
value of a relative maximum at one point X5 may very well be less than 
the value of a relative minimum at another point x2• The diagram also 
suggests the fact that relative maxima and minima of a continuous 
function alternate: Between two successive relative maxima there is 
always located a relative minimum. 
Let J(x) be a differentiable function defined in the closed interval 
a ~ x ~ b. We see at once that at a relative extremum point which is 
1 The formal definition of a relative maximum point E would state that there exists 
an open interval containing E such that ICE) ~ f(x) for all X of that interval for 
which I is defined. 

240 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
located in the interior of the interval the tangent to the curve must be 
horizontal. (The formal proof is given below.) Hence the condition 
/'(~) = 0 
is necessary for a relative extremum at the point ~ with a < ~ < b. 
If, however,f(~) is a relative extremum and ~ coincides with one of the 
end points of the interval of definition, the equation/,(~) = 0 need not 
hold. We can only say that if the left-hand end point is a relative 
maximum (minimum) point, the slope /'(a) of the- curve cannot be 
positive (negative), while if the right-hand end point b is a relative 
maximum (minimum) then/,(b) cannot be negative (positive). 
The points at which the tangent to the curve y = lex) is horizontal, 
corresponding to the roots ~ of the equation/'(~) = 0, are called the 
critical points or stationary points of f 
All relative extrema of a 
differentiable function / which are interior points of the domain of / 
are stationary points. Hence: an absolute maximum or minimum 0/ the 
function coincides either with a critical point 0/ the function or with 
an end point 0/ its domain. In order to locate the absolute maxima 
(minima) of the function we have only to compare the values of/in the 
critical points and in the two end points and to see which ofthese values 
are greatest (least). If / fails at a finite number of points to have a 
derivative, we have only to add those points to the list of possible 
locations of an extremum and to check also the values of / at those 
points. Thus the main labor in determining the extrema of a function 
is reduced to that of finding the zeros of the derivative of the function, 
which usually are finite in number. 
To take a simple example, let us determine the largest and smallest 
values of the function/(x) = l-ox'l -
lox2 in the interval -2 ::;; x ::;; 2. 
Here the critical points, the roots of the equation/'(x) = 6(x5 - x)/10 = 0 
are located at x = 0, + 1, -1. Computing the values of / at those 
points and also at the end points of the interval, we find 
x 
-2 
-1 
o 
2 
lex) 
5.2 
-0.2 
0 
-0.2 
5.2 
It is clear that the points x = ± 1 represent relative minima, whereas 
relative maxima occur at x = 0 and x = ±2. The maximum value of 
the function, assumed in the end points of the interval, is 5.2; the 
minimum value, assumed in the points x = ±1, is -0.2 (see Fig. 3.17). 
Without appealing to intuition we can easily prove by purely analytic 
methods that/'a) = 0 whenever F is a relative extremum point in the 
interior of the domain of/provided / is differentiable at ~. (Compare 

Sec. 3.6 
Maxima and Minima 241 
y 
6 
5 
4 
3 
-1 
Figure 3.17 Y = (x· -
3x2)/10. 
the exactly analogous considerations for Rolle's theorem, p. 175.) If 
the function I(x) has a relative maximum at the point ~, then for all 
sufficiently small values of h different from zero the expression 
I(~ + h) - 1m must be negative or zero. Therefore 
[f(~ + h) - 1m] < ° 
h 
-
for h > 0, whereas 
tiC; + h) - I(x)] > ° 
h 
-
for h < O. Thus if h tends to zero through positive values, the limit 
cannot be positive, whereas if h tends to zero through negative values, 
the limit cannot be negative. However, since we have assumed that the 
derivative at ~ exists, these two limits must be equal to one another, 
and, in fact, to the value I'(~), which therefore can only be zero; we 
must have/'(~) = O. A similar proof holds for a relative minimum. The 
proof also shows that if the left-hand end point ~ = a is a relative 
maximum (minimum) point, then at leastf'(a) ::;; 0 [f'(a) ~ 0]; if the 
right-hand end point b is a relative maximum (minimum) point, then 
('(b) ~ 0 [f'(b) ::;; 0]. 

242 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
The condition I'W = 0 characterizing the critical points is by no 
means sufficient for the occurrence of a relative extremum. There may 
be points at which the derivative vanishes, that is, at whicH the tangent 
is horizontal, although the curve has neither a relative maximum nor 
minimum there. This occurs if at the given point the curve has a 
horizontal inflectional tangent cutting it, as in the example of the 
function y = Xl at the point x = O. 
The following test gives the conditions under which a critical point 
is a point of relative maximum or minimum. It applies to a continuous 
function f, having a continuous derivative I' which vanishes at most 
at afinite number of points or, more generally to differentiable functions 
ffor whichI' changes sign at most at a finite number of points: 
The function f(x) has a relative extremum at an interior point ~ of its 
domain if, and only if, the derivative f'(x) changes sign as x passes through 
this point; in particular, the function has a relative minimum if near ~ 
the derivative is negative to the left of ~ and positive to the right, whereas 
in the contrary case it has a maximum. 
We prove this rigorously by using the mean value theorem. First, 
we observe that to the left and right of ~ there exist intervals ~1 < X < ~ 
and ~ < x < ~2' in each of which f'(x) has only one sign, since f' 
vanishes only at finite number of points. (Here ~1 and ~2 can be taken 
as the points nearest to ~ at whichI' vanishes, if such points exist.) If 
the signs of f'(x) in these two intervals are different, then f(~ + h) -
f(~) = hj'(~ + ()h) has the same sign for all numerically small values 
of h, whether h is positive or negative, so that ~ is a relative extremum. 
Iff'(x) has the same sign in both intervals, then hj'(~ + ()h) changes sign 
when h does, so that fa + h) is greater thanf(~) on one side and less 
thanf(~) on the other side, and there is no extreme value. Our theorem 
is thus proved. 
At the same time we see that the value f(~) is the greatest or least 
value of the function, in every interval containing the point ~, in which f 
is differentiable and in which the only change of sign of f'(x) occurs at ~ 
itself. 
The mean value theorem on which this proof is based can still be 
used if f(x) is not differentiable at an end point of the interval in which 
it is applied, provided thatf(x) is differentiable at all the other points of 
the interval; hence this proof still holds if f'(x) does not exist at 
x =~. For example, the function y = Ixl has a minimum at x = 0, 
since y' > 0 for x > 0 and y' < 0 for x < 0 (cf. Fig. 2.24, p. 167). 
The function y = iY x2 likewise has a minimum at the point x = 0, 
even though its derivative ix-~ is infinite there (cf. Fig. 2.27, p. 169). 

Sec. 3.6 
Maxima and Minima 243 
The simplest method for deciding whether a critical point e is a 
relative maximum or minimum involves the second derivative at that 
point. It is intuitively clear that if f'm = 0, then f has a relative 
maximum at e iff"(e) < 0, and a relative minimum iff"(e) > O. For 
in the first case the curve in the neighborhood of this point lies com-
pletely below the tangent, and in the second case completely above the 
tangent. This result follows analytically from the preceding test, 
provided that f(x) and ['(x) are continuous and that f"(e) exists. For 
iff'(e) = 0 and, say,["(e) > 0, we have 
f"(e) = lim f'(e + h) - f'(e) = lim f'(e + h) > O. 
h->O 
h 
h->O 
h 
It follows that f'(e + h)jh > 0 for all h =;f:. 0 which are sufficiently 
small in absolute value; hencef'(e + h) and h have the same sign in a 
neighborhood of e. For x near e the derivativef'(x) must be negative 
for x to the left of e, and positive for x to the right of e; this 
implies that there is a relative minimum at e. 
The situation is particularly simple in case f"(x) is of one and the 
same sign throughout the interval [a, b] in whichfis defined: 
A point e at which f' vanishes is a maximum point of f if f"(x) < 0 
throughout the interval (or if its curve is concave), and a minimum 
point off if throughout the interval f"(x) > 0 (that is, if the curve is 
convex). 
Indeed, if f"(x) < 0 the function f'(x) is monotonic decreasing, 
hence has e as its only zero. Moreover,J' > 0 for a :5: x < e, whereas 
f' < 0 for e < x 5: b. By the mean value theorem this implies again 
thatf(x) <fee) for x =;f:. e, so that e turns out to be a strict maximum 
point. The minimum of f must coincide with one of the end points 
since there is no other critical point besides e. The same argument 
applies when f" > 0 in the interval. 
Examples 
Example 1. Of all triangles with given base and given area, to find 
that with the least perimeter. 
To solve this problem, we take the x-axis along the given base AB 
and the middle point of AB as the origin (Fig. 3.18). If C is the vertex 
of the triangle, h its altitude (which is fixed by the area and the base), 
and (x, h) are the coordinates of the vertex, then the sum of the two 
sides AC and BC of the triangle is given by 
f(x) = .J(x + a)2 + h2 + J(x -
a)2 + h2, 

244 The Techniques of Calculus 
y 
C(x, h) 
A 
B 
--~~----------~--~~------~~--_x 
-B 
B 
Figure 3.18 
where 2a is the length of the base. From this we obtain 
f'(x) = 
x + a 
+ 
x -
a 
, 
~(x + a)2 + h2 
~(x _ a)2 + h2 
rex) = 
-(x + a)2 
+ 
1 
~[(x + a)2 + h2]3 
~(x + a)2 + h2 
Ch.3 
-(x -
a)2 
1 
+ 
+-;===== 
~[(x -
a)2 + h2]3 
~(x _ a)2 + h2 
h2 
h2 
-
~[(x + a)2 + h2]3 + ~[(x _ a)2 + h2]3· 
We see at once (1) that f'(O) vanishes, and (2) that f"(x) is always 
positive; hence at x = 0 there is a least value (see p. 243). This least 
value is accordingly given by the isosceles triangle. 
Similarly, we find that of all the triangles with a given perimeter and a 
given base the isosceles triangle has the greatest area. 
Example 2. To find a point on a given straight line such that the 
sum of its distances from two given fixed points is a minimum. 
Let there be given a straight line and two fixed points A and B on the 
same side of the line. We wish to find a point P on the straight line such 
that the distance P A + P B has the least possible value.1 
We take the given line as the x-axis and use the notation of Fig. 3.19. 
Then the distance in question is given by 
f(x) = ~X2 + h2 + ~(x -
a)2 + h12, 
1 If A and B lie on opposite sides of the line, P obviously is just the intersection of 
the line with the segment AB. 

Sec. 3.6 
Maxima and Minima 245 
y 
A 
~---a---~ 
Figure 3.19 Law of reflection. 
and we obtain 
f'(x) = 
x 
+ 
x -
a 
, 
.J x2 + h2 
.J(x -
a)2 + h12 
f"(x) = 
h2 
+ 
h12 
.J(x2 + h2)3 
.J[(x -
a)2 + h12]3 
The equationf'(~) = 0 means 
or 
cos IX = cos {J; 
hence the two lines PA and PB must form equal angles with the given 
line. The positive sign of f"(x) shows us that we really have a least 
value. 
The solution of this problem is closely connected with the optical 
law of reflection. By an important principle of optics, known as 
Fermat's principle of least time, the path of a light ray is determined by 
the property that the time the light takes to go from a point A to a 
point B under the given conditions must be the least possible. If 
the condition is imposed that a ray of light shall on its way from A to B 
pass through some point on a given straight line (say on a mirror), we 
see that the shortest time will be taken along the ray for which the 
"angle of incidence" is equal to the "angle of reflection." 

246 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
Example 3. The Law of Refraction.} Let there be given two points 
A and B on opposite sides of the x-axis. What is the path from A to B 
requiring the shortest possible time if the velocity on one side of the 
x-axis is c} and on the other side C2? 
Clearly, this shortest path must consist of two portions of straight 
lines meeting one another at a point P on the x-axis. Using the notation 
of Fig. 3.20, we obtain the two expressions J h2 + x2 and J h}2 + (a - X)2 
y 
A 
h 
----ro~--------~~-----------,--~x 
B 
Figure 3.20 Law of refraction. 
for the lengths PA, PB, respectively, and we find the time of passage 
along this path by dividing the lengths of the two segments by the 
corresponding velocities and then adding; 
f(x) = lJh2 + x2 +1. Jh12 + (a _ X)2. 
Cl 
C2 
By differentiation, we obtain 
r(x) = 1. 
x 
1 
a -
x 
c1Jh2 + x2 -
~Jh12 + (a -
X)2' 
rex) = l 
h2 
+ l 
h12 
C1 J(h2 + X2)3 
C2 J[h12 + (a _ X)2]3 
1 While the preceding examples can be treated also by elementary geometry, 
this one is not easily disposed of without calculus. 

Sec. 3.6 
Maxima and Minima 247 
As we readily see from Fig. 3.20, the equationf'(x) = 0, that is, the 
equation 
1 
x 
1 
a-x 
~.Jh2 + x2 = ~.Jh12 + (a _ X)2' 
is equivalent to the condition (l/cl ) sin ex: = (1/c2) sin p, or 
sin ex: 
CI 
--=-
sin p 
C2 
The reader should verify the fact that there is only one point which 
satisfies this condition and that this point actually yields the required 
least value. 
y 
b 
o 
Figure 3.21 Point on ellipse having the least distance from a point on the major axis. 
The physical meaning of our example is again given by the optical 
principle of least time. A ray of light traveling between two points 
describes the path of shortest time. If CI and C2 are the velocities of 
light on either side of the boundary of two optical media, the path of the 
light will be that given by our result, which is a form of Snell's law of 
refraction. 
Example 4. 
Find the point of an ellipse which is closest to a given 
point on its major axis (Fig. 3.21). 
Taking the ellipse in the form 
x2 
y2 
- + - = 1 
(b < a) 
a2 
b2 

248 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
and the given point on the major axis as (c, 0), we find for the distance 
of any point (x, y) on the ellipse from the point (c, 0), the expression 
where -a ::;; x ::;; a. The function f(x) = d2 is convex (I" > 0). It 
has a minimum for the same x as d itself. The only critical point off 
is at x == c/(l -
b2/a2). If this point lies in the domain of d, it represents 
the minimum point; if not, the minimum of d corresponds to the end 
point of the major axis closest to c. We find accordingly for the 
minimum distance the values 
d 
= bJl __ c_2_ 
a2 _ b2 
d = a -Icl 
if Icl::;; a(l - ::), 
if Icl ~ a(l - ::). 
*3.7 The Order of Magnitude of Functions 
Differences in the behavior of functions for large values of the 
argument, lead to the notion of the order of magnitude. Because of its 
great importance, this matter deserves a brief discussion here even 
though it is not directly connected with the idea of the integral or of the 
derivative. 
a. The Concept of Order of Magnitude. The Simplest Cases 
If the variable x increases beyond all bounds, then, for oc > 0, the 
functions x", log x, e"', e'"'' also increase beyond all bounds. They 
increase, however, in essentially different ways. For example, the 
function x3 becomes "infinite to a higher order" than X2; by this we 
mean: as x increases, the quotient X3/X2 itself increases beyond all 
bounds. Similarly, the function x~ becomes infinite to a higher order 
than xli if oc > (J > 0, etc. 
Quite generally, we shall say of two functions f(x) and g(x), whose 
absolute values increase with x beyond all bounds, that f(x) becomes 
infinite of a higher order than g(x) if for x -- 00 the quotient If(x)/g(x)I 
increases beyond all bounds; we shall say thatf(x) becomes infinite of a 
lower order than g(x) if the quotient If(x)/g(x)I tends to zero as x 
increases; and we shall say that the two functions become infinite of 
the same order of magnitude if as x increases, the quotient If(x)/g(x)1 

Sec. 3.7 
The Order of Magnitude of Functions 249 
possesses a limit different from zero or at least remains between two 
fixed positive b~unds. For example, the function ax3 + bx2 + c = 
f(x), where a ~ 0, will be of the same order Clfmagnitude as the funet~on 
x3 = g(x); for the quotient If(x)/g(x)I = l(axS + bx2 + c)/x31 has the 
limit lal as x -+ 00; on the other hand the function x3 + x + 1 becomes 
infinite of a higher order of magnitude than the function x 2 + x + 1. 
A sum oftwo functionsf(x) and c/>(x), wheref(x) is of higher order of 
magnitude than c/>(x) , has the same order of magnitude as f(x). For 
I(f(x) + c/>(x»If(x)I = 11 + c/>(x)/f(x)l, and by hypothesis this expres-
sion tends to one as x increases. 
h. The Order of Magnitude of the Exponential 
Function and of the Logarithm 
We might be tempted to measure the order of magnitude of functions 
by a scale, assigning to the quantity x the order of magnitude one and to 
the power x'" (IX > 0) the order of magnitude IX. A polynomial of the 
nth degree then obviously would have the order of magnitude n; a 
rational function, the degree of whose numerator is higher by h than 
that of the denominator, would have the order of magnitude h. 
It turns out, however, that any attempt to describe the order of 
magnitude of arbitrary functions by the foregoing scale must fail. 
For there are functions that become infinite of higher order than the 
power x'" of x, no matter how large IX is chosen; again, there are 
functions which become infinite of lower order than the power x"', 
no matter how small the positive number IX is chosen. These functions 
therefore will not fit in our scale. 
Without entering into a detailed theory we state the following 
theorem. 
THEOREM. If a is an arbitrary number greater than one, then the 
quotient aX/x tends to infinity as x increases. 
PROOF. To prove this we construct the function 
aX 
c/>(x) = log- = xloga -logx; 
x 
it is obviously sufficient to show that c/>(x) increases beyond all bounds if 
x tends to + 00. For this purpose we consider the derivative 
1 
c/>'(x) = log a - -x 

250 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
and notice that for x ~ c = 2/log a this is not less than the positive 
number t log a. Hence it follows that for x ~ c 
ep(x) -
ep(c) = f) ep'(t) dt ~ f) t log a dt ~ t(x -
c) log a, 
ep(x) ~ ep(c) + t(x -
c) log a, 
and the right-hand side becomes infinite for x ~ 
00. 
We give a second proof of this important theorem: with";;' = 
b = 1 + h, we have b > 1 and h > O. Let n be the integer such that 
n ~ x < n + 1; we may take x> 1, so that n ~ 1. Applying the 
lemma of p. 64, we have 
J?: = b~ = (1 + h)'" > (1 + ht > 1 + nh > nh = h_ • ./n, 
x 
Jx 
Jx 
In + 1 
In + 1 
J2n 
J2 
so that 
all) 
h2 
->-·n 
x 
2 
' 
and therefore tends to infinity with x. 
From the fact just proved many others follow. For example: for 
every positive index rx and every number a > 1 the quotient all)/x" tends 
to infinity as x increases; that is, 
THEOREM. 
The exponential function becomes infinite of a higher order 
of magnitude than any power of x. 
For the proof we need show only that the rxth root of the expression, 
that is, 
_= __ =_0-
X 
rx x/rx 
rx 
y 
tends to infinity. This, however, follows immediately from the pre-
ceding theorem when x is replaced by y = x/rx. 
In a similar fashion we prove the following theorem. For every 
positive value of rx the quotient (log x)/x" tends to zero for x ~ °00; 
that is 
THEOREM. 
The logarithm becomes infinite of a lower order of 
magnitude than any arbitrarily small positive power of x. 
PROOF. 
The proof follows immediately if we put log x = y so that 
our quotient is transformed into y/e"'Y. We then put eft = a; then 

Sec. 3.7 
The Order of Magnitude of Functions 251 
a > 1, and our quotient yld' approaches zero as y tends to infinity. 
Since y approaches infinity as x does, our theorem is proved.1 
On the basis of these results we can construct functions of an order 
of magnitude far higher than that of the exponential function and other 
functions of an order of magnitude far lower than that of the logarithm. 
For example, the function e<eZ ) is of a higher order than the exponential 
function, and the function log log x is of a lower order than the loga-
rithm; moreover we can iterate these processes as often as we like, 
piling up the symbols e or log to any extent we please. 
All the functions x, log x, log (log x), log [log (log x)], etc., eventually 
become arbitrarily large for sufficiently large x, but with increasing 
slowness. Taking, for example, for x the tremendous number x = 10100 
we find that log x is about 230, whereas log (log x) is only about 5.4. 
c. General Remarks 
These considerations show that it is not possible to assign to all 
functions definite numbers as orders of magnitude so that of two 
functions the one with the higher order of magnitude has a higher 
number. If, for example, the function x is of the order of magnitude 
one and the function x1+€ of the order of magnitude 1 + €, then the 
function x log x must be of an order of magnitude that is greater than 
one and less than 1 + € no matter how small € is chosen. But there 
is no such number. 
In addition, it is easy to see that functions need not possess a clearly 
defined relative order of magnitude at all. For example, the function 
[x2(sin X)2 + x + lJ/[x2(cos X)2 + x] approaches no definite limits as x 
increases; on the contrary, for x = mr (where n is an integer) the value 
is 11mI', whereas for x = (n + n7T it is (n + t)7T + 1 + l/(n + t)7T. 
Although the numerator and denominator both become infinite, the 
quotient neither remains between positive bounds nor tends to zero nor 
tends to infinity. The numerator, therefore, is neither of the same order 
as the denominator, nor of lower order nor of higher order. This 
apparently startling situation merely means that our definitions are not 
designed in such a way that we can compare every pair of functions. 
This is not a defect; we have no desire to compare the orders of such 
1 Another simple proof may be suggested: For x> 1 and € > 0 
1
"'dl; 1"' 
1 
logx= -< I;€-ldl;=-(x€-l); 
1 
I; 
1 
€ 
if we choose € equal to (t and divide both members of this inequality by x", then it 
follows that (log x)/x" -+ 0 as x -+ 00. 

252 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
functions as the numerator and denominator above; knowledge of the 
value of one of them gives us no useful information about the other. 
d. The Order of Magnitude of a Function in 
the Neighborhood of an Arbitrary Point 
Just as we may compare the behavior of functions for x -+ 00 
we may also compare functions that become infinite at the finite point 
x =~. 
We say that the function f(x) = l/lx -
~I becomes infinite of the 
first order at the point x = 
~, and correspondingly that the function 
l/lx -
~IIX becomes infinite of the order cx, provided that cx is positive. 
We recognize then that the function ellix-si becomes for x -+ ~ 
infinite of higher order and the function log Ix -
~I infinite of lower 
order than all these powers; that is, that the limiting relations 
lim (Ix -
~IIX . e1/1x-sl) = 00 
and 
lim (Ix - W· log Ix -
~I) = 0 
X-+s 
<I:-+s 
hold. 
To confirm this we merely put l/lx -
~I = y; our statements then 
reduce to the known theorem on p. 249, since 
and 
IX 
log y 
Ix -
~I . log Ix -
~I = - - yIX 
and y increases beyond all bounds as x tends to~. (The method of 
reducing the behavior at a point ~ to the behavior at infinity by the 
substitution l/lx :.-
~I = y frequently proves useful.) 
e. The Order of Magnitude (or Smallness) of a 
Function Tending to Zero 
Just as we seek to describe the approach of a function to infinity by 
means of the concept of order of magnitude, we may also specify the 
way in which a function approaches zero. We say that as x -+ 00 the 
quantity l/x vanishes to the first order, the quantity X-IX, where cx is 
positive, to the order cx. We find once again that the function l/log x 
vanishes to a lower order than an arbitrary power X-IX, that is, for every 
positive cx the relation 
lim (X-IX. log x) = 0 
holds. 
In the same way we say that for x = ~ the quantity x -
~ vanishes to 
the first order, the quantity Ix -
~IIX to the order cx. With our results 

Sec. 3.7 
The Order of Magnitude of Functions 253 
it is easy to prove the relations 
lim (Ixl" . log Ixl) = 0, 
lim (Ixl-" . e-lIl",l) = 0, 
", .... 0 
", .... 0 
which are usually expressed as follows: 
The function l/log Ixl vanishes as x ~ 0 to a lower order than any 
power of x; the exponential function e-1I1"'1 vanishes to a higher order 
than any power of x. 
f. The "0" and "0" Notationfor Orders of Magnitude 
A convenient way to indicate that a functionf(x) is oflower order of 
magnitude than a function g(x) is to write f = o(g). This symbolic 
equation signifies only that the quotientf/g has the limit zero, and can 
be used to equal advantage for functions vanishing or becoming infinite 
and for arguments x tending to infinity or approaching a value ~.l 
We can rewrite many of the results of the previous section in this 
notation; for example, 
x" = o(xP) 
for <X < f3 
as x~ 00 
log x = o(x") 
for <x> 0 
as x~ 00 
e-'" = o(x-a) 
as x ~ 00 
e-1/", = o(xa) 
as x~o 
through positive values 
log Ixl = o(l/x) 
as x~o 
1 -
cos x = o(x) 
as x~o. 
This notation, introduced by E. Landau, is useful for indicating the 
order of magnitude of the error in an approximation formula. For 
example, 
1 
1 (1) 
J 1 + 4x2 = 2x + 0 
; 
for x ~ 00 
stands for the relation 
1 
1 
lim J 1 + 4x2 
2x 
= o. 
"'''''00 
11x 
1 The letter 0 is chosen to suggest the word "order." Observe that the relation 
f = o(g) for vanishingg means that fvanishes of higher order. 

254 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
Similarly, the relation between increment and differential of a function 
fwhich has a derivative at the point x can be written in the form 
f(x + h) - f(x) = hf'(x) + o(h) 
for 
h -4- O. 
Equally useful is the symbolic notation f = O(g) to indicate that 
f(x) is at most of the order of magnitude of g(x), that is, that the quotient 
f(x)fg(x) is bounded for the values of x in question.! Use of the symbol 
o is again very flexible. Thus the phrase ''/ = O(g) for x -4- 00" means 
that the quotientffg is bounded for all sufficiently large x as in 
for x -4- 00. 
Similarly, "j = O(g) for x -4- f' means that fig is bounded in a suffi-
ciently small neighborhood of the point x = ~ as in 
eX -
I = O(x) 
for x -4- O. 
More generally we can use the equationf = O(g) to indicate the bound-
edness offfg in any domain of the x-axis without requiring x to approach 
a limit. Thus 
log x = O(x) 
x = O(sin x) 
for x > 1, 
7T 
for Ixl < -. 
2 
Some of the earlier examples involving the symbol 0 can now be 
refined to indicate a better estimate of the error with the help of the 
symbol O. Thus we have for a function f for whichf" is defined and 
continuous 
f(x + h) - f(x) = hf'(x) + O(h2) 
for h -4- O. 
Other examples are 
for all x. 
The same notations can be used for sequences am letting the index n 
tend to infinity. We shall meet some interesting examples of such 
"asymptotic" formulas with an error term of higher order in the sequel 
(cf. Stirling's formula for n! on p. 504). 
A famous asymptotic law,2 
1 Notice that.f = O(g) does not mean that fIg has the limit one or that the quotient 
necessarily has any limit at all. 
2 The proof cannot be given in this book. See A. E. Ingham, The Distribution of 
Primes, Cambridge University Press, 1932. 

Sec. A.I 
Some Special Functions 255 
already mentioned in Chapter 1, p. 56 states that the number 7T(n) of 
primes less than n is given approximately by nj(log n). Here the order 
of magnitude of the error also has been found and we have more 
precisely the result 
7T(n) = _n_ + 0(+). 
log n 
log n 
Appendix 
The difficulty in appreciating a rigorous development of calculus 
stems from a basic dilemma: Although the fundamental concepts and 
procedures, such as continuity, smoothness, etc., are motivated by 
compelling intuitive needs, they must be made precise in order to have 
any logical meaning, and the resulting rigorous definitions may cover 
phenomena beyond those of intuitive character. Thus the rigorous 
concept of continuity inevitably requires a degree of abstraction not 
completely reflected in the naive notion of a connected curve, and the 
concept of differentiability is more restrictive and more abstract than 
the vague idea of smoothness of a curve suggests. Discrepancies of this 
sort are not avoidable and may tax the patience and understanding of a 
beginner or of someone for whom logical finesse is not of primary 
interest. Nevertheless, we want to make the need for precision clearer 
to the reader by showing that, perhaps unexpectedly, precision and 
refinement are called for even by simple and intuitively comprehensible 
examples. 
A.1 Some Special Functions 
As a rule such examples need not be given in terms of single analytical 
expressions (see Figs. 2.28, p. 38 and 1.30, p. 39). Here, however, we 
wish to represent various typical discontinuities and "abnormal" or 
unexpected phenomena by very simple expressions constructed from 
the elementary functions. We begin with an example in which no 
discontinuity is present. 
a. The Function y = e-1/ x2 
This function (cf. Fig. 3.22) is defined in the first instance only for 
values of x other than zero, and obviously has the limit zero as x -- O. 
For by the transformation l/x2 = ~ our function becomes y = e-~ and 

256 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
lim e-~ = O. Hence it is natural to extend our function so that it is 
s-oo 
continuous for x = 0 by defining the value of the function at the point 
x = 0 as yeO) = O. 
By the chain rule the derivative of our function for x ~ 0 is y' = 
_(2jx3)e-1/x2 = U%e-s. If x tends to zero, this derivative also has the 
limit zero, as we find immediately from p. 250. At the point x = 0 
itself the derivative 
'(0) 
1· 
y(h) -
yeO) 
1. 
e-1/ h2 
y 
= 1m 
= Im--
h->O 
h 
h->O 
h 
can also be continuously defined as zero. 
y 
----------------------~--t_~~~----------------~~x 
a 
Figure 3.22 
For the higher derivatives when x ~ 0, we obviously always obtain 
the product of the function e-1/x2 and a polynomial in 1jx, and the 
passage to the limit x -+ 0 always yields the limit zero. Hence all the 
higher derivatives vanish, like y', at the point x = o. 
Thus our function is continuous everywhere and differentiable as 
many times as we please, and yet at the point x = 0 it vanishes with all 
its derivatives and yet does not vanish identically. We shall later realize 
(Appendix 1.1 in Chapter 5) how remarkable or "abnormal" this 
behavior is. 
h. The Function y = e-1/x 
As easily seen, for positive values of x this function behaves in the 
same way as the function just dealt with; if x tends to zero from one 
side, through positive values, the function tends to zero, and the same is 
true of all its derivatives. If we define the value of the function at 
x = 0 as yeO) = 0, all the right-hand derivatives at the point x = 0 have 
the value zero. It is quite another matter when x tends to zero through 
negative values; for then the function and all its derivatives become 
infinite, and left-hand derivatives at the point x = 0 do not exist. At 

Sec. A.I 
Some Special Functions 257 
the point x = 0, therefore, the function has a remarkable sort of 
discontinuity, quite unlike the infinite discontinuities of a rational 
functions considered on pp. 36,37 (cf. Fig. 3.23). 
y 
____________________ ~~~------------------~x 
1 
c. The Function y = tanh -
x 
o 
Figure 3.23 
As already seen on p. 65, functions with "jump" discontinuities 
can be obtained from simple functions by a passage to the limit. The 
exponential function defined on p. 151 together with the principle of 
compounding of functions give us another method for constructing 
functions with such discontinuities from elementary functions, without 
any further limiting process. An example of this is the function 
1 
ell'" _ e-1/'" 
y = tanh- = ----
x 
ell'" + e-1/'" 
and its behavior at the point x = O. The function is in the first instance 
not defined at this point. If we approach the point x = 0 through 
positive values of x, we obviously obtain the limit 1; if, on the other 
hand, we approach the point x = 0 through negative values, we 
obtain the limit -1. This point x = 0 is thus a point of jump dis-
continuity; as x increases through 0 the value of the function jumps by 
2 (cf. Fig. 3.24). On the other hand, the derivative 
, 
1 
1 
y=-
-
cosh2 (l/x) x 2 
1 
4 
= -
x2 (ell'" + e-l/"')2 

258 
The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
y 
--------------------r-----------------------~x 
o 
-1 
Figure 3.24 
approaches the limit zero from both sides, as follows readily froml 
Section 3.76, p. 249. 
d. The Function y = x tanh IJx 
In the case of the function 
1 
ell" _ e-l/., 
y = xtanh- = x----
x 
ella; + e-l/a; 
the preceding discontinuity is removed by the factor x. This function 
has the limit zero as x -- 0 from either side, so that we can again 
appropriately define y(O) as equal to zero. Our function is then con-
tinuous at x = 0, but its first derivative 
I 
hIll 
y = tan - - - -------
x 
X cosh2 (lJx) 
has just the same kind of discontinuity as the preceding example. 
The graph of the function is a curve with a corner (cf. Fig. 3.25); at 
the point x = 0 the function has no actual derivative but a right-hand 
derivative with the value + I and a left-hand derivative with the value 
-1. 
1 Another example of the occurrence of a "jump" discontinuity is given by the func-
tion y = arc tan l/x as x -+ O. 

Sec. A.2 
Remarks on Differentiability 259 
y 
------------ ------------
y = x tanh} 
-------------< __ --~¥_----~------------~x 
-1 
0 
Figure 3.25 
e. The Function y = x sin Ijx, yeO) = 0 
We have already seen that this function is not composed of a finite 
number of monotonic pieces-as we may say, it is not "sectionally" 
or "piecewise" monotonic-but that it is nevertheless continuous 
(p. 40 and Fig. 1.31). Its first derivative 
, 
. 1 
1 
1 
y = sm - -
- cos -
(x =;i: 0), 
x 
x 
x 
on the contrary, has a discontinuity at x = 0; for as x tends to zero 
this derivative oscillates continually between bounding curves, one 
positive and one negative, which themselves tend to + 00 and -
00 
respectively. At the actual point x = 0 the difference quotient is 
[y(h) -
y(O)]jh = sin (ljh); since this expression swings backward and 
forward between 1 and -1 an infinite number of times as h -+ 0, the 
function possesses neither a right-hand derivative nor a left-hand 
derivative at x = O. 
A.2 Remarks on the Differentiability of Functions 
The derivative of a function which is continuous and has a derivative 
at every point of an interval need not be continuous. 
As a simple example we consider the function given by 
y =f(x) = x 2 sin! 
for x =;i: 0 
x 
and 
1(0) = O. 

260 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
This function is defined and continuous everywhere. For all values of x 
different from zero the derivative is given by the expression 
f '( ) 
2( 
1) 1 
2 
. 1 
1 
2 
. 1 
x = -x cos- - + XSIn- = -cos- + XStn-. 
x, x2 
X 
X 
X 
When x tends to zero, f'(x) has no limit. If, on the other hand, we 
form the difference quotient [f(h) - f(O)]/h = (h2 sin l/h)/h = h sin l/h, 
y 
" " " " " " " , , , 
"-"-"-..... ..... 
------------~----~~~~~~~----~~----------~% 
Figure 3.26 
we see at once that this tends to zero as h does. The derivative therefore 
exists for x = 0 and has the value o. 
To grasp intuitively the reason for this paradoxical behavior we 
represent the function graphically (cf. Fig. 3.26). It oscillates between 
the curves y = x2 and y = _X2, which it touches alternately. Thus 
the ratio of the heights of the wavecrests of our curve and their distances 
from the origin steadily becomes smaller. Yet these waves do not 
become flatter, for their slope, given by the derivative 
f'(x) = 2x sin l/x - cos l/x, 

Part B 
Techniques of Integration 261 
is equal to -1 at the points x = 1/2mr where cos l/x = 1, and to + 1 
at the points x = 1/(2n + 1}1T where cos l/x = -1. 
In contrast to the possibility illustrated here (that a derivative exist 
everywhere and yet not be continuous) we state the following simple theorem, 
which throws light on a whole series of earlier examples and discussions. 
THEOREM. If we know that in a neighborhood of a point x = a, the function 
f(x) is continuous, and that for x ;of a it also has a derivative f'(x) and if in 
addition the equation lim f'(x) = b holds, then the derivative f'(x) exists at the 
x--+a 
point a also, and /'(a) = b. 
PROOF. 
The proof follows immediately from the mean value theorem. 
For we have [f(a + h) - f(a)]jh =/,W, where ~ is a value intermediate 
between a and a + h. If h now tends to zero by hypothesis /'(~) tends to b, 
and our statement follows at once. 
A companion theorem may be proved in a similar way: If the functionf(x) 
is continuous in a ~ x ~ b and for a < x < b possesses a derivative which 
increases beyond all bounds as x tends to a, the right-hand difference quotient 
[f(a + h) - f(a)]jh also increases beyond all bounds as h tends to zero, so 
that no finite right-hand derivative exists at x = a. The geometrical meaning 
of this statement is that at the point with the (finite) coordinates [a,f(a)] the 
curve has a vertical tangent. 
Part B Techniques of Integration 
Explicit Functions 
A wide class of functions can be constructed from the elementary 
functions! by repeated rational operations, that is, addition, multi-
plication, division, and furthermore by the operations of forming 
inverse functions and of compounding functions. The functions thus 
described form the class of "explicit" functions or "closed expressions."2 
As a result of Part A of this chapter we state the rather general fact: 
Every explicit function can be differentiated and its derivative is again an 
explicit function. 
Thus we have attained a fairly complete mastery of the operation or 
the "algorithm" of differentiation. Yet, the inverse process, that of 
1 It should be emphasized that the distinction between "elementary" and "explicit" 
functions and others is in itself somewhat arbitrary. For us the term "elementary" 
function includes just the rational functions, the trigonometric and exponential 
functions, and their inverses. 
2 This name indicates that we shall encounter many other functions which cannot 
be represented in this fashion but which can be constructed by means of limiting 
processes such as infinite series. 

262 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
integration, is generally speaking more important and presents the 
major challenge. 
To a certain extent the challenge is met by the 
fundamental theorem of calculus: To every formula of differentiation 
F'(x) = I(x) there corresponds an equivalent formula for the primitive 
functions F(x) to I(x) or the integral: 
f f(x) dx = F(x). 
(More precisely we have F(x) = lieu) du + constant). Thus as 
more explicit formulas of differentiation are derived, additional explicit 
functions can be integrated in terms of explicit functions. A first table 
of integrals is listed on p. 264; in principle, it would not be difficult, 
although impractical and confusing, to extend such a table very much. 
In the early phases of the development of calculus many mathema-
ticians tried to find, in explicit or closed form, the integral or primitive 
function for every explicitly given function. 
It took some time before it was realized that in principle this problem 
cannot be solved; on the contrary, for some quite elementary inte-
grands the integral just cannot be expressed in terms of elementary 
functions (see p. 298). Thus the need for studying new types offunctions 
generated by integration processes from elementary functions became 
an important stimulus for the development of analysis. Nevertheless the 
desire to integrate-when feasible-given explicit functions explicitly 
without getting hopelessly entangled in tedious consultation of tables 
or numerical computations has led to some simple devices which provide 
a certain flexibility for transforming given integrals; in fact, these 
devices permit us to carry out the integration by reduction to one of the 
elementary integrals in the Table of Integrals. 
Section 3.9 will be devoted to the development of such useful devices. 
In this connection the beginner should be cautioned against merely 
memorizing the many formulas obtained by using these technical 
devices. The student should instead direct his efforts toward gaining 
a clear understanding of the methods of integration and learning how to 
apply them. Moreover, he should remember that even when inte-
gration by these devices is impossible, the integral does exist (at least 
for all continuous functions), and can actually be calculated to as high a 
degree of accuracy as is desired by means of numerical methods whiCh 
will be further developed later (Section 6.1). 
In Part C of this chapter we shall endeavor to extend our conceptions 
of integration and integral, quite apart from the problem of the tech-
nique of integration. 

Sec. 3.8 
Table of Integrals 263 
Table of Elementary Integrals 
F'(x) = I(x) 
F(x) = fl(X) dx 
1. xa (a;e -1) 
1 
2. -x 
3. eX 
4. aX 
(a;e 1) 
5. sin x 
6. cos x 
1 
7. -'-2-
(= cosec2x) 
sm x 
1 
8 --
(=sec2x) 
. cos2 x 
9. sinhx 
10. cosh x 
1 
11. -:--h
2 
(= cosech2 x) 
sm 
x 
1 
12 --
(= sech2 x) 
. cosh2 X 
1 
13. 
(Ixl < 1) 
VI - x 2 
1 
14. -1--2 
+x 
15. -== 
VI + x2 
1 
16. 
(Ixl > 1) 
±vx2 -
1 
1 
17. -1--2 
-x 
{
IXI < 1 
Ixl > 1 
a + 1 
log Ixl 
eX 
aX 
log a 
-cos x 
sin x 
-cot x 
tan x 
cosh x 
sinh x 
-cothx 
tanh x 
{arc sin x 
-arc cos x 
{arc tan x 
-arc cot x 
ar sinh x = log (x + V 1 + x 2) 
ar cosh x = log (x ± V x 2 -
1) 
1 
1 + x 
ar tanh x = 2log 1 _ x 
1 
x + 1 
ar coth x = 2 log x-I 

264 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
3.8 Table of Elementary Integrals 
To each of the differentiation formulas proved earlier there corre-
sponds an equivalent integration formula. Since these elementary 
integrals are used time and again as materials for the art of 
integration, we collect them in a Table. The right-hand column con-
tains a number of elementary functions and the left-hand column 
the corresponding derivatives. If we read the table from left to right, 
we obtain in the right-hand column an indefinite integral of the 
function in the left-hand column. 
We also remind the reader of the fundamental theorems of the 
differential and integral calculus, proved in Section 2.9, in particular, 
of the fact that any definite integral is obtained from the indefinite 
integral F(x) by the formula1 
ff(X) dx = F(x) I: = F(b) -
F(a). 
In the following sections we shall attempt to reduce the calculation of 
integrals of given functions in some way or other to the elementary 
integrals collected in our Table. Apart from special artifices which 
are learned only from experience, this reduction is based essentially on 
two useful methods: "substitution" and "integration by parts." Each 
of these methods enables us to transform a given integral in many ways; 
the object of such transformations mostly is to reduce the given 
integral, in one step or in a sequence of steps, to one or more of the 
elementary integration formulas given above. 
3.9 The Method of Substitution 
Integrating Compound Functions 
The first of these methods is the introduction of a new variable 
(that is, the method of substitution or transformation). It aims at 
reducing the integration of composite functions-such as functions of 
x -
c or of ax + b-to that of simpler functions. 
a. The Substitution Formula. Integral of a Composite Function 
The rule for integrating composite functions follows from the corre-
sponding chain rule for differentiation. For a composite function 
1 We shall not discuss in this chapter the somewhat different problem of calculating 
special definite integrals without first finding a general primitive function. 

Sec. 3.9 
The Method 01 Substitution 265 
G(u) = F[</>(u)] we have (see p. 218) 
(16) 
dG(u) = dF[</>(u)] = F'[</>(u)]</>'(u). 
du 
du 
It is sufficient for the validity of this formula that the functions x = </>(u) 
and F(x) are continuously differentiable in their arguments u, x 
respectively, and that F(x) is defined for the values x assumed by the 
function x = </>(u) (that is, the range of the function </> must belong to 
the domain of F). Integrating the formula between the limits u = r:J. and 
u = (3, we find 
(17) 
G({3) -
G(r:J.) = F[</>({3)~ -
F[</>(r:J.)] = f: F'[</>(u)]</>'(u) duo 
If here 
</>({3) = b, 
</>(r:J.) = a, 
we have 
F[</>({3)~ -
F[</>(r:J.)] = F(b) -
F(a) = fF'(X) dx. 
Setting F'(x) = f(x) we obtain the basic substitution formula 
(18) 
f/(X) dx = f: f[</>(u)]</>'(u) du, 
x = </>(u) 
or, written suggestively in Leibnitz's notation with the differential 
d</> = </>'(x) dx, 
(18a) 
f I(x) dx = f I(</» d</>. 
Here x = </>(u) may be any function which is defined and has a con-
tinuous derivative in the interval J with end points r:J. and (3; it maps 
those end points into x = a and x = b respectively; the functionf(x) 
is assumed to be continuous in an interval I containing the images of all 
points of J under the mapping </>. For F(x) we can take any primitive 
function of f(x). 
As should be noticed the substitution rule (18) does not require that 
the mapping x = </>(u) map points between r:J. and {3 only on points 
between a and b or that different values u are mapped into different x; 
all that matters is that r:J. and (3 are mapped into a and band thatf(x) 
is defined for the values x taken by </>(u) for u between r:J. and (3. 
In terms of indefinite integrals the substitution rule takes the form 
(19) 
G(u) = ff[</>(U)]</>'(U) du = fl(X) dx = F(x) = F[</>(u)]. 

266 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
The differential symbols 
,p'(u) du = ~: du 
and 
dx 
become identical if we formally cancel the symbols du in the numerator 
and denominator. 
Examples. We apply formula (18) to the integrand I(x) = I/x and 
make the substitution x = ,p(u), assuming ,p(u) -:;f:. 0 in the interval 
considered; then 
f ,p'(u) du =f dx = log Ixl = log 1,p(u)1 
,p(u) 
x 
or changing the name of the variable u again into x, 
(20) 
f ,p'(x) dx = log 1,p(x)l. 
,p(x) 
If in this important formula we substitute particular functions, such 
as ,p(x) = log x, ,p(x) = sin x, or ,p(x) = cos x, we obtainl 
f dx 
-- = log Ilog xl, 
x log x 
(21) 
fcot x dx = log Isin xl, 
Further Examples. 
ftan x dx = -log Icos xl. 
f 
</>(u)</>'(u) du = f 
x dx = tx2 = U</>(u)]2, 
where f(x) = x. This yields for </>(u) = log u 
f
logu 
(22) 
-u- du = t (log U)2. 
We finally consider 
f 
sinn u cos u duo 
Here x = sin u = </>(u), and hence 
sinn u cos u du = xn dx = -- = -- . 
f 
f 
xn+! 
sinn+! u 
n+l 
n+l 
1 These and the following formulas are easily verified by showing that differentiation 
of the result gives us back the integrand. 

Sec. 3.9 
The Method o[ Substitution 267 
The same substitution x = sin u gives for any function [(x) continuous in 
the interval -1 ~ x ~ 1 
(1~[(Sin u) cos u du = (~in f3 [(x) dx. 
Jrx 
JSln IX 
Taking here IX = 0 and f3 = 21T gives us an example for applying the substitu-
tion formula to a case where the mapping function x = </>(u) = sin u = x is 
not monotonic throughout the interval IX ~ U ~ f3. We find 
1
2
". f(sin u) cos u du = 1° f(x) dx = O. 
Other Forms oj the Rule 
In many applications the integral to be evaluated is given in the form 
F(u) = J 
h[1>(u)] du 
in which the integrand appears as the composite function h[1>(u)] 
without the additional factor r/>'(u). We can apply the substitution rule 
(18) if we succeed in writing the integrand h[1>(u)] in the formj[1>(u)]r/>'(u). 
This can always be achieved under the assumption that the function 
x = 1>(u) has a continuous derivative 1>'(u) which does not vanish. For 
then there exists an inverse function u = 1p(x) with a continu('us 
derivative dujdx = 1p'(x) = IJ1>'(u). 
Taking for j(x) the function 
h(x)1j/(x) we have indeed h[1>(u)] = j[1>(u)]j1p'(x) = j[1>(u)]1>'(u) and we 
obtain from the substitution rule 
(23) 
J 
h[1>(u)] du = J 
j[1>(u)]1>'(u) du = J 
j(x) dx 
= f 
h(x)1j/(X) dx = f 
hex) ~: dx. 
The assumption 1>'(u) '# 0 has been introduced in order to prevent the 
expression dxjdu in formula (23) from becoming infinite. 
The beginner must never forget that in substituting u for 1p(x) in an 
integral one must not merely express the old variable x in terms of the 
new one, u, and then integrate with respect to this new variable; 
instead, before integrating one must multiply by the derivative of the 
original variable x with respect to the new variable u. This, of course, is 
dx 
suggested by Leibnitz' notation h dx = h du duo In the definite integral 
f h[1p(x)] dx = J: h(u)r/>'(u) du 
we must not forget to change the limits a, b for x into the corresponding 
limits (J. = 1p(a) and fJ = 1p(b) for the variable u. 

268 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
Examples. In order to calculate J sin 2x dx we take u = 'P(x) = 2x and 
h(u) = sin u. We have 
du 
dx 
1 
dx = 'P'(x) = 2, 
du = 2 . 
If we now introduce u = 2x into the integral as the new variable, then it is 
transformed, not into f sin u du but into 
!fsinudu = _!cosu = -!cos2x· 
2 
2 
2' 
this may, of course, be verified at once by differentiating the right-hand side. 
If we integrate with respect to x between the limits zero and 1T14, the cor-
responding limits for u = 2x are zero and 1T12 and we obtain 
sin 2x dx = -
sin u du = - - cos u 
= - . 
1"14 
1 1"12 
1 
1"12 
1 
o 
2 0 
2 
0 
2 
Another simple example is the integrali4 ~. Here we take u = 'P(x) = 
vi, from which x = </>(u) = u2• Since </>'(u) = 2u, we have 
(4 dx_ = (22 u du = 2 (2 du = 2. 
Jl vx Jl 
U 
Jl 
As another example we consider the integral of sin l/x for the interval 
t :::;;; x :::;;; 1. We have for u = l/x or x = l/u, dx = -dulu2, and hence 
il 1 
il sin u 
i2 sin u 
sin - dx = -
-2- du = 
-2- duo 
l-i 
x 
2 
U 
1 
U 
*b. An Alternative Derivation o/the Substitution Formula 
Our integration formula (17) with a slight change of notation can also 
be interpreted in a direct manner, based on the meaning of the definite 
integral as a limit of a sum instead of being deduced from the chain rule 
of differentiation. 1 To calculate the integral 
fh[1p(X)] dx 
(for the case a < b), we begin with an arbitrary subdivision of the 
interval a ~ x ~ b, and then make the subdivision finer and finer. 
We choose these subdivisions in the following way. If the function 
U = 1p(x) is assumed to be monotonic increasing, there is a one-to-one 
correspondence between the interval a ~ x ~ b on the x-axis and an 
1 The result obtained in this way is again restricted to monotonic substitutions and 
thus is less general than formula (18) furnished by the chain rule (on p. 265). 

Sec. 3.9 
The Method of Substitution 269 
interval IX ::;; U ::;; (3 of the values of u = 'If'(x), where IX = 'If'{a) and 
(3 = 'If'(b). We divide this x-interval into n parts oflength1 ~x; there is 
a corresponding subdivision of the u-interval into subintervals which, 
in general, are not all of the same length. We denote the points of 
division of the x-interval by 
and the lengths of the corresponding u-cells by 
The integral we are considering is then the limit of the sum 
n 1 h{ 'If'(~v)} ~x, 
v=l 
where the value ~. is arbitrarily selected from the vth subinterval of the 
n 
~x 
x-subdivision. This sum we now write in the form 1 h(v) X- ~uv, 
v=l 
Uv 
where v. = 'If'(~). By the mean value theorem of the differential 
calculus ~x/~uv = c//('Y}v)' where 'Y}. is a suitably chosen intermediate 
value of the variable u in the vth subinterval of the u-subdivision and 
x = cf>(u) denotes the inverse function of u = 'If'(x). If we now select 
the value ~v in such a way that vv and 'Y}v coincide, that is, 'Y}v = 'If'{~) 
~v = cf>('Y}), then our sum takes the form 
n 1 h('Y}v)cf>'('Y}v) ~UV· 
v=l 
If we here make the passage to the limit letting n --+ 00,2 we obtain the 
expression 
1
/1 
dx 
h(u) -du 
a 
du 
as the limiting value, that is, as the value of the integral we are con-
sidering, in agreement with formula (23) given before. 
Thus we arrive at the following result. 
THEOREM. Let h(u) be a continuous function of u in the interval 
IX ::;; U ::;; (3. Then if the function u = 'If'(x) is continuous and monotonic 
and has a continuous nonvanishing derivative du/dx in a ::;; x ::;; b, and 
1 The assumption that the lengths of these subintervals are all equal is by no means 
essential for the proof. 
• This limit exists (for Llx --+ 0) and is the integral, since on account of the uniform 
continuity of u = tp(x) the greatest of the lengths Lluv tends to zero with Llx. 

270 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
1jJ(a) = 
('J. and 1jJ(b) = p, then 
f bh{1jJ(X)} dx =fbh(U) dx =fP h(u) dx duo 
a 
a 
'" 
du 
This derivation exhibits the suggestive merit of Leibnitz's notation. 
In order to carry out the substitution u = 1jJ(x), we need only write 
(dx/du) du in place of dx, changing the limits from the original values of x 
to the corresponding values of u. 
c. Examples. Integration Formulas 
With the help of the substitution rule we can in many cases evaluate 
a given integral S f(x) dx if we reduce it by means of a suitable sub-
stitution x = rp(u) to one of the elementary integrals in our Table. 
Whether such substitutions exist and how to find them are questions 
to which no general answer can be given; this is rather a matter in 
which practice and ingenuity, in contrast to systematic methods, come 
into their own. 
f d 
As an example, we evaluate the integral .J 
x 
by means of the 
a2 _ x2 
substitution! x = rp(u) = au, u = 1jJ(x) = x/a, dx = a du, by which, 
using No. 13 of our Table we obtain 
(24) f 
dx 
f a du 
. 
. x 
--;====- = 
= arc sm u = arc sm - , 
.J a2 -
x2 
a.J 1 - u2 
a 
for Ixl < 14 
By the same substitution we similarly obtain 
(25) f dx f a du 
1 
1 
x 
--- = 
= - arc tan u = - arc tan - , 
a2 + x2 
a2(1 + u2) 
a 
a 
a 
(26) 
(27) 
(28) 
f dx 
. h x 
-;==== = ar sm -, 
.J a2 + x2 
a 
f --;==d=x== = ar cosh ~ , 
.J x 2 -
a2 
a 
(
1 
x 
- ar tanh-
f dx 
a 
a 
a2 -
x2 = 
1 
x 
- ar coth-
a 
a 
for Ixl > lal, 
for Ixl < lal, 
for Ixl > lal, 
1 For the sake of brevity we again take the liberty of writing the symbols dx and du 
separately, that is, dx = <f/(t;) du instead of dx/du = <f/(u) (ef. p. 180). 

Sec. 3.10 
Further Examples of the Substitution Methods 271 
formulas which occur very frequently and which can easily be verified 
by differentiating the right-hand side. 
3.10 Further Examples of the Substitution Method 
In this section we collect a number of examples which the reader may 
consider carefully for practice. 
By the substitution u = 1 ± x2, du = ± 2x dx, we deduce that 
(29) 
(30) 
I 
xdx 
./-
-== = ±vl ±x2, 
VI ± x 2 
I 
xdx 
-- = ±tlogll ±x21. 
1 ± x2 
In these formulas we must take either the plus sign in all three places or the 
minus sign in all three places. 
By the substitution u = ax + b, du = a dx (a ~ 0), we obtain 
(31) 
I~b 
=~loglax +bl, 
ax + 
a 
(32) 
I (ax + b)a dx = 
1 
(ax + b)aH 
a(tX + 1) 
(tX ~ -1), 
(33) 
ISin(aX +b)dx = -~cos(ax +b); 
similarly, by means of the substitution u = cos x, du = -sin x dx, we obtain 
(34) 
Itan x dx = -log Icos xl, 
and by means of the substitution u = sin x, du = cos x dx, 
(35) 
I cot x dx = log Isin xl 
[cf. (21) p. 266]. Using the analogous substitutions u = cosh x, du = sinh x 
dx and u = sinh x, du = cosh x dx, we obtain the formulas 
(36) 
(37) 
I 
tanh x dx = log cosh x, 
I 
coth x dx = log Isinh xl. 

272 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
By virtue of the substitution u = (a/b) tan x, du = (a/b) sec2 x dx, we arrive 
at the two formulas 
(38) 
and 
dx 
{- :bartanh (~tanx) 
(39) 
J 
-
a
2 sin2 x -b
2 cos2 x-I 
(a) . 
- -
ar coth - tan x 
ab 
b 
We evaluate the integral 
J 
dx 
sinx 
by writing sin x = 2 sin (x/2) cos (x/2) = 2 tan (x/2) cos2 (x/2), and putting 
u = tan (x/2), so that du = l sec2 (x/2) dx; the integral then becomes 
(40) 
J 
dx 
fdu 
I xl 
-.- = 
-
= log tan - . 
smx 
u 
2 
If we replace x by x + 1T/2, this formula becomes 
(41) 
The substitution u = 2x yields, if we also apply the known trigonometrical 
formulas 2 cos2 x = 1 + cos 2x and 2 sin2 x = 1 - cos 2x, the frequently 
used formulas 
(42) 
Jcos2 x dx = l(x + sin x cos x) 
and 
(43) 
J 
sin2 x dx = i(x - sin x cos x). 
By the substitution x = cos u, equivalent to u = arc cos x, or, more 
generally, x = a cos u (a :;i= 0), we can reduce 
and 

Sec. 3.10 
Further Examples of the Substitution Method 273 
respectively to these formulas. We thus obtain 
(44) 
f / 
2 
2 
a 2 
x 
x 
/ 2 
2 
Va -
x dx = - - arc cos - + - Va -
x . 
2 
a 
2 
Similarly, by the substitution x = a cosh u we obtain the formula 
(45) 
f / 
2 
2 
a 2 
x 
x / 2 
2 
V X 
-
a dx = -
- ar cosh - + - V x -
a 
2 
a 
2 
and by the substitution x = a sinh u 
(46) 
The substitution u = a/x, dx = -(a/u2) du leads to the formulas 
(47) 
f 
dx 
1. a 
--;==== - -arcsm-, 
x) x2 _ a2 
a 
x 
(48) 
f 
dx 
1. a 
/ 
= - - ar smh - , 
xV x 2 + a 2 
a 
x 
(49) 
f 
dx 
1 
a 
/ 
= - - ar cosh - . 
-xV a2 _ 
x 2 
a 
x 
Finally, we consider the three integrals 
f 
sin mx sin nx dx, f 
sin mx cos nx dx, f 
cos mx cos nx dx, 
where m and n are positive integers. By well-known trigonometrical 
formulas we can divide each of these integrals into two parts, writing 
sin mx sin nx = ![cos (m -
n)x -
cos (m + n)x], 
sin mx cos nx = ![sin (m + n)x + sin (m -
n)x], 
cos mx cos nx = ![cos (m + n)x + cos (m -
n)x]. 
If we now make use of the substitutions u = (m + n)x and u = 
(m -
n)x respectively, we obtain directly the following system of 

274 The Techniques of Calculus 
formulas: 
(50) 
J 
2 
m-n 
m+n 
(
! {sin (m -
n)x _ sin (m + n)x} 
sin mx sin nx dx = ! (x _ sin 2mx) 
2 
2m 
(51) 
J 
2 
m+n 
m-n 
(
_!{cos(m + n)x + cos(m - n)x} 
sin mx cos nx dx = _ ! (cos 2mx) 
2 
2m 
(52) 
(
! {sin (m + n)x + sin (m -
n)x} 
f 
2 
m+n 
m-n 
cos mx cos nx dx = 
! (sin 2mx + x) 
2 
2m 
Ch.3 
if m :F- n, 
if m = n; 
if m :F- n 
if m = n; 
if m :F- n, 
if m = n. 
If, in particular, we integrate from -1T to +1T, we obtain from these 
formulas the extremely important relations 
f+,. 
{o 
sin mx sin nx dx = 
-,. 
1T 
(53) 
f+,. 
-1T sin mx cos nx dx = 0, 
f
+lI' 
{o 
cos mx cos nx dx = 
-lI' 
1T 
if m :F- n, 
ifm = n, 
if m :F- n, 
if m = n. 
These are the orthogonality relations of the trigonometric functions, 
which we shall encounter again in Section 8.4e. 
3.11 Integration by Parts 
a. General Formula 
The second widely used method for dealing with integration problems 
expresses in integral form the rule for differentiating a product: 
(fg)' = f'g + fg'. 

Sec. 3.11 
Integration by Parts 275 
The corresponding integral formula is (cf. p. 189) 
f(x)g(x) = f g(x)f'(x) dx + ff(x)g'(X) dx 
or 
(54) 
f f(x)g'(x) dx = f(x)g(x) - f g(x)f'(x) dx. 
Using Leibnitz's differential notation, this becomes 
(54a) 
f f dg = fg - f g df· 
This formula will be referred to as the formula for integration by parts. 
It reduces the calculation of one integral to the calculation of another 
integral. Since a given integrand can be regarded as a productf(x)g'(x) 
in a great many different ways, this formula provides us with an effective 
tool for the transformation of integrals. 
Written as a formula for definite integration, the formula for inte-
gration by parts is 
(54b) 
fi(X)g'(X) dx = f(x)g(x) I: - fg(X)f'(X) dx 
= f(b)g(b) - f(a)g(a) - fg(X)f'(X) dx. 
This follows either directly by integrating the formula for the derivative 
of a product between the limits a and b or by forming the difference at 
the points b and a in formula (54). 
We can give a simple geometrical interpretation of formula (54b): 
Let us suppose that y = f(x) and z = g(x) are monotonic, and that 
f(a) = A,f(b) = B, g(a) = IX, g(b) = {3; we can then form the inverse 
of the first function and substitute in the second equation, thus obtaining 
z as a function ofy. We assume that this function is monotonic increas-
ing. Since dy = f'(x) dx and dz = g'(x) dx the formula for integration 
by parts can be written [cf. the substitution rule (18), p. 265]. 
f:y dz + f;z dy = B{3 -
AIX, 
in agreement with the relation made clear by Fig. 3.27, 
area NQLK + area PMLQ = area OMLK - area OPQN. 

276 The Techniques of Calculus 
:II 
K 
P~------------------------~L 
ex N 
Q 
M 
--O~------~~I----------------------~--~Y 
k-__ 
A _________ B ------------~J 
p 
Figure 3.27 
The following example may serve as a first illustration: 
flOg x dx = flog x ·1 dx. 
Ch.3 
We write the integrand in this way in order to indicate that we putf(x) = log x 
andg'(x) = 1, so that we have!'(x) = l/x andg(x) = x. Our formula then 
becomes 
(55) 
This last expression is therefore the indefinite integral of the logarithm, as 
may be verified at once by differentiation. 
b. Further Examples of Integration by Parts 
Withf(x) = x,g'(x) = ez, we havef'(x) = l,g(x) = ez, and 
(56) 
f 
x ez dx = ez(x -
1). 
In a similar way we obtain 
(57) 
f 
x sin x dx = -x cos x + sin x 
and 
(58) 
f 
x cos x dx = x sin x + cos x. 

Sec. 3.11 
Integration by Parts 277 
For f(x) = log x, g'(x) = x", we have the relation 
(59) 
I 
x"+1 ( 
1 ) 
x" log x dx = a + 1 log x - a + 1 . 
Here we must assume a "" -1. For a = -1 we obtain 
I ~ log x dx = (logx)1 - IIOgx. ~x ; 
transferring the integral on the right-hand side over to the left, we have [cf. 
(22), p. 266] 
(60) 
I ~ log x dx = l(log x)l. 
We calculate the integral I arc sin x dx by takingf(x) = arc sin x, g'(x) = 1. 
Hence 
I 
I xdx 
arcsinxdx = x arc sin x -./ 
. 
Y 1 -
Xl 
The integration on the right-hand side can be performed as in (29), p. 271; 
we thus find 
(61) 
I arc sin x dx = x arc sin x + VI -
Xl. 
In the same way we find 
(62) 
I arc tan x dx = x arc tan x - t log (1 + xl) 
and many others of a similar type. 
The following examples are of a somewhat different nature; here repeated 
integration by parts brings us back to the original integral, for which we thus 
obtain an equation. 
In this way we obtain 
I e<>"' sin bx dx = - ~ e<>"' cos bx + ~ I e<>"' cos bx dx 
= - - e<>"' cos bx + - e""' sin bx - -
e""' sin bx dx' 
1 
a 
alI 
b 
bl 
bl 
' 
Solving this equation for the integral I e<>"' sin bx dx, 
(63) 
I e<>"' sin bx dx = a2 : bl e""'(a sin bx - b cos bx). 
In a similar way it follows that 
(64) 
I 
f!'-"' cos bx dx = as ~ b2 ea"'(a cos bx + b sin bx). 

278 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
c. Integral Formula/or feb) + f(a) 
As a last example we derive a remarkable formula expressing the sum 
f(b) + f(a) as a definite integral (instead of the difference f(b) - f(a) given 
by the fundamental formula). Integration by parts will be applied by 
introducing 1 = g'(x), whereg(x) = x - m with a constant m at our disposal. 
Then we have for the indefinite integrals 
f 
f(x) dx + f 
['(x)(x - m) dx = f(x)(x - m) 
and for the integral between a and b 
f f(x) dx + Lb f'(x)(x - m) dx = f(b)(b - m) - f(a)(a - m). 
If for arbitrary a and b we choose for m the mean value m = (a + b )/2, 
between a and b, we obtain, as the reader will easily verify 
b - a 
(b 
(b 
-2- [f(a) + f(b)] = Ja f(x) dx + Ja (x - m)['(x) dx. 
d. Recursive Formulas 
In many cases the integrand is not only a function of the independent 
variable but also depends on an integer index n; on integrating by 
parts we sometimes obtain, instead of the value of the integral, another 
similar expression in which the index n has a smaller value. We thus 
might arrive after a number of steps at an integral which we can deal 
with by means of the Table of Integrals, p. 263. Such a process is 
called recursive. 
The following examples are illustrations: By repeated integration by 
parts we can calculate the trigonometrical integrals 
fcos n x dx, 
fSin n x dx, 
provided that m and n are positive integers. For usingf(x) = cosn- 1 x, 
g(x) = sin x we find for the first integral that 
f 
cosn x dx = cosn- 1 X sin x + (n -
1) f 
cosn-2 X sin2 x dx; 

Sec. 3.11 
Integration by Parts 279 
the right-hand side can be written in the form 
cos .. - 1 x sin x + (n -
1) fcos .. - s x dx - (n -
1) fcos .. x dx; 
thus a recursive relation is obtained: 
(65) f 
cos" x dx = ; cos .. - 1 x sin x + n ~ 1 f 
cos .. - s x dx. 
This formula enables us to diminish the index in the integrand step by 
step until we finally arrive at the integral 
fcos x dx = sin x 
or 
depending on whether n is odd or even. In a similar way we obtain the 
analogous recursive formulas 
(66) 
fSin .. x dx = - ; sin .. - 1 x cos x + n ~ 1 fSin .. - S x dx 
and 
(67) f 
sinm+1 x cos .. - 1 x 
n -
1 f 
sinm x cos" x dx = 
+ --
sinm x cos .. - s x dx. 
m+n 
m+n 
In particular, we calculate the integrals 
fSin 2 x dx = ~ (x -
sin x cos x) 
and 
fcos 2 X dx = ~ (x + sin x cos x), 
as we have already done by the method of substitution [Eqs. (42), (43), 
p.272]. 
It need hardly be mentioned that the corresponding integrals for the 
hyperbolic functions can be calculated in exactly the same way: 
(68) 
fSinh2 x dx = ~ (-x + sinh x cosh x), 
(69) 
f 
cosh2 X dx = ~ (x + sinh x cosh x). 

280 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
Further recursive formulas are given by the following transformations: 
(70) 
(71) 
(72) 
(73) 
(74) 
J (log x)m dx = x(log x)m - m J (log x)m-l dx, 
J xme"' dx = xmeX -
m J xm-1ex dx, 
JxmSinxdx = _xm cos X + m Jxm-1cosxdx, 
J xm cos x dx = xm sin x - m J xm- 1 sin x dx, 
- ~ 
Jxa(log x)m-l dx (a ¢ -1). 
a + 1 
e. Wallis's Infinite Product/or 17 
The recursive formula for the integral f sinn x dx with n > 1 leads 
to a fascinating expression for the number 17 as an "infinite product." 
In the formula 
JSinn x dx = -
~ sinn- 1 x cos x + n ~ 1 Jsinn- 2 x dx 
we insert the limits 0 and 17/2, thus obtaining 
1,,/2 . 
n -
1 1,,/2 . 
smn x dx = --
smn- 2 x dx 
o 
n 
0 
(75) 
for n > 1. 
If we repeatedly apply the recursive formula, we obtain, distinguishing 
between the cases n = 2m and n = 2m + 1, 
(76) 
1
"/2 . 
2m -
1 2m -
3 
1 1"/2 
sm2m x dx = 
... - . 
dx, 
o 
2m 
2m - 2 
2 
0 
(76a) 
sin2m+1x dx = 
. 
. .. - . 
sin x dx, 
1
"/2 
2m 
2m - 2 
2 1"/2 
o 
2m + 1 2m -
1 
3 
0 
whence 
(77) 
(,,/2 . 2m 
2m -
1 2m - 3 
1 17 
Jo sm x dx = 
2m 
. 2m _ 2' .. 2 . 2' 
(77a) 
1
"/2 • 2m+l d 
2m 
2m - 2 
2 
sm 
x x = 
. 
. .. -. 
o 
2m + 1 2m -
1 
3 

Sec. 3.11 
Integration by Parts 281 
By division this yields 
2·2 4·4 6·6 
["/2sin2m x dx 
2m· 2m 
Jo 
71' 
(78) - = -- . -_. -_. . . 
....::...;;-----
(2m -
1) . (2m + 1) 1"/2 . 2m+l 
d 
sm 
x x 
o 
2 
1·3 3·5 5·7 
The quotient of the two integrals on the right-hand side converges 
to 1 as m increases, as we recognize from the following considerations. 
In the interval 0 < x < 71'/2, where 0 < sin x < 1, we have 
consequently, 
o < i .. /2 sin2m+1 x dx :::;; i"/2 sin2m x dx :::;; i"/2 sin2m- 1 x dx. 
If we here divide each term by 1 
.. /2 sin2m+1 x dx and notice that by 
formula (75) 
0 
[0 .. /2sin2m-l x dx 
J 
= 2m + 1 = 1 + J.... , 
2m 
2m 
[ .. 12 
Jo sin2m+1 x dx 
we have 
["/2sin2m x dx 
Jo 
1 
1:::;; ["/2 
:::;; 1 + 2' 
Jo sin2m+1 x dx 
m 
from which the above statement follows. 
Consequently, the relation 
(79) 
! = lim ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ . .. 
2m 
2m 
2 
m-+oo1 3 3 5 5 7 
2m -
12m + 1 
holds. 
This product formula (due to Wallis), with its simple law offormation, 
gives a most remarkable relation between the number 71' and the integers. 
Product for ..;; 
As an easy consequence we can derive an equally remarkable ex-
pression for.j;. If we observe 
1· 
2m 
1 
1m 
= , 
m-+oo 2m + 1 

282 The Techniques of Calculus 
we can write 
. 
22. 42 ... (2m -
2)2 
1T 
hm 
2 
2 
22m = -; 
m-+ao 3 . 5 ... (2m -
1) 
2 
Ch.3 
taking the square root and then multiplying the numerator and 
denominator by 2 . 4 ... (2m -
2), we find 
A . 2 . 4 ... (2m - 2) .J-
. 
22. 42 ... (2m -
2)2 
-
- = hm 
2m = hm 
.J2m 
2 
m-+ao 3 . 5 ... (2m -
1) 
m-+ao 
(2m -
1)! 
. 
22 . 42 ... (2m)2 .J2m 
=hm 
--. 
m-+ao 
(2m)! 
2m 
= lim (22 . 12)(22 . 22)(22 . 32) ... (22 . m2) 
(2m)!.J2m 
From this we finally obtain 
. 
(m!)222m 
(80) 
hm 
= .,F, 
m-+oo (2m)!.Jm 
a form of Wallis's product which will be of use to us later (cf. Chapter 6, 
Appendix). 
*3.12 Integration of Rational Functions 
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries mathematicians 
were preoccupied with discovering classes of elementary explicit 
functions which could be integrated explicitly. A wealth of ingenious 
devices was invented and at the same time the basis for deeper under-
standing created. When one later realized that achieving integration of 
all explicit functions in closed form was neither an attainable nor 
really an important goal, the tedious technicalities which had been 
developed in connection with such problems were gradually deempha-
sized. Yet, a significant general result remained: 
All rational functions R(x) of a variable x can be integrated explicitly 
in terms of the elementary integrals listed in Table 3.1. 
This general result can be obtained much more easily in the context 
of the more advanced theory of functions of a complex variable. 
Yet, it is still worthwhile to sketch an elementary derivation employing 
only real variables. 

Sec. 3.12 
Integration of Rational Functions 283 
The rational functions are those of the form 
(81) 
R(x) = f(x), 
g(x) 
where J(x) and g(x) are polynomials: 
J(x) = amxm + am_1xm- l + ... + ao, 
g(x) = bnxn + bn_1xn - 1 + ... + bo (bn:;c 0). 
As we recall, every polynomial can be integrated at once and its 
integral is itself a polynomial. We therefore need consider only those 
rational functions for which the denominator g(x) is not a constant. 
Moreover, we can always assume that the degree of the numerator is 
less than the degree n of the denominator. For otherwise, dividing the 
polynomial J(x) by the polynomial g(x), we obtain a remainder of 
degree less than n; in other words, we can writeJ(x) = q(x)g(x) + rex), 
where q(x) and rex) are also polynomials and rex) is of lower degree than 
n. The integration ofJ(x)jg(x) is then reduced to the integration of the 
polynomial q(x) and of the "proper" fraction r(x)jg(x). We notice 
further that the functionJ(x)jg(x) can be represented as the sum of the 
functions avxvjg(x), so that we need only consider integrands of the 
form xVjg(x). 
a. The Fundamental Types 
We proceed in steps to the integration of the most general rational 
function of the type (81), studying first only those functions with de-
nominator g(x) of the particularly simple type 
g(x) = xn, 
or 
where n is any positive integer. 
To this case we can then reduce the somewhat more general case in 
which g(x) = (exx + {3)n, a power of a linear expression exx + {3 
(ex :;C 0), or g(x) = (ax2 + 2bx + c)n, a power of a definitel quadratic 
1 A quadratic expression Q(x) = ax2 + 2bx + c is said to be definite if for all real 
values of x it takes values having one and the same sign, that is, if the equation 
Q(x) = 0 has no real roots. For this it is necessary and sufficient that the "dis-
criminant" ac - b2 is positive. This follows, of course, from the explicit formula 
(-b ± v b2 -
ac)/a for the roots. Equivalently, a definite quadratic expression 
is one that cannot be factored into two real linear factors. 

284 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
expression. If g(x) = «(XX + (3)n we introduce ~ = (XX + {3 as a new 
variable. Then d~/dx = IX, and x = (~ -
(3)/1X is also a linear function 
of~. Each numerator f(x) becomes a polynomial cP(~) of the same 
degree, and consequently, 
J f(x) 
dx = 1 J 
cP(~) d~. 
(IXX + {3t 
IX 
~n 
In the second case, we write 
1 
d2 
ax2 + 2bx + c = - (ax + b)2 + -
a 
a 
since we have assumed our expression to be quadratic and definite, 
ac - b2 must be positive and a =F O. By introducing the new variable 
~ = ax + b 
d 
we arrive at an integral with the denominator [(d2/a)(l + ~2W. 
Hence in order to integrate rational functions whose denominators 
are powers of a linear expression or of a definite quadratic expression 
it is sufficient to be able to integrate the following types of functions: 
1 
xn' 
We shall, in fact, see that even these types need not be treated in general, 
for we can reduce the integration of every rational function to the 
integration of the very special forms of these three functions obtained 
by taking 'JI = o. Accordingly, we now consider the integration of the 
three expressions 
1 
x 
h. Integration of the Fundamental Types 
Integration of the first type of function, 1jxn , immediately yields the ex-
pression log Ixl if n = 1, and the expression -lj(n -
1)xn- 1 if n > 1, so that 
in both cases the integral is again an elementary function. Functions of the 
third type can be integrated immediately by introducing the new variable 
~ = x2 + 1, from which we obtain 2x dx = d~ and 
J 
x 
x = ! J 
d~ = {t log (x2 + 1) 
(x2 + l)n d 
2 
~n 
_ 
1 
2(n -
1)(x2 + l)n-l 
if n = 1, 
if n > 1. 

Sec. 3.12 
Integration of Rational Functions 285 
Finally, in order to calculate the integral 
In = f(x2 ~ l)n' 
where n has any value exceeding one, we make use of a recursive method: 
If we put 
so that 
f 
dx 
f 
dx 
f 
x2dx 
(x2 + l)n = 
(x2 + l)n-I -
(x2 + l)n' 
we can transform the right-hand side by integrating by parts, using formula 
(54) on p. 275 with 
x 
f(X) = x, 
g'(x) = (x2 + l)n . 
Then, as we have just found, 
g(x) = - 2 (n _ 1)(x2 + l)n-I ' 
and consequently, we obtain 
f 
dx 
x 
2n- 3 f 
dx 
In = 
(x2 + l)n = 2(n -
l)(x2 + 1)n-I + 2(n -
1) 
(x2 + 1)n-I . 
The calculation of the integral In is thus reduced to that of the integral In_I. 
If n - 1 > 1 we apply the same process to the latter integral, and continue 
until we finally arrive at the expression 
f 
dx 
x 2 + 1 = arc tan x. 
We thus see that the integraP In can be explicitly expressed in terms of 
rational functions and the function arc tan x. 
Incidentally, we could also have integrated the function 1/(x2 + l)n directly, 
using the substitution x = tan t; we should then have obtained dx = sec2 t dt 
and 1/(1 + x2) = cos2 t, so that 
f (x2 ~ 1)n = f cos 2n-2t dt, 
and we have already learned [Eq. (65) p. 279] how to evaluate this integral. 
1 The integral of the function Ij(x2 -
l)n can be calculated in the same way; by the 
corresponding recurrence method we reduce it to the integral 
J 
dx 
-- = ar tanh x 
1 -
x2 
(or ar coth x). 

286 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
c. Partial Fractions 
We are now in a position to integrate the most general rational 
functions. We make use of the fact that every such function can be 
represented as the sum of so-called partialfractions, that is, as the sum of 
a polynomial and a finite number of rational functions, each one of 
which has either a power of a linear expression for its denominator and 
a constant for its numerator, or else a power of a definite quadratic 
expression for its denominator and a linear function for its numerator. 
If the degree of the numerator f(x) is less than that of the denominator 
g(x) , the polynomial does not occur. We know already how to inte-
grate each partial fraction. For according to p. 284 the denominator 
can be reduced to one of the special forms xn and (x2 + l)n, and the 
fraction is then a combination of the fundamental types integrated on 
p.284. 
We shall not give the general proof of the possibility of this resolution 
into partial fractions. We shall merely confine ourselves to making 
the statement of the theorem intelligible to the reader and to showing 
by examples how the resolution into partial fractions can be carried out 
in typical cases. In practice only comparatively simple functions are 
dealt with, for otherwise the computations become too cumbersome. 
As we know from elementary algebra, every real polynomial g(x) can 
be written in the forml 
g(x) = a(x -
OCl)!l(X -
ocJ!· ••• 
. . . (x2 + 2bl x + cJr1(X2 + 2b~ + c2Y· .... 
Here the distinct numbers ocl, OC2' •.• are the real roots of the equation 
g(x) = 0, and the positive integers 110 12, ••• indicate the multiplicity 
of these roots; the factors x2 + 2byx + cy indicate definite quadratic 
expressions, of which no two are the same, with conjugate complex 
roots, and the positive integers r l , r 2 • ••• give the multiplicity of these 
roots. 
We assume that the denominator is either given to us in this form or 
that we have brought it to this form by calculating the real and 
imaginary roots. Let us further suppose that the numerator f(x) is of 
lower degree than the denominator (cf. p. 283). Then the theorem on 
resolution into partial fractions can be stated as follows: For each 
1 The actual proof of this so-called fundamental theorem of algebra does not belong 
to algebra. It is achieved most easily by methods belonging to the theory of functions 
of a complex variable. 

Sec. 3.12 
Integratioll 0/ Rational Functions 287 
factor (x -
Ot)/, where Ot is anyone of the real roots of multiplicity I, 
one can determine an expression of the form 
~ 
+ 
A2 
2 + ... + 
AI I' 
X -
Ot 
(x -
Ot) 
(x -
Ot) 
and for each quadratic factor Q(x) = x2 + 2bx + c in our product 
which is raised to the power r we can determine an expression of the 
form 
in such a way that the functionj(x)fg(x) is the sum of all these expres-
sions (Av' Bv' Cv' are constants). In other words, the quotientj(x)fg(x) 
can be represented as a sum of fractions, each of which belongs to one 
of the types integrated above. 1 
In particular cases the decomposition into partial fractions can be done 
easily by inspection. If, for example,g(x) = x 2 -
1, we see at once that 
so that 
f dx 
IX-II 
x2 _ 1 = t log X + 1 . 
I We give a brief sketch of a method by which the possibility of this decomposition 
into partial fractions can be proved without using the theory of functions of complex 
variables, once g(x) can be factored completely into linear factors. If g(x) = 
(x -
a.)kh(x) and h(a.) ~ 0, then on the right-hand side of the equation 
f(x) _ 
f(a.) 
= _1_ /(x)h(a.) - /(a.)h(x) 
g(x) 
h(a.)(x -
a.)k 
h(a.) 
(x -
a.)'h(x) 
the numerator obviously vanishes for x = a.; 
it is therefore of the form 
h(a.)(x -
a.)m/t(x), where/lex) is also a polynomial, the integer m ~ 1, and/l(a.) ~ O. 
Writingf(a.)/h(a.) = {3, this gives us 
lex) 
{3 
/t(x) 
g(x) -
(x -
a.)k = (x -
a.)k-mh(x) . 
Continuing the process, we can keep on diminishing the degree of the power of 
(x -
a.) occurring in the denominator until finally no such factor is left. On the 
remaining fraction we repeat the process for some other root of g(x), and do this as 
many times asg(x) has distinct factors. By doing this not only for the real but also 
for the complex roots, and by combining conjugate complex fractions we eventually 
arrive at the complete decomposition into partial fractions. 

288 
The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
More generally, if g(x) = (x - a)(x -
fJ), that is, if g(x) is a nondefinite 
quadratic expression with two real zeros a and fJ, we have 
1 
1 
1 
(x - a)(x -
fJ) = (a -
fJ) (x - a) - (a -
fJ) (x -
fJ) 
so that 
f-:-(x-----,-a~x-:-(x---fJ.",.) = -a -~-fJ log 1-: -=-; I· 
d. Examples of Resolution into Partial Fractions. 
Method of Undetermined Coefficients 
If g(x) = (x -
1X1)(X -
1X2) ••• (x -
IX,,), where lXi ¢ IXk if i ¢ k, 
that is, if the equation g(x) = 0 has only simple real roots, and if f(x) 
is any polynomial of degree <n, the expression in terms of partial 
fractions has the simple form 
f(x) = ~ 
+ _a_2_ + ... +~. 
g(x) 
X-IXI 
X-1X2 
X-IX" 
We obtain explicit expressions for the coefficients aI' a2, •.• if we 
multiply both sides of this equation by (x -
1X1), cancel the common 
factor (x -
1X1) in the numerator and denominator on the left and in the 
first term on the right, and then put x = 1X1' This gives 
f(lXl) 
al = ~----~~~~--~----~ 
(IXI -
1X2)( 1X1 -
IXs) ••• (IXI -
IX,,) 
The reader will observe from the rule for the derivative of a product 
that the denominator on the right is g'( 1X1), that is, the derivative of the 
function g(x) at the point x = 1X1' Similar formulas for a2, a3, ••• , 
obtained in this way, lead to the explicit partial fraction expansion 
f_(_x) = 
f(lXl) 
+ 
f(1X2) 
+ ... + 
f(IX,,) 
g(x) 
g'(lXl)(X -
1X1) 
g'(1X2)(X -
cx2) 
g'(cx,,)(x -
cx,,) 
As a typical example of a denominator g(x) with multiple roots, we consider 
the function 1f[x2(x - 1)]. It has a representation 
1 
abc 
......".---- =---- +- +-
x2(x -
1) 
X -
1 
X 
x2 
in accordance with p.287. If we multiply both sides of this equation by 
X2(X -
1), we obtain the equation 
1 = (a + b)x2 -
(b - c)x - c, 

Sec. 3.12 
Integration of Rational Functions 289 
true for all values of x, from which we have to determine the coefficients a, b, 
c. This condition cannot hold unless all the coefficients of the polynomial 
(a + b)x2 -
(b -
c)x - c - 1 are zero; that is, we must have a + b = 
b - c = c + 1 = ° or c = -1, b = -1, a = 1. 
We thus obtain the 
resolution 
and consequently, f 
dx 
1 
x2(x _ 1) = log Ix -
11 - log Ixl +;:. 
Next we decompose the function 1j[x(x2 + 1)] whose denominator has 
complex zeros in accordance with the equation 
1 
a 
bx+c 
x(x2 + 1) = ;: + x2 + 1 . 
For the coefficients we obtain a + b = c = a-I = ° 
so that 
and therefore 
X 
x(x2 + 1) = ;: -
x 2 + 1 ' 
f 
X(X2d: 1) = log Ixl - t log (x2 + 1). 
As a third example we consider the function 1j(x4 + 1), whose integration 
was a challenge even in Leibnitz' time. We can represent the denominator 
as the product of two quadratic factors: 1 
X4 + 1 = (x2 + 1)2 -
2x2 = (x2 + 1 + VZ-x)(x2 + 1 - vir). 
We know therefore that the resolution into partial fractions will have the form 
1 
ax+b 
cx+d 
--= 
+ 
. 
x4 + 1 
x2 + v2x + 1 
x2 -
v2x + 1 
To determine the coefficients a, b, c, d, we use the equation 
(a + c)x3 + (b + d - aV2 + CV2)x2 
+ (a + c - bV2 + dV2)x + (b + d -
1) = 0, 
1 The factorization of x4 + 1 into real quadratic factors corresponds to the factori-
zation into conjugate complex linear factors 
where 
x' + 1 = [(x -
€)(x - c')](x -
(3)(X _ €-3»), 
1T 
1T 
l.r 
€ = cos - + i sin - = - y 2(1 + j) 
442 
is one of the eighth roots of + 1, and a fourth root of -1 (see p. 105). 

290 The Techniques of Calculus 
which is satisfied by the values 
1 
a=--
2V2' 
b = t, 
We therefore have 
x + V2 
1 
c=---_, 
2V2 
and, applying the method given on p. 284, we obtain 
d =t. 
x -
V2 
J
dX 
1 
-
1 
-
-- = --::log Ix2 + V2x + 11 - -_log Ix2 - V2x + 11 
X4 + 1 
4V2 
4V2 
Ch.3 
1 
-
1 
-
+--_arctan(V2x + 1) +--_arctan(V2x -1), 
2V2 
2V2 
which may easily be verified by differentiation. 
The preceding examples illustrate a general method of integrating a 
rational function f(x)lg(x). We first divide and are reduced to the case where 
the degree of fis less than that of g. We factor g(x) into linear and definite 
quadratic factors, grouping the product into powers of such factors. We 
write down the appropriate partial fraction representation for fIg with 
indeterminate coefficients a, b, c, . . .. Multiplying through with g(x) and 
comparing coefficients of equal powers in the resulting polynomial identity, 
we obtain a system of linear equations for the unknown coefficients that 
should just be adequate for determining those coefficients, if we really have 
the correct form for the partial fraction expansion. We are then ready to 
integrate any of the resulting partial fractions. by the rules discussed before. 
3.13 Integration of Some Other Classes of Functions 
a. Preliminary Remarks on the Rational 
Representationl of the Circle and the Hyperbola 
The integration of some other general classes of functions can be 
reduced to the integration of rational functions. We shall be able to 
better understand this reduction by first stating certain elementary 
facts about the trigonometric and hyperbolic functions. If we put 
t = tan (x/2), elementary trigonometry yields the simple formulas 
. 
2t 
smx=--2' 
1 + t 
1 Sometimes called "uniformization." 
1 -
t2 
cosx=-- . 
1 + t2 ' 

Sec. 3.13 
Integration of Some Other Classes of Functions 291 
indeed, from 
1 
2X 
--=cos -
1 + t2 
2 
and 
and from the elementary formulas 
sin x = 2 cos2 ~ tan ~ 
2 
2 
and 
2 X 
• 2 X 
cos X = cos - -
sm -
2 
2' 
we obtain these equations. They show that sin x and cos x can both be 
expressed rationally in terms of the quantity t = tan xj2. By differen-
tiation we have 
dt 
1 
1 + t2 
-= 
=--
dx 
2 cos2 xj2 
2 
so that 
(82) 
dx 
2 
-=--; 
dt 
1 + t2 
hence the derivative dxjdt is also a rational expression in t. 
*The geometrical representation of our formulas and their geometrical 
meaning are given in Fig. 3-28. Here the circle u2 + v2 = 1 in a u,v-plane is 
shown. If x denotes the angle TOP in the figure, then u = cos x and v = sin x. 
The angle OSP with its vertex at the point u = -1, v = 0 is equal to x/2, by 
v 
Figure 3.28 Parametric representation of the trigonometric functions. 

292 
The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
a theorem in elementary geometry, and we can read off the geometrical 
meaning of the parameter t from the figure; t = tan ix = OR where R is 
the "projection" from S of the point P of the circle onto the v-axis. If the 
point P starts from S and describes once the circle in the positive direction, 
that is, if x runs through the interval from -1T to +1T, the quantity t will run 
through the whole range of values from + ex:> to + ex:> exactly once. (Notice 
that the point S itself corresponds to t = ± ex:». We have here a representation 
of the general point (u, v) of the circle u2 + v2 = 1 in terms of the rational 
functions u = (1 - t2)/(1 + t2), and v = 21/(1 + t2) of the parameter t. 
These formulas then define a rational mapping of the t-line onto the circle 
in the u,v-plane (which incidentally is the two-dimensional analogue of the 
stereographic projection of a sphere mentioned on p. 21). At the basis of 
this rational representation of the circle lies obviously the identity 
(t2 -
1)2 + (2t)2 = (t2 + 1)2. 
Curiously enough, this formula is of interest also in number theory since it 
generates for each integer t Pythagorean integers a = t2 -
1, b = 21, and 
c = t2 + 1 which satisfy the identity a2 + b2 = c2, that is, determine a right 
triangle with commensurable sides. Thus t = 2 gives rise to the well-known 
triple a = 3, b = 4, c = 5; for 1 = 4 we obtain a = 15, b = 8, c = 17, etc. 
It is remarkable, and, of course, no accident, that the same algebraic identity 
is of significance in such diverse contexts as integration in closed form, 
geometry, and number theory. Linking different fields in such a manner is 
the typical trend in modern mathematics, although our particular example 
goes back to antiquity. 
Similarly we may express the hyperbolic functions 
cosh x = He'" + e-"') 
and sinh x = He'" -
e-"') as rational functions of a third quantity. The 
most obvious way is to put e'" = T, so that we have 
cosh x = H 
T + ;), 
sinh x = H 
T -
;), 
which are rational expressions for sinh x and cosh x. Here again 
dxldT = lIT is rational in T. 
However, we obtain a closer analogy 
with the trigonometric functions by introducing the quantity t = 
tanh (x12) = (T -
1)/(T + 1); we then arrive at the formulas 
1 + t2 
coshx=--, 
1 -
t2 
. h 
2t 
sm X=--2' 
1 -
t 
By differentiating t = tanh (x12) we obtain, as in Eq. (82) on p. 291; 
the rational expression 
(83) 
dx 
2 
-=--
dt 
1 -
t2 

Sec. 3.13 
Integration of Some Other Classes of Functions 293 
v 
s 
--------~~----------~----------~------------~u 
-1 
Figure 3.29 Parametric representation of the hyperbolic functions. 
for the derivative dx/dt. Here again the quantity t has a geometrical 
meaning similar to that which it has for the trigonometric functions, 
as we see at once from Fig. 3.29. 
We have here a rational representation of the hyperbola u2 -
v2 = 1 
in the u,v-plane by means of the equations u = {1 + t2)/(1 -
(2) 
V = 2t/{1 -
(2). The points on the right-hand branch of the curve are 
of the form u = cosh x, v = sinh x and correspond to values of ( 
with It I < l. The other branch is obtained for It I > l. 
We now proceed to our integration problems. 
*h. Integration of R(cos x, sin x) 
Let R(cos x, sin x) denote an expression which is rational in the two 
functions sin x and cos x, that is, an expression which is formed rationally 
from these two functions and constants, such as 
3 sin2 x + cos x 
3 cos2 X + sin x . 

294 
The Techniques of Calculus 
If we apply the substitution t = tan x/2, the integral 
J 
R(cos x, sin x) dx 
is transformed into the integral 
fR(1 -
t2 ~)_2_ 
dt 
oJ 
1 + t2 ' 1 + t2 1 + t2 
' 
Ch.3 
and under the integral sign we now have a rational function of t. 
Thus we have in principle obtained the integral of our expression, 
since we can now perform the integration by the methods of the pre-
ceding section. 
c. Integration of R(cosh x, sinh x) 
In the same way, if R(cosh x, sinh x) is an expression which is rational 
in terms of the hyperbolic functions cosh x and sinh x, we can effect 
its integration by means of the substitution t = tanh x/2. Recalling 
Eq. (83), we have 
J R(COSh x, sinh x) dx =JR(1 + t:, ~)~ 
dt. 
I-t I-t I-t 
(According to a previous remark we could also have introduced T = err: 
as a new variable and expressed cosh x and sinh x in terms of T.) 
The integration is once again reduced to that of a rational function. 
*d. Integration of R(x, .J 1 -
x2) 
The integral S R(x, .J 1 -
x2) dx can be reduced to the type treated in 
Section 3.13b by using the substitution 
x = cos u, 
.J 1 -
x2 = sin u, 
dx = -sin u du; 
from this stage the transformation t = tan u/2 brings us to the inte-
gration of a rational function. Incidentally, we could have carried out 
the reduction in one step instead of two by using the substitution 
J~ 
t-
--' 
-
1 + x' 
1 -
t2 
X---' 
-
1 + t2 ' 
/--
2t 
....;1-x2 =--; 
1 + t2 
dx 
-4t 
-= 
dt 
(1 + t2)2 ' 
that is, we could have introduced t = tan u/2 directly as the new variable 
and thereby obtained a rational integrand. 

Sec. 3.13 
Integration of Some Other Classes of Functions 295 
*e. Integration of R(x, .J x2 -
1) 
The integral f R(x, J x2 -
1) dx is transformed by the substitution 
x = cosh u into the type treated in Section 3.13c. Here again we can 
arrive at our goal directly by introducing 
JX-l 
u 
t = 
x + 1 = tanh 2 . 
* f. Integration of R(x, .J~) 
The integral f R(x, J(x2 + 1» dx is reduced by the transformation 
x = sinh u to the type considered in Section 3.13c (p. 294) and can 
therefore be integrated in terms of elementary functions. Instead of the 
further reduction to the integral of a rational function by the sub-
stitution e" = T or tanh u/2 = t, we could have reached the integral of a 
rational function in a single step by either of the substitutions 
T = X + .J x2 + 1, 
-1+Jx2+1 
t = 
. 
x 
*g. Integration of R(x,.J ax2 + 2bx + c) 
The integral f R(x, .J ax2 + 2bx + c) dx of an expression which is 
rational in terms of x and the square root of an arbitrary polynomial 
of the second degree in x can immediately be reduced to one of the 
types just treated. We write (cf. p. 284) 
2 
1 
2 
ac -
b2 
ax + 2bx + c = - (ax + b) + ---
a 
a 
If ac -
b2 > ° we introduce a new variable ~ by means of the 
transformation ~ = (ax + b)/.J ac -
b2, whereupon the surd takes the 
form .J (ac -
b2)(~2 + 1)/a. Hence our integral when expressed in 
terms of ~ is of the type of Section 3.13f. The constant a must here be 
positive in order that the square root may have real values. 
If ac -
b2 = 0, and a > 0, then by way of the formula 
Jax2 + 2bx + c = .J~(x +~) 
we see that the integrand was rational in x to begin with. 

296 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
If, finally, ac - b2 < 0, we put; = (ax + b)/..jb2 -
ac and obtain 
for the surd the expre~sion J(ac - b2)(;2 -
1)/a. If a is positive, our 
integral is thus reduced to the type of Section 3.13e; if, on the other 
hand, a is negative, we write the surd in the form 
..j(b2 -
ac)(1 -
;2)/( -a) 
and see that the integral is thus reduced to the type of Section 3.13d. 
*h. Further Examples of Reduction to Integrals of Rational Functions 
Of other types ~f functions which can be integrat~d by reduction to 
rational functions we shall briefly mention two: (1) rational expressions 
involving two differ~nt square roots oflinear expressions, R(x, ..j~, 
../rt,X + (3); (2) expressions of the form R(x, V'(ax + b)/(ocx + -(3», 
where a, b, (x, {3 are constants. In the first type we introduce the new 
variable; = ..j ocx + {3,' so 'that (Xx + {3 = ;2, and cons~quently 
then 
dx 
U 
and d; = -;; 
J R(x, ..j ax + b, ..j (Xx + (3) dx 
J {;2 - (3)1 
2 
} 2; 
= 
R -(X- , 
; [a; -
(a{3 -
b(X)],; -; d;, 
which is of the type discussed in Section 3.13g. 
If in the second type we introduce the new variable 
; = Jax + b, 
(Xx + {3 
we have 
z:n 
ax + b 
\0 = 
, 
(Xx + (3 
and we immediately arrive at the formula 
J R(X' Jax + b) dx =JR(-{3;n + b ,~) a{3 -
b(X n;n-l d;, 
(Xx + {3 
(X;n -
a 
(a;n -
a)2 
which is the integral of a rational function. 

Sec. 3.13 
Integration of Some Other Classes of Functions 297 
i. Remarks on the Examples 
The preceding discussions are chiefly of theoretical interest. In 
complicated expressions the actual calculations would be far too 
involved. It is therefore expedient to take advantage, when possible, 
of the special form of the integrand to simplify the work. For example, 
to integrate 1/(a2 sin2 x + b2 cos2 x) it is better to use the substitution 
t = tan x instead of that given on p. 294; for sin2 x and cos2 x can be 
expressed rationally in terms of tan x, and it is therefore unnecessary 
to go back to t = tan x/2. The same is true for every expression formed 
rationally fromI sin2 x, cos2 x, and sin x cos x. Moreover, for the 
calculation of many integrals a trigonometrical form is to be preferred 
to a rational one, provided that the trigonometrical form can be 
evaluated by some simple recurrence method. For example, although 
the integrand in S x"( J 1 - x2)m dx can be reduced to a rational form, 
it is better to write x = sin u and bring it to the form S sinn u cosm+1 U du, 
since this can easily be treated by the recurrence method on p. 279 
(or by using the addition theorems to reduce the powers of the sine and 
cosine to sines and cosines of multiple angles). 
For the evaluation of the integral 
I 
dx 
a cos x + b sin x 
(a2 + b2 > 0), 
instead of referring to the general theory we write 
A = Va2 + b2, 
The integral then takes the form 
a 
sinO =:4' 
1 I dx 
:4 
sin (x + 0)' 
b 
cosO=:4' 
and on introducing the new variable x + 0 we find [(cf. Eq. (40), p. 272)] that 
the value of the integral is 
1 I 
x + 01 
:4 log tan -2-
. 
1 For sin x cos x = tan x cos' x can, of course, be expressed rationally in terms of 
tan x. 

298 
The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
Part C Further Steps in the Theory of Integral Calculus 
3.14 Integrals of Elementary Functions 
a. Definition of Functions by Integrals. 
Elliptic Integrals and Functions 
With the examples already given of types of functions which can be 
integrated by reduction to rational functions, we have practically 
exhausted the list of functions which are integrable in terms of ele-
mentary functions. Attempts to express indefinite integrals such as 
(for n > 2) 
j
~ 
dx 
~ ao + a1x + ... + anxn ' 
I~ao + a1x + ... + anxndx, 
or 
I
e'" 
-;; dx 
in terms of elementary functions have failed; in the nineteenth century 
it was finally proved that it is actually impossible to carry out these 
integrations in terms of elementary functions. 
If therefore the object of the integral calculus were to integrate 
functions explicitly, we should have come to a definite halt. However, 
such a restricted objective has no intrinsic justification; it is of an 
artificial nature. We know that the integral of every continuous 
function exists as a limit and is itself a continuous function of the 
upper limit whether or not the integral can be expressed in terms of 
elementary functions. The distinguishing features of the elementary 
functions are based on the fact that their properties are easily recog-
nized, that their application to numerical problems is facilitated by 
convenient tables, or that they can easily be calculated with as great a 
degree of accuracy as we please. 
Whenever the integral of a function cannot be expressed by means of 
functions with which we are already acquainted, there is no objection 
to introducing this integral as a new "higher" function, which really 
means no more than giving the integral a name. Whether the intro-
duction of such a new function is convenient depends on the properties 
which it possesses, the frequency with which it occurs, and the ease 
with which it can be manipulated in theory and in practice. In this 

Sec. 3.14 
Functions not Integrable 299 
sense the process of integration is a general principle for the generation 
of new functions. 
We are already acquainted with this principle from our dealings with 
the elementary functions. Thus we were forced (p. 145) to introduce the 
integral of l/x as a new function, which we called the logarithm and 
whose properties we could easily derive. We could have introduced the 
trigonometric functions in a similar way, making use only of the 
rational functions, the process of integration, and the process of 
inversion. For this purpose we need only take one or other of the 
equations 
i'" 
dt 
arc tan x = 
--9 
o 1 + r 
or 
. i'" 
dt 
arc sm x = 
/ 
o y 1 _ t2 
as the definition of the function arc tan x or arc sin x respectively, and 
then obtain the trigonometric functions by inversion. By this process 
the definition of these functions is divorced from intuitive geometry, 
(in particular, from the intuitive notion of "angle"), but we are left 
with the task of developing their properties, independently of geom-
etry.! (Later, in Section 3.16 we shall give another purely analytic 
discussion of the trigonometric functions.) 
* Elliptic Integrals 
The first important example which leads beyond the set of elementary 
functions is given by the elliptic integrals. These are integrals in which 
the integrand depends rationally on the square root of a polynomial 
of third or fourth degree. Among these integrals the function 
has become particularly important. Its inverse function s(u) similarly 
plays an important role.2 This function s(u) has been as thoroughly 
examined and tabulated as the elementary functions. 3 
1 We shall not go into the development of these ideas here. The essential step is to 
prove the addition theorems for the inverse functions, that is, for the sine and the 
tangent. 
2 For the special value k = 0 we obtain u(s) = arc sin x and s(u) = sin u respectively. 
3 The function s(u), one of the so-called Jacobian elliptic functions, is usually denoted 
by the symbol sn u to indicate that it is a generalization of the ordinary sine-function. 

300 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
It is the prototype of the so-called elliptic functions which occupy a 
central position in the theory of functions of a complex variable and 
occur in many physical applications (for example, in connection with the 
motion of a simple pendulum; see p. 410). 
The name "elliptic integral" arises from the fact that such integrals 
enter into the problem of determining the length of an arc of an ellipse 
(cf. Chapter 4, p. 378). 
We point out further that integrals which at first glance have quite a dif-
ferent appearance turn out to be elliptic integrals after a simple substitution. 
As an example, the integral f 
dx 
y cos ex - cos x 
is transformed by means of the substitution u = cos x/2 into the integral 
1 
k = 
. 
cos (ex/2) , 
the integral 
f 
dx 
YCOS 2x 
by means of the substitution u = sin x becomes 
and finally the integral 
f 
dx 
Y 1 - k 2 sin2 x 
is transformed by the substitution u = sin x into 
h. On Differentiation and Integration 
Another remark on the relation between differentiation and inte-
gration should be inserted. Differentiation may be considered a more 
elementary process than integration, because it does not lead us out of 
the domain of "known" functions. On the other hand, we must 
remember that the differentiability of an arbitrary continuous function 
is by no means a foregone conclusion but a stringent assumption. In 
fact, as we have seen, there are continuous functions which are not 
differentiable at certain isolated points, whereas since Weierstrass' 

Sec. 3.15 
Extension of the Concept of Integral 301 
time many examples of continuous functions have been constructed 
which do not possess a derivative anywhere.l In contrast, even though 
integration in terms of elementary functions is generally not possible, 
we are certain at least that the integral of a continuous function exists. 
Taken all in all, integration and differentiation cannot be contrasted 
simply as more elementary and less elementary operations; from some 
points of view the former and from other points of view the latter could 
be thought of as more elementary. 
Insofar as the concept of integral is concerned, we shall free ourselves 
in the next section from the assumption that the integrand is everywhere 
continuous; we shall see that it may be extended to wide classes of 
functions which have discontinuities. 
3.15 Extension of the Concept of Integral 
a. Introduction. Definition of" Improper" Integrals 
In Chapter 2, p. 128, we definedii(x) dx by forming the "Riemann 
sums" 
a 
n 
Fn = .1 !(lii) AXi 
i=1 
based on a subdivision of the interval [a, b] into n subintervals of 
lengths AXi and a choice of intermediate points li, in those subintervals. 
If the sequences Fn tend to the same limit Fab, for any sequence of sub-
divisions and intermediate points, as long as the largest value Ax, tends 
to zero, we define ii(x) dx to be that limit Fab• This limit was shown to 
exist when f(x) is continuous in [a, b]. However, we are often con-
fronted with the need for defining an integral whenf(x) is not defined, 
or not continuous, in all points of the closed interval I or when the 
interval of integration extends to infinity. We would wish, for example, 
to attach an appropriate meaning to expressions such as 
11 1 
11 
1 
---= dx 
or 
sin - dx, 
o .Jx 
o 
x 
L"e-<lJ dx 
or 1
00 sin x dx, 
1 x2 
etc. 
1 Compare Titchmarsh, The Theory of Functions, Oxford, 1932, Sections 11.21 to 
11.23, pp. 350-354. 

302 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
We first of all extend the concept of the integral to functions that are 
continuous in the open interval (a, b) but are not necessarily defined or 
continuous at the endpoints a, b. For any numbers IX, b with a < IX < 
f3 < b the ordinary ("proper") integralf(x) dx is then defined. If 
f
lit 
F = lim 
f(x) dx 
£-0 
III 
exists when a < IX. < f3. < b and lim IX. = a, lim fl. = b, and if F is 
.--+0 
.--+0 
independent of the particular choice of IX. and fl. we say that the im-
proper integral i
b f(x) dx converges and has the value F. 
Sectionally Continuous Integrand. 
If, more generally,f(x) is defined 
and continuous in (a, b) with the possible exception of a finite number 
of intermediate points Cl • C2 ••• Cn and f is continuous in each of the 
open intervals (a, Cl), (Cl' C2)' .•. , (cn , b) we define f f(x) dx as the 
sum of the improper integrals over the subintervals, provided each of 
those converges. 
b 
The improper integral i f(x) dx always converges when f is contin-
uous and bounded in the open interval (a, b). For example, the integral 
il. 1 dx 
l' f.l. 1 d 
Slfl-
= 1m 
Slfl- x 
o 
x 
._0. 
x 
converges. To prove this general statement we may assume, for brevity, 
that f is continuous at b, but not necessarily at a. Then by definition 
fbf(X) dx = lim F(IX), 
Ja 
ot-+-a 
where F(IX) for a < IX < b is defined as f f(x) dx. If M is an upper 
bound for If I and IXn a sequence tending to a, we have by the mean 
value theorem of integral calculus IF(lXn) -
F(lXm)1 ~ M IlXn -
IXml; 
hence, by Cauchy's convergence test lim F(lXn) exists. Since this is the 
n-+oo 
case for any sequence IXn converging to a, it follows that lim F(IX) exists. 
<x_a 
As a matter of fact, when f is continuous and bounded in (a, b) we 
can assign tofany values at the endpoints a, b and also obtain ff(X) dx 
directly as a "proper" integral defined as the limit of Riemann sums. 
It is easily seen that for continuous bounded f both definitions apply 
and lead to the same value, independently of the choice off(a) andf(b). 

Sec. 3.15 
Extension of the Concept of Integral 303 
The same is true more generally for bounded functions that are defined 
and continuous in (a, b) with the possible exception of a finite number 
of points. In particular, f f(x) dx always exists when f is continuous 
except for a finite number of jump discontinuities. Altogether con-
{(x) 
o 
Figure 3.30 Integral of a function with discontinuities. 
vergence of the improper integral of a function over a finite interval 
demands attention only whenfbecomes infinite. 
We note that the geometrical interpretation of the integral as the 
area under the curve is unchanged from the interpretation for a con-
tinuous f (Fig. 3.30). 
h. Functions with Infinite Discontinuities 
We begin with the integral 
J =11 dx 
'" ' 
o x 
where 01: is a positive number. The integrand l/x'" becomes infinite for x --+ O. 
We therefore must define J by taking the integral JE from the positive limit E 

304 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
to the limit 1, and finally letting" tend to zero. According to the elementary 
rules of integration, we obtain, provided ex '# 1, 
We immediately recognize the following possibilities: (1) ex is greater than 1; 
then for" -+ 0 the right-hand side tends to infinity. (2) ex is less than 1; 
then the right-hand side tends to the limit 1/(1 -
ex). In the second case, 
therefore, we shall simply have to take this limiting value as the integral 
i
1dX 
J = 
~. In the first case we shall say that the integral from 0 to 1 does 
o x 
not exist or diverges. (3) In the third case, where ex = 1, the integral is 
equal to -log E and therefore for E -+ 0 does not approach a limit, but tends 
i
1dX 
to infinity; that is, the integral 
-
= J does not exist or is divergent. 
o x 
Another example for an integrand with an infinite discontinuity is given by 
[(x) = l/vl - Xl. We find 
[ 1-" 
dx 
• I 
= arc sin (1 -
E) . 
• 0 
-vI_xli 
For E -+ 0, the right-hand side converges to the limit, 71'/2; this therefore is 
the value of the in~egral 
71' 
(1 
dx 
2 = Jo VI - Xl' 
although the integrand becomes infinite at the point x = 1. 
c. Interpretation as Areas 
Improper integrals can be interpreted as areas of regions extending to 
infinity defined by means of a passage to the limit from bounded regions. 
For example, the preceding results for the function l/x(1. assert that the area 
bounded by the x-axis, the line x = 1, the line x = E, and the curve y = l/x(1. 
tends to a finite limit as E -+ 0, provided that ex < 1, an4 that it tends to 
infinity if ex ~ 1. This fact may be simply expressed as follows: The area 
between the x-axis, the y-axis, the curve y = 1/~, and the line x = 1 is finite 
or infinite according as ex < 1 or ex ~ 1. 
Intuition can, of course, give us no reliable information about the finiteness 
or infiniteness of the area of a region stretching to infinity. Figure 3.31 
illustrates the fact that for ex < 1 the area under our curve remains finite, 
whereas for ex ~ 1 it is infinite, a fact which is certainly not suggested by 
geometrical intuition. " 

Sec. 3.15 
Extension of the Concept of Integral 305 
y 
a<l 
~---a=l 
~---a>l 
O~--------------------------------------~X 
Figure 3.31 To illustrate the convergence or divergence of improper integrals. 
d. Tests for Convergence 
To check the convergence of an integral of a function [(x) with an infinite 
discontinuity at the point x = b we can often use the following criterion. 
Let the function [(x) be continuous in the interval a ~ x < b, and let 
lim f(x) = 00. Then the integralib [(x) dx converges if there exist both a 
x-+b 
a 
positive number f.l less than 1 and a fixed number M independent of x, such 
that everywhere in the interval a ~ x < b the inequality I f(x) I ~ M/(b - x)" 
is true; in other words, if at the point x = b the [unction [(x) becomes infinite 
o[ a lower order than the first: [(x) = O[l/(h - x)!'] for some f.l < 1. On the 
other hand, the integral diverges if there exist both a number v ~ 1 and a fixed 
number N, such that everywhere in the interval a ~ x < b the inequality 
[(x) ~ N/(b - x)" is true; in other words, if at the point x = b the positive 
[unction [(x) becomes infinite o[ the first order at least. 
The proof follows almost immediately by comparison with the very simple 
special case just discussed. In order to prove the first part of the theorem we 
observe that for 0 < £ < b - a we have 
M 
2M 
o ~ (b _ x)" + [(x) ~ (b _ x)" 
and hence also 
o ~ Lb-T(b ':X),. + [(X)] dx ~ ib-£(b 2~X)!' dx. 
As E --+ 0 the integral on the right, which is obtained from the integral I dX/XI' 
by a simple substitution of b - x for x, has a limit and therefore stays 

306 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
bounded. Moreover, the values of the integral in the middle increase 
monotonically as E --+ 0; since they are also bounded, they must possess a 
limit and the integral 
L
b (b ~X)" dx + [(X») dx 
=!~(f-£(b ~X)"dX + Lb-£[(X)dX) 
converges. The convergence of the integral of M/(b - x)" then also implies 
that of f [(x) dx. 
The proof of the second part of the theorem is left as an exercise for the 
reader. 
We likewise see at once that exactly analogous theorems hold where the 
lower boundary of the integral is a point of infinite discontinuity. If a point 
of infinite discontinuity lies in the interior of the interval of integration, we 
merely separate the interval into two subintervals by this point and then apply 
these considerations to each of these. 
As an example we consider the elliptic integral 
e 
dx 
(k2 < 1). 
Jo '1/(1 -
x2)(1 - k2x2) 
From the identity 1 - xl = (1 - x)(1 + x) we see at once that as x --+ 1 the 
integrand becomes infinite only of order t, from which it follows that the 
improper integral converges. (For k = 1 the integral diverges.) 
e. Infinite Interval of Integration 
Another important extension of the concept of integral concerns an 
infinite interval of integration. For a precise formulation, we introduce 
the following notation: If the integral 
LA[(X) dx, 
with a fixed, tends to a definite limit for A --+ 00, we define the integral 
of [(x) over the infinite interval x ~ a, as 
lim fA [(x) dx =faJ[(X) dx. 
A-+oo 
a 
a 
Again, such an integral is called convergent. 
Examples. Simple examples of the various possibilities are again given by 
the functions[(x) = l/x", i
AdX 
1 
- = -- (AI-,. -
1). 
IX" 
I-at 

Sec. 3.15 
Extension of the Concept of Integral 307 
Here we see that, if we again exclude the case ex = 1, the integral to infinity 
exists for the case ex > 1, and, in fact, 
ioo::=ex~l; 
when ex < 1, the integral no longer exists. For the case ex = 1 the integral 
again clearly fails to exist since log x tends to infinity as x does. We see 
therefore that with regard to integration over an infinite interval the functions 
l/xll do not behave in the same way as for integration up to the origin. This 
statement also is made plausible by a glance at Fig. 3.31. For obviously, the 
larger ex is, the more closely do the curves draw towards the x-axis for x ->- OCJ; 
thus it is plausible that the area under consideration tends to a definite limit 
for sufficiently large values of ex. 
The following criterion for the existence of an integral with an infinite limit 
is often useful. (We again assume that for sufficiently large values of x, say 
for x ~ a, the integrand is continuous.) 
Criterion of Convergence 
The integral 1
00 f(X) dx converges if the function f(x) vanishes at infinity to 
a higher order than the first, that is, if there is a number v > 1 such that for all 
values of x, that are sufficiently large, the relation I f(x) I :s: Mix' is true, 
where M is a fixed number independent of x. In symbols: f(x) = o(b). 
Again, the integral diverges if the function remains positive and vanishes at 
infinity to an order not higher than the first, that is, if there is a fixed number 
N > 0 such that xf(x) ~ N. 
The proof of these criteria is exactly parallel to the previous argument and 
can be left to the reader. 
i 
00 I 
A very simple example is the integral 
"2 dx (a > 0). The integrand 
a 
X 
vanishes at infinity to the second order. We see at once that the integral 
i
A 1 
1 
1 
converges, for 
"2 dx = -
-
-
, and therefore 
a 
X 
a 
A 
rOO.!.dx=~. 
Ja 
x2 
a 
Another equally simple example is 
1
00 
1 
~ 
-I --2 dx = lim (arc tan A - arc tan 0) = -2 • 
o 
+ X 
A-oo 
Then obviously also 
f
+oo 
1 
-1--2 dx =~. 
-00 + x 

308 
The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
since the integrand is an even function. It is curious that the area between the 
curve and y = 1/(1 + x2) and the x-axis (see Fig. 3.8, p. 216) that extends to 
infinity turns out to be the same as that of a circle of radius one. 
f. The Gamma Function 
A further example of particular importance in analysis is that of 
the so-called gamma function 
r(n) = i'>' e-"'xn - 1 dx 
(n > 0). 
Splitting up the interval of integration into one part from x = 0 to 
x = 1 and another one from x = I to x = 00, we see that the integral 
over the first part clearly converges, since 0 < r"'xn-l < ljx" with 
p, = 1 - n < 1. For the integral over the second, infinite part, the 
criterion of convergence is also satisfied; for example, for" = 2, we 
have lim x2r"'xn-l = 0, since the exponential function rIll tends to zero 
<t-+ 00 
to a higher order than any power Ijxm (m > 0) (see p. 253). This 
gamma function which we consider as a function of the number n 
(not necessarily an integer) satisfies a remarkable relation obtained by 
integration by parts as follows. First, we have (with I(x) = xn- 1, 
g'(X) = r"') f 
e-"'xn- 1 dx = _e-"'xn- 1 + (n -
1) f 
e-"'xn- 2 dx. 
If we take this integral relation between 0 and A and then let A increase 
beyond all bounds, we immediately obtain 
r(n} = (n -
1) iooe-"'xn-2 dx = (n -
l)r(n -
1) 
for 
n > 1, 
and by this recurrence formula, provided p, is an integer and 0 < p, < n, 
it follows that 
r(n) = (n -
l)(n -
2) ... (n -
p,) Looe-"'xn-,.-l dx. 
In particular, if n is a positive integer, we have for p, = 11 -
1 
r(n) = (n -
l)(n -
2) ... 3 ·2· 1 i'x'e-'" dx, 
and since 
we have 
r(n) = (n -
l)(n -
2) .. ·2· I = (n -
I)!, 
a most useful expression of a factorial by an integral. 

Sec. 3./5 
Extension of the Concept of Integral 309 
Other Examples. The integrals 
i""e-.,2 dx, 
also converge, as we may easily deduce from our criterion. The first one is 
identical with trm, the second one with tr[(n + 1)/2] for n > -t, as is seen 
by the substitution x2 = u, dx = (1/2 v'/;) du. 
g. The Dirichlet Integral 
In many applications we encounter integrals whose convergence does not 
follow directly from our criterion. An important example is furnished by the 
integral 
1"" sin x 
1= 
--dx 
o 
x 
investigated by Dirichlet. If the upper limit is not infinite but finite, the 
integral is convergent since the function (sin x)/x is continuous for all finite x; 
( 
sin x 
) 
for x = 0 it is given by lim --;- = 1 for x ..... 0 . The convergence of the 
integral I is due to the periodic change in sign of the integrand, which causes 
contributions to the integral from neighboring intervals of length 7T almost to 
cancel one another (Fig. 3.32). Thus the sum of the infinitely many areas 
y 
sin x 
Figure 3.32 
Graph of y = -- . 
x 

310 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
sinx 
between the x-axis and the curve y = -- converges, if we count areas above 
x 
the x-axis as positive and below the x-axis as negative. (On the other hand. 
the sum of the numerical values of all areas, that is, the integral, 
1
00 Isinxl 
--dx 
x 
' 
o 
can easily be shown to diverge.) 
The alternating character of the function sin x accounts for the fact that 
its indefinite integral 
J 
sin x dx = 1 - cos x 
is bounded for all x. We make use of this fact in estimating the expression 
i
B sin x i B 1 d(l - cos x) 
lAB = -- dx = 
-
dx 
dx 
A 
X 
A X 
Integration by parts shows that 
_1 -cosB _1 -cosA 
(BI -cosx 
I.u -
B 
A 
+ JA 
x2 
dx. 
Hence 
1
00 sin x 
iool-COSX 
-- dx = lim lAB = 
2 
dx, 
o 
x 
A-O 
0 
x 
B-oo 
where the integral on the right-hand side clearly is convergent. In other 
words, the integral I exists. In Section 8.4c we shall establish further the 
remarkable fact that I has the value tr/2. 
h. Substitution. Fresnel Integrals 
Obviously, all rules for the substitution of new variables, etc., 
remain valid for convergent improper integrals. Often such trans-
formations can lead to different, more tractable expressions for the 
integral. 
As an example, to calculate 
(00 
2 
Jo xe-z dx 
we introduce the new variable u = x2 and obtain 
xe-z dx = -
e-udu = lim -(1 - e-A ) = -. 
1
00 
2 
11 00 
1 
1 
o 
2 
0 
A-+oo 2 
2 

Sec. 3.15 
Extension of the Concept of Integral 311 
Another example in the investigation of improper integrals is given 
by the Fresnel integrals, which occur in the theory of diffraction of 
light: 
Fl = ioosin (x2) dx, 
The substitution x2 = u yields 
F -! i 
00 sin u d 
1 -
2 
0 
.J~ u, 
Integrating by parts, we find 
F =! i 
00 cos u d 
2 
2 
0 
.Ju 
u. 
IE 
sin.!! du = 1 - cos B _ 1 - cos A + ~ IE 1 -
~os u duo 
A .Ju 
.JB 
.J A 
2 
A 
u!-i 
As A and B tend to zero and infinity respectively, we see by the same 
argument as for the Dirichlet integral that the integral Fl converges. 
The convergence of the integral F2 is proved in exactly the same way. 
These Fresnel integrals show that an improper integral may exist 
even if the integrand does not tend to zero as x -+ 00. In fact, an 
improper integral can exist even when the integrand is unbounded, as 
is shown by the example L 
00 2u cos (u 4) duo 
When u4 = nTr, that is, when u = {/nTr, n = 0,1,2, ... the integrand 
becomes 2{/ nTr cos n7r = ±2{/ n7r, so that the integrand is unbounded. 
By the substitution u2 = x, however, the integral is reduced to 
Loocos (x2) dx, 
which we have just shown to be convergent. 
By means of a substitution an improper integral may often be 
transformed into a proper one. For example, the transformation 
x = sin u gives 
fl 
dx 
i"/2 
7T 
Jo .J 1 _ x2 = 0 du = 2 . 
On the other hand, integrals of continuous functions may be trans-
formed into improper integrals; this occurs if the transformation 
u = rp(x) is such that at the end of the interval of integration the 
derivative rp'(x) vanishes, so that dx/du is infinite. 

312 
The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch. 3 
3.16 The Differential Equations of the Trigonometric Functions 
a. Introductory Remarks on Differential Equations 
Integration is merely the first step into a much more extensive 
field: Instead of inverting differentiation by integration, that is of 
solving the equation y' = f(x) with givenf(x) for y = F(x), we might 
aim at finding functions y = F(x) which satisfy more general relation-
ships between y and derivatives of y. Such "differential equations" 
occur everywhere in applications as well as in strictly theoretical 
contexts. Penetrating studies far beyond the framework of this book 
are made of these equations: we shall return to some elementary 
aspects of the theory of differential equations later in this and the 
following volume. At this stage we confine ourselves to a quite simple, 
yet significant, example. We shall discuss the differential equations of 
the functions sin x and cos x, which we have already mentioned on 
p. 171. 
Although in elementary trigonometry these functions and their 
properties were taken from a geometric standpoint, we now discard the 
reliance on geometric intuition and put the trigonometric functions in a 
simple way on a precise, analytical basis, in accordance with the general 
trend of development mentioned before. 
h. Sin x and cos x Defined hy a Differential Equation 
and Initial Conditions 
We consider the differential equation 
u" + u = ° 
with the aim of characterizing solutions u(x) which we shall identify 
with the sine and cosine functions. Any function u = F(x) satisfying 
the equation, that is for which F"(X) + F(x) = 0, is called a solution.} 
At once we realize that together with a solution u = F(x) the 
function u = F(x + h) for arbitrary constant h is also a solution, as 
immediately verified by differentiating F(x + h) twice with respect to x. 
Similarly, it is immediately seen that with F(x) the derivative F'(x) = u 
is also a solution, as is of course, cF(x) with a constant factor c. In 
addition, together with F}(x) and F2(x) any linear combination c}Fix) + 
c2F2(x) = F(x) with constants c} and C2 is a solution. 
1 Of course, it is always understood that the functions under consideration are 
sufficiently differentiable. 

Sec. 3.16 
Differential Equations of Trigonmetric Functions 313 
To single out from the multitude of solutions of the differential 
equation a specific one, we impose "initial conditions" stipulating that 
for x = 0 the values of u = F(O) and u' = F'(O) be prescribed as a and b 
respectively. We state first: 
The- solution is uniquely determined by these initial values. 
For the proof we start with a general remark valid for any solution u. 
By multiplying the differential equation with 2u' we find because of 
2u"u' = (U'2)' and 2u'u = (u2)' the equation 
o = 2u"u' + 2u'u = [(U')2 + u2]', 
which can be integrated at once and implies 
U'2 + u2 = c, 
where c is a constant, that is, does not depend on x; therefore c must 
have the same value as the left-hand side for x = O. Thus we have for 
any solution u 
U'2(0) + u2(0) = c. 
Now, suppose we have two solutions U1 and U2 with the same initial 
conditions: Then the difference z = U1 -
U2 is a solution with z'(O) = 
z(O) = O. Hence we have c = 0 and for all x Z'2 + Z2 = 0; this means 
that z = 0 and z' = 0 which obviously proves our statement. 
We now define the functions sin x arid cos x as those solutions of the 
differential equation u"(x) + u(x) = 0 for which the initial conditions 
are, respectively, for u = sin x, 
u(O) = a = 0, 
u'(O) = b = 1, 
and for u = cos x, 
u(O) = a = 1, 
u'(O) = b = O. 
We take for granted here the fact that such solutions exist and are 
arbitrarily often differentiable, since its proof will be given later anyway 
in a more general context (see Section 9.2).1 
The only solution u of u" + u = 0 for which u = a, u' = b for x = 0 
is then the function u = a cos x + b sin x. This proves that every 
solution of the differential equation is a linear combination of cos x 
and sin x. 
Now we obtain the basic properties of the trigonometric functions 
from our differential equation u" + u = 0 applied, for example, to the 
1 Incidentally, we can infer these facts immediately from the equation u" + u' = 1, 
which is valid for sin x as well as for cos x and from whose equivalent form dx/du = 
1/"'; 1 - u' the inverse functions of sin x and cos x are immediately obtained by 
integrations. 

314 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
function u = sin x. Obviously, with u also v = u' is a solution: 
v" + v = O. 
Because of u" + u = v' + u = 0 we have v'(O) = 
-u(O) = 0 whereas v(O) = u'(O) = 1. Hence 
d . 
vex) = cos x = dx sm x. 
Similarly, we derive (d/dx) cos x = -sin x. 
The central theorem of trigonometry is the addition theorem 
cos (x + y) = cos x cos y -
sin x sin y. 
It now follows immediately from our approach: First, the function 
cos (x + y) as a function of x, with y remaining constant for the 
moment, is a solution u(x) of the differential equation u" + u = 0 
satisfying for x = 0 the initial conditions u(O) = cos y = a and u'(O) = 
-sin y = b. Now, as verified immediately the solution-according 
to the preceding statement, the only one-for which u(O) = a and 
u'(O) = b is a cos x + b sin x. Hence we have at once for our solution 
cos (x + y) the expression 
. cos (x + y) = cos x cos y -
sin x sin y, 
as we wanted to prove. 
The remarks in this section should suffice to indicate how trigono-
metric functions can be introduced in an entirely analytical manner 
without any reference to geometry. 
Without going into further details we mention the following. 
The number t7T could now be defined as the smallest positive value 
of x for which cos x = O. 
The periodicity of the trigonometric functions likewise follows 
easily from the analytic approach. 
We shall return to the analytical construction of the trigonometric 
functions by infinite power series (see Section 5.56). 
PROBLEMS 
SECTION 3.1, page 201 
1. Let P(x) = ao + a1x + aiXJ2 + ... + anxn. 
(a) Calculate the polynomial F(x) from the equation 
F(x) -
F'(x) = P(x). 
*(b) Calculate F(x) from the equation 
coF(x) + c1F'(x) + c2F"(x) = P(x). 

Problems 315 
2. Find the limit as n ....... 00 of the absolute value of the nth derivative of 
l/x at the point x = 2. 
3. ·Prove if pn)(x) = 0 for all x, then f is a polynomial of degree at most 
n - 1, and conversely. 
4. Determine the form of a rational function r for which 
lim xr'(x) = o. 
",-Hi) r(x) 
5. Prove by induction that the nth derivative of a product may be found 
according to the following rule (Leibnitz's rule): 
d n 
dng 
(n) df dn- 1g 
(n) d2J dn- 2g 
dxn (fg) = f dxn + 1 dx dxn- 1 + 2 dx2 dxn- 2 + ... 
( 
n 
)dn-y dg 
d"f 
+ 
--- +-g 
n -
1 dxn- 1 dx 
dxn
' 
Here (7) = n, (;) = n(n 2~ 1) ,etc.; denote binomial coefficients. 
n-1. 
(n _ l)xn - nxn- 1 + 1 
6. Prove that.~ ;x·-1 = 
( _ 1)2 
. 
• =1 
X 
SECfION 3.2, page 206 
1. Let y = e"'(a sin x + b cos x). Show that yH can be expressed as a 
linear combination of y and y', that is, 
yH = Py' + qy, 
where p and q are constants. Express all higher derivatives as linear com-
binations of y' and y. 
*2. Find the nth derivative of arc sin x at x = 0, and then of (arc sin x)2 
at x = o. 
SECfION 3.3, page 217 
1. Find the second derivative of f[g{h(x))]. 
2. Differentiate the following function: logv(",) u(x), [that is, the logarithm 
of u(x) to the base v(x); v(x) > 0]. 
3. What conditions must the coefficients IX, p, a, b, c satisfy in order that 
/XX + p 
V(ax2 + 2bx + c) 
shall everywhere have a finite derivative that is never zero? 
4. Show that dn(e""/2)/dxn = un(x)e""/2, where un(x) is a polynomial of 
degree n. Establish the recurrence relation 
Un+1 = XUn + un'· 
*5. By applying Leibnitz's rule to 
!!..... (e"'2/2) = xe""/2 
dx 
' 

316 The Techniques of Calculus 
obtain the recurrence relation 
Un+l = XUn + nUn-I' 
Ch.3 
*6. By combining the recurrence relations of Problems 4 and 5, obtain 
the differential equation 
satisfied by un(x). 
7. Find the polynomial solution 
un(x) = x" + 0IX .. -l + ... + a .. 
of the differential equation un
N + xUn' -
nu .. = O. 
1 d" 
*8. If p .. (x) = 2" , dn (X2 -
1)n, prove the relations 
n. x 
)
' 
X2 -
1 P N 
(n + 2)x P' 
n + 2 P 
(0 P"+1 = 2(n + 1) .. + n + 1 
.. + 
2 
n' 
(b) P~+1 = xp .. ' + (n + l)Pn• 
d 
(c) dx [(x2 - l)p .. '] -
n(n + l)P .. = O. 
9. Find the polynomial solution 
P = (2n)! x" + 0 x .. - 1 + ... + 0 
n 
2"(n!)2 
1 
n 
of the differential equation 
d 
dx [(x2 -
l)P,,'] - n(n + I)P .. = O. 
10. Determine the polynomial Pn(x) = 2~ ,~ .... (X2 -
I)" by using the 
binomial theorem. 
n. x 
*11. Let A.n,,,(x) = (~)x"(l -
x)ll-n, n = 0,1,2, ... ,po Show that 
" 
I = ~ A.n,p(x). 
,,=0 
SECTION 3.4, page 223 
1. The function/(x) satisfies the equation 
/(x + y) =/(x).f(y). 
(0) If/(x) is differentiable, either [(x) =: 0 or [(x) = eaz. 
*(b) If [(x) is continuous, either [(x) =: 0 or [(x) = e'l'''. 

2. If a differentiable function [(x) satisfies the equation 
[(xy) = [(x) + fey), 
then [(x) = cx.log x. 
3. Prove that if [(x) is continuous and 
then [(x) is identically zero. 
SECfION 3.5, page 228 
1. Prove the formula 
[(x) = LX let) dt, 
sinh a + sinh b = 2 sinh (a ; b) cosh (a ~ b) . 
Problems 317 
Obtain similar formulas for sinh a - sinh b, cosh a + cosh b, cosh a -
cosh b. 
2. Express tanh (a + b) in terms of tanh a and tanh b. 
Express coth (a ± b) in terms of coth a and coth b. 
Express sinh ta and cosh ia in terms of cosh a. 
3. Differentiate 
(a) cosh x + sinh x; (b) et&nh z + coth z, 
(c) log sinh (x + cosh2 x); (d) arcoshx + ar sinh x (e) arsinh(cx.coshx); 
(!) ar tanh (2x/O + x2». 
4. Calculate the area bounded by the catenary y = cosh x, the ordinates 
x = a and x = b, and the x-axis. 
SECfION 3.6, page 236 
1. Determine the maxima, minima, and points of inflection of x3 + 3px + 
q. Discuss the nature of the roots of x3 + 3px + q = O. 
2. Given the parabola y2 = 2px, P > O. and a point P(x = g, y = 'Y}) 
within it ('Y}2 < 2p~), find the shortest path (consisting of two line segments) 
leading from P to a point Q on the parabola and then to the focus F(x = 
ip, y = 0) of the parabola. Show that the angle FQP is bisected by the 
normal to the parabola, and that QP is parallel to the axis of the parabola 
(principle of the parabolic mirror). 
3. Among all triangles with given base and given vertical angle, the isosceles 
triangle has the maximum area. 
4. Among all triangles with given base and given area, the isosceles tri-
angle has the maximum vertical angle. 
*5. Among all triangles with given area, the equilateral triangle has the 
least perimeter. 
*6. Among all triangles with given perimeter the equilateral triangle has 
the maximum area. 
*7. Among all triangles inscribed in a circle the equilateral triangle has 
the maximum area. 
8. Prove that if p > 1 and x > 0, XV -
1 ~ p(x -
1). 

318 The Techniques of Calculus 
9. Prove the inequality 1 > (sin x)/x ~ 2/-rr, 0 ~ x ~ 1T/2. 
10. Prove that (a) tan x ~ x, 0 ~ 1T/2. 
(b) cos x ~ 1 - x2/2. 
*11. Given al > 0, a2 > 0, ... , a" > 0, determine the minimum of 
al + ... + a"_1 + x 
n 
Ch.3 
for x > O. Use the result to prove by mathematical induction that (cf. 
Problem 13, p. 109) 
" 
. 12 • . (a> Given n fixed numbers aI' ..• , ano determine x so that ~ (ai -
x)2 
IS a mInimum. 
i=1 
" 
*(b) Minimize ~ lai - xl. 
i=1 
" 
*(c) Minimize ~ Ai lai - xl, where Ai > O. 
i=1 
13. Sketch the graph of the function 
y = (x2)"', y(O) = 1. 
Show that the function is continuous at x = O. Has the function maxima, 
minima, or points of inflection? 
*14. Find the least value IX such that 
(1 + ~)"'+« > e 
for all positive x. (Hint: It is known that [l + (l/x)]"'+1 decreases mono-
tonically and [l + O/x)]'" increases monotonically to the limit e at infinity.) 
*15. (a) Find the point such that the sum of the distances to the three 
sides of a triangle is a minimum. 
(b) Find the point for which the sum of the distances to the vertices is a 
minimum. 
16. Prove the following inequalities: 
(a) e'" > I/O + x), x > O. 
(b) e'" > 1 + log (1 + x), x > O. 
(c) e'" > 1 + (1 + x) log (1 + x), x > O. 
17. Suppose["(x) < 0 on (a, b). Prove: 
(a) Every arc of the graph within the interval lies above the chord joining 
its endpoints. 
(b) The graph lies below the tangent at any point within (a, b). 
*18. Let/be a function possessing a second derivative on (a, b). 
(a) Show that either condition a or b of Problem 22 is sufficient for 
r(x) ~ O. 

Problems 319 
(b) Show that the condition 
[(k: 1 
y) ~ [(x) ; [(y) 
for all x and y in (a, b) is sufficient for rex) 5: o. 
*19. Let a, b be two positive numbers, p and q any nonzero numbers 
p < q. Prove that 
[IJaP + (1 -
IJ)bP)l/P 
[IJaq + (1 _ IJ)bq]l/q 5: 1 
for all values of IJ in the interval 0 < IJ < 1. 
(This is Jensen's inequality, which states that the pth power mean [IJaP + 
(1 -
IJ)bP]lIp of two positive qualities a, b is an increasing function of p.) 
20. Show that the equality sign in the above inequality holds if, and only 
if, a = b. 
2 •• Prove that lim [IJaP + (1 -
IJ)bP]lIp = a9bl- 9• 
22. Defining the zeroth power mean of a, b as aBbl -41, show that Jensen's 
inequality applies to this case, and becomes (a ¢ b), 
a9bl-41 ~ [IJaq + (1 -
IJ)bq)l/q according to whether q ~ 0 
For q = 1, 
a9bl -41 5: IJa + (1 -
IJ)b. 
23. Prove the inequality 
a9bl- 9 5: IJa + (1 -
IJ)b, 
a, b > 0,0 < IJ < 1, without reference to Jensen's inequality, and show that 
equality holds only if a = b. (This inequality states that the IJ, 1 -
IJ geo-
metric mean is less than the corresponding arithmetic mean.) 
*24. Let [be continuous and positive on [a, b) and let M denote its maxi-
mum value. Prove 
M = lim J 
p[[(x)]n dx. 
ft_OO 
Ja 
SECTION 3.7, page 248 
1. Let [(x) be a continuous function vanishing, together with its first 
derivative, for x = O. Show that [(x) vanishes to a higher order than x as 
x --0. 
aoXn + a1xn- 1 + ... + an 
2. Show that [(x) = b m bIb' 
oX + lXm 
+ ... + m 
when aD, bo ¢ 0, is of the same order of magnitude as xn- m, when x -- 00. 
*3. Prove that e" is not a rational function. 
*4. Prove that e" cannot satisfy an algebraic equation with polynomials 
in x as coefficients. 
5. If the order of magnitude of the positive function [(x) as x -
00 is 
higher, the same, or lower than that of x m, prove that r" [W d~ has the 
corresponding order of magnitude relative to xmH. 
Ja 

320 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch. 3 
6. Compare the order of magnitude as x ->- co of i
Z [W d; relative to 
[(x) for the following functions [(x): 
eV~ 
I 
(a) V~. 
(c) xez . 
(b) ez. 
(d) log x. 
SECTION 3.8, page 263 
1. Find the limit as n ->- co of a .. = _I-I + ~2 + ... + 21 . 
n + 
n + 
n 
*2. Find the limit of 
1 
1 
1 
1 
b .. = --=== + 
+ 
+ ... + -;=~==;====:=;:;; 
vn2 - 0 
vn2 -
1 
vn2 - 4 
vn2 -
(n -
1)2 
*3. If or: is any real number greater than -I, evaluate 
. 
I" + 2" + 3" + ... + n" 
11m 
,,+1 
tl-OO 
n 
SECTION 3.11, page 274 
1. Show that for all odd positive values of n the integral I e-z1x" dx can be 
evaluated in terms of elementary functions. 
2. Show that if n is even, the integral J e-z'x" dx can be evaluated in terms 
of elementary functions and the integral J e-zi dx (for which tables have been 
constructed). 
3. Prove that i
Z [1" [(t) dtJ du = i
Z [(u)(x - u) duo 
*4. Problem 3 gives a formula for the second iterated integral. Prove that 
the nth iterated integral of [(x) is given by 
(n ~ 1)! i
Z [(u)(x -
U) .. -I duo 
5. Prove for the binomial coefficient (:) that 
(:) = [(n + I) fXk(1 - x) .. -k dx rl. 
6. Obtain a recursive formula for 
f 
xP(ax" + b)q dx 
and use this relation to integrate 
f 
x3(X7 + 1)4 dx. 

Problems 321 
1 
dn 
*7. (a) Let Pn(x) = 2nn! dxn (x2 - 1)n. Show that 
f/n(X)Pm(X) dx = 0, 
if m ¢ n. 
(b) Prove thatJl Pn2(x) dx = -2 
2 l' 
-1 
n + 
(c) Prove that i-1xmp • .(X) dx = 0, if m < n. 
(d) Evaluate J~lxnPn(X) dx. 
SECfION 3.12, page 282 
*1. Integrate 
J 
dx 
x6 + 1 . 
2. Use the partial fraction expansion to prove Newton's formulas 
a.1k 
a.l 
a.nk 
{o 
for k=0,1,2, ..• ,n-2 
g'(a.1) + g'(a.J + ... + g'(a.n) = 1 
for k = n - 1, 
where g(x) is a polynomial of the form xn + a.1xn- 1 + ... with distinct 
roots a.l> ••• , a.n• 
SECfION 3.14, page 298 
*1. Prove that the substitution x = (a.t + fJ)/(yt + d) with a.d -
yfJ ¢ 0, 
transforms the integral 
J vax' + bx3 :xCX2 + dx + e 
into an integral of similar type, and that if the biquadratic 
ax' +bx3 +cx2 +dx +e 
has no repeated factors, neither has the new biquadratic in t which takes its 
place. Prove that the same is true for 
J R(x, vax' + bx3 + cx2 + dx + e)dx, 
where R is a rational function. 
2. The function 
q,(x) = ill: VI _ ~sin2u 
is known as the elliptic integral of the .first kind. 
(a) Show that q, is continuous and increasing and hence has a continuous 
inverse. 
(b) Let am(x) denote the inverse of q,(x). Prove sn(x) = sin [am(x)), where 
sn(x) is defined on p. 299, footnote 3. 

322 The Techniques of Calculus 
Ch.3 
SECTION 3.15, page 301 
*1. Prove that So 00 sin2 [17 (x + ~) ] dx does not exist. 
*2 
h 
l' 
foo 
dx 
• Prove t at 1m 
1 
k 10 = O. 
k~OO 0 
+ X 1
00 xs-l 
1
00 sin x 
3. For what values of s is (a) 
-1-- dx, (b) 
-- dx convergent? 
o 
+ x 
0 
X S 
f
OO sin t 
*4. Does 
-1 -
dt converge? 
o 
+ t 
*5. (a) If a is a fixed positive number, prove that 
. fa 
h 
hm 
h-r-2 dx = 17. 
h~O+ -a 
+ X 
(b) If/(x) is continuous in the interval -1 ~ x ~ 1, prove that 
f
l 
h 
lim 
h~ 
I(x) dx = 171(0). 
h~O -1 
+ x 
*6. Prove that lim e-x2 (X et2 dt = O. 
x_co 
Jo 
7. Assuming that I(XI ;6 1,81, prove that 
1 iT 
lim T 
sin <Xx sin fJx dx = O. 
T~oo 
0 
*8. If (00 I(x) dx converges for any positive value of a, and if I(x) tends to a 
la 
x 
1
00 
(<xx) -
(,8x) 
limit L as x ->- 0, show that 
1 
1 
dx converges for at and ,8 
o 
x 
positive and has the value L log ~ . 
<x 
9. By reference to the Problem 8, show that 
f
oo e-ax -
e-(Jx 
f3 
(a) 
dx = log - . 
o 
X 
<x 
(b)l oo cos (Xx - cos f3x d 
1 
f3 
x = og-. 
o 
x 
(X 
*10. If P I(x) dx converges for any positive values of a and b, and if I(x) 
Ja x 
tends to a limit M as x ->- OCJ and a limit L as x ->- 0, show that 

Problems 323 
11. Obtain the following expressions for the gamma function: 
r(n) = 21
00 
X 2n- 1 e-,,2 dx, 
(I( l)n-l 
r(n) = Jo log;; 
dx. 
SECTION 3.16, page 312 
1. Obtain the addition formula for sin (x + y). 
2. Without using the addition formulas prove that cos x is an even function 
and sin x, odd. 
3. (a)* Prove for some positive h that cos x < 1 for 0 < x < h. 
(b) Prove if cos z > 0 for 0 ~ z ~ 2nx that 
cos (2nHx) < 2n (cos x-I) + 1. 
(c) Combining the results (a) and (b) prove that cos x has a zero. 
4. Let a be the smallest positive zero of cos x. Prove that 
sin (x + 4a) = sin x, 
cos (x + 4a) = cos x. 
5. Fill in the steps of the following indirect proof that cos x has a zero: 
(a) If cos x has no zeros, then sin x is monotonically increasing for x ~ O. 
(b) The functions sin x and cos x are bounded from above and below. 
(c) The limit of sin x as x tends to infinity exists and is positive. 
(d) The equation 
cos x = 1 - l"sintdt 
stands in contradiction to (b). 
MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEMS 
1. Prove 
~ 
f(log x) = x-n ~ (~ - 1) (~ - 2) ... (~ - n + 1) f(t) 
dxn 
dt dt 
dt 
dt 
when t = log x. Here, we employ 
(~ _ k)rp = drp _ krp 
dt 
dt' 
where rp is any function of t and k is a constant. 
2. A smooth closed curve C is said to be convex if it lies wholly to one side 
of each tangent. Show that for the triangle of minimum area circumscribed 
about Z that each side is tangent to C at its midpoint. 

4 
Applications in 
Physics and Geometry 
4.1 Theory of Plane Curves 
Q. Parametric Representation 
Definition 
The representation of a curve by an equation y = f(x) imposes a 
serious geometrical restriction: A curve so represented must not be 
intersected at more than one point by any parallel to the y-axis. 
Usually, this restriction can be overcome by decomposing the curve 
into portions each representable in the form y = f(x). Thus a 
circle of radius a about the origin is given by the two functions 
y = -J a2 -
x2 and y = --J a2 -
x2 defined for -a ~ x ~ a. How-
ever, for as simple a curve as a parallel to the y-axis this device does 
not work. 
More flexibility is obtained by an implicit representation through an 
equation cp(x, y) = 0 which involves a function cp of two independent 
variables. For example, the circle of radius a about the origin is 
completely described by cp(x, y) = x2 + y2 - a2 = O. Any straight line 
in the plane has an implicit equation of the form ax + by + c = 0, 
where a, b, c are constants and a and b do not both vanish; for b = 0 
we obtain a parallel to the y-axis. 
The implicit description of a curve has the disadvantage that to find 
points (x, y) of the curve at all, say for a given x, we must solve the 
equation cp(x, y) = O. This problem we shall discuss in detail in 
Volume II. 
324 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 325 
The most direct and most flexible description of a curve is a para-
metric representation. Instead of considering one of the rectangular 
coordinates y or x as a function of the other we think of both coordi-
nates x and y as functions of a third independent variable t, a so-called 
parameter;1 the point with coordinates x and y then describes the 
curve as t traverses a corresponding interval. Such parametric repre-
sentations have already been encountered; for example, the circle 
x2 + y2 = a2 has the parametric representation x = a cos t, y = 
a sin t. Here t denotes the angle at the center of the circle. 
y 
-----t--------~~--~--L-+-a--~x 
Figure 4.1 
For the ellipse x2ja2 + y2jb2 = I we have the similar parametric 
representation x = a cos t, y = b sin t, where t is the so-called eccentric 
angle, that is, the angle at the center corresponding to the point of the 
circumscribed circle lying vertically above or below the point P = 
(a cos t, b sin t) of the ellipse. We assume here that b < a (see Fig. 
4.1). In both cases the point with the coordinates x, y describes the 
complete circle or ellipse as the parameter t traverses the interval 
O:S;; t < 217. 
In general, curves C are parametrically represented by two functions 
of a parameter t, 
x = c/>(t) = x(t), 
y = tp(t) = y(t); 
1 This word denotes an auxiliary variable which we do not want to emphasize 
primarily. 

326 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
the shorter notation x(t) and y(t) will be used when there is no danger 
of confusion. 1 
We assume throughout that 4> and tp possess continuous derivatives 
unless the contrary is said. 
Mapping of Parameter Interval on Curve-Sense of Direction 
For a given curve these two functions 4>(t) and tp(t) must be deter-
mined in such a way that the set of pairs of functional values x(t) and 
y(t) corresponding to a certain interval of values t defines all the points 
on the curve and no other points. We have then a correspondence 
between the points of the curve and the values of t in an interval of the 
t-axis. The parameter representation defines a mapping of the t-axis 
onto the curve, the original point t on the t-axis being mapped onto the 
point x = 4>(t), y = tp(t) of C. 
Since x(t) and y(t) are assumed continuous, neighboring points on the 
t-axis correspond to neighboring points on the curve. Since the points 
of the t-axis are ordered, we may in an obvious manner assign an 
order or "sense" to the points of C by saying that the point onto which 
the number 11 is mapped precedes the point onto which t2 is mapped if 
11 < 12 (see p. 334). The parametric representation thus gives precise 
meaning to the vague intuitive notion of a curve as a set of points in 
which the points are arranged in the same order as on a straight 
line. 
h. Change of Parameters 
The values of the parameter t serve to distinguish the different 
points on the curve C; they play the role of "names" for the individual 
points of the curve. 
The same curve C admits of many different parameter representations. 
Any quantity that varies continuously along the curve and has different 
values in different points of the curve can serve as parameter. 
If, say, the curve originally is given by an equation y = f(x), we 
can choose for the parameter t the variable x and describe the curve by 
the functions x = t, Y = f(t). Similarly, for a curve described by giving 
x as a function of y, say x = g(y), we can use y as parameter t and write 
x = g(t), y = t. 
1 The notation x = </>(t), etc., puts emphasis on the specific functional connection 
between the dependent and independent variable; the notation x(t), etc., just 
means that t is to be considered as the independent variable which determines the 
function value of x in some prescribed way. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 327 
For a curve given by an equation r = h«() in polar coordinates r, () 
(see Chapter 1, p. 101) we can choose () as parameter t and obtain 
the parametric representation 
x = r cos () = h(t) cos t = 4>(t), 
y = r sin () = h(t) sin t = "P(t). 
From a given parametric representation x = 4>(t), y = "P(t) of a 
curve C we can always derive many other parameter representations. 
For that purpose we take an arbitrary function T = X(t) which is 
monotonic and continuous in that t-interval corresponding to the 
points of C; the function X has then a monotone and continuous 
inverse t = aCT) in a corresponding T-interval. The coordinates of the 
points (x, y) of C can then be represented in the form 
The functions ~(T) and (J(T) are again continuous; moreover, different 
points of C correspond to different values of t and hence, because of 
the monotone character of the function a, to different values of T. The 
total effect of the change of parameter from t to T is that of "renaming" 
the points on C. 
Thus the line y = x has the parameter representation x = t, Y = t, 
where -
00 < t < 00. Substituting T = t3 gives rise to the parameter 
representation x = TVa, Y = TVa for the same line. 
Similarly, the ellipse x2/a2 + y2/b2 = 1 admits of the parameter 
representation x = a cos t, y = b sin t, where 0 :::;; t < 27T. Defining 
t = c' + d, for c, d real numbers (c ,= 0) yields another representation 
xW = a cos (c' + d), yW = b sin (c' + d) for the same ellipse, with 
, varying in the interval -d/c:::;;' < (27T -
d)/c for c > 0, and 
(27T -
d)/c < , :::;; -die, for c < O. 
The substitution T = tan (t/2) 
leads to the "rational" parameter representation (see p. 292) 
for the ellipse; [,5 T runs through all real values we obtain all points 
of the ellipse with the exception of the point S = (-a, 0). 
Singularities in ordinary representation may disappear if a suitable 
parameter is used. For example, we can represent the curve y = ~ 
by the smooth functions x = t3, Y = t2• The point with coordinates 
x, y then describes the whole curve (semicubical parabola) as t varies 
from -
00 to + 00. 

328 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
This flexibility in the choice of the parameter often permits us to 
simplify the study of geometrical properties which, of course, do not 
depend on specific representations. 
In particular, we may sometimes find it convenient to use a repre-
sentation y = f(x) for C or part of C. Such a representation is always 
possible for a portion of the curve to ~ t ~ t1 in which one of the 
functions cp, 1p, say x = cp(t), is monotonic. Indeed for this portion we 
have a unique inverse function t = y(x) and thus y = 1p[y(x»).1 
c. Motion along a Curve. Time as the 
Parameter. Example of the Cycloid 
Motion along a Curve 
Very often the parameter ( has the natural physical meaning of time. 
Any motion of a point in the plane may be expressed by representing 
its coordinates x and y as functions of the time such that at the time (, 
the point (x, y) is at (x(t), y(t». These two functions therefore deter-
mine the motion along a path or trajectory C in parametric form; they 
constitute a mapping of the time scale onto the trajectory.2 
The CyC/oids and Trochoids 
An example is furnished by the cycloids, the paths of points on a 
circle rolling uniformly without slipping along a straight line or another 
circle. In the simplest case a circle of radius a rolls along the x-axis; 
the path of a point P on its circumference is a "common" cycloid. We 
choose the origin of the coordinate system and the initial time in such 
a way that for time t = 0 the point P is at the origin and that at the 
time ( the circle has turned from its original orientation by the angle t. 
This means that the circle turns clockwise with "angular velocity" one. 
The circle is assumed to roll uniformly along the x-axis without sliding 
so that at the time ( the distance of the point of contact from the origin 
is exactly equal to the length of the arc from the point of contact to P. 
Thus at the time t the center M of the rolling circle must be at the point 
(at, a); the center moves with constant velocity a to the right. For the 
1 This is, of course, merely a statement about a property "in the small" of a curve, 
meaning a statement made only for a suitably small portion. Usually (for example, 
in the case of a circle), the variable x cannot be used as a parameter throughout the 
whole curve but only on a portion. 
2 To a Change of the parameter t there would correspond then a change in the time 
scale according to which the curve C is described by the moving point. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 329 
coordinates of P at the time I we find then (see Fig. 4.2) the parametric 
representation 
(1) 
x = a(1 -
sin t), 
y = a(l -
cos I). 
By eliminating the parameter t we can obtain the equation of the 
curve in nonparametric form, at the cost, however, of neatness of 
y 
Y l--~~--t 
x 
Figure 4.2 Cycloid. 
expression. We have 
a-y 
cos 1= -- , 
a 
and hence 
(la) 
a-y 
I = arc cos -- , 
a 
sin t = ±Jl _ 
(a -
y)2, 
a2 
x = a arc cos a -
y 1= .J y(2a -
y), 
a 
thus obtaining x as a function of y. 
Epicycloid 
Our next example is that of an epicycloid, defined as the path of a point P 
fixed on the circumference of a circle of radius c, as it rolls at a uniform 
speed along the circumference and outside of a second circle of radius a. Let 
the fixed circle be centered at the origin of the x,y-plane. Suppose the moving 
circle is rolling along the fixed one in such a way that its center has rotated 
about the origin to an angle t at time t (Fig. 4.3). Then we find for the 
position at the time t of the point P = (x(t), yet»~, which at the time t = 0 is 
the point of contact (a, 0), the parametric equations 
( a + c ') 
x(t) = (a + c) cos t -
c cos - c-
t , 
(2) 
( a + c ) 
yet) = (a + c) sin t -
C sin -c- t . 

330 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
y 
Figure 4.3 Epicycloid. 
y 
Figure 4.4 Cardiod. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 331 
When a = c, the curve formed is called a cardiod, (Fig. 4.4) and is given by the 
parametric equations 
(3) 
x(t) = 2a cos t -
a cos (2t), 
y(t) = 2a sin t - a sin (2t). 
A third variety of cycloids is obtained as the locus of a point attached to the 
circumference of one circle rolling along the circumference of another 
fixed circle, but interior to it. To find the parametric equations for this 
"hypocycloid," let a be the radius of the fixed circle and c that of the rolling 
circle. Let the point P on the circumference of the moving circle be located 
y 
Figure 4.5 Hypocycloid. 
at (a, 0) at time t = O. Suppose that the rolling circle is moving along the 
fixed one in such a way that at time t its center has rotated about the oriBin 
through an angle t (Fig. 4.5). Then we find the parametric equations for the 
hypocycloid to be 
( a - c ) 
x(t) = (a - c) cos t + c cos -c- t , 
(4) 
( a - c ) 
y(t) = (a -
c) sin t - csin -c- t . 
In the special case when the fixed circle has twice the radius of the moving 
one, c = ta, we find 
x(t) = a cos t, 
y(t) = 0, 

332 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
and the hypocycloid degenerates into the diameter of the fixed circle, de-
scribed back and forth. The interesting feature of this example is that it 
provides a mechanical solution of the problem of drawing a straight line by 
using merely circular motions (Fig. 4.6). 
y 
Figure 4.6 A point P on the rim of a circle rolling inside a circle of twice the radius 
describes a straight line segment. 
If the radius of the fixed circle is three times that of the moving one, then 
c = a/3, and 
x(r) = 1a cos t + ta cos (2t), 
y(t) = 1a sin t -
!a sin (2t). 
By an elementary computation we find 
x 2 + y2 = i a2 + ta2 cos (3r), 
so that the hypocycloid meets the fixed circle at exactly three points and the 
curve appears as shown in Fig. 4.5. 
Trochoids 
More general curves called trochoids (epitrochoids, hypotrochoids) are 
obtained if we consider the motion of a point P attached to a circle (but not 
necessarily on its rim) when that circle rolls along a straight line or along the 
outside or inside of another circle (see Fig. 4.7). The same type of curve 
arises as the path of a point moving uniformly on a circle while the center of 
the circle itself moves uniformly along a line or circle. These curves playa 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 333 
y 
Figure 4.7 Trochoid. 
central role in the Ptolomaic description of the apparent motion of the 
planets. 
Some of the remarkable properties of cycloids will be discussed later on in 
this chapter (p. 428). 
d. Classifications of Curves. Orientation 
Definitions 
Among the most obvious features of a curve are the number of 
separate pieces or branches and the number of loops which it has. A 
hyperbola is an example of a curve consisting of two disjoint branches; 
another such example is the curve y2 = (4 -
X2)(X2 -
1) which consists 
of two separate ovals. We shall be concerned mainly with curves 
consisting of one piece, the connected curves. A connected curve can 
intersect itself, like the trochoid (Fig. 4.7) or the "lemniscate" of Fig. 
153, p. 103. 
A connected curve without self-intersections is called simple. Among 
the simple curves we can still distinguish the closed curves, such as 
circles or ellipses, from the ones that are not closed, such as parabolas 
or straight-line segments. We shall not attempt here to give either a 
rigorous or a complete classification of curves, but only point out 
certain "topological" features of a curve relevant for parameter 
representation. 
Simple Arcs 
A parameter representation of a curve C by two continuous functions 
x = 4>(t), y = "P(t) defines a mapping of the (-axis or of a portion of it 

334 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
onto C. We call C a simple arc if it can be represented in such a way 
that the parameter t describes a closed interval [a, b] on the t-axis, 
forming the domain of the functions q,(t), lp(t), and if in addition 
different t in the interval correspond to different points P on C. An 
example is the parabolic arc x = t, Y = t 2 for 0 :::;; t :::;; 1. 
The same arc C (that is, the same points in the plane) can be repre-
sented parametrically in many ways. Any monotone continuous 
function T = X(t) for a :::;; t :::;; b defines a parameter T such that x and y 
are continuous functions of T in a suitable closed interval [at, 11], 
different values of T corresponding to different P. As a matter of fact, 
as is easily seen the continuous monotone substitutions T = X(t) 
provide the most general continuous parameter representations of a 
simple arc that assign different points of the arc to different parameter 
values. (See the remarks on p. 55 about one-to-one continuous 
mappings.) 
To a special parameter representation x = x(t), y = y(t) of a simple 
arc C belongs a definite sense on C corresponding to the direction of 
increasing t. Given any two distinct points Po, PI we say that PI 
follows Po if PI belongs to the larger value of the parameter t. If we 
introduce a new parameter T by a continuous increasing function 
T = X(t) the order of the pairs of points with respect to T is the same; 
the parameter T defines the same sense on C. If x(t) is decreasing, the 
sense is reversed. 
Direction or Orientation of Arcs 
A directed or oriented simple arc is one on which a definite sense has 
been selected (for example, that sense corresponding to an increase in 
a particular choice of the parameter t); that sense is then called the 
positive sense on the arc. The positive sense is completely specified, if 
we know which of the two end points of the arc follows the other one. 
We call the end point that follows, the final point of the arc, and the 
other one the initial point. Given any parameter representation 
x = X(T), Y = Y(T) of the oriented arc, where a :::;; T :::;; b, the positive 
sense will be that of increasing T if the parameter value T = a corre-
sponds to the initial point and T = b to the final point; otherwise the 
sense of increasing T will be the negative sense on the arc (Fig. 4.8). 
Any two distinct points Po, PIon a simple arc C define a sub-arc 
with end points Po, PI, which consists of the points with parameter 
values between those of Po and Pl. If C is a directed arc and PI follows 
Po in the positive sense on C, we obtain a directed sub-arc with initial 
point Po and final point Pl. A finite number of points of subdivision 
on a directed simple arc C breaks up that arc into a sequence of directed 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 335 
• • • • 
• 
• 
~ t \ 
0 
1 
a 
to 
tl 
b 
• • • • • 
• 
• 
T 
0 
1 
fJ 
Tl 
TO 
a 
Figure 4.8 Sense and parameter representation. 
sub-arcs, the initial point of one sub-arc being the final point of the 
preceding one. 
Often it is impractical to restrict oneself to simple arcs and to insist 
that different parameter values t shall belong to different points of the 
curve. If, for example, the equations x = x(t), Y = y(t) give the posi-
tion of a moving particle P at the time t, there is no reason why the 
particle should not stand still for a while or why its path should not be 
allowed to cross itself so that the particle returns to the same position 
at a later time. 
y 
Figure 4.9 A curve with a loop: x = 12 -
1, y = (3 -
1 with sense of increasing I. 

336 Applications In Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
An example is the curve x = (2 -
1, y = t3 -
t [which also could be 
described completely by the cubic equation y2 -
x2(1 + x) = 0]. As t 
varies from -
00 to + 00 the curve crosses the origin twice, for t = -1 
and t = + 1 (Fig. 4.9). We verify easily that all other points of the 
curve belong to a unique value of t. Geometrically, the interval 
-1 < t < + 1 corresponds to a loop of the curve. Here again the sense 
of increasing t defines a certain order among the points of the curve, at 
least if we visualize in some way the points corresponding to t = -1 
and t = + 1 as distinct, one lying "on top" of the other one. The 
whole oriented cubic curve can be decomposed into directed simple 
arcs, for example, into the arcs correspondiQg to n ~ t ~ n + 1, where 
n runs over all integers. 
Closed Curves 
The standard example of a parameter representation in which 
different t correspond to the same point on the curve is given by the 
formulas 
x = a cos t, 
y = a sin t, 
which describe the uniform motion of a point on a circle with t as the 
time. As t varies from -
00 to + 00 the point P = (x, y) describes the 
circle infinitely often in the counterclockwise sense. We can cause 
the points of the circle to be described exactly once by restricting t to 
any half-open interval of length 217: 
at ~ t < at + 217. 
The end points at and at + 217 of the interval correspond to the same 
point on the circle. Here the end points of the parameter interval have 
no special geometrical significance for the curve. 
Generally, a pair of continuous functions x = 4>(t), y = tp(t) defined 
in a closed interval a ~ t ~ b will represent a closed curve if c/>(a) = 
4>(b), tp{a) = tp{b). The closed curve will be simple if different t-values 
with a ~ t < b correspond to different points (x, y). 
The point corresponding to t = a and t = b could be any point on 
the curve; it is just the point at which we "break" the curve to make its 
points correspond to those of an interval on the axis. 
Closed Curves Represented by Periodic Functions 
Just as in the example of the circle we can avoid distinguishing any 
particular break by taking f9r 4>(t) and tp(t) periodiC functions with 
period p = b - a. It is of value here to make some general remarks 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory o[ Plane Curves 337 
about periodic functions to which we will turn more extensively in 
Chapter 8. 
A functionJ(t) is called periodic with period p if it is defined for all t 
and satisfies the equation J(t) = J(t + p). Thus, for example, the 
trigonometric functions sin t and cos t are periodic with period 27T. 
(Any multiple 2n7T where n is an integer is then also a period.) Geo-
metrically interpreted J(t) has the period p if a shift of its graph by p 
units to the right leads to the same graph again. 
t' 
T 
P 
b; 
t= t' + 2p 
Figure 4.10 Graph of a periodic function[(/). 
Since thenJ(t) "repeats" itself, a functionJ(t) of period p is determined 
for all t if it is known merely in a single interval a ~ t < b of length 
p = b - a (Fig. 4.10). Indeed for every t there exists a value t' in the 
interval a ~ t' < b such that t -
t' = np, where n is an integer [one 
only has to take for n the largest integer that does not exceed (t - a)/p]. 
ThenJ(t) = J(t') is known. 
As a matter of fact we can start with any continuous function l(t) in 
a half-open interval a ~ t < b; the extended function will clearly be 
a - p 
a 
b = a + p 
a + 2p 
a + 3p 
Figure 4.11 Periodic continuation of a function [(I) from the interval a ::s;; 1 < b. 
continuous for all t which are not of the form t = a + np with an 
integer n (Fig. 4.11). 
For example, extending the function J(t) defined by J(t) = t for 
o ~ t < I periodically, leads to a function of period p = I which we 
can call the "fractional part of t," and which is discontinuous at points 
t which are integers (Fig. 4.12a). Generally, at t = a + np the periodi-
cally extended function J will have the valueJ(a); this will also be the 
limit ofJ on approaching the point from the right, whereas the limit ofJ 
from the left will be the same as at the point b. In the case of greatest 

338 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
interest to us at present we start out with a function defined and 
continuous in the closed interval a ~ t ~ b which moreover has the 
same value in the end points f(a) = f(b). Continuing such a function 
periodically always leads to a function f(t) of period p = b -
a which 
is continuous for all t. (Fig. 4.12b.) 
Continuous periodic functions are ideal for representing closed 
curves C. Let C be given parametrically by x = cp(t), y = VJ(t), for cp, VJ 
continuous in the interval a ::;; t ~ b and having the same values in both 
end points. We can extend the definition of these functions to all values 
f(t) 
.. ' 
..... 
. 
' 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
-1 
.. ····0 
2 
3 
.' 
(a) 
f(t) 
-1 
(b) 
Figure 4.12 Periodic continuation of functions [(t) from the interval 0 :s; t < 1. 
Here (a) [(t) = t, (b) [(t) = 2t - 2t·. 
of t in such a way that cp and VJ have period b -
a = p and are con-
tinuous for all I. For any t the extended parameter representation only 
yields points of C, since we have t = t' + np with n an integer and 
a ::;; t' ~ b. The point corresponding to t is then the same as the one 
corresponding to I', which lies on C. As t varies from -
<Xl to + <Xl the 
point (x, y) traverses the curve C infinitely often, just as in the circle 
x = a cos I, y = a sin I. Here the distinguished role of the parameter 
value t = a is removed. For any ex the whole curve is already repre-
sented by x = cp(t), Y = VJ(t) when t runs from ex to ex + p. 
A portion of the closed curve C corresponding to the parameter 
values I in an interval ex ::;; t ::;; {J forms a simple arc if different I-values 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 339 
in that interval lead to different points (x, y). The whole closed curve C 
is a simple curve if different t in the same interval IX::;; t < IX + P 
always lead to different points on C. Thus any closed parameter 
interval of length less than p gives a simple arc. 
Closed Curves Composed of Simple Arcs. Order of Points 
The closed curves which we shall consider can all be decomposed 
into simple arcs. If the whole closed curve C is simple, it can be 
decomposed into two simple arcs to::;; t ::;; t1 and t1 ::;; t ::;; to + P 
which have only their end points Po, P1 in common. The sense of 
increasing t determines a positive sense or orientation on C by fixing a 
positive direction on each simple arc of C. Any two distinct points Po, 
P1 on the simple closed curve C divide C into two simple arcs. In the 
sense of increasing t exactly one of the two arcs will have Po as the initial 
point and P1 as the end point; we will call it POP1: the reverse holds for 
the other arc. 
Orientation and Order 
The positive orientation of C can also be characterized by an ordered 
triple of points POP1P2 of C if we specify that P2 does not lie on the 
--O------O------o--~ t 
to 
tl 
t2 to + P 
(a) 
to+p 
(b) 
Figure 4.13 Orientation of closed curves in the sense of increasing t. 

340 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
simple directed arc with initial point Po and final point Pl. The triples 
PlP2Po and P2POPl obtained by a cyclic permutation from POPlP2 
describe the same orientation (Fig.4.l3a). 
*Quite .generally, any n distinct points on the oriented closed simple 
curve C always follow each other in a certain order PlP2 • •• P.,. deter-
mined up to cyclic permutationsl , and divide C into directed simple 
arcs, PlP2, •• • ,P.,.-lP.,., P.,.Pl. We can always choose parameter 
values tl , t2, ••• , t.,. for the points PI' P2, ••• , P.,. such that the ti form 
a monotone increasing sequence and are all contained in one and the 
same parameter interval of length equal to the period p (Fig. 4.13b). 
Orientation of Curves and Angles 
As already emphasized in Chapter 1 we are forced to make use of 
the sign plus or minus to establish satisfactory relations between 
y 
D 
Figure 4.14 Angle of inclination t of a direction D. 
geometric entities and analytic concepts expressed by numbers. Directed 
lines, such as the number axis, are the simplest instances. Which 
direction on a line we define as positive is arbitrary at the beginning. 
A positive sense corresponding to increasing t can be associated with 
any particular parameter representation x = at + b, y = ct + d of the 
line. A line oriented in this way points in a certain direction. Two 
parallel directed lines have either the same or the opposite direction. 
A direction can also be determined by a ray issuing from a point po. 
that is, by a half-line which consists of the points on a line which 
"follow" a given point Po in the positive sense. 
1 That is. PaPa· .. P"Ph P3P,· .. PnP1P2 • •••• p .. P1 • •• p .. - 1 give the same orien-
tation. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 341 
Any direction in the plane can be represented by a ray from the origin 
or also by the point P on the circle of radius I about the origin that lies 
on that ray. If we represent this unit circle parametrically by x = cos t, 
Y = sin t, we have associated with every direction certain values t, 
differing from each other by multiples of 21T. We call them the angles 
of inclination of the direction or the angles the direction makes with the 
positive x-axis. There is always exactly one angle of inclination t for 
which 0 ~ t < 21T (Fig. 4.14). 
The angles between two directions are simply the differences of their 
angles of inclination. More precisely, since the order in which we take 
the two directions matters, we say that a direction with inclination t' 
forms with a direction with inclination t n an angle IX = t' -
t n (Fig. 4.15). 
D" 
y 
IY 
Figure 4.15 Angle IX the direction D' forms with the direction DR. 
Since I and I' can be changed by integral multiples of21T, the same change 
is permissible for the angle one direction makes with another one. 
Sense of Rotation 
We also say that the direction with angle of inclination tn passes into 
that with direction t' by a rotation through the angle IX. The intuitive 
idea of rotation here is that of a continuous motion, by which the direc-
tion with inclination t" goes into that with inclination t' by passing 
through directions with all possible inclinations t intermediate between 
t" and t'. We call the rotation positive or counterclockwise if IX = 
t' -
t" is positive, and negative or clockwise in the opposite case. Of 
course, there are many different rotations both clockwise and counter-
clockwise that will take a given direction into another given one unless 
we insist that the angle of rotation IX satisfies -1T < IX ~ 1T. 

342 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Ultimately then, the positive sense of rotation is associated with 
a particular parameter representation x = cos t, Y = sin t of the 
circle which we have chosen. If as usual, the x-axis points to the 
right and the y-axis upwards, then the positive sense of rotation coin-
cides with the sense opposite to that of the hands on a conventional 
clock.! 
Positive and Negative Sides of a Curve 
A curve separates the points of the plane near one of its points P 
into two classes. Locally at least we can distinguish two "sides" of 
the curve. If the curve C is oriented, we can 
define a positive (or "left") and a negative 
(or "right") side2 as follows: Consider a ray 
issuing from P. We say that this ray points to 
the positive side of the curve if there are points 
Q on the curve arbitrarily close to P and 
following P in the sense given to the curve, 
such that the angle through which a line from 
P to Q must be rotated in the counterclock-
wise sense to reach the given ray, lies between 
o and 7T (Fig. 4.16). The points on the ray 
close to P are then said to lie on the positive 
side of the curve. In the opposite case the 
ray is said to point to the negative side of C, 
and the points on it are said to lie on the 
Figure 4.16 Positive and 
negative side of the curve. If the curve C is 
negative side of oriented 
a simple closed curve, it divides all points 
arc. 
of the plane into two classes, those interior 
to C and those exterior to c.3 We say that C has the counterclock-
wise orientation if its interior lies on the positive (that is, left) side 
(Fig. 4.17). 
If the closed curve C, however, consists of several loops, then it is 
not always possible to describe C so that all enclosed regions are on 
the positive side of C (see Fig. 4.18). 
1 This sense, in turn, is suggested by the motion of the shadow on the ground in a 
sun dial in the northern hemisphere. 
2 The terms "left" and "right" side correspond to the ordinary usage of the words 
"left bank" and "right bank" for a river oriented by its direction of flow. 
3 These concepts as well as the division of the plane by a simple closed continuous 
curve into two parts are analyzed precisely in topology and must be accepted here 
on an intuitive basis. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 343 
Figure 4.17 Simple closed curve with counterclockwise orientation. 
+ 
+ 
Figure 4.18 
e. Derivatives, Tangent and Normal, in Parametric Representation 
Direction and Speed 
F or a curve C given III parameter representation with the time 
parameter t 
x = x(t) = 4>(t), 
y = y(t) = "P(t) 
we denote the derivatives, as Newton did, by a dot: 
. 
d4>.i. 
. 
d"P 
. 
x = -
= '1" 
Y = -
= "P. 
dt 
dt 
The derivatives X, yare often conveniently visualized as the "velocity 
components" or the "speeds" of the coordinates of a point P moving 
along C. 
Whenever x ¥= 0, it is possible to represent the corresponding portion 
of C by an equation y = f(x) by first calculating t as a function of x 
from the first equation and then substituting the resulting expression 
for t into the second equation. By the chain rule of differentiation and 
the rule for the derivative of the inverse of a function (see p. 207) we 
find then for the slope of the tangent to the curve 
dy 
dy 
dy dt 
dt 
y 
-=--=-=-
dx 
dt dx 
dx 
i 
dt 
The equivalent formula dx/dy = i/'Ii holds if 'Ii :;!:. o. 

344 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Unless the contrary is stated we always assume that x and iJ do not 
vanish simultaneously or, concisely written, we assume 
x2 + iJ2 =;i: O. 
Then the tangent always exists;1 it is horizontal if iJ = 0 and vertical 
if x = O. 
For the cycloid, for example, [see Eq. (1), p. 329] we have 
x = a(l -
cos t) = 2a sin2 .!. , 
2 
. 
. 
2. t 
t 
Y = a sm t = a sm - cos - , 
2 
2 
dy 
t 
-
= cot-. 
dx 
2 
These formulas show that x2 + iJ2 =;i: 0 except for t = 0, ±21T, 
±41T, .... Moreover, the cycloid has a cusp (that is, a point where it 
reverses direction), with a vertical tangent at those exceptional points 
at which it also meets the x-axis, that is, when y = 0; for on approach-
ing these points, the derivative y' = iJ/X = cot (t/2) becomes infinite. 
Tangent, Normal, and Direction Cosines 
The equation of the tangent to the curve at the point x, y is 
dy 
'YJ -
Y = dx (~ -
x), 
where ~ and 'YJ are the "running" coordinates corresponding to an 
arbitrary point on the tangent, whereas x, y, and dy/dx have the fixed 
values belonging to the point of contact. Substituting iJ/x for dy/dx 
we can write the equation of the tangent in the form 
(5) 
(~ - x)iJ -
('YJ -
y)x = o. 
Exactly the same equation is obtained under the assumption, iJ =;i: 0; 
we only have to express x as a function of y. In the exceptional points 
where both x and iJ vanish for the same t the equation becomes 
meaningless, since it is satisfied for all ~, 'YJ. 
1 We observe that the condition :t' + y' ¢ 0, although sufficient, is not necessary 
to guarantee a nonparametric representation. Thus we may define the curve y = x' 
by means of the parametric equations x = t 3, y = t 6• At the origin of the t-axis, the 
condition of positivity for :t' + y' fails, but still the curve has a definite and well-
defined nonparametric representation. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 345 
The normal to the curve, that is, the straight line through a point of 
the curve perpendicular to the tangent at that point, has the slope 
-dx/dy. This leads to the equation 
(6) 
(~ -
x)x + (1] -
y)y = 0 
for the normal. 
If a point of C corresponds to several values of t, then in general a 
different tangent exists for each of the branches of the curve passing 
through the point, or for each value of t. For example, the curve 
x = t 2 -
1, y = (3 -
t (Fig. 4.9, p. 335) passes through the origin for 
t = -1 and t = + 1. For t = -1 we find for the equation of the 
tangent ~ + 1] = 0, whereas the tangent for t = + I is given by 
~ -
1] = O. 
From the definition of derivative we have 
dy 
if 
- = - = tan IX, 
dx 
x 
where IX is the angle the tangent makes with the x-axis. This means a 
rotation by the angle IX applied to the x-axis (counterclockwise if 
IX > 0, clockwise if IX < 0) will cause it to be parallel to the tangent. 
Rotations by the angles IX ± 7T, IX ± 27T, ..• will then also make the 
x-axis parallel to the tangent. Hence the angle IX is determined only to 
within a multiple of 7T, whereas tan IX is determined uniquely. From 
the relations ii/x = (sin IX)/(COS IX) and x2 + y2 yl:. 0 we find 
x 
cos IX = ± J 
' 
x2 + 1? 
(where the same sign must be taken in both formulas). We call cos IX 
and sin IX the direction cosines of the tangent.l 
Assigning Directions to Tangent and Normal 
The two possible choices for the direction cosines correspond to the 
two directions in which we can traverse the tangent; the corresponding 
angles IX differ by an odd multiple of 7T. One of the two directions on 
the tangent corresponds to increasing t, the other one to decreasing t. 
Assume that the sense on the curve ;s that of increasing t: Then, by 
definition, the positive dire~tion on the tangent, or the one that corre-
sponds to increasing values of t, is the one that forms with the positive 
lOne thinks here or sin IX as cos p, where p = rr/2 -
IX is the angle the y-axis forms 
with the tangent. 

346 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
x-axis an angle at for which cos at has the same sign as x and sin at the 
same sign as y. The direction cosines of that direction on the tangent 
are then, without ambiguity, 
x 
. 
y 
cos at = / 
' 
SIn at = J 
. 
y x2 + y2 
x2 + y2 
(7) 
If, say, x = dx/dt > 0, then the direction of increasing t on the tangent 
is that of increasing x; the angle that direction forms with the positive 
y 
Tangent 
Normal 
~o~------~--~------------------~x 
Figure 4.19 Positive tangent and normal of an oriented curve. 
x-axis has then a positive cosine. Similarly, that normal direction 
obtained by rotating the direction of the positive tangent corresponding 
to increasing t in the positive (counterclockwise) sense by 17/2 has the 
unambiguous direction cosines 
cos (at + !) = 
- y . , 
2 
JX2+y2 
. (17) 
X 
SID 
at + -
= --;::=== 
2 
JX2+y2 
It is called the positive normal direction and points to the "positive 
side" of the curve (Fig. 4.19). 
If we introduce a new parameter T = X(t) on the curve, then the 
values of cos at and sin at stay unchanged if dT/dt > 0 and they change 
sign if dT/dt < 0; that is, if we change the sense of the curve, then the 
positive sense of tangent and normal likewise is changed. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 347 
Critical Points 
If i and iJ are continuous and i 2 + iJ2 > 0, the quantities cos ex and 
sin ex which determine the direction of the tangent will vary continuously 
with t. The tangent, whose equation is 
(; -
x) sin ex -
('YJ -
y) cos ex = 0, 
then changes continuously along the curve, as does the normal. 
If both i and y vanish for a certain value of I, the direction cosines 
of the tangent are not defined by our formulas; a tangent may fail 
to exist altogether or it may not be determined uniquely. Such a point 
is called a "critical" point or a "stationary" point. We illustrate by 
examples various possibilities that arise at critical points. 
One example is furnished by the curve y = Ixl with the parameter 
representation x = t3, Y = It1 3 ; this curve has a corner for t = 0 
although both i and y stay continuous. In the example of the cycloid, 
discussed on p. 344, the "stationary" points at which i = Y = 0 corre-
spond to cusps. On the other hand, the vanishing of i and y in some 
cases is merely inherent in a specific parameter representation and not 
connected with the behavior of the curve, as for the straight line repre-
sented by x = t 3,.y = t 3 for the parameter value t = o. 
Corners 
Curves consisting of several smooth arcs meeting at corners are 
represented conveniently in parameter representation by functions x(t), 
y(t) which are continuous but have derivatives i, iJ with jump dis-
continuities. This is illustrated by the trivial example of the broken 
y 
--------------~----------------~x 
Figure 4.20 Graph of x = t, Y = l(t + Itl}. 

348 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
line represented by 
x = t, 
y=o 
for 
t ~ 0 
and 
x = t, 
y=t 
for 
t ~ o. 
Here i: = 1, if = 0 for t < 0 and i: = 1, if = 1 for t > O. At t = 0 
the tangent is indeterminate (see Fig. 4.20). 
f. The Length of a Curve 
The Length as an Integral 
Two different types of geometrical properties or quantities are 
associated with curves. The first type depends only on the behavior of 
the curve in the small, that is, in the immediate neighborhood of a 
point; such properties are those which can be expressed by means of 
derivatives at the point. Properties of the second type or properties in 
the large depend on the whole configuration of the curve or of a portion 
of the curve, and are usually expressed analytically by means of the 
concept of integral. We shall begin by considering a quantity of the 
second type, the length of a curve. 
Of course, we have an intuitive notion of what we mean by the 
length of a curve. However, just as in the classical case of circular arcs, 
a precise mathematical meaning must be given to the intuitive concept. 
Guided by intuition we define the length of an arbitrary curve as the 
limit of the lengths of approximating polygons, in particular, inscribed 
polygons. The lengths of polygons, in turn, are immediately defined as 
soon as a unit oflength is chosen. The final result will be the expression 
of length by an integral. 
We assume our curve given in the form x = x(t), y = yet), (X ~ 
t ~ {3. In the interval between (X and {3 we choose intermediate points 
tl , t2, ••• , t n-l such that 
We join the points Po, PI, ... ,P n on the curve corresponding to these 
values ti in order, by line segments, thus obtaining an inscribed polygon. 
The length of the perimeter of this inscribed polygon depends on the 
way in which the points ti' or the vertices Pi of the polygon, are chosen. 
We now let the number of the points ti increase beyond all bounds 
in such a way that at the same time the length of the longest subinterval 
(ti> ti+1) tends to zero. The length of the curve is then defined to be the 
limit of the perimeters of these inscribed polygons, provided that such 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 349 
a limit exists and is independent of the particular way in which the 
polygons are chosen. When this assumption (assumption of recti-
fiability) is fulfilled, we can speak of the length of the curve. 
We assume that the functions x(t) and yet) have continuous derivatives 
x(t) and yet) for oc ~ t ~ p. The inscribed polygon corresponding to 
the subdivision of the t-interval by points ti with I:l.ti = ti+l -
ti has 
vertices Pi = (x(ti), yeti»~; its total length is given by the expression 
n-1 
n-1 
S = ! PiPi+l = ! ~[X(ti+1) -
X(ti)]2 + [y(ti+l) -
y(ti)]2 
i=O 
i=O 
according to the theorem of Pythagoras (cf. Fig. 4.21, p. 356). By the 
mean value theorem of differential calculus 
where $i and 'YJi are intermediate values in the interval ti < t < ti+l' 
This leads to the expression 
n-1 
Sn = ! ~[X2($i)]2 + [y2('YJi)]2I:l.ti 
i=O 
for the length of the polygon, where we have made use of the fact that 
the differences I:l.ti are positive. If the number n of points of subdivision 
ti increases beyond all bounds while at the same time the largest value 
I:l.ti tends to zero, the sum Sn tends to the integral 
This fact is a direct consequence of the existence theorems for integrals 
in Chapter 2.1 
This proves that for continuous t, y the curve actually has a length 
and that this length is given analytically by the expression 
(8) 
The same is true if x and yare allowed to be discontinuous at isolated 
points, where then the curve may not have a unique tangent; the 
1 Since the intermediate points ~i and 1)i need not coincide, we make use of the more 
general approximating sums that were shown to converge to the integral on p. 195. 

350 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
integral of course must then be considered as an "improper" one (see 
Chapter 3, p. 301). More general "rectifiable" curves, for which our 
integral is meaningful, will not be discussed in this volume. 
Alternative Definition of Length 
We add an interesting observation: The perimeter S of any inscribed 
polygon 'T/' can never exceed the length L of the curve. (In particular, the 
distance of the end points of the curve cannot exceed L; for the straight 
line joining the end points is the shortest curve joining those points.) Indeed 
we may obtain L as limit of the perimeters of a special sequence of inscribed 
polygons, in which we start with the polygon 'T/' of perimeter S and obtain 
the following ones by adding successively more and more vertices. Inserting 
an additional vertex between two successive vertices of an inscribed polygon 
can never lead to a decrease in perimeters, because one side of a triangle 
can never exceed the sum of the other two. Thus L is the limit of a non-
decreasing sequence of perimeters that starts with S. Hence S ~ L. Instead 
of defining therefore L as limit of the perimeters of a sequence of inscribed 
polygons corresponding to finer and finer subdivisions of the t-interval, we 
could also have defined L as the least upper bound of the perimeters of all 
inscribed polygons. It is interesting that the length can be defined without 
formally invoking any passage to the limit. 
Invariance of Length under Parameter Changes 
From its definition it is clear that the length L of a curve c cannot 
depend on the particular parametric representation we use for C. 
Hence, if we introduce a new parameter T = X(t), where dT/dt > 0, 
our integral formula for L must give the same value whether t or T is 
used as parameter. This can be verified immediately from the chain 
rule of differentiation and the substitution law for integrals. We have 
indeed 
hence, if X(rx) = a, X({3) = b, 
L = {II J i;2 + il dt = {II J(dX)2 + (dy)2 dT dt 
JIZ 
JIZ 
dT 
dT dt 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 351 
so that the expression for length based on the parameter -r leads to the 
same value L. If, instead, d-rJdt < 0 we find similarly 
f: -/x2 + y2 dt = - fJ (~r + (~r d-r 
fa J (dX)2 
(dy)2 
= 
-
+ -
d-r; 
b 
d-r 
d-r 
the right-hand side is again the correct integral for the length of C 
referred to the parameter -r since now b < a because X(t) is a decreasing 
function. 
For a curve given nonparametrically by a function y = f(x), 
a ~ x ~ b, we can introduce x as parameter t. Then x = 1, Y = dyJdx. 
The length of the curve is then given by 
(9) 
L= fJl + (~~r dx. 
Examples. As an example we find for the length of a segment of 
the parabola y = tx2' corresponding to the interval a ~ x ~ b: 
L=f~dX. 
Here the substitution x = sinh t (see Chapter 3, p. 273) leads to 
f
a .. sinh b 
Jar sinh b 
cosh2 t dt = t 
(1 + cosh 2t) dt 
ar sinh a 
ar sinh a 
l
ar sinh b 
= t(t + sinh t cosh t) 
ar sinha 
= t(arsinh b + b-/l + b2 -
ar sinh a - a-/1 + a2). 
For a curve given by an equation r = r(O), IX ~ 0 ~ f3 in polar 
coordinates, we have the representation x = r(O) cos 0, y = r(O) sin 0. 
Choosing 0 as parameter, we have 
x = ; cos 0 -
r sin 0, 
y = ; sin 0 + r cos 0, 
x2 + y2 = r2 + ;2. 
This leads to the expression 
(10) 
L = J: J 
r2 + (~;r dO 
for the length of a curve in polar coordinates. We have, for example, 
for the circle of radius a about the origin, the equation r = constant = a 
o ~ 0 ~ 27T. This gives for the total length of the circle 
(211 
L= Jo a dO = 27Ta. 

352 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Additivity of Length 
Let C be a curve given by x = x(t), Y = y(t), ex ~ t ~ p, where 
x and iJ are continuous. Let y be any intermediate value between ex and 
p. From the general rules for integrals we have 
f: JX2 + il dt = iYJx2 + J? dt + f: JX2 + iJ2 dt. 
The integrals on the right, respectively represent the lengths of the 
portions into which C is divided by the point corresponding to t = y. 
Hence the length of the whole curve equals the sum of the lengths of 
its parts. 
It is not necessary that x and yare continuous. The integrals exist 
just as well when x and y have a finite number of jump discontinuities, 
as would occur in a curve with corners. The total length of the curve 
is then the sum of the lengths of the smooth portions between the 
corners. Even more singular behavior of x and y is permitted as long 
as the expression for the length is meaningful as an improper integral. 
g. The Arc Length as a Parameter 
We have seen that one and the same curve permits many different 
parameter representations x = x(t), Y = y(t). Any monotone function 
of t can be ,used as parameter instead of t. For many purposes, however, 
it is of advantage to refer curves C to some "standard parameter" 
which in some way is distinguished geometrically. The abscissa x or the 
polar angle (} are not suitable for that purpose if curves are to be 
described in the large; moreover, they depend on the choice of 
coordinate system. The possibility of measuring lengths along a curve 
provides us with a naturai geometrically defined parameter to which 
points P of a rectifiable curve can be referred, namely, the length of the 
portion of the curve between P and some fixed point Po. 
We start out with an arbitrary parameter representation x = x(t), 
y = y(t), ex ~ t ~ P of C. Differentiation with respect to t is indicated 
by a dot. We introduce the "arc length" s by the indefinite integral 
( 11) 
s = f J x2 + y2 dt 
or more precisely s as a function of t by 
s = s(t) = C +1t J x2(r) + y2(-r) dT, 
to 
(Ita) 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 353 
where c is a constant, 10 a value between IX and p, and where we have 
written T for the variable of integration to distingllish it from the upper 
limit 1. Clearly, for any values 11 and 12 in the parameter interval the 
difference 
(12) 
is equal to the length of the portion of the curve bounded by the points 
corresponding to 1 = 11 and t = t2, provided tl < t2• For tl > t2 the 
difference S(t2) -
S(11) is the negative of the length of that portion. 
Thus the knowledge of any indefinite integral s permits us to calculate 
the length of any part of the curve. 
The Sign of Arc Length 
If the constant c has the value 0 we can interpret S(I) itself as the 
length of the arc of the curve (or the "distance along the curve") 
between the point Po with parameter 10 and the point P with parameter 
t; here the length is counted positive in the case where the arc with 
initial point Po and end point P has the orientation corresponding to 
increasing t.1 
The integral form of the definition of s is equivalent to the relation 
(12a) 
ds = J(dX)2 + (dy)2. 
dt 
dt 
dt 
Using the symbolic notation for differentials (p. 180) ds = (ds/dt) dl, 
etc., we can write this relation in the suggestive form 
ds = .Jdx2 + dy2 
for the "element of length" ds. 
Speed of Motion along a Curve 
If 1 is interpreted as the time and X(I), y(t) as coordinates of the 
position of a moving point at the time t, we have in 
oS = ds = lim s(t + h) -
s(t) 
dt 
11-+0 
h 
the rate of change of the distance moved by the point along its path with 
respect to the time, that is, the speed of the particle. For a particle 
1 Notice that the variable s is not completely unique; it depends on the choice of 
Po and c and also on the orientation of the curve induced by the parameter t. How-
ever, any other arc length is expressible in terms of s in the form (s + constant) or 
(-s + constant). 

354 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
moving with uniform speed along the curve s is a constant and s is 
a linear function of the time t. 
If our usual assumption 
is satisfied, we have ds/dt :;6 0 and can introduce s itself as parameter. 
Many formulas and calculations then simplify. The quantities 
dx 
dx dt 
x 
- = - - = -r=;::.====;: 
ds 
dt ds 
.J x2 + y2 ' 
dy 
dy dt 
Y 
-=--=~=== 
ds 
dt ds 
.JX2 + y2 
are then just the direction cosines of the tangent pointing in the 
direction of increasing s (see (7), p. 346). The relation 
(13) 
characterizes the parameter s as the arc length along the curve. 
h. Curvature 
Definition by Rate of Change of Direction 
We discuss next a basic concept which refers only to the local 
behavior of a curve in the neighborhood of a point, the concept of 
curvature. 
As we describe the curve, the angle IX of inclination of the curve will 
vary at a definite rate per unit arc length traversed; this rate of change 
of IX we call the curvature of the curve. Accordingly the curvature is 
defined as 
(14) 
dlX 
K=-. 
ds 
Parametric Expressions. Let the curve be given parametrically by 
functions x = x(t), y = yet) having continuous first and second 
derivatives with respect to t, for which x2 + y2 :;6 O. In calculating the 
rate of change of the direction angle IX at the point P we have to take 
into account that IX is not defined uniquely. However, the trigonometric 
function of IX, tan IX = iffX (or cot IX = x/if for x = 0) has a defi.nite 
value. In forming dlX/ds we can always assume that the parameter 
values belonging to points in a neighborhood of P allIie in an interval 
throughout which one of the quantities x, if stays different from zero. 
If, say, x :;6 0 we can assign to IX a value that varies continuously with t 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 355 
throughout the interval by taking 
ex = ex(t) = arc tan ~ + n17, 
x 
where n is a fixed, possibly negative integer, and "arc tan" stands for 
the principal value of the function (cf. p. 214), lying between -17/2 and 
1712. Similarly, if if ¥= 0 in the interval we can take for ex the expression 
i; 
17 
i; 
ex(t) = arc cot - + n17 = - - arc tan - + n17. 1 
y 
2 
Y 
In either case we find by direct differentiation for any parameter 
representation 
. 
dex 
Xij - xy 
ex=-= 
. 
dt 
i;2 + y2 
Since (see (12a), p. 353) also 
. 
ds 
/'2 + '2 
s=-='Vx 
y, 
dt 
we obtain for the curvature dexlds = lils of the curve the expression 
dex 
Ii 
xy- yx 
(15) 
K = ds = j = (x2 + y2)"A 
Choosing in particular, the arc length s as the parameter t we have 
x2+y2=1 
[see Eq. (13), p. 354] and hence we obtain the simplified result 
(15a) 
K = xy - yx. 
Sign and Absolute Value of Curvature 
Intoducing a new parameter T = T(t) instead of t does not affect the 
direction of the tangent, and hence, does not affect changes in ex. 
Similarly, the absolute value of the difference of the s-values in two 
points has a geometric meaning independent of the choice of parameter, 
namely that of distance measured along the curve. However, the sign of 
the difference must always be taken as the same as the sign of the 
difference of the corresponding parameter values, since we defined s as 
1 We could define lX(t) as a continuous function for all parameter values t by dis-
secting the whole parameter interval into subintervals in each of which either :i; ¢ 0 
or 'Ii ¢ O. In each of the subintervals we can define then lX(t) by one of the above 
expressions, choosing for each interval the constant integer n in such a way that the 
values of IX in the common end point of two adjacent intervals, as determined from 
the expressions for those intervals, coincide. 

356 Applications ill Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
y 
--~o~------------------------------------~x 
a 
I1t; 
(J 
t; 
Figure 4.21 Rectification of curves. 
y 
o 
Figure 4.21(a) Curvature K = lim da./ds of a curve. (In the case illustrated we 
have K < 0.) 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 357 
an increasing function of t. Thus the absolute value of the curvature 
IKI = I da./ds I does not depend on choice of parameter, whereas the sign 
of K depends on the sense on the curve corresponding to increasing t. 
Obviously, K > 0 means that a. increases with s, that is, that the tangent 
turns counterclockwise as we proceed along the curve with increasing s 
or t (see Fig. 4.21a). In this case the orientation of the curve C is such 
that the positive side of C also is the "inner" side of C, that is, the side 
toward which C curves. 
y 
...... -- ......... 
_ ........ --
~o~--------------------------------------------~x 
Figure 4.22 Graph of a convex function f(x) (left) and concave function (right). 
If the curve is given by an equation y = f(x), we have, using x as 
parameter, 
y" 
K -
-----"-"""07 
-
(1 + y'2)% ' 
(16) 
where y' and y" are the derivatives of y with respect to the variable 
x. Here the sign of the curvature is that corresponding to increasing x. 
Obviously, K is positive for y" > 0; in this case the tangent turns 
counterclockwise as x increases; we call the function f(x) convex. 
The portion of the curve joining any two points lies below the straight 
line joining them. For y" < 0 the tangent turns clockwise for increasing 
x, and the functionfis called concave. (Fig. 4.22.). Here the curve lies 
above the chord joining two of its points. The intermediate case where 
the curvature has the value zero corresponds (generally speaking) to a 
point of inflection at which y" = 0 (see p. 237). 
Examples. For the curvature of the circle of radius a given by 
x = a cos t, y = a sin t we find the constant value l/a from the 

358 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
general formula (15). Thus the curvature of a circle described in the 
counterclockwise sense is the reciprocal of the radius. This result 
assures us that our definition of curvature is really a suitable one; for 
in a circle we naturally think of the reciprocal of the radius as a measure 
of its curvature. 
A second example is the curve defined by the function y = x3• 
The curvature is 
6x 
For x < 0, the function y = x3 is concave, since K < 0, and the tangent 
is turning in a clockwise sense, whereas at x = 0, we have a point of 
inflection, and for x > 0 the function becomes convex. 
A function whose curvature is identically equal to zero is a straight 
line as is easily seen by our definition, and the straight line is the only 
such curve. 
Circle of Curvature and Center of Curvature 
We introduce P = l/K. The quantity Ipi = I/iKI is called the radius of 
curvature at the point in question. (It is infinite at a point of inflection 
where K = 0.) For a circle the radius of curvature at any point is just 
the radius of the circle. 
To any point P = (x, y) of the curve C we assign a circle tangent to 
C and P and having the same curvature as C when we traverse the 
curve and the circle in the same sense at P. This circle is called the 
circle of curvature of the curve C at the point P. Its center is the center 
of curvature of the curve C corresponding to the point P (Fig. 4.23). 
Since C and the circle have the same radius of curvature the radius of 
the circle must be the radius of curvature Ipi of C, and the center a, 'YJ) 
of the circle must lie on the normal of C at P, and a distance Ipl away 
from P. Since C and the circle curve toward the same side, the center 
lies along the normal direction to the curve at P, on the positive or 
negative side according as the curvature K is positive or negative. 
The direction from P to the center of curvature forms an angle 
(X + 17/2 with the positive x-axis, if K > O. Thus, if ~, 'YJ are the coor-
dinates of the center of curvature and x, y those of P, we have [see 
Equation (7), p. 346] 

SeC'. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 359 
y 
(~, .,,) 
r 
Figure 4.23 Circle of curvature r and center of curvature (e, "I) corresponding to 
point P of curve C. 
Hence for K > 0, 
(17) 
If arc length s is used as parameter t, we obtain the simple expressions 
(17a) 
~ = x -
pi;, 
'YJ =y+ pi. 
The same formulas for ~, 'YJ are obtained for K < 0, in which case the 
radius of curvature is - p and moreover the direction from P to the 
center forms an angle ()( -
7T/2 with the positive x-axis. 
Circle of Curvature as Osculating Circle 
Formulas (17) give an expression for the center of curvature in terms 
of the parameter t of the point P on the curve. As t ranges over all values 
in the parameter interval the center of curvature describes a curve, the 
so-called evolute of the given curve; since, with x and y, we have to 
regard i, i;, and p as known functions of t, the foregoing formulas give 
parametric equations for this evolute. Examples and a discussion of 
geometrical properties of the evolute will be found in Appendix I, 
p.424. 
Any two curves are said to "osculate" at a point P or to have "con-
tact of order two" at P, if they pass through P, have the same tangent 

360 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
at P, and also the same curvature, when oriented the same way. 
Obviously, two osculating curves have the same circle of curvature 
and center of curvature at P. If the curves are given by equations 
y = f(x) and y = g(x) in nonparametric form, it is easy to express the 
condition that they have a point of contact P and the same tangent and 
curvature at P. If x is the abscissa of the point of contact P, we have 
f(x) = g(x), f'(x) = g'(x); the equality of curvature is expressed by 
rex) 
g"(x) 
[1 + f'2(X)]% = [1 + g,2(X)]% ' 
and hence also f"(x) = g"(x). Thus the condition for a point of contact 
with equal curvatures is that the values off and g together with those of 
their first and second derivatives agree at the point. 
Consider a curve C: y = f(x) and its circle of curvature r at P 
represented by y = g(x) in a neighborhood of P. Since the circle r 
coincides with its circle of curvature, we see that C and r have the 
same circle of curvature, hence osculate at P. Consequently, at the 
point of contactf(x) = g(x), f'(x) = g'(x), j"(x) = g"(x). We say this 
circle is the "best fitting" circle to the curve at the point P of contact, 
since no other circle meeting the curve at the point of contact has 
"contact of order two" with C at the point. The circle of curvature 
is the osculating circle. (See also Chapter 6, p. 459.) 
Incidentally, just as the tangent to a curve is the limit for Pl -- P 
of a line through two consecutive points P and P 1 on C, one can show 
that the circle of curvature at P is the limit of the circles through three 
points P, Pl' P2 for Pl -- P and P2 -- P. The proof is left to the reader. 
(See Problem 4, p. 437.) 
i. Change of Coordinate Axes. Invariance 
Properties inherent in a geometrical or physical situation do not 
depend on the specific coordinate system or "frame of reference" with 
respect to which they are formulated; the intrinsic character of prop-
erties such as distance or length or angle must be reflected in state-
ments showing that the respective formulas remain unchanged or are 
invariant if one passes from one coordinate system to another. A few 
brief remarks concerning this subject are appropriate in this section. 
We use the general equations connecting the coordinates x, y of a 
point P in one coordinate system with the coordinates ~, rJ of the same 
point P in any other system. The relative position of the second set of 
coordinate axes to the first set is characterized by the coordinates a, b 
that the origin of the second system has in the first system, and by the 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 361 
angle y which the positive ';-axis makes with the positive x-axis.1 
The coordinates (x, y) and (.;, 'YJ) of the same point in the two systems are 
(cf. Fig. 4.24) connected by the transformation 
(18) 
x = .; cos y -
'YJ sin y + a, 
y = .; sin y + 'YJ cos y + b. 
For y = 0 no rotation of the axes but only a parallel displacement or 
translation is involved, and the formulas take the simple form x = 
.; + a, y = 'YJ + b. 
y 
y 
b 
I 
I 
:?--
Ie: 
:.;;; 
I .... 
I 
I 
'Y 
: 
I 
------~--------r----l 
, 
, 
! 
: 
____ ~-----------¢----------~I~~I----------~s 
o 
a 
x 
Figure 4.24 Change of coordinate axes. 
Solving for .;, 'YJ in terms of x, y we find 
(180) 
.; = (x -
a) cos y + (y -
b) sin y, 
'YJ = -(x - a) sin y + (y -
b) cos y. 
If x and yare functions of a parameter t defining a curve, we obtain 
immediately from these formulas expressions for'; and 'YJ as functions of 
t, giving the parameter representation of the same curve in the ';,'YJ-
system. Differentiating with respect to t (the quantities a, b, y which 
fix the relative position of the two coordinate systems do not depend 
on t) yields the transformation of the "velocity components," that is, 
1 We restrict ourselves to "right-handed" coordinate systems in which the positive 
direction of the second axis of a system is obtained by a counterclockwise 90· 
rotation from that of the first axis. 

362 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
for the derivatives of the coordinates with respect to t, 
x = ~ cos y -
iJ sin y, 
We confirm 
iJ = ~ sin y + 'fJ cos y.1 
x2 + iJ2 = ~2 + iJ2. 
Ch.4 
Thus the expression J x2 + y2 has the same value in all coordinate 
systems; this invariance property is, of course, obvious from the 
interpretation of this quantity as rate of change dsJdt of the length 
along the curve with respect to t. The reader may verify by an easy 
y 
/ 
/ 
/ 
b 
/ 
/ 
/ 
a 
(x, y) 
/-"" 
/ 
'Y 
_-
/_--1----
(~, 1/) 
-o:;:j'".=.-------------~ X 
Figure 4.25 Displacement of point P from position (x, y) to position (;, rj). 
calculation that also the expression K = (xii -
iiJ)(x2 + iJ2)-% for 
the curvature is invariant. (This, of course, follows also directly from 
the fact that the angles the tangent makes respectively with the ~­
and x-axes differ only by the constant value y, so that K = docJds 
cannot change.) 
Equations (18) relating the coordinates x, y to the coordinates ~, 1] 
are often interpreted in a different way as describing a displacement. In 
this interpretation the points P are shifted instead of the coordinate 
axes (Fig. 4.25). Only one coordinate system is used. The point with 
1 In some physical applications, where I stands for time, the relative position of the 
two coordinate systems also depends on time; let the quantities x, y stand for the 
coordinates of a particle in a coordinate system that is at rest, whereas ;, 11 are 
the coordinates of the same particle referred to a moving coordinate system, for example, 
axes that are attached to the moving earth. The functions x(/), y(/) describe the path 
of the particle as it looks to an observer at rest, whereas ;(t), 11(/) describe the path 
as it looks to a moving observer. The formulas connecting X, 'Ii with ~, iJ have to 
include then also the obvious terms arising from differentiation of a, b, and y. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 363 
coordinates (x, y) in that system is mapped onto the point with co-
ordinates (~, TJ) in the same system. Invariance of length or curvature 
of a curve now means that these quantities do not change when the 
whole curve undergoes a rigid motion. 
* j. Uniform Motion in the Special Theory of Relativity 
As pointed out on p. 234 there are far reaching analogies between the 
trigonometric and the hyperbolic functions which have their geometric 
counterpart in the correspondence between properties of ellipses and hyper-
bolas. The relationship will become clear when we shall be able to define the 
trigonometric functions for an imaginary argument and to verify that 
cos (it) = cosh t, sin (it) = i sinh t in Section 7.7a. As an application of this 
analogy we consider the "hyperbolic rotations" of the plane which can be 
identified with the Lorentz-transformations of a line in Einstein's special 
theory of relativity. 
We saw in (18a), p. 361, that a rotation of coordinate axes by an angle y 
which leaves the origin fixed can be described by the equations 
(18b) 
~ = x cos y + y sin y, 
7J = -x sin y + y cos y 
connecting the coordinates x, y of a point P in the first system with its co-
ordinates ~, 7J in the second system. The distance of P from the origin is given 
by the same expression in both systems: 
OP = v'x2 + y2 = v'~2 + 7J2. 
This follows also immediately from the transformation equations if we make 
use of the identity cos2 y + sinS y = 1. 
We now consider the analogous transformation with coefficients that are 
hyperbolic instead of trigonometric functions: 
(19) 
~ = x cosh Ot -
t sinh Ot, 
7 = -x sinh Ot + t cosh Ot; 
these formulas can be obtained from the formulas (I8b) for rotations by taking 
for the rotation angle yand the y-and 7J-coordinates, pure imaginary quantities : 
y = iOt, 
y = it, 
We notice that for a real value of Ot (which would mean an imaginary 
angle of rotation y in the original interpretation) formulas (19) define ~ and 
7 as real linear functions of x and t. These functions have the special property 
that 
~2 _ 
7 2 = (x cosh Ot -
t sinh Ot)2 -
( -x sinh Ot + t cosh Ot)2 
=x2 _t2 
as a consequence of the identity cosh2 Ot - sinh2 Ot = 1. (This follows, of 
course, also from the observation that x2 -
t2 = x2 + y2 is the square of the 
distance from the origin in the x,y-plane.) We now interpret t as the time and 

364 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
x as a space-coordinate describing the location of a point in a one-dimen-
sional space, that is, on a straight line. Any event takes place at a certain 
point at a certain time. These two pieces of information are provided by the 
two numbers x, t giving respectively the (signed) distance x of the point from 
the origin 0 and the time t that has elapsed from the time O. In the theory of 
relativity we take the point of view that the measured values of this distance 
and of elapsed time depend on the frame of reference used by the observer, 
that is, on the special coordinate system in the space-time continuum. The 
quantities ~, T obtained from the formulas (19) will describe the same event 
in a different frame of reference in which distances and lengths of time inter-
vals can have different values. The quantity that is unchanged in the 
transition from one reference frame to another one (known as "Lorentz-
transformation") is 
vi x 2 -
t2 = vI;2 _ T2, 
the "space-time distance" of the event from the origin. For an observer 
using the second system the quantity ; is the space distance measured from 
the origin ~ = O. That origin is a point for which 
x cosh ex - t sinh ex = 0 
or xft = tanh 0(. Thus the origin of the second system is a point which in the 
first system appears to move with uniform velocity v = dxfdt = tanh ex 
relative to the origin of the first system. Hence the Lorentz transformation 
relates the values of distances and times as they appear for observers in two 
systems moving with constant velocity v relative to each other. Here 
sinh 0( 
elY. -
e-IY. 
v=--= 
cosh 0( 
elY. + e-IY. 
lies necessarily between -1 and + 1 so that we are restricted to relative 
velocities of the two systems that lie numerically below the value 1. The value 
1 here represents for suitable choice of units the velocity c of light which 
cannot be exceeded by v. 
For a constant u the equation x = ut corresponds to a point which in the 
first system moves with the velocity u, starting at x = 0 at the time t = O. In 
the second system the same point will have the velocity 
d; 
(d;) / (dT) 
u - tanh ex 
u -
v 
w = dT = dt 
dt = 1 - u tanh ex = 1 -
uv . 
This result, valid in Einstein's special theory of relativity, differs from what 
we would obtain in classical kinematics where the velocity w of a point with 
respect to a system moving with velocity v would simply be given by w = 
1I -
v. The relativistic formula shows that w = u when u = + 1 or -
1; 
this corresponds to the fact suggested by the famous Michelson-Morley 
experiment that the velocity of light is the same for observers moving with 
different velocities. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 
365 
k. Integrals Expressing Area within Closed Curves 
In Chapter 2 the concept of integral was motivated by reference to 
"area under a curve," that is, the area of a strip of special shape. This 
specialization to areas under a curve is not quite satisfactory since the 
areas actually encountered most frequently are those of domains 
inside closed curves C, and are of more general shape than the strips 
whose area can be represented by integrals of the form i
b f(x) dx. 
The Basic Formula 
We shall now derive an elegant general integral representation for 
the area bounded by a closed curve C which is given in parametric 
representation, by bre? king up the area into special strip areas. This 
representation will be independent of the parameter representation and 
likewise independent of the coordinate system. Furthermore, it will 
express the oriented area within the curve in accordance with the sense 
of direction assigned to the boundary C; that is it will assign to an 
area within a simple closed curve C the negative or positive sign accord-
ing as the sense of the boundary curve is clockwise or counter-
clockwise. 
Assume that the simple closed oriented curve C is given by x = x(t), 
Y = yet), where t varies over the interval rx S t S {3 and the sense 
of increasing t determines the sense on C. We assume that x and y 
are continuous functions of t (with the same value at t = rx and t = {3) 
and that their first derivatives x and yare continuous, with the possible 
exception of a finite number of jump-discontinuities if C has corners. 
Under these assumptions we shall prove the basic formula 
(20) 
for the oriented area A within C. 
That the three integral representations in the formula are equivalent 
follows directly if we integrate the first one by parts and use the perio-
dicity conditions x(rx) = x({3), y(rx) = y({3); the third, more symmetric 
representation is just the arithmetic mean of the first two. 
The expressions (20) do not depend on the location of the coordinate 
system in the plane. In fact, the symmetric expression 
A = ~ JP(XY -
yx) dt 
2 
~ 

366 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
shows clearly that the value of A is independent of the choice of the 
coordinate system. As we saw on p. 361 a change of coordinates from 
an xy-system to a Ef}-system is achieved by a substitution of the form 
x = E cos y -
f} sin y + a, 
y = E sin y + f} cos y -I- b, 
with constant a, b, y. Differentiation of these formulas with respect to t 
yields 
i = t cos y -
1) sin y, 
and consequently, 
y = tsiny + 1) cos y 
xy - yi = E1) -
f} t + ay - bi. 
Thus the expression x'fi - yi is invariant under rotations about the 
origin (that is, when a = b = 0). Even when a or b do not vanish, 
the value of the integral for A is not affected, since 
f:(a y -
bi) dt = (ay -
bx) I: = 0 
for the closed curve C. 
Proof of the Basic Formula (20). Line Integrals over Simple Arcs. The 
basic formula (20) is proved in some easy steps. 
First, let C be a simple oriented arc with initial point Po and final 
point Pl' Let x = x(t), y = y(t) be any parameter representation of C 
with Po, PI corresponding respectively to t = to, tl' (Here to may be 
larger or smaller than 11') Then the integral 
A = _ [tl Y dx dt 
Jto 
dt 
depends only on C and not on the particular parameter representation. 
This is an obvious consequence of the substitution rule; if we introduce 
a new parameter 'T by the monotone function 'T = X(t) where 'To = 
X(to), 'Tl = X(tl) the corresponding integral is! 
i'l dx 
itl dx d'T 
itl dx 
-
y -
d'T = -
Y -
-
dt = -
y -
dt = A. 
'0 
d'T 
to 
d'T dt 
to 
dt 
1 We assume not only that x(t), y(t) but also T(t) are continuous functions and that 
their derivatives are continuous with the possiJle exception of a finite number of 
jump-discontinuities. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 367 
It is therefore justified to drop from the expression for the integral A 
the reference to any special parameter I and simply to write 
A = Ac = - J/ dx. 
Here Ac for a simple oriented arc C is to be computed by referring the 
arc to a parameter I, using dx = (dxfdl) dl, and taking as limits for the 
I-integration the parameter values for the end points of C in the order 
determined by the orientation of C.1 
If C' is the arc obtained from C by changing its orientation, that is, 
the arc with initial point P1 and final point Po we have, using the same 
parameter representation for C', 
Ito dx 
Itl dx 
Ac' = -
y -
dt = + 
y -
dt = - Ac. 
tl 
dt 
to 
dt 
Hence changing the orientation of an arc C changes the sign of the 
integral Ac. 
If the oriented simple arc C is broken up into oriented subarcs 
Cl> C2, ••• , Cn' each with the same orientation as C, we obviously have 
Ac = AC1 + Ac. + ... + Acn • 
For in a parameter representation of C where, say, the sense of C is 
that of increasing I, this decomposition corresponds to a subdivision 
of the parameter interval 10 ~ I ~ tn for C into subintervals to ~ t ~ /1, 
t1 ~ t ~ t2, ••• , tn- 1 ~ t ~ In corresponding to C1, ... , Cn. 
The 
result then follows from the additivity of integrals. 
The additivity of the integrals Ac makes it much easier to compute the 
value of Ac in cases where C consists of several smooth arcs C1, 
C2, ••• , each with its own parameter representation. We do not need 
to construct artificially a common parameter representation for the 
whole curve C, but instead compute each Ac. separately from its 
parameter representation and then take the sum'. Moreover, the Ac. 
can be added in any order; we only have to make sure that all C; 
have the same orientation as C. 
The Basic Line Integral for Closed Curves 
We can now define Ac for any oriented, simple closed curve C by 
breaking up C into simple arcs C1, ••• , Cn with orientations agreeing 
1 The integral Ly dx is an example of the general line integrals i p dx + q dy 
which will be discussed in Volume II. 

368 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
with that on C and forming the sum of the Ao.l If the whole closed 
curve C has the parameter representation ; = x(t), y = y(t) for 
IX ~ t ~ j3, where the sense of increasing t gives the orientation of C and 
where t = IX and t = j3 correspond to the same point then Ao is again 
given by 
f
p dx 
Ao = -
y -- dt. 
" 
dt 
In the same way we can define Ao for nonsimple oriented curves C by 
decomposition into simple oriented arcs, even when C consists of several 
disjoint pieces, as long as each portion of C has a definite sense. 
The Basic Integral as Area 
We now turn to the main point; that is, we identify the expressions 
Ao for a closed curve with the intuitive geometric quantity of oriented 
area within C. 
y 
t 
--~---<~------------~>-----~ x 
o 
a 
Figure 4.25(Q) Area of a "cell." 
We consider first a domain G bounded from above by an arc Cl : 
y = g(x) for a ~ x ~ b; below by an arc C3 : y = f(x) for a ~ x ~ b: 
and laterally by line segments C2, C4 given by x = a and x = b (Fig. 
4.25a). Here C2 and C4 are permitted to shrink into points. If we give to 
l That the value of Ac obtained in this fashion does not depend on the particular 
way in which we divide up C into simple arcs follows easily: first the additivity 
property of A for simple arcs shows that refining a given subdivision by introducing 
additional dividing points does not change the resulting value of Ac; moreover, any 
two subdivisions can be replaced by one that is a refinement of both without changing 
the value of Ac. 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 369 
C the counterclockwise orientation, the arc C1 will be described in the 
sense of decreasing x, and the arc Ca in that of increasing x. In forming 
Ac as the sum of the four Ac the portions C2 and Ct along which x is 
constant make no contribution since there dxfdt = o. Using x as 
parameter on the arcs C1 and Ca, we find 
Ac = ACI + AC3 = - iag(X) dx - fl(X) dx 
= fg(X) dx - fl(X) dx. 
This clearly is the positive area of the domain G, if G lies completely 
above the x-axis, being the difference of the areas lying respectively 
below the curves C1 and Ca. We can always guarantee that G lies 
above the axis by replacing y by y + c with a suitable constant c, 
that is, by a translation in the y-direction. This does not change areas 
and also does not affect the value of Ac = - L 
y dx for a closed curve 
C as we saw before. Hence for domains G of the type described which 
have a boundary C intersected in no more than two points by parallels 
to the y-axis, the integral Ac represents the area, taken positive if C is 
oriented counterclockwise, negative if clockwise. We obtain the same 
result for areas bounded by a curve C intersected by parallels to the 
x-axis in at most two points; we have only to write Ac in the form 
Lx dy and to interchange x 
and y in the preceding argument. We call 
domains G of one of these two types "cells." We shall talk of "oriented 
cells" when their boundary curves are given one or the other orientation. 
We now consider a domain G with the oriented boundary C, which 
is composed of a number of simple cells Gt> G2, ••• ,Gn with the 
boundaries C1, ••• , Cn respectively; all these cells are assumed to 
have the same orientation, say counterclockwise. Then, as indicated 
in Fig. 4.26, the parts of the boundaries of the cells which are common 
to two adjacent cells are described in a different sense according 
as they are considered boundary arcs of one or the other of the 
adjacent cells. Therefore, if we add the intergrals ACi = - r y dx for 
Je, 
the different cells, the contributions of all the interior cell boundaries 
cancel out and we obtain 
A = IAci =.f(- r YdX) = - r ydx = Ac 
.=1 
,=1 
JCi 
Jc 
where A i's the oriented area of the total domain G. 

370 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Thus the formulas (20) for the area A of an oriented domain G within 
a closed curve is proved for all domains which can be decomposed 
into simple cells, for example, by drawing parallels to the coordinate 
axes. 
For all domains that we shall encounter, this assumption will be 
obviously satisfied, as for example, polygonal domains. 
y 
o 
Figure 4.26 Decomposition of oriented domain into oriented cells. 
Supplementary Remarks 
Finally, it might be added that the validity of the formula for area 
follows in the same way, even for multiply connected domains, such as 
ring-shaped domains, which can be decomposed into a finite number of 
simple cells. Then all the boundary curves have to be described con-
sistently in such a sense that the interior of G is always either on the 
"left" side or always on the "right" side. 
The formulas for A remain meaningful even when C is not a simple 
curve but is allowed to intersect itself, dividing the plane into more than 
two regions. In this case we may consider the formula as a guide to 
interpreting area suitably as an additive combination of the oriented 
areas of the various connected pieces of the plane bounded by C. 
We shall discuss this matter in Appendix II to this chapter. 
Examples. As an example we can find the area enclosed by the 
ellipse x2ja2 + y2jb2 = 1. Using the counterclockwise orientation for 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 371 
the ellipse, we find from the parameter representation 
x = a cos t, 
y = b sin t 
for 0 ~ t ~ 2?T 
that 
112.. 
112 .. 
A = -
(xy - yi) dt = -
ab dt = ?Tab. 
2 
0 
2 
0 
Area in Polar Coordinates. To express area in polar coordinates 
rand (), we consider first the area A of the region bounded by a curve 
segment r = I(()) and the radii () = ex and () = {J. We assume that 
ex < {J and that () can be used as parameter along the curve (that is, 
that different points have different polar angles). We use for A the 
expression 
A = ~ f(X dy -
y dx) = ~ f(xy - yi) dt, 
which then has to be extended over the curved part of the boundary 
and over the two radii. On the radii () = ex and () = (J we can use r as 
parameter and find from x = r cos (), y = r sin (), and () = constant 
that i = cos (), Y = sin (), and thus xy - yi = O. 
On the curved 
part we use () as parameter. Then 
. 
dr 
() 
. () 
x = -
cos 
-
r sm , 
d() 
. 
dr. () 
() 
y = -
sm + r cos , 
d() 
and thus xy - yi = r2. Consequently, 
(21) 
A = ~ JP r2 d() = ~ JPp(()) d(). 
2 " 
2 " 
For a simple closed curve C which contains the origin in its interior and 
is intersected by every ray from the origin in exactly one point we can 
use () as parameter for 0 ~ () ~ 2?T and find for the enclosed area 
(22) 
A = ~ (2"r2 d(). 
2 Jo 
Formula (21) for area in polar coordinates can also be derived directly 
from the definition of integrals. For that purpose we divide our domain 
into sectors by drawing radii from the origin (Fig. 4.27). Each sector 
is described by inequalities 
0< r </(()). 
Obviously, the area of the sector lies between the areas of the inscribed 
and circumscribed circular sectors; the area of a sector of the domain 

372 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Figure 4.27 Area in polar coordinates. 
is then equal to tr2(Oi -
0i-l)' where r lies between the largest and 
smallest values of/CO) for the interval 0i-l < 0 < 0;. As we refine the 
subdivision, the sum of the areas of the sectors of our domain clearly 
1 i P 
converges to the integral-
r2 dO. 
2 
ex 
Area in a Lemniscate 
As an example of Equation (21) we consider the area bounded by a 
loop of a lemniscate. The equation of the lemniscate (cf. p. 103) is 
r2 = 2a2 cos 20; one loop is obtained by having 0 vary from -1T/4 
to +1T/4. This gives us the expression 
f
"/4 
a2 
cos 20 dO = a2 
-,,/4 
for the area. Of course, the other loop has the same absolute but 
negative value of area. 
Area Bounded by a Hyperbola 
We now consider the area of a sector bounded by the hyperbola 
x2 -
y2 = 1, which we computed already on p. 234 in a rather cumber-
some fashion (see Fig. 3.12). For the hyperbola (or rather for its 
right-hand branch) we have the parameter representation x = cosh t, 
y = sinh t. We find indeed for twice the area bounded by the hyperbola 
and the radii leading to the points with parameters 0 and t the value 
2A = f(XY -
yx) dT = f(COSh2 T -
sinh2 T) dT 
= fdT= t. 
(There is again no contribution to the integral from the radii.) 

Sec. 4.1 
Theory of Plane Curves 373 
I. Center of Mass and Moment of a Curve 
We now turn to some ideas arising in mechanics. We consider a 
system of n-particles in a plane having the masses mi, m2' ... , mn and 
the respective ordinates Yi' Y2' ... ,Yn- We then call 
n 
T = ! mvYv = miYi + m2Y2 + ... + mnYn 
v~i 
the moment of the system of particles with respect to the x-axis. The 
expression rJ = T/ M, where M denotes the total mass mi + m2 + 
... + mn of the system, defines the height of the center of mass of the 
system of particles above the x-axis, or its ordinate. It is just the 
weighted average of Yi' Y2' ... ,Yn using the "weight factors" mi, 
m2, ... , mn (see p. 142). Hence rJ is the average height of the masses. 
We define similarly the moment with respect to the y-axis and the 
abscissa of the center of mass. 
We can now easily extend these definitions of the moment to a curve 
along which a mass is uniformly distributed, and thus define the 
coordinates ~ and rJ of the center of mass of such a curve. (The assump-
tion of a constant density, say fl, along the curve is not essential: 
Any continuous distribution could be discussed equally well.) 
In a procedure typical for mechanics we start with a system of a 
finite number n of particles, and then pass to a limit for n ---->- 00. For this 
purpose we introduce the length of arc s as a parameter on the curve, 
and subdivide the curve by (n -
1) points of division into arcs of 
lengths ~Sl> ~S2' ••• ,~sn' We represent the mass fl ~Si of each arc 
~Si as if it is concentrated at an arbitrary point of the arc, say that with 
the ordinate Yi' 
By definition the moment of this system of particles with respect to 
the x-axis is 
T = fl ! Yi ~Si' 
If now the largest of the quantities ~Si tends to zero, this sum tends 
to a limit given by the integral 
(23) 
which is therefore naturally accepted as the definition of the moment 
of the curve with respect to the x-axis. Since the total mass of the curve 
is equal to its length multiplied by fl, 

374 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
we are immediately led to the following expressions for the coordinates 
of the center of mass of the curve: 
(24) 
flXdS 
~ = .;.,.8;;=.0 __ , 
Sl -
So 
f.
'ly ds 
'YJ = .;.,..;;=.0 __ 
Sl -
So 
These statements are actually definitions of the moment and center-
of-mass of a curve; but they are such straightforward extensions of the 
simpler case of a finite number of particles that we naturally expect 
that-as is actually the case-any statement in mechanics involving the 
center-of-mass or the moment of a system of particles will be valid 
also for continuous mass distribution along curves. 
m. Area and Volume of a Surface of Revolution 
Guldins Rule 
If we rotate a curve y = f(x) for which f(x) ~ 0, about the x-axis, 
it describes a so-called surface of revolution. The area of this surface, 
whose abscissas we suppose to lie between the bounds Xo and Xl > Xo, 
is obtained by a discussion analogous to that above. For if we 
replace the curve by an inscribed polygon, instead of the curved 
surface, we have a figure composed of a number of thin truncated 
cones. Intuition suggests that we should define the area of the surface 
of revolution as the limit of the areas of these conical surfaces when 
the length of the longest side of the inscribed polygon tends to zero. 
From elementary geometry we know that the area of each truncated 
cone is equal to the length of the slanted straight generating side multi-
plied by the circumference of the circular section of mean radius. 
(Fig. 4.28). If we add these expressions and then carry out the passage 
to the limit, we obtain the expression 
f
8 1 
1<1:1 
A = 277 
Y ds = 277 
yJ 1 + y,2 dx = 27TfJ(Sl -
so) 
80 
<1:0 
(25) 
for the area. Expressed in words, this result states that the area of a 
surface of revolution is equal to the length of the generating curve 
multiplied by the distance traversed by the center of mass (Guldin's 
rule). 
In the same way we find that the volume interior to the surface of 
revolution and bounded at the ends by the planes x = Xo and x = 
Xl > Xo is given by the expression 
(26) 
f
<l:l 
V= 77 
y2 dx. 
<1:0 

Sec. 4.1 
y 
o 
Theory of Plane Curves 375 
Figure 4.28 Area of surface of revolution. 
This formula is obtained by following the intuitive suggestion that the 
volume in question is the limit of the volumes of the earlier mentioned 
figures consisting of truncated cones. The rest of the proof is left to 
the reader. 
n. Moment of Inertia 
In the study of the rotation of an object an important role is played 
by certain quantities called moments of inertia. These expressions will 
be briefly mentioned here. 
We suppose that a particle m at a distance Y from the x-axis rotates 
uniformly about that axis with angular velocity w (that is, in unit time 
it rotates through an angle w). The kinetic energy of the particle, 
expressed by half the product of the mass and the square of the velocity, 
is obviously 
We call the coefficient of iwz, that is, the quantity myZ, the moment 
of inertia of the particle about the x-axis. 
Similarly, if we have n-particles with masses m l , mz, . .. ,mn and 
ordinates YI' Yz, .. . , Ym we call the expression 
T= L m;y;2 
; 
the moment of inertia of the system of masses about the x-axis. The 
moment of inertia is a quantity that belongs to the system of masses 
itself, without reference to its state of motion. Its importance lies in the 
fact that under rigid rotation of the system about an axis, without 
change of the distance between pairs of particles, the kinetic energy is 
obtained by multiplying the moment of inertia about that axis by half 

376 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
the square of the angular velocity. Thus the moment of inertia about 
an axis plays the same part in rotation about an axis as is played by the 
mass in rectilinear motion. 
Suppose now that we have an arbitrary curve y = f(x) lying between 
the abscissas Xo and Xl >xo, along which a mass is uniformly dis-
tributed with unit density. In order to define the moment of inertia of 
this curve we proceed just as in the preceding section, arriving at 
an expression for the moment of inertia about the x-axis, 
(27) 
For the moment of inertia about the y-axis we have correspondingly 
(2S) 
4.2 Examples 
From the great variety of plane curves we choose a few typical 
examples to illustrate the concepts discussed. 
a. The Common Cycloid 
From the equations (cf. (1), p. 329) x = aCt - sin t), y = a(1 - cos t), 
we obtain i; = a(l - cos t), 'Ii = a sin t, and find for the length of arc 
1"-
1" 
s = ° J i;2 + 'li2 dt = ° ~ha2(1 - cos t) dt. 
Since 1 - cos t = 2 sin2 t/2 the integrand is equal to 2a sin 1/2, and 
hence for 0 ~ IX ~ 21r 
1" 
t /" 
( 
IX) 
IX 
S = 2a 
sin (t/2) dt = -4a cos -
= 4a 1 -
cos -
= Sa sin2 -
• 
020 
2 
4 
If, in particular, we consider the length of arc between two successive 
cusps, we must put IX = 271', since the interval 0 ~ I ~ 271' of the values 
of the parameter corresponds to one revolution of the rolling circle. 
We thus obtain the value Sa; that is, the length of arc of the cycloid 
between successive cusps is equal to four times the diameter of the 
rolling circle. 

Sec. 4.2 
Examples 377 
Similarly, we calculate the area bounded by one arch of the cycloid 
and the x-axis: 
(2u 
(2U 
1= Jo yxdt = a2Jo (1 -
cos t)2dt 
(2u 
=a2Jo (1-2cost+cos2t)dt 
2 ( 
• 
t 
sin 2t) 12U 
2 
= a t -
2 Sill t + 2: + -4-
0 = 3a 7T. 
This area is therefore three times the area of the rolling circle. 
For the radius of curvature Ipl = l/IKI we have by Eq. (15), p. 355, 
·2 + ·2 % 
1 
t 1 
p = (x ... y ~ .. 
= -2a~h(1 -
cos t) = -4a sin-2 ; 
yx- yx 
at the points t = 0, t = ±27T, ... this expression has the value zero. 
These are actually the cusps, where the cycloid meets the x-axis at right 
angles. 
The area of the surface of revolution formed by rotating an arch of 
the cycloid about the x-axis is given according to our formula (25), 
p. 374, by 
f8a 
i2U 
t 
A = 27T 
Y ds = 27T 
a(l -
cos t) . 2a sin - dt 
o 
0 
2 
The last integral can be evaluated by means of the substitution 
cos u = v; we find 
As an exercise the reader may calculate for himself the height r; 
of the center-of-mass of the cycloid above the x-axis and also the 
moment of inertia T;r. The results are 
4 
A 
r;=-a=-
3 
2m 

378 
Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
h. The catenary 
The catenary! is the curve defined by the equation y = cosh x. The 
length of the catenary between the abscissas x = a and x = b is 
s = {\11 + sinh2 x dx = {bCOSh x dx = sinh b -sinh a. 
For the area of the surface of revolution obtained by rotating the 
catenary about the x-axis, the so-called catenoid, we find 
fb 
fb 1 + cosh 2x 
A = 27T 
cosh2 X dx = 27T 
dx 
a 
a 
2 
= 7T(b -
a + t sinh 2b - ! sinh 2a). 
From this we further obtain the height of the center-of-mass of the arc 
from a to b: 
A 
b -
a + ! sinh 2b - t sinh 2a 
r;=-= 
. 
27TS 
2(sinh b -
sinh a) 
Finally, for the curvature we have 
y" 
cosh x 
1 
K = (1 + yf2)72 = cosh3 x = cosh2 X· 
c. The Ellipse and the Lemniscate 
The lengths of arc of these two curves cannot be reduced to elemen-
tary functions, but belong to the class of "elliptic integrals" mentioned 
on p. 299. 
For the ellipse y = (b/a)J a2 -
x2 we obtain 
1 fJa 4 - (a 2 - b
2)X2 
f J1 - r; 2e 
S = -
dx = a 
d~, 
a 
a2 -
x2 
1 - e 
where we have put x/a =~, 1 -
b2/a2 = r;2. 
By the substitution 
~ = sin ¢> this integral can be expressed in the form 
s = a f Jl -
r; 2 sin 2 ¢> d¢>. 
1 The name derives from the fact that a chain suspended from its ends will assume 
the shape of this curve. Curiously enough the same curve arises in a quite different 
physical application. A soap film, bounded by two circles in space that lie in parallel 
planes and have centers on the same perpendicular to those planes, has the same 
shape as the surface of revolution obtained by rotating the catenary about the x-axis. 

Sec. 4.3 
Vectors in Two Dimensions 379 
Here, to obtain the semiperimeter of the ellipse, we must let x traverse 
the interval from -a to +a, which corresponds to the interval 
7T 
7T 
or -"2 ~ rP ~ + "2 . 
For the lemniscate, whose equation in polar coordinates r, t is 
r2 = 2a2 cos 2t, we similarly obtain 
s = fJ r2 + ,2 dt = fJ2a 2 cos 2t + 2a2 sin
2 2t dt 
cos 2t 
J-f dt 
J-f 
dt 
=a 2 
=a 2 
. 
Jcos 2t 
Jl - 2 sin2 t 
If we introduce u = tan t as an independent variable in the last integral, 
we have 
and consequently, 
du 
dt=--, 
1 + u2 
J-f 
du 
s=a 2 J 
. 
1 - u4 
In a complete loop of the lemniscate u runs from -1 to + 1, and the 
length of arc is therefore equal to 
J
+1 
du 
aJ2 
~' 
-1 'V 1 -
u4 
a special elliptic integral which played a great part in the researches 
of Gauss. 
4.3 Vectors in Two Dimensions 
For the discussions of plane curves and of many other topics in 
geometry, mechanics, and physics, vector notation constitutes a 
convenient and almost indispensable tool. 
We shall develop and 
apply in this chapter the concept of a vector in two dimensions, leaving 
extensions to higher dimensions to Volume II. 
Intuitive Explanation 
Many mathematical and physical objects are characterized com-
pletely by a single number, called a "scalar" since it measures the 
object on a given scale. Examples are angles, lengths, areas, times, 
masses, and temperatures. There are other objects, however, for which 
such a characterization is not possible, for example, the shape of a 

380 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
triangle, the location of a point in space, the acceleration or direction 
of motion of a particle, and the state of tension in a body. Several 
numbers are required to identify each of these objects. Gradually, 
mathematical concepts beyond the continuum of real numbers have 
been developed which permit us to represent such objects by a single 
symboU Vectors in a plane are objects that can be described by 
two items of information: A length and a direction. Of this type are, 
for example, the relative position of two points, the velocity and 
acceleration of a particle, and the force acting on a particle. 2 
Geometrically, or intuitively, a vector is essentially a directed straight 
line segment in the plane (or in space), characterized by its length or 
magnitude and by its direction. Ordinarily, vectors are indicated by 
arrows of the given length and pointing in the given direction. Unless a 
restriction is explicitly imposed, the vector is "free", that is, the 
location of the beginning of the directed line, or arrow, is not an 
inherent part of the specifications for the vector. 
While physical concepts, such as velocity, acceleration, and force, 
are primary instances of vectors in applications, we shall define vectors 
geometrically, by means of "translations" or "parallel displacements." 
Vector analysis starts simply by giving a name, "vector," to such 
directed line segments or parallel displacements. However, its decisive 
significance is not that a unifying name was introduced, but that these 
entities, the vectors, (similarly as the complex numbers) can be combined 
with each other or with scalars (that is, ordinary numbers) by a set of 
rules, called vector algebra or vector analysis, in ways that have natural 
interpretations in the various applications, as, for example, the super-
position of two velocities or the work done by a displacement against a 
force. In the intuitively appealing language of vectors many mathe-
matical and physical relations can be expressed concisely and clearly. 
a. Definition of Vectors by Translation. Notations 
The simplest type of transformation of the plane is a translation or 
parallel displacement. A translation shifts or maps any point P = (x, y) 
into the point P' = (x', y') with coordinates 
x' = x + a, 
y' = y + b, 
1 Of course, complex numbers a + bi = z are such symbols representing the pair 
of real numbers, a, b; it is indeed sometimes convenient to use complex numbers 
rather than vectors. 
2 Vectors are insufficient for some purposes; to describe, for example, tensions or 
curvature of spaces, more general entities called "tensors" are used. 

Sec. 4.3 
Vectors in Two Dimensions 381 
where a and b are constants. The translation is completely determined 
by the constants a and b which we call the components of the trans-
lation. We shall use the term "vector" as another name for "trans-
lation." Employing boldface type to denote vectors or translations 
we write R = (a, b) for the vector with components a, b (Fig. 4.29). 
y 
6 
4 
2 
--O~----~2r-----04----~6r-----~8----~lrO----~12~~X 
Figure 4.29 The translation x' = x + 2, y' = y + 1 corresponding to the vector 
R = H' = ill.?' = (2, 1). 
The components of the vector R are determined by one pair of 
corresponding points P = (x, y) and P' = (x', y'), since then 
, 
a = x -
x, 
b = y' -
y. 
Clearly, for any points P and P' it is always possible to find a trans-
lation R which takes Pinto P'. We denote it as the vector R = W. 
Any ordered pair of points P = (x, y), P' = (x', y'), that is, any oriented 
~ 
line segment, thus determines the vector R = PP' = (x' -
x, y' -
y). 
We observe that a second pair of points Q = (~, 'YJ), Q' = (~', 'YJ') 
defines the same vector if t -
~ = x' -
x and 'YJ' -
'YJ = y' -
y; 
the same translation R takes then Pinto P' and Q into Q'. Vectors R 
are determined by two numbers, the components, just as points are by 
two coordinates in the plane; the basic distinction is that a vector is 
represented geometrically by a pair of points. In the representation 
~ 
R = PP' we call P the initial point and P' the end point. For given R 
one of the points, say the initial point P = (x, y), can be chosen 
arbitrarily; the end point P' = (x', y') is then determined uniquely 

382 Applications ill Physics and Geometry 
P' 
I 
I 
I 
Ib 
I 
I 
I 
I 
P 
--------------~ 
a 
--" 
Figure 4.30 Components a, b and length r of a vector R = pr. 
Ch.4 
by the relations x' = x + a, y' = y + b. Interchanging initial and 
end point leads to the opposite vector P'P = (-a, -b). 
If we choose for the initial point the origin 0 = (0, 0), we can 
associate uniquely a vector R with every point Q = (x, y) by taking 
---"'" 
R = OQ. The vector R with the fixed initial point 0 is then called the 
position vector of Q. The components of the position of Q are simply 
the coordinates x, y of Q. 
The vector R with components a = 0, b = 0 is called the null 
vector and is denoted by o. It corresponds to a translation that leaves 
every point fixed: 
o = (0, 0) = "-
The distance r of two points P = (x, y), P' = (x', y') depends only 
~ 
on the vector R = (a, b) = PP', since 
r = .J(x' -
X)2 + (y' -
y)2 = .Ja2 + b2• 
We call it the length o/the vector R and write r = IRI. The length of R 
is always a positive number unless R = 0 (see Fig. 4.30). 
We define the product of a vector R = (a, b) by a number or a 
"scalar" }. as the vector 
R* = }.R = (}.a, Ab). 
For}. = -1 we have in R* = (-a, -b) the vector opposite to R 
(Fig. 4.31). 
Figure 4.31 Scalar multiples of a vector R. 

Sec. 4.3 
Vectors in Two Dimensions 383 
~ 
If R = pp' = (a, b) with P = (x, y), p' = (x', y'), we can represent 
-->0. 
R* = AR as PP", where P" = (x", y") = (x + A.a, y + Ab) (see Fig. 
4.32). For a = b = 0 we have, of course, P" = p' = P. For a and b 
not both zero the point P" = (x", y") = (x + Aa, y + Ab) traverses 
for varying A the whole line 
x"b -
y"a = xb -
ya. 
The value A = 0 gives P" = P, whereas A = 1 gives P" = P'. Thus P" 
lies on the line through P and pI; for A > 0 the points P" and P' lie on 
the same side of P, for A < 0 they lie on opposite sides. 
--" 
--" 
Figure 4.32 The vector relation R* = pr =.it PP' for.it = t. 
The two vectors R = (a, b) and R* = (a*, b*) are said to have the 
same direction if R * = AR with a positive A and opposite directions if 
A < o. If R = 0, this means that also R * = O. If R :;1= 0, the 
necessary and sufficient condition for R * to have the same direction as 
R is that 
a 
a* 
b 
b* 
../a2 + b2 = -Ja*2 + b*2' 
-Ja2 + b2 - ../a*2 + b*2· 
We call the quantities 
a 
a 
a 
~= 
=-=-, 
../a2 + b2 
IRI 
r 
b 
b 
b 
"/= 
=-=-
-Ja 2 + b2 
IRI 
r 
which determine the direction of the vector R the direction cosines ofR; 
they are, of course, not defined for R = O. Since ~2 + ,,/2 = 1, we 
can always find an angle IX and a corresponding angle fJ = 17/2 -
IX 
such that 
~ = cos IX, 
'fJ = sin IX = cos fJ. 

384 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
The angle ot is called a direction angle of R (Fig. 4.33). It is determined 
uniquely only to within an even multiple of 1T. For R = P? we have 
x' -
x 
COSot = --, 
r 
sin ot = y' -
y 
r 
Obviously, ot is the angle between the positive x-axis and the line 
from P to P'. More precisely a rotation of the positive x-axis about 
the origin by the angle ot (counted positive if we turn counterclockwise, 
negative if clockwise) will give the axis the direction from P to P'. 
P' 
" 
a 
Figure 4.33 Direction cosines ;, 7], and direction angles for a vector fiP. 
The opposite vector -R = (-a, -b) has direction cosines -~ and 
-'Y} and direction angles differing from ot by an odd multiple of 1T. 
If the initial point P of the vector R = pPi is the origin, the direction 
angle ot of R is simply the polar angle () of P'. 
h. Addition and Multiplication of Vectors 
Sums of Vectors 
Vectors have been defined by translations, that is as certain mappings 
of points in the plane. There is a perfectly general way of com-
bining any two mappings by applying them successively. If the first 
mapping carries a point P into the point P' and the second one carries 
P' into r, the combined mapping is the one that carries Pinto r. 
In the case of two vectors R = (a, b) and R* = (a*, b*) the vector R 
will map the point P = (x, y) onto the point P' = (x + a, y + b) 
and R* will map P' onto P" = (x + a + a*, y + b + b*). The 

Sec. 4.3 
Vectors in Two Dimensions 385 
resulting mapping from Ponto P" is again a translation; we call it the 
sum or the resultant of the vectors R = Wand R * = ]>'"P, and denote 
it by R + R* (Fig. 4.34).1 The components of the sum are a + a* and 
b + b*. Thus our definition of the sum of two vectors is 
~ ----'"-
~ 
PP' + P'P" = PP", 
or, if we describe the vectors by their components, 
(a, b) + (a*, b*) = (a + a*, b + b*). 
If R* is taken from the same initial point as R, say R* = ppm, the 
points P, pm, P", and p' form the vertices of a parallelogram. The 
/"' I b* 
/' 
i 
--7"""---.., 
/' 
I 
,/ 
I 
,/ 
I 
,/ 
I b 
I / , I  
I 
~ 
I 
.-J---
P''' 
I 
_-
I 
ft'" 
I 
__ -----
I 
I 
----------~------------------~ 
p 
a 
~ 
Figure 4.34 Addition of the vectors FP' = (a, b) and" = (a*, b*). 
two sides from P represent the vectors Rand R *; the sum R + R * is 
represented by the diagonal from P ("parallelogram construction" 
for the sum of vectors). 
Sums of vectors obey the commutative and associative laws of 
arithmetic, since addition of vectors just amounts to addition of 
corresponding components (Fig. 4.35). 
They obey moreover the 
distributive laws for multiplication of a sum of two vectors by a number A 
and of a vector by the sum of two numbers A, fl: 
A(R + R*) = AR + AR*, 
(A + fl)R = AR + flR. 2 
1 This "sum" is really the "symbolic product" of the two mappings as defined on 
p. 52. The sum notation is here more natural because it corresponds to addition of 
the components. 
2 To distinguish vectors from numbers in an equation we always let the number 
precede the vector in writing products; the combination R). will not be used, 
although it could be defined by AR = RA. 

386 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
(R + R*) + R" = R + (R* + R**) 
Figure 4.35 Commutative and associate laws of vector addition. 
P 
pfo 
---
--
--
---
o 
---+ 
---+ 
---
Figure 4.36 PP' = OP' - OP. 
D 
P ---------
----* 
---4>-
---:.0-
--+-
Figure4.37 PQ = PA + AB + BC + ... + FQ. 

Sec. 4.3 
Vectors in Two Dimensions 387 
--
These rules permit us to express a vector PP' in terms of the position 
-- --
vectors OP and OP' of the points P and P' (Fig. 4.36): 
w=Po+oF=w+PO=oP-oP: 
It is important to realize that generally if we go from a point P to a 
~ 
point Q by way of points A, B, C, ... , E, F, then the vector PQ is the 
~~.-. 
~-
sum of the vectors PA, AB, BC, ... , EF, FQ (Fig. 4.37). 
Angle between Vectors 
The angle () formed by a vector R* = (a*, b*) with the vector 
R = (a, b) is defined as the difference of their direction angles: 
() = ex* -
ex. (It is assumed here that neither R nor R* is a zero 
vector.) The angle () again is determined only to within integer multiples 
Figure 4.38 Angle () the vector R· forms with R. 
of 277 (Fig 4.38) A rotation by the angle () (with the sign of () indicating 
the sense of rotation) will take the direction of R into that of R *. The 
quantities cos () and sin (), which are determined uniquely, can be 
expressed immediately in terms of the direction cosines of Rand R * : 
cos () = cos (ex* -
ex) = cos ex cos ex* + sin ex sin ex* 
aa* + bb* 
=..; 
-7=a:::=2 =+=b2:;-Jl-a=*:::=2 =+=b*==2 ' 
sin () = sin (ex* -
ex) = cos ex sin ex* -
sin ex cos ex* 
ab* -
a*b 
= 
-J7=a:::=2 =+=b2:;-Jl-a=*72 =+=b*==2 • 
The denominator in each expression IS just the product rr* of the 
length of the vectors. We introduce the expressions occurring in 
the numerators as "products" of the two vectors. 

388 
Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Inner Product and Exterior Product of Two Vectors 
We define the "scalar" or "inner" or "dot" product of the vectors 
R = (a, b) and R* = Ca*, b*) by 
R . R * = aa* + bb * = rr* cos e, 
and the "outer" or "exterior" or "cross" product by 
R x R* = ab* -
a*b = rr* sin e.1 
As immediately confirmed inner and outer products obey the dis-
tributive and associative laws: 
R • (R * + R * *) = R • R * + R . R * *, 
R x CR * + R * *) = R x R * + R x R * *, 
ACR. R*) = (AR) . R* = R· CAR*), 
ACR x R*) = (AR) x R* = R x CAR*). 
Q* 
Q 
Figure 4.39 The vector product R X R* = IRIIR*I sin e as twice the area of the 
triangle PQQ*. 
The commutative law of multiplication also holds for inner products 
R·R*=R*·R; 
for exterior products however, the sign is changed if the factors are 
interchanged: 
R x R* = -R* x R. 
Giving Rand R* the same initial point, R = PQ, R* = PQ* we 
can interpret R . R * as the product of the projection r* cos e of the 
segment PQ* onto the segment PQ, with the length r of that segment. 
The outer product R x R * is simply twice the area of the oriented 
triangle PQQ*, taken with the positive sign if the vertices PQQ* are 
in counterclockwise order, with the negative sign if in clockwise order 
(Fig. 4.39). 
1 With our definition both inner and exterior products are actually "scalars." The 
term "scalar product" is reserved for the inner product because in three dimensions 
the analogue of the exterior product is a vector. 

Sec. 4.3 
Vectors in Two Dimensions 389 
For any vector R = (a, b) 
R • R = a2 + b2 = IRI2 
is the square of the length of the vector. Thus R • R is positive unless 
R = O. On the other hand, R x R is always zero. The condition for 
two nonzero vectors to be orthogonal to each other is that R • R * = 0 
while they are parallel (that is, have the same or opposite directions) if 
R x R* = O. 
' 
Equation of Straight Line 
We can easily write the equation of a line through two points and 
that of a line through a given point with a given direction, in vector 
o 
Figure 4.40 Line in vector notation. 
notation. If P = (x, Y), Po = (xo, Yo), and Pi = (Xl' Yl) are three points 
with Po ~ Pi then P lies on the line through Po and Pi if the vectors 
~ ----
P oF and P oF 1 are parallel, that is, 
~ 
~ 
If R = OP, Ro = OPo, and Rl = OPl are the position vectors of the 
three points, the condition takes the form 
or 
Substituting the coordinates of the points for the position vectors, we 
obtain the equation of the line in the usual form (Fig. 4.40): 
(Xl -
xo)Y -
(Yl - Yo)x = xlYo -
Y1XO' 

390 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Instead of prescribing two points of the line we can prescribe one 
point Po and require that the line is to be parallel to a vector S = (a, b). 
Obviously, the equation of the line is then 
(R-Ro)xS=O 
or 
(x -
xo)b - (y -
yo)a = O. 
For S = POPl we obtain the previous equation. 
The distance d of the line from the origin can also be expressed in 
vector notation. Obviously, d multiplied with the length of the vector 
~ 
POPl is twice the area of the triangle OPOPl • Hence 
d = 
1. (CJP; x oP;) = Ro x Rl 
IPOPll 
IRl -
Rol 
_ 
XOYl -
XlYo 
-
.J(xl -
XO)2 + (Yl -
Yo)!' 
Here d is taken with the positive sign if the points 0, Po, P 1 follow each 
other in counterclockwise order. 
Coordinate Vectors. A vector R = (a, b) trivially can be represented 
in the form 
(29) 
R = ai + bj, 
where we denote by i and j the "coordinate vectors" 
(30) 
i = (1,0), 
j = (0, 1). 
In this way R is split into two vectors ai and bj pointing respectively 
in the direction of the x-axis and y-axis. The components a and b of R 
are just the (signed) lengths of these two vectors. 
In applications one is often called upon to represent a vector R as 
resultant of vectors with two given orthogonal (that is, mutually 
perpendicular) directions. For that purpose it is best to introduce two 
unit vectors (that is, vectors oflength 1) I and J with the given directions. 
The required decomposition of R is achieved if we can represent R 
in the form 
(31) 
R = AI + BJ 
with suitable scalars A, B (cf. Fig. 4.40). It is easy to find the values 
of A and B if such a representation of R exists. For, by assumption, 
the vectors I and J are orthogonal unit vectors of length 1, so that 
(32) 
I· 1= J. J = 1, 
I·J = O. 

Sec. 4.3 
Vectors in Two Dimensions 391 
Forming the scalar product of Eq. (31) with I, J respectively we find 
immediately that A and B must have the values 
(33) 
A = R.I, 
B=R·J; 
in words, A and B are the (signed) lengths of the projections of the 
segment representing R in the given directions. 
The possibility of writing R as a linear combination (31) of I and J 
follows from the representation (29) of R in terms of i and j, if we can 
y 
b 
J 
~~-+ 
______________ 
~ 
__ x 
Figure 4.40 
show that i and j themselves can be expressed in terms of I and J. 
However, I = (oc., (3), J = (y, ~), can be written as, 
(34) 
1= oc.i + {3j, 
J = yi + !5j. 
Because of (32) the quantities oc., {3, y, 15 must satisfy the so-called 
orthogonality relations 
(35) 
oc.2 + {32 = y2 + 152 = 1, 
oc.y + {3!5 = O. 
If we multiply the first of the equations (34) by 15, the second one by 
{3, and subtract we find 
(36) 
(oc.!5 - {3y)i = 151 - {3J 

392 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
and similarly, 
(37) 
(exb -
py)j = -yI + exJ. 
Here for the mutually perpendicular unit vectors I and J 
(38) 
exb-py=IxJ=±I, 
where the upper or lower sign holds depending on the counterclockwise 
or clockwise sense of the 90° rotation that takes I into J. In either case 
formulas (36) and (37) express i and j in terms of I and J; substituting 
these expressions into (29) justifies the representation formula (31) for 
an arbitrary vector R. 
Formula (31) also can be interpreted as the representation of the 
vector R in a new coordinate system with axes pointing respectively 
in the directions of I and J. The components of a unit vector are at the 
same time the direction cosines of the direction angle of the vector. 
Let I and J have direction angles 1> and 'If respectively. Then 
ex = cos 1>, 
p = sin 1>, 
y = cos 'If, 
b = sin 'If. 
Here either 'If = 1> +!7T or '1jl = 1> - !7T. In the first case (which 
corresponds to a right-handed system of coordinate vectors I, J), we 
have y = -p, b = ex, exb - py = +1 so that 
(39) 
I = (cos 1>, sin 1», 
J = (- sin 1>, cos 1». 
The formulas (33) giving the components of R referred to coordinate 
vectors I, J then take the form 
(40) 
A = a cos 1> + b sin 1>, 
B = -a sin 1> + b cos 1>. 
These formulas express the relations between the components of one 
and the sam~ vector R in two right-handed coordinate systems obtained 
one from the other by a rotation of axes by the angle 1>. If we assume 
that the coordinate systems have the same origin 0 and that R is the 
position vector oP of an arbitrary point P we have in (40) the formulas 
for changes of coordinate systems already derived on p. 361, Equation 
(18). The components a, b and A, B are then respectively the co-
ordinates of P in the two systems. 
c. Variable Vectors, Their Derivatives, and Integrals 
It is natural to consider vectors R = (a, b) whose components a, b 
are functions of a variable t, say a = a(t), b = bet). For any t we then 
have a vector 
R = R(t) = (a(t), bet»~ 

Sec. 4.3 
Vectors in Two Dimensions 393 
and we say that R(t) is a vector function of t. An example is furnished 
by the position vector of a point that moves with the time t. 
We say that R(t) has the limit R * = (a*, b*) for t -
to if aCt) has the 
limit a* and bet) the limit b* for t -
to. In that case the length of 
R(t) tends toward that of R*, and in case R* :;6. 0 the direction of 
R(t) tends toward that of R * (this means that the direction cosines of R 
tend toward those of R *). The vector R(t) is said to depend contin-
uously on t, if 
lim R(t) = R(to), 
t-+to 
that is, if the components of R are continuous functions of t. 
The 
length and, if R(to) :;6. 0, also the direction of a continuous vector 
vary continuously with t. 
To introduce the derivative of a vector we form for two values t and 
t + h of the parameter the difference quotient 
~ [R(t + h) _ R(t)] = [aCt + ~ - a(t) , bet + h~ -
b(t)] , 
and define the derivative of R as the limit qf the difference quotient 
for h-O: 
R = dR = lim.! [R(t + h) _ R(t)] = (da ,db)' = (d, b). 
dt 
h-+O h 
dt 
dt 
The derivative of a vector is formed by differep.tiating the components. 
Derivatives of products of vectors are easily seen to obey the ordinary 
rules 
(RSt = dR • S = dR • S + R . dS = RS + RS 
dt 
dt 
dt 
(R x S)' = dRd~ S = Ii x S + R x S, 
where for outer products, factors have to be taken in the original order. 
We define similarly the integral of the vector R(t) in terms of the 
integrals of its components: 
f:R(t)dt = (fa(t) dt,f:b(t) dt). 
The fundamental theorem of calculus implies 
d It 
-
R(s) ds = R(t). 
dt 
ac 

394 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
d. Application to Plane Curves. Direction, Speed, and Acceleration 
Velocity Vector 
In Section 4.1 we represented a curve C by two functions x = c/>(t) and 
y = 1jJ(t). Each t in the domain of these functions determines a point 
P = (x, y) on C; here t may be considered as time and P as a moving 
point whose position at the time t is given by x(t) and y(t). If we identify 
~ 
x and y with the components of the position vector R = OP of P, 
o 
Figure 4.41 Derivative of the position vector for a curve. 
then C is described by the end point of the position vector 
R = R(t) = (x(t), y(t» 
(Fig. 4.41). For two pointsP andP' of C corresponding to the parameter 
values t and t + 6.t we have in 
pP = ZiP - OF = R(t + 6.t) -
R(t) = 6.R 
the vector represented by the directed secant of C with end points P, 
P'. If here 6.t is positive, that is, if the point P' follows P on C in the 
direction of increasing t, then the vector 
1. (R(t + 6.t) -
R(t») 
6.t 
~ 
has the same direction as the vector R(t + 6.t) -
R(t) = PP'; its 
length is the distance of the points P and P' divided by 6.t. For 6.t 
tending to zero we obtain in the limit the vector 
R = R(t) = (i(t), y(t», 

Sec. 4.3 
Vectors in Two Dimensions 395 
where again the dot is used to denote differentiation with respect to 
the parameter t. The direction of R is the limit of the direction of the 
secants PP' and hence is the direction of the tangent at the point P. 
More precisely R points in that direction on the tangent that corre-
sponds to increasing t on C, provided R =F- O. The direction cosines of 
R are the quantities 
x 
. 
y 
cos IX = 
/ 
,sm IX = 
/ 
' 
V x2 + y2 
V x2 + y2 
introduced on p. 346 as direction cosines of the tangent. The length ofR 
IRI = .JX2 + y2 
can be interpreted as dsjdt, the rate of change of the length s along the 
curve with respect to the parameter t. If t stands for the time, we have 
in IRI the speed with which the point travels along the curve. 
In mechanics one must consider the velocity of a particle not only as 
having a certain magnitude (the "speed") but also a certain direction. 
Velocity is then represented by the vector R = (x, y), whose length is 
the speed and whose direction is the instantaneous direction of motion, 
that is, the direction of the tangent in the sense of increasing t. 
Acceleration 
Similarly the acceleration of the particle is defined as the vector 
it = (x, fj). Vanishing acceleration means that x = fj = 0; if it = 0 
along a whole t-interval, the velocity components have constant values 
x = a, y = b; the components of the position vector itself are then 
linear functions of t: x = at + c, y = bt + d. The particle in this case 
moves with constant speed along a straight line. 
All our previous results pertaining to curves are easily expressible 
in vector notation if the curve is described by the position vector 
R = R(t) = (x(t), yet»~, with IX ::::;; t ::::;; {3. We find for the length [cf. 
Eq. (8), p. 349] 
ifJ 
IRI dt, 
~ 
while for the signed area enclosed by a curve [cf. Eq. (20), p. 365] 
A = !J:R x R dt 
(the sign of this quantity depending again on the orientation of the 
curve). Finally, we have for the curvature K the formula [cf. Eq. (15), 
p.355] 
RxR 
K = iif!3. 

396 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Tangential and Normal Components of Acceleration 
These formulas have interesting implications if we interpret t again as 
the time. Let 'Y be the angle formed by the vector :tt with the vector R, 
that is, with the instantaneous direction of motion. The quantity 
l:ttl cos 'Y represents the projection of:tt onto the direction of R; we 
call it the tangential component of acceleration. Similarly, l:ttl sin 'Y is 
the projection of:tt onto the normal (more precisely onto that normal 
o 
Figure 4.42 Tangential and normal acceleration. 
obtained by a 90° counterclockwise rotation from R); this is the normal 
component of acceleration (see Fig. 4.42). By definition of inner and 
outer products 
Now 
.. 
R·l 
IRI cos 'Y = --;;,;- , 
1n.1 
i'.' 
Rxl 
1n.1 SID 'Y = - ... -
. 
1n.1 
..... 
1..... 
..... 
1 d ...... 
1 dv2 
dv 
n. • R = - (n. • R + R • n.) = - - (n. • n.) = - -
= v -
, 
2 
2~ 
2~ 
~ 
where v = dsfdt = rRI = .JR. R is the speed of the point. Hence 
(41) 
III cos 'Y = dv = v; 
dt 
Thus the tangential component of acceleration is identical with the rate 
of change of speed with respect to time. For the normal acceleration 
the formula for the curvature yields 
(42) 
l:ttl sin'Y = Ie IRI2 = leVi, 
that is, the product of the square of the speed with the curvature. 

Sec. 4.4 
Motion oj a Particle IInder Given Forces 397 
For a particle moving with constant speed v along a curve the tan-
gential acceleration v vanishes. The acceleration vector then is per-
pendicular to the curve. More precisely it points toward the "inner" 
side of the curve, the side toward which the curve turns (this is sten, 
for example, from the fact that sin y > ° when K > 0, that is, when the 
tangent turns counterclockwise). In moving along a curve at constant 
speed therefore, a point experiences an acceleration toward the inside 
of the curve which is proportional to the curvature and also to the 
square of the speed. This fact is of obvious significance because as a 
result of Newton's law (to be discussed later) a force proportional to the 
acceleration is needed to hold the point P on the curve. 
4.4 Motion of a Particle under Given Forces 
The early development of calculus was decisively stimulated not only 
by geometry but just as much by the concepts of mechanics. Mechanics 
rests on certain basic principles first laid down by Newton; the state-
ment of these principles involves the concept of the derivative, and their 
application requires the theory of integration. Without analyzing 
Newton's principles in detail, we shall illustrate by some simple 
examples how calculus is applied in mechanics. 
a. Newton's Law of Motion 
We shall restrict ourselves to the consideration of a single particle, 
that is, of a point at which a mass m is imagined to be concentrated. 
We shall further assume that the motion takes place in the x,y-plane, 
in which the position of the particle at the time t is specified by its 
coordinates x = x(t), y = y(t), or, equivalently, by its "position vector" 
R = R(t) = (x(t), y(t)). A dot above a quantity indicates differentiation 
with respect to the time t. The velocity and acceleration of the particle 
are then represented by the vectors 
R = (i, y) 
and it = (x, ii). 
In mechanics one relates the motion of a point to the concept of 
forces of definite direction and magnitude acting on the point. A force 
is then also described by a vector F = (p, 0"). The effect of several 
forces Fl, F2, ... acting on the same particle is the same as that of a 
single force F, the resultant force, which is simply the vector sum 
F = Fl + F2 + ... of the individual forces. 
Newton's fundamental law states: The mass m multiplied by the 
acceleration is equal to the force acting on the particle, in symbols 
(43) 
mit = F. 

398 
Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
If we write this vector equation which expresses the fundamental law 
in terms of the components of those vectors, we obtain the equivalent 
pair of equations 
(44) 
mx = p, 
my ~ G. 
Since acceleration and force differ only by the positive factor m, 
the direction of the acceleration is the same as that of the force. If no 
force acts, that is, F = 0, the acceleration vanishes, the velocity is 
constant, and x and y become linear functions of t. This is Newton's 
first law: A particle on which no force acts moves with constant 
velocity along a straight line. 
Newton's law mit = F is in the first instance nothing more than a 
quantitative definition of the concept of force. The left-hand side of 
this relation can be determined by observation of the motion, by means 
of which we then obtain the force. 
However, Newton's law has a far deeper meaning, due to the fact 
that in many cases we can determine the acting force from other physical 
considerations, without any knowledge of the corresponding motion. 
This fund mental law is then no longer a definition of force, but it 
instead is a relation from which we can hope to determine the motion. 
This decisive turn in using Newton's law comes into play in all the 
numerous instances where physical considerations permit us to express 
the force F or its components p, G in an explicit way as functions of the 
position and velocity of the particle and of the time t. The law of 
motion then is not a tautology, but furnishes two equations expressing 
mx, my in terms of x, y, x, y, and t, the so-called equations of motion. 
These equations are differential equations, that is, relations between 
functions and their derivatives. Solving these differential equations, 
that is, finding all pairs of functions x(t), yet) for which the equations of 
motion are valid, yields all possible motions of a particle under the 
prescribed force. 
h. Motion of Falling Bodies 
The simplest example of a known force is that of gravity acting on a 
particle near the surface of the earth. It is known from direct obser-
vation that (aside from effects of air resistance) every falling body has an 
acceleration which is directed vertically downward, and which has the 
same magnitude g for all bodies. Measured in feet per second per 
second, g has the approximate value 32.16.1 
If we choose an 
1 The precise value of g, which also includes in addition to gravitational attraction, 
effects of the rotation of the earth, depends on the location on the earth. 

Sec. 4.4 
Motion of a Particle under Given Forces 399 
x,y-coordinate system in which the y-axis points vertically upward while 
the x-axis is horizontal, the acceleration :It = (x, fj) has the components 
x = 0, 
fj = -g. 
By Newton's fundamental law the vector F representing the force of 
gravity acting on a particle of mass m must then be 
F = (0, -mg). 
This force vector is likewise directed vertically downward; its magni-
tude, the weight of the body near the surface of the earth, is mg. 
When we cancel out the factor m, the equations of motion of a 
particle under gravity take the form 
x = 0, 
fj = -g. 
From these equations we can easily obtain a description of the most 
general motion possible for a falling body. Integrating with respect 
to t yields 
x = a, 
'Ii = -gt + b, 
where a and b are constants. A further integration then shows that 
x = at + c, 
y = -lgt2 + bt + d, 
where c and d are constants. Thus the general solution of our equations 
of motion depends on four un-specified constants a, b, c, d. We can 
immediately relate the values of these constants for an individual 
motion to the initial conditions for that motion. If the particle at the 
initial time t = 0 is at the point (xo, Yo), then setting t = 0 we find 
c = xo, 
d = Yo. 
The velocity R = (x, 'Ii) = (a, -gt + b) reduces for t = 0 to (a, b). 
Thus (c, d) and (a, b) represent respectively initial position and initial 
velocity of the particle. Any choice of these initial conditions leads 
uniquely to a motion. 
In case a :;6. 0, that is, in case the initial velocity is not vertical, we can 
eliminate t and obtain a nonparametric representation for the orbit 
of the particle. Solving the first equation for t and substituting into 
the second yields 
y = -
...K.. (x -
C)2 + ~ (x -
c) + d. 
2a2 
a 
Hence the path is a parabola. For a = 0 we have x = c = constant, 
and the whole motion takes place along a vertical straight line. 

400 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
c. Motion of a Particle Constrained to a Given Curve 
In most problems of mechanics the forces acting on a particle depend 
on the position and velocity of the particle. As a rule, the equations 
of motion are too complicated to permit us to determine all possible 
motions. Considerable-simplification arises if we may consider the curve 
C described by the particle as known and only have to determine the 
motion of the particle along the curve. In a large class of mechanical 
problems the particle is constrained (by means of some mechanical 
device) to move on a given curve C. The simplest example is the plane 
pendulum where a mass m is joined by an inextensible string of length L 
to a point Po and moves under the influence of gravity on a circle of 
radius L about Po. 
Along the curve C we use the arc length s as parameter. The curve is 
then given by x = x(s), y = y(s). Finding the motion of the particle 
along C then amounts to finding s as a function of t. An equation of 
motion along the curve is obta:~ned as follows. 
We form the inner product of both sides of Newton's formula 
m~ = F with a vector ;: 
m~.; = F.;. 
If we take for; the vector of length 1 whose direction is that of the 
tangent to C in the sense of increasing s, that is, ; = dR/ds, we have 
in F . ; = f the tangential component of the force, or the force acting 
in the direction of the motion. According to Equation (41), p. 396,the 
tangential component it· ; of the acceleration is just dv/dt = d 2s/dt2, 
that is, the acceleration of the particle along the curve. Newton's law 
then yields the formula 
(45) 
ms =f, 
that is, the mass of the particle multiplied with the acceleration of the 
particle along its path equals the force acting on the particle in the 
direction of motion. 
In applying this equation to a particle constrained to move along C 
we assume that the constraints make no contribution to 11 For a 
force F = (p, 0') we have then by Equation (44), p. 398, 
(46) 
f = P dx + 0' dy 
ds 
ds 
1 Actually, the mechanism of constraint has to supply a force that holds the particle 
on C (in the simple pendulum this is provided by the tension of the string). We 
assume that this "reaction" force is perpendicular to the curve and thus has no 
tangential component; this would be the case for frictionless sliding of the particle 
along a curve. 

Sec. 4.4 
Motion of a Particle under Given Forces 
401 
dx dy 
since the vector ~ has the components -
, -
(see p. 394). For a known 
ds ds 
curve C the direction cosines dx and dy of the tangent can be considered 
ds 
ds 
as known functions of s. If likewise the force F = (p, a) depends only 
on the position of the particle, we have in f a known function of s. 
The motion of the particle along C then has to be determined from 
the relatively simple differential equation ms = f(s). 
Figure 4.43 Motion on a given curve under gravity. 
Specifically, for the gravitational force F = (0, -mg) we have 
(46a) 
f = -mg dy ; 
ds 
thus the equation of motion of a particle constrained to move on a 
curve C under the influence of gravity becomes 
d2s 
dy 
(47) 
dt2 = -g ds' 
If IX denotes the inclination angle of the curve, we have dyjds = sin ex 
(see Fig. 4.43), and the equation of motion becomes 
d2s 
. 
-
= -gsmlX. 
dt 2 
For a particle constrained to move on a circle of radius L about the 
origin ("simple pendulum") 
x = L sin e, 
y = -L cos e, 

402 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
o 
Figure 4.44 The simple pendulum. 
where e = s/L is the polar angle counted from the downward direction. 
Here (see Fig. 4.44) rx. = e and thus 
d2s 
dy de 
. 
-
= - g -.:.- - = - g Stu e 
dt2 
de ds 
or 
4.5 Free Fall of a Body Resisted by Air 
We start with two examples of the motion of a particle along a 
straight line. We consider only cases where the force acts in the 
direction of the line so that no mechanism of constraint is necessary. 
The path of a body falling freely downward can be described para-
metrically by x = constant, Y = s. If gravity is the only force acting, we 
have the equation of motion 
ms = -mg. 
F or a particle released at the time t = 0 from the altitude Yo = So 
with initial velocity Po (counted positive if upward), we find then by 
integration 
] f we wish to take account of the effect of the friction or air resistance 
acting on the particle, we have to consider this as a force whose direction 
is opposite to the direction of motion and concerning which we must 
make definite physical assumptions.1 We shall work out the results of 
1 These assumptions must be chosen to suit the particular physical system under 
consideration; for example. the law of resistance for low speeds is not the same as 
that for high ones (such as bul1et velocities). 

Sec. 4.5 
Free Fall of a Body Resisted by Air 403 
different physical assumptions: (a) The resistance is proportional to 
the velocity, and is given by an expression of the form -d, where r is a 
positive constant; (b) the resistance is proportional to the square of 
the velocity, and is of the form -d2 for positive sand d 2 for negative s. 
In accordance with Newton's law we obtain the equations of motion 
(a) 
(b) 
ms= -mg - d, 
ms = -mg + d 2, 
where we have assumed in (b) that the body is falling (s < 0). If we 
first consider s = vet) as the function sought, we have 
(a) 
(b) 
mv = -mg - rv, 
mv = -mg + rv2• 
Instead of determining v as a function of t by these equations, we 
determine t as a function of v, writing our differential equations in the 
form 
(a) 
dt 
I 
-=- g(l + k 2v) , 
dv 
(b) 
dt 
I 
-=- g(l -
k 2v2) , 
dv 
where we have put J r/mg = k. With the help of the methods given in 
Chapter 3 we can immediately carry out the integrations and obtain 
(a) 
(b) 
t = - ~ 
log (1 + k 2v) + to, 
gk 
1 
I -
kv 
t = -
log --- + to. 
2gk 
I + kv 
Solving these equations for t', we have 
(a) 
v = - ~ (1 _ e-gk2U-to). 
k 
I I -
e-2gkU-to) 
1 
v = - -
= - - tanh [gk(t -
to)]. 
k 1 + e-2gk<t- to) 
k 
(b) 
These equations at once reveal an important property of the motion. 
The velocity does not increase with time beyond all bounds, but tends 
to a definite limit depending on the mass m and the constant r (which, 
in turn, depends on the shape of the falling body and the air density). 

404 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
For 
(a) 
lim vet) = _ 12 = _ mg , 
t-+oo 
k 
r 
(b) 
lim vet) = - !. = -
rmg. 
t-+oo 
k"';-; 
For the limiting velocities frictional resistance just balances gravi-
tational attraction. A second integration performed on our expressions 
for vet) = s, with the help of the methods of Chapter 3, gives the results 
(which may be verified by differentiation) 
112 
set) = - - (t - t) -
-
(e-gk (t-to) -
1) + c 
k2 
0 
gk4 
(a) 
1 
set) = - -2 log [cosh gk(t -
to)] + c, 
gk 
(b) 
where c is a constant of integration. Here to is the time at which the 
particle would have had velocity 0 and c its altitude at the time to. 
The two constants c and to can also be related easily to the velocity and 
position at any other time fl' if we consider those quantities as initial 
conditions. 
4.6 The Simplest Type of Elastic Vibration-Motion of a Spring 
As a second example-of major significance-we consider the 
motion of a particle which moves along the x-axis and is pulled back 
toward the origin by an elastic force. As regards the elastic force we 
assume that it is always directed toward the origin and that its magni-
tude is proportional to the distance from the origin. In other words, we 
take the force as equal to - kx, where the coefficient k is a measure of the 
stiffness of the elastic connection. Since k is assumed positive, the 
force is negative when x is positive and positive when x is negative. 
Newton's law now tells us that 
(48) 
mx = -kx. 
This differential equation by itself does not determine the motion 
completely, but for a given instant of time, say t = 0, we can arbitrarily 
assign the initial position x(O) = Xo and the initial velocity x(O) = Vo; 
that is, in physical language, that we can start off the particle from 
an arbitrary position with an arbitrary velocity; thereafter the motion 
is determined by the differential equation. Mathematically, this is 
expressed by the fact that the general solution of our differential 
equation contains two constants of integration, at first undetermined, 

Sec. 4.7 
Motion on a Given Curve 405 
whose values we find by means of the initial conditions. This fact we 
shall prove immediately. 
__ 
We can easily state such a solution directly. If we put w = ~ kim, 
our differential equation becomes d2xldt2 = -w2x. The substitution 
T = wt for the independent variable reduces this equation to the form 
d2xldT2 = -x, discussed in Chapter 3, p. 312. Thus our differential 
equation is satisfied by all the functions 
x(t) = C1 cos wt + C2 sin wt, 
which may also be verified at once by differentiation (where C1 and C2 
denote constants chosen arbitrarily). In Chapter 3, p. 313, we saw 
that there are no other solutions of our differential equation and hence 
that every such motion under the influence of an elastic force is given 
by this expression. This can easily be put in the form 
x(t) = a sin w(t -
b) = -a sin w b cos wt + a cos w b sin wt; 
we need only write -a sin w {) = C1 and a cos w b = C2, thus intro-
ducing instead of Cl and C2 the new constants a and b. Motions of this 
type are said to be sinusoidal or simple harmonic. They are periodic; 
any state [that is, position x(t) and velocity x(t)] is repeated after the 
time T = 27Tlw, which is called the period, since the functions sin wt 
and cos wt have the period T. The number a is called the maximum 
displacement or amplitude of the oscillation. The number liT = w127T 
is called the frequency of the oscillation; it measures the number of 
oscillations per unit time. We shall return to the theory of oscillations 
in Chapter 8. 
*4.7 Motion on a Given Curve 
a. The Differential Equation and Its Solution 
We now turn to the general form of the problem of motion along a 
given curve under an arbitrary preassigned force mf(s). We shall deter-
mine the function s(t) as a function of t by means of the differential 
equation [Eq. (45), p. 400] 
s = f(s), 
where f(s) is a given function. l This differential equation in s can be 
solved completely by the following device. 
lOur original equation of motion along a curve was ms = (s); we can, however, 
always write the function /(s) in the form m(s), obtaining the simpler form of the 
equation used here. 

406 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
We consider any primitive function F(s) of f(s), so that F'(s) = f(s), 
and multiply both sides of the equation s = f(s) = F'(s) by s. We can 
then write the left-hand side in the form d(S2j2)jdl, as we see at once by 
differentiating the expression S2; the right-hand side F'(s)s, however, 
by the chain rule of differentiation is the derivative of F(s) with respect 
to the time I, if in F(s) we regard the quantity s as a function of I. 
Hence we immediately have 
d (1 .2) 
d ( 
-
- s = - F S), 
dt 2 
dt 
or by integration 
lS2 = F(s) + c, 
where c denotes a constant yet to be determined. 
We have now arrived at an equation which only involves the function 
S(/) and its firsl derivative. (Later on we shall interpret this equation as 
expressing the conservation of energy during the motion.) Let us write 
this equation in the form dsjdl = v'2[F(s) + c). We see that from 
this we cannot immediately find s as a function of 1 by integration. 
However, we arrive at a solution of the problem if we at first content 
ourselves with finding the inverse function t(s), that is, the time taken 
by the particle to reach a definite position s. For t(s) we have the 
equation 
dt 
1 
. 
ds = ~v':=2[=F(=s )=+=c) , 
thus the derivative of the function t(s) is known, and we have 
J 
ds 
t = v'2[F(s) + c] + c1, 
where C1 is another constant of integration. As soon as we have 
performed this last integration we have solved the problem, for although 
we have not determined the position s as a function of t, we have 
inversely found the time t as a function of the position s. The fact 
that the two constants of integration c and C1 are still available enables 
us to make the general solution fit special initial conditions. 
The general discussion can be illustrated by our earlier example of 
elastic vibrations if we identify x with s; heref(s) = -oh and corre-
spondingly, say, F(s) = -ioh2• We therefore obtain 
dt 
1 
-
= ---;-==== 
ds 
,,/2c _ nis2 ' 

Sec. 4.7 
Motion on a Given Curve 407 
and furthermore, 
t =f, ds 
+ CI • 
v2c -
W 2S2 
This integral, however, 'can easily be evaluated by introducing ws/.J2c 
as a new variable: we thus obtain 
1 
. ws 
t = - arc Sin j_ + CI , 
W 
y2c 
or, forming the inverse function, 
.J2c. 
( 
) 
s = -- Sin W t -
CI • 
W 
We are thus led to exactly the same formula for the solution as before. 
From this example we also see what the constants of integration 
mean and how they are to be determined. If, for example, we require 
that at the time t = 0 the particle shall be at the point s = 0 and at that 
instant shall have the velocity 05(0) = 1, we obtain the two equations 
O 
.J2c. 
= --SInWCI , 
1 = .J 2c cos WCI' 
W 
from which we find that the constants have the values CI = 0, C = i. 
The constants of integration c and CI can be determined in exactly the 
same way when the initial position So and the initial velocity So (at 
time t = 0) are prescribed arbitrarily. 
h. Particle Sliding down a Curve 
The case of a particle sliding down a frictionless curve under the 
influence of gravity can be treated very simply by the method just 
described. We found already on p. 401 the equation of motion corre-
sponding to this case: 
.. 
dy 
s = -g ds' 
where dots indicate differentiation with respect to the time t. The 
right-hand side of this equation is a known function of s, since we know 
the curve and we can therefore regard the quantities x and y as known 
functions of s. 
As in the last section, we multiply both sides of this equation by S. 
The left-hand side then becomes the derivative of ts2 with respect to t. 
If in the function y(s) we regard s as a function of t, the right-hand side 

408 
Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
of our equation is the derivative of -gy with respect to t. On inte-
grating, we therefore have 
M2 = -gy + c, 
where C is a constant of integration. To find the interpretation of this 
constant, we suppose that at the time t = 0 our particle is at the point 
of the curve for which the coordinates are Xo and Yo and that at this 
instant its velocity is zero, that is, s(O) = O. Then putting t = 0 we 
immediately have -gyo + C = 0, so that 
M2 = g(yo -
y). 
Since S2 could never be negative, we see that the altitude y of the particle 
never exceeds the value Yo, and only reaches it at those instants when the 
velocity of the particle is zero. The velocity is larger as the particle is 
lower. Now instead ofregarding s as a function of t we shall consider 
the inverse function t(s). For this we at once obtain 
dt = ± 
I 
, 
ds 
-J2g(yo -
y) 
which is equivalent to 
f 
ds 
t = C1 ± 
, 
-J2g(yo -
y) 
where C1 is a new constant of integration. As regards the sign of the 
square root, which is the same as the sign of s, we notice that if the 
particle moves along an arc which is lower than Yo everywhere except 
at the ends, the sign cannot change. For the sign of s can change only 
where s = 0, that is, where y -
Yo = O. Thus the particle can only 
"turn back" at points of maximum elevation Yo on the curve. Instead 
of the arc length s the curve can also be referred to any parameter (), 
so that x = c/>«(), y = 1p«(). Introducing () as independent variable, we 
obtain 
f ds 
d() 
fJ X,2 + y,2 
t = C1 ± -
= C1 ± 
d(), 
d() -J2g(yo -
y) 
2g(yo -
y) 
where the functions x' = c/>'«(), y' = 1p'«(), and y = 1p«() are known. 
In order to determine the constant of integration C1 we note that for 
t = 0 the parameter () will have a value ()o. This immediately gives us 
our solution in the form i
B J 
X,2 + y,2 
(49) 
t = ± 
d(). 
Bo 
2g(yo -
y) 

Sec. 4.7 
Motion on a Given Curve 409 
We see that this equation represents the time taken by the particle to 
move from the parameter value 00 to the parameter value 0. The 
inverse function O(t) of this function t(O) enables us to describe the 
motion completely; for at each instant t we can determine the point 
x = 4>[O(t)], Y = 1p[O(t)] which the particle is then passing. 
c. Discussion of the Motion 
From the equations just found, even without an explicit expression 
for the result of the integration we can deduce the general nature of the 
motion by simple intuitive reasoning. We suppose that our curve is of 
y 
B 
A 
Yo~--"----------------------~ 
o 
Xo 
Figure 4.45 
the type shown in Fig. 4.45, that is, that it consists of an arc convex 
downward; we take s as increasing from left to right. If we initially 
release the particle at the point A with coordinates Xo = 4>(00), Yo = "p(Oo), 
corresponding to 0 = 00, the velocity increases, for the acceleration 
s is positive. The particle travels from A to the lowest point with 
ever-increasing velocity. After the lowest point is passed, however, the 
acceleration is negative, since the right-hand side -g dy/ds of the 
equation of motion is negative. The velocity therefore decreases. From 
the equation S2 = 2g(yo -
y) we see at once that the velocity reaches 
the value zero when the particle reaches the point B whose height is the 
same as that of the initial position A. Since the acceleration is still 
negative, the motion of the particle must be reversed at this point, 
so that the particle will swing back to the point A; this action will 
repeat itself indefinitely. (The reader will recall that friction has been 
disregarded.) In this oscillatory motion the time which the point takes 
to return from B to A must clearly be the same as the time taken to 
move from A to B, since at equal heights we have equal values of lsi. If 

410 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
we denote the time required for a complete journey from A to Band 
back again by T, the motion will obviously be periodic with period T. 
If 00 and 01 are the values of the parameter corresponding to the points 
A and B, respectively, the half-period is given by the expression 
(50) 
T 
1 / ill1 J 
x'· + y'. 
/ 
- = -= 
dO 
2 
.J2g 
110 
Yo - Y 
= 1 / (111 
cp'2(0) + "1"2(0) dO / . 
.J2g Jllo 
"1'(00) -
"1'(0) 
If O2 is the value of the parameter corresponding to the lowest point of 
the curve, the time which the particle takes to fall from A to this lowest 
point is 
1 / (112 Jx'. + y'. dO / . 
.J2g Jllo 
Yo - Y 
d. The Ordinary Pendulum 
The simplest example is given by the so-called simple pendulum. 
Here the curve under consideration is a circle of fixed radius L: 
x = L sin 0, 
Y = -L cos 0, 
where the angle 0 is measured in the positive sense from the position 
of rest. From the general expression (50) we at once obtain using the 
addition theorem for the cosine, 
(2i (110 
dO 
fL (110 
dO 
T = ,.j g Lllo .Jcos 0 - cos 00 = ,.j g Lllo J .. 
00 
•• 0 ' 
sm -
- sm -
2 
2 
where 00 (0 < 00 < 1T) denotes the amplitude of oscillation of the 
pendulum, that is, the angular position from which the particle is 
released at time t = 0 with velocity zero.l By the substitution 
sin (0/2) 
du 
cos (0/2) 
u= 
,-= 
sin (00/2) 
dO 
2 sin (00/2) 
our expression for the period of oscillation of the pendulum becomes 
T=2J~ r 
du 
g -1 J(1 _ 
U 2)( 1 _ u2 sin2 (~)) 
1 We have assumed here that the velocity does become equal to zero at some time 
during the motion. This excludes the type of tumbling motion of the pendulum in 
which () is not periodic and varies monotonically for all t. 

Sec. 4.7 
Motion on a Given Curve 411 
We have therefore expressed the period of oscillation of the pendulum 
by an elliptic integral (see p. 299). 
If we assume that the amplitude of the oscillation is small, so that we 
may with sufficient accuracy replace the second factor under the 
square root sign by I, we obtain the expression 
as an approximation for the period of oscillation. We can evaluate 
this last integral by formula 13 in our table of integrals (p. 263) and 
obtain the expression 27TJ L/g as an approximate value for T. To this 
order of approximation the period is independent of 00, that is, of the 
amplitude of the oscillation of the pendulum. Clearly, the exact 
period is larger and increases with 00• Since in the interval of inte-
gration 
we find for the period the estimates 
27TJ~ < T < 
1 
27TJ~ . 
g -
- cos (00/2) 
g 
For angles 00 < 10° we have I/(cos 00/2) :s;; sec 5° < 1.004, so that the 
period will be given by the formula 27TJ L/g with a relative error of less 
than ~ %. For finer approximation of the elliptic integral for T see 
Section 7.6f. 
e. The Cycloidal Pendulum 
The fact that the period of oscillation of the ordinary pendulum is not 
strictly independent of the amplitude of oscillation caused Christian 
Huygens, in his prolonged efforts to construct accurate clocks, to seek a 
curve C for which the period of oscillation is independent of the position 
on C at which the oscillating particle begins its motion.l Huygens 
recognized that the cycloid is such a curve. 
In order that a particle may actually be able to oscillate on a cycloid 
the cusps of the cycloid must point in the direction opposite to that of 
the force of gravity; that is, we must rotate the cycloid considered 
previously (p. 328) about the x-axis (cf. Fig. 4.2, p. 329). We therefore 
1 The oscillations are then said to be isochronous. 

412 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
write the equations of the cycloid in the form 
x = a(O + 77 + sin 0), 
Y = -a(1 + cos 0), 
Ch.4 
which also involves a change of the parameter t into 0 + 77 (Fig. 4.46). 
______ ~O~------------------~2~~~a----------~x 
1\ 
/YO 
I \ 
-~----
"-' .... 
,../ 
-2a~----~~----~~------------------
Figure 4.46 Path described by a cycloidal pendulum. 
The time which the particle takes to travel from a point at the height 
Yo = -a(1 + cos ( 0) 
down to the lowest point, and up again to the height Yo, by formula 
(50) of p. 410, is 
I = J 1 f60 J 
X,2 + y,2 dO = J2af60 
cos (012) 
dO. 
2 
2g -60 
Yo -
Y 
g -60 -Jcos 0 - cos 00 
Using exactly the same substitutions as for the period of the simple 
pendulum, we arrive at the integral 
!: - 2J~ Ii 
du 
2 -
g -1 -J 1 - u2 
and we therefore obtain 
T=477/g. 
The period of oscillation T, therefore, is indeed independent of the 
amplitude 00, A simple way of actually constraining a particle by a 
string to move on a cycloid will be described on p. 428. 

Sec. 4.8 
Motion in a Gravitational Field 413 
*4.8 Motion in a Gravitational Field 
As an example of unconstrained motion we consider a particle 
moving in the gravitational field of an attracting mass. 
a. Newton's Universal Law of Gravitation 
Kepler's description of the motion of the planets, which was based on 
the precise observations of Tycho Brahe, led Newton to formulate his 
general law for the gravitational attraction between any two particles. 
Let Po = (xo, Yo) and P = (x, y) be two particles of masses mo and m, 
respectively. Let r = ../(x -
XO)2 + (y -
yo)2 be the distance between 
the particles. Then Po exerts on P a force F which has the direction of 
liP; and the magnitude IFI = ymom/r2, where y is the "universal 
gravitational constant." Since F can then only differ by a positive 
~ 
factor from the vector PPo, which itself has magnitude r, we must have 
_ ymom ~ 
_ (ymom(xo -
x) ymom(yo -
y») 
F -
3 
PPo -
3 
' 
3 
• 
r 
r 
r 
This law of attraction refers to particles, that is, to bodies that can be 
considered to be concentrated in points, neglecting the actual extent of 
the bodies (Fig. 4.47). The validity of such an assumption is plausible 
enough for celestial bodies whose mutual distances are tremendous 
when compared with their diameters. Newton vastly increased the 
range of application of this law by showing that the same law of attraction 
also describes the attraction of a body of mass mo of considerable extent 
on a particle of mass m, provided that the body is a sphere of constant 
density, or, more generally, provided that the body is made up of 
concentric spherical shells of constant density; in that case the attrac-
tion of the body on a particle P located outside the body is the same as 
if the total mass mo of the body were located at its center Po (Fig. 4.47). 
The earth can with fair accuracy be thought of as made up of concentric 
shells of constant density, so that the attraction of the earth on a 
particle of mass m on its surface is directed toward the center Po of the 
earth (that is, vertically downward for an observer) and has magnitude 
ymom/R2, where R is the radius of the earth and mo its mass. We can 
identify then ymom/R2 with mg, whereg is the gravitational acceleration 
(see p. 398). In other words, we have g = ymO/R2. 
From Newton's fundamental law we find for a particle P of mass m 
moving under the influence of the attraction of a mass mo located at Po 

414 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
the equations of motion 
.. 
ymo(Yo -
y) 
y= 
3 
• 
r 
We now make the further simplifying assumption that mo is so much 
larger than m that the effects of the attraction of P on Po can be neglected 
r 
F = ----;:2 
mI 
'Ymom 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
bmo 
(/I) 
m 
mo 
(b) 
Figure 4.47 (a) Newtonian attraction of two particles. (b) Gravitational attrac-
tion of the earth. 
and Po can be considered at rest. This would, for example, be the 
situation for a pair of bodies like the sun and a planet or the earth and 
a body on its surface. Taking the origin of coordinates at Po we then 
have for P = (x, y) the equations of motion 
(51) 
.. 
ymox 
x= ---, 
r 3 
with r = JX2 + y2. 
.. 
ymoY 
y=---
r3 

Sec. 4.8 
Motion in a Gravitational Field 415 
b. Circular Motion about the Center of Attraction 
We shall not attempt to find the most general solution of these 
differential equations (which, as is well known, would correspond to 
motion along a path of the form of a conic section, with one focus at 
the attracting center). Instead, we shall just consider the simplest types 
of motion consistent with these equations, namely, uniform circular 
motions about the origin and motions along a radius from the origin. 
For uniform circular motion of P along a circle of radius a about the 
origin we have r = a and 
x = a cos wt, 
y = a sin wt, 
where w is a constant. The period T of the motion, that is, the time 
after which P returns to the same position, is T = 27T/W. We find for 
the velocity components 
i = -aw sin wt, 
y = aw cos wt 
so that the speed of P in its orbit is 
(52) 
/ .2.2 
27Ta 
v = V x + y = aw = -- . 
T 
The acceleration of P has the components 
x = -aw2 cos wt = -w2x, 
fj = -aws sin wt = -wSy. 
Clearly, the equations of motion (51) are then satisfied if 
or 
(53) 
a3 = ymo = ymo T2. 
w2 
%2 
This is just Kepler's third law for the special case of circular motion, 
according to which the cubes of the distances of the planets from the 
sun are proportional to the squares of their periods. 
We can give some simple illustrations of Kepler's law for the case 
where the attracting body is the earth with its mass mo and radius R. 
Observing that here ymo = g R2 we have 
a3 = gR2 T2. 
%2 
For a satellite circling the earth at tree-top level (neglecting, of course, 
air resistance) we have a = R -- 3963 miles. We find then from our 

416 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch. 4 
formula for the period of the satellite the value 
T = 27T ~ 
"" 1.4 hours 
and for its velocity in its orbit 
(54) 
2'7TR 
I-
v = -
= V Rg "" 27,000 feet per second. 
T 
We can compare the value of T for the satellite circling the earth 
with the period of 27.32 days of the moon, that is, the time after which 
the moon returns to the same position among the stars ("sidereal 
month"). By Kepler's law the ratio of the distance a of the moon to the 
radius R of the earth should be given by the i-power of the ratio of 
the periods. This leads for the distance of the moon from the center of 
the earth to the value 
a = (27.32 X 24)% R "" 60R "" 240,000 miles, 
1.4 
which agrees well with the actual average value of the distance. 
c. Radial Motion-Escape Velocity 
The second type of motion we shall consider is that of a particle 
moving from the center of attraction along a ray, say the x-axis. Here 
y = 0, x = r, so that the equations of motion reduce to 
.. 
ymo 
X=--. 
x2 
Following our general procedure for equations of the type s = f(s), 
we multiply both sides of this equation with i; and obtain 
or 
Thus the expression 
... 
i; 
xx = -ymo-
x 2 
1 .2 _ ymo 
-x 
2 
x 

Sec. 4.8 
Motion in a Gravitational Field 417 
has a constant value h during the motion. (Later on we shall recognize 
this fact as an instance of the law of conservation of energy.) If we 
introduce x instead of t as independent variable, we have then 
dt 
1 
1 
-=-=± 
, 
dx 
i; 
-.}2h + (2ymo/x) 
which by integration leads to 
I
x 
d~ 
t = to ± 
. 
Xo -.}2h + (2ymo/~) 
We shall not bother to carry out the integration which can be performed 
easily with the help of the methods developed in Chapter 3. For a particle 
released at the time to = 0 at the distance Xo with initial velocity zero we 
have h = -ymo/xo. The time required for such a particle to fall into 
th::: attracting particle (x = 0) is then 
(xo 
d~ 
7T J 
X03 
t = Jo -.}2ymo(1/~ -
l/xo) = '2 
2ymo' 
By Kepler's law this is -.} -h times the time it would take the particle 
to circle the center of attraction at the distance Xo [see Eq. (53), 
p.4l5]. 
The relation 
has an interesting consequence when we investigate the circumstances 
under which a particle can escape to infinity. Since ti;2 ~ 0 we find for 
x -+ 00 that the constant h must be nonnegative, and hence that 
ti;2 -
ymo/x ~ 0 during the whole motion. In particular, a particle 
starting at the distance x = a with velocity v can escape to infinity 
only if tv2 -
ymo/a ~ O. The lowest possible value of the velocity v 
which will permit a particle to escape to infinity is then v = -.}2ymo/a. 
This is the escape velocity VB' For a particle starting at the surface of the 
earth and escaping to infinity, that is, escaping its gravitational pull, 
we have a = R, ymo = gR2, so that 
VB = -.}2gR I"-..J 37,000 feet per second. 
Hence [cf. (54), p. 416] the escape velocity is just Ii times the velocity 
needed to maintain a satellite in a circular orbit near the earth. A 

418 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
meteor falling from infinity onto the earth also would have velocity 
VB on impact, if we neglect air resistance and motion of the earth in its 
orbit. 
4.9 Work and Energy 
a. Work Done by Forces during a Motion 
The concept of work throws new light on the considerations of the 
last section and on many other questions of mechanics and physics. 
Let us again think of the particle as moving on a curve under the 
influence of a force acting along the curve, and let us suppose that its 
position is specified by the length of arc measured from any fixed 
initial point. The force acting in the direction of motion itself will 
then, as a rule, be a function of s. This function will have positive 
values where the direction of the force is the same as the direction of 
increasing values of 1'1 and negative values where the direction of the 
force is opposite to that of increasing values of s. 
If the magnitude of the force is constant along the path, we mean by 
the work done by the force the product of the force by the distance 
(I'll -
so) traversed, where I'll denotes the final point and So the initial 
point of the motion. If the force is not constant, we define the work by 
means of a limiting process. We subdivide the interval from So to I'll 
into n equal or unequal subintervals and notice that if the subintervals 
are small, the force in each one is nearly constant; if (Iv is a point chosen 
arbitrarily in the 'JIth subinterval, then throughout this subinterval the 
force will be approximately f( (Iv)' If the force throughout the 'JIth sub-
interval were exactly f( (Iv), the work done by our force would be 
exactly 
where I!l.sv as usual denotes the length of the 'JIth subinterval. If we now 
pass to the limit, letting n increase beyond all bounds while the length 
of the longest subinterval tends to zero, then by the definition of an 
integral our sum will tend to f
B1 
W= 
/(s) ds, 
BO 
which we naturally call the work done by the force. 
If the direction of the force and that of the motion are the same, the 
work done by the force is positive; we then say that the force does 
work. On the other hand, if the direction of the force and that of the 

Sec. 4.9 
HVork and Energy 419 
motion are opposed, the work done by the force is negative; we then 
say that work is done against the force. 1 
If we regard the coordinate of position s as a function of the time I, 
so that the force f(s) = p is also a function of t, then in a plane with 
rectangular coordinates sand p we can plot the point with coordinates 
s = s(t), p = p(t) as a function of the time. This point will describe a 
curve, which may be called the work diagram of the motion. If we are 
dealing with a periodic motion, as in any machine, then after a certain 
time T (one period) the moving point (s(t), pet)) must return to the same 
point; that is, the work diagram will be a closed curve. In this case the 
curve may consist simply of one and the same are, traversed first 
forward and then backward; this happens, for instance, in elastic 
oscillations. However, it is also possible for the curve to be a more 
general closed curve, enclosing an area; this is the case, for example, 
with machines in which the pressure on a piston is not the same during 
the forward stroke as during the backward stroke. The work done in 
one cycle, that is, in time T, will then be given simply by the negative 
of the area of the work diagram or, in other words, by the integral 
J
tO+T 
ds 
pet) -
dt, 
to 
dt 
where the interval of time from to to to + Trepresents exactly one period 
of the motion. If the boundary of the area is positively traversed, the 
work done is negative, if negatively traversed, the work done is positive. 
If the curve consists of several loops, some traversed positively and some 
traversed negatively, the work done is given by the sum of the areas of 
loops, each with its sign changed. 
These considerations are illustrated in practice by the indicator 
diagram of an old-fashioned steam engine. By a suitably designed 
mechanical device a pencil is made to move over a sheet of paper; the 
horizontal motion of the pencil relative to the paper is proportional to 
the distance's of the piston from its extreme position, whereas the 
vertical motion is proportional to the steam pressure, and hence 
proportional to the total force p of the steam on the piston. The 
piston therefore describes the work diagram for the engine on a known 
scale. The area of this diagram is measured (usually by means of a 
planimeter), and the work done by the steam on the piston is thus found. 
1 Note that here we must carefully characterize the force of which we are speaking. 
For example, in lifting a weight the work done by the force of gravity is negative: 
Work is done against gravity. But from the point of view of the person doing the 
lifting the work done is positive, for the person must exert a force opposed to gravity. 

420 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Here we also see that our convention for the sign of an area, as discussed 
on p. 365 is definitely of practical interest. 
For it sometimes 
happens when an engine is running light, that the highly expanded 
steam at the end of the stroke has a pressure lower than that required 
to expel it on the return stroke; on the diagram this is shown by a 
positively traversed loop; the engine itself is drawing energy from the 
flywheel instead of furnishing energy. 
b. Work and Kinetic Energy. 
Conservation 0/ Energy 
The law of motion 
ms=/ 
leads to a fundamental relation between the changes in velocity during 
the motion of a particle along a curve and the work done by the force 
/ in the direction of motion. We apply the same device used already 
several times in the preceding examples and multiply both sides of the 
equation of motion by s: 
mss =f(s)s. 
Now mss = (dfdt)lms2 = (dfdt)lmv2, where vet) = s is the velocity of 
the particle. Integrating both sides of the equation with respect to t 
between the limits to and t1, we find 
1 
1 
it1 
ds 
- mv2(t1 ) -
- mv2(to) = 
f(s) -
dt 
2 
2 
to 
dt 
f
S1 
= 
f(s) ds = W. 
So 
The quantity tmv2 is called the kinetic energy K of the particle. Hence: 
The change in kinetic energy of a particle during the motion equals the 
work done by the force acting on the particle in the direction of motion. 
The quantity f represented the force acting in the direction of motion 
or the tangential component of force. For a force F = (p, a) the force 
in the direction of motion is 
dR 
dx 
dy 
f=F'-=p-+a-. 
ds 
ds 
ds 
If p and a are known functions of x and y and if the particle is known to 
move along a curve x = xes), y = yes), then f also becomes a known 
function of s. Hence in order to compute the work 
(55) 
f
S1 
W= 
f(s)ds 
So 

Sec. 4.9 
Work and Energy 421 
as the particle moves from one position (xo, Yo) to another (Xl' YI), 
we have to know in general the path along which the particle moves. 
In an important class of cases the work W depends only on initial 
and final position and can be expressed in the form 
(56) 
with a suitable function V(x, y) the potential energy. The formula 
expressing that the change in kinetic energy equals the work done by 
the force then can also be written in the form 
Thus the quantity K + V, the sum of kinetic and potential mechanical 
energy, that is, the total energy, does not change during the motion. 
This is an instance of the general physical law of conservation of 
energy. 
A potential energy function V can easily be constructed in some of the 
motions discussed earlier. Thus for a particle subject to gravity we have 
F = (0, -mg) and f = -mg(dyjds). The work done by the force of 
gravity as the particle moves from a position (xo, Yo) to a position 
(xl> YI) is then 
f81 
dy 
f.1I1 
W= 
-mg-ds = 
-mgdy = mgyo -
mgYI' 
80 
ds 
110 
We see that W is proportional to the change in altitude between initial 
and end position. For the potential energy function V we can choose 
V = mgy (or more generally V = mgy + c, where c is any constant). 
The law of conservation of energy then states that the quantity 
is constant during the motion. We had noticed this fact already in 
investigating the motion of a particle sliding down a curve (p. 408). 
c. The Mutual Attraction of Two Masses 
Another example of a force with which we can associate a potential 
energy function V is furnished by the gravitational attraction F exerted 
by a particle Po = (xo, Yo) of mass mo on a particle P = (x, y) of mass m. 
Here 
= [-p(X -
xo) -p(y -
Yo)] 
F 
3' 
3 
' 
r 
r 

422 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
where I-' = ymom and r = .../(x -
XO)2 + (y -
YO)2. 
(According to 
Coulomb's law the same type of formula gives the interaction of two 
electric charges.) 
The force in the direction of motion is then 
I-' [ 
dx 
dY] 
I-' dr 
d I-' 
f = - -
(x -
xo) - + (y -
Yo) -
= - - - = - -
r3 
ds 
ds 
r2 ds 
ds r 
since 
(x -
xo) dx + (y _ Yo) dy = !!!. [(x -
XO)2 + (y -
Yo)2] 
ds 
ds 
2 ds 
1 dr2 
dr 
=--=r-. 
2 ds 
ds 
The work done by the force of attraction when the particle P moves 
from a position (xl> Yl) to the position (X2' Y2) is then 
where Vex, y) = -I-'/r = -I-'/.../(x -
XO)2 + (y -
YO)2 is the potential 
energy. 
If we move the particle from the position (Xl' Yl) to infinity (corre-
sponding to r2 = (0), the work done by the force of attraction is 
-I-'/rl • The work done by an opposing force that moves the particle 
to infinity has the same numerical value but the opposite sign. Hence 
I-'/rl = - V(xl> Yl) is the work that has to be done against the force of 
attraction in order to move the particle to infinity from the position 
(Xl' Yl)' This important expression is called the mutual potential of 
the two particles. Therefore here the potential is defined as the work 
required to separate the two attracting masses completely, for example, 
the work required in order to tear an electron completely away from its 
atom (ionization potential). 
If the attracting mass Po is considered as fixed, the law of conser-
vation of energy implies that the attracted particle P moves in such a way 
that the expression 
(the total energy per unit mass m) has a constant value during the 
motion. We had derived this fact already for the special case of purely 
radial motion; we see now that it holds for any type of motion under 

Sec. 4.9 
Work and Energy 423 
the influence of gravitational attraction. We can conclude again that 
h ~ 0 for a particle escaping to infinity; its orbit is then unbounded 
(parabola or hyperbola) instead of bounded (ellipse). The escape 
velocity 
v =J2ymo 
e 
, 
r 
which corresponds to h = 0, is the least velocity which enables the 
particle to escape to infinity from a given distance r. It does not 
depend on the direction in which the particle is released but only on 
the distance r from the attracting center. 
d. The Stretching of a Spring 
As a third example we consider the work done in stretching a spring. 
Under the assumptions on the elastic properties of the spring made on 
p. 404, the force acting is! = -kx, where k is constant. The work that 
must be done against this force in order to stretch the spring from the 
unstretched position x = 0 to the final position x = Xl is therefore 
given by the integral 
*e. The Charging of a Condenser 
The concept of work in other branches of physics can be treated in a 
similar way. For example, let us consider the charging of a condenser. 
If we denote the quantity of electricity in the condenser by Q, its 
capacity by C, and the difference of potential (voltage) across the 
condenser by V, then we know from physics that Q = CV. Moreover, 
the work done in moving a charge Q through a difference of potential 
V is equal to Q V. Since in the charging of the condenser the difference 
of potential V is not constant but increases with Q, we perform a 
passage to the limit exactly analogous to that on p. 418, and as the 
expression for the work done in charging the condenser we obtain 
(Ql 
1 (Ql 
1 Q 2 
1 
Jo VdQ = c Jo Q dQ = 2-Z = 2 QlVl, 
where Ql is the total quantity of electricity passed into the condenser 
and VI is the difference of potential across the condenser at the end of 
charging process. 

424 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Appendix 
* A.1 Properties of the Evolute 
On p. 359 we defined the evolute E of a curve C as the locus of the 
centers of curvature of C. If C is represented by: x = x(s), y = y(s), 
using the arc length s as parameter, then the center of curvature (~, 'f}) 
of the point C with parameter s is given by [cf. (17a), p. 359] 
(58) 
~ = x -
py, 
'f} = y + pi, 
with 
1 
... 
. .. 
I< = - = xy -
yx. 
p 
The quantities I< and Ipi are, respectively, curvature and radius of 
curvature of C. 
We can deduce some interesting geometrical properties of the 
evolute from these formulas. 
DIfferentiating the relation i 2 + y2 = 1 leads to, ix + Yii = O. 
Since also iii - yx = 1/ p, we have 
(59) 
.. 
1 . 
x = - -y, 
.. 
1. 
y=-x. 
p 
p 
Differentiating the formulas (58) with respect to s 
g = i - pii - py = -Py, 
iJ = Y + px + pi = pi, 
and therefore 
gi + iJy = O. 
Since the direction cosines of the normal to the curve are given by 
-y and i, the normal to the curve C is tangent to the evo/ute E at the 
center of curvature,' or the tangent to the evolute is the normal of 
the given curve; or the evo/ute is the "envelope" of the normals (cf. 
Fig. A.1). 
If further we denote the length of arc of the evolute, measured from 
an arbitrary fixed point, by (1, we have, using s as parameter, 
.2 
(d(1)2 
t2 + '2 
(1= 
-
=s-
'f). 
ds 
S~nce i 2 + y2 = I, we obtain from our formulas (59), 
&2 = p2. 

Sec. A.I 
Properties of the Eva/ute 425 
If we choose the direction in which a is measured in a suitable way, 
it follows that 
a = p, 
provided that p =F O. Integration yields 
al -
ao = PI -
Po· 
That is, the length of arc of the evolute between two points is equal to the 
difference of the corresponding radii of curvature, provided that p 
remains different from zero for the arc under consideration. 
Figure A.I Evolute (E). 
This last condition is not superfluous. For if p changes sign, then 
the formula a = p shows that on passing the corresponding point of 
the evolute the length of arc a has a maximum or minimum; that is, 
on passing this point we do not simply continue to reckon a onward, 
but we must reverse the sense in which a is measured. If we wish to 
avoid this reversal, we must on passing such a point change the sign in 
the preceding formula, that is, put a = - p. 
It may also be noted that the centers of curvature which correspond 
to maxima or minima of the radius of curvature are cusps of the evolute. 
[The proof is omitted here.] (See Figs. A.4, A.6.) 
The geometrical relationship just found can be expressed in yet 
another way: We imagine a flexible inextensible thread laid along an 

426 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Figure A.2 String construction of the involute C of a curve E: P1 = po + G1 -
Go. 
arc of the evolute E and stretched so that a part of it extends tangentially 
away from the curve to it; if in addition the end point Q of this thread 
lies initially on the original curve C, then as we unwind the thread Q 
will describe the curve C. This accounts for the name evolute (evolvere, 
to unwind). The curve C is called an involute of the evolute E. On the 
other hand, we may start with an arbitrary curve E and construct its 
involute C by this unwinding process. Then conversely E is seen to be 
the evolute of C (Fig. A.2). 
For the proof we consider the curve E, which is now the given curve, 
as given in the form e = e( a), 1J = 1J( a), where the current rectangular 
coordinates are denoted by ~ and 1J and the parameter a is length of 
arc on E. The winding is done as indicated in Fig. A.3; when the 
Figure A.3 

Sec. A.I 
Properties of the Evolute 427 
thread is completely wound on to the evolute E, its end Q coincides with 
the point A of E corresponding to some arc-length a. If the thread is 
now unwound until it is tangent to the evolute at the point P, corre-
sponding to the length of arc a > a, the length of the segment PQ will be 
(a -
a) and its direction cosines will be -~ and -ij, where the dot 
now denotes differentiation with respect to a. Thus for the coordinates 
x, y of the point Q we obtain the expressions 
(60) 
x = ~ - (a -
a)~, 
y = 'YJ -
(a -
a)ij, 
which give the equations for the involute described by the point Q in 
terms ofthe parameter a. By differentiation with respect to a we obtain 
(61) 
x = ~ -
~ + (a -
a)~ = (a -
a)~, 
y = ij - ij + (a -
aN = (a -
a)ij. 
Since U + ijij = 0, we at once find that 
~x + ijy = 0, 
which shows that the line PQ is normal to the involute C. We can 
therefore state that the normals to the curve Care tangl'"nt to the curve E. 
Since the tangent to E has direction cosines ~, ij we find for the direction 
cosines of the tangent of C the expressions 
(62) 
x 
. 
-;:=.=2 =+=.2 = 'YJ, 
" x 
y 
Differentiating the relation tx + ijy = 0 with respect to a and sub-
stituting for ~, ij, ~, ij, their expressions from the previous equations 
(61), (62) shows that 
o = ~x + ijy + ~x + ijii = x2 + y2 + -xy + xii . 
a -
a 
.Jx2 + y2 
Hence the radius of curvature of the curve C corresponding to the point 
Q = (x, y) turns out to be (see formula (IS) on p. 355) 
1 
(x2 + y2)3,i 
P = - = 
= a-a. 
K 
xii - yx 
This is also the distance of the point Q from P = (~, 'YJ). Because P 
also lies on the normal to Cat Q, we have in P the center of curvature 
of C corresponding to the point Q. Thus every curve E is the evo/ute 
of all its involutes. 

428 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
Examples. We consider the evolute of the cycloid 
x = TT + t + sin t, 
y = -I - cos t. 
By Eq. (17), p. 359, the center of curvature (~, 'fJ) for a curve referred 
to an arbitrary parameter t is 
~ 
. i 2 +il 
+. i 2 +il 
~=x-y '" 
... ' 
'fJ=y 
x ...
... 
xy -
yx 
xy -
yx 
A short computation yields then for the evolute of the cycloid 
~ = TT + t - sin t, 
'fJ = 1 + cos t. 
If we put t = T -
TT, then 
~ + TT = TT + T + sin T, 
'fJ -
2 = -I - cos T: 
these equations show that the evolute is itself a cycloid which is similar 
to the original curve, and can be obtained from it by translation as 
indicated in Fig. A.4. 
y 
----o----c 
Figure A.4 The cycloidal pendulum. 
This gives us a simple method of constructing a cycloidal pendulum 
(see p. 412). If a mass P is attached by a thread of length 4 to one of the 
cusps of the evolute, then under tension the thread will partly coincide 
with the evolute and lie along a tangent to the evolute the rest of the way. 
The mass P is then forced to lie on the involute, that is, on the original 
cycloid. Under gravity P must describe an isochronous motion over 
some portion of the cycloid with a period independent of the position 
at which P begins the motion. (The parameter t to which the cycloid is 
referred does not correspond to the time in the isochronous motion.) 

Sec. A.I 
Properties of the Eva/ute 429 
The free straight portion of a pendulum of this type varies in length 
during the motion (see Fig. A.4). 
As a further example we derive the equation for the involute of a 
circle. We begin with the circle ~ = cos (J, fJ = -sin (J and unwind the 
tangent, as indicated in Fig. A.5. The involute of the circle is then 
given in the form 
x = cos (J + (J sin (J, 
y = -sin (J + (J cos (J. 
(using the equation (60), on p. 427 with a = 0). 
Figure A.S Involute of the circle. 
Finally, we determine the evolute of the ellipse x = a cos t, y = 
b sin t. We at once have 
i 2 + 'll 
a2 -
b2 
~ = X - Y '" 
. " = 
cos3 t. 
xy -
yx 
a 
and 
. i 2 + y2 
a2 _ b2 . 
'I'l = Y + x 
= -
sm3 t, 
" 
iii - yi 
b 
as parametric representation of the evolute. If from these equations we 
eliminate t in the usual way, we obtain the equation of the evolute in 
non parametric form: ' 
(aW'~ + (bfJ)2/" = (a2 -
b2)2/". 

430 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
This curve is called an astroid. Its graph is given in Fig. A.6. By 
means of the parametric equations we may readily convince ourselves 
that the centers of curvature corresponding to the vertices of the ellipse 
are actually the cusps of the astroid. 
y 
Figure A.6 Evolute of the ellipse. 
* A.2 Areas Bounded by Closed Cu"es. Indices 
In Section 4.2 the oriented area bounded by a closed curve x = x(t), 
Y = y(t), ex ~ t ~ p, which nowhere intersects itself (a so-called simple 
closed curve), was represented by the integral 
A = - f: y(t)i(t) dt; 
the value obtained is positive or negative depending on whether the 
sense in which the boundary is described is counterclockwise or clock-
wise. This formula remains meaningful as a definition of A if we allow 
self-intersections of curves. It remains to see how A is related to areas 

Sec. A.2 
Areas Bounded by Closed Curves. Indices 
431 
in such cases. Suppose that the curve C, given by the equation x = x(t), 
y = yet), intersects itself in a finite number of points, thus dividing the 
plane into a finite number of portions R1, R2, • • •• Suppose further 
that the derivatives are continuous and that i;2 + '!? ¥: 0, except per-
haps for a finite number of jump-discontinuities (which mayor may 
not correspond to corners). Finally, it is assumed that the curve has 
y 
o 
Figure A.7 Indices {I i of regions R i formed by oriented closed curve. Figure A.S. 
a finite number of lines of support x = constant, that is, vertical lines 
that are either tangent to the curve or pass through a point of self-
intersection of the curve. 
To each region R i we then assign an integer, the index # i' defined in 
the following way: We choose an arbitrary point Q in R i , not lying on 
any line of support, and erect the half-line extending from Q upward 
in the direction of the positive y-axis. We count the number of times 
the curve C for increasing t crosses the half-line from right to left, 
and subtract the number of times the curve C crosses from left to right; 
the difference is the index #i. For example, the intericr of the curve 
illustrated in Fig. 4.17, p. 343, has the index # = + 1; and in Fig. A.7 
the regions R h ••• , Rs, R6 have the indexes #1 = -1, #2 = - 2, 

432 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
/1-3 = -1, /1-4 = 0, /1-5 = 1 and /1-6 = O. 
This number /1-i actually 
depends on the region Ri only and not on the particular point Q chosen 
in R i , as we readily see in the following manner. We choose any other 
point Q' in R i , not on a line of support, and join Q to Q' by a broken 
line lying entirely in the region Ri (Fig. A.8). As we proceed along this 
broken line from Q to Q' the number of right-to-Ieft crossings minus 
the number of left-to-right crossings is constant; for between lines of 
support the number of crossings of either type is unchanged, whereas 
on crossing a line of support the number of crossings of both types 
y 
--~o~------------~------~----------~x 
Figure A.8 
either stay the same or both numbers increase by one or both decrease 
by one; in every case, the difference is unaltered. Here a line of support 
that meets the curve at several different points, say A, R, ... , H, is 
considered as several different lines of support, FA, FR, .. " FH, 
where F is a point vertically below all the points A, R, ... ,H. Our 
argument then applies to each of these lines. Hence the number /1-i has 
the same value whether we use Q or Q' in determining it. 
In particular, if our curve does not intersect itself, the interior of the 
curve consists of a single region R whose index is + I or -1 depending 
on whether the sense in which the boundary is described is counter-
clockwise or clockwise. To see this we draw any vertical line (not a 
line of support) intersecting the curve; on this line we find the highest 
point of intersection P with the curve, and in R we choose a point Q 

Sec. A.2 
Areas Bounded by Closed Curves. Indices 433 
below P and so near it that no point of intersection lies between P 
and Q. Then above Q there lies one crossing of the curve, which if the 
curve is traversed in the counterclockwise sense must be a right-to-Ieft 
crossing, so that I-' = + 1; otherwise I-' = -1. As we have just seen, 
this same value of I-' holds for every other point of R. For such a 
curve, and, in fact, for all closed curves, one of the regions, the "out-
side" of the curve, extends unboundedly in all directions; we see 
immediately that this region has index 0, and ignore it in what follows. 
Then the relation between the integral A and the areas of the regions 
Ri is given by the following theorem: 
THEOREM. 
The value of the integral - f: yx dt is equal to the sum 
of the absolute areas of the regions R i , each area Ri being counted I-'i 
times; in symbols -f: yx dt = !I-'i larea Ril· 
PROOF. 
The proof is simple. We assume, as we are entitled to do, 
that the whole of the curve lies above the x-axis. (Adding a constant 
to y does not change the value of the integral A for a closed curve.) 
The lines of support cut Ri into a finite number of portions; let r be 
one of these portions. Then on taking the integral - f yx dt = - f y dx 
for each single-valued branch of the function y = y(x) and interpreting 
it as area between the curve and the x-axis, we find that the absolute 
area of r is counted + I times for each right-to-Ieft branch above rand 
-1 times for each left-to-right branch above r; in all, I-'i times. The 
same is true for every other portion of R i ; hence Ri is counted I-'i 
times. Thus the integral round the complete curve has the value 
l: I-'i larea Ril, as stated (cf. Fig. A.7). This formula agrees with what 
we have found for simple closed curves, as we recognize from the 
discussion of the values of I-' for such curves. 
The definition given for the index I-'i has the disadvantage of being 
stated in terms of a particular coordinate system. As a matter of fact, 
however, it can be shown that the value of I-'i assigned to a region 
Ri is independent of the coordinate system and depends solely on the 
curve. This can be readily seen by identifying I-'i with the total number 
v i of times a point on the curve for t increasing from IX to (3 runs about 
any fixed point Q i of Ri in the counterclockwise sense, that is with 
the number of times C winds around Qi' We shall prove the identity 
of I-'i and Vi' 
Let C be given parametrically by x = x(t), y = y(t) where IX ~ t ~ {3. 
Let Q = (~, 'f}) be a point which does not lie on a line of support of C. 

434 Applications in Physics and Geometry 
Ch.4 
We take Q as origin of a system of polar coordinates r, () in which 
x-e 
Y-'YJ 
cos 0 = -- , sin 0 = -- . 
r 
r 
The polar angle 0 is determined only within whole multiples of 27T; 
however, 0 is determined uniquely as a function of t by its value 00 
for t = ot if we require 0 = OCt) to vary continuously with t along the 
curve C. At t = f3 the angle 0 will then have a value O(f3) = 00 + 2V7T, 
where v is an integer. The number 
1 
1 ill dO 
1 f 
v = -
[O(f3) -
O(ot)] = -
-
dt = -
dO 
27T 
27T 
/Z dt 
27T 
0 
represents the number of times that the oriented curve C winds 
around Q. 
The curve C crosses the vertical half-line through Q for those values 
of t for which the expression (l/27T)[O(t) -
7T/2] has an integral value n. 
Consider for a fixed n the t-values in the parameter interval for which 
(l/27T)(O -
7T/2) = n. Let (In and Tn be the number of such t-values 
for which dO/dt > 0, respectively dO/dt < O. Obviously, the index at 
the point Q is 
ft = I (In -
ITn = I «(In -
Tn)· 
n 
n 
n 
On the other hand, (In -
Tn can only have one of the values 1, 0, 
-1, for the graph of OCt) in the 0, t-plane must cross the line 0 = 
7T/2 + 2n7T alternately from above or below. 
Actually, we have 
(In -
Tn = sign [O(f3) -
O(ot)] if 7T/2 + 2n7T lies between O(ot) and O(f3) 
and (In -
Tn = 0 otherwise. 
Consequently, ft equals the number of values of the form 7T/2 + 2n7T 
with an integer n that lie between O(ot) and O(f3) taken with the sign of 
O(f3) -
O(ot); that is, ft equals the number v. 
Since 0 = arc tan [(y -
'YJ)/(x -
e)), we have 
dO 
y(x -
e) -
x(y -
'YJ) 
dt = (x -
e)2 + (y -
'YJ)2 . 
This yields for the index ft of the oriented closed curve C with respect 
to the point (e, 'YJ) the integral representation 

Problems 435 
which can be simply written (see p. 367) without referring to the param-
eter t explicitly: 
fl = 1. r (x -
~) dy -
(y -
r;) dx . 
27TJC 
(x_~)2+(y-r;)2 
The remarkable feature of these results is that the integer fl or v which 
describes a topological relation between the point Q and the curve C 
can be determined analytically, from the parameter representation of 
C, by evaluating an integral. 
PROBLEMS 
SECTION 4.1c, page 328 
1. Sketch the hypocycloid for a = 4c (the astroid) and find its nonpara-
metric equation. 
2. Prove that if cJa is rational the general hypocycloid is closed after the 
moving circle has rotated an integral number of times, whereas if cJa is 
irrational, the curve has infinitely many points where it meets the circum-
ference of the fixed circle and will not close. 
3. Derive the parametric representation 
x = at - b sin t, 
y=a-bcost 
for ordinary trochoid, that is, for the path of a point P attached to a disc 
of radius a rolling along a line, P having the distance b from the center of 
the disc (see Fig. 4.7). 
4. Find the parametric equations for the curve x3 + y3 = 3axy (the folium 
of Descartes), choosing as parameter t the tangent of the angle between the 
x-axis and the ray from the origin to the point (x, y). 
SECTION 4.1e, page 343 
1. The angle oc between two curves at a point of intersection is defined 
to be the angle between their tangents at the point. Find a formula for 
cos oc in terms of the parametric representations of the curves. 
2. Let x = I(t) and y = get). Derive formulas for d 2yJdx2 and d3yJdx3 in 
terms of derivatives with respect to the parameter t. 
3. Find the formula for the angle oc between two curves r = f(O) and 
r = g( 0) in polar coordinates. 
4. Find the equations of the curves which everywhere intersect the straight 
lines through the origin at the same angle oc. 
5. Prove: if x = f(t) and y = g(t) are continuous on the closed interval 
[a, b] and differentiable on the open interval (a, b) with x'2 + y'2 > 0, then 

436 Problems 
there is at least one point on the open arc 
x = let), 
y = get), 
(a < t < b), 
where the tangent is parallel to the chord joining the end points. 
6. Let P be the point of a circle which traces out a cycloid as the circle 
rolls on a given line. Let Q be the point of contact of the circle with the line. 
Prove that at any instant, the normal to the cycloid at P passes through Q. 
What similar property holds for the tangent at P? 
7. Prove that the length of the segment of the tangent to the astroid, 
x = 4c cos3 0, 
y = 4c sin3 0, 
cut off by the coordinate axes is constant. 
*8. Show that the two families of ellipses and hyperbolas, (0 < a < b) 
x2 
y2 
a2 _ 
,1,2 + b2 _ 
,1,2 = 1, for 0 < ,1, < a, 
x2 
y2 
--- + --- = 1 
for a < 7 < b, 
a 2 -72 
b2 _72 
' 
are confocal (that is, have the same focii) and intersect at right angles. 
9. (a) Show for the ellipse that the angle between the two rays from the 
foci to a point on the curve is bisected by the normal at the point. 
(b) Show for the hyperbola that the angle is bisected by the tangent. 
SECTION 4.lf, page 348 
1. Prove that the curve defined by 
(
.t.2 sin ~, 
y = 
.r 
0, 
has finite length, but that the continuous curve defined by 
X'SIn-, 
( 
. 1 
Y = 
x 
0, 
x=O 
is not rectifiable. 
2. Prove that if the function [ is defined and monotone on the closed 
interval [a, b], then the arc defined by 
?I = [(x), 
(a ~ x ~ b), 
is rectifiable. 
SECTION 4.1 g, page 352 
1. An elliptic integral o[ the second kind has the form 
i'" VI - k 2 sin2 0 dO. 

Problems 437 
(a) Show that the arc length of the ellipse x = a cos (J, Y = b sin (J can 
be expressed in terms of an elliptic integral of the second kind. 
(b) Do the same for the trochoid 
x = at - b sin t, 
y = a - b cos t. 
·(c) Show that the arc length of the hyperbola can be expressed in terms 
of elliptic integrals of the first and second kinds. 
SECTION 4.1h, page 354 
1. Let P be a point of the rolling circle which generates a cycloid and let 
Q be the lowest point of the circle at any given instant. Show that Q 
bisects the segment joining P to the center of the osculating circle of the 
cycloid at P. 
2. Find the center of curvature for y = x2 when x = O. Determine the 
point of intersection of the normal lines to the curve when x = 0 and when 
x = €. Calculate the distance of the intersection from the center of curvature. 
Suggest an alternative definition for the center of curvature. Prove that this 
definition is equivalent to the definition given in the text. 
3. Consider the question of whether the osculating circle crosses the curve 
at the point of contact. 
·4. Prove that the circle of curvature at a point P of the curve C is the 
limit of the circles through three points P. PI' Pz as PI and Pz tend to P. 
5. Let r = f«(J) be the equation of a curve in polar coordinates. Prove 
that the curvature is given by the formula 
where 
2r'2 -
rr" + r2 
k = 
(r'2 + r2)% 
' 
, 
df 
r = dO' 
" 
d2J 
r = d02 ' 
6. The curve for which the length of the tangent intercepted between the 
point of contact and the y-axis is always equal to 1 is called the tractrix. 
Find its equation. Show that the radius of curvature at each point of the 
curve is inversely proportional to the length of the normal intercepted between 
the point on the curve and the y-axis. Calculate the length of arc of the 
tractrix and find the parametric equations in terms of the length of arc. 
7. Let x = x(t), Y = y(t) be a closed curve. A constant length p is measured 
off along the normal to the curve. The extremity of this segment describes 
a curve which is called a parallel curve to the original curve. Find the area, 
the length of arc, and the radius of curvature of the parallel curve. 
8. Show that the only curves whose curvature is a fixed constant k are 
circles of radius 11k. 
·9. If the curvature of a curve in the xy-plane is a monotonic function of 
the length of arc, prove that the curve is not closed and that it has no 
double points. 

438 Problems 
SECTION 4.1i, page 360 
1. Show that the expression for the curvature of a curve x = x(t), y = y(t) 
is unaltered by rotation of axes and also by change of parameter given by 
t = </>(T), where </>'(T) > O. 
SECTION 4.3d, page 394 
1. Prove if the acceleration is always perpendicular to velocity that the 
speed is constant. 
2. The velocity vector, considered as a position vector, traces out a curve 
known as the hodograph. Show whether or not a particle moving on a 
closed curve may have a straight line as its hOdograph. 
3. Assuming the rolling circle moves at constant speed, find the velocity 
and acceleration of the point P which generates the cycloid. 
4. Let A be a fixed point of the plane and suppose that the acceleration 
vector for a moving point P is always directed toward A and proportional 
to the 1/IAPI2• Prove that the hodograph (cf. Problem 2) is a circle. 
S. Let A be a fixed point on a circle. Let P be a point of the circle moving 
so that the acceleration vector points to A. Prove that the acceleration is 
proportional to IAPI-5• 
SECTION 4.5, page 402 
1. A particle moves in a straight line subject to a resistance producing 
the retardation ku3, where u is the velocity and k a constant. Find expressions 
for the velocity (u) and the time (t) in terms of s, the distance from the initial 
position, and Vo, the initial velocity. 
2. A particle of unit mass moves along the x-axis and is acted upon by a 
force f(x) = -sin x. 
(a) Determine the motion of the point if at time t = 0 it is at the point 
x = 0 and has velocity Vo = 2. Show that as t -- 00 the particle approaches 
a limiting position, and find this limiting position. 
(b) If the conditions are the same, except that Vo may have any value, 
show that if Vo > 2 the point moves to an infinite distance as t -- 00, and 
that if Vo < 2 the point oscillates about the origin. 
3. Choose axes with their origin at the center of the earth, whose radius 
we shall denote by R. According to Newton's law of gravitation, a particle 
of unit mass lying on the y-axis is attracted by the earth with a force - f1M/y2, 
where It is the "gravitational constant" and M is the mass of the earth. 
(a) Calculate the motion of the particle after it is released at the point 
Yo (> R); that is, if at time t = 0 it is at the point y = Yo and has the velocity 
Vo = O. 
(b) Find the velocity with which the particle in (a) strikes the earth. 
(c) Using the result of (b), calculate the velocity of a particle falling to the 
earth from infinity.1 
*4. A particle perturbed slightly from rest on top of a circle slides down-
ward under the force of gravity. At what point does it fly unconstrained off 
the circle? 
1 This is the same as the least velocity with which a projectile would have to be fired 
in order that it should leave the earth and never return. 

Problems 439 
*5. A particle of mass m moves along the ellipse r = k/(l - e cos 8). 
The force on the particle is cm/r2 directed toward the origin. Describe the 
motion of the particle, find its period, and show that the radius vector to the 
particle sweeps out equal areas in equal times. 
SECTION 4A.1, page 424 
1. Show that the evolute of an epicycloid (Example, p. 329) is another 
epicycloid similar to the first, which can be obtained from the first by rotation 
and contraction. 
2. Show that the evolute of a hypocycloid (Example, p. 331) is another 
hypocycloid, which can be obtained from the first by rotation and expansion. 

5 
Taylor's Expansion 
5.1 Introduction: Power Series 
It was a great triumph in the early years of Calculus when Newton 
and others discovered that many known functions could be expressed 
as "polynomials of infinite order" or "power series," with coefficients 
formed by elegant transparent laws. The geometrical series for 1/(1 -
x) 
or 1/(1 + X 2) 
(1) 
I 
2 
n 
--=I+x+x +···+X +". 
I-x 
(Ia) 
_1_ = I _ x2 + X4 _ x6 + ... + (_l)nx2n + ... 
1 + x 2 
valid for the open intervallxl < 1, are prototypes (see Chapter 1, p. 67). 
Similar expansions of the form 
f(x) = ao + a1x + ... + anxn + ... 
00 
_ 
'" 
v 
-
kavx • 
v=o 
with numerical coefficients av, will be derived in this chapter for many 
other functions. 
The following are striking examples: 
. 
x2 
x3 
xn 
eX = I + x + -
+ -
+ ... + -
+ .... 
2! 
3! 
n! 
' 
x3 
x5 
( _l)nx2n+l 
sin x = x -
-
+ -
-
+ ... + 
+ .... 
3! 
5! 
(2n+I)!' 
x2 
X4 
(_1)nx2n 
cos x = I - -
+ -
+ ... + 
+ ... 
2! 
4! 
(2n)! 
These series expansions are valid for all x. 
440 

Sec. 5.1 
Introduction: Power Series 441 
Newton's General Binomial Theorem. The expansion 
IX 
IX(IX -
1) 
2 
(1 + xy = 1 + - x + 
X· + ... 
I! 
2! 
is valid for Ixl < 1 and any exponent IX. 
To explain the precise meaning of such expansions, we consider the 
polynomial of order n formed as the sum of the first n + I terms of 
the series, the nth "partial sum," 
The formula 
00 
f(x) = La.x', 
for 
Ixl < a 
.~O 
then means: For n -+ 00 the sequence Sn tends to the value of the 
function I(x) at each point x in the interval Ixl < a. The infinite series 
is then said to converge to I(x) in the intervallxl < a. The difference 
the "remainder" of the series, measures the precision with which I(x) 
is approximated by the polynomial Sn(x) at x. For example, 
(lb) 
1 
-- = 1 + x + x 2 + ... + xn + R (x) 
I
n' 
-x 
where the remainder Rn(x) = xn+I/(1 -
x) tends to zero for Ixl < 1 
00 
as n increases; thus the infinite geometric series LX' = 1/(1 -
x) 
.~O 
results. To find simple manageable estimates for Rn in specific cases 
is a task of bo~h tlieoretical and practical importance. 
In this chapter we are concerned with such expansions for a wide 
class of functions, including all the "elementary" transcendental 
functions. It is a striking fact that in these expansions of transcendental 
functions the coefficients are elegant expressions in terms of integers. 
The approach to these expansions will be by Taylor's theorem; later 
in Chapter 7 we shall discuss a different approach by a direct study of 
power serIes. 
It should be emphasized that often just as for the geometrical series 
of Eq. (la), the infinite expansion is not valid outside some interval 

442 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
for x-(in the case of the geometrical series, the interval x2 < 1) even 
though the function represented by the series is well defined outside 
this interval. 
5.2 Expansion of the Logarithm and the Inverse Tangent 
a. The Logarithm 
As simple examples we first derive expansions of the logarithmic 
and the inverse tangent functions by integration, from the geometric 
series 
_1_ = 1 + t + t2 + ... + tn- 1 + r n(t) 
1 -
t 
with Tit) = tn /(1 - t). 
We substitute this sum for the integrand in the formula 
1'" dt 
-log(1- x) = --
01 -
t 
and integrate term by term, obtaining for x < 1 
x 2 
x 3 
X4 
xn 
-log (1 -
x) = x + 2' + '3 + '4 + ... + --;; + Rix), 
with the remainder 
I'" 
I'" tn 
Rn(x) = 
Tn dt = 
-- dt. 
o 
01 -
t 
Hence for any positive integer n the function -log (1 -
x) is approxi-
mated by the polynomial of nth degree, 
x~ 
x3 
xn 
x+-+-+,,·+-
2 
3 
n 
and the remainder Rn indicates the "error" of this approximation. 
To appraise the accuracy of this approximation we estimate the 
remainder Rn. If we at first suppose that -1 ~ x ~ 0, then in the 
entire interval of integration the integrand tnf(l -
t) in absolute value, 
nowhere exceeds Itnl = (_l)ntn. Thus 
hence for every value of x in the closed interval -1 ~ x ~ 0 including 
x = -1 this remainder can be made as small as we wish by choosing n 

Sec. 5.2 
Expansion of the Logarithm and the Inverse Tangent 443 
large enough (cf. p. 61). For x > 0 the end point x = 1 must be 
omitted; we have to restrict x to the half-open interval 0 ~ x < 1; 
the integrand does not change sign and its absolute value does not 
exceed tnJ(l -
x); we thus obtain for 0 ~ x < 1 the estimate 
1 iX 
xn+l 
IRnl < --
tnat = 
. 
-
1 -
x 
0 
(1 -
x)(n + 1) 
Hence again, if x is fixed, the remainder is arbitrarily small when n is 
sufficiently large. Of course, the estimate has no meaning for x = 1. 
Summing up, 
x2 
x3 
xn 
(2) 
log (1 -
x) = -x - 2" -"3 - ... - -;; - Rn 
where the remainder Rn tends to zero as n increases, provided that x 
lies in the half-open interval -1 ~ x < 1. 
In fact, this reasoning establishes a "uniform" estimate for the 
remainder, independent of x and valid for all values of x in the interval 
-1 ~ x ~ 1 -
h, where h is any number such that 0 < h ~ 1; 
namely, IRnl ~ IJ[(n + l)h]. 
The fact that the remainder Rn tends to zero in the half-open interval 
-1 ~ x < I is expressed by saying that in this interval the logarithmic 
function is given by the infinite seriesl 
x2 
x3 
X4 
(3) 
log (1 -
x) = -x -
-
-
-
-
-
- .... 
234 
If we insert the particular value x = -1 in this series, we obtain the 
remarkable formula 
(4) 
log 2 = 1 - t + ! - t + - .... 
This is one of the relations whose discovery made a deep impression 
on the early pioneers of the calculus. 
For the open interval -1 < x < 1, we have only to write -x in 
place of x in (2) in order to obtain 
x 2 
x 3 
X4 
xn 
(2a) log(l + x) = x -"2 +"3 -"4 + _ ... + (-It-l -; -
Rn', 
where 
Rn'(x) = r-x (ndt = (-It+! {X tn dt . 
Jo 1 - t· 
Jo 1 + t 
1 We leave it as an exercise to the reader to ascertain that for all values of x for which 
Ixl > 1 the remainder not only fails to approach zero, but, in fact, that I Rnl increases 
beyond all bounds as n increases, so that for such values of x the polynomial is not 
a good approximation of the logarithm and becomes worse with increasing n. 

444 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
Taking n as even and subtracting (2) from (2a), we have 
1 (1 + x) 
x 3 
x 5 
xn- 1
_ 
-log --
= ar tanh x = x + - + - + ... + -- + Rno 
2 
I-x 
3 
5 
n-l 
where the remainder Rn is given by 
-
1 
fill tn 
R = - (R -
R ') = -- dt 
n 
2 
n 
n 
0 1 _ t2 
' 
and where ar tanh x is defined according to p. 233. 
Observing that 1/(1 -
t2) ~ 1/(1 -
X2), we find by an elementary 
estimate of the integral that 
IR I < Ixn+ll._l_ . 
n -n+l l_x2 ' 
thus the remainder Rn tends to zero as n increases, a fact again expressed 
by writing the expansion as an infinite series: 
1 
1 + X 
x3 
x5 
x7 
(5) 
-log -- = ar tanh x = x + - + - + - + ... , 
2 
I-x 
3 
5 
7 
for all values of x with Ixl < 1. Incidentally, this result also could be 
derived directly by integrating the geometric series for 1/(1 -
x 2). It 
is an advantage of this formula that as x traverses the interval from 
-1 to 1, the expression (1 + x)/(1 -
x) ranges over all positive numbers. 
Thus, if the value of x is suitably chosen, the series enables us to calculate 
the value of the logarithm of any positive number, with an error not 
exceeding the above estimate for Rn-
h. The Inverse Tangent 
We can treat the inverse. tangent in a way similar to that of the 
logarithm, starting with the formula 
_1_ = 1 _ t2 + t4 _ + ... + (_l)n-1t2n- 2 + r 
l+f 
n 
t2n 
where now rn = (-1)n_--2 • 
1 + t 
By integration [see Eq. (14), p. 263], we obtain 
x 3 
x5 
X2n- 1 
arc tan x = x -
- + - - + ... + (_l)n-l __ + R 
3 
5 
2n _ 1 
no 
fill 
t2n 
R = (-It --dt· 
n 
01+t2 
' 

Sec. 5.3 
Taylor's Theorem 445 
we see at once that in the closed interval -1 ~ x ~ 1 the remainder Rn 
tends to zero as n increases, since 
IRnl ~ 
t2n dt = _x __ . 
l
izi 
I 12n+l 
o 
2n + 1 
From the formula for the remainder we can also easily show that for 
Ixl > 1 the absolute value of the remainder increases beyond all bounds 
as n increases. 
We have accordingly deduced the infinite series 
(6) 
x 3 
x 5 
X 2n- l 
arc tan x = x -
- + - - + ... + ( _l)n-l --- + - ... , 
3 
5 
2n -
1 
valid for the closed interval Ixl ~ 1. Since arc tan 1 = 7Tj4, we obtain 
for x = 1, the Leibnitz-Gregory series 
(7) 
7T -=l-!+i-+"', 
4 
an expression as remarkable as that found earlier for log 2. 
5.3 Taylor's Theorem 
Newton's pupil Taylor, observed that the elementary expansion of 
polynomials lends itself to a wide generalization for nonpolynomial 
functions, provided that these functions are sufficiently differentiable 
and that their domain is suitably restricted. 
a. Taylor's Representation of Polynomials 
This is an entirely elementary algebraic formula concerning a 
polynomial in x of order n, say 
I(x) = ao + alx + a2x2 + ... + anxn. 
If we replace x by a + h = b and expand each term in powers of h, 
there results immediately a representation of the form 
(8) 
I(a + h) = Co + clh + C2h2 + ... + cnhn. 
Taylor's formula is the relation 
I 
(8a) 
c. = ,I<"(a), 
'II. 
for the coefficients c. in terms of f and its derivatives at x = a. To 
prove this fact we consider the quantity h = b - a as the independent 

446 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
variable, and apply the chain rule which shows that differentiation 
with respect to h is the same as differentiation with respect to b = a + h. 
Thus successively differentiating the formula (8) with respect to hand 
each time thereafter, substituting h = 0 yields succelisively the res~lts 
Co = f(a), C1 = 1'(a), ... , v! Cy = f(Y)(a) 
and therefore indeed the Taylor formula for polynomials: 
(9) 
f(a + h) = f(a) + h1'(a) + h
2 f"(a) + ... + hn f(n)(a). 
2 
n! 
The (n + 1)st derivative vanishes for a polynomial of degree n, and 
thus our formula (9) naturally terminates. 
As stated the formula (9) is nothing but an elementary algebraic 
rearrangement of a polynomial in powers of a + h, into a polynomial in 
powers of h. 
h. Taylor's Formula for Nonpolynomial Functions 
Newton and his immediate pupils boldly applied formula (9) to 
nonpolynomial functions for which the expansion does not auto-
matically stop at the nth term; instead they simply allowed n to 
increase to infinity, a procedure which for many of the important 
special functions will be justified later on. 
Assuming the function f differentiable at least n times in an interval 
containing the points a and a + h we certainly can no longer write for 
f(a + h) an expression as in (9) of a finite number of powers of h, but 
must account for the discrepancy by an additional "remainder" R n, 
writing tentatively 
hn 
(10) feb) = f(a + h) = f(a) + h1'(a) + ... + - rea) + Rn; 
n! 
in fact, (10) is nothing but a definition of the corrective remainder term 
Rn and indicates the expectation that Rn might become small and tend 
to zero for n -- 00. If the remainder indeed tends to zero, then the 
formula (10) in the limit n -- 00 leads to an expansion 
(11) 
hn 
f(a + h) = f(a) + h1'(a) + ... + - f(n)(a) + ... 
n! 
off (x) as an infinite power series in h. 
The crucial problem, far transcending in difficulty that of the alge-
braic manipulations in Section S.3a is then to find estimates for the 

Sec. 5.4 
Expression and Estimates for the Remainder 447 
remainder Rn so that the accuracy of Taylor's representation by the 
finite Taylor polynomial of order n in h 
n j(v)( ) 
(12) 
Tn(h) = L __ 
a hV 
o 
v! 
and the passage to the limit for n -+ 00, can be rigorously explored. 
Taylor's polynomial Tn(h) is an approximation to f(a + h) in the 
sense that at h = 0 the functions Tn and f, as well as their derivatives 
up to order n coincide, so that the difference Rn = f - Tn vanishes at 
x = a together with its first n derivatives. 
5.4 Expression and Estimates for the Remainder 
a. Cauchy's and Lagrange's Expressions 
A direct representation of the remainder Rno allowing estimates of 
its absolute value IRnl, is the core of Taylor's theorem. The results are 
easily obtained on the basis of the mean value theorem of calculus. 
They are moreover related to the linear approximation of functions by 
differentials (see p. 179). 
Let us first examine again this approximation. 
The definition of derivative at the point a states merely that 
f(a + h) = f(a) + hf'(a) + hE, where 
E -+ 0 for h -+ o. 
We can 
attain a somewhat sharper approximation by ascertaining that E is in 
fact of order at least as small as h, provided that not only f' but also 
f" exists and is continuous in our interval J. The estimate is obtained 
if we write again a + h = b, introduce a remainder R by 
(13) 
feb) = f(a) + (b - a)f'(a) + R, 
and now consider b as fixed and the initial point a as variable; this 
equation defines R as a function of a in the interval J; then differen-
tiation with respect to the variable a yields zero on the left-hand side 
since feb) is constant and the rule for differentiating a product shows 
that 
o = f'ea) - f'ea) + (b - a)f"(a) + R'(a) 
and hence 
(14) 
- R'(a) = (b - a)f"(a). 
Now, for a = b we obviously have R(b) = O. 
By the mean value 
theorem of calculus [R(a) -
R(b)]/(b -
a) = -R'(~), where ~ is a 
not otherwise specified value between a and b; because of R(b) = 0 we 
therefore conclude R(a) = -(b -
a)R'(~) = -hR'(~). Now by (14) 
R'm = -(b -
~)f"m and hence IR'ml < h If"ml since Ib -
~I ~ h. 

448 
Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
Since 1f"(~)1 is bounded in an interval around a, we obtain finally an 
estimate that shows that the remainder or "error" Rn is small of at 
least second order in h: 
(15) 
IR(a)1 < h21f"WI. 
We turn from the special case n = 1 to that of any order n. The 
direct characterization of the remainder Rn is achieved by the same 
device as for n = 1. We assume that a and b = a + h are points in an 
interval J in which J(x) is defined and has continuous derivatives up 
to the order n + 1. We consider a as the independent variable and keep 
the end point b fixed. In formula (10), p. 446, which defines Rn(a), we 
write b - a instead of h. Differentiating and taking into account that 
feb) is constant, we find from the product rule that almost all terms 
cancel out, and we are left with the formula. 
(16) 
for every value a in the interval. Since for a = b the remainder Rn is 
zero, this direct expression for its derivative as a function of a completely 
characterizes Rn as the integral fba Rn'(t) dt = - f Rn'(t) dt or 
(17) 
Rn(a) =lb(b -
t)nr+\t)dt. 
a 
n! 
This is an exact integral representation of the remainder. 
An estimate for Rn similar to the one obtained above for n = 1 
follows directly by the mean value theorem of calculus applied to (16): 
Rn(a) -
Rn(b) = Rn(a) = -Rn'(~) = (b -
~)n r+1(~) 
b-a 
b-a 
n! 
or 
(18) 
where ~ is a suitable, not specified, intermediate value between a and b. 
The same estimate can also be obtained by applying to the expression 
(17) the mean value theorem of integral calculus (Chapter 2, p. 141). 
Cauchy's Form of the Remainder. If we define 
~ = a + Oh 
= a + O(b -
a) we obtain Cauchy's formula for the remainder in 
Taylor's formula (10) 
hn+1 
(19) 
Rn(a) = -, (1 - orfn+1)(a + Oh), 
n. 
where 0 is an unspecified quantity between 0 and 1. 

Sec. 5.4 
Expression and Estimates for the Remainder 449 
We can also apply to the integral (17) for Rn the generalized mean 
value theorem of integral calculus (see p. 142) taking for the "weight 
function" pet) the expression pet) = (b -
t)n which does not change 
sign throughout the interval of integration. 1 Then 
(20) 
Lagrange's Form of the Remainder. Setting again 
~ = a + Oh 
yields Lagrange's form for the remainder 
(21) 
hn+l 
R (a) = 
f(n+l)(a + Oh) 
n 
(n + I)! 
with a suitable quantity 0 satisfying 0 ~ 0 ::::;; 1. Lagrange's form is 
particularly suggestive, and hence more commonly applied, since it 
makes the remainder Rn in the formula 
h 
h2 
(22) f(a + h) = f(a) + - f'(a) + - rea) + ... 
1! 
2! 
+ h: f(n)(a) + Rn = P n(h) + Rn 
n. 
look like the term hnH pn+l)(a)/(n + I)! that would arise in the 
expansion (22) to one order higher, only with the argument a replaced 
by the intermediate value a + Oh. 
For a function f for which pnH ) is continuous in a closed interval 
containing the point a, the quantity IpnH)(~)1 has a fixed bound M. 
Since then 
hn+l 
IRnl ::::;; (n + I)! M 
the Taylor polynomial Pn(h) gives for fixed n an approximation to the 
functionf(a + h) with an error of order at least n + 1 in h. 
Our interest will be directed chiefly toward the question whether the 
remainder Rn tends to zero as n increases; if this is the case, we say 
that we have expanded the function in an infinite Taylor series 
(23) f(a + h) = f(a) + ..!!.. f'(a) + h
2 rea) + h
3 f"'(a) + ... ; 
1! 
2! 
3! 
1 The generalized mean value theorem was proved for the case of a positive p(t), 
but it applies equally well when p(t) is negative throughout the interval of integration. 

450 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
in particular, if we first put a = 0 and then write x in place of h, we 
obtain the "power series" 
2 
f(x) = f(O) + ":"1'(0) + ~ 1"(0) + .... 
1! 
2! 
We shall discuss examples in Section 5.5. 
For applications the finite Taylor expansion (22) for a fixed n with the 
remainder term is just as important. If we let h tend to zero in this 
formula in the terminology of Chapter 3, p. 252, the various terms of 
the series tend to zero with different orders of magnitude in h. The 
expressionf(o) represents the term of zero order in Taylor's series, the 
expression hf'(a) the term of first order, the expression h2j"(a)j2! the 
term of second order, etc. We see from the form of the remainder 
that in expanding a function as far as the term of nth order we make an 
error which tends to zero of order (n + 1) as h tends to zero. The 
nearer the point a + h lies to the point a, the better is the representation 
of the function f(a + h) by the approximating polynomial P n(h); 
in the cases of greatest interest the approximation in the immediate 
neighborhood of the point x can be improved by increasing the value 
ofn. 
h. An Alternative Derivation of Taylor's Formula 
The integral representation (17) for the remainder term Rn in Taylor's 
theorem was based on formula (16) for Rn'(a). Because of the importance 
of the theorem we give here a different version of the derivation, which 
leads directly to the expression for Rn by repeated integration by parts 
starting with the formula: 
(24) 
feb) - f(a) = ff'(t) dt. 
To transform (24) by successive integration by parts, we introduce 
the functions 
by the relations: 
(25) 
4>o(t) = 1, 
and the conditions 
(26) 
4>v(b) = 0, 
for 
y ~ 1 
where we consider b as a fixed parameter. Clearly, the conditions (25) 
and (26) determine successively all 4>v(t). As is verified immediately 

Sec. 5.4 
Expression and Estimates for the Remainder 451 
the CPv(t) are just the polynomials 
CPv(t) = (t -,bY 
v. 
We note in passing that the functions <Pv originate from each other by 
successive integration, leaving constants of integration open; therefore the 
defining conditions (25) could also be satisfied by functions satisfying other 
side conditions instead of (26) (see p. 189). 
Since cpv(a) = (-lr(b - arlv! and cpib) = 0, we obtain 
feb) - f(a) = fcpof' dt = f CPl'f' dt = cpd' I: -f cpd" dt; 
integrating the last term again by parts, we find 
feb) - f(a) = (b -
a)f'(a) - f CP2'j" dt 
= (b -
a)f'(a) + (b ~! a)2 j"(a) + f cpd'" dt, 
and repeating the process n times, 
feb) - f(a) = (b -
a)f'(a) + (b -
a)2 j"(a) + ... + (b - at f(n)(a) 
2! 
n! 
+ f( -ltCPn(t)f(n+1)(t) dt 
= (b _ a)f'(a) + (b ~! a)2 j"(a) + ... + (b ~! a)n f(n)(a) + Rm 
where, by the definition of CPn' 
Thus we have again proved 
TAYLOR'S THEOREM. If a function f(t) has continuous derivatives 
up to the (n + l)th order on a closed interval containing the two 
points a and b, then: 
feb) = f(a) + (b -
a)f'(a) + ... + (b -,at f(n)(a) + Rn 
n. 

452 
Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
with the remainder Rm depending on n, a, and b, given by the expression 
(27) 
By changes of notation we obtain slightly different expressions of the 
Taylor formula. Thus, replacing a by x and b by x + h, we have 
(27a) 
hn 
f(x + h) = f(x) + hf'(x) + ... + ,In)(x) + Rm 
n. 
with 
1 iX+h 
Rn = I" 
(x + h -
Wf(n+l)(t) dt; 
n. 
x 
or with t = x + T, 
(27b) 
Rn = ~ (\h - Ttf(n+l)(x + T) dT. 
n! Jo 
If we set x = 0 and write x in place of h, we obtainl 
(27c) 
2 
f(x) = f(O) + ~ 1'(0) + ~ 
1"(0) + ... 
1! 
2! 
with the remainder 
+ x~ f(n)(o) + Rn 
n. 
Applying the mean value theorem of integral calculus or its generalized 
form to the integral leads to the Cauchy formula 
Rn = (1 -, (j)n xn+lf(n+l)(ex) 
n. 
and respectively, the Lagrange formula 
for the remainder, as was shown before (p. 448). Here e is a suitable 
nonspecified number with 0 ~ e ~ I (not the same in both formulas). 
1 This special case of the theorem is sometimes without historical justification, 
called Maclaurin's theorem. Taylor's general theorem was published in 1715; 
Maclaurin's special result, in 1742. 

Sec. 5.5 
Expansions of the Elementary Functions 453 
As an exercise, the reader should construct functions CP. satisfying 
(25) for which the side conditions (26) are replaced by the relations 
f CPv(t) dt = 0 
for v ~ 1 (see Chapter 8, Appendix A). 
5.5 Expansions of the Elementary Functions 
The preceding general results permit us to expand the simple elemen-
tary functions in Taylor series. Expansions of other functions will be 
discussed in Chapter 7. 
a. The Exponential Function 
First we expand the exponential function, f(x) = eX. In this case 
all the derivatives are identical with f(x) and have the value 1 for 
x = O. Lagrange's form for the remainder (p. 449, Equation (21)), 
yields at once the formula: 
X 
x2 
x3 
xn 
xn+1 
eX = 1 + - + - + _ + ... + - + 
eOx, 
I! 
2! 
3! 
n! 
(n + I)! 
0<0<1. 
If we now let n increase beyond all bounds, the remainder Rn tends 
to zero for any fixed value of x. To prove this we note first that 
eOX ~ e1xl since eX is a monotone increasing function. Let m be any 
integer greater than 21xl. Then for all k ~ m, Ixl/k < t, and 
I xn+l I Ixml 
Ixl 
Ixl 
=-'--"'--
(n + I)! 
m! 
m + 1 
n + 1 
< Ixml. _1_ < 12xlm.1-
-
m! 
2n+1- m -
m! 
2n 
so that 
Since the first two factors on the right are independent of n, whereas 
lj2 n --+ 0 for n --+ 00 our statement is proved. 

454 Taylor's Expansion 
The function eX therefore is represented by the infinite series 
X 
X2 
X3 
eX =I+-+-+-+'" 
I! 
2! 
3! 
00 
XV 
=2-· 
v=o y! 
Ch.5 
This expansion is validfor all values ofx. In particular, for x = 1 we 
obtain again the infinite series that served to define the number e in 
Chapter 1 (cf. p. 77). 
Of course, for numerical calculations we must make use of the 
form of Taylor's theorem with the remainder; for x = 1, for 
example, (compare with similar computation on p. 78) we have 
1 
1 
1 
eO 
e= 1 + 1 +- +-+ ... +-+---
2! 
3! 
n! 
(n + I)! 
If we wish to calculate e with an error of at most 1/10,000, we need only 
choose n so large that the remainder is less than 1/10,000, and since 
this remainder is certainly lessI than 3/(n + I)!, it suffices to choose 
n = 7, since 8! > 30,000. We thus obtain the approximate value 
e = 2.71825, with an error less than 0.0001. 
h. Expansion of sin x, cos x, sinh x, cosh x 
For the functions sin x, cos x, sinh x, cosh x we find the following 
formulas: 
f(x) = 
sin x 
cos x 
sinh x 
cosh x, 
f'ex) = 
cos x 
-sin x 
cosh x 
sinh x, 
f"(x) = -sin x 
-cos x 
sinh x 
cosh x, 
flll(X) = -cos x 
sin x 
cosh x 
sinh x, 
J<4l(x) = 
sin x 
cos x 
sinh x 
cosh x. 
Thus in the approximating polynomials in x for sin x and sinh x, the 
coefficients of the even powers of x will vanish, whereas in those 
for cos x and cosh x the coefficients of the odd powers vanish. 
1 Here we have made use of the fact that e < 3. This follows (cf. p. 78) from our 
series for e; for it is always true that lIn! ~ l/2n-t, and therefore 
1 
e < 1 + 1 + ! + ! + .. = 1 + 1 _ ! = 3. 

Sec. 5.5 
Expansions of the Elementary Functions 455 
When we use Lagrange's form of the remainder (21), p. 449, the Taylor 
series for our functions take the form: 
. 
x3 
x5 
( _l)nx2n+1 
sm x = x -
-
+ -
+ ... + ~~--
3! 
5! 
(2n + I)! 
+ (_l)n+1x2n+3 cos (Ox) . 
(2n + 3)! 
' 
x2 
X4 
( _l)nx2n 
cos X = 1 - -
+ -
-
+ ... + "--~-
2! 
4! 
(2n)! 
( _l)n+1x2n+2 cos (Ox) 
+ 
(2n + 2)! 
' 
. 
x3 
x5 
x2n+l 
smh x = x + -
+ -
+ ... + ----
3! 
5! 
(2n + I)! 
X2n+3 cosh (Ox) 
+ 
(2n + 3)! 
' 
x 2 
X4 
x 2n 
cosh x = 1 + -
+ -
+ ... + --
2! 
4! 
(2n)! 
x2n+2 cosh (Ox) 
+ 
, 
(2n + 2)! 
where, of course, in each of the four formulas 0 denotes a different 
number in the interval 0 S 0 S 1, a number which in addition depends 
on n and on x. Since in each of these formulas, the remainder tends to 
zero as n increases, as can be seen by exactly the same argument as in 
the case of eX, we can make the approximations as precise as we wish. 
We thus obtain the four infinite series, valid for all values x: 
. 
x 3 
x 5 
co (_I)'x2V+1 
sm x = x -
- + - - + ... = L -'-----'---
3! 
5! 
v=o (2y + I)! ' 
x2 
X4 
co (_I)'x2v 
cos X = 1 -
- + - - + ... = L 
' 
2! 
4! 
v=o 
(2y)! 
x3 
x5 
co 
X2v+l 
sinh x = x + - + - + ... = L 
, 
3! 
5! 
v=0(2v+l)! 
x 2 
X4 
co 
x2v 
cosh x = 1 + -
+ -
+ ... = L -
. 
2! 
4! 
v=O (2y)! 
The last two may also be obtained formally from the series for eX in 
accordance with the definitions of the hyperbolic functions (see p. 228). 

456 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch. 5 
c. The Binomial Series 
We pass over the Taylor series for the functions log (1 + x) and are 
tan x already treated directly in Section 5.2. We shall, however, take up 
the generalization of the binomial theorem for arbitrary exponents, 
which was one of the most spectacular of Newton's mathematical dis-
coveries. We wish to expand the functionf(x) = (1 + x)'" in a Taylor 
series where x > -1 and IX is an arbitrary number, positive or negative, 
rational or irrational. The function (1 + x)" is chosen instead of x" 
since for the latter at the point x = 0 it is not true that all the deriv-
atives are continuous, except in the trivial case of nonnegative integral 
values of IX. We first calculate the derivatives of j(x), obtaining 
f'(x) = 1X(1 + x)<x-I, 
rex) = IX(IX -
1)(1 + xy-2, ... , 
j(V)(x) = IX(IX -
1) ... (IX -
V + 1)(1 + xy-v. 
In particular, for x = 0 we have 
1'(0) = IX, 
1"(0) = IX(IX -
1), ... , 
j(V)(O) = IX(IX -
1) ... (IX -
V + 1). 
Taylor's theorem then states 
IX(IX -
1) 2 
(1 + xy = 1 + IXX + 
X + ... 
2! 
IX(IX -
1)(1X -
2) ... (IX -
n + 1) 
n 
+ 
X + Rn-
n! 
Convergence 
We must yet discuss the remainder. This problem is not very diffi-
cult, but nonetheless is not quite so simple as the cases previously 
treated. We shall obtain an estimate for the remainder both directly 
and also as a special case of a general result of Section AA. This will 
permit us to conclude that whenever Ixl < 1, the remainder Rn for the 
binomial expansion tends to zero. Thus the expression (1 + x)" may 
be expanded in the infinite binomial series 
(1 + xy = 1 + :=.. x + IX(IX -
1) x2 + 
1! 
2! 
<:I) 
( 
) 
" 
IX 
v 
= £., 
x 
v=o 
V 
' 

Sec. 5.6 
Geometrical Applications 457 
where for brevity we have introduced the general binomial coefficients 
( IX) __ IX(IX -
1) ... (IX -
'V + 1) 
(for'll> 0), 
'V'll! 
(~) = 1. 
*To prove directly that the remainder Rn ---+ 0 for n ---+ 00 in the case 
where -1 < x < 1, we make use of Cauchy's form of the remainder 
(19), p. 448: 
Rn = (1 -, Ot xn+1j(n+1)(Ox) 
n. 
(1 -
Ot 
= 
IX(IX -
1)(1X -
2) ... (IX -
n)xn+1(1 + Ox),,-n-l 
n! 
(0 :5: 0 :5: 1). Since Ixl < 1, we have 0:5: (1 -
0)/(1 + Ox) :5: 1 so 
that 
IRnl:5: (1 + Ox)"-IIIXXI/ (1 - i)xll (1 - ~)x /···1 (1 - ~)x ,. 
There exists a number q with Ixl < q < 1. Then obviously also 
for all sufficiently large m, say for m > N. Thus for n > N 
IRnl :5: (1 + Ox)"-111X1 (1 + IIXI)Nqn-N. 
The factor (1 + XO)",-1 is bounded (by 2"'-1 if IX ;;::: 1, by (1 -
q)<X-l if 
IX < 1) so that clearly Rn ---+ O. 
A slightly more general formula gives an expression for (a + b)"'. 
We only have to factor out a'" and apply the binomial expansion with 
x = b/a to obtain for a > 0 and Ibl < a 
(a + b)" = a"(1 + ~r = a"(1 + IX~ + IX(~ :-/) (~r + .. -) 
" + IX ,,-lb + IX(IX -
1) ,,-2b2 + 
=a 
-a 
a···. 
1 
1·2 
5.6 Geometrical Applications 
The behavior of a function I(x) in a neighborhood of the point 
x = a, or the behavior of a given curve in a neighborhood of one of 

458 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
its points, can be described in detail by means of Taylor's theorem, 
since this theorem permits us to resolve the increment of the function 
on passing to a neighboring point x = a + h into a sum of quantities 
of the first order, second order, etc., in h. 
a. Contact 0/ Curves 
Contact of Higher Order 
If at a point x = a, two curves y = [(x) and y = g(x) intersect and 
have a common tangent, we say that the curves touch one another or 
have contact of the first order. In this case the Taylor expansions of the 
functions/(a + h) and g(a + h) have the same terms of zero order and 
first order in h. If, in addition, at the point x = a the second derivatives 
of [(x) and g(x) are also equal to each other, we say that the curves 
have contact of the second order. Then the terms of second order 
in the Taylor expansions of [ and g will also agree. If we assume that 
both functions have continuous derivatives of at least the third order, 
then the difference 
D(x) = [(x) - g(x) 
can be expressed in the form 
D(a + h) = I(a + h) -
g(a + h) 
= h
3 D"'(a + Oh) = h
3 F(h) 
3! 
3!' 
where the expression F(h) tends to ["'(a) - gll/(a) as h tends to zero. 
The difference D(a + h) therefore vanishes to at least the third order 
with h. 
We can proceed in this way and consider the general case where the 
Taylor series for lex) and g(x) agree up to terms of the nth order; 
that is, 
lea) = g(a),j'(a) = g'(a), ... ,jlnl(a) = g(nl(a). 
We assume that the (n + l)th derivatives are continuous. Under these 
conditions the curves defined by our two functions are said to have 
contact of the nth order at the point x = a. The difference of the two 
functions is then of the form 
hn+l 
D(a + h) = I(a + h) - g(a + h) = 
D(n+ll(a + Oh) 
(n + I)! 
hn+l 
= (n + I)! F(h), 

Sec. 5.6 
Geometrical Applications 459 
where since 0 S () S 1 the quantity F(h) = D(n+l)(a + (}h) tends to 
j<n+1)(a) - g(n+1)(a) as h tends to zero. We see from this formula that 
at the point of contact the difference f(x) -
g(x) vanishes to at least 
the (n + l)th order. 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
III/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
y 
o 
Figure 5.1 Osculating parabolas of e". 
The Taylor polynomials defined by 
P n(x) = f(a) + x ~ a f'(a) + ... + (x :! a)n f(n)(a) 
x 
are characterized geometrically as the "parabolas" of the nth order 
having contact of the greatest possible order with the graph of the 
given function at the given point. Hence these parabolas are sometimes 
called osculating parabolas. (Only for n = 2 are these curves "parab-
olas" in the ordinary sense.) 
For the function y = e"', Fig. 5.1 shows the first three osculating 
parabolas at the point x = o. 

460 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
Two curves y = f(x) and y = g(x) that have contact of the nth 
order at a point x = a, might possibly have contact of an even higher 
order, that is, that the equationpnH(a) = g(nH)(a) might also be true. 
If this is not the case, that is, if pnH)(a) ¢ g(nH)(a), we say that the 
order of contact is exactly n.1 
Contact of Even or Odd Order 
From our formulas as well as from intuition we can state a remarkable 
fact often unnoticed by beginners. Let the contact of two curves be 
exactly of even order; that is, an even number n of derivatives of the 
two functions have the same value at the point in question, whereas the 
(n + l)th derivatives differ. Then the preceding formulas show that 
the differencef(a + h) - g(a + h) has different signs for small positive 
values of h and for numerically small negative values of h. The two 
curves then cross at the point of contact. This occurs, for instance, in 
contact of the second order if the third derivatives have different 
values. In contrast, contact exactly of an odd order, for example, an 
ordinary contact of the first order, implies that thedifferencef(a + h) -
g(a + h) has the same sign for all numerically small values of h, 
positive or negative; the two curves therefore do not cross in a neigh-
borhood of the point of contact. The simplest example is the contact 
of a curve with its tangent. The tangent can cross the curve only at 
points where the contact is at least of second order; it does actually 
cross the curve at points where the order of contact is even, for example, 
an ordinary point of inflection where f"(x) = 0 but flll(x) ¢ O. At 
points where the order of contact is odd the tangent does not cross 
the curve, as for example, at an ordinary point of the curve where 
the second derivative is not zero, such as for the curve y = x4 at the 
origin. 
We know from Chapter 4, p. 360, that for the circle of curvature at 
the point x = a given by the function y = g(x) in a neighborhood of the 
point x = a, we not only have g(a) = f(a) and g'(a) = f'(a), but also 
g"(a) = f"(a). Hence the circle of curvature is at the same time the 
osculating circle at the point of the curve under discussion; that is, it is 
the circle which at that point has contact of the second order with 
the curve. In the limiting case of a point of inflection, or in general, of 
a point at which the curvature is zero and the radius of curvature is 
infinite, the circle of curvature degenerates into the tangent. In ordinary 
1 That the order of contact of two curves is a genuine geometrical relation which 
is unaffected by change of axes is a fact which can be easily confirmed by means 
of the formulas for change of axes (see Chapter 4, p. 360). 

Sec. 5.6 
Geometrical Applications 461 
cases, when the contact at the point in question is not of an order 
higher than the second, the circle of curvature does not merely touch 
the curve, but also crosses it (cf. Fig. 4.23, p. 359). 
In conclusion it should be mentioned that sometimes contact of 
order exactly m is described by saying: the curves have m + 1 infinitely 
near points in common; of course, the precise meaning of such a 
statement obviously refers to a limiting process. If the curves have, in 
fact, m + I distinct points P, PI' ... Pm in common and if we let all 
the points Pi tend to P, if necessary modifying one of the curves, then 
the limiting position might be expected to be that of two curves with 
a contact of order m. For example, if we draw a circle through three 
points P, PI' P2 on a curve C and then let PI and P2 tend to P, it can be 
seen that the circle tends to the circle of curvature on C in P. (See 
Problem 4, p. 437.) 
b. On the Theory of Relative Maxima and Minima 
As we have already seen in Chapter 3, p. 243, a functionf(x), whose 
first derivative vanishes at x = a, has a relative maximum at the point if 
rea) is negative, a minimum if rea) is positive. These conditions, 
therefore, are sufficient conditions for the occurrence of a maximum or 
minimum. They are by no means necessary; for in the case when 
f"(a) = 0 there are three possibilities open; at the point in question 
the function may have a maximum or a minimum or neither. Examples 
of the three possibilities are given by the functions y = _X4, Y = x4, 
and y = x3 at the point x = O. Taylor's theorem at once enables us to 
make a general statement of sufficient conditions for a maximum or a 
minimum. We need only to expand the functionf(a + h) in powers of 
h; the essential point is then to find whether the first non vanishing 
term contains an even or an odd power of h. In the first case we have a 
maximum or a minimum depending on whether the coefficient of 
h is negative or positive; in the second case we have a horizontal 
inflectional tangent and neither maximum nor minimum. The reader 
may complete the argument for himself using the formula for the 
remainder.l 
1 The necessary and sufficient condition given previously (p. 242), however, is 
more general and more convenient in applications: provided the first derivative 
rex) vanishes at only a finite number of points, a necessary and sufficient con-
dition for the occurrence of a maximum or minimum at one of these points is 
that the first derivative rex) changes sign as the curve passes through the 
point. 

462 
Taylor's Expansion 
Appendix I 
A.I.t Example of a Function Which Cannot Be Expanded 
in a Taylor Series 
Ch.5 
The possibility of expressing a function by means of a Taylor series 
with remainder of (n + I )th order depends essentially on the con-
tinuity and differentiability of the function at the point in question. 
For this reason log x cannot be represented by a Taylor series in powers 
of x, and the same is true of the function x~ whose derivative is infinite 
at x = 0. 
In order that a function may be capable of being expanded in an 
infinite Taylor series, all its derivatives must necessarily exist at the 
point in question; however, this condition is by no means sufficient. 
A function for which all derivatives exist and are continuous throughout 
an interval still need not be capable of expansion in a Taylor series; 
that is, the remainder Rn in Taylor's theorem may fail to tend to zero as 
n increases, no matter how small the interval is, in which we want to 
expand the function. 
An important simple example of this phenomenon is the function 
for x =;6 0, f(O) = 0, 
which we have already considered in the Appendix to Chapter 3, 
p. 255. This function and all its derivatives are continuous in every 
interval, even at x = 0, and as we have seen, at this point all the deriv-
atives vanish, that is,pn)(o) = ° for every value of n. (Geometrically, 
this means that the line y = ° has contact ofinfinite order with the curve 
of the function at the point x = 0). Hence in the Taylor expansion 
X 
x 2 
1(0) + - 1'(0) + -1"(0) + ... 
I! 
2! 
all the coefficients of the approximating polynomials Pn(x) vanish, 
no matter what value is chosen for n. Thus the remainder remains 
equal to the function itself, and thus, except for x = 0, can not approach 
zero as n increases, since the function is positive for every other 
value of x. 
Incidentally, this function is useful for the construction of functions 
exhibiting intuitively unexpected phenomena. For example, 
g(x) = e-1/.,2sin (l/x) 

Sec. A.I.2 
Zeros and Infinities of Functions 463 
supplemented by g(O) = 0 is again a function with derivatives of all orders, 
all of which vanish at x = 0; the graph of y = g(x) near x = 0, intersects 
the x-axis infinitely many times, and oscillates infinitely often. 
A.I.2 Zeros and Infinities of Functions 
a. Zeros of Order n 
The Taylor expansion of a functionj(x) allows us to characterize the 
order to which a function vanishes at a point x = a. We say that a 
functionj(x) has an exact n-fold zero at x = a or that it vanishes there 
exactly of order n, if j(a) = 0, /,(a) = O,I"(a) = 0, ... ,pn-1l(a) = 0, 
and pnl(a) ~ 0. We expressly assume that in the neighborhood the 
function has continuous derivatives at least to the nth order. By our 
definition we imply that the Taylor series for the function in the 
neighborhood of the point can be written in the form 
(28) 
f(a + h) = hn F(h) = hn j<nl(a + ()h), 
n! 
n! 
() < 1, 
in which as h tends to zero the factor F(h) = n !f(a + h)/hn tends to a 
limit different from zero, namely, the value J<nl(a). Hence f(a + h) 
has the same order as hn for h - ° or vanishes to order n in the sense 
defined in Chapter 3, p. 252. 
Similarly, expanding the derivatives /,(x), I"(x), ... ,p.l(x) by 
Taylor's theorem with the Lagrange form of the remainder, we obtain 
a series of expressions 
f'(a + h) = 
hn- l 
Fl(h) = 
hn- 1 f(nl(a + ()h) 
(n-l)! 
(n-l)! 
(29) 
rea + h) = 
h n- v 
F.(h) = 
hn-. j<nl(a + ()h) 
(n -
v)! 
(n -
v)! 
in all of which the factors () may be different, whereas the factors 
Flo F2, ••• , F. tend continuously to pnl(a) as h -
0. Hence j'vanishes 
of order n -
I, j" of order n - 2, etc. 
In these formulas, of course, the assumption is made that j(x) 
vanishes of order n ~ v. 
h. Infinity of Order v 
If a function 4>(x) is defined at all points in a neighborhood of the 
point x = a, except perhaps at x = a itself, and if 4>(x) = f(x)/g(x), 
where at x ~ a the numerator does not vanish, but the denominator 

464 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
possesses a v-fold zero, we say that the function 4>(x) becomes infinite of 
the vth order at the point x = a. If at the point x = a the numerator 
has a ,u-fold zero and if ,u > v, the function has a (,u - v)fold zero 
there; if,u < v, the function has a (v -
,u)fold infinity at the point. 
These definitions are in agreement with the conventions already laid 
down (cf. Section 3.7) regarding the behavior of a function. 
A.I.3 Indeterminate Expressions 
We now discuss in a more precise manner, the "indeterminate 
expressions" of the form 4>(x) = j(x)lg(x), in whichj(x) and g(x) both 
vanish at the same point x = a, such as the function (sin x)lx at x = O. 
We shall always assign to such functions the value 
(30) 
4>(a) = lim 4>(a + h) 
h-+O 
provided this limit exists. 
These limiting values can be characterized by a simple rule, known 
as L' Hospital's rule, for which we assume that all derivatives of j and g 
that arise are continuous in an interval containing a. We furthermore 
assume that the denominator g(x) vanishes at x = a to an order v not 
higher than that of the numerator j(x), so that the function 4>(x) does 
not become infinite at x = a. Then the rule states 
(31) 
jev)(o) 
4>(a) = geV)(a) . 
By the definition of continuity, the function 4>(x) is then continuous 
at x = a, and being continuous elsewhere, as long as g(x) :;!: 0, 4> is 
continuous in an interval about a. 
The proof follows immediately from the results of A.2; applying 
Eqs. (28) to both j and g, we find the function 4> is, in a neighborhood 
of a, given by the relation 
4>(a + h) = j(a + h) = /,v)(a + Oh) , 
g(a + h) 
gev)(a + Olh) 
whence the continuity of the numerator and denominator, and the 
nonvanishing of gev)(a) yield (31). We can express the meaning of the 
last equations in the following way: if the numerator and denominator 
of a function 4>(x) = j(x)lg(x) both vanish at x = a, we can determine 
the limiting value as x tends to a by differentiating the numerator and 
denominator an equal number of times until at least one of the deriv-
atives is not zero at the point. Ifwe encounter a nonvanishing derivative 
in the denominator before one appears in the numerator, the fraction 

Sec. A.I.3 
Indeterminate Expressions 465 
tends to zero. If a nonvanishing derivative in the numerator is met 
before one in the denominator, the absolute value of the fraction 
increases beyond all bounds. 
We thus have a method of evaluating the so-called "indeterminate 
expression" 0/0, that is, of determining the limiting value of a quotient 
in which the numerator and denominator tend to zero. 
We can arrive at our results in a somewhat different way by basing 
the proof on the generalized mean value theorem instead of on Taylor's 
theorem (cf. p. 222). Accordingly, if g'(x) ¥= 0 in a neighborhood of 
the point a, we have 
f (a + h) - f ( a) = f,--'-'.-( a_+-,---O h....c.) 
g(a + h) -
g(a) 
g'(a + Oh) , 
where 0 is the same in both numerator and denominator. Hence, in 
particular, whenf(a) = 0 = g(a), 
f(a + h) 
1'(a + Oh) 
g(a + h) 
g'(a + Oh) 
Here 0 is a value in the interval 0 < 0 < 1, and putting k = Oh, we 
obtain 
1· f(a + h) 
l' 1'(a + k) 
1m 
= 1m 
, 
h~O g(a + h) 
k~O g'(a + k) 
it being assumed that the limit on the right exists. 
1f1'(a) = 0 = g'(a), we proceed in the same manner until we reach a 
first index fl for which it is no longer true that simultaneously p'/)(a) = 
0= g(.tl)(a). Then 
. f(a + h) 
. f(Jl)(a + /) 
f(Jl)(a) 
hm 
=hm 
=--, 
h~O g(a + h) 
I~O g(Jl}(a + 1) 
g(Jl}(a) 
an expression in which we include the case when both sides are 
infinite. 
Examples. The following examples which are significant by them-
selves, illustrate the application of L'Hospital's rule. 
lim sin x = cos 0 = l' 
x~o xl' 
lim 1 -
cos x = sin 0 = o. 
x~o xl' 
e2x _ 1 
2e2x 
lim 
= lim 
- 2' 
x~O log (1 + x) 
x~O 1/(1 + x) -
, 
I· 
1 -
cos x 
I' 
sin x 
l' 
cos x 
1 
1m 
= Im-- = Im-- =-. 
x~O 
x2 
x~O 2x 
x~O 2 
2 

466 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
Other Indeterminate Forms. We further note that other so-called 
indeterminate forms can also be reduced to the case we have considered; 
for example, the limit of 
1 
1 
sin x 
x 
as x tends to zero, is the limit of the difference of two expressions both 
of which become infinite, or is an "indeterminate form" 00 -
00. By 
the transformation 
1 
1 
x - sin x 
----= 
sin x 
x 
x sin x 
we at once arrive at an expression whose limit as x tends to zero is 
determined by our rule to be 
1 - cos x 
sin x 
lim 
= lim 
= O. 
a: .... 0 X cos X + sin x 
a: .... 0 2 cos x -
x sin x 
Derivatives of Indeterminate Forms 
The expressions q,(x) = f(x)/g(x) defined at x = a by our rule are not 
only continuous but also have continuous derivatives provided that f 
and g have continuous derivatives of sufficiently high order. 
It suffices for us to establish this fact in the case where g vanishes to 
first order at a, or g(a) = 0, g'(a) #- O. For x #- a, 
..I.' X _ g(x)f'(x) - f(x)g'(x) _ z(x) 
'f' ( ) -
(g(X»2 
-
N(x) , 
where again, both numerator and denominator vanish at x = ii, since 
f(a) = g(a) = O. Hence we can determine the limiting value by 
applying our rule 
lim q,'(x) = lim z'(x) . 
a: .... a 
a: .... 0 N'(x) 
Clearly, 
d(N(x»/dx = 2g(x)g'(x), 
d(z(x»/dx = g(x)f"(x) - f(x)g"(x), 
both of which again vanish at x = a. Applying L'Hospital's rule once 
more, as 
zl/(x) 
lim q,'(x) = lim -1/ -, 
a: .... a 
a: .... a N (x) 
and noting that NI/(x) = 2g(x)gl/(x) + 2(g'(X»2, which does not vanish 
at x = a, we find that 
. 
. 
g'(a)f"(a) - f'(a)gl/(a) 
hm ..1.'/ x) = ~...:..:<-~'--~.....:..::::.--'--"-
a: .... a 'f' \ 
2(g'(a»2' 

Sec. A.I.4 
The Convergence of the Taylor Series 467 
and this limit is indeed the derivative of cf>'(x) at x = a (see Chapter 
3, p. 261). 
Similar rules for indefinite forms hold for x -
00. Thus let J(x) and 
g(x) be functions for which limJ(x) = lim g(x) = 0 while limJ'(x) and 
x-oo 
limg'(x) exist and are ¢O. Then 
f() 
lim f'(x) 
lim _x_ = x:...-_oo,--_ 
x-oo g(x) 
lim g'(x) 
x-oo 
The proof follows again from the mean value theorem of differential 
calculus. 
* A.I.4 The Convergence of the Taylor Series of a Function 
with Nonnegative Derivatives of All Orders 
We insert a general theorem concerning the convergence of Taylor's 
expansion for functions all of whose derivatives are nonnegative. 
Consider the class offunctionsJ(x), differentiable to all orders on the 
closed interval a ~ x ~ b, all of whose derivatives are nonnegative on 
this interval: 
'JI = 1,2, .... 
We shall show: For every such function the corresponding Taylor 
expansion of!(x + h) in powers of h converges, and the series represents 
the value of !(x + h) when x and ~ = x + h lie in the open interval 
(a, b) and Ihl < b -
x. 
For the proof we start with the observation thatf'(x) ~ 0 by assump-
tion and hence 
o ~ f(x) - f(q) = ii'(~) d~ 
~ ff'(~) d~ =f(b) - f(a) = M. 
Moreover, for x and ~ = x + h in the interval between a and b, we may 
write 
f(nl(X) 
f(x + h) - f(x) = hf'(x) + ... + -- hn + Rn. 
n! 
Assume first that h > 0, or x < ~ < b. Then all of the terms on the 
right-hand side are nonnegativel and so each is not greater than the 
1 This follows for R" from the Cauchy or Lagrange formulas and the assumption 
/1,,+1) ~ o. 

468 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
value of the left-hand side or than M; thus 
fn)(x) 
M 
M 
0<--<-=---
-
n! 
-
hn 
(~ _ x)n 
For ~ -
b it follows that 
j(n)(x) 
M 
(32) 
--<--
n! 
-
(b -
x)n 
Now, using Cauchy's formula «19), p. 448) for the remainder, we 
know there exists some 0 in the interval 0 ::;;; 0 ::;;; 1, such that 
o ::;;; Rn = (1 _,o)n hn+y(n+1)(x + Oh) 
n. 
hn+1(n + 1)(1 - OtM 
::;;; 
(b -
x _ Oh)n+l 
. 
Since ~ = x + h < b, we may choose a positive number p such that 
O<h<b-x 
-
-1+p 
or 
b -
x -
Oh ~ h(l + p -
0). 
We then have 
or 
o < R < 
M(n + 1) ( 
1 -
0 )n < M(n + 1) 
1 
-
n - (l + p _ 0) 1 _ 0 + p 
-
p 
(1 + p)n 
since 
= 
1 
< _1_ < 1. 
1 -
0 + p 
1 + pl(l -
0) -
1 + p 
1 - 0 
We know (Chapter 1, p. 70) that (n + 1)/(1 + p)n tends to zero as 
n increases, so that Rn tends to zero as n increases, when 0 ::;;; h < b -
x; 
thus Taylor's series tends to the function/for h ~ O. 
For negative h, the fact that Rn tends to zero with increasing n 
follows by using the Lagrange form (21), p. 449, for Rn: 
IR I = 
1 
Ihn+1llj(n+1)(x -
0 Ihl)l. 
n 
(n + I)! 
Now j<n+2) is nonnegative and hencej<n+l) is monotone nondecreasing. 
It follows then from the estimate (32) used above that 
jln+1)(x _ 0 Ihl) 
j(n+1)(x) 
M 
'---------'----'--'-' < 
< ----
(n + I)! 
- (n + I)! - (b -
x)n+1 

Sec. A.I.4 
Therefore 
The Convergence of a Taylor Series 469 
IRnl ~ (_I_hl_)"+lM 
b -
x' 
and so Rn tends to zero as n increases when 
0< -h < b - x. 
Thus for any point x with a ~ x < b, the remainder Rn in the 
Taylor series for I(x + h) in powers of h will tend to zero once 
Ihl < b -
x and h > -(x -
a). 
We note that our result is still true if we assume the inequality 
pv)(x) ~ 0 only for all sufficiently large Y, say for Y > N for some 
integer N, whereas when Y ~ N the sign ofpv)(x) may be arbitrary. To 
prove this we need only replace the function I in our proof by the 
function 
g(x) = f(x) + M(x -
a + 1)\ 
for M some positive constant. Then g(V)(x) = PV)(x) ~ 0 for Y > N, 
andg(V)(x) =pv)(x) + MN(N - 1)··· (N -
Y + 1)(x -
a + I)N-v ~ 
PV)(x) + M for Y ~ N. Thus g(V)(x) ~ 0 for all Y if M is chosen 
sufficiently large. This proves that g(x) can be expanded in powers of x, 
and the same result follows then for the function/, which differs from 
g only by a polynomial. 
The theorem on the binomial series (p. 456) is an immediate con-
sequence of this result: We change the notation slightly and consider 
first the function 1>(x) = (1 -
x)'" in place of (1 + x)". The derivatives 
of 1> are then given by 
1>(v)(x) = (-1r(:)(1 - X)Hy! 
Since the binomial coefficients 
( !X) = !X(!X -
1) . . . (!X -
Y + 1) 
y 
y! 
have alternating signs as soon as !X -
y is negative, we see that either 
the function 1>(x) or -1>(x) belongs to the class of functions with non-
negative derivatives from some order on when we limit x to values 
x < 1. Thus for a = -1, b = J, x = 0, and Ihl < b -
x = lour 
general theorem proves that 
(J - ht =v~(-lr(:)hV. 
If here we write x for -h, we obtain the binomial expansion 
(l + x)a = i (!X) XV = 1 + !Xx + !X(!X -
1) x2 + !X(!X -
1)(!X - 2) x 3 + 
V~O y 
1 . 2 
1 . 2 . 3 
for any exponent !X and any x with -1 < x < 1. 

470 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
Appendix II Interpolation 
* A.II.t The Problem of Interpolation. 
Uniqueness 
The Taylor polynomial P ",(x) approximates the function f(x) in 
such a way that the graphs of f(x) and Pix) have contact of order n 
at a point a, or in such a way that f{x) and P ",{x) coincide at n + 1 
points "infinitely near" to a. We might "resolve" the point with 
abscissa a into n + 1 distinct points with abscissas xo, Xl' ... , X'" and 
seek an approximation to f{x) by a polynomial ,p{x) of degree n which 
coincides with f{x) at these points. This polynomial, as it turns out, 
is determined uniquely by a system of linear equations. By a passage to 
the limit Xi -- X for all i we regain the Taylor polynomials. But 
"interpolation," that is, the approximation by polynomials coincid-
ing with f(x) in distinct points is of great importance in many appli-
cations. The following discussion will give a brief account of the theory 
of interpolation. 
We consider the following problem: Determine a polynomial 
,p(x) of nth degree, so that it assumes at n + 1 given distinct points 
xo, Xl> ... ,x"" the n + 1 given valuesfo,fl> ... ,f"" that is, 
If the numbersfi are the valuesfi = f(x i ) assumed by a given (possibly 
less elementary) function f(x) at the points Xi' then the polynomial 
,p(x) will be named the interpolation polynomial of nth degree of the 
functionf(x) for the points xo, Xl' ... , X"'. 
There can at most be one such polynomial of nth degree, for if there 
were two different such polynomials ,p(x) and 1p(x), then their difference 
D(x) = ,p(x) -
1p(x) would be a polynomial of mth degree with 
o ~ m ~ n having n + 1 distinct roots, which is not possible according 
to elementary algebra.l 
We can prove the uniqueness of the interpolation polynomial by yet 
another method, based on the 
GENERAL THEOREM OF ROLLE. If a function F(x) has continuous 
derivatives of order up to n in an interval, and vanishes at least at n + 1 
1 For we would have 
D(x) = co(x -
x1)(x -
x2) ... (x -
xm), 
co"" 0, 
since Xl> ••• , Xm are zeros of D(x); but then since D(xo) = 0, 
co(xo -
x1)(Xo -
X2) .•. (xo -
x .. ) = 0 
contrary to the distinctness of X o• Xl> ••• , x ... 

Sec. A.I!.l 
The Problem of Interpolation. Uniqueness 471 
distinct points xo, Xl' .•• , Xn of the interval, then there is a point ~ in the 
interior of the intervalfor which F(nl(~) = O. 
PROOF. The general theorem follows easily from the special case 
n = 1 which is the Rolle theorem proved on p. 175. Let the numbers 
xo, Xl' ... ,Xn be arranged in increasing order. Then by the mean value 
theorem (or by Rolle's theorem) the first derivative F'(x) must vanish 
at least once within each of the n subintervals (Xi' xi+l). This same 
consideration applied to F'(x), and the intervals between its zeros tells 
us that F"(x) vanishes at n -
1 points; by applying this argument 
repeatedly, the assertion is proved. 
We now apply this theorem to the difference 
F(x) = D(x) = cp(x) -
1p(x) 
= doXn + dlxn- l + ... + dn, 
which by assumption vanishes at n + 1 points. We obtain a point ~ at 
which the nth derivative vanishes; D(n1a) = O. This is, however, 
n! do, so that do = 0 and the difference is a polynomial of at most degree 
n -
1, vanishing at n + 1 points. Again applying the theorem of 
Rolle, we obtain dl = 0, etc., or D(x) is identically 0 as we asserted. 
These considerations can be extended to the case where the Xi are 
not all distinct from each other and, perhaps, r of the values Xi 
agree; that is, Xo = Xl = ... = xr_ l • In the interpolation problem we 
shall then require that cp(x) and the derivatives cp'(X), . .. , cp(r-ll(x) 
should assume preassigned values for X = Xo, and correspondingly for 
the other points XV. 
The polynomial D(x) then is of the form 
c(x - xoY(x - xr)· ... The general theorem of Rolle and the unique-
ness theorem, as well as the proofs, hold unchanged in this case. 
A.II.2 Construction of the Solution. 
Newton's Interpolation Formula 
We shall now construct an interpolation polynomial cp(x) of nth 
degree, such that cp(xo) = 10, ... , cp(xn) = In. In order to construct it in 
a stepwise manner, we shall begin with the constant fo which is a 
polynomial CPo(x) of Oth order which for all X and, in particular, for 
X = Xo assumes the value Ao = fo. To it we add a polynomial of first 
order, vanishing for X = Xo and therefore of the form Al(x - xo); 
then we determine Al such that the sum has for X = Xl' the correct 
value fl. The resulting polynomial of first degree we name CPl(X). 
Now we add to CPl(X) a polynomial of second order which vanishes for 
x = Xo and X = Xl' and is thus of the form A2(x - xo)(x -
Xl)' whose 

472 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
addition thus will not change the behavior at these two points; the 
factor A2 is then determined so that the resulting polynomial of second 
order, CP2(X), will also take the assigned value, in this case};, at x = X2• 
This procedure is continued until all points are reached and we 
obtain the polynomial 
(33) 
cp(x) = CPn(x) = Ao + Al(x -
xo) + A2(x -
xo)(x -
Xl) + ... 
+ An(x -
xo) ... (x -
xn- l). 
Our method of obtaining the coefficients Ai in the expression for cP is 
made clear by substituting X = Xu, X = Xl' ••• , X = Xn in order, thus 
obtaining the system of n + I equations 
10 = Ao 
11 = Ao + Al(Xl -
Xo) 
(34) 
12 = Ao + Al(X2 -
xo) + A2(x2 -
XO)(X2 -
Xl) 
In = Ao + Al(xn -
xo) + ... + 
+ Aixn -
xo)(xn -
Xl) ••• (xn -
xn_l)· 
Clearly, we can determine the coefficients Ao, AI, ... , An successively 
so as to satisfy these equations, and in this way the interpolation 
polynomial can be constructed. 
When the values Xv are equidistant, Xv = Xv_ l + h, the result can be written 
explicitly in a more elegant manner. The equations for the Ai now become 
10 = Ao 
11 = Ao + hAl 
(35) 
12 = Ao + 2hAl + 2! h2A2 
/3 = AO + 3hAl + 3 ·2h2A2 + 3! h3A3 
n! 
. 
In = AO + nhA} + ... + (n _ i)! h'Ai + ... + n! hnAn· 
The solutions may easily be expressed as successive differences of I: 
Given any sequence (finite or infinite) of terms /0,/}'/2' ... , we call the 
expressions 
the first differences of the /k' Applying the differencing process again to the 
sequence of D./k , we obtain the expressions 

Sec. A.II.2 
Construction of the Solution. Newton's Interpolation Formula 473 
that is, 
which are the second differences of the /k' The nth difference I1Yk is defined 
recursively as I1n-Yk+1 -
I1n-Yk' When expressed directly in terms of the /k 
it is given by the formula 
which follows by a simple inductive argument left to the reader. With this 
terminology the coefficients Av can be written in the form 
1 
(37) 
A = -h-vl1vF 
v 
v! 
)0 
as can be verified by induction. 1 
Newton's Interpolation Formula. 
Putting ~ = (x -
xo)/h we have x -
Xr = 
h(~ -
r). The expressions (x -
xo)(x - xl) ... (x -
xv) assume then the 
form ~(~ - 1) ... (~ - v)hv+1. Thus we obtain for the polynomials </>(x) 
from (33), (37), Newton's interpolation /ormula: 2 
If /0,/1'/2' ... are the values of a function /(x) at the points xo, xl' x2, ••• , 
where/has continuous derivatives through the nth order, then I1v/o/hv is an 
1 We have to verify that the values Av given by (37) satisfy the equations (35); 
that is, for any sequence fo, f" f2' ... , the identity 
is satisfied. Assuming that this is true for a certain k, we must show that 
fm =f1 + G) I1f1 + C) 11"/1 + ... 
= (fo + I1fo) + G) (l1fo + 11"/0) + G) (11"/0 + 1110)+ ... 
(k + 1) 
(k + 1) 
= fo + 
1 
I1fo + 
2 
!:J.1o + ... 
which is the identity for the case k + 1. 
2 As on p. 457 we define here the bionomial coefficients (!) for general ~ and 
position integers k by (!) = ~(~ - 1)··· (~- k + l)/k! 

474 Taylor's Expansion 
approximation to the derivative I(v)(xo); we shall show on p. 476 that 
1 
lim -
~vr =/(V)(x) 
h~O hv 
JO 
0 • 
Since also 
lim hk(;) = (x - xo)" 
h~O 
k 
k! 
Ch. 5 
we see that in this case </>(x) tends to the Taylor polynomiaIPn(x) when h tends 
to zero. 
We note that the construction of the interpolation polynomial is 
possible in the same manner, if, perhaps, the first r values Xo, ..• , X r - l 
coincide, and corresponding values 10,[0" ... ,/~r-l) are preassigned 
for 4>(xo), 4>'(xo), ... , 4>(r-l)(xo), which coincide with the values 
I(xo),['(xo), ... ,J<r-l)(xo), 
for a given function! For 4>(x) we write the form 
4>(x) = Ao + Al(X -
xo) + A2(X -
XO)2 
+ ... + A.(x -
xoY + Ar+1(x -
xoY(x -
xr) + ... ; 
we then determine the Av in order from the equations 
10 = Ao 
10' = Al 
10" = 2A2 
1~r-1) = (r -
I)! A r- l 
Ir = Ao + AI(xr -
xo) + ... + Ar(xr -
xoY 
Ir+1 = Ao + A I(xr+1 -
xo) + .. . 
+ A.(xr+1 -
xoY + Ar+1(xr+l -
xoY(xr+1 -
xr) 
A.II.3 The Estimate of the Remainder 
For the foregoing considerations it did not matter how the values 
/0,[1, ... ,[n were originally given. For instance, if these values were 
obtained from physical observations, the problem of constructing the 
interpolation polynomial could still be completely solved, giving us 
then in 4>(x) a simple smooth function defined for all x and taking the 
observed values at the given points, which can be used to "predict" 
approximate values for f(x) at other x. However, if the functionf(x) 
taking the n + 1 given values fk at the given points X k is defined also 
for intermediate values x, we have to face the new problem of estimating 
the difference R(x) = f(x) -
4>(x), the error of interpolation. 
We 
know at first only that R(xo) = R(xl ) = ... R(xn) = O. In order to be 
able to say more, we must make further assumptions on the behavior 

Sec. A.II3 
The Estimate of the Remainder 475 
of the functionj(x), which affect the remainder R(x). We will therefore 
assume that in the interval under consideration j(x) has continuous 
derivatives of at least the (n + l)th order. 
We note at first that for every choice of the constant c, the function 
K(x) = R(x) -
c(x -
xo)(x -
Xl) ••• (X -
xn) 
vanishes at the n + 1 points xo, ... ,xn • Choose now any value y 
distinct from xo, Xl' •.. ,xn • We can then determine c so that K(y) = 0, 
that is, 
Then there are n + 2 points at which K(x) vanishes. We apply the 
generalized Rolle's theorem used earlier to K(x); by this we know there 
is a value X = ; between the largest and the smallest of the values 
xo, Xl' ••• , Xn, y, such that K(nH )(;) = 0. Since R(x) = f(x) -
4>(x), 
and 4>, as a polynomial of nth order, has an identically vanishing 
(n + l)th derivative, we have 
pn+l)(;) _ c(n + I)! = 0, 
noting that (n + I)! is the (n + l)th derivative of (x -
xo) ... (x -
xn). 
Thus we have obtained for c, a second expression c = pn+l)(;)/(n + I)!, 
containing; and depending in some manner on y. We now use the 
equation K(y) = 0, in which y is completely arbitrary and therefore 
can be replaced by x, and obtain the representation 
(38) 
R(x) = (x -
xo)(x -
Xl) ..• (X -
xn) j(nH)(;). 
(n + 1)! 
where; is some value lying between the smallest and the largest of the 
points x, Xo, Xl' ... , xn-
Thus the general problem of interpolation for a given functionf(x) 
is completely solved. We have for f(x) the representation 
(39) j(x) = Ao + AI(X -
xo) + A 2(x -
xo)(x -
Xl) + ... 
+ An(x -
Xo)(x -
Xl) ••• (X -
Xn- l ) + Rno 
where the coefficients Ao, AI, ... , An can be found successively from 
the values of f at the points xo, Xl' ••• ,Xn by the recursion formulas 
(34) on p. 472 and where the remainder R" is of the form 
(40) 
R = (x -
xo)(x -
Xl) .•• (X -
xn) j(nH)(;) 
n 
(n + 1)! 
' 
with a suitable number; between the largest and smallest of the values 

476 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
If we take the corresponding formula (39) for f(x) with n replaced 
by n -
1 and subtract, we obtain 
AJx -
xo)(x -
Xl) ••• (X -
xn- l ) + Rn -
Rn- l = 0. 
F or X = Xn we have Rn = 0, and hence for the coefficient An (using (40) 
with n replaced by n -
1) the representation 
f(n)(~) 
A =--
n 
n! 
where ~ lies between the smallest and largest of the values xo, Xl> ••• , X n • 
Similar representations exist for An-I, An- 2, ••• ,Ao' Thus we recognize 
that if the points xo, Xl' •.• ,xn are tending together to one and the 
same point, perhaps the origin, then our interpolation formula (39) 
goes term for term into the Taylor formula (27a), p. 452, with the 
Lagrange form (21), p. 449, of the remainder. The Taylor formula can 
thus be considered a limiting case of the Newton interpolation formula. 
This formula enables us to give precise meaning to an expression 
commonly used in geometry. The osculating parabola which meets 
a given curve at a point, of nth order, is said to have "(n + 1) consec-
utive points in common" with the given curve at the point. Actually, 
we obtain this osculating parabola if we find a parabola having n + 1 
points in common with the curve, and then draw these points together. 
Analytically, this just corresponds to the transition from the inter-
polating to the Taylor polynomial. In the same fashion we can 
characterize the osculation of arbitrary curves. For example, the 
circle of curvature is that circle which has three consecutive points 
in common with the given curve. 
The interpolation formula can be expected to give the values of a 
function whose values at some definite points are known, with a high 
degree of accuracy between these points (both 
lJ<v+1)(~)1 and the 
Ix - Xii are then bounded). If the value X lies outside the intervals of 
the points xo, Xl' ... , Xu> we speak of extrapolation. By means of such 
an extrapolation we shall obtain good agreement provided the point X 
is sufficiently near the given points. The Taylor formula corresponds 
in a sense to complete extrapolation; in general, it is suitable for use 
only in a neighborhood of a point. 
A.n.4 The Lagrange Interpolation Formula 
In closing, we solve the interpolation problem by a somewhat differ-
ent formula, due to Lagrange, and differing from Newton's inter-
polation formula insofar as each individual term contains only one of 

Problems 477 
the given values of the function. Moreover, the formula gives cp(x) quite 
explicitly, not requiring any solution of recursive formulas. 
For 
brevity we introduce the polynomial of (n + l)th degree 
tp(x) = (x -
xo)(x -
Xl) ... (x -
xn), 
corresponding to the given points XV. Differentiating by the product 
rule and substituting then successively for x the values xo, ••• , xn , we 
obtain the relations 
tp'(xn) = (xn -
xo)(xn -
Xl) ••• (xn -
xn_l). 
We note that 
tp(X) 
= 
(x -
xo) ... (x -
xv_l)(x -
xvH) ... (x -
xn) 
(x -
xv)tp'(xv) 
(xv -
xo) ... (xv -
xv_l)(xv -
xvH) ... (xv -
xn) 
is a polynomial of nth degree, having at the point x = xv' the value 1, 
and at the remaining points Xi' the value 0; then it is immediately 
clear that the expression 
(41) cp(x) = tp(x) 
[ 
fo 
+ 
fl 
+ ... + 
fn 
] 
(x -
xo)tp'(xo} 
(x -
xl)tp'(Xl} 
(x -
xn)tp'(xn} 
is the desired interpolation polynomial. This is the interpolation 
formula of Lagrange. 
PROBLEMS 
SECTION 5.4b, page 540 
1. Give the complete formal derivation of the remainder formula (27), 
p. 452, using mathematical induction. 
2. (A Variant of Proof of Taylor's Theorem) 
(a) If g(h} has continuous derivatives through the (n + l)th order for 
o :::;; h :::;; A, and if g(O) = g'(O) = ... = g(n)(o) = 0, while Ig(n+l)(h)I :::;; M 
on [0, A], for M a constant, show that Ig(n)(h)I :s: Mh, Ig(n-ll(h)I :::;; 
Mh2/2! , ... , Igln-O(h)I :::;; Mhi/i!, ... , Ig(h)I :s: Mhn/n!, for all h in the 
interval. 

478 
Taylor's Expansion 
Ch. 5 
(b) Letf(x) be a sufficiently differentiable function on a ~ x ~ b, and Tn(h) 
be the Taylor polynomial for f(x) at x = a. Apply the result of (a) to the 
function g(h) = Rn = f(a + h) -
Tn(h) to obtain Taylor's formula with a 
rough estimate for the remainder. 
' 
3. Let f(x) have a continuous derivative in the interval a ~ x ~ b, 'and 
letf"(x) ~ 0 for every value of x. Then if ~ is any point in the interval, the 
curve nowhere falls below its tangent at the point x = ~, y = f(~). 
(Use the Taylor expansion to three terms.) 
4. Deduce the integral formula for the remainder Rn by applying inte-
gration by parts to 
f(x + h) - f(x) = f.f'(X + T) dT. 
5. Integrate by parts the formula 
and so obtain 
hn 
Rn = f(x + h) - f(x) -
h.f'(.T;) - ... -
n!f<n)(x). 
*6. Suppose that in some way a series for the function f(x) has been 
obtained, namely 
f(x) = ao + a1x + a2x2 + ... + anxn + Rn(x), 
where ao, aI, ... , an are constants, Rn(x) is n times continuously differentiable, 
and Rn(x)Jxn --+ 0 as x --+ O. 
Show that ak = (F(O)/k!) (k = 0, ... ,n), 
that is, that the series is a Taylor series. 
SECTION 5.5, page 453 
1. Find the first four non vanishing terms of the Taylor series for the 
following functions in the neighborhood of x = 0: 
(a) x cot x 
(d) eSin x 
Vsinx 
(b) 
V; 
(c) sec x 
(e) eex 
(f) log sin x - log x. 
2. Find the Taylor series for arc sin x in the neighborhood of x = 0 by 
using 
1'" 
dt 
arc sin x = 
.1 
o y 1 - t 2 
Compare Section 3.2, Problem 2. 
*3. Find the first three nonvanishing terms of the Taylor series for sin2 x 
in the neighborhood of x = 0 by multiplying the Taylor series for sin x by 
itself. Justify this procedure. 
*4. Find the first three nonvanishing terms of the Taylor series for tan x 
in the neighborhood of x = 0 by using the relation tan x = sin x/cos x, and 
justify the procedure. 

Problems 479 
*5. Find the first three nonvanishing terms of the Taylor series for V cos x 
in the neighborhood of x = 0 by applying the binomial theorem to the 
Taylor series for cos x, and justify the procedure. 
*6. Find the Taylor series for (arc sin x)2. Compare Section 3.2, Problem 2. 
7. Find the Taylor series for the following functions in the neighborhood 
ofx = 0: 
(a) sinh-1 x. 
(c) r'" sin t dt. 
Jo 
t 
*8. Estimate the error involved in using the first n terms in the series in 
Problem 7. 
9. The elliptic function s(u) has been defined (Section 3.14a) as the inverse 
of the elliptic integral 
u(s) = rs 
dx 
. 
Jo V (I - x2)(1 - k2x2) 
Find the Taylor expansion of s(u) to the term of degree 5. 
10. Evaluate the following limits: 
(a) !~~x[ (I + ~r -eJ. 
(d) lim 
SIOX 
, 
( . 
)1/"'2 
",--0 
X 
(b) !~~ {~x +x2[(1 +~r -eJ}, 
(e) lim 
SIO X 
( . 
)1/"'2 
:t-oo 
X 
*( c) !~~ x [ (I + ~ r -e log (I + ~ rJ. 
*11. Find the first three terms of the Taylor series for [I + (l/x)]'" in 
powers of I/x. 
*12. Two oppositely charged particles +e, -e situated at a small distance 
d apart form an electric dipole with moment M = ed. Show that the potential 
energy 
(a) At a point situated on the axis of the dipole at a distance r from the 
center of the dipole is (M/r2)(1 + .. ), where .. is approximately equal to 
d2J4r2• 
(b) At a point situated on the perpendicular bisector of the dipole is O. 
(c) At a point with polar coordinates r, 0 relative to the center and axis of 
the dipole is [M cos (0/r2)](1 + .. ), where .. is approximately equal to 
(d2/Sr2)(5 cos2 0 - 3). 
(The potential energy of a single charge q at a point at a distance r from the 
charge is q/ r; the potential energy of several charges is the sum of the potential 
energies of the separate charges.) 
SECTION 5.6, page 457 
1. Prove if [(a) = 0 and [(x) has sufficiently many derivatives at x = a 
that[(x)n has at least an (n - l)th order contact with the x-axis. 

480 Taylor's Expansion 
Ch.5 
2. The curve y = I( x) passes through the origin 0 and touches the x-axis at 
O. Show that the radius of curvature of the curve at 0 is given by 
x2 
p =lim-' 
.. _o2y 
*3. K is a circle which touches a given curve at a point P and passes 
through a neighboring point Q of the curve. Show that the limit of the circle 
K as Q --+ P is the circle of curvature of the curve at P. 
*4. Show that the order of contact of a curve and its osculating circle is at 
least three at points where the radius of curvature is a maximum or minimum. 
*5. Show that the osculating circle at a point where the radius of curvature 
is a maximum or minimum does not cross the curve unless the contact is of 
higher than third order. 
*6. Find the maxima and minima of the following functions: 
(a) cos x cosh x 
(b) x + cos x 
*7. Determine the maxima and minima of the function y = e-1/ .. 2 (see 
p.242). 
SECTION A.3, page 464 
1. Prove if 1 is continuous on the interval [0, 1] that 
lim x P I~z) dz = 1(0) . 
.. -0 J .. 
z 
2. Prove that the function y = (x2) .. , y(O) = 1 is continuous at x = O. 

6 
Numerical Methods 
The task of solving an analytical problem always remains uncom-
pleted. The proof of the existence and of some basic properties of the 
solution is usually considered satisfactory, but relevant questions 
always remain to be answered. Thus, when the solution is defined by a 
limit process, for example by an integral, the problem arises of actually 
finding approximations to this limit and of estima!ing the accuracy of 
these approximations. Not only are such questions of basic importance 
theoretically but they are also inevitable, if we wish to apply analysis 
to the description and control of natural phenomena which in principle 
can be described only in an approximate manner. 
Accordingly it is a great challenge to carry the solution to the point 
where numerical answers and estimates of their accuracy come into 
reach. 
Recently, with the advent of high-speed automatic computing 
machines, theoretical and practical aspects of "numerical analysis" have 
received a great stimulus; they are presented in a variety of textbooks. 1 
For centuries, however, many of the foremost mathematicians, such as 
Newton, Euler, and, in particular, Gauss, have greatly contributed to 
numerical methods. 
In this volume we cannot present numerical analysis in a com-
prehensive way, but at least we shall discuss some of the simple classical 
results. 
1 See for example, Hildebrand, Introduction to Numerical Analysis, McGraw-Hili 
Book Co., 1956; Householder, Principles of Numerical Analysis, McGraw-Hill 
Book Co., 1953; and Whittaker and Robinson, The Calculus of Observations, 
Blackie and Sons, Ltd., 1929. 
481 

482 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
6.1 Computation of Integrals 
Although the existence of the integral of a (continuous) function is 
assured by the theory of Chapter 2, the evaluation of such an integral 
or "quadrature"l cannot be effected by elementary functions except in 
relatively rare cases. We must therefore devise methods for numerical 
integration and for estimating the accuracy of the numerical approxi-
mation. 
To compute approximately the integral 
(1) 
J =f1(X)dX 
with a < b, we subdivide the interval a ~ x ~ b into n equal parts, each 
of length h = (b - a)/n by means of the n + I points 
(2) 
Then 
where 
(3) 
X. = a + 'JIh, 
nh = b -
a, 
'II = 0, 1, ... , n. 
n 
J = IJ., 
.=1 
i"'· 
J. = 
f(x) dx; 
2lV_l 
the problem of computing the integral J is reduced to that of obtaining 
good approximations for the areas J. of strips of width h into which we 
have dissected the entire area, represented by J. 
a. Approximation by Rectangles 
The most direct approximation, paraphrasing the original definition 
of the integral, yields the relation 
n 
J =IJ • 
• =1 
~ h(fl + 12 + ... + In), 
where for abbreviation we set 
1. =1(x.). 
1 The word "quadrature" indicates the process of "squaring", that is, of measuring 
an area inside a curve by finding a square having the same area (as in the problem 
of "squaring the circle"). 

Sec. 6.1 
Computation of Integrals 483 
Here (and throughout this chapter) the symbol ~ means "approxi-
mately equal." 
To estimate the accuracy or "error" of this approximation, we 
assume thatf(x) is continuous with a uniformly bounded derivative on 
the interval a ::;;; x ::;;; b: Ir(x)1 ::;;; MI' Then it can be proved easily (see 
Problem 4 p. 507, 6.1) that 
(4) 
IJ. - hf.1 ::;;; M~h2 , 
or therefore 
I J -
h if. I::;;; n Mlh2 
.=1 
2 
(5) 
= iM1(b - a)h. 
Thus the accuracy of the approximation of the integral by the finite 
sum is of the order h of the "mesh width" in the terminology of Chapter 
3, p. 252. 
h. Refined Approximations-Simpson's Rule 
A better approximation is obtained with hardly more effort if we 
approximate the areas J. not by rectangular strips but by the slender 
trapezoids, as in Fig. 6.1a. The approximation formula (trapezoid 
formula) is then 
(6) 
since every function value except the first and the last appears twice. 
An approximation which is generally slightly more precise than that 
of the trapezoid formula is that in which the 'Pth strip is approximated 
by a trapezoid bounded above by the tangent to the curve at the 
midpoint x._1 + hj2 of the interval x._1 ::;;; x ::;;; x.. The area of this 
trapezoid is simply 
hf.-l/2 = hf (x._ 1 + ~) , 
and we obtain by addition the tangent formula, 
(7) 
J ~ h(jl/2 + f3/2 + ... + f(2n-l)/J· 
As we shall see on p. 486, the accuracy of this approximation is of order 
h2 when the second derivative offis continuous in the interval a::;;; x ::;;; b 
and 1f"(x)1 < M 2, with some constant bound M 2• 
Finally, we mention the famous approximation of Simpson, which 
with little additional effort yields a much more accurate approximation 

484 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
y 
o 
(a) 
y 
o 
(b) 
Figure 6.1 (a) The trapezoid formula. (b) The tangent formula. 

Sec. 6.1 
Computation of Integrals 485 
y 
oL-----L---~----~--------------~ 
Xv -1 
Xv 
x v +1 
X 
Figure 6.2 Simpson's rule. 
if the fourth derivative of f exists and is uniformly bounded in the 
interval: 
1J<4)(X)I ~ M 4, 
with M4 a constant. Simpson's formula for n = 2m is 
4h 
(8) 
J ~ ""3 ([1 + fa + fs + ... + f2m-l) 
2h 
h 
+ ""3 ([2 + f4 + f6 + ... + f2m-2) + "3 ([0 + f2m)· 
The formula is easily obtained if we approximate the region composed 
of the yth and (y + I )th strips by a strip of width 2h bounded above by 
the parabola which agrees with f at the three abscissae 
xv_I> 
Xv = xv_1 + h, and xv+! = Xv_1 + 2h (see Fig. 6.2). Newton's inter-
polation formula (p. 473) yields the equation of this parabola: 
y = f, + (x -
x ).Iv -
fv-1 
v-I 
v-I 
h 
+ (x -
Xv_1)(X -
XV-l -
h) fv+! -
2fv + fv-l . 
2 
h2
' 
hence we have the approximation 
1
"'H1 
1"'V-1+2h 
J v + Jv+! ~ 
Y dx = 
y dx 
X V_ 1 
X V- 1 
ih - 2h 
= 2hfv-l + 2h([v - fv-l) + 
2 
([v+! -
2fv + fv-l) 
h 
= "3 ([v-l + 4fv + fv+l)· 

486 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
The formula is now obtained for even n = 2m by adding all these 
approximate values for 'V = 1,3,4, ... , 2m -
1 or all the areas of the 
pairs of strips. 
*Accuracy 
It is not difficult to estimate the accuracy of our approximations. 
Each quadrature proceeds by approximating the function f(x) in an 
interval by an easily integrated function cP(x) (a polynomial). An 
estimate for the error in the integration formula can thus be 
obtained by estimating If(x) -
4>(x)l. 
In the tangent formula (p. 483) we replaced f(x) in the interval 
[x._I> x.] by its tangent at the midpoint x. - (h/2), that is, by 
4>(x) =f(xv -~) + (x -
Xv + ~)f'(xv -~). 
By Taylor's theorem with Lagrange's form of the remainder 
1( 
h)2 
f(x) = 4>(x) + 2 x -
Xv + 2 f"(~), 
where ~ lies between x and Xv - h/2. Hence the error corresponding to 
one strip is estimated by 
IJv -
hfv-~I = I L:~l [f(x) -
4>(x)] dx I 
:::;;1"'v If(x) -
4>(x) I dx :::;; M21"'v !(x -
Xv + ~)2 dx 
"'V-1 
",v-h 2 
2 
h3 
--M 
-
24 
2' 
For the total error in the tangent formula contributed by the various 
intervalsl we find then the upper bound 
1 This is the total error inherent in using the approximating formula, the so-called 
truncation error; in practice, additional error arises because of round off in the 
computation. The total effect of round-off errors increases most likely with the 
number of steps taken, that is, with decreasing h, whereas the truncation error 
decreases. 

Sec. 6.1 
Computation of Integrals 487 
We use this derivation as a model for estimating the error in the other 
quadrature formulas. In the trapezoidal rule (6) we approximate lex) in 
the interval [XV-I' XV] by the linear interpolation polynomial 
~(X) = Iv-l + (x -
XV_1/ v - IV-I. 
h 
From the error estimate for the remainder in the interpolation formula 
[see p. 475, Eq. (40)] for n = 1, we find 
I(x) -
~(x) = l(x -
xv_I)(x -
xv)f"(~), 
where ~ lies between xv- I and XV. Hence the absolute value of the error 
in the computation of Jv is at most 
and the total error is then at most n times this quantity: 
h2 
-M2(b -
a). 
12 
The same technique can be applied to Simpson's rule (8), taking for 
~(x) the quadratic polynomial agreeing with / in the points XV-I' Xv' 
xv+1leading to an error in J. + J.+1 of the order h4. Actually, however, 
the error estimate can be improved by one order of magnitude by 
using a cubic polynomial ~(x) that gives a better approximation to / 
in the interval [Xv-I' Xv+I] than the quadratic one, and still has the same 
integral, thus leading to the same approximation formula (9) for the 
integral J. We simply use the interpolation polynomial which agrees 
with /(x) at the points Xv- lo Xv, xv+1 and for which ~'(x.) = J'(x.); it 
has the form 
~(X) = Ao + AI(X -
Xv_I) + A 2(x -
xv_I)(x -
X.) 
+ A3(X -
xv_I)(x -
xv)(x -
xvH). 
Here the first three terms represent the quadratic interpolation poly-
nomial agreeing with/at the three points xv_I' Xv' xvH. The constant 
A3 has to be determined from the condition ~'(x.) = J'(xv). 
The last term 
obviously is an odd function of X -
Xv and therefore does not con-
tribute to the integral between the limits Xv - h and Xv + h. For the 

488 Numerical Methods 
Ch. 6 
error in the approximation to / we then have the estimate [cf. (40), 
p. 475, with n = 3 and with two of the interpolation points coincident 
at xJ. 
1 
f -
4> = -
(x -
xv_1)(x -
xv)2(X -
XV+1)f(4)(~). 
4! 
This yields for the error in the computation of J v + JV+1 the estimate 
hS -M 
90 
4, 
and hence for the total error the estimate 
n hS 
h4 
"2 90 M4 = 180 (b -
a)M4· 
Naturally, we may attain higher accuracy by approximation of the 
function/(x) in a strip by a polynomial of a still higher order. 
Examples. We apply these methods to the calculation of 
1
2 dx 
loge 2 = -. 
1 
X 
Dividing the interval 1 ::::;; x ::::;; 2 into ten parts of length h = lb, and 
using the trapezoidal rule (6), we obtain 
Xl = l.1 
X 2 = l.2 
Xa = l.3 
X 4 = l.4 
Xs = l.5 
X6 = l.6 
X 7 = l.7 
Xs = l.8 
X9 = l.9 
Xo = l.0 
X 10 = 2.0 
/1 = 0.90909 
/2 = 0.83333 
/a = 0.76923 
/4 = 0.71429 
/s = 0.66667 
/6 = 0.62500 
/7 = 0.58824 
/s = 0.55556 
/9 = 0.52632 
Sum 6.18773 
!fo = 0.5 
!flO = 0.25 
6.93773· l'-o 
loge 2 ~ 0.69377. 
Since the graph of the integrand function has its convex side turned 
towards the x-axis, this value is too large. 

Sec. 6.1 
Computation of Integrals 489 
Using the tangent rule (7) we have 
Xo + lh = 1.05 
/1/2 = 0.95238 
Xl + lh = 1.15 
/a/2 = 0.86957 
X 2 + lh = 1.25 
/5/2 = 0.80000 
Xa + ·~h = 1.35 
/7/2 = 0.74074 
X4 + lh = 1.45 
/9/2 = 0.68966 
Xs + ~h = 1.55 
/11/2 = 0.64516 
Xs + lh = 1.65 
j~a/2 = 0.60606 
X 7 + lh = 1.75 
/15/2 = 0.57143 
Xs + lh = 1.85 
/17/2 = 0.54054 
X9 + lh = 1.95 
/19/2 = 0.51282 
6.92836· lo 
log. 2 ~ 0.69284, 
which, owing to the convexity of the curve, is too small. 
For the same subdivision we obtain a much more precise result using 
Simpson's rule (8). We have 
In reality 
Xl = 1.1 
Xa = 1.3 
X5 = 1.5 
X 7 = 1.7 
X9 = 1.9 
XI = 1.2 
X 4 = 1.4 
Xs = 1.6 
Xs = 1.8 
Xo = 1.0 
XI0 = 2.0 
11 = 0.90909 
/a = 0.76923 
/5 = 0.66667 
/7 = 0.58824 
/9 = 0.52632 
Sum 3.45955 . 4 
13.83820 
12 = 0.83333 
/4 = 0.71429 
/6 = 0.62500 
fs = 0.55556 
Sum 2.72818·2 
5.45636 
13.83820 
/0 = 1.0 
j~o = 0.5 
20.79456· lo 
log. ~ 0.69315. 
log. 2 = 0.693147 .... 

490 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
6.2 Other Examples of Numerical Methods 
a. The "Calculus of Errors" 
The "calculus of errors" is simply a numerical application of the 
basic fact of differential calculus: a function f(x) which is differentiable 
a sufficient number of times can be represented in the neighborhood of 
a point by a linear function with an error of higher than the first order, 
by a quadratic function with an error of higher than the second order, 
and so on. 
Consider the linear approximation to a function y = f(x). If 
y + lly = f(x + llx) = f(x + h), we have by Taylor's theorem 
lly = hf'(x) + h
2 f"(~), 
2 
where ~ = x + ()h (0 < () < 1) is an intermediate value which need 
not be more precisely known. If h = llx is small, we obtain the practical 
approximation 
lly ~ hf'(x). 
Thus we replace the difference quotient by the derivative to which it is 
approximately equal, and the increment of y by the approximately 
equal linear expression in h. 
This simple fact is used for numerical purposes in the following way. 
Suppose two physical quantities x and yare related by y = f(x). We 
then ask what effect an inaccuracy in the measurement of x has on the 
determination of y. If instead of the "true" value x we use the in-
accurate value x + h, then the corresponding value of y differs from 
the true value y = f(x) by the amount lly = f(x + h) - f(x). The 
error is therefore given approximately by the above relation. 
We illustrate the usefulness of such linear approximations by 
examples. 
Examples. (a) In a triangle ABC (cf. Fig. 6.3) suppose that the sides 
band e are measured accurately, whereas the angle (X = x is only 
measured to within an error Illxl < 15. What is the corresponding error 
in the value of the third side y = a = J b2 + e2 -
2be cos (X ? 
We have lla ~ (be sin (X ll(X)/a; the percentage error is therefore 
100 lla 
100 be. 
A 
-- ~ -- sm (X u(X. 
a 
a2 

Sec. 6.2 
Other Examples of Numerical Methods 491 
In the special case when b = 400 meters, C = 500 meters, and oc. = 60°, 
we have y = a = 458.2576 meters, so that 
200000 
-
~a R:i 458.2576 X h/3 ~oc.. 
If ~oc. can be measured to within 10 seconds of arc, that is, if 
~oc. = 10" = 4846 X 10-8 radians, 
we find that at worst 
~a R:i 1.83 cm; 
thus the error is at most about 0.004 %. 
AL-----~----------c------------------~C 
Figure 6.3 
(b) The following example illustrates the usefulness of the lineari-
zation for physical problems. 
It is known experimentally that if a metal rod has length 10 at tem-
perature to, then at temperature t its length will be 1 = 10(1 + oc.(t -
to», 
where oc. depends only on to and the material of which the rod is com-
posed. If now a pendulum clock keeps correct time at temperature to. 
how many seconds will it lose per day if the temperature rises to t1? 
For the period T(I) of oscillation we have (see p. 411) 
T(l) = 21T fJ:. ; 
g 
hence 
dT 
1T 
di = Jig: 
If the change of length is ~/. the corresponding change in the period of 
oscillation is 

492 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
where 11 = loCI + 1X(t1 -
to» and !J..I = 1X/0(t1 -
to). This is the time 
lost per oscillation. The time lost per second is !J..TIT:=::::i !::..l12/0; hence 
in one day the clock loses 43,200 !::..llio = 43,200 lX(tl -
to) seconds. 
In this case and in many other cases where the function under con-
sideration is a product of several factors, we can simplify the calculation 
by taking the logarithms of both sides before differentiating. In this 
example we have 
log T= log27T - tlogg + tlog/; 
differentiating, we have 
1 dT 
1 
----
T dl 
21 
Replacing dTldl by !J..TI!::..l gives 
!J..T 
!J..l 
-Y=2i' 
in agreement with the preceding result. 
*h. Calculation of 7T 
A different example, using special artificial devices, is classical, although 
perhaps made obsolete by modern computers. 
Leibnitz's series 1T/4 = 1 - t +} -
~ + . .. [Eq, (7), Section 5.2, 
p. 445], using the series for the inverse tangent, is not suitable for the 
calculation of 1T, because of the extreme slowness of its convergence. We 
may, however, calculate 1T with comparative ease by the following artifice. 
If, in the addition theorem for the tangent, 
tan ex + tan f3 
tan (ex + (3) = 1 
fJ ' 
- tan ex tan 
we introduce the inverse functions ex = arc tan u, f3 = arc tan v, we obtain 
the formula 
( u + V) 
arc tan u + arc tan v = arc tan 1 _ uv . 
Now, choosing u and v so that (u + v)/(l -
uv) = 1, we obtain the value 
1T/4 on the right-hand side, and if u and v are small numbers we can easily 
calculate the left-hand side by means of known series. If, for example. we 
put u = t, v = t, as Euler did, we obtain 
(9) 
1T 
"4 = arc tan! + arc tan t· 
J_+1. 
1 
If we further notice that 13 _ 
: 
= 2 ' 
21 

Sec. 6.2 
Other Examples of Numerical Methods 493 
we have arc tan! = arc tan i + arc tan t, so that by (9), 
7T '4 = 2 arc tan! + arc tan t. 
Using this formula, Vega calculated the number 7T to 140 places. 
By means of the equation (!- + l)/(l -
fo) = 1, we further obtain 
arc tan 1 = arc tan!- + arc tan i 
or 
7T '4 = 2 arc tan t + arc tan t + 2 arc tan t· 
This expansion is extremely useful for calculating 7T by means of the series 
arc tan x = x - x3J3 + xSJ5 - ... ; for if we substitute for x the value 
t, t, or -1-, we obtain with but few terms a high degree of accuracy, since the 
terms diminish rapidly. 
The reader who is not especially interested in these skilful, yet artificial 
manipulations, might be satisfied with an understanding of the principle. 
*c. Calculation of Logarithms 
For the numerical calculation of logarithms we transform the loga-
rithmic series [Eq. (5), p. 444] 
l+x 
x3 
x5 
t log -- = x + -
+ -
+ ... 
1 -
x 
3 
5 
where 0 < x < I, by the substitution 
1 + x 
p2 
--=---, 
I-x l-l 
1 
x=---
2l-1 
into the series 
1 
log p = t log (p -
1) + ! log (p + 1) + ---:2--
2p -
1 
1 
+ 3(2l -
1)3 + ... , 
where 2p2 -
1 > 1 or p2 > I. If P is an integer and p + 1 can be 
resolved into smaller integral factors (for example, if p + I is even), 
this last series expresses the logarithm of p by the logarithms of smaller 
integers plus a series whose terms diminish very rapidly and whose sum 
can therefore be calculated accurately enough by use of only a few 
terms. From this series we can therefore calculate successively the 
logarithms of any prime number, and hence of any number, provided we 
have already calculated the value of log 2 (for example, by its integral 
representation, as on p. 489). 

494 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
The accuracy of this determination of log p can be estimated more 
easily by means of the geometric series than from the general formula 
for the remainder. For the remainder Rn of the series, that is, the sum 
of all the terms following the term Ijn(2p2 -
l)n, we have 
, 
R < 
1 
(1 + 
1 
+ 
1 
+ 
) 
n 
(n + 2)(2l -
1)n+2 
(2l -
1)2 
(2l _ 1)4 
1 
1 
= (n + 2)(2l -
l)n . (2l -
1)2 -
1 ' 
and this formula immediately gives the required estimate of the error. 
Let us for example calculate log. 7 (under the assumption that log 2 and 
log 3 have already been found numerically), using the first four terms of the 
series. We have 
p = 7, 
2p2 - 1 = 97, 
1 
1 
log 7 = 2 log 2 + ! log 3 + 97 + 3 . 973 + ... ; 
J7 "'" 0.01030928, 
1 
3 . 973 "'" 0.00000037, 
2 log 2 "'" 1.38629436, 
! log 3 "'" 0.54930614; 
hence 
log. 7 "'" 1.94591015. 
Estimation of the error gives 
1 
1 
1 
Rn < 5 . 973 X 972 _ 1 < 36 X 109 ' 
However, we note that each of the four numbers which we have added is 
only given to within an error of 5 x 10-9, so that the last place in the com-
puted value of log 7 might be wrong by 2. As a matter of fact, however, the 
last place is also correct. 
6.3 Numerical Solution of Equations 
We add some remarks about the numerical solution of the equation 
f(x) = 0, where f(x) need not be a polynomiaP We start with some 
tentative first value Xo of one of the roots and then improve this approxi-
mation. How the first approximation for the root is chosen and how 
good that approximation is may be left open. We may, for example, 
take a rough guess, or better, obtain a first approximation from the 
1 We are, of course, concerned only with the determination of real roots of f(x) = O. 

Sec. 6.3 
Numerical Solution of Equations 495 
graph of the function y = f(x), whose intersection with the x-axis 
indicates the required root. 
Then we try to improve the approximation by a process or mapping 
which takes the value Xo into a "second approximation," and repeat this 
process. Solving the equationf(x) = 0 numerically consists in carrying 
out such successive approximations repeatedly (or as one says "iter-
ating" the process) with the expectation that the iterated values 
Xl, X 2, ••• , Xn converge satisfactorily to the root~. We shall consider 
various such procedures and briefly discuss their accuracy. 
a. Newton's Method 
Description of Method. Newton's iterative procedure is based on the 
fundamental principle of the differential calculus-the replacing of a 
curve by a tangent in the immediate neighborhood of the point of con-
tact. Starting from a first approximate value Xo for a root ~ of the 
equation f(x) = 0 we consider the point on the graph of the function 
y = f(x) whose coordinates are X = Xo, Y = f(xo). To find a better 
approximation for the intersection ~ of the curve with the x-axis we 
determine the point Xl where the tangent at the point X = Xo, Y = f(xo) 
intersects the x-axis. The abscissa Xl of this intersection represents 
a new and, under certain circumstances, a better approximation than 
Xo to the required root ~ of the equation. 
Figure 6.4 at once gives 
hence the new approximation 
(10) 
X 
-
X 
_ f(xo) 
i -
0 
f'(xo)· 
Starting with Xl as an approximation, we repeat the process to find 
X 2 = Xl - f(xl)If'(xJ and so on. 
The usefulness of this process depends essentially on the nature of the 
curve y = f(x). In the situation indicated in Fig. 6.4 the successive 
approximations Xn converge with increasing accuracy to the required 
root ~. 
However, Fig. 6.5 shows that with a plausible choice of the 
original value xo, our construction need not converge to the required 
root at all. It is therefore necessary to examine in general the circum-
stances under which Newton's method furnishes useful approximations 
to the solution of the equation. 

496 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
y 
o 
Figure 6.4 Newton's method of approximation. 
y 
Or-------~~~~---6--------~~~~x 
Figure 6.5 
Quadratic Convergence of Newton's Method 
Assuming that in a sufficiently wide interval about the root ~ the 
second derivative fl/(x) is not "too large" and the first derivative f'ex) 
not "to small", the main fact concerning Newton's approximation is 
that the successive "errors" 

Sec. 6.3 
Numerical Solution of Equations 497 
converge to zero quadratically in the sense that Ihn+11 ~ p,hn 2 with a 
fixed constant p,. This indicates an extremely rapid rate of convergence; 
if we write the inequality in the form I hn+1p, I ~ Ihnp,12 it implies, for 
example, that when Ihnp,1 < lO-m we have Ihn+1p,1 < 10-2m, that is, 
the number of "significant digits" in p'xn is doubled at each step. 
The proof of the quadratic convergence is immediate. From the 
relations xn+1 = xn - I(xn)/ j'(xn) and I(~) = 0 we find that 
hn+1 = ~ -
xn+1 = ~ -
xn -
f(~) - f(xn). 
f'(xn) 
By Taylor's formula 
I(~) - I(xn) = (~ - xn)f'(xn) + l(~ -
xn)2f"('YJ), 
where 'YJ lies between ~ and xn• Hence 
(11) 
h 
-
_ f"('YJ) h2 
n+1 -
2f'(xn) n· 
To establish convergence we assume that Xn belongs already to a fixed 
interval ~ -
c5 < x < ~ + c5 in which 11"1 has the maximum value M 2, 
1/'1 the positive minimum value ml> and for which c5 is so small that 
tc5M2/ml < 1. Putting p, = lM2/ml we have p,c5 < I and 
Ihn+ll ~ p, Ihnl2 ~ p,c5 Ihnl < Ihnl. 
This inequality shows first of all that xn+1 belongs again to the same 
c5-neighborhood of ~ so that the argument can be repeated. Thus, if 
only Xo lies in the c5-neighborhood of ~, all subsequent Xn will do the 
same. From Ihn+11 ~ p,c5 Ihnl it follows then that Ihn+ll ~ (p,c5)nH Ihol, 
which implies that hn -+ 0 or that Xn -+~; moreover, the quadratic law 
of decrease Ihn+11 ~ p, Ihnl2 will hold for the errors. It is clear then that 
Newton's method will provide us with a sequence Xn which certainly 
converges toward the solution ~ provided I' and I" exist, and are con-
tinuous near ~, that f'(~) ¥= 0, and that Xo is already sufficiently close 
to~. The quadratic character of the approximation is often a decided 
advantage of Newton's method over others (see p. 503). 
*h. The Rule of False Position 
Newton's method is the limiting case of an older method, the "rule 
of false position," in which the secant appears in place of the tangent. 
Let us assume that we kndw two points (xo, Yo) and (Xl> yJ in the 
neighborhood of the required intersection with the x-axis. If we replace 
the curve by the secant joining these two points, the intersection of this 

498 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
y 
o I-----o-----,k~_<>_-------~ x 
Figure 6.6 The rule of false position. 
secant with the x-axis can be an improved approximation to the re-
quired rootl of the equation. For the abscissa ~ of the point of inter-
section, we have (Fig. 6.6) 
~ -
Xo 
~ -
Xl 
---=--
f(xo} 
f(x l } 
(12) 
which leads to 
xof(xl ) -
xd(xo) 
~ = -.:..::......:....::'----=:........:..-=--
f(x l } -
f(xo) 
xOf(xl ) -
xof(xo} + xof(xo) -
xd(xo) 
= 
f(x l } -
f(xo} 
or 
(13) 
Xl -
Xo 
This formula, which determines the further approximation ~ from Xo 
and Xl> constitutes the rule of false position. It is useful if one value of 
the function is positive and the other negative, say as in Fig. 6.6, where 
Yo > 0 and Yl < O. 
1 This amounts essentially to linear interpolation applied to the inverse function. 

Sec. 6.3 
Numerical Solution of Equations 499 
The approximation formula of Newton results as a limiting case for 
Xl -
xo, for the denominator of the second term on the right-hand side 
of formula (13) tends to j'(xo) as Xl tends to Xo' 
Although the rule of false position may be considered more elemen-
tary than Newton's method, the latter has the great convenience of 
requiring only one value of X as initial approximation instead of two 
values. 
c. The Method of Iteration 
The Iteration Scheme. We now turn to a far-reaching scheme for 
solving equations written in the form 
X = 4>(x), 
where 4> is a continuous function with a continuous derivative. The 
solution of equations of the form f(x) = 0 can be reduced to that of 
X = 4>(x) if we put 4>(x) = X -
c(x)f(x) where c(x) is any function 
different from zero. 
In the particularly suggestive method of iterationl we begin again 
with a suitably chosen initial approximating value Xo and then determine 
a sequence Xl> x2, xa, •.• of values by the conditions 
xn+1 = 4>(xn), 
n = 0, 1,2, .... 
If this "iteration" sequence Xn converges to a limit ~, then ~ = 4>(~) is a 
solution of our equation, since then lim xn+1 = ~ and lim 4>(xn) = 4>(~) 
n---+-co 
n---+CO 
because of the continuity of the function 4>. 
Convergence. The sequence of values Xn in the iteration process con-
verges to a solution under a very general assumption: If the first ap-
proximation Xo lies in an interva12 J about the solution ~, in which 
I 4>'(x) I < q 
with a constant q < 1, then Xn converges to ~. 
For supposing that Xo lies in J, we have 
Xl -
~ = 4>(xo) -
4>W. 
1 Sometimes called the method of successive approximation. The method is used in 
many different mathematical contexts for solving equations of one kind or other. 
2 Although i; is unknown, we can very often determine such an interval a priori. 

500 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
By the mean value theorem, the right-hand side of this equation equals 
(xo -
~)4>'(i), where i lies in I. Thus by our assumption 
IXl -
~I =:;; q Ixo -
~I, 
so that Xl belongs to I, and then also 
IXI -
~I =:;; q IXl -
~ I=:;; q"lxo -
~I· 
In general, we obtain 
since qn __ 0 as n __ 00, our assertion is proved. 
We see, moreover, from the preceding, that the iteration sequence 
Xn does not converge when 4>'(x) > 1 in an interval about E; if I 4>'(E) I = 1 
we cannot make a general statement. 
Attracting and Repelling Fixed Points 
It is useful to consider the iteration process in terms of a mapping 
or transformation. The function y = 4>(x) represents a transformation 
which maps a point x on the number axis into an image point y of this 
number axis (see p. 20). The solution E is then a point not changed by 
the transformation 4>, a so-called fixed point, and the problem is thus 
one of finding a fixed point of the mapping; this problem is solvable 
by iteration when 14>'(E)1 =:;; q < 1, as we have seen. 
The mapping y = 4>(x) of the neighborhood of the root or fixed 
point E has, for I 4>'(x) I < q < 1, the property of being contracting, 
that is, diminishing the distance of the original from the fixed point. 
Such fixed points of contracting mappings are called attracting fixed 
pOints. Their construction by iteration converges as the terms of a 
geometric series with the quotient q. 
If the root E, or the corresponding fixed point of our transformation 
is in an interval in which 14>'(x)1 > r, where r is a constant larger than 1, 
the transformation is expanding, the iteration process diverges, and the 
fixed pOint is called repelling. 
If at the fixed point we have I 4>'(E) I = 1, no general statements con-
cerning the convergence of the iterations can be made; such fixed 
points are sometimes called indifferent. 
The following observation should be stressed: a fixed point E of the 
mapping 4> is automatically also a fixed point for 'P, the inverse mapping 
: E = VJ{E). 
If 14>'(E) I > 1 in a neighborhood of a root E and 
x = 'P(y) is the inverse function of 4>, then 1'P'a)1 < 1. Thus E is an 
attracting fixed point for this inverse mapping and it is possible to 
replace the originally divergent iteration scheme by a convergent one 

Sec. 6.3 
Numerical Solution of Equations 501 
y 
x 
Figure 6.7 Intersection (~,~) of the curves y = tan x and y = x. 
for the inverse mapping. As an example we consider the equation 
x = tanx. 
It is clear from the graphs of the functions y = x and y = tan x that 
these intersect somewhere in the interval TT < X < ! TT and that our 
equation will have a root ~ in that interval (Fig. 6.7). Since 
dtanx= _1_> 1, 
dx 
cos2 X 
the iteration procedure with any point Xo in the interval does not con-
verge. However, we obtain a convergent iteration sequence if we write 
the equation in the inverse form (using the notation arc tan x for the 
principal branch), 
x = arctan x + TT. 
Since here 
d 
1 
-arc tan x = --- < 1, 
dx 
1 + x2 
the sequence defined by xn+1 = arc tan Xn + TT and, say, Xo = TT, 
converges to ~. 

502 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
d. Iterations and Newton's Procedure 
As mentioned before the solution of an equation of the form 
f(x) = 0 can be reduced to that of the form x = cp(x) if we choose 
for cp any expression of the form 
cp(x) = x -
c(x)f(x) 
where c(x) is a nonvanishing function. Ifwe want to solve the resulting 
equation x = cp(x) by iteration we have to make sure by a suitable 
choice of c(x) that the fixed point ~ of the mapping cp is "attractive", 
that is, that WWI < 1. Now for the solution ~ off(~) = 0 we have 
cp'(~) = 1 -
c'(~)f(~) -
cmf'(~) = 1 -
c(~)f'(~). 
The simplest choice is to take for c(x) the expression lff'(x). Then 
certainly WWI = 0 < 1. This choice of c(x) leads to the iteration 
sequence 
x 
-
-J.(x ) -
X 
_ f(x n ) 
n+l -
'I' 
n 
-
n 
f'(x n) , 
which is just the sequence of approximations (10), p. 495, in Newton's 
method. For the error Xn -
~ = hn we have the estimate 
where q is the maximum of Icp'(x)1 in the interval with end points ~ and 
xn • Since here 
-J.'(x) = f(x)f"(x) 
'I' 
f'\x) 
and f(x) = f(x) -
f(~) = f'(rJ)(x -
~), we see that q itself is of the 
order of hn , and thus confirm again the quadratic character of the 
approximation in Newton's method. 
Another simple choice for c(x) is to take the constant value ll.f'(xo), 
leading to the recursion formula 
f(x n ) 
Xn+l = cp(xn) = Xn - -- • 
f'(xo) 
Here cp'(~) = 1 - f'Wff'(xo). Iff' is continuous and different from 
zero, we will have an attractive fixed point ~ if our initial approximation 
Xo is already so close to the solution ~ that 

Sec. 6.3 
Numerical Solution of Equations 503 
This iteration sequence is somewhat simpler than the one used in 
Newton's method; however, convergence will be much slower, like 
that for a geometric progression, as is the case with most iteration 
schemes. 
Examples. As an example we consider the cubic equation 
f(x) = x3 -
2x -
5 = o. 
Since f(2) = -1 < 0, f(3) = 16 > 0, a root ~ certainly exists in the 
interval 2 < x < 3. Since, moreover,f'(x) = 3x2 -2 > 3(2)2 -2 > 0, 
the interval contains only one root. By Newton's method we find 
starting with the approximation Xo = 2 successively 
x = x - f(xo) = 2 -
-1 
= 2.1 
f(XI) = 0.061 
I 
0 
f'(xo) 
3(2)2 _ 2 
' 
X2 = Xl - f(Xl) = 2.1 _ 
0.061 
= 2.094568. 
f'(xl ) 
3(2.1)2 - 2 
Since f(2.1) > 0,f(2) < 0, the root ~ lies between 2 and 2.1. In the 
interval 1.9 < x < 2.2, and a fortiori then in the interval ~ -
0.1 < 
x < ~ + 0.1, we have the estimates 
I r(x) I = 16xl < 6(2.2) = 13.2, 
f'(x) = 3x2 -2 > 3(1.9)2 - 2 = 8.83. 
It follows [see (11), p. 497] that 
13.2 
2 
2 
I~ -
xn+ll < 
IXn -
~I < 0.751xn -
~I 
- 2(10.83) 
provided IXn -
~I < 0.1. Since Ixo -
~I = I~ -
21 < 0.1, we find suc-
cessively 
IXl -
~I < (0.75)(0.1)2 = 0.0061 
IX2 -
~I < (0.61)(0.0061)2 < 0.000042. 
If this degree of approximation is not sufficient, we obtain a further 
approximation X3 with an error < (0.75)(0.000042)2 < 0.000000001 3. 
All Xn after Xo must be larger than ~ as is obvious from the fact that 
f' and f" are positive, which implies that 
hn+1 = -f"('YJ)hn2/2f'(xn) < O. 
Applying instead the rule of false position [(13), p. 498] to the values 
xo, Xl we find for the intersection ~ with the x-axis of the secant joining 
the points (xo,f(xo)) and (Xl,f(Xl)) 
~ = Xo _ f( Xo)( Xl -
Xo) = 2.09425 .... 
f(xl) - f(xo) 

504 Numerical Methods 
Ch.6 
Since the curve is convex in the interval in question, the secant lies 
above the curve and the approximation ~ must be less than the root ~. 
As a second example, let us solve the equation 
f(x) = x log 10 X -
2 = o. 
We havef(3) = -0.6 andf(4) = +0.4, and therefore use Xo = 3.5 as 
a first approximation. Using ten-digit logarithmic tables we obtain the 
successive approximations 
Xo = 3.5, 
Xl = 3.598, 
X 2 = 3.5972849, 
Xa = 3.5972850235. 
Appendix 
* A.I Stirling's Formula 
In many applications, particularly in statistics and the theory of 
probability, we find it necessary to have a simple approximation to n! as 
an elementary function of n. Such an expression is given by the follow-
ing theorem, which bears the name of its discoverer, Stirling (see also 
Chapter 8, p. 630). 
As n ---+ 00, 
(14) 
more exactly, 
(14a) 
• ./21Tnn+1/2e- n < n! < .J21Tnn+1/2e-n(1 + 41J. 
In other words, the expressions n! and .J 21T nn+1/2e-n differ only by a 
small percentage when the value of n is large-as we say, the two 
expressions are asymptotically equal-and at the same time the factor 
1 + Ij4n gives us an estimate of the degree of accuracy of the approxi-
mation. 
We are led to this remarkable formula if we attempt to evaluate 
the area under the curve y = log X.l By integration (p. 276) we find that 
An' the exact area under this curve between the ordinates X = 1 and 
1 The method used here is a special instance of the Euler MacLaurin formula which 
will be discussed in Chapter 8, p. 624. 

Sec. A.I 
Stirling's Formula 505 
x = n, is given by 
(15) 
An = in log X dx = X log X -
X r 
= n log n -
n + 1. 
If, however, we estimate the area by the trapezoid rule, erecting 
ordinates at X = 1, X = 2, ... , X = n as in Fig. 6.8, we obtain an 
approximate value Tn for the area [cf. (6), p. 483] 
(16) 
Tn = log 2 + log 3 + ... + log (n -
1) + t log n 
= log n! - t log n. 
If we make the reasonable assumption that An and Tn are of the same 
order of magnitude, we find at once that n! and nn+l/2e-n are of the 
y 
r---~~--~----~----L---~-----L----~----O-----~x 
n - 1 
n 
Figure 6.8 
same order of magnitude, which is essentially what is stated in Stirling's 
formula. 
To make this argument precise, we first show that the difference 
an = An -
Tn is bounded, from which it will immediately follow that 
Tn = An{l -
an/An) is of the same order of magnitude as An. The 
difference ak+! -
ak is the difference between the area under the curve 
and the area under the secant in the strip k < x < k + 1. Since the 
curve is concave and lies above the secant, ak+! -
ak is positive, and 
an = (an -
an-I) + (an-l -
an_2) + ... + (a2 -
a1) + a1 is mono-
tonic increasing. Moreover, the difference ak+! -
Ok is clearly less 
(cf. Fig. 6.9) than the difference between the area under the tangent 

506 Numerical Methods 
k 
k + 1/2 
Figure 6.9 
Ch. 6 
y = log % 
k + 1 
at x = k + t and the area under the secant; hence we have the in-
equality 
ak+l -
ak < log (k + t) - t log k - t log (k + 1) 
= t 10g(1 + 1..) - t 10g[1 + 
1 
] 
2k 
2(k + t) 
< t 10g(1 + ~) - t log[l + 
1 
] . 
2k 
2(k + 1) 
Adding these inequalities for k = 1,2, ... , n -1, we find that all the 
terms on the right-hand side except two will cancel out, and (since 
a1 = 0), we have 
an < t log t - llog (1 + 21J < t log t. 
Since an is bounded, and in addition monotonic increasing it tends 
to a limit a as n -- 00. Our inequality for ak+l -
ak now gives us 
a -
an = i (ak+l -
ak) < t log (1 + 1..) . 
k~ n 
2n 
Since by definition An -
Tn = am we have from (15), (16), 
log n! = 1 -
an + (n + t) log n -
n, 
or, writing r:t.n = e1--an, 
The sequence r:t.n is monotonic decreasing and tends to the limit 
0( = e1- a ; hence 
1 < O(n = ea-an < e(l/2) log (l+l/2n) 
0( J-
1 
1 
= 
1+-<1+-. 
2n 
4n 

Problems 507 
Hence we have 
(l..nn+1/2e-n < n! < (l..nn+l/2e-n (1 + 41J 
It only remains for us to find the actual value of the limit a. Here 
we make use of the formula (80) of Chapter 3, p. 282: 
_ 
. 
(n!)222n 
J1r = hm (2 )' I 
• 
n-+O() 
n ·yn 
Replacing n! by (l..nnnH/2 e-n and (2n)! by (l..2n22n+1/2 n2n+1/2 e-2n, we 
immediately obtain 
_ 
. 
(l..n2 
../1r = hm ----r-
n-+O() (l..2ny 2 
(1..2 
= (l..J"2' 
from which (I.. = J2;. The proof of Stirling's formula is thus complete. 
In addition to its theoretical interest, Stirling's formula is a very 
useful tool for the numerical calculation of n! when n is large. Instead 
of multiplying together a large number of integers, we have merely to 
calculate Stirling's expression by means of logarithms which involves 
far fewer operations. Thus for n = 10 we obtain the value 3598696 for 
Stirling's expression (using seven-figure tables), whereas the exact value 
of 10! is 3628800. The percentage error is barely t%. 
PROBLEMS 
SECTION 6.1, page 482 
1. Prove if r(x) ~ 0, that the trapezoid rule yields a greater value and the 
tangent rule a lesser value than the exact integral off 
2. Estimate the value h = (b - a)/n needed for a calculation by Simpson's 
rule accurate to p decimal places of 
i
21 
(a) log 2 = 
- dx, 
1 X 
i
l 
1 
(b) 7T = 4 
-1--2 dx. 
o 
+x 
3. Estimate in terms of k and s (k < 1 and s < 1), the number of points 
needed to calculate within an error E the elliptic integral 
u(s) = fS 
dx 
Jo v (1 - x2)(1 - k2x2) • 
4. Let f(x) be a continuous function on the interval ex !5: x !5: ex + h, with 
a uniformly bounded derivative: It(x)l!5: Ml for Ml a constant. Prove 

508 Numerical Methods 
Ch. 6 
that for any fixed point ~, a: ::;; ~ ::;; a: + h, the estimate 
I 1"'+11 f(x) dx - hfm I ~ Mt2 
5. Calculate {<Xl e-"'z dx numerically to within 1/100. 
SECTION 6.2, page 490 
1. The period of a pendulum is given by 
T =2~Jl 
where I is the length of the pendulum. If the pendulum drives a clock which 
gains a minute per day determine the necessary correction in I. 
2. To measure the height of a hill, a tower 100 meters high on top of the 
hill is observed from the plain. The angle of elevation of the base of the 
tower is 42° and the tower itself subtends an angle of 6°. What are the limits 
of error in the determination of the height if the angle 42° is subject to an 
error of 1°? 
SECTION 6.3, page 494 
1. (a) To solve the equation x = f(x), show how best to choose the 
constant a so that the iteration scheme 
Xk+l = Xk + a[xk - f(xk)] 
converges as rapidly as possible in the neighborhood of the solution. 
(b) Apply this method to solve the equation for vA", 
A 
x =-. 
x 
(c) Show if A ~ 1 that the number of accurate decimal places is at least 
doubled at each step of the iteration scheme obtained in (b). 
2. (a) Show how best to choose a polynomial 
g(x) = a + bx2 
so that the iteration scheme for vA", 
xk+l = Xk + g(;Ck)(Xk _ A) 
xk 
converges most rapidly in the neighborhood of the solution. 
(b) Estimate the rapidity of convergence. 
(c) Show how to further improve the convergence by suitable choices of 
polynomials g(x) which are of higher degree. 

Problems 509 
3. Investigate suitable schemes of the type of Problems 1 and 2 for the 
calculation of \11i. 
SECTION A.I, page 504 
\11 
1 
1. Prove that lim ~ 
= - . 
n--+CO n 
e 
i
n+1/2 
*2. By considering 
log (tX + x) dx, tX > 0, show that 
1/2 
tX(tX + 1) ... (tX + n) = ann! na, 
where an is bounded below by a positive number. Show that an is mono-
tonically decreasing for sufficiently large values of n. [The limit of an as 
n -+- 00 is Ijr(tX).] 
n 'n , ... n , 
3. Find an approximate expression for log l' 2', 
!. , where n1 + n2 + 
... +nz =n. 
n. 
4. Show that the coefficient of xn in the binomial expansion of v 1 
is 
1 
1 - x 
asymptotically given by . j_ • 
y 7Tn 

7 
Infinite Sums and Products 
The geometric series, Taylor's series, and a number of examples 
previously discussed in this book, suggest that we may well study those 
limiting processes of analysis which involve the summation of infinite 
series from a more general point of view. In principle, any limiting value 
S = lim Sn 
n--+oo 
can be written as an infinite series; we need only put an = Sn -
Sn-1 
for n > 1 and a 1 = S1 to obtain 
and the value S thus appears as the limit of Sm the sum of n terms, as n 
increases. We express this fact by saying that S is the "sum of the 
infinite series" 
a l + a 2 + a 3 + .... 
Such an "infinite sum" is simply a way of representing a limit where 
each successive approximation is found from the preceding by adding 
one more term. Thus the expression of a number as a decimal is in 
principle merely the representation of a number a in the form of an 
infinite series a = a l + a 2 + a 3 + ... , where, if 0 ::;;; a ::;;; 1, the term 
an is replaced by CXn X lo-n and CXn is an integer between 0 and 9 
inclusive. 
Since every limiting value can be written in the form of an infinite 
series, a special study of series may seem superfluous. However, very 
often it happens that limiting values occur naturally in the form of 
such infinite series which exhibit particularly simple laws of formation. 
510 

Sec. 7.1 
The Concepts of Convergence and Divergence Sl1 
Not every series has an easily recognizable law of formation. For 
example, the number 1T can certainly be represented as a decimal (which 
is a series ~cv lO-v), yet we know no simple law enabling us to state the 
value of an arbitrary digit, say the 7000th, of this decimal. If, however, 
we consider the Leibnitz-Gregory series for 1T14 instead, we have an 
expression with a perfectly clear general law of formation [see (7), 
p.445]. 
. 
Analogous to infinite series, in which the approximations to the 
limit are formed by repeated addition of new terms, are infinite products, 
in which the approximations to the limit arise from repeated multi-
plication by new factors. We shall not go deeply into the general 
theory of infinite products, however; the principal subject of this 
chapter and of Chapter 8 will be infinite series. 
7.1 The Concepts of Convergence and Divergence 
a. Basic Concepts 
Cauchy's Convergence Criterion. We consider an infinite series with 
the "general term" an; the series1 is then of the form 
co 
al + a2 + ... = I avo 
y=1 
The symbol on the right with the summation sign is merely an abbre-
viated way of writing the expression on the left. 
If as n increases, the nth partial sum 
n 
Sn = a1 + a2 + ... + an = I a y 
y=1 
approaches a limit 
S = lim Sn 
n-+co 
we say that the series is convergent; otherwise we say that it is divergent. 
In the first case we call S the sum of the series. 
We have already encountered many examples of convergent series; 
for instance, the geometric series 1 + q + q2 + ... , which converges 
to the sum 1/(1 - q) when Iql < 1, the series for log 2, the series for e, 
and others. 
In the language of infinite series, Cauchy's convergence test (cf. 
Chapter 1, p. 75) is expressed as follows: 
1 For formal reasons we include the possibility that certain of the numbers an may be 
zero. If all terms from an index N onward (that is, when n > N) vanish, we speak 
of a terminating series. 

512 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
A necessary and sufficient condition for the convergence of a series is 
that the number 
(1) 
(m > n), becomes arbitrarily small ifm and nare chosen sufficiently large. 
In other words: A series converges if, and only if, the following con-
dition is fulfilled: for a given positive number E, it is possible to choose 
an index N = N(E), in such a way that the above expression ISm - snl 
is less than E, provided only that m > Nand n > N. 
We can illustrate the convergence test by the geometric series for 
q = t. If we choose £ = 10, we need only take N = 4. For 
1 
1 
ISm - snl = 2n + . . . + 2m- 1 
= 2!-lG + ~ + ... + 2~-fI) < 2n~1 
1 
1 
and 
2n- 1 < 10 
if n > 4. 
If we choose £ equal to ·do, it is sufficient to take 7 as the corresponding 
value of N, as may easily be verified. 
Obviously, it is a necessary condition for the convergence of a 
series that 
lim an = O. 
n-+OO 
Otherwise, the convergence criterion certainly cannot be fulfilled for 
m = n + 1. But this necessary condition is by no means sufficient for 
convergence; on the contrary, it is easy to find infinite series whose 
general term an approaches O.as n increases, but whose sum does not 
exist, since the partial sum Sn increases without limit as n increases. 
Examples. An example is the series 
111 
1+.J_+;=+ ... +";-+ ... ' 
2 
"" 3 
n 
the general term of which is 1/.J~. We immediately see that 
lin ..;-
Sn > .J~ + ... + .J;' = ..;;, = 
n. 
The nth partial sum increases beyond all bounds as n increases, and 
therefore the series diverges. 

Sec. 7.1 
The Concepts of Convergence and Divergence 513 
The same is true for the classic example of the harmonic series 
Here 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
an+! + ... + a 2n = n + 1 + ... + 2n > 2n + ... + 2n = 2 . 
Since nand m = 2n can be chosen to be as large as we please, the 
series diverges, for Cauchy's test is not fulfilled; in fact, the nth partial 
sum obviously tends to infinity, since all the terms are positive. On the 
other hand, the series formed from the same numbers with alternating 
signs, 
1 1 1 1 
( _l)n-l 
1--+---+--+"'+ 
+". 
2 
3 
4 
5 
n' 
converges [cf. (4) Chapter 5, p. 443], and has the sum log 2. 
It is by no means true that in every divergent series sn tends to + 00 
or -
00. Thus in the series 
1-1+1-1+1+- .. ·, 
we see that the partial sum sn has the values 1 and 0 alternately, and 
on account of this oscillation backward and forward, neither approaches 
a definite limit nor increases numerically beyond all bounds. 
The following fact, although it is self-evident, is very important and 
should be noted. The convergence or divergence of a series is not changed 
by inserting a finite number of terms or by removing a finite number of 
terms. As far as convergence or divergence is concerned, it does not 
matter in the least whether we begin the series at the term ao, or aI, or 
as, or any other term chosen arbitrarily. 
b. Absolute Convergence and Conditional Convergence 
The harmonic series 1 + t + i + ! ... diverges, but if we change 
the sign of every other term the resulting series for log 2 converges. 
On the other hand, the geometric series 1 - q + q2 _ q3 + - ... 
converges and has the sum 1/(1 + q), provided that 0 ~ q < 1, and 
on making all the signs plus we obtain the series 
1 + q + q2 + q3 + ... , 
which is also convergent, having the sum 1/(1 - q). 

514 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
Here there appears a distinction which we must examine. With a 
series whose terms are all positive there are only two possible cases; 
either it converges or the partial sum increases beyond all bounds as n 
increases. For the partial sums, being a monotonic increasing sequence, 
must converge if they r~main bounded. Convergence occurs if the 
individual terms approach zero rapidly enough as n increases; on the 
other hand, divergence occurs if the terms do not approach zero at all 
or if they approach zero too slowly. However, in series some terms of 
which are positive and some negative, it may be that the changes of sign 
bring about convergence, when too great an increase in the partial sums, 
due to the positive terms, is compensated by the negative terms, so that 
as the final result a definite limit is approached. 
00 
To understand the possibilities better we consider a series I a. having 
.=1 
positive and negative terms and form for comparison the series which 
has the same terms all with positive signs, that is, 
00 
la1 1 + la21 + ... = I la.l· 
.=1 
If this series converges, then for sufficiently large values ofn and m > n, 
the expression 
lan+11 + lan+21 + ... + laml 
will certainly be as small as we please; because of the relation 
lan+l + ... + ami ~ lan+ll + ... + laml 
the expression on the left is also arbitrarily small, and so by the Cauchy 
00 
test the original series I a. converges. In this case the original series is 
.=1 
said to be absolutely convergent. Its convergence is due to the absolute 
smallness of its terms and does not depend on the changes in sign. 
If, on the other hand, the series with the terms lanl diverges and the 
original series still converges, we say that the original series is con-
ditionally convergent. Conditional convergence results from the terms 
of opposite signs compensating one another. 
Leibnitz's Test. 
For conditional convergence Leibnitz's convergence 
test is frequently useful: 
If the terms of a series are of alternating sign and in addition their 
absolute values lanl tend monotonically to 0 (so that I an+l I ~ lanl), the 
00 
series I a. converges. [Example: Leibnitz's series, (7), p. 445.] 
.=1 

Sec. 7.1 
The Concepts of Convergence and Divergence 515 
For the proof we assume that a1 > 0, which does not limit the 
generality of the argument, and write our series in the form 
where all the terms hn are now positive, hn tends to zero, and the 
condition hn+1 ~ h n is satisfied. If we bracket the terms together in the 
two different ways 
hI -
(h2 -
hs) -
(h, -
h5) -
••• 
and 
(hI -
h 2) + (hs -
h.l ) + (h5 -
h6) + ... 
n 
we see at once that the partial sums $n = .2 a. satisfy the following 
two relations 
1 
SI ~ Sa ~ $5 ~ ••• ~ $2n+l ~ ••• , 
$2 ~ $, ~ $6 ~ ••• ~ S2n ~ • •• • 
On the other hand, S2n ~ S2n+1 ~ SI and $2n+1 ~ s2n ~ S2. The odd 
partial sums $1' Sa, ••• therefore form a monotonic decreasing sequence, 
s 
8, 
86 
8a 
Ss 
87 
85 
8a 
Figure 7.1 Convergence of an alternating series. 
which in no case falls below the value S2; hence this sequence possesses 
a limit L (p. 73). The even partial sums S2' $" ••• likewise form a 
monotonic increasing sequence whose terms in no case exceed the fixed 
number S1> and therefore this sequence must have a limiting value L'. 
Since the numbers S2n and s2n+1 differ from one another only by the 
number h2n+1 which approaches 0 as n increases, the limiting values Land 
L' are equal to one another. That is, the even and the odd partial sums 
approach the same limit, which we now denote by S (cf. Fig. 7.1). This, 
however, implies that our series is convergent, as was asserted; its 
sum is S. 
*Abel's Test 
A test for conditional convergence that includes the Leibnitz test as a 
special case is Abel's convergence test. Let a1 + a2 + ... be an infinite series 
whose partial sums Sn = al + ... + an are bounded independently of n. 
Let PI' P2, ... be a sequence of positive numbers decreasing monotonically to 
the value zero. Then the infinite series 
(2) 

516 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
converges. (For the special series a1 + as + ... = + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + - ... 
we find that PI - P2 +Pa - ... converges, which is Leibnitz' test.) The 
proof follows if we apply Cauchy's test using "summation by parts" to 
estimate 
Ipn+lan+l + Pn+'1.an+s + ... + Pmaml 
= Ipn+I(Sn+l - s .. ) + Pn+2(Sn+2 - Sn+l) + ... + Pm(sm - sm-l)1 
= I-p"+ls" + pmsm + (P"+l - Pn+2)Sn+1 + (Pn+2 - P .. +JSn+2 + ... 
+ (Pm-I - pmlsm-11 
~p"+lM + PmM + (Pn+l - Pn+2 + Pn+2 - P"+3 + - ... + pm-l - Pm) M 
= 2Pn+IM, 
where M is a bound for the ISil; since P"+l ->- 0 the convergence of the 
series (2) follows by Cauchy's test. 
*In conclusion, we make another general remark about the funda-
mental difference between absolute convergence and conditional con-
00 
vergence. We consider a convergent series I avo We denote the positive 
v=1 
terms of the series by Pl> PI, P3' ... , and the negative terms by -ql> 
.. 
-qs, -q3' . .. . If we form the nth partial sum s .. = I av of the given 
v=l 
series, a certain number, say n', of positive terms and a certain number, 
say nil, of negative terms must appear, where n' + n" = n. Fur-
thermore, if the number of positive terms as well as the number of 
negative terms in the series is infinite, then the two numbers n' and 
nil will increase beyond all bounds as n does. We see immediately 
.. ' 
that the partial sum s .. is simply equal to the partial sum Ipv of 
ft'" 
v=1 
the positive terms of the series plus the partial sum - I q v of the nega-
v=1 
tive terms. If the given series converges absolutely, then the series of posi-
00 
tive terms I Pv and the series of absolute values of the negative 
00 
v=1 
terms I qv certainly both converge. For as m increases, the partial sums 
m 
v=1 
m 
I Pv and I qv are monotonic nondecreasing sequences with the upper 
v=1 
co v=1 
bound I lavl· 
v=1 
The sum of an absolutely convergent series is then simply equal to the 
sum of the series consisting of the positive terms only, plus the sum of the 
series consisting of the negative terms only, or, in other words, is equal 
to the difference of the two series with positive terms. 

Sec. 7.1 
The Concepts of Convergence and Divergence 517 
n 
n 
nil 
For L av = LPv - L qv; as n increases n' and n" also increase 
v~1 
v~1 
v~1 
beyond all bounds, and the limit of the left-hand side must therefore be 
equal to the difference of the two sums on the right. If the series con-
tains only a finite number of terms of one particular sign, the facts are 
correspondingly simplified. If, on the other hand, the series does not 
converge absolutely, but does converge conditionally, then the series 
co 
co 
LPv and L qv must both be divergent. For if both were convergent the 
v~1 
v~1 
series would converge absolutely, contrary to our hypothesis. If only 
co 
one diverged, say L Pv' and the other converged, then separation into 
v=l 
n' 
n" 
positive and negative parts, Sn = LPv - L qv' shows that the series 
v~1 
v~1 
n' 
could not converge; for as n increases n' and L Pv would increase beyond 
n" 
v=l 
all bounds, whereas the term L qv would approach a definite limit, so 
v~1 
that the partial sum Sn would increase beyond all bounds. 
We see, therefore, that a conditionally convergent series cannot be 
thought of as the difference of two convergent series, the one consisting 
of its positive terms and the other consisting of the absolute values of its 
negative terms. 
Closely connected with this fact is another difference between abso-
lutely and conditionally convergent series which we shall now briefly 
mention. 
*c. Rearrangement of Terms 
It is a property of finite sums that we can Change the order of the terms or, 
as we say, rearrange the terms at will without changing the value of the sum. 
The question arises: what is the exact meaning of a change of the order of 
terms in an infinite series, and does such a rearrangement leave the value of 
the sum unchanged? Although in finite sums there is no difficulty, for 
example, in adding the terms in reverse order, in infinite series such a pos-
sibility does not exist; there is no last term with which to begin. Nowa change 
of order in an infinite series can only mean this: we say that a series 
al + a 2 + a 3 + ... is transformed by rearrangement into a series b1 + b2 + 
b3 + ... , provided that every term an of the first series occurs exactly once 
in the second and conversely. For example, the amount by which an is 
displaced may increase beyond all bounds as n does; the only point is that 
an must appear somewhere in the new series. If some of the terms are moved 
to later positions in the series, other terms must, of course, be moved to 

518 Infinite Sums and Products 
earlier positions. For example, the series 
1 + q + q2 + q4 + rf + rf + q7 + q6 + if + q16 + ... 
is a rearrangement1 of the geometric series 1 + q + q2 + .... 
Ch. 7 
With regard to change of order there is a fundamental distinction between 
absolutely convergent series and conditionally convergent series. 
In absolutely convergent series rearrangement of the terms does not affect 
the convergence, and the value of the sum of the series is unchanged, exactly 
as in finite sums. 
In conditionally convergent series, on the other hand, the value of the sum 
of the series can be changed at will by suitable rearrangement of the series, 
and the series can even be made to diverge if desired. 
The first of these facts, referring to absolutely convergent series, is easily 
established. Let us assume initially, that our series has positive terms only, 
n 
and consider the nth partial sum Sn = 2 avo All the terms of this partial 
v=l 
m 
sum occur in the mth partial sum tm = 2 bv of the rearranged series, provided 
v=l 
only that m is chosen large enough. Hence tm ~ Sn. On the other hand, we 
n' 
can determine an index n' so large that the partial sum Sn' = 2 av of the first 
v=l 
series contains all the terms bI> b2, ••• ,bm • It then follows that 1m ~ Sn' ~ A, 
where A is the sum of the first series. Thus for all sufficiently large values 
of m we have Sn ~ 1m ~ A, and since Sn can be made to differ from A by an 
arbitrarily small amount, it follows that the rearranged series also converges 
and, in fact, to the same limit A as the original series. 
If the absolutely convergent series has both positive and negative terms, 
we may, in fact, regard it as the difference of two series each of which has 
positive terms only. Since in the rearrangement of the original series each 
of these two series merely undergoes rearrangement and therefore converges 
to the same value as before, the same is true of the original series when 
rearranged. For by the case just considered the new series is absolutely 
convergent and is therefore the difference of the two rearranged series of 
positive terms. 
To the beginner the fact just proved may seem a triviality. That it really 
does require proof, and that in this proof the absolute convergence is essential, 
can be shown by an example of the opposite behavior of conditionally 
convergent series. We take the familiar series for log 2, below which we 
write the result of multiplication by the factor t, 
- t + ! - ! + i - i + ~. - I + - ... = log 2, 
-1 
+i 
--1 + - ... = t log 2, 
1 For each n > 0 the terms qk with 2" < k ~ 2Ml are written in reverse order. 

Sec. 7.1 
The Concepts of Convergence and Divergence 519 
and add, combining the terms placed in vertical columns.l We thus obtain 
1 + i- - ! + ! + t - ! + t + 11.1 - I + +- - . . . =! log 2. 
This last series can obviously be obtained by rearranging the original series, 
and yet the value of the sum of the series has been multiplied by the factor !. 
It is easy to imagine the effect that the discovery of this apparent paradox 
must have had on the mathematicians of the eighteenth century, who were 
accustomed to operate with infinite series without regard to their convergence. 
·We shall give the proof of the above theorem concerning the change 
in the sum of a conditionally convergent series ~ an which arises from change 
of order of the terms, although we shall have no occasion to make use of the 
result. Let PI' P2' ... be the positive terms and -qI' -q2' ... the negative 
terms of the series. Since the absolute value lanl tends to 0 as n increases, 
the numbers pn and qn must also tend to 0 as n increases. As we have already 
00 
00 
seen, moreover, the sum 2,P. must diverge, and the same is true of 2, q •. 
1 
1 
Now we can easily find a rearrangement of the original series which has an 
arbitrary number a as sum. Suppose, to be specific, that a is positive. We 
then add together the first nl positive terms, just enough to bring about that 
nl 
nl 
the sum 2,P. is greater than a. Since the sum 2,P. increases with nl beyond 
I 
I 
all bounds, it is always possible by using enough terms to make the partial 
sum greater than a. The sum will then differ from the exact value a by pn1, 
ml 
at most. We now add just enough negative terms -2, q. to ensure that the 
1 
nl 
ml 
sum 2,P. - 2,q. is less than a; this is also possible, as follows from the 
1 
I 
00 
divergence of the series.! q •. The difference between this sum and a is now 
1 
n. 
qml at most. We now add just enough other positive terms 2, P. to make 
nl+l 
the partial sum again greater than a, as is again possible, since the series of 
positive terms diverges. The difference between the partial sum and a is now 
m. 
Pn. at most. We again add just enough negative terms - 2, q., beginning 
ml+I 
next after the last one previously used, to make the sum once more less than a, 
and continue in the same way. The values of the sums thus obtained will 
oscillate about the number a, and when the process is carried far enough the 
oscillation will only take place between arbitrarily narrow bounds; for, 
since the terms P. and q. themselves tend to 0 when 11 is sufficiently large, the 
length of the interval in which the oscillation takes place will also tend to O. 
The theorem is thus proved. 
1 For the addition of series see Section 7.1d. 

520 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
In th~ same way we can rearrange the series in such a way as to make it 
diverge: we have only to choose such large numbers of the positive terms as 
compared with the negative that compensation no longer takes place. 
d. Operations with Infinite Series 
It is clear that two convergent 'infinite series a1 + a2 + ... = S 
and b1 + b2 + ... = T can be added term by term, that is, that the 
series formed from the terms Cn = an + bn converges and has the 
value S + Tfor its sum,l For 
n 
n 
n 
~ C. = ~ a. + ~ b. --+ S + T . 
• =1 
.=1 
.=1 
It is also clear that if we multiply each term of a convergent infinite 
series by the same factor, the series remains convergent, its sum being 
multiplied by the same factor. 
For these operations it is immaterial whether the convergence is 
absolute or conditional. On the other hand, further study shows that 
multiplication of two infinite series by the method used in multiplying 
finite sums does not necessarily lead to a convergent series for the value 
of the product, unless at least one of the two series is absolutely con-
vergent (cf. Appendix, p. 555). 
7.2 Tests for Absolute Convergence and Divergence 
In Section 7.lb we have already encountered Leibnitz' useful test for 
the conditional convergence of series. In the following pages we shall 
only consider criteria referring to absolute convergence. 
a. The Comparison Test. Majorants 
All such considerations of convergence depend on the comparison 
of the series in question with a second series; this second series is 
chosen in such a way that its convergence can readily be tested. The 
general comparison test may be stated as follows: 
00 
If the numbers b1, b2, ••• are all positive and the series ~ b. converges, 
~if 
~ 
lanl :::;; bn 
00 
for all values of n, then the series ~ an is absolutely convergent. 
n=1 
1 This theorem is really nothing more than another statement of the fact (cf. Chapter 
1, p. 72) that the limit of the sum of two terms is the sum of their limits. 

Sec. 7.2 
Tests for Absolute Convergence and Divergence 521 
By Cauchy's test the proof becomes almost trivial. For if m ~ n, 
we have 
Ian + ... + ami::::;; lanl + ... + laml ::::;; bn + ... + bm· 
00 
Since the series! bn converges, the right-hand side is arbitrarily small, 
n=l 
provided that nand m are sufficiently large. It follows that for such 
values of nand m the left-hand side is also arbitrarily small, so that by 
Cauchy's test the given series converges. The convergence is absolute, 
since our argument applies equally well to the convergence of the series 
of absolute values lanl. 
The analogous proof for the following fact can be left to the reader. 
If 
lanl ~ bn > 0, 
00 
00 
and the series! bn diverges, then the series! an is certainly not abso-
n=l 
n=l 
lutely convergent. 
Sometimes the above series with the positive terms bn are called 
majorant and minorant series, respectively, for the one with terms an' 
b. Convergence Tested by Comparison with the Geometric Series 
In applications of the test the comparison series most frequently 
used as a majorant is the geometric series. We at once obtain the 
following theorem. 
00 
THEOREM. 
The series ! an is absolutely convergent if from a certain 
n=l 
term onward a relation of the form 
(3) 
lanl < cqn 
holds, where c is a positive number independent of nand q is any fixed 
positive number less than 1. 
Ratio and Root Tests. 
This test is usually expressed in one of the 
00 
following weaker forms: the series ! an converges absolutely, if 
n=l 
from a certain term onward a relation of the form 
(4a) 
/ a;:I/ < q 
holds, where q is again a positive number less than 1 and independent 
of n, or: if from a certain term onward a relation of the form 
(4b) 

522 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
holds, where q is a positive number less than 1. In particular, the 
conditions of these tests are satisfied if a relation of the form 
(Sa) 
lim I a,,+l I = k < 1 
n-+oo 
aft 
or 
(5b) 
lim \Vla,,1 = k < 1 
" .... 00 
is true. 
These statements are easily established in the following way. 
Let us suppose that the criterion (4a), the ratio test, is satisfied from 
the suffix no onward, that is, when n > no. For brevity we put 
a"o+m+1 = bm and find that 
and so on; hence 
and then for n > 110, and c = rr"o-l Ibol 
which establishes our statement. For the criterion (4b), the root test, 
we at once have la,,1 < q", and our statement follows immediately. 
Finally, in order to prove the criteria (5), we consider an arbitrary 
number q such that k < q < L Then from a certain no onward, that is, 
when n > no, Eqs. 40, b imply that 1 a;:l I < q and \Vla,,1 < q respec-
tively, since from a certain term onwards the values of 1 a;:ll or of \}'la,,1 
differ from k by less than (q - k). The statement is then established 
on the basis of the results already proved. 
We stress the point that the four tests 4a, b, Sa, b, derived from 
the original criterion la,,1 < cq" are not equivalent to one another or to 
the original, that is, that they cannot be derived from one another in 
both directions. We shall soon see from examples that if a series satisfies 
one of the conditions, it need not satisfy all the others. 

Sec. 7.2 
Tests for Absolute Convergence and Divergence 523 
For completeness it may be pointed out that a series certainly 
diverges if from a certain term onward 
lanl > c 
for some positive number c, or if from a certain term onward 
V"lanl > 1, 
or if 
lim I an+l I = k, 
or 
lim V"lanl = k, 
n-+oo 
an 
n-t>OCl 
where k is a number greater than 1. For, as we immediately recognize, 
in such a series the terms cannot tend to zero as n increases; the series 
must therefore diverge. (In these circumstances the series cannot even 
be conditionally convergent.) 
Our tests furnish sufficient conditions for the absolute convergence of 
a series; that is, when they are satisfied we can conclude that the series 
converges absolutely. They are definitely not necessary conditions, 
however; that is, absolutely convergent series can be formed which do 
not satisfy the conditions. 
Thus the knowledge that 
lim I an+1 1 = 1 or 
lim'V'lanl = 1 
n----?oo 
an 
n--+oo 
does not imply anything about the convergence of the series. Such a 
series may converge or diverge. For example, the series 
co 1 
~-, 
n~ln 
for which lim V"jQJ = 1 and lim I 
an+1 / = 1, is divergent, as we saw on 
n- CX) 
n; 00 
an 
00 1 
p.513. On the other hand, as we shall soon see, the series ~ "2' which 
satisfies the same relations, is convergent. 
n~l n 
As an example of the application of our tests we first consider the series 
q +2q2 +3cf + ... +nqn + .... 
For this series 
lim '\l/Ianl = Iql . lim \y~ = Iql, 
n .... co 
n .... co 
I an+ll 
n + I 
lim -
= Iql'lim-- = Iql. 
ft-OO 
an 
ft-+C() 
n 
That the series converges if Iql < 1 follows from the ratio test and from the 
root test also, even in the weaker form (5). 

524 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
If, on the other hand, we consider the series 
1 +2q +q2 +2q3 + ... +q2R +2q2R+l + ... . , 
we can no longer prove convergence by the ratio test when t :::;; Iql < 1; 
I 
2q2R+l I 
for then tn = 2 Iql ~ 1. But the root test immediately gives us 
lim ~laRI = Iql, and shows that the series converges provided that Iql < 1, 
R--+oo 
which, of course, we could also have observed directly. 
c. Comparison with an Integrall 
We now proceed to discuss quite a different method of studying 
convergence. We shall explain it for the typical, particularly simple 
and important case of the series 
00 
1 
1 
1 
~-=1+-+-+"" 
n=l n'" 
2'" 
3'" 
where the general term an is lin"', 0( being a positive number. In order 
to investigate the convergence or divergence of this series, we consider 
the graph of the function y = 1/x'" and mark off on the x-axis the in-
tegral abscissae x = 1, x = 2, . . .. We first construct the rectangle of 
height lin'" over the interval n -
1 :s;; x :s;; n of the x-axis (n > 1), and 
compare it with the area of the region bounded by the same interval 
of the x-axis, the ordinates at the ends, and the curve y = l/x'" (this 
region is shown shaded in Fig. 7.2). Secondly, we construct the 
y 
O ~------~~~~--------------~X 
n-l n n + l 
Figure 7.2 Comparison of series with an integral. 
1 In this connection see also the Appendix to Chapter 5, p. 505. 

Sec. 7.2 
Tests for Absolute Convergence and Divergence 525 
rectangle of height I Ina. lying above the interval n ~ x ~ n + I, and 
similarly compare it with the area of the region lying above the same 
interval and below the curve (this region is cross-hatched in Fig. 7.2). 
In the first case the area under the curve is obviously greater than the 
area of the rectangle; in the second case it is less than the area of the 
rectangle. In other words, 
In+l dx 
1 In 
dx 
-<-< 
-. 
n 
xa. 
na. 
n-l xa. 
Writing down these inequalities for n = 1, 2, 3, ... , m, respectively 
n = 2, 3, ... , m, and summing, we obtain the following estimate for 
m 
I 
the mth partial sum sm = .L --;: 
n=l n 
(6) 
1
m+! dx 
fm dx 
- < Sm < 1 + -. 
1 
Xa. 
~ 1 
Xa. 
Now as m increases the integral rm ..!. dx tends to a finite limit or 
Jl xa. 
increases without limit depending on whether 
ex > 1 or ex ~ 1. 
Consequently, the monotonic sequence of numbers sm is bounded or 
increases beyond all bounds depending on whether ex > 1 or ex ~ 1, 
and we thus have the following theorem. 
THEOREM. 
The series of reciprocal powers 
00 1 
1 
1 
1 
.L-=-+-+-+'" 
n=l na. 
la. 
2a. 
3a. 
is convergent if and only if ex > 1. 
For ex = I the divergence of the harmonic series, which we previously 
proved in a different way, is an immediate consequence; likewise the 
series 
I 
I 
I 
converge while the series;= + -;- + /- + ... diverges. 
viI 
",2 
v3 
00 1 
The convergent series .L -; for ex > 1 frequently serve as comparison 
v=l Y 
series in investigations of convergence. For example, we see at once that 

526 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
for IX> 1 the series ~ c; converges absolutely if the absolute values Icvl 
v~l Y 
of the coefficients remain less than a fixed bound independent of Y. 
Euler's Constant. From the estimate (6) for IX = I it follows at once 
111 
that the sequence of numbers Cn = 1 + - + - + ... + - - log n = 
2 
3 
n 
Sn -
log n > log (n + 1) - log n > 0 is bounded below. Since from 
1 
In+! dx 
1 
the 
inequality -- < 
-
= log (n + 1) - log n = -- + 
n+l 
n 
x 
n+l 
Cn -
Cn +- l , we see that the sequence is monotonic decreasing, it must 
approach a limit 
lim Cn = lim (1 + ~ + ~ + ... + ! - log n) = C. 
n->oo 
n->oo 
2 
3 
n 
The number C whose value is 0.5772 ... , is called Euler's constant. In 
contrast to the other important special numbers of analysis, such as 7T 
and e, no other expression with a simple law of formation has been 
found for Euler's constant. Whether C is rational or irrational is not 
known to this day. 
7.3 Sequences of Functions 
As emphasized frequently before, the limit process serves not only 
to represent known numbers approximately by other, simpler ones, 
but it also serves to extend the set of known numbers into a wider one. 
It is of decisive importance in analysis to study limits not only for 
sequences-or infinite series-of constant numbers, but similarly for 
sequences of functions, or series whose terms are functions of a variable 
x, as, for example the Taylor series or power series in general. Not only 
the approximation of given functions by simpler ones requires such 
limiting processes but also the definition and analytic description of 
new functions must frequently be based on the concept of limit of 
sequences of functions: f(x) = lim fn(x) for n -+ 00. Equivalently, 
we may consider f(x) as the sum and the fn(x) as the partial sums of 
00 
an infinite series f(x) = ! gr(x) of functions gn(x) where gn(x) = 
r~l 
fn(x) - fn-l(X) for n > 1 and gl(X) = fleX). 
We shall now discuss precise definitions and geometrical inter-
pretations. 

Sec. 7.3 
Sequences of Functions 527 
a. Limiting Processes with Functions and Curves 
Definition. The sequence fleX), f2(X), •.. converges in the interval 
a ~ x ~ b to the limit function f(x), if at each point x of the interval 
the valuesfn(x) converge in the usual sense to the valuef(x). In this case 
we write limfn(x) = f(x). According to Cauchy's test (cf. p. 75) 
we can express the convergence of the sequence without referring to 
the limit functionf(x): The sequence offunctions converges to a limit 
function if and only if at each point x in our interval and for every 
positive number €, the quantity Ifn(x) - fm(x) I is less than €, pro-
vided that nand m are chosen large enough, that is, larger than a 
certain number. This number N = N( €, x) usually depends on € and x 
and increases beyond all bounds as € tends to zero. 
We have frequently met with cases oflimits of sequences offunctions. 
We mention only the definition of the power xa. for irrational values of 
at by the equation 
where r1, r2, ••• , r no ••• is a sequence of rational numbers tending to 
at; or the equation 
efIJ = lim (1 + ~)n, 
n-+ 00 
n 
where the approximating functions fn(x) on the right are polymomials 
of degree n. 
The graphical representation of functions by means of curves suggests 
that we can also speak of limits of sequences of curves, saying, for 
example, that the graphs of the preceding limit functions xa. and efIJ 
are to be regarded as the limit curves of the graphs of the functions 
xrn and (1 + ~r respectively. 
There is, however, a fine distinction between passages to the limit 
with functions and with curves, not clearly observed until the middle of 
the nineteenth century. We shall illustrate this point by an example and 
then discuss it systematically in the next section. 
We consider the functions 
n = 1,2, ... 
in the interval 0 ~ x ~ 1. All these functions are continuous, and the 
limit function limfn(x) = f(x) exists. But this limit function is not 
n-+co 

528 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
continuous. On the contrary, since for all values of n the value of the 
functionfn(I) = 1, the limit 
f(l) = 1; 
while, on the other hand, for 0 :$; x < 1, the limitf(x) = limfn(x) = 0, 
n~oo 
as we saw in Chapter 1, p. 65. The function f(x) is therefore a dis-
continuous function which at x = 1 has the value 1 while for all other 
values of x in the interval has the value O. 
y 
x 
Figure 7.3 Limit curve and limit function. 
This discontinuity is geometrically illustrated by the graphs Cn of the 
functions y = fn(x). These (cf. Fig. 1.44, p. 66) are continuous curves, 
all of which pass through the origin and the point x = 1, Y = 1, and 
which draw in closer and closer to the x-axis as n increases. The curves 
do possess a limit curve C which is not discontinuous at all, but consists 
(cf. Fig. 7.3) of the portion of the x-axis between x = 0 and x = 1, and 
the portion of the line x = 1 between y = 0 and y = 1. The curves 
therefore converge to a continuous limit curve with a vertical portion, 
whereas the functions converge to a discontinuous limit function. We 
thus recognize that this discontinuity of the limit function expresses 
itself by the occurrence in the limit curve of a portion perpendicular to 
the x-axis. This limit curve is not the graph of the limit function; for 
corresponding to the value of x at which the vertical portion occurs the 
curve gives an infinite number of values of y and the function only one. 

Sec. 7.4 
Uniform and Nonuniform Convergence 529 
Hence the limit of the graphs of the functions fnex) is not the same as 
the graph of the limit f(x) of these function. 
Corresponding statements, of course, hold for infinite series as well. 
7.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Convergence 
a. General Remarks and Definitions 
The distinction between the concept of the convergence of functions 
and that of the convergence of curves is a phenomenon which the 
y 
O~--~a--------------------~b--------~x 
Figure 7.4 To illustrate uniform convergence. 
student should clearly grasp. This involves the so-called nonuniform 
convergence of sequences or infinite series of functions which we shall 
discuss in some detail. 
That a functionf(x) is the limit of a sequencefl(x),f2eX), ... in an 
interval a :$; x :$; b means by definition merely that the usual limit 
relationshipf(x) = limfn (x) holds at each point x of the interval. 
n---+oo 
Such convergence is a local property of the sequence at the point x. 
It is, however, natural to require somewhat more than the mere local 
convergence of our approximations: that if we assign an arbitrary 
measure of accuracy E, then from a certain index N onward all the func-
tionsfnex) should lie betweenf(x) -
E andf(x) + E, for all values of 
x, so that their graphs y = fnex) lie entirely in the strip shown in Fig. 7.4. 
If the accuracy of the approximation can be made at least equal to a 
preassigned positive number E, everywhere in the interval at the same 

530 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
time, that is, by everywhere choosing the same number N( €) independent 
of x, we say that the approximation is uniform.l If lim fn(x) = f(x) 
n---.CXl 
uniformly for a ~ x ~ b, there exists for every € > 0 a corresponding 
number N = N(€) such that IJ(x) - fn(X) I < € for all n > Nand 
all x in the interval. Many people were quite surprised when in the 
middle of the nineteenth century it was noticed by Seidel and others 
that convergence of functions need not at all be uniform as had been 
naively assumed. 
Examples of Nonuniform Convergence. The concept of uniform convergence 
is illuminated by examples of nonuniform convergence. 
(a) The first example occurs for the sequence of functions just considered, 
In(x) = xn; in the interval 0 :::;; x :::;; 1 this sequence converges to the limit 
function f(x) = 0 for 0 :::;; x < 1, f(1) = 1. Convergence occurs at every 
point in the interval; that is, if E is any positive number, and if we select 
any definite fixed value x = ;, the inequality I;n - fWI < E certainly holds 
if n is sufficiently large. Yet this approximation is not uniform. For, if we 
choose E = t, then no matter how large the number n is chosen, we can find 
a point x = 1] ¢ 1 at which l1]n - f( 1])1 = rln > t; this is, in fact, true for 
all points x = 1] where 1 > 1] > \VI. It is therefore impossible to choose 
the number n so large that the difference betweenf(x) andln(x) is less than t 
throughout the whole interval. 
This behavior becomes intelligible if we refer to the graphs of these 
functions (Fig. 7.3). We see that no matter how large a value of n we choose, 
for values of ; only a little less than 1 the value of the function In(;) will be 
very near 1, and therefore cannot be a good approximation to f( ;), which is O. 
Similar behavior is exhibited by the functions 
in the neighborhood of the points x = 1 and x = -1; this can easily be 
established. Here f(x) = 1 for Ixl < 1, f(x) = t for Ixl = 1 and f(x) = 0 
for Ixl > 1. 
(b) In the above two examples the nonuniformity of the convergence is 
connected with the fact that the limit function is discontinuous. Yet it is also 
easy to construct a sequence of continuous functions which do converge to a 
continuous limit function, but not uniformly. We restrict our attention to 
1 Compare with the analogous definition at uniform continuity, p. 41, where we can 
choose the same number O(E) independent of x. 

Sec. 7.4 
Uniform and Nonuniform Convergence 531 
the interval 0 ~ x ~ 1 and make the following definitions for n ~ 2: 
for 
for 
2 
1 
O~x~-, 
n 
for 
-
~ x ~ 1, 
n 
where to begin with we can choose any value for 0(, but must then keep this 
value of 0( fixed for all terms of the sequence. Graphically, our functions are 
y 
~-------&--------~----~x 
lin 
21n 
Figure 7.5 To illustrate nonuniform convergence. 
represented by a roof-shaped figure made of two line segments lying over 
the interval 0 ~ x ~ 2/n of the x-axis, whereas from x = 2/n onward the 
graph is the x-axis itself (cf. Fig. 7.5). 
If 0( < 1, the altitude of the highest point of the graph, which has in 
general the value n'Y.-l, will tend to zero as n increases; the curves will then 
tend toward the x-axis, and the functions /n(x) will converge uniformly to 
the limit function/(x) = O. 
If 0( = 1, the peak of the graph will have the height 1 for every value of n. 
If 0( > 1, the height of the peak will increase beyond all bounds as n increases. 
However, no matter how 0( is chosen, the sequence /lx), /2(X), ... always 
tends to the limit functionf(x) = O. For, if x is positive, we have 2/n < x, 
for all sufficiently large values of n so that x is not under the roof-shaped part 
of the graph and j~(x) =: 0; for x = 0 all the functional values /n(x) are 
equal to 0, so that in either case lim/n(x) = O. 
n-OO 
The convergence is certainly nonuniform, however, if 0( ~ 1; for it is 
plainly impossible to choose n so large that the expression I/(x) - /n(X) I 
/n(x) is less than t everywhere in the interval. 

532 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
(c) Exactly similar behavior is exhibited by the sequence of functions 
fix) = xn'Xe--, 
where, in contrast with the preceding case, each function of the sequence is 
represented by a single analytical expression. Here again the equation 
lim fn(x) = 0 holds for every positive value of x, since as n increases the 
n-+CXl 
y 
",n=4 
/ 
.. 
: 
\ 
I -' 
1 
,,~ 
: Ie., 
, 
It'll 
\. 
: ,:: 
...... --~\.. 
I 
"'", 
'.,~ 
.1 11/ 
\'''' .... 
. I~ 
...... 
/ 1 
.... 
/ 
"'-..................... ...... 
/ 
'-..:-.----
""'"--... ..-- ---
-- .... ----- ---
2 
3 
x 
Figure 7.6 Nonuniform convergence of the sequence /,,(x) = n"xe-""'. 
function e-nz tends to zero to a higher order than any power of l/n (cf. 
Section 3.7b, p. 250). For x = 0, we have alwaysfn(x) = 0, and thus 
f(x) = limfn(x) = 0 
for every value of x in the interval 0 ~ x ~ a, where a is an arbitrary positive 
number. But here again the convergence to the limit function is not uniform. 
For at the point x = 1/11 [where fn(x) has its maximum] we have 
(1) 
'X-I 
fn(x) = fn ~ = ~ 
, 
and we thus recognize that if IX ~ 1, the convergence is nonuniform, for 
every curve y = fn(x), no matter how large n is chosen, will contain points 
(namely, the point x = l/n, which varies with II) at which fn(x) - f(x) = 
fn(x) > 1/2e (cf. Fig. 7.6). 
(d) The concepts of uniform and nonuniform convergence may, of course, 
be extended to an infinite series. We say that a series 
gl(X) + g2(x) + ... 

Sec. 7.4 
Uniform and Nonuniform Convergence 533 
is uniformly convergent, or not, according to the behavior of its partial sums 
[n(x). A very simple example of a nonuniformly convergent series is given by 
x2 
x2 
x2 
[(x) = x2 + 1 + x2 + (1 + x2)2 + (1 + x2)3 + .... 
For x = 0 every partial sum [n(x) = x2 + ... + x2/(1 + x2)n-l has the value 
0; therefore [(0) = O. For x ~ 0 the series is simply a geometric series 
y 
\ 
I 
\ 
/f1(x) 
\ 
/ 
\ 
l' 
/ 
\ 
;.-!f41 (x) / 
\ 
'/:' 
/ 
\ 
I . fn(x) / 
, 
. / 
/ 
'" 
\. \ if / 
..... \: :, ",/ 
-...... 
/ 
o 
x 
Figure 7.7 Convergence to function with removable jump discontinuity. 
with the positive ratio 1/(1 + x 2) < 1; we can therefore sum it by the 
elementary rules and thus obtain for every x ~ 0 the sum 
x 2 
.,-------,-,---;0,- -
1 +:r;2 
1 -
1/(1 + :r;2) -
. 
The limit function [(x) is thus given everywhere except at x = 0 by the 
expression [(x) = 1 + x 2, whereas [(0) = 0; it therefore has a removable 
discontinuity at the origin. 
Here again we have nonuniform convergence in every interval containing 
the origin. For the difference j'(x) - fn('''C) = rix) is always 0 for x = 0, 
whereas it is given by the expression rn(x) = 1/(1 + x2r-1 for all other 
values of x, as the reader may verify for himself. If we require this expression 
to be less than, say l, then for each fixed value of x this can be attained by 
choosing 11 large enough. But we can find no value of 11 sufficiently large to 
ensure that rn(x) is everywhere less than t; for if we choose any value of 11, 
no matter how large, we can make Yn(x) greater than t by taking x near 
enough to O. A uniform approximation to within ~ is therefore impossible. 
The matter becomes clear if we consider the approximating curves (cf. Fig. 
7.7). These curves, except near x = 0, lie nearer and nearer to the parabola 

534 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
y = 1 + x 2 as n increases; near x = 0, however, the curves send down a 
narrower and narrower extension to the origin, and as n increases this 
extension draws in closer and closer to a certain straight line, a portion of the 
y-axis, so that for the limiting curve we have the parabola plus a linear exten-
sion reaching vertically down to the origin. 
As a further example of nonuniform convergence we mention the series 
ro 
~gv(x), where gv(x) = XV - xv-I for v ~ 1, go(x) = 1, defined in the 
v=o 
interval 0 ~ x ~ 1. The partial sums of this series are the functions XV 
already considered in Example (a), p. 530. 
h. A Test of Uniform Convergence 
The preceding considerations show us that the uniform convergence 
of a sequence or series is a special property not possessed by all 
sequences and series. We now repeat the definition of uniform con-
vergence as it applies to infinite series: the series 
gl(X) + g2(X) + ... 
is uniformly convergent to a function f(x) in an interval if f(x) can be 
approximated to within a margin of approximation £ (where £ is an 
arbitrarily small positive number) by the sum of a fixed and sufficiently 
large number of terms gl(X) + ... + gN(x) = fN(X) , independent of x 
in the interval. 
We again have a test (Cauchy's test) for uniform convergence that 
does not require knowledge of the limit function f(x): the series con-
verges uniformly (or equivalently, the sequence of functions fix) 
converges uniformly) if and only if the difference Ifix) - fm(x) I can be 
made less than an arbitrary quantity £ everywhere in the interval by 
choosing nand m larger than a number N independent of x. For, first, 
if the convergence is uniform, we can make Ifn(x) - f(X) I and 
Ifm(x) - f(X) I both less than £/2 by choosing nand m greater than a 
number N independent of x, from which it follows that Ifn(x) - fm(x) I < 
£; and secondly, if Ifn(x) - fm(X) I < £ for all values of x whenever n 
and m are greater than N, then on choosing any fixed value of n > N 
and letting m increase beyond all bounds we have the relation 
IfiX) - f(x)1 = lim Ifn(x) - fm(x) I s:; £, 
m~ro 
for every value of x, so that the convergence is uniform. 
As we shall see it is just this condition of uniform convergence that 
makes infinite series and other limiting processes with functions into 
convenient and useful tools of analysis. Fortunately, in the limiting 

Sec. 7.4 
Uniform and Nonuniform Convergence 535 
processes usually encountered in analysis and its applications, non-
uniform convergence occurs only at isolated exceptional points and will 
scarcely trouble us for the present. 
Usually, the uniformity of convergence of a series is established 
by means of the following criterion (comparing the series with a 
majorant of constant terms): 
00 
If the terms of the series 1: g.(x) satisfy the condition Ig.(x)I ~ a., 
.=1 
where the numbers a. are positive constants which form a convergent 
00 
00 
series 1: a., then the series 1: g.(x) converges uniformly (and absolutely) . 
.=1 
• =1 
For we then have 
I.~ g.(x) I 
~.~ Ig.(x)1 ~.~ a., 
m 
and since by Cauchy's test the sum 1: a. can be made arbitrarily small 
v=n 
by choosing nand m > n large enough, this expresses exactly the 
necessary and sufficient condition for uniform convergence. 
A first example is offered by the geometric series 1 + x + x2 + ... , 
where x is restricted to the interval Ixl ~ q, q being any positive number less 
than 1. The terms of the series are then numerically less than or equal to the 
terms of the convergent geometric series '£q'. 
A further example is given by the "trigonometric series" 
~~~-~ ~~~-~ ~~~-~ 
12 
+ 
22 
+ 
32 
+ ... , 
provided that len I < c, where c is a positive constant independent of n. For 
then we have 
Cn sin (x -
<5n) 
C 
gn(x) = 
2 
,so that 
Ign(x)1 < "2. 
n 
n 
Hence the uniform and absolute convergence of the trigonometric series 
00 
C 
follows from the convergence of the series 1: "2 . 
• =1 n 
c. Continuity of the Sum of a Uniformly Con-
vergent Series of Continuous Functions 
The significance of uniform convergence lies in the fact that a 
uniformly convergent series in many respects behaves exactly like the 
sum of a finite number of functions. Thus, for example, the sum of a 

536 
Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
finite number of continuous functions is itself continuous, and cor-
respondingly we have the following theorem. 
THEOREM. If a series of continuous terms converges uniformly in an 
interval, its sum is also a continuous function. 
PROOF. The proof is quite simple. We subdivide the series 
f(x) = gl(X) + g2(X) + ... 
into the nth partial sum fn(x) plus the remainder Rn(x). As usual, 
fn(x) = gl(X) + ... + gn(x), If now any positive number E is assigned, 
we can in virtue of the uniform convergence choose the number n so 
large that the remainder is less than E/4 throughout the whole interval, 
and hence 
for every pair of numbers x and x + h in the in.terval. The partial sum 
fn(x) consists of the sum of a finite number of continuous functions and 
is therefore continuous; for each point x in the interval, therefore, we 
can choose a positive (j so small that 
E 
Ifn(x + h) - fn(x) I < "2 
provided Ihl < (j and the points x and x + h lie in the interval. It then 
follows that 
If(X +h) - f(X) I = Ifn(x + h) - fn(x) + Rn(x + h) -
Rn(x) I 
~ Ifn(x + h) - fn(X) I + IRn(x + h) -
RnCx) I < E, 
which expresses the continuity of our function. 
The importance of this theorem becomes clear when we recall that 
the sums of non uniformly convergent series of continuous functions are 
not necessarily continuous from our previous examples. From the pre-
ceding theorem we may conclude: if the sum of a convergent series of 
continuous functions has a point of discontinuity, then in every 
neighborhood of this point the convergence is nonuniform. Hence 
every representation of discontinuous functions by series of continuous 
functions must be based on the use of nonuniformly convergent limiting 
processes. 
d. Integration of Uniformly Convergent Series 
A sum of a finite number of continuous functions can be integrated 
"term by term"; that is, the integral of the sum obtained by integrating 

Sec. 7.4 
Uniform and Nonuniform Convergence 
537 
each term separately and adding the integrals. In a convergent infinite 
series of continuous functions the same procedure is permissible, 
provided that the series converges uniformly in the interval of integra-
tion. 
OC! 
A series .2 gJx) = f(x) which converges uniformly in an interval can be 
v~! 
integrated term by term in that interval; or, more precisely, if a and x 
are two numbers in the interval of uniform convergence, the series 
v~ iXgv(t) dt converges, a:d, infact, converges uniformly with respect to 
x, its sum being equal to i f(t) dt.! 
To prove this we write as before 
OC! 
f(x) = .2gv(x) = fn(x) + Rnex). 
We have assumed that the separate terms of the series are continuous; 
hence by Section 7.4c the sum is also continuous and therefore in-
tegrable. Now if E is any positive number, we can find a number N so 
large that for every n > N the inequality I Rn(x) I < E holds for every 
value of x in the interval. By the mean value theorem of the integral 
calculus we have 
I iX[f(t) - fn(t)] dt I ~ d, 
where I is the length of the interval of integration. Since the in-
tegration of the finite sum fn(x) can be performed term by term, this 
gives us 
I iXf(t) dt - ~ lXgv(t) dt I < d. 
But since d can be made as small as we please, this states that 
~! LXgv(t) dt = !,i~CX) ~l LXgv(t) dt = lXf(t) dt, 
which was to be proved. 
1 Observe that in this theorem we must take definite integrals. Thus, for example, 
CIJ 
the series .2gv(x) with gv(x) = 0 converges uniformly; taking the indefinite in-
v~l 
tegral S g.(x) dx = constant = c of each term, however, leads to the generally 
OC! 
divergent series .2 c. 
v~l 

538 
Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
If, instead of infinite series, we wish to deal with sequences of func-
tions, our result can be expressed in the following way: 
If in an interval the sequence of functions fl(x), f2(x), ... tends uni-
formly to the limit function f(X) , then 
(7) 
ff(X) dx = !~~ ffn(X) dx 
for every pair of numbers a and b lying in the interval; in other words, 
we can then interchange the order of the operations of integration and 
passing to the limit. 
This fact is not a triviality. From a naive point of view such as prevailed in 
the eighteenth century it is true that the interchangeability of the two processes 
is hardly to be doubted; but a glance at the examples in 7.4a shows us that 
in nonuniform convergence the preceding equation might not hold. We need 
only consider Example b, p. 530, in which the integral of the limit function 
is 0, whereas the integral of the function fn(x) over the interval 0 :::;; x :::;; 1, 
that is to say, the area of the triangle in Fig. 7.5, has the value 
iin(X) dx = na- 2, 
and when ex. ;;::: 2 this does not tend to zero. Here we immediately see 
from the figure that the reason for the difference betweenilf(X) dx and 
lim (Ifn(x) dx lies in the nonuniformity of the convergence. 0 
n-+ 00 Jo 
On the other hand, by considering values of ex. such that 1 :::;; ex. < 2, we 
see that the equation lim rin(x) dx = ri(x) dx can hold good although 
n-+oo Jo 
Jo 
00 
the convergence is nonuniform. As a further example, the series L gn(x), 
o 
wheregn(x) = xn - xn- 1 for n ;;::: 1 andgo(x) = 1, can be integrated term by 
term between the limits 0 and 1, even though it does not converge uniformly. 
Thus, although uniformity of convergence is a sufficient condition for term-
by-term integrability, it is by no means a necessary condition. 
e. Differentiation of Infinite Series 
The behavior of uniformly convergent series or sequences with 
respect to differentiation is quite different from that with respect to 
sin n2x 
integration. For example, the sequence of functions fn(x) = ---
n 
certainly converges uniformly to the limit function f(x) = 0, but the 

Sec. 7.4 
Uniform and Nonuniform Convergence 539 
derivative fn'(x) = n cos n2x certainly does not converge everywhere 
to the derivative of the limit functionf'(x) = 0, as we see by considering 
x = 0. In spite of the uniformity of the convergence, therefore, we 
cannot interchange the processes of differentiation and passage to 
the limit. 
Corresponding statements of course hold for infinite series. For 
example, the series 
. 
+ sin 24X + sin 34x + 
S10 X 
---
---
••• 
22 
32 
is absolutely and uniformly convergent, for its terms are numerically not 
1 
1 
1 
greater than the terms of the convergent series 12 + 22 + 32 + .... 
If, however, we differentiate the series term by term, we obtain the 
series 
cos x + 22 cos 24X + 32 cos 34x + ... , 
which plainly diverges at x = 0. 
The only useful criterion which assures us in special cases that term-
by-term differentiation is permissible is given by the following theorem. 
co 
If, on differentiating a convergent infinite series ~ G.(x) = F(x) term 
.=0 
by term, we obtain a uniformly convergent series of continuous terms 
co 
~ g.(x) = f(x), then the sum of this last series is equal to the derivative 
.=0 
of the sum of the .first series. 
This theorem therefore expr~ssly requires that after differentiating the 
series term by term we must still investigate whether the result of the 
differentiation is a uniformly convergent series or not. 
The proof of the theorem is almost trivial. For by the theorem in 
Section 7.4d we can integrate term by term the series obtained by 
differentiation. Recalling that g.(t) = G.'(t), we obtain 
fJf(t) dt = LX C~/.(t)) dt = ~o LXg.(t) dt = ~o(G.(X) -
G.(a» 
= F(x) -
F(a). 
This being true for every value of x in the interval of uniform con-
vergence, it follows that 
f(x) = F'(x), 
which was to be proved. 

540 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
7.5 Power Series 
Power series occupy a most important position among infinite series. 
By a power series we mean a series of the type 
00 
(8) 
P(x) = Co + C1x + C2X2 + ... = ZCyXY 
y=o 
("power series in x"), or more generally 
00 
(8a) P(x) = Co + c1(x -
xo) + C2(X -
XO)2 + ... = zcy(x -
xor 
y=o 
("power series in (x -
xo)"), where Xo is a fixed number. If in the last 
series we introduce ~ = x -
Xo as a new variable, it becomes a power 
00 
series Z Cy~y in the new variable ~, and we can therefore confine our 
v=O 
00 
attention to power series of the more special form Z cy xy without any 
loss of generality. 
y=o 
In Chapter 5 (p. 446) we considered the approximate representation 
of functions by polynomials and were thus led to the expansion of 
functions in Taylor series, which are, in fact, power series. In this 
section we shall study power series in somewhat greater detail, and shall 
obtain the expansions of some of the most important functions in 
series more conveniently than before. 
a. Convergence Properties of Power Series-Interval of Convergence 
There are power series which converge for no value of x except, of 
course, for x = 0, as for example, the series 
x + 22X2 + 33x3 + ... + nnxn + .... 
For if x -:;6- 0, we can find an integer N such that Ixl > l/N. Then all 
the terms nnxn for which n > N will be greater than 1 in absolute value, 
and, in fact, as n increases nnxn will increase beyond all bounds, so that 
the series fails to converge. 
On the other hand, there are series which converge for every value of 
x; for example, the power series for the exponential function 
x2 
x3 
eX = 1 + x + - + - + ... 
2! 
3! 
whose convergence for every value of x follows at once from the ratio 
test (criterion Sa, p. 522). The (n + l)th term divided by the nth term 
gives x/n, and, whatever number x is chosen, this ratio tends to zero 
as n increases. 

Sec. 7.5 
Power Series 541 
The behavior of power series with regard to convergence is expressed 
in the following fundamental theorem. 
If a power series in x converges for a value x = ~, it converges abso-
lutely for every value x such that Ixl < I~I, and the convergence is uniform 
in every intervallxl :::;; rJ, where rJ is any positive number less than I~I. 
Here rJ may lie as near I~I as we please. 
00 
The proof is simple. If the series ~ cJv converges, its terms tend to 
v=o 
zero as n increases. From this follows the weaker statement that the 
terms all lie below a bound M independent of P, that is, Icv~vl < M. If 
now q is any number such that 0 < q < I, and if we restrict x to the 
interval Ixl:::;; q In then IcvxVI:::;; Icv~vl qV < Mqv. 
In this interval, 
00 
therefore, the terms of our series ~ cvxv are smaller in absolute value 
o 
than the terms of the convergent geometric series ~Mqv. Hence from 
the theorem on p. 535 the absolute and uniform convergence of the 
series in the interval -q I~I :::;; x :::;; q I~I follows. 
If a power series does not converge everywhere, that is, if there is a 
value x = ~ for which it diverges, it must diverge for every value of x 
such that Ixl > I~I. For if it were convergent for such a value of x, by 
the theorem above it would have to converge for the numerically 
smaller value ;. 
From this we recognize that a power series which converges for at 
least one value of x other than 0 and which diverges for at least one 
value of x has an interval of convergence; that is, a definite positive 
number p exists such that for Ixl > p the series diverges and for 
Ixl < p the series converges. For Ixl = p no general statement can be 
made. Here p is just the least upper bound of the values x for which 
the series converges (such a least upper bound exists by the theorem 
on p. 98 since the values x for which the series converges form a 
bounded set). The limiting cases, those in which the series converges 
only for x = 0 and those in which it converges everywhere, are ex-
pressed symbolically by writing p = 0 and p = 00 respectively.1 
1 It is possible to find this interval of convergence directly from the coefficients 
c. of the series. If the limit lim 'l'Y'iCJ exists, then 
n~OO 
P = lim ~/lcnl 
n~OO 
For the general case, see Problem 8, p. 569. 

542 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
For example, for the geometric series 1 + x + x2 + ... we have p = 1; 
at the end points of the interval of convergence the series diverges. Similarly, 
for the series for the inverse tangent (p. 444), 
x3 
x5 
arc tan x =x - 3" +5 - +"', 
we have p = 1, and at both the end points x = ±1 of the interval of con-
vergence the series converges, as we recognize at once from Leibnitz's test 
(p. 514). 
From the uniform convergence we derive the important fact that 
within its interval of convergence (if such an interval exists) the power 
series represents a continuous function. 
h. Integration and Differentiation of Power Series 
Because of the uniformity of convergence it is always permissible to 
integrate a power series 
0() 
f(x) = ~c.x· 
v=o 
term by term over any closed interval lying entirely within the interval 
of convergence. We thus obtain the function 
(9) 
0() 
C 
F(x) = c + ~ __ 
v_ xV+I, 
v=o'll + 1 
for which 
F'(x) = f(x) and F(O) = c. 
We may also differentiate a power series term by term within its 
interval of convergence, thus obtaining the equation 
0() 
(10) 
f'(x) = ~ 
'IICvX V- 1• 
v-1 
In order to prove this statement we need only show that the series 
On the right converges uniformly if x is restricted to an interval lying 
entirely within the interval of convergence. Suppose then that ~ is a 
0() 
number, lying as close to p as we please, for which I c.~V converges; 
v=1 
then, as we have seen before, the numbers kJvl all lie below a bound 
M independent of'll, so that kv~·-11 < ~ = N. Now let q be any 
number such that 0 < q < 1; if we restrict x to the interval Ixl ::;;; q I~I, 

Sec. 7.5 
Power Series 543 
the terms of the infinite series (10) are not greater than those of 
00 
the series L Ivcv qV-1 ~v-11, and therefore less than those of the series 
00 
v=l 
L NvqV-1. 
However, in this last series the ratio of the (n + 1)th term 
v=o 
to the nth term is q(n + l)/n, which tends to q as n increases. Since 
0< q < 1, it follows [criterion (Sa)] that this series converges. Hence 
the series obtained by differentiation converges uniformly, and by the 
theorem on p. 539 represents the derivative f'(x) of the function f(x), 
which proves our statement. 
If we apply this result again to the power series 
00 
f'(X) = L vcvxv-t, 
v=1 
we find on differentiating term by term that 
00 
f"(x) = L V(V -
1)cvxV- 2, 
v=2 
and, continuing the process, we arrive at the theorem: Every function 
represented by a power series can be differentiated as often as we please 
within the interval of convergence, and the differentiation can be per-
formed term by term.1 
c. Operations with Power Series 
The preceding theorems on the behavior of power series are our 
justification for operating in the same way with power series as with 
polynomials. It is obvious that two power series can be added or sub-
tracted by adding or subtracting the corresponding coefficients (see 
p. 520). It is also clear that a power series, like any other convergent 
series, can be multiplied by a constant factor by multiplying each term 
by that factor. On the other hand, the multiplication and division of 
two power series require somewhat more detailed study, for which we 
1 As an explicit expression for the kth derivative we obtain 
00 
(lk) (x) = L v(v -
1) ... (v -
k + l)c xv- k , 
v=k 
or in a slightly different form, 
f(k) (x) _ 
00 (V) 
v.-k _ 
ro (k + v) 
v 
~ 
- L 
cvx 
- L 
k 
Ck+vX. 
• 
v=k k 
v=o 
These two formulas are frequently useful. 

544 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
refer the reader to the Appendix (p. 555). Here we merely mention 
without proof that two power series 
00 
f(x) = Ia.x· 
.=0 
and 
00 
g(x) = Ib.x· 
.=0 
can be multiplied together like polynomials. To be specific, we have 
the following theorems: Throughout the common part of the intervals 
of convergence of these two series their product is given by the convergent 
00 
power series I c.x·, where the coefficients c. are given by the formulas 
'=0 
Co = aobo, 
Cl = aobl + albo, 
C2 = aob2 + albl + a~o, 
d. Uniqueness of Expansion 
In the theory of power series the following fact is of importance: if 
00 
00 
two power series I a.x· and I b.x· both converge in an interval which 
.=0 
'=0 
contains the point x = 0 in its interior, and if in that interval the two 
series represent the same function f(x), then they are identical, that is, 
the equation an = bn is true for every value of n. In other words: 
A function f(x) can be represented by a power series in x in only one 
way, if at all. 
Briefly: the representation of a function by a power series is "unique." 
For the proof we need only notice that the difference of the two power 
00 
series, that is, the power series ~(x) = I c.x· with coefficients c. = 
a. - b., represents the function 
.=0 
~(x) = f(x) - f(x) = 0 
in the interval; that is, this last power series converges to the limit 0 
everywhere in the interval. For x = 0, in particular, the sum of the 
series must be 0; that is, Co = 0, so that ao = boo We now differentiate 

Sec. 7.5 
Power Series 545 
00 
the series in the interior of the interval, obtaining cp'(x) = ! ')ICyXY-i. 
y=I 
However, cp'(x) is also 0 throughout the interval; hence for x = 0, in 
particular, we have CI = 0 or al = hI. Continuing this process of 
differentiating and then putting x = 0, we find successively that all the 
coefficients cy are equal to zero, which proves the theorem. 
In addition, we can draw the following conclusion from our dis-
cussion: if we take the ')Ith derivative of a series f(x) = ~ayxy and then 
put x = 0, we at once obtain 
that is, 
a y = ~ f(Y)(O), 
')I. 
Every power series which converges for points other than x = 0 is the 
Taylor series of the function which it represents. 
The uniqueness of the expansion corresponds to the fact that the 
coefficients can be expressed in terms of the function itself. 
*e. Analytic Functions 
For functions f(x) which can be expressed by power series, the name 
"analytic functions" has been used since the importance of such functions 
was first recognized by Lagrange. Specifically, f(x) is called analytic in the 
neighborhood of x = a if in this neighborhood an expansion of f(x) as a 
convergent power series in x -
a is possible. 
While functions which are not at all or not everywhere analytic do playa 
great role in analysis and applications (See Chapter 8), the analytic functions 
are particularly important, for they share with polynomials many simple 
features. 
For example, an analytic function which does not vanish identically will 
have some nonvanishing derivative for x = a. Let r be the smallest number 
for which f(r)(a) :;t= O. Then f having a zero of order r at a point x = a, 
can be represented as a product f(x) = (x - a)'g(x), where g(x) is an 
1 
analytic function for whichg(a) = --; pr)(a) is different from zero. (Compare 
r. 
Chapter 5, p. 463.) Indeed, the possibility offactoring out the power (x - a)' 
follows immediately from the convergence of the respective power series. 
Also, as is seen from the continuity of the convergent power series for g(x), 
the factor g(x) cannot vanish in a suitably small neighborhood of x = a, 
or: the zeros of f(x) are isolated unless, of course, f vanishes identically. 
Since the same is true of the function ['(x) it follows that in a finite interval 
an analytic function is piecewise monotone, that is, it cannot change its 
character of monotonicity infinitely often; thus the graph of y = f(x) 
cannot have infinitely many intersections with a line y = constant (or any 
straight line) in a finite interval. 

546 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
One may note that these last statements are not neccessarily true for non-
analytic functions, such as for y = sin (ljx) e-1/X', in the neighborhood of 
x = 0 (see p. 462). 
7.6 Expansion of Given Functions in Power Series. 
Method of Undetermined Coefficients. Examples 
Within its interval of convergence every power series represents a 
continuous function with continuous derivatives of all orders. We 
shall now discuss the converse problem of the expansion of a given 
function in a power series. In theory we can always do this by means of 
Taylor's theorem; in practice we often meet with difficulties in the 
actual calculation of the nth derivative and in the estimation of the 
remainder. But we can often reach our goal more simply by making 
use of the following device. We first write down tentatively f(x) = 
00 ! c.x·, where the coefficients c. are unknown to begin with. Then by 
.~o 
some known property of the functionf(x) we determine the coefficients, 
and then prove the convergence of the series. The series represents a 
function, and it only remains to prove that this function is identical 
withf(x). Because of the uniqueness of the expansion in power series 
we know that no other series than the one just found can be the re-
quired expansion. Actually, we have earlier obtained the series for 
arc tan x and log (1 + x) by a method related to the idea of this chapter. 
For we simply integrated term by term the series for the derivatives 
of these functions, which we knew to be geometric series. We shall 
now consider some examples of this method. 
a. The Exponential Function 
As we saw in Chapter 3, Section 4a, p. 223, the function y = eX is com-
pletely characterized by the differential equation y' = y and the initial con-
dition y = 1 for x = O. We can use these properties directly to find the 
power series for the exponential function. Our problem is to find a function 
f(x) for which rex) = f(x) and f(O) = 1. If we write tentatively the series 
with undetermined coefficients 
f(x) = Co + C1x + C2x2 + .... 
and differentiate it, we obtain 
rex) = C1 + 2C2x + 3C3X2 + .... 
Since by hypothesis these two power series must be identical, we have the 
equation 

Sec. 7.6 
Expansion of Given Functions in Power Series 547 
true for all values of n ~ 1. If we observe that because of the relation 
[(0) = 1 the coefficient Co must have the value 1, we can calculate all the 
coefficients successively, and obtain the power series 
X 
x 3 
x3 
[ (x) = 1 + - + - + - + ... 
I! 
2! 
3! 
. 
As we easily see by the ratio test, this series converges for all values of x 
and therefore represents a function for which the relations ['(x) = [(x), 
[(0) = 1 are actually fulfilled. (Here we intentionally avoid making any 
use of what we have previously learned about the expansion of the exponential 
function.) 
Since only the function e"' possesses these properties we readily deduce that 
the function[(x) is identical with e"'. 
h. The Binomial Series 
We can now return to the binomial series (Section 5.5c, p. 456), this 
time making use of the method of undetermined coefficients. We wish 
to expand the function [(x) = (1 + X)II in a power series, and therefore 
write 
the coefficients c. being undetermined. We now notice that our function 
obviously satisfies the relation 
co 
(1 + x)['(x) = a.[(x) = I a.c.x' . 
• =0 
On the other hand, if we differentiate the series for [(x) term by term and 
multiply by (1 + x), we obtain 
(1 + x)['(x) = Cl + (2C2 + Cl)X + (3C3 + 2C2)x2 + ... ; 
and since these two power series for (1 + x)['(x) must be identical, 
Now it is certain that Co = 1, since our series must have the value 1 for x = 0, 
and so we obtain in succession the expressions 
(a. -
1)a. 
(a. -
2)(a. -
1)a. 
C2 = 
2 
C3 = 
3.2 
, ... , 
for the coefficients, and in general, as is easily established, we have 
C = (a. -
v + 1)(a. -
v + 2)··· (a. -
1)a. = (a.). 
v 
v(v -
1) .. ·2 . 1 
v 

548 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
Substituting these values for the coefficients, we have the series i: (lX)xv; 
v=o 
V 
we have yet to investigate the convergence of this series and to show that it 
actually represents (1 + x)!1.. 
By the ratio test we find that when IX is not a positive integer, the series 
converges if Ixl < 1 and diverges if Ixl > 1; for then the ratio of the (n + l)th 
IX-n+l 
term to the nth term is 
x, and the absolute value of this expression 
n 
tends to Ixl as n increases beyond all bounds.l Hence, if Ixl < lour series 
represents a function lex) which satisfies the condition (1 + x)['(x) = IX/(X), 
as follows from the method of forming the coefficients. Moreover, /(0) = 1. 
Together, these two conditions ensure that the function/(x) is identical with 
(1 + x)!1.. For on putting 
lex) 
</>(x) = (1 + X)IZ 
we find that 
, 
(1 + x)"f'(x) -
1X(1 + X)IZ-l/(x) 
</> (x) = 
(1 + X)21Z 
= 0; 
</>(x) is therefore a constant, and, in fact, is always equal to 1, since </>(0) = 1. 
We have therefore proved that for Ixl < 1 
(1 + X)IZ =v~ G)xv, 
which is the binomial series. 
Here we note the following special cases of the binomial series; the 
geometric series 
the series 
1 
-- = (1 + x)-l = 1 - x + x2 -
x3 + X4 -
+ ... 
1 + x 
00 
=! (-I)VxV; 
v=o 
1 
(1 
= (1 + x)-2 = 1 - 2x + 3x2 - 4x3 + 
+ x)2 
00 
=! (-l)V(v + l)xV, 
v=o 
1 Here we state, without proof, the exact conditions under which this series converges. 
If the index IX is an integer ~O, the series terminates and is therefore valid for all 
values of x (becoming the ordinary binomial theorem). For all other values of IX the 
series is absolutely convergent for Ixl < 1 and divergent for Ixl > 1. For x = + 1 
the series converges absolutely if IX > 0, converges conditionally if -1 < IX < 0, and 
diverges if IX :::;; -1. Finally, at x = -1 the series is absolutely convergent if IX> 0, 
divergent if IX < O. 

Sec. 7.6 
Expansion of Given Functions in Power Series 549 
which may also be obtained from the geometric series by differentiation; 
and the series 
1 
1 
1 ·3 
Y(1 +x)=(1 +x)~=1 +-x--x2 + __ 
X 3 
2 
2·4 
2·4·6 
1 ·3·5 
--__ x4 + 
2·4·6·8 
1 
lL 
1 
1·3 
1·3'5 
--==== = (1 + X)->'2 = 1 - -x + --x2 - ---x3 
Y(1 +x) 
2 
2·4 
2·4·6 
1 ·3·5·7 
+ 
X4_ + ... 
2·4·6·8 
' 
the first two or three terms of which form useful approximations. 
c. The Series for arc sin x 
This series can be obtained very easily by expanding the expression 
1/ Y (1 - t2) according to the binomial series, 
This series converges if It I ~ 1, and so converges uniformly if It I ~ q < 1. 
On integrating term by term between 0 and x, we obtain 
lx3 
1'3x5 
arc sin x = x + - - + -- - + .... 
23 
2·45 
' 
by the ratio test we find that this converges if Ixl < 1, and diverges if Ixl > 1. 
The deduction of this series from Taylor's theorem would be decidedly 
less convenient, owing to the difficulty of estimating the remainder. 
d. The Series for ar sinh x = log[x + .J(I + x2)] 
We obtain this expansion by a similar method. Using the binomial 
theorem we write down the series for the derivative of ar sinh x, 
1 
1·3 
1·3·5 
--=== = 1 __ x2 +--x4 ____ x6 + 
Yl+x2 
2 
2·4 
2·4·6 
and then integrate term by term. We thus obtain the expansion 
lx3
1·3x5 
arsinhx =X --- +--- - + .... 
23 
2·45 
whose interval of convergence is -I < x < 1. 

550 Infinite Sums and Products 
e. Example of Multiplication of Series 
The expansion of the function 
log (l + x) 
1 + x 
Ch. 7 
is a simple example of the application of the rule for the multiplication of 
power series. We have only to multiply the logarithmic series 
x2 
x3 
x' 
log (l + x) = x -
- + - - - + - ... 
2 
3 
4 
by the geometric series 
as the reader may verify for himself, we obtain the remarkable expansion 
log (1 + x) 
1 + x 
= x - (I + t)x2 + (I + t + -l)x3 
- (1 + t + -l + i)x4 + - ... 
for Ixl < 1. 
f. Example of Term-by-Term Integration (Elliptic Integral) 
In previous applications pp. 300,411 we have met with the elliptic integral 
K _ (,,/2 
d</> 
Jo 
Y(l - k 2 sin2 </»' 
for (k2 < 1) 
[the period of oscillation of a pendulum]. In order to evaluate the integral 
we can first expand the integrand by the binomial theorem, thus obtaining 
1 
1 ·3 
---;====:=~=;;=~ = 1 + tk2 sin2 </> + -
k' sin4 </> 
Y(I - k2 sin2 </» 
2·4 
1 ·3·5 
+ --- k6 sin6 </> + .... 
2·4·6 
Since k 2 sin2 </> is never greater than k 2 this series converges uniformly for 
all values of </>, and we may integrate term by term: 

Sec. 7.7 
Power Series with Complex Terms 
551 
The integrals occurring here have already been calculated [cf. Eq. (76), 
p. 279]. If we substitute their values, we have 
K -
- -
1 + - k 2 + -
k4 
1
,,/2 
dcf> 
1T [ 
(1)2 
(1 . 3)2 
-
0 
V(1 - k 2 sin2 cf» 
- 2 
2, 
2·4 
( 1 . 3 . 5)2 
] 
+ --- k 6 + .... 
2·4·6 
7.7 Power Series with Complex Terms 
a. Introduction of Complex Terms into Power Series. 
Complex Representations of the Trigonometric Functions 
The similarity between certain power series representing functions 
which are apparently unrelated led Euler to a purely formal connection 
between them by giving complex values, in particular, pure imaginary 
values, to the variable x. We shall first describe Euler's formal, but 
most striking and fruitful discovery, unhindered by questions of rigor. We 
shall then indicate a more rigorous justification. 
The first relation of this sort is obtained if we replace the quantity x 
in the series for eX by a pure imaginary i~, where ~ is a real number. If 
we recall the fundamental equation for the imaginary unit i, that is, 
i2 = -1, from which i3 = -i, i4 = 1, is = i, ... follows, then on 
separating the real and the imaginary terms of the series, we obtain 
ei 4> = (1 _ ~2 + ~4 _ 
~6 + _ ... ) 
2! 
4! 
6! 
or in another form, 
(11) 
+ i(~ _ ~3 + ~5 _ 
~7 + _ ... ), 
3! 
5! 
7! 
ei 4> = cos ~ + i sin ~. 
This is the well-known and important "Euler formula," a landmark in 
analysis; as yet it is purely formaJ.1 It is consistent with De Moivre's 
theorem (p. 105), which is expressed by the equation 
(cos ~ + i sin ~)(cos 1p + i sin 1p) = cos (~ + 1p) + i sin (~ + 1p). 
By virtue of Euler's formula this equation merely states that the 
relation 
continues to hold for pure imaginary values x = i~, Y = i1p. 
'One consequence for cf> = 1T is the formula e"i = -1, a striking relation between 
the three most important constants e, 1T and i. 

552 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
It should be stated that this Euler formula and the addition theorem 
eiqJeif/J = ei(qJ+f/J1 may be used rigorously without further justification 
simply by defining eit/> as the complex number cos cp + i sin cpo This 
definition is consistent with the ordinary rules for operating with 
exponentials. In particular, the ordinary rule for multiplying powers of 
e just furnishes simple concise expressions of the addition theorems 
of trigonometry as expressed by de Moivre's formula which in turn is 
of an entirely elementary character. Therefore we are on safe ground 
when we make use of Euler's relations without the benefit of a more 
general analysis of functions of a complex variable, as in the next 
section. 
More generally we can define the exponential function for an 
arbitrary complex exponent x + iy (where x and yare real) by the 
formula 
e,*ill = e"'eill = e"'(cos y + i sin y). 
If we replace the variable x in the power series for cos x by the pure 
imaginary ix we at once obtain the series for cosh x; this relation can 
be expressed by the equation 
(12) 
cosh x = cos ix. 
In the same way we obtain 
. hi. . 
sm x = - sm IX. 
i 
(13) 
Since Euler's formula also gives e-it/> = cos cp - i sin cp, we arrive 
at the exponential expressions for the trigonometric functiOns, 
ei '" _ e-i'" 
ei ... + e-i ... 
sin x = 
, cos x = ---'----
2i 
2 
(14) 
These are exactly analogous to the exponential expressions for the 
hyperbolic functions and are, in fact, transformed into them by the 
relations cosh x = cos ix, sinh x = ~ sin ix. 
I 
Corresponding formal relations can, of course, be obtained for 
the functions tan x, tanh x, cot x, coth x, which are connected by the 
1 
equations tanh x = -: tan ix, coth x = i cot ix. 
I 
Finally, similar relations can also be found for the inverse trigono-
metric and hyperbolic functions. For example, from 
ei ... _ e-i'" 
e2i'" -
1 
y=tanx=. 
. =----
i(e· ... + e-· ... ) 
i(e2i'" + 1) 

Sec. 7.7 
Power Series with Complex Terms 553 
we immediately find that 
2i'" 
1 + iy 
e =--. 
1 -
iy 
If we take the logarithms of both sides of this equation and then write 
x instead of y and arc tan x instead of x, we obtain the equation 
(15) 
1 
1 + ix 
arc tan x = -log --- , 
2i 
1 -
ix 
which expresses a remarkable connection between the inverse tangent 
1 
1 + x 
and the logarithm. Ifin the known power series for 2'log I _ x (p. 444) 
we replace x by ix, we actually obtain the power series for arc tan x, 
1 ( 
(iX)3 
(iX)5 
) 
arc tan x = -
ix + -- + -- + ... 
i 
3 
5 
x3 
x5 
=x--+--+ .. ·. 
3 
5 
These relations are as yet of a purely formal character and naturally 
call for a more exact statement of the meaning they are intended to 
convey. We have, however, seen above that by using proper defi-
nitions these relations acquire a satisfactorily rigorous meaning. 
*b. A Glance at the General Theory of 
Functions of a Complex Variable 
Although the purely formal point of view indicated in the last Section 
is in itself free from objection, it is still desirable to recognize in the 
preceding formulas something more than a mere formal connection. 
This goal leads to the general theory of complex functions, as (for the 
sake of brevity) we call the general theory of the so-called analytic 
functions of a complex variable. As our starting point we may use a 
general discussion of the theory of power series with complex variables 
and complex coefficients. The construction of such a theory of power 
series offers no difficulty once we define the concept of limit in the 
domain of complex numbers; in fact, it parallels the theory of real 
power series almost exactly. However, as we shall not make any use 
of these matters in what follows we shall content ourselves here by 
stating certain facts, omitting proofs. It is found that the following 

554 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
generalization of the theorem of Section 7.Sa, holds for the complex 
power series: 
If a power series converges for any complex value x = ~ whatever, then 
it converges absolutely for every value x for which Ixl < I ~I; if it diverges 
for a value x = ~,then it diverges for every value x for which Ixl > I~I. A 
power series which does not converge everywhere, but does converge for 
some other point in addition to x = 0, possesses a circle of convergence, 
that is, there exists a number p > 0 such that the series converges 
absolutely for Ixl < p and diverges for Ixl > p. 
Having once established the concept of functions of a complex 
variable represented by power series, and having developed the rules 
for operating with such functions, we can think of the functions e"', 
sin x, cos x, arc tan x, etc., of the complex variable x as simply defined 
by the power series which represent them for real values of x. 
We shall indicate by two examples how this introduction of complex 
variables illuminates the behavior of the elementary functions. 
The geometric series for 1/(1 + x2) ceases to converge when x leaves 
the interval -1 :::;; x :::;; 1, and so does the series for arc tan x, although 
there are no peculiarities in the behavior of these functions at the ends 
of the interval of convergence; in fact, they and all their derivatives are 
continuous for all real values of x. On the other hand, we can readily 
understand that the series for 1/(1 -
x2) and log (1 -
x) cease to con-
verge as x passes through the value 1, since they become infinite there. 
But the divergence of the series for the inverse tangent and the series 
00 I (_I)Vx2V for Ixl > 1 immediately becomes clear if we consider com-
v=o 
plex values of x also. For we find that when x = i the functions become 
infinite and so cannot be represented by a convergent series. Hence 
by our theorem about the circle of convergence the series must diverge 
for all values of x such that Ixl > Iii = 1; in particular, for real 
values of x the series diverge outside the interval -1 :::;; x :::;; 1. 
Another example is given by the function f(x) = e-1/z2 for x :;!: 0, 
f(O) = 0 (see p. 462), which, in spite of its completely smooth behavior, 
cannot be expanded in a Taylor series. As a matter of fact, this function 
ceases to be continuous if we take pure imaginary values of x = i~ 
into account. 'The function then takes the form ellel and increases 
beyond all bounds as ~ -- O. It is therefore clear that no power series in 
x can represent this function for all complex values of x in a neighbor-
hood of the origin, no matter how small a neighborhood we choose. 
These remarks on the theory of functions and power series of a 
complex variable must suffice for us here. 

Sec. A.I 
Multiplication and Division of Series 555 
Appendix 
* A.I Multiplication and Division of Series 
a. Multiplication of Absolutely Convergent Series 
00 
00 
Let 
A =La .. 
B =L b. 
.=0 
.=0 
be two absolutely convergent series. Together with these we consider the 
corresponding convergent series of absolute values 
00 
00 
A = L la.1 
and 
D = L Ibpl. 
.=0 
.=0 
We further put 
and 
n-l 
An = La .. 
v=O 
n-l 
n-l 
n-l 
Bn = L b.. An = L lapl, 
Dn = L Ib.1 
v=O 
v=O 
v=O 
00 
We assert that the series L Cn is absolutely convergent, and that its sum 
is equal to AB. 
v=o 
To prove this, we write down the series 
aobo + albo + albl + aObl + a2bo + a2bl 
+ a2b2 + alb2 + aOb2 + ... + anbo + anbl 
+ ... + anbn + ... + albn + aobn + ... , 
the n2th partial sum of which is AnBn> and we assert that it converges 
absolutely. For the partial sums of the corresponding series with absolute 
values increase monotonically; the n2th partial sum is equal to AnDn, which 
is less than AD (and which tends to AD). The series with absolute values 
therefore converges, and the series written down above converges absolutely. 
The sum of the series is obviously AB, since its n2th partial sum is AnBn, 
which tends to AB as n ~ 00. We now interchange the order of the terms, 
which is permissible for absolutely convergent series, and bracket successive 
terms together. In a convergent series we may bracket successive terms 
together in as many places as we desire without disturbing the convergence or 
altering the sum of the series, for if we bracket together, say, all the terms 
(an+! + an+2 + ... + am), then when we form the partial sums we shall 
omit those partial sums that originally fell between Sn and Sm, which does not 
affect the convergence or change the value of the limit. Also, if the series 
was absolutely convergent before the brackets were inserted, it remains 

556 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
absolutely convergent. Since the series 
co ! c. = (aobo) + (aobl + albo) + (aob2 + albl + a~o) + ... 
• ~O 
is formed in this way from the series written down above, the required proof 
is complete. 
*h. Multiplication and Division of Power Series 
The principal use of our theorem is found in the theory of power series. 
The following assertion is an immediate consequence of it: The product of 
the two power series 
co 
! a,x' and 
.~O 
CXl 
!b.x· 
,~O 
is represented in the interval of convergence common to the two power 
CXl 
series by a third power series! c.x·, whose coefficients are given by 
.~O 
c. = aob, + alb._1 + ... + a.bo. 
* As for the division of power series, we can likewise represent the quotient 
CXl 
of the two power series above by a power series! q.x', provided bo, the 
,~O 
constant term in the denominator, does not vanish. (In the latter case such 
a representation is in general impossible; for it could not converge at x = 0 
on account of the vanishing of the denominator, whereas on the other hand, 
every power series must converge at x = 0.) The coefficients of the power 
series 
CXl ! q.x· 
,~O 
CXl 
CXl 
00 
can be calculated by remembering that! q,x' . ! b.x' = ! a.x', so that 
.~O 
.~O 
.~O 
the following equations must be true: 
ao = qobo, 
al = qobl + qlbo, 
a2 = qob2 + q1bl + q~o, 
a. = qob. + qlb._1 + ... + q.bo. 
From the first of these equations qo is readily found, from the second we find 
the value ql> from the third (by using the values of qo and ql) we find the value 
q2' etc. In order to give strict justification for the expression of the quotient 
of two power series by the third power series we have to investigate the 
CXl 
convergence of the formally-calculated power series! q.x". However, we 
,~O 

Sec. A.2 
Infinite Series and Improper Integrals 557 
shall make no further use of the result and content ourselves with the state-
ment that the series for the quotient does actually converge in some interval 
about the origin. The proof is omitted. 
A.2 Infinite Series and Improper Integrals 
The infinite series and the concepts developed in connection with 
them have simple applications and analogies in the theory of improper 
integrals (cf. Chapter 4, p. 301). We confine ourselves to the case of a 
convergent integral with an infinite interval of integration, sayan 
integral of the form L"'f(X) dx. If we divide the interval of integration 
by a sequence of numbers Xo = 0, Xl' ... tending monotonically to 
+ 00, we can write the improper integral in the form 
L'" f(x) dx = a1 + a2 + ... , 
where each term of our infinite series is an integral; 
i "'1 
f"" 
a1 = 
f(x) dx, a2 = 
f(x) dx, ... , 
o 
"'1 
and so on. This is true no matter how we choose the points xv. We 
can therefore relate the idea of a convergent improper integral to that 
of an infinite series in many ways. 
It is especially convenient to choose the points Xv in such a way that the 
integrand does not change sign within any individual subinterval. The 
'" 
series! lavl then corresponds to the integral of the absolute value of 
v=l 
our function, 
L'" If(x)1 dx. 
We are thus naturally led to the following concept: an improper 
integral L"'f(X) dx is said to be absolutely convergent if the integral 
L '" If(x) I dx converges. Otherwise, if our integral exists at all, we say 
that it is conditionally convergent. 
Some of the integrals considered earlier (pp. 307 to 309), such as 
f"'_1_2 dx, f'" e-"" dx, r(x) = fo'" e-tt",-l dt, 
Jo 1 + X 
Jo 
J 
are absolutely convergent. 

558 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
On the other hand, the important "Dirichlet" integral 
J i OOsinxd 
l'iAsinxd 
= --
x = 1m 
--
x, 
o 
X 
A~oo 0 
X 
studied on p. 309, is the typical example of a conditionally convergent 
integral. The simplest proof of convergence is by reduction to an 
absolutely convergent integral: 
We write sin x = (1 - cos x)' = 
2(sin2 xj2)' and use integration by parts, transforming J into the abso-
lutely convergent form 
J = 2!OO(sin2 ~)l dx. 
II 
2 x2 
(Note that the new integrand approaches continuously the limit t for 
x __ 0 and vanishes of the order x-2 for x -- 00.) 
* A different proof of the convergence is obtained if we subdivide the 
interval from 0 to A at the points Xv = "m(v = 0, 1,2, ... , f-tA)' where 
f-tA is the largest possible integer for which f-tA'IT ~ A. We therefore 
divide the integral into terms of the form 
i
v.. 
sin x 
av = 
-- dx, 
for 
(v-I)" x 
v = 1,2, ... , 
and a remainder RA of the form 
f
A sin x 
--dx (0 ~ A -
f-tA'IT < 'IT). 
PA1T 
X 
Obviously, the quantities av have alternating signs, since sin x is 
alternately positive and negative in consecutive intervals. Moreover, 
la"+11 < IOvl; for on applying the transformation x = ~ -
'IT, we have 
i
V1T 
Isin xl 
f(V+1)1T Isin (~ -
'IT)I 
f(V+1)1T Isin ~I 
lavl = 
-- dx = 
d~ = 
-- d~ 
(V-I)1T 
X 
V1T 
~ -
'IT 
V1T 
~ -
'IT 
f
(V+I)1T Isin ~I 
> 
-- d~ = la V+1I. 
V" 
~ 
Hence by Leibnitz's test we see that ~av converges. Moreover, the 
remainder RA has the absolute value 
I JA sin x I J(PA+l)1T Isin xl 
IRAI = 
-dx ~ 
--dx 
p,,1T x 
p"" 
x 
1 J(PA+l)1T 
2 
~-
Isinxldx=-, 
f-tA'IT p"" 
f-tA'IT 

Sec. A.3 
Infinite Products 559 
and this tends to 0 as A increases. Thus, if we let A tend to 00 in the 
equation i
A sin x 
-- dx = a l + a2 + a3 + ... + aliA + RA , 
e 
x 
the right-hand side tends to Lavas a limit, and our integral is convergent. 
But the convergence is not absolute for 
I I I
V" 
Isin xl d 
2 
a v > 
--
x =-, 
(v-I)" V1T 
V1T 
so that L lavl diverges. 
* A.3 Infinite Products 
In the introduction to this chapter (p. 511), we stated that infinite 
series are only one way, although a particularly important one, of 
representing numbers or functions by infinite processes. As an example 
of another such process, we consider infinite products. No proofs will 
be given. 
On p. 281 we encountered Wallis's product, 
1T 
224466 
2 
1 3 3 5 5 7 
in which the number 1Tj2 is expressed as an "infinite product." Gener-
ally speaking, by the value of the infinite product 
00 II a v = a l . a2 . a3 . a4 .•. 
v~I 
we mean the limit of the sequence of "partial products" 
provided it exists. 
The factors aI' a2, a3, ... , of course, may also be functions of a 
variable x. An especially interesting example is the "infinite product" 
for the function sin x, 
(16) 
sin 1TX = 1TX(1 _ X2) (1 _ X2) (1 _ X2) ... 
12 
22 
32 
' 
which we shall obtain in Section 8.5, p. 603. 
The infinite product for the zeta function plays a very important role 
in the theory of numbers. In order to retain the notation usual in the theory 
of numbers we here denote the independent variable by s, and we define the 

560 Infinite Sums and Products 
zeta function for s > 1, following Riemann, by the expression 
00 
1 
'(s) =! ... 
n=l n 
Ch. 7 
We know (Section 7.2c, p. 525) that the series on the right converges if s > 1. 
If P is any number greater than 1, we obtain the equation 
1 
1 
1 
1 
--=1 +-+- +- + ... 
1 
p" 
p2s 
pas 
1--
ps 
by expanding the left-hand side in a geometric series with the quotient p-s• 
If we imagine this series written down for all the prime numbers Pt, P2' Pa, ... 
in increasing order of magnitude, and all the equations thus formed multiplied 
together, we obtain on the left a product of the form 
1 
1 
1 - P1-s 1 - Ps-s 
Without stopping to justify the process, we multiply together the series on 
the right-hand sides of our equations; we obtain a sum of terms 
Plklsp;,kl"p;k3 8 ••• = (pllP2kzPak3 ... )-8, 
where k1' ks, k3' ... are any nonnegative integers: also we remember that by 
an elementary theorem each integer n > 1 can be expressed in one and only 
one way as a product of powers of different prime numbers n = PI kIpS ks •••• 
Thus we find that the product on the right is again the function Us), and so we 
obtain the remarkable "product form" of Euler 
(17) 
111 
'(s) = 1 
-8 • 1 
-s . 1 
-8 .... 
- PI 
- Ps 
- Pa 
This "product form," the derivation of which we have only briefly sketched 
here, is actually an expression of the zeta function as an infinite product, since 
the number of prime numbers is infinite. 
In the general theory of infinite products one usually excludes the 
case where the product a1a2 ••• a;. has the limit zero. Hence it is 
specially important that none of the factors an should vanish. 
In 
order that the product may converge, the factors an must 
accordingly tend to I as n increases. Since we can if necessary omit a 
finite number of factors (this has no bearing on the question of con-
vergence), we may assume an > O. The following almost trivial theorem 
applies to this case: 
A necessary and sufficient condition for the convergence of the 
00 
00 
product IT a., where a. > 0, is that the series! log a. should converge . 
• =1 
n 
.=1 
For the partial sums! log a. = log (a1a2 ••• an) of this series will tend 
.=1 

Sec. A.3 
Infinite Products 561 
to a definite limit if, and only if, the partial products a1a2 ••• an possess 
a positive limit, as a consequence of the continuity of the logarithm. 
In studying convergence the following sufficient condition usually 
applies, where a. = 1 + 0(.. The product 
00 II (1 + 0(.) 
.=1 
converges, if the series 
converges and no factor (1 + 0(.) is zero. In the proof we may assume, 
after omission of a finite number of factors if necessary, that each 
10(.1 < t. Then we have 1 -
10(.1 > t. By the mean value theorem 
log (1 + h) = log (I + h) -
log 1 = h/(l + ()h) with 0 < () < 1. 
Therefore 
Ilog (1 + 0(,)1 = I 0(. I ~ 10(.1 
~ 210(.1, 
1 + ()O(. 
1 -
10(.1 
00 
and so the convergence of the series I log (1 + 0(.) follows from the 
00 
.=1 
convergence of I 10(.1 . 
• =1 
From our criterion it follows that the infinite product (16) above for 
sin 1TX converges for all values of x except for x = 0, ±1, ±2, ... , where 
factors of the product are zero. As to the Riemann ~-function, for p z 2 and 
s > 1 we readily find that 
1 
1 
-1 
-s = 1 + -8--1' 
-p 
P -
1 
2 
0<-'--1 <-so 
F-
p 
1 
Now if we let p assume all prime values, the series ~ ps must converge, since 
00 1 
its terms form only a part of the convergent series Is. The convergence 
V=l v 
of the product in Eq. (17) for s > 1 is thus proved. From the fact that the 
series for ~(s) for s = 1 (that is, the harmonic series) diverges, we can draw 
the remarkable conclusion that the series of reciprocal prime numbers, that 
is, the series 
00 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
I -=-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ ... 
k=1 Pk 
2 
3 
5 
7 
11 
13 
17 
19 
diverges. (Incidentally, this shows that the number of primes is infinite.) 
Indeed, if the series of reciprocal primes were convergent, then also the series 

562 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
with terms 
would be convergent, since h 
~ 2 and 
Then, by our test, also the infinite product 
00 
00 
1 
00 
( 
1 
1 
) 
II (1 + ock ) = II 
-1 = II 1 + - + "2 + ... 
k=l 
k=l 1 - Pk 
k=l 
Pk 
Pk 
would be convergent; but then clearly the harmonic series would converge as 
well which is impossible. 
* A.4 Series Involving Bernoulli Numbers 
So far we have given no expansions in power series for certain elementary 
functions, for example, tan x. The reason is that the numerical coefficients 
which occur are not of any simple form. We can express these coefficients, 
and those in the series for a number of other functions, in terms of the so-
called Bernoulli numbers. 
These are curious rational numbers, with a 
somewhat hidden law of formation, which occur in many parts of analysis. 
The simplest way to arrive at them is by expanding the function 
x 
I 
-----
=--------~----
eX -1 
x 
x 2 
1+-+-+'" 
2! 
3! 
in a formal power series of the form 
x 
00 B * 
-- = L _v-xv. 
eX -
1 
v=o v! 
If we write this equation in the form 
00 B * 
x = (eX -
1) L ~ 
XV 
v=o v. 
and substitute on the right the power series for eX -
I, we obtain for the Bn *, 
a recurrence relation 
( n + I) * 
(n + 1) * 
(n + 1) * 
(n + 1) * 
1 
Bn + 
2 
Bn- 1 + 
3 
Bn- 2 + ... + n + 1 Bo 
= 0 

Sec. A.4 
Series Involving Bernoulli Numbers 563 
for n > 0, Bo * = 1 from which the Bi * can easily be calculated successively. 
These rational numbers are called Bernoulli numbers.l They are rational 
since in their formation only rational operations are concerned; as we easily 
recognize, they vanish for all odd indices other than v = 1. The first few are 
Bo* = 1, 
Bl* = -t, B2* = -1, 
B4* = -3\, B6* = i2, 
Bs * = -fo, BIO * = oliff, •.• 
We must content ourselves with a brief hint as to how these numbers 
are involved in the power series in question. First, by making use of the 
transformation 
B* 
x 
x 
x eX +l 
x etX+e-tx 
+_2_x2 + ... =--- +- -- '-- -- '--;-:-:--;-:: 
2! 
eX -
1 
2 - 2 eX -
1 - 2 etx - e-tx ' 
we obtain 
x 
x 
ooB* 
- coth -
= L ~ 
x2v 
2 
2 
v~o (2v)! 
. 
(This formula proves that B2~+1 = ° for v > 0, since (xf2)coth(xf2) is an 
even function of x.) 
If we replace x by 2x, we have the series 
00 22v B * 
x coth x = L __ 2_v_ x2v 
v~o (2v)! 
' 
valid, as can be shown, for Ixl < 1T, from which, by replacing x by -ix, we 
obtain (cf. p. 552) 
00 
22vB * 
x cot x = L (-I)V __ 
2v_ x2v 
v~o 
(2v)!' 
Ixl < 1T. 
By means of the equation 2 cot 2x = cot x - tan x we now obtain the 
series 
00 
22v(22V -
1) 
tan x = L (_1)V-l 
B *x2v- 1 
v~l 
(2v)! 
2v 
, 
1T 
which holds for Ixl < 2' 
For further information we refer the reader to Chapter 8 and to more 
detailed treatises. 2 
1 In a slightly different notation (p. 623), the basic formula will be written 
x 
00 
B 
-- = 1 -!x + L (_1)v+1_V_X2V. 
eX -
1 
v~1 
(2v)! 
2 See, for example, K. Knopp, Theory and Application of Infinite Series, p. 183, 
Blackie & Son, Ltd., 1928 and K. Knopp, Infinite Sequences and Series, Dover 
Publications, 1956. 

564 Infinite Sums and Products 
SECTION 7.1, page 511 
1. Prove that 
PROBLEMS 
<Xl 
1 
1 
1 
.~ v(v + 1) = t:2 + 2 . 3 + ... + = 1 
<Xl 
1 
[cf. Problems 1.6, 12(a)] and use the result to prove! 2 converges. 
0=1 v 
Ch. 7 
2. Use the result of Problem 1 to obtain upper and lower bounds for 
<Xl 1 
! 2· 
.=1 V 
<Xl 
2v + 3 
3. Prove that ! (-1)· ( 
1)( 
2) = 1. 
.=0 
v + 
v + 
1 
1 
1 
4. For what values of ex does the series 1 - -
+ - - - + ... converge? 
2a 
3a 
4a 
• 
<Xl 
5. Prove that if ! 
a. converges, and Sn = a1 + a2 + . . . + an> then the 
sequence 
.=1 
<Xl 
also converges, and has ~ a. as its limit . 
• =1 
. ~ (2n 
2n - 1) 
6. Is the serIes k 
-2--1 - -2--
convergent? 
n=1 
n + 
n 
<Xl 
7. Is the series ! (-1). ~1 convergent? 
.=1 
V + 
<Xl 
<Xl 
8. Prove that if ! a.2 converges, so does ! 
~ . 
• =1 
.=1 V 
9. (a) If an is a monotonic increasing sequence with positive terms, when 
d 
h
·l I I ?  
oes t e serIes - + -
+ -- + ... converge. 
a1 
a1a2 
a1a2a3 
(b) Give an example of a monotone decreasing sequence with lim an = 1 
for which the series diverges. 
n-+<Xl 
(c) Show that if decreasing sequences are allowed, then it is possible to 
obtain convergent sums even when lim an = 1. 
n-+<Xl 
<Xl 
10. If the series ! a. with decreasing positive terms converges, then 
lim nan = o. 
.=1 
n-+<Xl 

Problems 565 
<Xl 
11. Show that the series ! sin ~ diverges. 
v=l 
v 
12. Prove that if ~av converges and if bI> b2• ba • ••. is a bounded monotonic 
sequence of numbers, then ~avbv converges. Moreover, prove that if S = 
~avbv and if ~av ~ M. then lSI ~ Mb1• 
13. A sequence {an} is said to be of bounded variation if the series 
converges. 
(a) Prove that if the sequence {an} is of bounded variation, then the 
sequence {an} converges. 
(b) Find a divergent infinite series ~ai whose elements ai constitute a 
sequence which is of bounded variation. 
(c) Prove the following generalization of Abel's convergence test (see page 
515) due to Dedekind: 
The series ~aiPi is convergent if ~ai oscillates between finite bounds and 
{Pi} is a null sequence which is of bounded variation. 
(d) Prove the convergence of the following infinite series: 
(a) i sin nx (_l)n; 
n=2 log n 
(b),! cos nx (_l)n 
n=2 log n 
for x any fixed real number. 
14. Discuss the convergence or divergence of the following series: 
(a)! (-I)v 
(d)! sin vO 
v 
v 
(b) .! ( -l)v cos (O/v) 
(e) ! ( -1)v cos vO 
v 
v 
(c)! cos vO 
v 
(j)! (-I)v sin vO. 
v 
15. Find the sums of the following derangements of the series 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1--+---+---+'" 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
for log 2: 
(a) 1 - I - ! + 1- - l - i + ! - -l'-o - -i2-- + - - .... 
(b) 1 + 1 + ! - t - ! - l + + + .... 
16. Find whether the following series converge or diverge: 
(a) 1 + I - 1- + ! + ! - l + t + l - t + + - ... . 
(b) 1 + I - i + ! + ! - i + t + i - t + + - ... . 
SECTION 7.2, page 520 
<Xl 
1 
1. Prove that ! 
converges when 
IX > 1 and diverges when 
IX ~ 1. 
v=2 v(log V)II 

566 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
'" 
1 
2. Prove that! I 
(I 
I 
) converges when ex > 1 and diverges 
when ex ~ 1. 
.=3 11 og 11 og og 11 " 
3. Prove that if n is an arbitrary integer greater than 1 
'" 
n 
! ~ =Iogn, 
.=1 
11 
where a.n is defined as follows: 
n _ {1 if n is not a factor of 11, 
a. -
-en - 1) if n is a factor of 11. 
~ log (11 + 1) - log 11 
4. Show that k 
(1 
)2 
converges . 
• =2 
og 11 
~ 
1·2·3"'11 
S. Show that k 
( 
1)( 
2) 
( 
) converges if ex > 1 and 
.=1 ex + 
ex + . .. ex + 11 
diverges if ex ~ 1. 
*6. By comparison with the series! ~, prove the following test: 
.=1 11 
log (Illanl) 
. 
If 
I 
> 1 + " for some fixed number " > 0 Independent of n, 
ogn 
and for every sufficiently large n, the series ~a. converges absolutely; if 
log (1/1a .. 1) 
. 
I 
< 1 - " for every sufficIently large n and some number " > 0 
ogn 
independent of n, the series ~a. does not converge absolutely. 
7. Show that the series! 1 - -_ converges . 
"'( 
1)' 
• =1 
"';11 
8. For what values of ex do the following series converge? 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
(a) 1 - - + - - - + - - - + - .... 
2" 
3 
4" 
5 
6" 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
(b) 1 + 3" -
2" + 5" + 7" - 4" + - .... 
9. By comparison with the series ~ (l 1 ) ,prove the following test: 
11 og1l" 
The series ~ la.1 converges or diverges according as 
log (lIn lanl) 
log log n 
is greater than 1 + " or less than 1 -
" for every sufficiently large n. 
10. Derive the nth root test from the test of Problem 6. 
11. Prove the following comparison test: if the series ~b. of positive terms 
converges, and 

Problems 
'.>67 
from a certain term onward, the series l::av is absolutely convergent; if l::bv 
diverges and 
from a certain term onwards, the series l::av is not absolutely convergent. 
*12. By comparison with 1 ~, prove "Raabe's" test: 
v=l v 
The series l:: lavl converges or diverges according as 
is greater than 1 + E or less than 1 -
E for every sufficiently large n and for 
some E > 0 independent of n. 
13. By comparison with l:: _(_1_) ,prove the following test: 
v log v '" 
The series l:: lavl converges or diverges according as 
is greater than 1 + E or less than 1 -
E for every sufficiently large n. 
14. Prove Gauss's test: 
If 
where IRnl is bounded and E > 0 is independent of n, the l:: lavl converges 
if ft > 1, diverges if It :s; 1. 
15. Test the following "hypergeometric" series for convergence or diver-
gence: 
oc 
oc(oc + 1) 
oc(oc + 1)(oc + 2) 
(a) p + fJ(fJ + 1) + fJ(fJ + 1)(f3 + 2) + .... 
(b) 1 + oc . fJ + oc( oc + 1) . fJ(fJ + 1) 
1 . Y 
1 . 2 . y(y + 1) 
oc( oc + 1)( oc + 2) . fJ(fJ + 1 )(fJ + 2) 
+ 
+ .,. 
1 . 2 . 3 . y(y + 1)(y + 2) 
. 
SECTION 7.4, page 529 
1. The sequence !n(x), n = 1,2, ... , is defined in the interval 0 :s; x :s; 1 
by the equations 
fo(x) == 1, 
.fn(x) = V xjn_1(x). 

568 Infinite Sums and Products 
Ch. 7 
(a) Prove that in the interval 0 ~ x ~ 1 the sequence converges to a 
continuous limit. 
*(b) Prove that the convergence is uniform. 
*2. Let lo(x) be continuous in the interval 0 ~ x ~ a. The sequence of 
functions In(x) is defined by 
In(x) = f'ln-l(t) dt, 
n = 1,2, .... 
Prove that in any fixed interval 0 ~ x ~ a the sequence converges uniformly 
to O. 
*3. Let In(x), n = 1,2, ... , be a sequence of functions with continuous 
derivatives in the interval a ~ x ~ b. Prove that if In(x) converges at each 
point of the interval and the inequality I In' (x) I < M (where M is a constant) 
is satisfied for all values of n and x, then the convergence is uniform. 
4. (a) Show that the series ! ~ converges uniformly for x ~ 1 + " with 
.=1 v 
" > 0 any fixed number. 
(b) Show that the derived series -! lo~ v converges uniformly for 
v 
x ~ 1 + " with" a fixed positive number. 
. 
cosvx 
*5. Show that the senes ~ --, IX > 0, converges uniformly for 
"'" 
v'" 
" ~ x ~ 21T -
" with" any small positive value. 
6. The series 
x-I 1 (x - 1)3 
1 (x - 1)5 
--+--- +--- + ... 
x+l 
3 x+l 
5 x+l 
converges uniformly for " ~ x ~ N when ", N are fixed positive numbers. 
7. Find the regions in which the following series are convergent: 
(b) ~ (v!)2xv 
"'" (2v)! • 
a' 
(c) ~ -, a < 1. 
"'" v'" 
a' 
(d) ~ -, a> 1. 
"'" v'" 
(e) ~ log v . 
"'" v'" 
*8. Prove that if the Dirichlet series! a; converges for x = xo, it converges 
v 
for any x > xo; if it diverges for x = xo, it diverges for any x < xo. Thus there 
is an "abscissa of convergence" such that for any greater value of x the 
series converges, and for any smaller value of x the series diverges. 
9. If ~ a. converges for x = xo, the derived series _ "" a.log v converges 
"'" v" 
"'" 
v'" 
for any x > Xo' 

Problems 569 
SECTION 7.5, page 540 
1. If the interval of convergence of the power series :Eanxn is Ixl < p, and 
that of :Ebnxn is Ixl < p', where p < p', what is the interval of convergence 
of :E(an + bn)xn? 
2. If a v > 0 and :Eav converges, then 
lim I avxv = I avo 
al'--+l-O 
3. If a v > 0 and :Eav diverges, 
lim I avxv = 
eX). 
",--+1-0 
*4. Prove Abel's theorem: 
If :EavXv converges, then :Eavxv converges uniformly for 0 ~ x ~ X. 
*5. If :EavXV converges, then lim :Eavxv = :EavXv. 
ll:~X-O 
*6. By multiplication of power series prove that 
(a) e"'eY = e"*Y. 
(b) sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x. 
7. Using the binomial series, calculate V2 to four decimal places. 
8. Let an be any sequence of real numbers, and S the set of all limit points 
of the an. We denote the least upper bound p of S by P = lim an' Show 
co 
that the power series I cnxn converges for Ixl < p and diverges for Ixl > p, 
n=O 
where 
APPENDIX, page 555 
1. Prove that the power series for v (1 -
x) still converges when x = 1. 
2. Prove that for every positive € there is a polynomial in x which represents 
v (1 -
x) in the interval 0 ::s;; x ::s;; 1 with an error less than €. 
3. By setting x = 1 -
t2 in Problem 2. prove that for every positive € there 
is a polynomial in t which represents It I in the interval -1 ::s;; t ~ 1 with an 
error less than €. 
4. (a) Prove that if [(x) is continuous for a ~ x ~ b, then for every € > 0 
there exists a polygonal function tp(x) (that is, a continuous function whose 
graph consists of a finite number of rectilinear segments meeting at corners) 
such that I[(x) -
tp(x)1 < € for every x in the interval. 
(b) Prove that every polygonal function tp(x) can be represented by a 
sum tp(x) = a + bx + :ECi Ix - Xii, where the x;'s are the abscissae of 
the corners. 
5. WEIERSTRASS' ApPROXIMATION THEOREM. Prove on the basis of the last 
statement that if [(x) is continuous in a ~ x ~ b, then for every positive € 
there exists a polynomial P(x) such that I[(x) - P(x) I < € for all values of 
x in the interval a ~ x ~ b. 
Hint: Approximate [(x) by linear combinations of the form (x - xr) + 
Ix - xrl. 

570 Infinite Sums and Products 
6. Prove that the following infinite products converge: 
00 
(a) II (1 + (t)2n); 
00 n3 -
1 
(b) II n3 + 1 ; 
n=2 
(c) n 
(1 _ :2!) , 
if Izl < 1. 
7. Prove by the methods of the text that ft (1 +~) diverges. 
8. Prove the identity 
00 
1 
II (1 + X2v) = --
v=1 
1 - x 
for Ixl < 1. 
Ch.7 
* 9. Consider all the natural numbers which represented in the decimal 
system have no 9 among their digits. Prove that the sum of the reciprocals 
of these numbers converge. 
10. (a) Prove that for s > 1, 
111 
1 - - + - - - + ... = (1 -
21- 8H(S) 
28 
38 
48 
' 
where ~(s) is the Zeta function defined on p. 560. 
(b) Use this identity to show that lim (s -
l)~(s) = 1. 
8~1+ 
11. Integral test for convergence 
(a) Letf(x) be positive and decreasing for x;;;. 1. Prove that the improper 
integral roo f(x) dx and the infinite series ~:t(k) either both converge or 
J1 
k~ 
both diverge. 
(b) Prove that in either case the limit 
!~~ (in f(X) dx - k~!(k)) 
exists. 
(c) Apply this test to prove that the series 
00 
1 
~2 nlogrt.n 
converges for (1. > 1 and diverges for (1. ~ 1. 

8 
Trigonometric Series 
The functions represented by power series, or as Lagrange called 
them, the "analytic functions," play indeed a central role in analysis. 
But the class of analytic functions is too restricted in many instances. 
It was therefore an event of major importance for all of mathematics 
and for a great variety of applications when Fourier in his "Theorie 
analytique de la chaleur"l observed and illustrated by many examples 
the fact that convergent trigonometric series of the form 
(1) 
a 
0() 
f(x) = ~ + !(av cos 1IX + bv sin 1IX) 
2 
v=! 
with constant coefficients av' h. are capable of representing a wide class 
of "arbitrary" functions f(x), a class which includes essentially every 
function of specific interest, whether defined geometrically by mecha-
nical means, or in any other way: even functions possessing jump 
discontinuities, or obeying different laws of formation in different 
intervals, can thus be expressed. 
Soon after Fourier's dramatic discovery the "Fourier series" were 
recognized not only as a most powerful tool for physics and mechanics, 
but just as much as a fruitful source of many beautiful purely mathe-
matical results. Cauchy, and especially Dirichlet, in the years between 
1820 and 1830, provided a solid basis for Fourier's somewhat heuristic 
and incomplete reasoning, making the subject as accessible as it 
is important. 
1 See the translation: The Analytical Theory of Heat, by Joseph Fourier, republished, 
Dover Publications, 1955. 
571 

S72 
Trigonometric Series 
Ch.B 
In spite of the "arbitrariness" of the functions expressible by trigono-
metrical series they are inherently subjected to the condition of perio-
dicity with the period 2'IT, since each term of the series has this period. 
But, as we shall see, this restriction is inessential as soon as we consider 
a function merely in a finite interval from which we can easily extend 
it as a periodic function. 
This chapter provides an elementary introduction to the theory of 
Fourier series, leaving aside more advanced refinements. 
After some preliminary discussion of periodic functions we shall 
prove the main theorem establishing the validity of the trigonometric 
expansion for a wide class of functions. 
In the subsequent sections we shall discuss somewhat more advanced 
supplementary topics such as uniform and absolute convergence of the 
Fourier series and polynomial approximation of arbitrary continuous 
functions. In the Appendix we shall discuss the theory of Bernoulli's 
polynomials and their applications. 
8.1. Periodic Functions 
a. General Remarks. Periodic Extension 
of a Function 
The functions sin nx and cos nx are periodic functions of x with the 
common period 2'IT; thus any finite or convergent infinite sum of the 
type (1) is also periodic with period 2'IT. We now make some general 
observations concerning periodic functions, amplifying those of Chap-
ter 4. p. 336. 
Periodicity of a functionj(x) with the period T is expressed by the 
equation 
(2a) 
j(x + T) = j(x), 
valid for all values of X.I Having the period Timplies thatj(x) also has 
the periods ±T, ±2T, ... , ±mT, . .. , and 
(2b) 
j(x ± mT) = j(x) 
for all integers m. 
1 In representing periodic functions it is often convenient to think of the independent 
variable x as a point on the circumference of a circle instead of on a straight line. 
For a function [(x) with the period 27T, we consider the angle x at the center of a 
circle of unit radius, included between an arbitrary initial radius and the radius to a 
variable point on the circumference; then the periodicity of [(x) means that to each 
point on the circumference there corresponds just one value of the function, although 
the angle x itself is determined only within multiples of 27T. 

Sec. 8.1 
Periodic Functions 573 
In special casesf(x) may also happen to have a shorter period. For 
example, the function sin(47TxIT) has the period T as well as the smaller 
period T12. 
As we saw already in Chapter 4, p. 337, a function f(x) defined in a 
closed interval a :::;; x :::;; b, can be extended as a periodic function with 
period T = b -
a for all values of x by defining the function in succes-
sive adjacent intervals of length T outside the original interval 
a :::;; x :::;; b by the periodicity relation 
(2c) 
f(x + nT) = f(x), 
n = ±1, ±2, .... 
The extended function is neither defined uniquely nor necessarily 
continuously at the end points x = a + nT = b + (n -
I)T of our 
intervals of length T. We must admit functions f(x) with jump dis-
continuities at points x = ~, which are continuous on either side of ~ 
but not necessarily defined or continuous at the point ~ itself. 
Then the following notations and definition of f(~) will be useful 
throughout this chapter: we denote the right-hand limit and the left-
hand limit off(x) at x = ~ by 
(3a) 
f(~ + 0) = limf(~ + 102), 
£-+0 
(3b) 
f(~ -
0) = limf(~ -
102); 
it is convenient to assign by definition, to f as its value at the point of 
discontinuity ~ itself the mean value 
(4) 
f(~) = Hf(~ + 0) + f(~ -
0)] 
disregarding whatever value f(~) may have had originally. 
With this convention there is no restriction on extending our 
original function from a closed interval a :::;; x :::;; b periodically to all 
values of x even in cases wheref(a) :rf feb). We need pay attention only 
to the values off(x) at the jump discontinuities, arising in particular if 
the originally defined values off(a) andf(b) do not coincide; to define 
the periodic extension we have to use the mean value Hf(a) + feb)] in 
place of the values f(a) andf(b). 
h. Integrals Over a Period 
The graph of a periodic functionf(x) clearly has the same shape in 
any two consecutive intervals corresponding to a period. This implies 
the important fact that for a periodic function f(x) of period T and for 
arbitrary a 
(5) 
J
T~a 
(T 
~a f(x) dx = Jo f(x) dx, 

574 Trigonometric Series 
Ch. B 
or in words : the integral of a periodic function over a period interval 
of length T always has the same value no matter where the interval 
lies. 
To prove this fact we need only notice that by virtue of the equation 
I(~ - T) = 1m the substitution x = ~ -
T yields, for any IX, fl, 
y 
f.fJ 
f.fJ+T 
J.fJ+T 
f(x) dx = 
f(~) d~ = 
f(x) dx. 
a 
~ T 
~T 
Figure 8.1 To illustrate the integral over a whole period. 
In particular, for IX = -a and fl = 0 
and hence 
fa f(x) dx = f: a f(x) dx 
L:-af(X) dx = f~a f(x) dx + iT-af(X) dx 
=fT f(x) dx +iT-af(X) dx 
T-a 
0 
= iT f(x) dx, 
oX 
as stated. Recalling the geometrical meaning of the integral, the state-
ment is made obvious by Fig. 8.1. 
c. Harmonic Vibrations 
The simplest periodic functions from which we shall construct the 
most general ones are the functions a sin wx and a cos wx, or more 

Sec. 8.1 
Periodic Functions 575 
generally a sin w(x -
~) and a cos w(x -
~), where a (;;::: 0), w (> 0), 
and ~ are constants. These functions represent "sinusoidal vibrations" 
or simple harmonic vibrations (or oscillations).l The period of vibra-
tion is T = 27f/w. The number w is called the circular or angular 
frequency of the vibrations2 ; since l/T = w/27f is the number of 
vibrations in unit time, or the frequency, w is the number of vibrations 
in the time 27f. The number a is called the amplitude of the vibration; 
it represents the maximum value of the function a sin w(x -
~) or 
y 
~r~--~~f-~~~~--~~~~~~--~~~L-~~-o~x 
-"2 
Figure 8.2 Sinusoidal vibrations. 
a cos w(x -
~), since both sine and cosine have the maximum value 1. 
The number w(x -
~) is called the phase and the number w~ is called 
the phase displacement or phase shift. 
We obtain the functions a sin w(x -
~) graphically by stretching 
the sine curve in the ratios 1 : w along the x-axis and a : 1 along the 
y-axis, and then translating the curve a distance ~ in the positive 
direction along the x-axis (cf. Fig. 8.2). 
By the addition formulas for the trigonometric functions we can also 
express harmonic vibrations by ex cos wx + f3 sin wx and respectively 
f3 cos wx -
ex sin wx where ex = -a sin w~ and f3 = a cos w~. Con-
versely, every function of the form ex cos wx + f3 sin wx represents a 
1 Either of these formulas taken alone (for all values of a and ;) represents the set of 
all sinusoidal vibrations; the two formulas are equivalent, since a 
sin w(x - ;) = 
acosw[x-(;+2:)} 
2 Notice that we distinguish between the frequency and the circular frequency. 

576 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.B 
sinusoidal vibration a sin w(x -
~) with the amplitude a = .J exS + fJs 
and the phase displacement w~ given by the equations ex = -a sin w~, 
fJ = a cos w~. Using the expression ex cos £ox + fJ sin £ox we immediately 
can write the sum of two or more such functions with the same circular 
frequency £0 as another vibration with circular frequency w. 
As seen earlier, periodic functions arise when we wish to represent 
closed curves parametrically. Naturally, they can be used to represent 
phenomena induced by circular motion, say a process repeated peri-
odically in tune with a flywheel; moreover they are associated with all 
phenomena of vibration. 
8.2 Superposition of Harmonic Vibrations 
a. Harmonics. Trigonometric Polynomials 
Although many vibrations are purely sinusoidal (cf. p. 405), most 
periodic motions have a more complicated character, being obtained 
by "superposition" ?f several sinusoidal vibrations. Mathematically, 
the motion of a point Oil a line with the coordinate x as a function of 
the titne may be given by a function that is the sum of a number of pure 
periodic functions of the above type. The harmonic components of the 
function are then superimposed (that is, their ordinates are added). 
In this superposition we assume that the circular frequencies (and, of 
course, the periods) of the superposed vibrations are all different, for 
the superposition of two sinusoidal vibrations with the same circular 
frequency yields another sinusoidal vibration with the same circular 
frequency as shown above. 
For the superposition of two sinusoidal vibrations with the different 
circular frequencies WI and £Os, there are two fundamentally distinct 
possibilities, depending on whether WI/WS is rational or not, or, as we 
said, whether the frequencies are commensurable or incommensurable. 
As an example of the first case we assume that the second circular 
frequency is twice that of the first: Wa = 2£01, The period of the second 
vibration is then half that of the first, 271'j2wl = Ts = T1j2, and so it 
has not only the period Ta but also the doubled period Tl> since the 
function repeats itself after this double period; the function formed by 
superposition must likewise have the period T1• The second vibration, 
with twice the circular frequency and half the period of the first, is 
called aftrs! harmonic of the first vibration (the fundamental). 
Corresponding statements are true if we introduce another vibration 
with circular frequency £03 = 3£01, Here again the function sin 3w1x 
necessarily repeats itself with the period 271'jWl = T1• Such a vibration 

Sec. 8.2 
Superposition of Harmonic Vibrations 577 
is called a second harmonic of the given vibration. 
S~milarly, we can 
consider third, fourth, ... , (n -
l)th harmonics with the circular 
frequencies w, = 4wl, Ws = 5wl, ... , Wn = nwl , and, moreover, with 
any phase displacements we wish. Every such harmonic necessarily 
repeats itself after the period TI = 21T/WI' and consequently every 
function obtained by superposing a number of vibrations, each of which 
is a harmonic of a given fundamental circular frequency WI> is itself a 
periodic function with the period 21T/W1 = T1• By superposing vibra-
tions with circular frequencies ranging from that of the fundamental to 
that of the (n -
l)th harmonic we obtain a periodic function in the 
form of a trigonometric polynomial 
(6) 
Six) = ao + !(av cos vwx + bv sin vwx). 
2 
v~l 
(The constant ao/2 which does not affect the periodicity is affixed for 
later convenience.) Since this function contains 2n + I arbitrary con-
stants av' bv' we are able to generate curves which may not at all 
resemble the original sine curves. Figures 8.3 to 8.5 are graphical 
illustrations. 
The term "harmonic" alludes to acoustics,l where a fundamental 
vibration with circular frequency W corresponds to a tone of a certain 
pitch, and the first, second, third, etc., harmonics correspond to the 
sequence of harmonics of the fundamental, that is, to the octave plus 
fifth, double octave, etc. 
In general, for the superposition of vibrations in which the circular 
frequencies have rational ratios, these circular frequencies can all 
be represented as integral multiples of a common fundamental 
frequency. 
The superposition of two vibrations having incommensurable circular 
frequencies WI and W 2, however, represents a different phenomenon. 
Here the superposition of sinusoidal vibrations is no longer periodic. 
Without going into a detailed discussion, we remark that such functions 
have an "approximately periodic" character or, as we say, are almost 
periodic. 
*h. Beats 
A final remark on the superposition of sinusoidal vibrations con-
cerns the phenomenon of so-called beats. If we superpose two vibra-
tions, each of unit amplitude but having different circular frequencies 
1 In acoustics the term overtone is also used. 

y 
Y=Yl+Y2 
' 
'=" 
Fa 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
/Y2 
\0 .... 
Yl =.; sin wx 
Y2 = .; sin 3wx 
"" 
7" 
• 
-1--77"'''''" 
" 
' 
,,,,. 
, 
.. 
, 
A~ 
-----:,..-;t:,;;:--
~) x 
Figure 8,3 Combination of vibrations, (Proportions of the figure correspond to the assumption w = 1.) 
Ul 
..... 
00 
~ 
oq' 
§ 
~ 
~ 
;:;' 
~ 
~. 
~ 
00 

y 
IV 
./""\ 
:71 
I 
\ 
il 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ \ 
\ 
o 
, 
\ 
\ 
\ 
, 
\ 
, , 
\ . 
\ 
\ 
, 
\ \ 
\ \ \ 
'\ \ 
, 
\ 
, 
, \ \ 
\ \ 
, 
. \ \ 
\\ , \ \ i 
. \ ' 
\ \ '\ 
' \ 
~\:I 
7r 
Figure8.4 Combination of vibrations. I: sin x -
(sin2x)/2; II: sin x -
(sin2x)/2 + (sin 3x)/3; III: sin x - (sin2x)/2 + 
(sin 3x)/3 -
(sin 4x)/4; IV: sin x - (sin 2x)/2 + (sin 3x)/3 -
(sin 4x)/4 + (sin 5x)/5 -
(sin 6x)/6 + (sin 7x)/7. 
x 
~ 
00 
iv 
til 
-§ .. 
--ti c 
'" 
::: . 
c· 
;:, 
~ 
~ 
3 
c 
;:, ". 
51 
i3 
5" a 
v. 
-..,J 
ID 

y 
! ~ 
,. I I 
1\ '. " 
/ ............ ,1 .r\-- /'\.\ \ 
2 
7 ,.r 
7\ \" 
/7'"" ,. 
\. .{·_.r 
" 
/ 
.... ." 
Figure 8.S Combination of vibrations. The curves 
correspond to the trigonometrical polynomials ob-
tained by taking 3, 5, 6, and 8 terms respectively 
of the series 
sin x 
sin 2x 
sin 3x 
sin 5x 
sin 6x 
-+2--+--+-- +2--
1 
2 
3 
5 
6 
sin 7x 
sin 9x 
sin lOx 
+--+--+2--+'" 
II _ 
........ 
7 
9 
10 
. 
~:....!!I 'X---" 
r 
/, \, 
X,:><:t+ 
--.. ' .; 
. 
~ 
, X 
\ "., 
\. 
7 
< 
.' 7r 
o 
... 
... "';,t:: 
... 
• 
... ;....-
,'-. .. --" 
2 
'-\' 
-
/.. 
........._./. 
U\ 
gg 
~ 
olQ' 
~ 
~ 
;:;. 
~ 
... 
~. 
p 
00 

Sec. 8.2 
Superposition of Harmonic Vibrations 
581 
WI and W 2, and if for the sake of simplicity we take the same value of ~ 
(see p. 575) for both (the generalization to arbitrary phase is left to the 
reader), then we are concerned with the function 
By a well-known trigonometrical formula we have 
y = 2 cos [i(WI -
w2)x] sin [Hwi + w2)x]. 
This equation represents a phenomenon which we describe as follows: 
we have a vibration with the circular frequency HWI + w2) and the 
y 
y = sin 5x + sin 6x 
= 2 cos~x sin¥x 
----
Figure 8.6 Beats. 
period 47T/(WI + w2). This vibration does not have a constant ampli-
tude but a varying "amplitude" given by the expression 
2 cos [i(Wl -
w2)x] 
which varies with a longer period 47T/(WI -
w2). This description is 
particularly useful when the two circular frequencies WI and W 2 are 
relatively large, whereas their difference (WI -
w2) is comparatively 
small. Then the amplitude 2 cos [i(WI -
w 2)x] of the vibration with 
period 47T/(WI + W2) varies only slowly compared with the period of 
vibration, and this change of amplitude repeats itself periodically with 
the long period 47T/(WI -
w2). These rhythmic changes of amplitude 
are called beats. Everyone is acquainted with this phenomenon in 
acoustics and electronics. In radio transmission the circular frequencies 
WI and W 2 are, as a rule, far above those which the ear can detect, 
whereas the difference WI -
W 2 falls in the range of audible notes. The 
beats then cause an audible tone, whereas the original vibrations re-
main imperceptible to the ear. 
An example of beats is illustrated graphically in Fig. 8.6. 

582 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
8.3 Complex Notation 
a. General Remarks 
Operation with trigonometric functions is often simplified by using 
complex numbers according to Euler's relation 
cos () + i sin () = ei8 
or 
(7a) 
cos () = -Hei8 + e-i8) 
1 
°8 
°8 
sin () = - (e' -
e-' ) 
2i 
(7b) 
(Compare Chapter 7, p. 551.) Accordingly, we can express sinusoidal 
vibrations in terms of the complex quantities eiwa:, e-iwa:, or aeiw(a:-s>, 
ae-iw(a:-S> respectively, where a, w, and w~ are amplitude, circular 
frequency, and phase displacement. Ultimately of course, real vibra-
tions are obtained from the complex expression, simply by separating 
real and imaginary parts. 
One of the conveniences of the complex notation is the fact that the 
derivatives with respect to the time x are obtained by differentiating the 
complex exponential function as if i were a real constant; the formula 
~ a[cos w(x -
~) + i sin w(x -
~)] 
dx 
= aw[-sin w(x -
~) + i cos w(x - m 
= iaw[cos w(x -
~) + i sin w(x - m 
that follows from the formulas for the derivatives of the sine and 
cosine functions can be written in the concise form 
(8) 
~ aeiw(a:-;> = iaweiw(a:-;>. 
dx 
The integral of a complex-valued function rex), say rex) = p(x) + iq(x), 
is naturally defined by 
J rex) dx = J p(x) dx + i Jq(X) dx. 
Accordingly, for n =F 0 
Jeina: dx = Jcos nx dx + i JSin nx dx 
1 . 
i 
1 ina: 
= - sm nx - - COS nx = -
e 
. 
n 
n 
in 

Sec. 8.3 
Complex Notation 583 
In particular, for any integer n we have 
ei1l~ dx = 
f
'IT 
{O 
for n :F 0 
-'IT 
27T for n = O. 
More generally, if we remember that ein~ e-im~ = ei(n-m)~, we have for 
any integers m, n 
(9) 
for n:F m 
for n = m. 
These relations are merely concise expressions of the orthogonality 
relations between trigonometric functions (see p. 274). 
* b. Application to Alternating Currents 
We insert an illustration of these ideas by an important example, denoting 
the independent variable, the time, by t instead of x. 
We consider an electric circuit with resistance R and inductance L, on 
which an external electromotive force (voltage) E is impressed. In direct 
current, the voltage E is constant, and the current I is given by Ohm's law, 
E = RI. For an alternating current however, E, and consequently I, is a 
function of the time t, and Ohm's law takes the generalized form (cf. p. 635) 
(10) 
dI 
E-Ldt=RI. 
We consider the external electromotive forces E which are sinusoidal with 
circular frequency w, given by 
€ cos wt or € sin wt and combine both 
possibilities formally in the complex form 
E = €e irot = € cos wt + i€ sin wt, 
where € represents the amplitude. Often it is useful to admit complex values 
also for the amplitude 
then 
We may operate with this "complex voltage" E and the corresponding 
complex current I as if i were a real parameter. Then the significance of the 
complex relation between the complex quantities E and I is that the current 
corresponding to an electromotive force € cos wt is the real part of I, whereas 
the current corresponding to an electromotive force € sin wt is the imaginary 
part of I. The complex current is given by an expression of the form 
I = rt.eirot = rt.(cos wt + i sin wt) 

584 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.B 
which is also sinusoidal with circular frequency w. The derivative of I is 
then given forITIally by 
dI 
. 
-
= i IXwe,cot 
dt 
= IXW( -sin wt + i cos wt) = iw/. 
Substituting these quantities in the generalized form of Ohm's law (Eq. 10) 
and dividing by the factor eicot, we obtain the equation 
" -
IXLiw = RIX, 
or 
" 
IX =---
R + iwL' 
as well as 
E = (R + iwL)I = WI. 
We may regard this last equation as Ohm's law for alternating currents in 
complex form if we call the quantity 
W=R +iwL 
the complex resistance of the circuit. Ohm's law is then the same as for 
direct current: the current is equal to the voltage divided by the resistance. 
Writing the complex resistance W with w = I WI in the form 
wh~re 
we obtain 
W = wei6 = w cos lJ + iw sin lJ, 
wL 
tanlJ=""R' 
" . 
E 
1= -
e,(wt-a) =-
w 
W· 
According to this formula the current has the same period (and circular 
frequency) as the voltage; the amplitude IX of the current is related to the 
amplitude " of the electromotive force for real " by 
and, in addition, there is a difference of phase between the current and 
the voltage. The current reaches its maximum, not at the same time as 
the voltage but at a time lJjw later, and the same is, of course, true for the 
minimum. In electrical engineering the quantity w = -vi R2 + L 2w2 is fre-
quently called the impedance or alternating current resistance of the circuit 
for the circular frequency w; the phase displacement, usually stated in 
degrees, is sometimes called the lag. 
If the amplitude " is complex in the form 
" = 1,,1 e-iq, 

Sec. 8.3 
Complex Notation 585 
then nothing essential is changed in the form of Ohm's law, except 1] is an 
additional phase shift and we have 
E = 1 .. 1 ei(wt-q), 
E 
1 .. 1 
. 
. 
I = - = -
e,wte-,(.I+q) 
W 
IWI 
. 
c. Complex Notation for Trigonometrical Polynomials 
A compound vibration of the type 
" 
(11) 
S,,(x) = lao + !(a y cos '/IX + by sin '/Ix) 
y=l 
(for brevity we have taken w = 1) can be reduced to complex form by 
substituting 
and sin '/IX = -ti(eiy<l) _ e-iY~. 
This expression then assumes the simpler form 
" 
(12) 
S,,(x) = ! a.yeiY<l), 
'V=-n 
where the complex numbers a.y are related to the real numbers ao, 
ay , and by by the equations 
(13a) 
{
a.y = t(a y -
ib y ), 
a._y = Hay + ib y ), 
a.o = lao· 
for 
'/I = 1, 2, ... , n, 
Solving these relations for the ay and by, we find that 
(13b) 
ay = a.y + a._y, 
by = i(a.y -
a._y). 
(The case '/I = 0 is included.) 
and 
Conversely, we may regard any arbitrary expression of the form 
as a function representing the superposition of vibrations written in 
complex form. The result of this superposition is real if and only if 
!Xy + a._y is real and a.y -
a._y is pure imaginary; that is, if a.y and a._yare 
conjugate complex numbers. 

586 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.B 
d. A Trigonometric Formula 
As an application of the complex notation we prove the following 
identity: 
(14) 
O'n(lX) = t + cos IX + cos 21X + ... + cos nIX 
sin (n + i)1X 
= _--0---'--=_ 
2 sin tlX 
which is needed later on in this chapter. The formula makes sense only 
when sin tlX =F 0, that is, when IX does not have one of the values 
0, ±27T, ±47T, . .. . However, once the formula has been established 
for sin tlX =F 0, we conclude that the expression [sin (n + t)IX]/(2 sin tlX) 
is a continuous function of IX for all IX, if we define its value at the 
exceptional points as that of O'nClX) that is, n + t. 
For the proof we replace the cosine function by its exponential 
expression [see formula (13a) with av = 1, bv = 0]: 
n 
O'n(lX) = t 2 eiva• 
v=-n 
On the right we have a geometric progression with the common ratio 
q = eia = cos IX + i sin IX. 
Hence q can have the value 1 only if 
cos IX = 1, sin IX = 0, that is, if IX has one of the exceptional values 
0, ±27T, ±47T, . .. . For all other values IX the ordinary formula for 
the sum yields 
. 1 _ q2n+1 
0' (IX) = .le-·na -----"--
n 
2 
1 -q 
1 e-ina _ 
e(n+1lia 
=- . 
On multiplying the numerator and denominator by e-ia/2 we obtain, 
as stated, 
O'n(lX) = sin (~ + t)1X • 
2 sm tlX 
Integrating O'n(t) on ° 
~ t ~ 7T, we find the useful result that 
independently of n 
(15) 
1" 
sin (~ + t)t dt =1" (t + icos yt) dt 
o 
2 sm it 
0 
v=1 
= t7T 
since the integral of each term of the series vanishes. 

Sec. 8.4 
Fourier Series 587 
8.4 Fourier Series 
a. Fourier Coefficients 
Trigonometrical polynomials 
n 
(16) 
f(x) = Sn(X) = tao + I(ay cos YX + by sin yx) 
y~l 
of order n depend on the 2n + 1 coefficients a. and by. It is remarkable 
that these "Fourier coefficients" can be expressed simply by the following 
formulas in terms of the values f(x) of the sum: 
(17) 
1 f" 
1 f" 
a", =;;. _" f(x) cos f-lx dx, b", =; _/(x) sin f-lx dx. 
The proof follows if we multiply (16) by cos f-lx or sin f-lx and then 
integrate. The orthogonality relations (see p. 214) yield the expressions 
immediately, since only the terms with Y = f-l make a nonvanishing 
contribution. 
In the complex terminology 
n 
(16a) 
f(x) = Sn(x) = I Cl.yeiY", 
v=-n 
the corresponding expressions for the complex Fourier coefficients are 
(17a) 
1 f" 
. 
Cl.y = -
f(x)e-n ., dx 
27T 
-7T 
as is seen also on the basis of the complex orthogonality relations 
(9), p. 583. 
Incidentally, the factor t in the notation for the constant term tao 
of (16) serves merely to make the formula (17) valid for Y = O. 
Now we are led to the main theorem on Fourier series by the natural 
question of whether, by letting the degree n of the Fourier polynomial 
(16) tend to infinity, it becomes possible to represent functions f( x) which 
are periodic with the period 27T but otherwise essentially arbitrary. 
Our main result in the next articles will indeed be: Any periodic 
function f(x) which is sectionally continuous and has sectionally con-
tinuous derivatives of first and second order can be represented by an 
infinite "Fourier series" 
a 
00 
f(x) = _0 + I (a y cos YX + by sin yx) 
2 
y~l 

588 
Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
or in complex notation 
v=-oo 
with coefficients given by (17) and (17a). 
h. Basic Lemma 
We first recall the definition of a piecewise or sectionally continuous 
function in an interval, as a function which is continuous except for a 
finite number of jump discontinuities in the interval. 
We further recall that the value of a periodic functionj(x) is defined 
at a point of discontinuity as the mean of the limiting values from the 
two sides as agreed earlier [Eq. (4), p. 573]. 
A function j(x) is sectionally continuous and has sectionally con-
tinuous first and second derivatives, if we can divide the whole interval 
into a finite number of subintervals, such that f,f' ,j" are continuous 
in each open subinterval and approach definite limits at the end points. 
The key to the proof of the main theorem will be a simple fact. 
LEMMA. If a junction k( x), and its first derivative k' (x) are sectionally 
continuous in the interval a ~ x ~ b, then the integral 
K;. = fk(X) sin AX dx 
tends to zero as A -+ 00. 
PROOF. To prove this lemma we use integration by parts. Suppos-
ing that k and k' are continuous on a ~ x ~ b, we have 
(18) K;. = f k(x) sin AX dx 
=1[k(a)COsAa -
k(b)cOSAb + fk'(X) cos AXdX} 
as A increases, the right-hand side obviously tends to zero. If k(x) 
or k'(x) have jump discontinuities g in the interval, then we subdivide it 
into parts by these points g, apply our argument to the parts, and add 
the results. 
Omitting the proof, we state that the lemma actually remains true without 
any assumption about existence of the derivative k'(x), merely using the 
sectional continuity of k. The proof under these milder conditions relies on 
the fact that for A ;>Ii 0 the function sin Ax is alternately positive and negative 
in successive intervals of length TTl A. For large values of A the contributions 
to the integral from adjacent intervals almost cancel one another because of 
the continuity of k(x). 

Sec. 8.4 
Fourier Series 589 
(00 sin z 
7T 
c. Proof of Jo -z- dz = 2" 
As an application of the lemma we evaluate the integral 
(19) 
I = (00 sin z dz. 
Jo 
z 
This improper integral is defined by the relation 
I = lim 1M 
where 
]}[ .... 00 
1
M 
. 
1M = 
sm z dz. 
o 
z 
The convergence of the improper integral I, that is, the existence of 
the limit of 1M for M -- 00 had been proved already on p. 310. The 
convergence proof was based on integration by parts and may be 
restated here. If, say, 0 < M < N, we have 
(20) 
lIN -
IMI = If: Si:z dzl 
= 1- cos Z IN +fN cos z dz I 
z 
M 
M 
Z2 
1 
1 
fN dz 
2 
<-+-+ -=-. 
-
M 
N 
M 
Z2 
M 
Since then IN and 1M differ arbitrarily little if both M and N are 
sufficiently large, the existence of I = lim 1M is assured by Cauchy's 
M--+oo 
convergence test. Moreover, letting N tend to infinity in (20) we find 
an estimate for the rate at which the 1M approach their limit I: 
(20a) 
We can rewrite our expression for I in such a way that I appears as 
a limit of integrals over a fixed finite interval. Let p be an arbitrary 
positive number; for M = Ap the substitution z = AX, dz = A dx 
shows that 
1
kP sin z 
1il sin AX 
IAil = 
--dz = --dx. 
o 
z 
0 
X 

590 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.B 
Since Ap -+ 00 for A -+ OCJ and fixed positive p, we clearly have 
I 
I· 
iPsin AX d 
= 1m 
--
x, 
.... -.00 
0 
x 
and more precisely from (20a) 
I I -
{P sin Ax dx I < ~ . 
Jo 
x 
AP 
Thus for any positive p the expressions 
(P sin AX dx 
Jo 
x 
approach for A -+ 00 one and the same value J; moreover, the con-
vergence is uniform in p as long as we restrict p to values above some 
fixed positive number P. Indeed, the difference between the integral 
and the limit J is then less than e for A > 21Pe. 
We now apply our lemma of p. 588 to the function 
1 
1 
k(x) = -----
x 
2 sin (xJ2) 
If we define k(O) = 0, the function k(x) is continuous and has a con-
tinuous first derivative for 0 ~ x < 27T (see p. 466). Hence our lemma 
shows that 
i
p 
(1 
1) 
sin Ax - -
dx 
o 
x 
2 sin (xJ2) 
tends to zero for A -+ 00 as long as 0 :s; p < 27T. Moreover, by (18) the 
convergence is uniform for O:S; P :s; 7T since Ik(x)1 and Ik'(x)1 are 
bounded in the interval 0 :s; x :s; 7T. It follows from our previous 
result that for any p in the interval 0 < p < 27T 
I· IP 
sin AX 
d 
I 
1m 
X= 
).-+00 
0 2 sin (xI2) 
, 
and also that the convergence is uniform in p for P ~ P ~ 7T, where P 
is a fixed positive number. 
Now for p = 7T and A = n + t (where n is an integer) we have 
evaluated this integral [see formula (15), p. 586] and found that it has the 
value 7T/2 independently of n. Letting A tend to infinity through values 
of the form A = n + t, we find then for I the value 7T/2: 
(21) 
roo sin Z dz = ~ . 
Jo 
z 
2 

Sec. 8.4 
Fourier Series 591 
We have proved moreover that 
(21a) 
1· 
J.21 sin AX d 
7T 
1m 
-- X=-, 
;. ... 00 
0 
X 
2 
where for a fixed positive P the convergence is uniform for P ::;; p, 
and that 
(21b) 
lim (21 
sin AX 
dx = :!: , 
""'00 Jo 2 sin (xJ2) 
2 
where the convergence is uniform for P ::;; P ::;; 7T. 
d. Fourier Expansion for the Function cp(x) = X 
Our last result leads directly to the Fourier expansion of two re-
lated sectionally linear periodic functions cp(x), x(x) defined in the 
y 
--~----~--~----~--~----~---o--~~----__ x 
Figure 8.7 The function t/>(x). 
interval -7T < X < 7T by 
cp(x) = x 
and 
( 
7T -
X 
x(x) = _: _ x 
(See Figs. 8.7 and 8.8.) 
(22) 
for x> 0 
for x = 0 
for x < O. 
The first function cp, periodically extended outside the interval 
-7T < X < + 7T, has jump discontinuities at the end points, whereas 
x(x) suffers a jump of 27T at x = O. Obviously, the two functions 
periodically extended are related to each other by 
x(x) = cp(7T - x). 

592 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.B 
The Fourier expansion for X(x) follows immediately for 0 < x ~ 7T 
from formulas (14), p. 586, and (21b), p. 591, for A. = n + i and 
p = x, by passage to the limit, n ---+ 00. We find the Fourier series 
( . 
sin 2x 
sin 3x 
) 
(23a) 
x(x) = 2 SIn X + -2- + -3- + .... 
The same holds then also for -7T ~ X < 0, since both sides are odd 
functions of x. The series is uniformly convergent for E < Ixl ~ 7T, 
with any arbitrarily small, positive value of E. At x = 0 all terms of the 
y 
--~~--o---~~--¢---~~--o---~----------~% 
Figure 8.8 The function X(x). 
series are zero, hence also the sum, in agreement with the definition of 
X(O). Since both sides have period 27T the identity (23a) holds then for 
all x. 
That the coefficients of the expansion are indeed the Fourier 
coefficients defined by formula (17), p. 587, is confirmed easily. 
The Fourier expansion for cp(x) is now obtained directly from 
cp(x) = X(7T -
x): 
(23b) 
cp(x) = 2 f (_1)"+1 sin 'JIX 
v=! 
'JI 
= 2(sin x - i sin 2x + t sin 3x - + .. '). 
Here the convergence is uniform as soon as the point x is bounded away 
from the discontinuity points x = ±7T by the condition Ixl < 7T -
E. 
For x = 7Tj2 we obtain again Leibnitz' series 
7T - = 2(1 - 1 + i - ... + -). 
2 
' 
It should be mentioned that the two series for X and cp do not con-
verge absolutely; indeed the absolute values for x = 7T/2 form the 

Sec. 8.4 
Fourier Series 
593 
divergent series 
00 
1 
2L--· 
1 2v -
1 
Formula (23b) is remarkable as an example of an infinite series of 
continuous functions which converges for all x but has as sum a dis-
continuous function, namely, the piecewise linear function c/>(x). Each 
partial sum of the series is continuous, since the sum of any finite 
number of continuous functions must again be continuous. Because 
a uniformly convergent infinite series of continuous functions has a 
continuous sum, the Fourier series cannot converge uniformly in a 
neighborhood of a point x at which c/> is discontinuous, that is, for 
x = ±1T, ±31T, . . .. Figure 8.4, p. 579 illustrates how the successive 
partial sums which are trigonometric polynomials and continuous 
functions approximate the sectionally linear function tc/>(x) uniformly 
in an interval of continuity, but that near the end point the functions 
change more and more rapidly. 
e. The Main Theorem on Fourier Expansion 
The Fourier Coefficients. After the preceding preparations, the 
possibility of expanding a large class of functions can be easily ascer-
tained. The form of such an expansion for a function f(x) with the 
period 21T is 
00 
(24a) 
f(x) = tao + L(a v cos vx + bv sin vx), 
v=1 
or in complex notation 
00 
(24b) 
f(x) = L rxveiV"'. 
v=-oo 
We first assume that we have uniformly convergent expansions (24a) or 
(24b) for the function f(x). We can then determine the coefficients 
av, b., respectively, rxv in these expansions by multiplying by cos f-lX, 
sin f-lX, respectively by riP-x, and integrating from -1T to 1T, using the 
orthogonality relations (see pp. 274 and 583) 
J: .. sin vx sin f-lx dx = J: .. cos vx cos f-lx dx = {~ 
if f-l ¥: v 
if f-l = v¥: 0, 
(25) 
J: .. sin vx cos f-lx dx = 0, 
f .. eiv"'e-ip.", dx = {O 
~f f-l ¥: v 
_.. 
21T 
If f-l = v. 

594 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.B 
Writing t for the variable of integration, we at once obtain the formulas 
1 i" 
(26a) 
all =:;;. _" J(t) cos f-tt dt, 
1 i" 
bll =:;;. _" J(t) sin f-tt dt 
for f-t = 0, 1,2, ... , and 
(26b) 
1 i" 
. 
IXIl = -
J(t)e-zilt dt 
27T -" 
for f-t = 0, ± I, ±2, . .. . 
Thus, if f(x) can be expanded at all into a uniformly convergent 
series (24a) or (24b) , then the coefficients can only have the values 
determined by the formulas (26a) and (26b). But even without a justi-
fication for this very tentative procedure, these formulas (26a) or (26b) 
define sequences of numbers av, b., and IXv called the Fourier coeffi-
cients for every function f(x) which is continuous or piecewise con-
tinuous in the interval -7T :::;; X :::;; 7T. 
For a given functionf(x), we form with the coefficients thus defined 
by (26a, b) the Fourier partial sums 
n 
Sn(x) = tao + L(a, cos vx + b, sin vx) 
,~1 
or 
v=n 
Sn(x) = L IX,ei'. 
v=-n 
Our task is to prove that these Fourier sums actually converge for 
n -+ 00 and that the limit is the functionf(x). 
We now state the 
MAIN THEOREM. 
The Fourier series 
00 
(27a) 
tao + L(a, cos vx + b, sin vx) 
'~1 
or 
(27b) 
formed with the Fourier coefficients (26a) or (26b) converges to the value 
f(x) for any sectionally continuous function f(x) of period 27T, which has 
sectionally continuous derivatives of first and second order.1 Here the 
1 We mention again that this theorem can be proved for much more general classes 
of functions (see, for example, Section 8.6). The result formulated here, however, 
amply suffices for most applications. 

Sec. 8.4 
Fourier Series 595 
value of f(x) at a point of discontinuity must be defined by 
(27c) 
f(x) = Uf(x + 0) + f(x -
0)]. 
PRooF.l 
For the proof we substitute in the nth "Fourier polynomial" 
n 
Six) = tao + ~(av cos vx + bv sin vx) 
v=l 
the integral expressions (26a) for the coefficients and then interchange 
the order of integration and summation; we obtain 
Sn(x) = :; f~O' J(t{l + vt(COS 'lit cos vx + sin 'lit sin VX)] dt, 
or, using the addition theorem for the cosine, 
By the summation formula (14) of p. 586 therefore, 
(28) 
Sn(x) = 1. f11 J(t) sin [(~ + l)(t -
x)] dt. 
217 
-11 
sm Ht -
x) 
Finally, setting T = t -
x and recalling that periodicity allows us to 
shift the interval of integration by the quantity x (see p. 574), we obtain 
(28a) 
Sn(x) = 1. f" J(x + T) sin (~ + t)T dT, 
217 
-O' 
sm tr 
where x is, of course, fixed. 
We now prove that Sn(x) tends for n ---+ 00 to f(x); or 
(29) 
lim Sn(x) = lim 1. fIT J(x + t) sin (~ + })t dt = J(x). 
n-+ 00 
n-+ 00 217 
-11 
sin tt 
Because f(x) = Hf(x + 0) + f(x -
0)] for all x, we have [see 
formula (15), p. 586] 
Sn(x) - J(x) =! (It [J(x + t) ~ J(x + 0)] sin (n + i)t dt 
17 Jo 
2 sm it 
+ ! JO 
[J(~ + t) ~ {(x - 0)] sin (n + t)t dt. 
17 -It 
2 sm 2t 
1 We give here only the proof for expansion of fin a series (27a). Series (27b) follows 
then by the substitutions given in Eq. (13b), p. 585. 

596 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
If we can show now that the functions [!(x + t) - !(x + 0)]/(2 sin it) 
and [f(x + t) - !(x - 0)]/(2 sin it) of the variable t are sectionally 
continuous together with their first derivatives in the intervals 0 ~ t ~ 71" 
and -71" ~ t ~ 0 respectively, then by our basic lemma (p. 588) both 
integrals on the right-hand side tend to zero for n -- 00 and formula 
(29) follows. 
Thus the main theorem is proved if we can show that for a fixed x the 
function of t defined by 
ep(t) =f(x + t) ~ f(x + 0) 
2 sm it 
ep(t) =f(x + t) ~ f(x -
0) 
2 sm it 
for 0 < t < 71" 
for 
-71" < t < 0 
is sectionally continuous and has a sectionally continuous first 
derivative, provided J, j', j" are sectionally continuous. 
To ascertain that these conditions are satisfied for the quotient ep(t) 
we first observe that the denominator vanishes only for t = 0, and that 
therefore ep and its first derivative are sectionally continuous except 
possibly near t = O. Only at the singular point t = 0 could a loss of 
differentiability occur. All we have to do, therefore, is to show that 
ep(t) and its derivative ep'(t) approach limits if t tends to zero from 
positive or negative values respectively. We shall indeed show that 
these limits exist, and that they have the values 
ep( +0) = j'(x + 0), 
ep( -0) = j'(x - 0) 
respectively 
ep'( +0) = tj"(x + 0), 
cp'( -0) = t["(x - 0). 
For the proof we introduce the function g(t) by ep(t) = g(t)h(t), 
where the factor h(t) is defined by 
h(t) = 
t 
2 sin (t/2) 
for t =;l: 0, 
h(O) = 1. 
We have (see Chapter 5, p. 465) in h(t) a continuous function with a 
continuous derivative in the whole interval -71" ~ t ~ 71" with h(O) = I, 
h'(O) = 0; therefore in the limit for t -- 0 the values of g(t) and 
ep(t) as well as those of g'(t) and ep'(t) = gh' + g'h coincide. 
Now in the interval 0 < t < 71" (see Chapter 5, p. 464 for general 
remarks about indeterminate expressions) by the mean value theorem 

Sec. 8.4 
of calculus 
Fourier Series 597 
g(t) =f(x + t) - f(x + 0) = f'(x + ~) 
t 
with an intermediate value ~ between 0 and t; hence for t, and thus 
also ~, tending to zero 
g( +0) = f'(x + 0). 
For the derivative we obtain 
'( ) _ tf'(x + t) + f(x + 0) - f(x + t) 
g t -
2 
' 
t 
again an expression where numerator and denominator both tend to 
zero for t -+ 0 and have the derivatives tf"(x + t) and 2t, respectively. 
To determine the limit for t -+ 0 we make use of the generalized mean 
value theorem (cf. p. 222) and find 
g'(t) = 1]f"(x + 1]) = tf"(x + 1]) 
21] 
with 1] intermediate between 0 and t. For t -+ 0 we have 1] -+ 0, and 
hence, as said before, g'( +0) = cp'( +0) = tf"(x + 0). 
The same reasoning applies to negative values of t. Consequently, our 
application of the lemma is justified and the main theorem established. 
Again it may be stated that the result obtained is amply sufficient for 
all needs arising in calculus and its applications. Yet the theoretical 
interests of mathematicians, starting with the original work of 
Dirichlet, were frequently aimed at greater generality, that is, at trying 
to expand functions of a wider class.l These efforts have stimulated a 
more refined analysis of the concepts of function and integral and have 
led to the development of advanced Fourier analysis as an attractive 
specialized field, which however, must remain outside the scope of 
this book. 
1 It might be noted that there are examples of continuous functions which are not 
expandable in a Fourier series. In addition, there exist examples of functions f(x) 
represented by a convergent trigonometrical series which, however, are not Fourier 
series having the expressions (26) as coefficients. Such examples show that for 
refined investigations a distinction between trigonometric series in general and Fou-
rier series in particular is in order. For us moreover, they illustrate the fact that 
more restrictive conditions than that of continuity are indeed appropriate, even 
though the restrictions assumed in our main theorem and in an extension given in 
Section 8.6 are much more severe than really needed. (See for the general theory, 
Trigonometrical Series, by A. Zygmund, Chelsea Publishing Co., 1952.) 

598 
Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
8.5 Examples of Fourier Series 
a. Preliminary Remarks 
We assume throughout that the period of our functions f(x) is 27T. 
Iff(x) is an even function (cf. p. 29), then clearly f(x) sin vx is odd 
and f(x) cos vx is even, so that 
1 f" 
b. = -
f(x) sin vx dx = 0, 
7T -" 
and we obtain a "cosine series." If, on the other hand, the function 
f(x) is odd, then 
1 f" 
a. = -
f(x) cos vx dx = 0, 
7T 
-" 
and we obtain a "sine series."! 
h. Expansion of the Function r/>(x) = x 2 
For the even function X2, we have upon integrating twice by parts 
a.=~ ("x 2 cosvxdx=(-1Y±, 
7Th 
~ 
(v> 0), 
so that we obtain the expansion 
(30) 
x 2 = 7T2 _ 4(cOS x _ cos 2x + cos 3x + ... ). 
3 
12 
22 
32 
Differentiating this series term by term and dividing by 2, we formally 
recover the series (23b), p. 592, obtained previously for r/>(x) = x. 
c. Expansion of x cos x 
(See Fig. 8.9.) For this odd function we have 
2 i1T 
a. = 0, 
b. = -
x cos x sin vx dx. 
7T 
0 
1 Consequently, if the function f(x) is initially given only in the interval 0 < x < 7r, 
then we can extend it in the interval -7r < X < 0 either as an odd function or as an 
even function, and thus for the smaller interval 0 < x < 7r either a sine series or a 
cosine series is obtainable. 

Sec. 8.5 
Examples of Fourier Series 599 
~----~----~----~----~----~----~--~~--~~~x 
Figure 8.9 
Using the formula 
we find 
(Il = 1,2, ... ,), 
21" 
bv = -
x cos x sin 'IIX dx 
1T 
0 
= ! (" x[sin ('II + l)x + sin ('II -
l)x] dx 
1T Jo 
= (-lr(~) 
'112 -
1 
('II = 2, 3, ... ) 
We therefore obtain the series 
(31) 
00 (-1)"'11 
X cos X = -t sin x + 2 L -- sin 'IIX. 
v~2'112 -
1 
Adding the series (23b), p. 592, found for c/>(x) = x yields 
(3Ia) 
211" 
3 
• 
( sin 2x 
sin 3x 
sin 4x 
) 
x(l + cos x) = "2 sm x + 2 ----- - ---+ --- - + . .. . 
1·2·3 
2·3·4 3·4·5 
When the function which is equal to x cos x in the interval -1T < X < 1T 
is extended periodically beyond this interval, the same discontinu-
ities (cf. Fig. 8.7) occur as exhibited by the function c/>(x) considered 
earlier in Section 8.4d. On the other hand, the function x(1 + cos x), 

600 
Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
periodically extended, remains continuous at the end points of the 
intervals, and in fact its derivative also remains continuous, since the 
discontinuities are eliminated by the factor 1 + cos x, which together 
with its derivative vanishes at the end points. This accounts for the 
fact that the series (31) converges uniformly for all x, as is evident by 
. 
·h h 
··h 
1 
1 
1 
companson WIt t e senes WIt constant terms 13 + 23 + 33 + .... 
d. The Function f(x) = Ixl 
For this even function h. = 0, and a. = ~ i"x cos lIX dx; by inte-
grating by parts we readily obtain 
1T 
0 
i.. 
1 
/.. Ii" 
x cos lIX dx = - x sin lIX 
-
-
sin lIX dx 
o 
11' 
0 
110 
{
O' 
= 
2 
-Ii' 
11 
if 11 is even and :;!: 0, 
if 11 is odd. 
Consequently, 
4 ( 
cos 3x 
cos 5x 
) 
(32) 
Ixl = trr - -
cos x + -- + -- + . .. . 
1T 
32 
52 
Putting x = 0, we obtain the remarkable formula 
(32a) 
e. A Piecewise Constant Function 
The function defined by the equations 
(
-I, 
f(x) = sgnx = 
0, 
+1, 
for -1T < X < 0, 
fOJ; x = 0, 
for ° < x < 1T, 
as indicated in Fig. 1.22, p. 32, is odd. Hence a. = ° 
and 
if 11 is even, 
if 11 fs odd, 

Sec. 8.5 
Examples of Fourier Series 601 
so that the Fourier series for this function is 
(33) 
For x = t7T, in particular, this again yields Leibnitz's series. 
y 
-----_-~~I~----~O~-------o--------o-----------~X 
'------1-1 
Figure 8.10 
The series (33) can be formally derived from that for Ixl given in (32), 
using term-by-term differentiation. 
f. The Function Isin xl 
The even function f(x) = Isin xl can be expanded in a cosine series, 
with the coefficients av given by the following calculations: 
t7Ta. = IlTsin x cos vx dx 
= t f[Sin (v + l)x -
sin (v -
l)x] dx 
{
o 
= 
-2 
v2 -
1 
if v is odd, 
if v is even. 
We thus obtain, writing 2v instead of v, 
(34) 
Isin xl = ~ _ ± ~ cos 2vx 
7T 
7T .~1 4v2 -
1 . 

602 Trigonometric Series 
g. Expansion of cos ftx. Resolution of the Cotangent 
into Partial Fractions. The Infinite Product for 
the Sine 
Ch.8 
The function f(x) = cos ftx for -7T < X < 7T, where fl is not an 
integer, is even; hence bv = 0, whereas 
t7Tav = llTcos ftx cos 'JIX dx 
= t llT[COS (ft + v)x + cos (ft -
v)x] dx 
= t [sin (ft + 'JI )7T + sin (ft -
'I' )7TJ 
U+'JI 
fl-V 
(-1)" 
= _ft __ sin ft7T. 
ft2 _ '1'2 
We thus have 
(35) 
2ft sin ft7T ( 1 
cos x + cos 2x 
) 
cos ftx = 
-
- ---
--- + - .... 
7T 
2ft2 
ft2-1 2 
ft2-2 2 
This function extended periodically with period 27T from the interval 
-7T < X < 7T remains continuous at the points x = ±7T. 
Putting 
x = 7T, dividing both sides of the equation by sin f-l1T, and writing x 
instead of f-l, we obtain the equation 
(36) 
2X( 1 
1 
1 
) 
cot 1TX = -
-
+ 
+ --- + . .. . 
1T 2X2 
X2 _ 12 
X2 _ 22 
This is the resolution of the cotangent into partial fractions (in analogy 
to the finite partial fraction resolutions of rational functions discussed 
in Chapter 3, p. 286), a very important formula of analysis. 
We write this series in the form 
COt1TX - 1. = - 2X[ __ 1_ + __ 1_ + ... J. 
1TX 
1T 
12 -
X2 
22 _ X2 
If x lies in an interval 0 ~ x ~ q < 1, the nth term on the right is less 
in absolute value than 2J[7T(n2 -
q2)]. 
Hence the series converges 
uniformly in this interval and can be integrated term by term. Multi-
plying both sides by 1T and integrating, we obtain 
I
x ( 
1 ) 
sin 1TX. 
sin 1Ta 
sin 1TX 
1T 
COt1Tt -
-
dt = log -- -
lIm log -- = log--
o 
7Tt 
TTX 
a-O 
7Ta 
1TX 

Sec. 8.5 
Examples oj Fourier Series 603 
on the left and 
( 
X2) 
(X2) 
n 
( 
X2) 
log 1 -
2 + log 1 -"2 + ... = lim L log 1 - 2 
1 
,2 
n-oo v~l 
V 
on the right. Thus 
sin TTX 
. 
n 
( 
X2) 
log-- = hm Llog 1 -"2 
TTX 
n- 00 v~l 
V 
n (X2) 
n 
( 
X2) 
= lim log II 1 -"2 = log lim II 1 -"2 . 
n-+ 00 
v=! 
V 
v=l 
'V 
If we pass from the logarithm to the exponential function we have 
(36a) 
sin TTX = TTX (1 -
~:) (1 - ;:) (1 - ;:) .... 
We have thus obtained the famous expression for the sine as an 
infinite product.! 
From this result, by putting x = !, we obtain Wallis's product 
00 
2'11 
2'11 
2 2 4 4 
!TT=II---'--=-'-'-'- ... 
v~l 2'11 -
1 2'11 + 1 
1 3 3 5 
as derived before on p. 281. 
h. Further Examples 
By brief calculations similar to the preceding, we obtain further 
examples of expansions. 
The function/(x) defined by the equation/ex) = sin f1X for -
TT < 
X < TT can be expanded in the series 
(37) sin f1x = _ 2 sin f1TT ( sin x 
_ 2 sin 2x + 3 sin 3x _ + ... ). 
TT 
f12 -
12 
f12 -
22 
f12 _ 32 
Putting x = !TT and using the relation sin f1TT = 2 sin !f1TT cos !f1TT 
yields the resolution of the secant, that is, of the function IJcos !f1TT 
into partial fractions; this expansion is 
TTseCTTX = _TT_ = 41 (-1)"(2'11- 1) , 
cos TTX 
v~l 4X2 -
(2'11 -
1)2 
where we have written x in place of !f1. 
1 This formula is particularly interesting because it exhibits directly that the function 
sin 1TX vanishes at the points x = 0, ± 1, ±2, . . .. In this respect it corresponds to 
the factorization of a polynomial when its zeros are known. 

604 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
Series analogous to (35) and (37) for the hyperbolic functions cosh flx 
and sinh flX (-7T < X < 7T) are 
2fl . 
( 1 
cos x 
cos 2x 
cos 3x 
) 
cosh flx = -
smh fl7T -
-
+ 
-
+ ... 
7T 
2fl2 
fl2 + 12 
fl2 + 22 
fl2 + 32 
' 
. h 
2 . h 
(sin x 
2 sin 2x + 3 sin 3x 
) 
sm flx = - sm fl7T 
-
- + . .. . 
7T 
fl2 + 12 
fl2 + 22 
fl2 + 32 
8.6 Further Discussion of Convergence 
a. Results 
A closer examination of the Fourier coefficients av' bv leads easily to 
the following corollaries to the main theorem of Section 8.4e, p. 593. 
(a) The Fourier series (27), p. 594, converg.e to f(x) for all periodic 
functions under the relaxed condition that f(x) and merely its first 
derivative f'ex) are sectionally continuous or, as we say, that the 
function is sectionally smooth. 
(b) If the periodic sectionally smooth functionf(x) is continuous, the 
convergence is absolute and uniform. 
(c) If the sectionally smooth function f(x) suffers jump discon-
tinuities, the convergence is uniform in each closed interval which does 
not contain a point of discontinuity. 
The proof of (b) depends on a simple inequality of Bessel, whereas 
for the proof of (a) and (c) the results of Section 8.4d, p. 591, will be 
used. 
h. Bessel's Inequality 
This inequality yields bounds for the Fourier coefficients of any 
piecewise continuous not necessarily differentiable function. It states 
that 
n 
(38) 
lao2 + L(a v2 + bv2) ~ M2 
v=1 
where the bound M2 = l f~!(X)2 dx is a number fixed by the function 
f(x) and depends neither on the individual Fourier coefficients av' bv 
nor the number n. With the complex Fourier coefficients (Xv [see (13a)], 
p. 585, Bessel's inequality can be immediately written in the form 
(38a) 
v~nl(XvI2 ~ L 
f~/(X)2 dx = !M2. 

Sec. 8.6 
Further Discussion of Convergence 605 
The inequality is a direct consequence of the obvious fact that 
1 fIr [n 
J2 
;;. _" f(x) -
tao -
V~l(av cos vx + bv sin vx) 
dx ~ o. 
We evaluate the integral by expanding the square under the integral 
sign and observing the orthogonality relations (25), p. 593, as well as the 
definitions (17), p. 587, of the Fourier coefficients: by integrating the 
individual terms we immediately obtain Bessel's inequality in the form 
(38) stated above. 
Since the left-hand side of Bessel's inequality increases monotonically 
with n and the upper bound M2 is fixed, we can pass to the limit 
n ---+ 00 and infer that the inequality 
00 
00 
(39) 
2 ! 
IClvl2 = tao2 + !(av2 + bv2) :$; M2 
v=-oo 
v=l 
is valid. The inequality (39) holds for the Fourier coefficients of a piece-
wise continuous function/(x) even if/should not be represented by the 
series (27a) or (27b). 
Incidentally, we shall show in Section 8.7d that Bessel's inequality 
(39) remains valid if we replace the inequality sign by that of equality. 
*c. Proof of Corollaries (a), (h), and (c) 
Assuming lex) itself to be continuous we apply Bessel's inequality 
to its piecewise continuous derivative g(x) = f'ex) which has the 
Fourier coefficients Cv = +vbv' dv = -vav' as we find immediately 
using integration by parts (since the integrated terms cancel): 
1 fIr 
fIr 
Cv =;;. _"f'(X) cos vx dx = + _" vf(x) sin vx dx = +vbvo 
and similarly for dv • [Here we have made use of the continuity and 
periodicity of/(x).] We have therefore 
n 
n 
!v2(a v2 + b/) = !(cv2 + d/) 
v~l 
v~l 
1 fIr 
1 fIr 
:$;;;. _" g(X)2 dx =;;. _" f'(X)2 dx = M2 
This result allows us to construct for the Fourier series of/ex) a major-
ant with constant positive terms, which according to p. 535 assures 
absolute and uniform convergence as stated in (b). Indeed, we have 

606 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
first for the '11th harmonic oscillation by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality 
(cf. p. 15) 
la. cos Vie + b. sin vxl2 :s;; (a.2 + b;.2)(COS2 VX + sin2 vx) = a.2 + b.2 ; 
then by using the inequality 
for p = 1/'11, q = v.ja.2 + h.2, we have for all V, 
la. cos vx + b. sin vxl :s;; .!. v..! a.2 + b.2 
V 
1[1 
2( 
2 
2 ] 
:s;; 2 ~ + v a. + b.) . 
Since the sum over v of the last expression is convergent, we have con-
structed a majorant. Therefore the Fourier series 
00 
lao + I (a. cos vx + b. sin vx) 
.=1 
converges uniformly. It then has a sum s(x) which is a continuous 
function of x. To show that actually s(x) = f(x) we use an artifice by 
considering the integrated function 
F(x) = J: .. (f(t) -
lao) dt. 
Clearly, F(x) is continuous for -7T:S;; X :s;; 7T; moreover, F has the 
same value at x = -7T and x = 7T, since 
f
+ .. 
F(7T) = _ .. f(t) dt -
7Tao = 0 = F( -7T). 
Hence the periodic extension of F is continuous. Since also the first 
and second derivatives of F are sectionally continuous, the function F 
is represented by its Fourier series. By the same argument based on 
integration by parts as before the Fourier coefficients of Fare -(l/v)b. 
and (l/v)a. for v ::;1= 0, so that 
00 1 
F(x) = tAo + I - (-b. cos vx + a. sin vx) 
.=1 v 
with some constant coefficient Ao. Now the series obtained by formal 
term-by-term differentiation is already known to converge uniformly. 

Sec. 8.6 
Further Discussion of Convergence 607 
Consequently, formal term-by-term differentiation is legitimate (see 
p. 539), and we obtain the desired relation 
CI) 
F'(x) = f(x) - tao = L(a. cos vx + b. sin vx) . 
• =1 
To prove the remaining statements for f sectionally continuous and 
periodic with a sectionally continuous derivative f' we recall that by our 
previous result they are true for the periodic function X(x) of Section 
8.4d and hence for the function X(x -
~) which suffers the jump 27T at 
the point~. If now the function f(x) suffers the jumps f11' f12' ... , f1m 
1 m 
at the points ~1' ~2' •.• '~m' then f*(x) = f(x) -
- L f1iX(X -
~i) 
27T i=l 
satisfies the conditions of (b) and hence possesses a uniformly conver-
gent Fourier series, thus proving statement (a), (c) for f(x). 
d. Order of Magnitude of the Fourier Coefficients. 
Differentiation of Fourier Series 
The preceding discussions of convergence illustrate a general fact: 
The Fourier coefficients a., b. converge more rapidly to zero as n --+ 00, 
when f(x) is smoother, that is, when more derivatives of the periodic 
function f(x) are continuous. Correspondingly, the Fourier series 
converges better as the functions are smoother. We state precisely: 
If the periodic function f(x) has continuous derivatives up to order k 
and a piecewise continuous derivative of order k + I, there exists a 
bound B, depending only onf(x) and k, such that 
(40) 
B 
la.l, Ib.1 < k+1' 
V 
The proof is again (see above) almost immediate if we use integration 
by parts. For brevity we write in complex notation 
and integrate successively by parts until in the integrand the factor 
f(k+l)(x) appears. Because of the periodicity and continuity of f(x), 
f'(x) , etc., the boundary terms cancel each other and, 
Ju 
'Ju 
27T1x. = 
f(x)e- i• X dx = - .!. 
!'(x)e-i • X dx 
-u 
v -u 

608 
Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
Hence if !B is an upper bound for lJ<k+I)(x)l, then IlXvl :::;; !B/Vk+I, 
which implies the inequalities (40). 
A further remarkable result is that for k > 2 the Fourier series can 
be differentiated term by term k -
1 times and then yields the Fourier 
series for the differentiated function. For the proof we observe that 
all these differentiated series have the convergent series with B f ; 
v~l V 
as majorant, hence converge absolutely and uniformly themselves 
(cf. the criteria of Chapter 7, p. 541). 
*8.7 Approximation by Trigonometric and Rational Polynomials 
a. General Remark on Representations of Functions 
In what manner the concept of function should be restricted by 
demanding the possibility of "explicit expressions" has been a challeng-
ing question since the early times of calculus. Functions often are not 
given analytically, but rather by geometrical or mechanical ccn-
structions or by the geometric description of their graphs, which could 
be of a different nature in different intervals. 
The discovery of Fourier series in the early nineteenth century was 
a most illuminating step towards answering the old question; it 
revealed that indeed "arbitrary" functions, certainly much less 
restricted than "analytic" ones, can be expressed by convergent 
Fourier series. Yet even the Fourier series do not cover all continuous 
functions: as we mentioned without proof, one can define continuous 
functions for which the Fourier series, formed with the Fourier co-
efficients, does not converge. 
It is all the more remarkable that by giving up the principle of 
infinite series in which the approximation is achieved by addition of 
higher order terms only, we can for any continuous functionf(x) con-
struct approximating trigonometric or rational polynomials P n(x) of 
order n which converge for n -+ 00 in a closed interval uniformly to 
the given functionf(x). 
h. Weierstrass Approximation Theorem 
We prove the following closely related theorems. 
(a) If f(x) is a continuous function in a closed interval I, which is 
contained in the larger interval -7T < X < 7T, then f can in I be uni-
formly approximated by a trigonometric polynomial of period 27T of 
sufficiently high order n. 

Sec. 8.7 
Approximation by Trigonometric and Rational Polynomials 609 
(b) Any functionf(x) which is continuous in a closed interval I can 
be uniformly approximated in I by a polynomial P(x) in x. This state-
ment due to Weierstrass, can be supplemented (see p. 539) by the 
corollary: 
*(c) If f(x) possesses a continuous derivative in I then the approxi-
mating polynomials can be so chosen, that the derivative polynomials 
P n'(x) approximate the derivative f'(x) uniformly. 
The proof of (a) is quite direct. We first approximate f(x) by a 
piecewise linear function whose graph is a polygon LnCx) inscribed in 
the graph of f(x) (see Fig. 8.11). Obviously, Ln(x) differs from f(x) 
absolutely, by less than an arbitrarily small chosen margin E/2, if the 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
/ 
/ 
-71" 
Xl 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
71" 
Figure 8.11 Uniform approximation of continuous function by a polygon. 
vertices of the polygon are at equally spaced points Xl' x2, ••• , Xn and 
the constant h = xv+! -
Xv is chosen sufficiently small, due to the 
uniform continuity in I of the continuous function f (cf. p. 100). 
The next step is to join, as indicated in the figure, the end points 
-7T and 7T of the larger interval by straight lines, and thus extend 
Ln(x) into a piecewise linear function, again called Ln(x), within the 
closed interval -7T ~ X ~ 7T: this function, being zero at both end 
points, can now be extended periodically and, according to Section 8.6a, 
can be expanded in a uniformly convergent Fourier series whose poly-
nomial section Sm(x) differs from Ln(x) absolutely by less than E/2 if 
m is sufficiently large. Now ISm - II ~ ISm - Lnl + ILn - II < E, 
and (a) is proved. I 
To prove (b) we replace in each term of the finite sum Sm(x) according 
to Section 5.5b, p. 454, the trigonometric functions cos vx and sin vx by 
1 The same result holds when I is the whole interval -1T ::;; X ::;; +1T if we assume 
that [(1T) = [( -1T). Here we choose an approximating polygon Ln(x) as before, 
only choosing Ln{ -1T) = L n{1T} = [( -7T) = [(7T). 

610 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
Taylor polynomials with a uniformly small remainder; hence, com-
bining these last approximations, we construct a polynomial PN(x) for 
which JPN(x) -
Sm(x)J < e/2 where we must choose N large enough 
to attain the accuracy e/2. Combining, we have certainly in the smaller 
interval JPN(x) - f(x)J < e if m chosen such that JSm(x) - f(x)J < e/2. 
*c. Fejers Trigonometric Approximation of Fourier 
Polynomials by Arithmetical Means 
The theorem (a) of Section 8.7b can be proved very simply by a 
direct and rather explicit construction of the approximating polynomial, 
which is provided by the following remarkable theorem of L. Fejer. 
THEOREM. If Sn(x) is the nth Fourier polynomial of a periodic con-
tinuous function I(x), then the arithmetical mean 
F (x) = So(x) + ... + Sn(x) 
n 
n + 1 
converges uniformly to f(X) for n -- 00. 
The theorem guarantees convergence by averaging out whatever dis-
turbing oscillations might occur in the ordinary Fourier approximation. 
PROOF. The proof is similar to that of the main theorem of Fourier 
. 
b .. . 
I 
b 
h 
'11' 
k 
1 sin (n + t)x 
expanSIOn, ut It IS simp er ecause t e OSCI atmg erne 
2' 1. 
sm 2X 
occurring there is replaced here by the positive "Fejer kernel" 
sn(t) = (Sin t~n + l)t)2. _2_. We first note that the function 
2sm!t 
n+l 
O"n(lX) = t + cos IX + ... + cos nIX ofp. 586 can be written in the form 
0" (IX) = sin (n + t)1X = sin !IX sin (n + t)1X 
n 
2 sin tlX 
2 sin2 fIX 
1 cos nIX - cos (n + 1)1X 
= - -----'---'--~ 
2 
1 - cos IX 
by using the addition formulas for the cosine. We thus obtain the 
formula 
O"o(lX) + O"t(lX) + ... + O"n(lX) 
1 
1 - cos (n + 1)1X 
=---
n+l 
2(n + 1) 
1 - cos IX 
= 
1 
(Sin [en + 1)1X/2])2 
2(n + 1) 
sin (1X/2) 

Sec. 8.7 
Approximation by Trigonometric and Rational Polynomials 611 
Since by the definition of the Gn(IX), [see (14), p. 586] 
1 J" 
-
Gk(lX) dlX = 1, 
7T -" 
it follows that 
Now [see (28a), p. 595] 
1 J" 
Sn(x) =; _/(x + t)Gn(t) dt 
and hence 
1 
J" 
Fn(x) = 
f(x + t)[Go(t) + ... + Gn(t)] dt 
7T(n + 1) -" 
1 J" 
=; _/(x + t)sn(t) dt. 
For any positive 15 
1 Jro 
f(x) -
Fn(x) =; _l1[f(X) - f(x + t)]snCt) dt 
1 Jt5 
=; )f(x) - f(x + t)]Sn(t) dt 
I]" 
+ -
[f(x) - f(x + t)]Sn(t) dt 
7T 
t5 
1 J-t5 
+; _" [f(x) - f(x + t)]Sn(t) dt. 
Now for f(x) continuous the continuity is uniform and we can choose 
a 15 such that If(x) - f(x + t)1 < iE for all x in [-7T, 7T] and for 
It I < b. Moreoverfis bounded, say If I < M. Since from its definition 
1 
ISn(t)1 S 2(n + 1) sin2 (15/2)' 
for 
15 S It I S 7T 
we find using sn ~ 0 that 
E Jt5 
27T 1" 
27T J-t5 
If(x) -
F n(X) I S -
ISn(t)1 dt + -
ISn(t)1 dt + -
ISn(t)1 dt 
37T 
-t5 
7T 
t5 
7T 
-" 
E J" 
27T· 
27T 
< -
S (t)dt + -.------
-
37T -" n 
7T 
2(n + 1) sin 2 (15/2) 
= ~ + 
27T 
3 
(n + 1) sin2 (15/2) 

612 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
Clearly, 
for n sufficiently large, and the theorem is proved. 
*d. Approximation in the Mean and Parseval's Relation 
The proximity of two functions g(x) and hex) in a closed interval I in 
which they are continuous can be measured with a view to uniform 
convergencebythemaximumvalueoflg(x) - h(x)l. Calling the maximum 
absolute value of a continuous function cp(x) in I its maximum norm, 
we can express the uniform convergence of a sequence of functions In 
to a function I as n -+ 00 by saying that the maximum norm of the 
difference I - In or also of In - 1m tends to zero. 
For Fourier approximations (as well as for other important mathe-
matical theories outside the scope of this volume) it is natural to con-
sider another measure or "norm" for the deviation between two 
functions, or what is sufficient, for the "distance" of a function cp(x) 
from the function identically zero. This is the "quadratic mean" or 
the "mean square norm" ft = Ilcpll defined by an average value 
where I is the length of the interval l. It is a cruder measure than the 
maximum norm insofar as its smallness does not mean necessarily that 
the function is small everywhere. 
As an example, the norm of xn over the interval I: 0::::;; x ::::;; 1 has the 
value (2n + 1)-J.-l which can be made arbitrarily small by choosing n 
sufficiently large whereas the function xn is equal to 1 for x = 1. 
If the quadratic norm II In - III tends to zero as n -+ 00, then we say 
that In tends to I in the quadratic mean. 
The quadratic norm can be usefully denoted as "distance" because of 
the so-called triangle inequality, corresponding to that valid for numbers 
(see p. 14). This inequality III +gll ::::;; IIIII + Ilgll for two functions 
f and g follows immediately: applying the inequality pq ::::;; !(P2 + q2) 
with 
=f(x) 
= g(x) 
p 
Ilfll,q 
Ilgll' 
and integrating over I, we find 
~ L 
f(x)g(x) dx ::::;; Ilfll . Ilgll. 

Sec. 8.7 
Now 
or 
Approximation by Trigonometric and Rational Polynomials 613 
111+ gl12 = ! J [/(x) + g(X)]2 dx 
1 I 
= 11/112 + IIgl12 + ! r 2/(x)g(x) dx 
1 JI 
:::;; (11/11 + Ilgll)2 
III + gil:::;; 11I11 + Ilgll. 
With these concepts we may illuminate Bessel's inequality of Section 
8.6b. We show first: The closest approximation in the mean to a given 
piecewise continuous function I( x) by a trigonometric polynomial 
Tn = ~ + icv cos vx + d v sin vx 
2 
v~l 
11 
= L f3veiVX, 
v=-n 
of order n [with f30 = co/2, f3v + f3-v = cv' i(f3v -
f3-v) = dv'] with 
freedom of the choice of the coefficients cv' dv is given by the Fourier 
polynomial 
Sn = ao + fa v cos vx + bv sin vx 
2 
v~l 
v=-n 
where av' bv' and <Xv are the real and complex Fourier coefficients, deter-
mined from I by the formulas (26), p. 594, respectively. 
The proof, written in complex notation for brevity, is easily obtained 
using the orthogonality relations (25) in the interval 1= [-TT, TT] for 
the functions e ivX : 
n 
n 
= 11/112 - 2 L f3v<X-v + L f3vf3-v 
v=-n 
v=-n 
n 
n 
= 11/112 - L <Xv<X_v + L (Ctv -
f3v)(<X-v -
f3-v) 
v=-n 
v=-n 
n 
n 
= 11/112 - L <Xviiv + L (<Xv -
f3v)(iiv -
Pv) 
v=-n 
v=-n 
n 
n 
= 11/112 - L l<Xvl2 + L I<xv - f3l; 
v=-n 
v=-n 

614 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
clearly, this last expression is minimized when the f3. are chosen as 
the Fourier coefficients IX.; that is, for IX. = f3., or equivalently, 
c. = a., d. = b •. 
We can now prove Parseval's theorem, using the approximation 
results obtained above. 
Bessel's inequality 
la02 + ~1(a.2 + b.2) ~ ;. f~lI' f(X)2 dx 
for n -
00 becomes Parseva/'s equality 
la02 + ~1(a.2 + b.2) = ;. f~lI' f(X)2 dx 
for any function f(x) of period 27r which is continuous for all x. 
PROOF. 
By the Weierstrass approximation theorem for trigono-
metrical polynomials we may choose a sequence of polynomials Tn 
such thatf(x) -
Tn(x) -
0 uniformly in x. Then also 
I Ill' 
-
[f(x) -
Tn(X)]2 dx -
0 
27T 
-lI' 
asn- 00. 
However, according to our last result, the Fourier polynomial 
ao 
n 
sncx) = '2 + .~ (a. cos vx+ b. sin vx) 
yields the closest approximation to f(x) in the mean among all nth order 
Fourier polynomials, so that 
1 Ill' 
1 Ill' 
-
[f(x) -
Sn(x)]2 dx ~ -
[f(x) -
Tn{x)]2 dx. 
27T 
-lI' 
27T 
-IT 
It follows that 
I ill' 
lim -
[f(x) -
SiX)]2 dx = O. 
n-+oo27T 
-11 
On squaring the integrand as on p. 613, we obtain the Parseval 
relation. 
Finally, we remark that Parseval's relation remains valid even if 
f(x) has a number of jump discontinuities. The simple proof is omitted 
here. 
Appendix I 
* A.I.t Stretching of the Period Interval. Fourier's Integral Theorem 
The base interval -7T ~ X ~ 7T for our periodic functions could be 
replaced by any interval -B ~ x ~ B. 
By the transformation 

Sec. A.!,] 
Stretching of the Period Interval. Fourier's Integral Theorem 615 
y = 7Tx/B this interval of length 2B is transformed into the interval 
-7T ::s;; Y ::s;; 7T, and a function f(x) with the period 2B is transformed 
into a function g(y) = f(BY/7T) = f(x) with period 27T. 
The main 
theorem, written in the complex form [see formula (27b), p. 594], implies 
00 
1 J1T 
. 
g(y) = v=~oo 27T -1T g(t)e-lV(t-IJ) dt 
and therefore by this transformation 
(41) 
f(x) = ~ i ~ JB f(s)e-iV1T(S-,,)/B ds, 
27T v=-oo B -B 
where the variable of integration is replaced by s = Bt/7T. 
The relation (41) is valid for every function piecewise smooth in 
-B::S;;x::S;;B. 
We set 7T/B = h, v7T!B = vh = Uv and write (41) in the form 
f(x) = ~ i hJB f(s)e-iUv(s-,,) ds 
27T v=-oo 
-B 
1 
00 
= -
2 heiUv" Hv 
27T v=-oo 
with Hv =fB e-iuvSf(s)ds. Now the formal passage to the limit for 
-B 
B ---+ 00 or f}.u = h ---+ 0 is obvious and yields 
(42) 
1 Joo. 
Joo 
. 
f(x) = -
em" du 
e-zu"!(s) ds. 
27T 
-00 
-00 
This is Fourier's integral formula which will be proved rigorously in 
Volume II for a large class of functions f This formula can be written 
in a clearer symmetric form as a pair of reciprocal integral relations 
between a functionf(x) and its "Fourier transform" F(u): 
1 Joo 
F(u) = /-
f(s)e- iUS ds 
y 27T 
-oc 
(43a) 
1 Joo 
f(x) = -= 
F(u)eiU" dx. 
~27T -00 
Fourier's integral formula (42) can be written in a form which does 
not involve the use of imaginary exponents. We only have to make use 
of the expressions 
eiuxe-ius = eiu(X-S) = cos u(s -
x) -
i sin u(s -
x). 

616 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
Since sin u(s -
x) is an odd function of u and cos u(s -
x) an even 
function, integration with respect to u from -
00 to + 00 of the sine 
term makes no contribution, whereas integrating the cosine term yields 
twice the value obtained from integrating from 0 to 00. Hence 
11
00 i+
oo 
(43b) 
f(x) = -
du 
f(s) cos u(s -
x) ds. 
1T 
0 
-00 
* A.I.2 Gibb's Phenomenon at Points of Discontinuity 
The nature of the convergence of the Fourier series in the vicinity of 
a jump discontinuity exhibits a remarkable feature which Gibbs dis-
covered by examining the graphs of the Fourier polynomials 
Sn(x) = ~ + i (ay cos vx + by sin vx). 
2 
y=l 
As already emphasized in Chapter 7, p. 530 the nonuniform convergence 
of a convergent sequence in the vicinity of a discontinuity of the limit 
function can be visualized by the way the continuous graphs of the 
approximating functions fail to approach the discontinuous graph of 
the limit function. 
In Fourier expansions these graphs do not simply approach the 
graph ofJ(x) supplemented by vertical connecting segments x = ~ join-
ing the two end points at the jump position g. Instead, the graphs of Sn 
show waves which near ~ exceed the ordinatesJ(~ + 0) andJ(g - 0) to 
either side by about 9 % of the total height of the jump. Thus the 
approximating graphs do approximate the graph ofJ(x) augmented by 
a vertical line segment at x = ~, not only connecting the two points on 
the graph of J(x) but overshooting this connecting line segment at 
both ends; see Figs. 8.4 and 8.5, pp. 579 and 580. 
The mathematical analysis of this situation is simple and need be 
discussed only for the discontinuity of the function x(x) of Section 8.4d 
to which all jump discontinuities were reduced on p. 607. 
The function hex) for positive x is [see formula (23a), p. 592], given by 
00 sinvx 
hex) = l(1T -
x) = I -
, 
0< x < 1T. 
y=l 
'II 
By integration of formula (14), p. 586, we find that 
Sn(x) = i sin vx = -fx + fill sin (~ ~ l)t dt 
y=l 
'II 
Jo 
2 SIO 'It 

Sec. A.I.2 
Gibb's Phenomenon at Points of Discontinuity 617 
Hence the remainder r nCx) = hex) -
Sncx) takes the form 
( 
) _ 
1 -iilJ sin (n + t)t d + 
() 
r n X 
-
21T 
t 
Pn x , 
o 
t 
where 
i
ilJ 2 sin it -
t . 
Pn(x) = 
. 
Sill (n + i)t dt. 
o 
2t sm it 
Since the expression (2 sin it -
t)/2t sin tt is sectionally continuous 
and has a sectionally continuous first derivative the lemma on p. 588 
implies that Pn(x) for n -- 00 tends to zero uniformly for 0 < x < 1T. 
Moreover, 
i
ilJ sin (n + t)t 
i(n+;..J)ilJ sin t 
O"n(x) = t1T -
dt = t1T -
-
dt 
o t o t  
tends to zero for each individual positive x as n -- 00 (see p. 589). The 
convergence, however, is not uniform. Clearly, the derivative of 
O"ncx) vanishes at the points Xk = 2k1T/(2n +1) for k = 1,2,3, .... 
It is easily seen that more precisely O"n(x) has minima at the points 
Xl' xs, X 5, ••• and maxima at X 2, X4, • • •• Moreover, the values of O"n 
at the minimum points form an increasing sequence. Thus O"n(x) has as 
its "absolute" minimum for positive X the value 
i
lf sin t 
O"n(xI ) = t1T -
-
dt 
o 
t 
= t1T - {If (1 _ 1.. t2 + 1.. t4 -
••• ) dt 
Jo 
3! 
5! 
( 
1T2 
1T' 
=1T t-l+ 
-----
2·3·3 
2·3·4·5·5 
+ 
1T6 
_ 
••• ) 
2·3·4·5·6·7·7 
~ -0.090 ... 1T. 
For large n the remainder r n is approximately equal to O"n. Hence for 
large n the approximating polynomial Sn exceeds the function X by 
about (9jlOO)1T, that is, by about 9% of the difference of the limiting 
values of the function at the origin from the right and left. Thus the 
oscillating branches of the graph of Sn(x) indeed overshoot the height 
of the graph of X(x) and exhibit the limit phenomenon described above. 
It is easily seen that the Fejer mean values of the sums Sn(x) are free 
from Gibb's phenomenon. 

618 
Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
* A.I.3 Integration of Fourier Series 
In general, as we have seen (p. 536), an infinite series can be integrated 
term by term if it is uniformly convergent. However, for Fourier 
series, we have the remarkable result that termwise integration is 
always possible. We state: !ff(x) is a sectionally continuous function in 
-TT ~ X ~ TT having the formal Fourier expansion 
00 
tao + .L(av cos vx + bv sin vx), 
v~l 
then for any two points Xl' x2, 
I
x. 
IX. 
00 IX. 
J(x) dx = 
tao dx + .L 
(a v cos vx + bv sin vx) dx, 
Xl 
Xl 
v=l 
Xl 
or the Fourier series can be integrated termwise. Moreover, the series 
on the right converges uniformly in x2for fixed Xl. 
The remarkable part of this theorem is that not only do we not need 
to assume the uniform convergence of the series but also we do not 
even need to make use of its convergence. 
To prove the theorem, define as on p. 606 
F(x) = J:" [J(t) -
tao] dt. 
F(x) is continuous and has a sectionally continuous derivative; more-
over, it satisfies the condition F( TT) = F( -TT) = 0, so that it stays 
continuous when it is periodically extended. Thus the Fourier series 
00 
tAo + .L(Av cos vx + Bv sin vx) 
v=l 
of F(x) converges uniformly to F(x). Using integration by parts, we 
obtain for v =/:. 0, the values 
1 J" 
1 J" 
sin vt 
bv 
Av = -
F(t) cos vt dt = - -
J(t) -- dt = - - , 
TT 
~ 
TT 
~ 
V 
V 
1 J". 
1 J" 
cos vt 
a 
Bv = -
F(t) sm vt dt = -
J(t) -- dt = .2 , 
TT 
-" 
TT 
-" 
V 
V 
for the Fourier coefficients. Therefore the series 
00 
F(x2) -
F(XI) = L [Av(cos VX2 -
cos vxl ) + Bv(sin VX2 -
sin vxl )] 
v~l 

Sec. A.II.l 
Bernoulli Polynomials and Their Applications 619 
converges uniformly in x. Replacing F(x) by JX [f(x) -tao] dx, we 
obtain the relation 
7T 
I:2[J(X) -
tao] dx =v~ L~2(av cos vx + bv sin vx) dx 
as was asserted. 
Appendix II 
* A.II.t Bernoulli Polynomials and Their Applications 
a. Definition and Fourier Expansion 
In the derivation of the Taylor series (p. 450) the polynomials 
P n(x) = (x -
~)nln!, n ~ 1 in x with parameter ~ played a role. The 
sequence of these polynomials is characterized by the conditions that 
every polynomial P n+1 is a primitive function of Pm that is, P~+1(x) = 
Pn(x), and moreover, Pn(~) = 0 and Po(x) == 1. 
We now construct another remarkable sequence of polynomials, by 
successive integration, the Bernoulli polynomials, which we shall then 
extend as periodic functions and expand in Fourier series. 
The Bernoulli polynomials 4>n(x), for 0 ~ x ~ 1, are recursively 
defined by the following relations: 
(44a) 
4>n'(x) = 4>n-1(X), 
4>o(x) = 1 
(44b) 
for n > O. 
For known 4>0' 4>1, ... , 4>n condition (44a) determines 1>n within an 
arbitrary constant of integration; this constant is then completely 
fixed by the condition (44b). We see immediately by induction that 
4>n is a polynomial of the nth order with coefficients that are rational 
numbers. The first Bernoulli polynomials are easily calculated: 
4>o(x) = 1, 
4>l(X) = X - t, 
4>2(X) = tx2 - tx + i1c2, 
4>a(x) = txa -
tx2 + l\X, 
4>ix) = l-4x4 -
l2Xa + i'4 X2 - 7to. 
For n > 1, we have by (44a, b) 
4>n(l) -
4>n(O) = ll4>n'(t) dt = O. 

620 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
Therefore the polynomials CPn may be extended from the basic interval 
o ~ x ~ 1 to all x as continuous periodic functions V'n(x) with the 
period 1, the so-called Bernoulli functions,whereas the function V'l(X) 
coincides with the discontinuous function 2~ cp(27TX -
7T) and [see 
formula (23b), p. 592] can be represented as a Fourier series 
(45a) 
V'l(X) = - .; (sin127Tx + Sin2%x + sin367Tx + .. J 
By means of successive integration, we obtain then 
(45b) 
It) = (_I)(n/2)+1 . _2_ ~ cos 27Tkt 
V'n' 
(27T)n k7::1 
kn 
' 
for even n, 
(45c) 
(t) = (_I)(n+1)/2 . _2_ ~ sin 27Tkt 
V'n 
(27T)n k7::1 
kn 
' 
for odd n. 
In the original interval 0 ~ x ~ 1 the periodic functions V'..(t) are 
identical with the Bernoulli polynomials CPn(t). 
For n, even V'n is an even function, for n odd V'n is odd; equivalently 
(45d) 
The constant terms in the successive Bernoulli polynomials form a 
noteworthy sequence of rational numbers 
(46a) 
bn = CPn(O). 
= {V'n(O) for n ~ 1, 
-t for n = 1. 
We obtain immediately from the Fourier expansion 
(46b) 
for odd n = 3, 5, . .. , 
(46c) b =( _1)(n/2)+1. _2_ ~ 1. 
n 
(27T)n k7::1 kn ' 
for even n = 2, 4, .... 
Furthermore, evidentally for even n = 2m, the signs of b2m alternate. 
In place of the numbers bn which decrease rapidly with increasing n, 
Jacob Bernoulli introduced the following somewhat more suitable 
numbers: 
(47) 
which we call the Bernoulli numbers. (That the numbers B2m * = 
(-I)m-1Bm are identical with the Bernoulli numbers introduced on 

Sec. A.I1.] 
Bernoulli Polynomials and Their Applications 621 
p. 562 will become apparent later on.) In particular, 
1 
Bl =-, 
6 
1 
B 2 = -, 
30 
1 
B3 =-, 
42 
1 
B4 =-, 
30 
5 
B5 =-, 
66 
B _ 691 
6 -
2730' 
7 
B7 = -, .... 
6 
As a consequence of formula (46c), we have in 
(48) 
~ l = (_I)n-l(21T)2n1b = (21T)2n B 
k~l k2n 
~ 2n 
2(2n)! n 
an explicit representation of Riemann's ~-function ~(s) for integers 
s = 2n (see p. 560) by known numbers. For example, we obtain such 
striking formulas as 
1 
1 
1 
1T2 
1 + - + - + - + ... = - = ~(2) 
22 
32 
42 
6 
and 
1 
1 
1 
1T4 
1 + - + - + - + ... = - = ~(4). 
2' 
34 
44 
90 
As n -- 00, the numbers bn and Bn tend to zero and infinity, re-
spectively. For, first of all, we have 
00 
1 
001 
1T2 
1 < ~ -
< ~ - = - < 2. 
k=l k2n - k=l k2 
6 
Therefore 
Since 21T> 1 and (21T)-2n -- 0, when n -- 00, we have b2n -- 0, 
whereas b2n+l = o. Furthermore, 
as is seen easily, the right-hand side tends to infinity. 
*b. Generating Function; the Taylor Series of 
the Trigonometric and Hyperbolic Cotangent 
The Bernoulli numbers and polynomials lead in an elegant manner 
to the Taylor expansion of the cotangent and related functions. These 
expansions follow most easily by means of the so-called generating 

622 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
function of the Bernoulli functions, namely, the function 
00 
(49) 
F(t, z) = L "Pn(t)zn. 
n~O 
This is the power series in z whose coefficients are the Bernoulli functions 
of the parameter t. On the basis of the Fourier expansion of Eqns. 
(45) we have the estimate 
[ 2JOOI 
[2JOOI 
I "Pn(t)1 :::;; 
(27Tt k~1 kn :::;; 
(27Tt '!:I k2 
7T2 
4 
=--<-
3(27T)n 
(27T)n 
ff)r all t, and n ~ 2; hence the absolute value of the nth term of the 
series for F(!, z) is less than 4(1zl/27Tt. Thus for all t the radius of con-
vergence of the power series in z is at least 27T, as one sees by comparison 
with the series 
4 i (.1.:l)n 
m~1 27T 
Since for a fixed z with Izl < 27T the series for F(z, t) has a convergent 
majorant series, independent of t, it follows from the general theory 
(see p. 535) that the series converges uniformly for all t. Thus it can be 
integrated termwise in this domain; it can also be differentiated 
termwise if the resulting series is also uniformly convergent. We use 
this fact to determine an explicit formula for F(t, z) (see p. 539). Term-
wise differentiation with respect to t yields formally for 0 < t < 1 
(for t = 0 or t = 1, "PICt) has no derivative). 
d 
00 
- F(t, z) = L "Pn_l(t)zn 
dt 
n~1 
00 
= z L "Pn_l(t)zn-1 
n~1 
00 
= z L "Pn(t)zn 
n~O 
= zF(t, z). 
This series has the same form as the original and is certainly uniformly 
convergent, so that the termwise differentiation was justified. Hence 
for every fixed z with Izl < 27T and for 0 < t < 1, the generating 
function F(t, z) obeys the differential equation dF/dt = zF(t, z). The 
general solution of this differentiated equation is F = cezt, where c is 

Sec. A.I!.I 
Bernoulli Polynomials and Their Applications 623 
a factor whose value depends on z as parameter (see p. 223). To 
determine c, we integrate the series for F{t, z) with respect to t between 
o and 1: 
eZ -
1 
=c--
z 
Consequently, c = zJ(eZ 
-
1) and so we obtain the final results 
(50) 
ze"t 
F(t z) = --. 
, 
eZ -
1 
Letting t -
0 in this expression, we obtain the Taylor series for the 
function zJ{eZ -
1): 
lim F{t, z) = _z_ = 1 + i: bnzn. 
t-+O 
eZ -
1 
n=l 
Since bl = -t, adding tz to both sides yields 
(51) 
Incidentally, this formula shows that the numbers Bn * = n! bn are the 
Bernoulli numbers introduced on p. 562. Since bo = 1 and bn = 0 for 
odd n, we have 
(52) 
eZ + 1 z 
z ez/2 + e-Z/2 
eZ -
1 . 2 = 2 . ez/2 _ e-z/2 
z 2 cosh tz 
=- . 
2 2 sinh tz 
<Xl 
B* 
= 1 z coth 1 z = '" b z2n = '" ---.!!!... Z2n. 
2 
2 
~ 2n 
k (2 )' 
n-O 
n . 
Thus we obtain the Taylor series for the hyperbolic cotangent already 
given on p. 563; the Taylor coefficients are simply related to the 
Bernoulli numbers; we have proved now that the expansion holds for 
all \z\ < 21T. 

624 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
Similarly, we obtain the Taylor series for the ordinary (trigono-
metric) cotangent. We begin for Izl < 21T,0 < t < 1, with the generat-
ing function 
co 
(53) 
G(t, z) = ~ (-1)n"P2n(t)z2n; 
n=O 
differentiating twice, we find that G satisfies the differential equation 
d2G/dt2 + z2G = 0, whose general solution is G = a cos (zt) + b sin (zt), 
with a and b not depending on t but possibly on z as a parameter. To 
determine a and b we use two conditions. The first, il G(t, z) dt = 1, 
is found through termwise integration. The second, 
lim dG(t, z) = tz2 
t---+o 
dt 
for all z, is found by termwise differentiation, in which we use the fact 
that for n > 1, 
"P2n'(0) = "P2n-l(0) = b2n- 1 = O. 
These conditions imply 
z 
z 
a = -cot-
2 
2' 
z 
b = -, 
2 
so that for Izl < 21T, 0 < t < 1 
G( 
) _ .: cos (zt - z/2) 
t, z -
. 
2 sin (z/2) 
We leave the details to the reader. 
If we let t --+ 0 in this formula, we obtain the Taylor expansion of the 
cotangent (see p. 563) for Izi < 21T 
co 
(54) 
G(O, z) = ~ (-1)nb2nz2n = -!z coqz. 
n=O 
c. The Euler-Maclaurin Summation Formula 
In Section 5.4b we derived Taylor's formula using successive in-
tegration by parts. In the following analogous derivation of a famous 
formula of Euler, the Bernoulli polynomials, or rather their periodic 
extensions "Pn(t), take the previous place ofthe polynomials (t - b)n/n! . 
(We thus replace a and b from p. 450 by 0 and 1, which is always 
possible by means of the transformation of the variable t into the 
variable s = (t -
a)/(b -
a), and is therefore not an essential change.) 

Sec. A.ILl 
Bernoulli Polynomials and Their Applications 625 
Instead of beginning with the relation 
(55) 
1(1) - 1(0) = ff'(t) dt 
which would correspond to our previous derivation of the Taylor 
formula, we begin with the relation 
(56) 
f I(t) dt = 50
1 l(t)1po(t) dt, 
which leads to greater symmetry. Since 
and "1'1(1 -
0) = l, the formula for integration by parts 
LIUdv=uvl: -LlvdU 
for U = /(t), v = 1pl(t),/(O) = /0,/(1) = II yields (see also Chapter 3, 
p.278). 
or 
(57) 
IUo + 11) = f I(t) dt + f f'(t)1pl(t) dt, 
an explicit expression for the deviation of the sum on the left from the 
integral i 1/(t) dt. 
Since a corresponding formula holds true for every interval between 
two successive integers due to the periodicity of 1pl(t), we immediately 
obtain 
(58) -l/o + 11 + 12 + ... In-l + lin 
= fon I(x) dx + Ln f'(X)1pl(X) dx, 
or for any interval a ~ x ~ b, with a and b integers, 
(58a) la + la+! + ... + Ib-l 
= f I(x) dx + f f'(X)1pl(X) dx, -tUb - la)' 
Thus we obtain an exact expression for the difference between the left-
hand sum (the area of the inscribed rectangles in the case of an 

626 Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
increasing function) and the first term on the right-hand side (the area 
underneath the curve); formula (58a) is the simplest formulation of 
the Euler-Maclaurin summation formula. 
It is natural to improve upon this result by repeating the integration 
by parts. Integrating the expression i bf'(X)1Pl(X) dx, and setting 
u = f'(x) , dv = 'Ij'l(X) dx, we obtain 
a 
f f'(X)"P1(X) dx = f'(X)"P2(X) I: -f f"(X)"P2(X) dx. 
Since 
"P2(b) = "P2(a) = "P2(0) = b2, 
the first term takes the form 
b2[f'(b) - f'(a)]; 
the second term can be again integrated by parts, yielding 
-b3[f"(b) - f"(a)] + f:f"'(X)"P3(X) dx. 
Here, since bs = 0, the first expression vanishes; we again integrate 
by parts, obtaining 
b,[f"'(b) - j"'(a)] - f f""(x)"Plx) dx. 
Repeating this operation, until we reach "P2k' we obtain the general form 
of the Euler summation formula 
(59) fa + ja+1 + ... + jO-1 = f j(x) dx - trj(b) - j(a)] 
k 
+ ! b2n[j(2n-1I(b) - j(2n-1)(a)] + Rk, 
n=l 
where the remainder Rk may be written in one of the two forms 
(60) 
Rk = -f j(2k)(X)"P2k(X) dx, 
or 
(60a) 
d. Applications. Asymptotic Expressions 
Convergent Expansions. Euler's summation formula can be applied 
in different circumstances. First, if Rk -- 0 as k -- 00, then the infinite 
series 
co ! b2n[f(2n-1)(b) - j(2n-1)(a)] 
n=l 

Sec. A.II.l 
Bernoulli Polynomials and Their Applications 627 
converges, and the formula gives an important means of expressing the 
sum of the corresponding series in closed form, or for expressing 
definite functions as series. 
Nonconvergent Expansions. 
Secondly, and of more importance, the 
remainder Rk may not tend to zero as k ---+ 00; the above series does 
not necessarily converge. Nevertheless it may happen that at first the 
absolute values IRkl decrease with increasing k, and that IRkl for suit-
ably chosen values of k is very small, whereas IRkl begins later (for large 
k) to increase strongly. In this case the summation formula can be an 
important tool for numerical computations; although it is not possible 
to obtain arbitrarily high precision, as with convergent series, we can 
nevertheless compute the value of the left side to within an error which 
is at most equal to the least value IRkl, which is often a highly satis-
factory precision. We shall examine examples of both these phenomena. 
Example. Exponential Functions. We consider first the function 
f(x) = e ZX for some fixed z. Wit!'! a = 0 and b = 1, we obtain for any 
number k, the relation 
fo = f f(x) dx -
Hf(1) - f(O)] 
Ie 
+ L b2n[f(2n-l)(b) - f(2n-l)(a)] + Ric. 
n=l 
Consequently, 
eZ-l [ 
z 
Ic 
] 
= -_. 1 -
-2 + L b2nZ2n + Rk , 
Z 
n=l 
where 
Since 1'!f'2k(X)I ~ 4j(27T)2k (p. 622), it follows that 
IR I < Izl 2k • eizi . _4_ = 4e1zI (11)2k 
k -
(27T)2k 
27T' 
or Rk ---+ 0, at least for Izl < 27T. Consequently, for these values of z, we 
can allow k to grow beyond all bounds in the summation formula, 
obtaining 
(61) 
z 
OCJ 
-- = 1 -
1 z + L b z2n 
eZ _ 
1 
2 
n=l 2n 

628 
Trigonometric Series 
Ch.8 
for the function zj(e Z -
1), a formula already found by other methods 
(p. 623). We note that the interval of convergence is again Izl < 21T. 
e. Sums of Powers; Recursion Formula for Bernoulli Numbers 
An even simpler example of a convergent Euler summation formula 
occurs when the series on the right contains only finitely many terms, 
especially if f(x) is a polynomial of rth degree with r ~ 1, so that 
fTH(x) vanishes identically. We choose f(x) = xT, a = 0, b = n, and 
k > ir. For simplification we again introduce the sequence Bn * of 
Bernoulli numbers, defined previously (p. 623), as Bn * = n! hno for all 
n. Noting that 
Bo* = 1, BI* = -i, B3* = B5* = B7* = ... = B:nH = 0, 
we see that Euler's formula (59) takes the form 
1 + 2T + 3T + ... + (n -
1Y 
I
n 
r B * 
= 
xr dx + L _v . (j<V-Il(n) - fV-1l(0» 
o 
v~l v! 
nr+l 
T B * 
= -- + L _v r(r -
1) ... (r -
v + 2)nT- VH 
r + 1 
V~l v! 
= _1_ {nTH + i (r + 1)Bv *n<T+ll-V} 
r + 1 
v~l 
V 
= _1_ {Tf(r + l)n<r+ll-VBv* _ B:+l}' 
r + 1 v~o 
v 
This formula can be written symbolically as 
(62) 
1 + 2T + 3T + ... + (n -
1Y = _1_ {en + B*y+l _ B*r+l}, 
r + 1 
where the term within the parentheses is to be expanded formally by 
using the binomial theorem, and each of the "powers" BU is to be 
replaced by the corresponding Bernoulli number Bk *. For example, 
1 + 22 + 32 + ... + (n -
1)2 = Hn3 + 3n2B1 + 3nB2) 
= l{2n3 -
3n2 + n) 
1 + 23 + 33 + ... + (n -
1)3 = !n2(n -
1)2 
(cf. p. 58). 
By setting n = 1, formula (62) assumes the form 
_1_ {(1 + B*y+l _ B*T+l} = 0, 
r + 1 

Sec. A.II.! 
Bernoulli Polynomials and Their Applications 629 
or 
(62a) 
for all r = 1. 
which is just the recursion formula for the Bk * given on p. 562. 
f. Euler's Constant and Stirling's Series 
An example of an application of the Euler-Maclaurin formula in the 
second case, that of divergence, is given by the function f(x) = Ijx 
with a = 1, b = n. By (58a) 
(63) 1 + ! + ! + ... + _1_ =In dx + !(1 _ !) _ (n "Pl(X) dx 
n -
1 
1 X 
2 
n 
)1 
x 2 
or 
= log n + t _ ~ _ (n "Pl(X) dx 
2n 
)1 
x 2 
1 + ! + ! + ! + ... +! -log n = ! + ~ _ (n "Pl(X) dx. 
n 
2n 
)1 
x 2 
For n -- 00 the integral on the right side converges, since I "PI (x) I :E;; t, 
for all x; thus the absolute value of the integrand is always less than 
that of the convergent integral (00 dxjx2• Hence we obtain in the 
relation 
)1 
(64) 
lim [i ! - log nJ = ! - (00 "Pl\X) dx = C 
n .... oo k=lk 
)1 
x 
a definite constant C, the Euler constant, already introduced on p. 526. 
We have then two results: The harmonic series is of the same order 
of growth as the logarithm, both diverging to infinity, and there is an 
explicit expression for the difference between the two 
n i l  
foo 
(x) 
L - - log n -
C = Rn = - + 
"PI 2 
dx. 
k=1 k 
2n 
n 
x 
We note that Rn vanishes for n -- 00 at least of first order. 
We obtain a more important application when we setf(x) = log x, 
a = 1, b = n in formula (59), p. 626. Then 
log 1 + log 2 + ... + log (n -
1) = n log n -
n + 1 - ! log n 
k 
(1 ) In(2k)! 
- L b2m(2m -
2)! 1 -
2m-l + 
2k+1 "P2k+1(X) dx. 
m=1 
nIX 

630 
Trigonometric Series 
Ch. 8 
Adding log n to both sides, we obtain 
k (2m -
2)' 
(65) log n! = (n + !) log n -
n + ck + .2 
. b2m - rk(n), 
m~l 
n2m- 1 
where 
k~ 
1'" (2k)! 
Ck = 1 - .2 b2m(2m -
2)! + 
2k+l 'lI'2k+l( x) dx 
m~l 
1 
X 
The improper integrals converge for k > 0, since the functions 
'lI'2k+1(X) are periodic, and hence bounded for all x (see p. 307). We can 
find the value of the constant Ck if we observe that by (65) for n ---+ 00 
(n' en) 
Ck = lim log 
~+1/2' 
n-+oo 
n 
We conclude then from Stirling's formula (14), p. 504 (or directly from 
Wallis' product for 7T as on p. 280) that Ck = log vi 27T. If we still express 
the Bernoulli numbers b2m as (_l)m-lBml(2m)! (see formula (47), 
p. 620), we obtain the so-called Stirling series 
( 
n! 
) 
k 
( _l)m-l Bm 
10 
= 
-
r n 
g 
12 
n+1/2 -n 
.2 2 (2 
1) 2m-l 
i)· 
y 
7T n 
e 
m~l m m -
n 
This formula is a refinement of Stirling's formula. For any fixed 
positive integer k and large n the terms in the sum approach zero 
respectively of the order of lin, I/n3, I/n5, ••• ,l/n2k- 1 
The re-
mainder term rk(n) approaches zero like I/n2k, since 'lI'2k+1(X) is a bounded 
function. Thus for fixed k and very large n each term in the sum will 
be very large compared to the following terms, and the remainder will 
be smaller than all the terms in the sum. We thus obtain an approxi-
mation formula of the form 
This expansion must, however, not be considered in the same light 
as a convergent infinite series. It is only asymptotically correct in the 
sense that if we break off the series after a fixed number of terms, 
say k terms, then the error rk is small compared with all the terms 
kept provided n is sufficiently large. We can never make the error 

Problems 631 
arbitrarily small for a fixed n by taking more and more terms. As a 
matter of fact the infinite series (66) diverges, as we see immediately 
from the estimate on p. 621 for the Bernoulli numbers. For a given 
large n there is an optimum number of terms of the series which one 
might use. Thus for moderately large n we have the approximation 
for very large n the formula 
gives a more accurate approximation, etc. 
PROBLEMS 
SECTION 8.1, page 572 
1. The fundamental period T of a periodic function fis defined as the greatest 
lower bound of the positive periods off Prove: 
(a) If T <F 0, then T is a period. 
(b) If T <F 0, then every other period is an integral multiple of T. 
(c) If T = 0 and if f is continuous at any point, then f is a constant 
function. 
2. Show that iffhas incommensurable periods Tl and T2, then the funda-
mental period T is zero. Give an example of a nonconstant function with 
incommensurable periods. 
3. Letfandg have fundamental periods a and b, respectively. If a and b 
are commensurable, say alb = qlp, where p and q are relatively prime 
integers, then show by example that f + g can have as its fundamental period 
any value mIn, where m = aq = bp and n is any natural number. 
SECTION 8.5, page 598 
1. Obtain the Fourier series for the function f(x) = 1TX on the interval 
o ~ x ~ 1 as a pure sine series and as a pure cosine series. 
2. Show how to represent a function defined on an arbitrary bounded 
interval as a Fourier series. 
3. Obtain the infinite product for the cosine from the relation 
sin 21TX 
cos 1TX = 2 sin 1TX • 
4. Using the infinite products for the sine and cosine, evaluate 
(a) ~·~·!·~·1.,P-·H·H ... ; 
(b) 2 . ~ . t . & . l.l· H . U. 
S. Express the hyperbolic cotangent in terms of partial fractions. 

632 
Trigonometric Series 
Ch. 8 
6. Determine the special properties of the coefficients of the Fourier 
expansions of even and odd functions for whichf(x) = f(7T -
x). 
SECTION 8.6, page 604 
1. Investigate the convergence of the Fourier expansion 
cos 2x 
cos 3x 
cos x + -2- + -3- + ... 
of the function -log 21 sin ~ I. 
SECTION 8.7, page 608 
1. Prove Parseval's equation for a piecewise smooth function f where f 
may have a number of discontinuities. 
APPENDIX 11.1, page 619 
1. Prove that 
<Pn(t) = ~! k~ (:)B:tn- k • 
2. Prove for n ~ 1 that 
<Pn(t) = (_1)n<Pn(1 -
t). 
3. Using the expression for the cotangent in partial fractions, expand 
7TX cot TTX as a power series in x. By comparing this with the series given on 
p. 625, show that 
00 _1_ _ _ 
m-l (27T)2m 
* 
V~1 v2m - (1) 
2 . (2m)! B2m • 
4. Show that 
~ 
1 
(_1)m-l(22m -
1)7T2m 
~ ~--~~ -
B* 
v=1 (2'1' -
1)2m -
2(2m)! 
2m' 
5. Show that 
~ (-I)v = (_1)m(22m -
2)7T2m * 
V-=1 ~ 
2' (2m)! 
B2m• 
6. Using the infinite products for the sine and cosine, show that 
(sin x) 
~ (-I)v-122v- 1B* 
(a) log --
= - ~ 
2. x2v ' 
X 
, 
v=1 
(2v)! v 
' 
~ (-1)v-122v-l(22v -1)B* 
(b) log cos x = - ~ 
2. X2v. 
v=1 
(2v)! V 
7. Prove that 
1
1 logx 
7T2 
(a) 
-- dx = - -6 ; 
o 1 - x 
(b) (Ilogx dx = 
7T2 
Jo 1 + x 
- 12' 

9 
Differential Equations 
for the Simplest Types of Vibration 
On several previous occasions we have met with differential equa-
tions, that is, equations from which an unknown function is to be 
determined and which involve not only this function itself but also 
its derivatives. 
The simplest problem of this type is that of finding the indefinite 
integral of a given functionf(x): to find a function y = F(x) which 
satisfies the differential equation y' - f(x) = O. 
Furthermore, in 
Chapter 3, p. 223, we showed that an equation of the form y' = ocy is 
satisfied by an exponential function y = cea"" and we characterized the 
trigonometrical functions by differential equations (p. 312). As we saw 
in Chapter 4 (e.g., p. 405), differential equations arise in connection with 
the problems of mechanics, and indeed many branches of pure mathe-
matics and most of applied mathematics depend on differential 
equations. In this chapter, without going into the general theory, we 
shall consider the differential equations of the simplest types of 
vibration. These are not only of theoretical value but are also ex-
tremely important in applied mathematics. 
It will be convenient to bear in mind the following general ideas and 
definitions. 
By a solution of a differential equation we mean a 
function which, when substituted in the differential equation, satisfies 
the equation "identically"; this means for all values of the inde-
pendent variable that are being considered. Instead of solution the 
term integral is often used: first, because the problem is more or less a 
generalization of the ordinary problem of integration; secondly, 
because it frequently happens that the solution is actually found by 
integration. 
633 

634 
Differential Equations for the Simplest Types of Vibration 
9.1 Vibration Problems of Mechanics and Physics 
a. The Simplest Mechanical Vibrations 
Ch.9 
The simplest type of mechanical vibration has already been con-
sidered in Chapter 4 (p. 404). We there considered a particle of mass m 
which is free to move on the x-axis and which is brought back to its 
initial position x = 0 by a restoring force. The magnitude of this 
restoring force we took to be proportional to the displacement x by, 
in fact, equating it to -kx, where k is a positive constant and the 
negative sign expresses the fact that the force is always directed toward 
the origin. We shall now assume that there is a frictional force present 
also and that this frictional force is proportional to the velocity 
dxfdt = x of the particle and opposed to it. This force is then given by 
an expression of the form -rx, with a positive frictional constant r. 
Finally, we shall assume that the particle is also acted on by an external 
force which is a functionf(t) of the time t. Then by Newton's funda-
mental law the product of the mass m and the acceleration x must be 
equal to the total force, that is, the elastic force plus the frictional force 
plus the external force. This is expressed by the equation 
(1) 
mx + rx + kx = f(t). 
This equation governs the motion of the particle. If we recall the 
previous examples of differential equations, such as the integration 
problem for x = dxfdt = f(t) solved by x = Sf(t) dt + c, or the 
solution of the particular differential equation mx + kx = 0 on p. 405, 
we observe that these problems have an infinite number of distinct 
solutions. Here too we shall find that there are an infinite number of 
solutions, a fact expressed in the following way. It is possible to 
find a general solution or complete integral x(t) of the differential 
equation, depending not only,on the independent variable t but also on 
two arbitrary parameters C1 and C2' called the constants of integration. 
Assigning special values to these constants we obtain a particular 
solution, and every solution can be found by assigning special values to 
these constants. 
This fact is quite understandable (cf. also p. 404). We cannot expect 
that the differential equation alone will determine the motion completely. 
On the contrary, it is plausible that at a given instant, say at the time 
t = 0, we should be able to choose the initial position x(O) = Xo and the 
initial velocity X(O) = Xo (in short, the initial state) arbitrarily; in other 
words, at time t = 0 we should be able to start the particle from any initial 
position with any velocity. This being done, we may expect the rest of the 

Sec. 9.1 
Vibration Problems of Mechanics and Physics 635 
motion to be completely determined. The two arbitrary constants c1 and C2 
in the general solution are just enough to enable us to select the particular 
solution which fits these initial conditions. In the next section we shall see 
that this can be done in one way only. 
If no external force is present, that is, if f(t) = 0, the motion is 
called a free motion. The differential equation is then said to be 
homogeneous. Iff(t) is not equal to zero for all values of t, we say that 
the motion is forced and that the differential equation is nonhomo-
geneous. The term f(t) is also occasionally referred to as the per-
turbation term. 
b. Electrical Oscillations 
A mechanical system of the simple type described can physically 
be realized only approximately. 
An example is offered by the 
pendulum, provided its oscillations are small. The oscillations of a 
magnetic needle, the oscillations of the centre of 
a telephone or microphone diaphragm, and 
other mechanical vibrations can be represented 
to within a certain degree of accuracy by systems 
such as described. But there is another type 
/J. 
of phenomenon which corresponds with great 
precision to our differential equation (1). This 
is the oscillatory electrical circuit. 
p 
c 
cfI(t) 
We consider the circuit sketched in Fig. 9.1, 
Figure 9.1 Oscillatory 
having inductance ft, resistance p, and capacity 
electrical circuit. 
C = 11K. We also suppose that the circuit is 
acted on by an external electromotive force cp(t) which is known as a 
function of the time t, such as the voltage supplied by a dynamo or the 
voltage due to electric waves. In order to describe the process taking 
place in the circuit we denote the voltage across the condenser by E and 
the charge in the condenser by Q. These quantities are then connected 
by the equation CE = ElK = Q. The current I, which like the voltage 
E is a function of the time, is defined as the rate of change of the charge 
per unit time, that is, as the rate at which the charge on the condenser 
diminishes: 1= -Q = -dQldt = -E/K. Ohm's law states that the 
product of the current and the resistance is equal to the electromotive 
force (voltage); that is, it is equal to the condenser voltage E minus the 
counter electromotive force due to self-induction plus the external 
electromotive force cp(t). We thus arrive at the equation lp = E -
ftl + 
cp(t) or -(pjK)£ = E + (fljK)E + cp(t), that is, ftE + p£ + KE = 
-Kcp(t), which is satisfied by the voltage in the circuit. We see therefore 

636 
Differential Equations for the Simplest Types of Vibration 
Ch.9 
that we have obtained a differential equation of exactly type (1). 
Instead of the mass we have the inductance, instead of the frictional 
force, the resistance, and instead of the elastic constant, the reciprocal 
of the capacity, whereas the external electromotive force (apart from a 
constant factor) corresponds to the external force. If the electro-
motive force is zero, the differential equation is homogeneous. 
If we multiply both sides of the differential equation by -1/ K and 
differentiate with respect to the time, we obtain for the current I the 
corresponding equation 
f11 + pI + Kl = ¢(t), 
which differs from the equation for the voltage on the right-hand side 
only, and for free oscillations (1) = 0) has identically the same form. 
9.2 Solution of the Homogeneous Equation. Free Oscillations 
a. The Formal Solution 
We can easily obtain a solution of the homogeneous equation (1) 
rnx + rx + kx = 0 in the form of an exponential expression, by deter-
mining a constant A in such a way that the expression eAt = x is a 
solution. If we substitute this tentative solution and its derivatives 
x = AeAt, x = A2eAt in the differential equation and remove the common 
factor eAt, we obtain the quadratic equation. 
(2) 
rnA2 + rA + k = 0 
for A. The roots of this equation are 
r 
1 
/ 
r 
1 
/ 
Al = - -
+ -
"r2 -
4mk, 
,12 = - -
- -" r2 -
4mk. 
2m 
2m 
2m 
2m 
Each of the two expressions x = eA1t and x = eA• t is, at least formally, 
a particular solution of the differential equation, as we see by carrying 
out the calculations in the reverse direction. Three different cases can 
now occur: 
1. r2 -
4rnk > O. The two roots Al and A2 are then real, negative, 
and unequal, and we have two solutions of the differential equation, 
Ul = eA1t 
and 
U2 = eA• t• 
With the help of these two solutions we can at once construct a solution 
in which two arbitrary constants are present. For after differentiation 
we see that 
(3) 

Sec. 9.2 
Solution of the Homogeneous Equation. Free Oscillations 637 
is also a solution of the differential equation. In Section 9.3 we shall 
show that this expression is in fact the most general solution of the 
equation; that is, that we can obtain every solution of the equation by 
substituting suitable numerical values for C1 and C2• 
2. r2 -
4mk = O. The quadratic equation has a double root. Thus 
to begin with we have, apart from a constant factor, only the one 
solution x = WI = e-·tI2m. But we easily verify that in this case the 
function 
is also a solution of the differential equation.l For we find that 
. (1 
r t) -.tI2m 
.. 
(r2 t 
r) -.tI2m 
x= --
e 
,x= -
-- e 
2m 
4m2 
m 
' 
and by substitution we see that the differential equation 
2 
mx + ri + .!..- x = mx + rx + kx = 0 
4m 
is satisfied. Then the expression 
(4) 
again gives us a solution of the differential equation with two arbitrary 
constants of integration C1 and C2• 
3. r2 -
4mk < O. We put r2 -
4mk = -4m2v2 and obtain two 
solutions of the differential equation in complex form, given by the 
expressions x = U1 = e-·t/2m+ivt and x = U2 = e-rt/2m-ivt. 
Euler's 
formula 
e±ivt = cos vt ± i sin vt 
gives us for the real and imaginary parts of the complex solution U1, on 
the one hand the expressions 
VI = e-rtl2m cos vt, 
v2 = e-rtl2m sin vt, 
and on the other hand, the representation 
From the second form of representation we see that VI and V2 are (real) 
solutions of the differential equation. To verify this directly by 
differentiation and substitution is a simple exercise. 
1 We are led to this solution naturally by the following limiting process: if Al ¥< A2, 
then the expression (eA11 -
eA21)/(Al - A2) also represents a solution. If we now let 
Al tend to A2 and write A instead of Ai> AI> our expression becomes d(eA')/dA = teAl. 

638 
Differential Equations for the Simplest Types of Vibration 
Ch.9 
From our two particular solutions we can again form a general 
solution 
(5) 
x = C1V1 + C2V2 = (C1 cos vt + C2 sin vt)e-Tt/2m 
with two arbitrary constants C1 and C2• This may also be written in 
the form 
(6) 
x = arTtl2m cos v(t -
b), 
where we have put C1 = a cos vb, C2 = a sin vb, and a, 15 are two new 
constants. 
We recall that we have already met this solution for the special 
r = 0 (Section 5.4). 
h. Interpretation of the Solution 
In the two cases r > 2 .J mk and r = 2.J mk the solution is given by 
the exponential curve or by the graph of the function trTt/2m, which for 
large values of t resembles the exponential curve, or by the superposition 
of such curves. In these cases the process is aperiodic; that is, as the 
time increases the "distance" x approaches the value 0 asymptotically 
without oscillating about the value x = O. The motion therefore is not 
oscillatory. The effect of friction or damping is so great that it prevents 
the elastic force from setting up oscillatory motions. 
It is quite different for r < .J2mk, where the damping is so small that 
complex roots AI, A2 occur. The expression x = a cos vet -
b)e-rt / 2m 
here gives us damped harmonic oscillations. These are oscillations which 
follow the sine law and have the circular frequency v = .J kim - r2/4m2, 
o 
but whose amplitude, instead of being 
constant, is given by the expression 
arTtl2m. That is, the amplitude dimin-
ishes exponentially; the greater the 
expression rl2m is, the faster is the rate 
of decrease. In physical literature this 
damping factor is frequently called the 
attenuation constant of the damped 
Figure 
9.2 Damped 
harmonic 
oscillation, the term indicating that 
oscillations. 
the logarithm of the amplitude de-
creases at the rate rl2m. A damped 
oscillation of this kind is illustrated in Fig. 9.2. As before, we call the 
quantity T = 27Tlv the period of the oscillation and the quantity vb the 
phase displacement. For the special case r = 0 we again obtain simple 
harmonic oscillations with the frequency 
Vo = .J kim, the natural 
frequency of the undamped oscillatory system. 

Sec. 9.2 
Solution of the Homogeneous Equation. Free Oscillations 639 
c. Fulfilment of Given Initial Conditions. 
Uniqueness of the Solution 
We have still to show that the solution with the two constants CI and 
C2 can be made to fit any preassigned initial state, and also that it repre-
sents all the possible solutions of the equation. Suppose that we have 
to find a solution which at time t = 0 satisfies the initial conditions 
x(O) = Xo, x(O) = xo, where the numbers Xo and Xo can have any values. 
Then in case 1 of Section 9.2a (p. 636) we must put 
CI + C2 = xo, 
CIAI + C2A2 = xo· 
For the constants CI and C2 we accordingly have two linear equations, 
and these have the unique solutions 
In case 2 the same process gives the two linear equations 
CI = Xo, 
ACI + C2 = Xo 
( A = - 2:)' 
froftl which CI and C2 can again be uniquely determined. Finally, in 
case 3 the equations determining the constants take the form 
a cos yO = xo, 
a(y sin yO - 2: cos YO) = xo, 
with the solutions 
.Il 
1 
Xo 
1 J [2 2 ( . 
r 
)2J 
u = - arc cos -, a = -
Y Xo + Xo + -
Xo 
. 
yay 
2m 
Thus we have shown that the general solutions can be made to fit any 
arbitrary initial conditions. We have still to show that there is no other 
solution. For this we need show only that for a given initial state there 
can never be two different solutions. 
If two such solutions u(t) and vet) existed, for which u(O) = Xo, 
u(O) = Xo and v(O) = Xo, v(O) = xo, then their difference w = u -
v 
would also be a solution of the differential equation, and we should 
have w(O) = 0, w(O) = O. This solution would therefore correspond to 
an initial state of rest, that is, to a state in which at time t = 0 the 

640 Differential Equations for the Simplest Types of Vibration 
Ch.9 
particle is in its position of rest and has zero velocity. We must show 
that it can never set itself in motion. To do this we multiply both sides 
of the differential equation mw + rw + kw = 0 by 2w and recall that 
2ww = (djdt)tiI2 and 2ww = (djdi)w2. We thus optain 
!!.. (mw2) + !!.. (kw2) + 2rw2 = O. 
dt 
dt 
If we integrate between the instants t = 0 and t = T and use the initial 
conditions w(O) = 0, w(O), we have 
(T(dw)2 
mw2(T) + kW2(T) + 2r Jo dt dt = o. 
This equation, however, would yield a contradiction if at any time 
T> 0 the function w were different from O. For then the left-hand side 
of the equation would be positive, since we have taken m, k, and r to be 
positive, and the right-hand side is zero. Hence w = u -
v is always 
equal to 0, which proves that the solution is unique. 
9.3 The Nonhomogeneous Equation. Forced Oscillations 
a. General Remarks. Superposition 
Before proceeding to the solution of the problem when an external 
force J(t) is present, that is, to the solution of the nonhomogeneous 
equation, we make the following remark. 
If wand v are two solutions of the nonhomogeneous equation, the 
difference u = w -
v satisfies the homogeneous equation; this we see 
at once by substitution. Conversely, if u is a solution of the homo-
geneous equation and v a solution of the nonhomogeneous equation, 
then w = u + v is also a solution of the nonhomogeneous equation. 
Therefore from one solution1 of the nonhomogeneous equation we 
obtain all its solutions by adding the complete integral of the homo-
geneous equation. We therefore need find only a single solution of the 
nonhomogeneous equation. Physically this means that if we have a 
forced oscillation due to an external force, and superpose on it an 
arbitrary free oscillation, represented by a solution of the homogeneous 
equation, we obtain a phenomenon which satisfies the same nonhomo-
geneous equation as the original forced oscillation. If a frictional force 
is present, the free motion in the case of oscillatory motion must fade 
out as time goes on because of the damping factor e-rt / 2m• Hence for a 
1 Often called a particular integral or particular solution. 

Sec. 9.3 
The Nonhomogeneous Equation. Forced Oscillations 641 
given forced vibration with friction it is immaterial what free vibration 
we superpose; the motion will always tend to the same final state as 
time goes on. 
Second, we notice that the effect of a force f(t) can be split up in 
the same way as the force itself. By this we mean the following: if 
fl(t),f2(t), andf(t) are three functions such that 
fl(t) + f2(t) = f(t), 
and if Xl = xl(t) is a solution of the differential equation mx + ri + 
kx = fl(t) and X2 = x2(t) is a solution of the equation mx + ri + kx = 
fit), then x(t) = xl(t) + x2(t) is a solution of the differential equation 
(7) 
mx + ri + kx = f(t). 
A corresponding statement, of course, holds if f(t) consists of any 
number of terms. This simple but important fact is called the prin-
ciple of superposition. The proof follows from a glance at the 
equation itself. By subdividing the function f(t) into two or more 
terms we can thus split the differential equation into several equations, 
which in certain circumstances may be easier to manipulate. 
The most important case is that of a periodic external force f( t). Such 
a periodic external force can be resolved into purely periodic com-
ponents by expansion in a Fourier series, and can thereforel be 
approximated to as closely as we please by a sum of a finite number of 
purely periodic functions. It is therefore sufficient to find the solution 
of the differential equation subject to the assumption that the right-hand 
side has the form 
a cos rot 
or 
b sin rot, 
where a, b, and ro are arbitrary constants. 
Instead of working with these trigonometric functions, we can 
obtain the solution more simply and neatly if we use complex notation. 
We putf(t) = ceiwt, and the principle of superposition shows that we 
need only consider the differential equation 
(8) 
mx + ri + kx = ceiwt, 
where by c we mean an arbitrary real or complex constant. Such a 
differential equation actually represents two real differential equations. 
For if we split the right-hand side into two terms by taking, for 
example, c = I and write eiwt = cos rot + i sin rot, then Xl and x 2, the 
solutions of the two real differential equations mx + ri + kx = cos rot 
1 Provided that it is continuous and sectionally smooth (p. 604), which is the most 
important case in physics. 

642 Differential Equations for the Simplest Types of Vibration 
Ch.9 
and mx + rx + kx = sin wt, combine to form the solution x = Xl + iX2 
of the complex differential equation. Conversely, if we first solve the 
differential equations in complex form, the real part of the solution 
gives us the function Xl and the imaginary part the function X2• 
h. Solution of the Nonhomogeneous Equation 
We solve Equation (8) by a device suggested naturally by intuition. 
We assume that c is real and (for the time being) that r oF O. We now 
make the guess that a motion will exist which has the same rhythm as 
the periodic external force, and we accordingly attempt to find a 
solution of the differential equation in the form 
(9) 
where we have only to determine the factor a, which is independent 
of the time. If we substitute this expression and its derivatives x = 
iwaeiwt , x = _w2aeiwt in the differential equation and remove the 
common factor eiwt we obtain the equation 
- mw2a + irwa + ka = c 
or 
(10) 
c 
a= --------------
-mw2 + irw + k 
Conversely, we see that for this value of a the expression aeiwt is 
actually a solution of the differential equation. To express the meaning 
of this result clearly, however, we must perform a few transformations. 
We begin by writing the complex factor a in the form 
k -
mw2 -
irw 
-iw6 
a = c 
= crxe 
, 
(k -
mw2)2 + r2w2 
(11) 
where the positive "distortion factor" rx and the "phase displacement" 
wb are expressed in terms of the given quantities m, r, k, by the 
equations 
rx2 = 
1 
, sin wb = rwrx, 
cos wb = (k -
mw2)rx. 
(k -
mw2)2 + r2w2 
With this notation our solution takes the form 
and the meaning of the result is as follows: to the force c cos wt there 
corresponds the "effect" crx cos w(t -
b), and to the force c sin wt 
corresponds the effect crx sin w(t -
b). 

Sec. 9.3 
The Nonhomogeneous Equation. Forced Oscillations 643 
Hence we see that the effect is a function of the same type as the 
force, that is, an undamped oscillation. This oscillation differs from 
the oscillation representing the force in that the amplitude is increased 
in the ratio oc : I and the phase is altered by the angle w!5. Of course, 
it is easy to obtain the same result without using the complex notation, 
but at the cost of somewhat longer calculations. 
According to the remark at the beginning of this section, by finding 
this one solution we have completely solved the problem; for by 
superposing any free oscillation we can obtain the most general forced 
oscillation. 
Collecting the results, we state the following: 
The complete integral of the differential equation 
mx + rx + kx = ceiwt 
(where x ~ 0) is x = coceiw(t-6) + u, where u is the complete integral of 
the homogeneous equation mx + rx + kx = 0 and the quantities oc and 
!5 are defined by the equations 
(12) 
2 
1 
2 
oc -
sin wb = rwoc, 
cos w!5 = (k -
mw )oc. 
- (k -
mw2)2 + r2w2 ' 
The constants in this general solution leave us the possibility of 
making the solution suit an arbitrary initial state, that is, for arbitrarily 
assigned values of Xo and Xo the constants can be chosen in such a way 
that x(O) = Xo and x(O) = xo. 
c. The Resonance Curve 
To acquire a grasp of the solution which we have obtained and of its 
significance in applications, we shall study the distortion factor oc as a 
function of the "exciting frequency" w, that is, the function 
(13) 
cfo(w) = 
1 
,J(k -
mw2l + r2w2 
Such a detailed investigation is motivated by the fact that for given con-
stants k, m, r, or as we say for a given "oscillatory system," we can think 
of the system as being acted on by periodic exciting forces of very dif-
ferent circular frequencies, and it is important to consider the solution 
of the differential equation for these widely different exciting forces. In 
order to describe the function conveniently we introduce the quantity 
Wo = ,J kim. This number Wo is the circular frequency which the 
system would have for free oscillations if the friction r were zero; or, 

644 Differential Equations for the Simplest Types of Vibration 
Ch.9 
briefly, the natural frequency of the undamped system (cf. p. 639). The 
actual frequency of the free system, owing to the friction r, is not equal 
to Wo, but is instead 
V= J: -4~2' 
where we assume that 4km -
r2 > O. (If this is not the case the free 
system has no frequency; it is aperiodic.) 
The function rp( w) tends asymptotically to the value zero as the 
exciting frequency tends to infinity, and, in fact, it vanishes to the 
order l/w2• Furthermore, 4>(0) = 11k; in other words, an exciting 
force of frequency zero and magnitude one, that is, a constant force 
of magnitude one, gives rise to a displacement of the oscillatory system 
amounting to 11k. In the region of positive values of W the derivative 
rp'(w) cannot vanish except where the derivative of the expression 
(k - m(2)2 + r2w2 vanishes, that is, for a value W = WI > 0 for which 
the equation 
-4mw(k - m(2) + 2r2w = 0 
holds. In order that such a value may exist we must obviously have 
2km -
r2 > 0; in this case 
WI = J~ -I... = Jwo2 - ~ 
• 
m 
2m2 
2m2 
Since the function rp( w) is positive everywhere, increases monotonically 
for small values of w, and vanishes at infinity, this value WI must give 
a maximum. We call this frequency WI the "resonance frequency" 
of the system. 
By substituting this expression for WI we find that the value of the 
maximum is 
1 
rp(wl ) = 
. 
r,J(klm - r2/4m2) 
As r ---+- 0, this value increases beyond all bounds. For r = 0, that is, 
for an undamped oscillatory system, the function rp( w) has an infinite 
discontinuity at the value W = WI. This is a limiting case to which we 
shall give special consideration later. 
The graph of the function rp(w) is called the resonance curve of the 
system. The fact that for W = WI (and consequently for small values 
of r in the neighborhood of the natural frequency) the distortion of 
amplitude ex = rp( w) .is particularly large is the mathematical expression 
of the "phenomenon of resonance," which for fixed values of m and k 
is more and more evident as r becomes smaller and smaller. 

Sec. 9.3 
The Nonhomogeneous Equation. Forced Oscillations 645 
In Fig 9.3 we have sketched a family of resonance curves, all correspond-
ing to the values m = 1 and k = 1, and consequently to Wo = 1, but with 
different values of D = 1r. We see that for small values of Dwell-marked 
resonance occurs near W = 1; in the limiting case D = 0 there would be an 
infinite discontinuity of t/>( w) at w = 1, instead of a maximum. As D increases 
2.2 ~---"""---r---'---'----'------' 
2.1 
2.0 I-----If-----+-I---\:---+--+---~ 
1.9 
D=O 
l.8 1--___ 
-+-~l-jL--_ 
1.7 
1.61-----t--f-J~-+_-\-_\_-_+---_I 
1.5 
~1.41_-----~f_---~~~r__+-----~ 
t l.3 
l.21------#'1-------+---\---\--+-----I 
51.1 
'S 1.0 kotI!!!!:=;;;...=:::±---=----'~--~\---1I-----I 
~ 0.9 
o 0.81+~._---=~-----=~~~~---=\_\-----___l 
0.7 
0.6 Hr--~+_-~..."....-+~..."....~c-+-¥..----__l 
0.5 
0.41----\---P......---+-"':::O"~----::!~~~~ 
0.3 
0.2 r--~~-:::J5~T-......=;::::\::::=~ 
O.lr=-_---J~==:::;±;:::::=d:==d 
00 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
Exciting frequency _ 
Cd 
Figure 9.3 Resonance curves. 
the maxima move towards the left, and for the value D = 1/v''2 we have 
WI = O. In this last case the point where the tangent is horizontal has moved 
to the origin, and the maximum has disappeared. If D > 1/v'"2 there is no 
zero of t/>'(w); the resonance curve no longer has a maximum, and resonance 
no longer occurs. 
In general, the resonance phenomenon ceases as soon as the con-
dition 
2km-r2~0 
becomes true. In the case of the equality sign, the resonance curve 
reaches its greatest height cp(O) = 11k at WI = 0; its tangent is hori-
zontal there, and after an initial course which is almost horizontal it 
declines towards zero. 

646 Differential Equations for the Simplest Types of Vibration 
Ch.9 
d. Further Discussion of the Oscillation 
We cannot, however, remain content with the above discussion. 
To really understand the phenomenon of forced motion an additional 
point needs to be emphasized. The particular integral cexeim(t-d) is to 
be regarded as a limiting state which the complete integral 
x(t) = cexeim(t-d) + C1U1 + C2U2 
approaches more and more closely as time goes on, since the free 
oscillation C1U1 + C2U2 superposed on the particular integral fades away 
with the passage of time. This fading away will take place slowly if r 
is small, rapidly if r is large. 
Let us suppose, for example, that at the beginning of the motion, 
that is, at time t = 0, the system is at rest, so that x(O) = 0 and 
i(O) = O. From this we can determine the constants C1 and C2, and we 
see at once that they are not both zero. Even when the exciting fre-
quency is approximately or exactly equal to WI> so that resonance 
occurs, the relatively large amplitude ex = cp(w1) will not at first appear. 
On the contrary, it will be masked by the function C1U1 + C2U2' and will 
first make its appearance when this function fades away; that is, it will 
appear more slowly as r grows smaller. 
For the undamped system, that is, for r = 0, our solution fails when 
the exciting frequency is equal to the natural circular frequency 
Wo = -Jk/m, for then cp(wo) is infinite. We therefore cannot obtain a 
solution of the equation ma: + kx = eimt in the form aeimt. We can, 
however, at once obtain a particular solution in the form x = ateimt. 
If we substitute this expression in the differential equation, remember-
ing that 
we have 
a(2imw -
mw2t + kt) = 1, 
and, since mw2 = k, 
1 
a=--. 
2imw 
Thus when resonance occurs in an undamped system we have a solution 
t 
. t 
t 
. t 
X = -- e'm = --=e'm. 
2imw 
2i-Jkm 
Using real notation, whenf(t) = cos wt, we have 
1 
t 
. 
x = - ---= sm wt 
2-Jkm 

Sec. 9.3 
The Nonhomogeneous Equation. Forced Oscillations 647 
and when f{t) = sin wt we have 
1 
t 
x = - --=cos wt. 
2.Jkm 
We thus see that we have found a function which may be referred to 
as an oscillation, but whose amplitude increases proportionally with 
the time. The superposed free oscillation does not fade away since it is 
undamped; but it retains its original amplitude and becomes un-
important in comparison with the increasing amplitude of the special 
forced oscillation. The fact that in this case the solution oscillates 
backward and forward between positive and negative bounds which 
continually increase as time goes on represents the real meaning of the 
infinite discontinuity of the resonance function for an undamped 
system. 
e. Remarks on the Construction of Recording Instruments 
In a great variety of applications in physics and engineering the discussion 
in the previous subsection is of the utmost importance. With many in-
struments, such as galvanometers, seismographs, oscillatory electrical circuits 
in radio receivers, and microphone diaphragms, the problem is to record 
an oscillatory displacement x due to an external periodic force. In such 
cases the quantity x satisfies our differential equation, at least to a first 
approximation. 
If T is the period of oscillation of the external periodic force, we can 
expand the force in a Fourier series of the form 
00 
/(t) = L "/iei1(21r/T)t, 
1--00 
or, better still, we can think of it as represented with sufficient accuracy by 
N 
a trigonometric sum L Yleil(21r/T)t consisting of a finite number of terms 
l--N 
only. By the principle of superposition (p. 641), the solution x(t) of the 
differential equation, apart from the superposed free oscillation, will be 
represented by an infinite seriesl of the form 
00 
x(t) = L f1zeil(21r/T)t, 
1--00 
or approximately by a finite expression of the form 
N 
x(t) = L f1zeil(21r/T)t. 
l--N 
1 Questions of convergence will not be discussed here. 

648 
Differential Equations for the Simplest Types of Vibration 
By virtue of our previous results 
at = YtOCte-idz(27rI}T) 
and 
Ch.9 
We can then describe the action of an arbitrary periodic external force 
in the following way: if we resolve the exciting force into purely periodic 
components, the individual terms of the Fourier series, then each com-
ponent is subject to its own distortion of amplitude and phase displace-
ment, and the separate effects are then superposed additively. If we are 
interested only in the distortion of amplitude (the phase displacement is only 
of secondary importance2 in applications and, moreover, can be discussed in 
the same way as the distortion of amplitude), a study of the resonance curve 
gives us complete information about the way in which the motions of the 
recording apparatus mirror the external exciting force. 
For very large 
values of I or w[ =(27r1T)1] the effect of the exciting frequency on the displace-
ment x will be hardly perceptible. On the other hand, all exciting frequencies 
in the neighborhood of WI' the (circular) resonance frequency, will markedly 
affect the quantity x. 
In the construction of physical measuring and recording apparatus the 
constants m, r, and k are at our disposal, at least within wide limits. These 
should be chosen so that the shape of the resonance curve is as well adapted 
as possible to the special requirements of the measurement in question. 
Here two considerations predominate. First, it is desirable that the apparatus 
should be as sensitive as possibl~; that is, for all frequencies w in question 
the value of IX should be as large as possible. For small values of w, as we 
have seen, oc is approximately proportional to 11k, so that the number 11k 
is a measure of the sensitiveness of the instrument for small exciting fre-
quencies. The sensitiveness can therefore be increased by increasing 11k, 
that is, by weakening the restoring force. 
The other important point is the necessity for relative freedom from dis-
N 
tortion. Let us assume that the representation f(t) = .2 Yleil(21r}T)! is an 
l=-N 
adequate approximation to the exciting force. We then say that the apparatus 
records the exciting force f(t) with relative freedom from distortion if for all 
circular frequencies W ~ N(27rIT) the distortion factor has approximately 
the same value. This condition is indispensable if we wish to derive con-
clusions about the exciting process directly from the behavior of the appa-
ratus; if, for example, a recorder or radio is to reproduce both high and 
low musical notes with an approximately correct ratio of intensity. The 
requirement that the reproduction should be relatively "distortionless" can 
2 Since, for example, it is imperceptible to the human ear. 

Sec. 9.3 
The Nonhomogeneous Equation. Forced Oscillations 649 
never be satisfied exactly, since no portion of the resonance curve is exactly 
horizontal. We can, however, attempt to choose the constants m, k, r, of 
the apparatus in such a way that no marked resonance occurs, and also in 
such a way that the curve has a horizontal tangent at the beginning, so that 
tp(w) = CY. remains approximately constant for small values of w. As we have 
learned above, we can do this by putting 
2km -
r2 = O. 
Given a constant m and a constant k, we can satisfy this requirement by 
adjusting the friction r properly, for example, by inserting a properly chosen 
resistance in an electrical circuit. The resonance curve then shows us that 
from the frequency 0 to circular frequencies near the natural circular fre-
quency Wo of the undamped system the instrument is nearly distortion less, 
and that above this frequency the damping is considerable. We therefore 
obtain relative freedom from distortion in a given interval of frequencies by 
first choosing m so small and k so large that the natural circular frequency 
Wo of the undamped system is greater than any of the exciting circular 
frequencies under consideration, and then choosing a damping factor r in 
accordance with the equation 2km -
r2 = O. 

List of Biographical Dates 
Abel, Niels Henrik (1802-1829) 
Archimedes (287 ?-212 B.C.) 
Barrow, Isaac (1630-1677) 
Bernoulli, Jakob (1654--1705) 
Bernoulli, John (1667-1748) 
Bessel, Friedrich Wilhelm (1784--1846) 
Bolzano, Bernhard (1781-1848) 
Brahe, Tycho (1546-1601) 
Briggs, Henry (1556?-1630) 
Cantor, Georg (1845-1918) 
Cauchy, Augustin (1789-1857) 
Coulomb, Charles Augustin de (1736-1806) 
Darboux, Gaston (1842-1917) 
Dedekind, Richard (1831-1916) 
De Moivre, Abraham (1667-1754) 
Descartes, (Cartesius) Rene (1596-1650) 
Dirichlet, Gustav Lejeune (1805-1859) 
Einstein, Albert (1879-1955) 
Euclid (about 300 B.C.) 
Euler, Leonhard (1707-1783) 
Fejer, Lipot (1880-1959) 
Fermat, Pierre de (1601-1665) 
Fourier, Joseph (1768-1830) 
Fresnel', Augustin (1788-1827) 
Gauss, Carl Friedrich (1777-1855) 
Gibbs, Josiah Willard (1839-1903) 
Gregory, James (1638-1675) 
Guldin, Paul (1577-1643) 
650 

List of Biographical Dates 
651 
Hermite, Charles (1822-1901) 
Holder, Otto (1860-1937) 
Huygens, Christian (1629-1695) 
Jensen, J. L. W. V. (1859-1925) 
Kepler, Johannes (1571-1630) 
Lagrange, Joseph Louis (1736-1813) 
Lambert, Johann Heinrich (1728-1777) 
Landau, Edmund (1877-1938) 
Leibnitz, Gottfried Wilhelm von (1646-1716) 
L'H6pital, Guillaume, Fran~ois Antoine de (1661-1704) 
Lipschitz, Rudolf Otto (1832-1903) 
Lorentz, Hendrik Antoon (1853-1928) 
Maclaurin, Colin (1698-1746) 
Michelson, Albert Abraham (1852-1931) 
Morley, Edmund Williams (1838-1923) 
Napier, John (1550-1617) 
Newton, Isaac (1642-1727) 
Ohm, Georg Simon (1787-1854) 
Parseval, Marc Anton (B. ?-1836) 
Ptolemy, (Claudius Ptolemaeus) (second Century A.D.) 
Raabe, Joseph Ludwig (1801-1859) 
Riemann, Bernhard (1826-1866) 
Rolle, Michael (1652-1719) 
Schwarz, Hermann Amandus (1843-1921) 
Seidel, Philipp Ludwig von (1821-1896) 
Simpson, Thomas (1710-1761) 
Stirling, James (1692-1770) 
Taylor, Brook (1685-1731) 
Vega, George (1754-1802) 
Wallis, John (1616-1703) 
Weierstrass, Karl (1815-1897) 


Index 
Abel's test, 515 
Abel's theorem, 569 
Absolute value, 3, 104 
Acceleration, 169, 395 
normal component of, 396 
tangential component of, 396 
Addition theorem of trigonometry, 
314 
Affine mapping, 20 
Algebraic equation, 103 
Algebraic function, 49 
Algebraic number, 79 
Almost all, 90 
Alternating currents, 583 
Amplitude of oscillation, 405, 410, 
582-583 
Analytic function, 545 
of a complex variable, 553 
Angle, between two directions, 341 
direction, 161 
of inclination, 341 
Antecedent, 18 
Approximation, by trigonometrical 
and rational polynomials, 608 
Fejer's trigonometric, 610 
in the mean, 612 
successive, 495 
Arc, directed simple, 334, 336 
oriented, 334 
sense on the, 334 
simple, 334 
Arc sin x, 213 
principal value of, 211 
Arc tan x, 214, 441, 445, 553 
Arc cot x, 214 
Area, 120, 395 
bounded by closed curves, 430 
Area, in polar coordinates, 371 
oriented, 365, 368 
under a curve, 121 
within closed curves, 365 
Arithmetic, average, 141, 142 
geometric mean, 113 
mean, 16, 109, 139, 190 
Associative law, 2 
Astroid, 430, 435, 436 
Attenuation constant, 638 
Attraction, gravitational, 413, 421 
Average, arithmetic, 141 
height, 373 
note of change, 160 
of function, 139 
velocity, 162, 191 
weighted, 142 
Axiom, 87 
of continuity, 8 
Beats, 577 
Bernoulli functions, 620, 622 
Bernoulli numbers, 562, 620, 623, 
628 
Bernoulli polynomials, 619 
Bessel's inequality, 604, 614 
Binary representation, 11 
Binomial, coefficient, 59, 110 
coefficients, general, 457 
series, 456, 469, 547 
theorem, 59 
Bound, greatest lower, 97 
integral, 139 
least upper, 97, 98 
Bounded sequence, 71 
Bounded set of real numbers, 97 
653 

654 Index 
Capacity, 423 
Cardioid, 435 
Catenary, 378 
Catenoid, 378 
Cauchy convergence test, 75, 97, 
511 
Cauchy formula for remainder in 
Taylor's formula, 448, 452 
Cauchy inequality, 15, 108 
Cauchy test for uniform conver-
gence, 5.34 
Center, of gravity, 142 
of mass, 373 
Chain rule of differentiation, 218 
Circle, of convergence, 554 
of curvature, 360, 460, 461, 476 
osculating, 360, 460 
rational representation, 292 
Closed curves, 339 
Closed intervals, 4 
Commensurable, 5 
Commutative law, 2 
Compact, 96 
Comparison test, 520 
Completeness of real number con-
tinuum, 95 
Complex, conjugate, 104 
number, 103, 104 
Component, 381 
Composite function, 217 
higher derivatives of, 219 
Compound function, 52 
derivative of, 218 
Concave, 236, 357 
Condenser, 423 
Confocal, 436 
Conjugate complex number, 104 
Constrained motion, 400 
Contact, 359 
of curves, 458 
of infinite order, 462 
of nth order, 458' 
Continuity, 31-47, 100 
axiom of, 8 
definition of, 33 
Holder, 118 
Lipschitz, 43 
modulus of, 41, 178 
of compound functions, 55 
Continuity, principle, 95 
uniform, 41 
Continuous, sectionally, 588 
uniformly, 100 
Continuum, of numbers, 1 
space-time, 364 
Convergence, Cauchy test for, 75, 
511 
circle of, 554 
integral test for, 570 
of improper integrals, 305 
of series, 75 
uniform, 529, 532, 534, 535 
Convergent, absolutely, 557 
conditionally, 557 
Convex, 236 
function. 357 
Cooling, law of, 225 
Coordinate axes, change of, 360 
Corners, 347 
Cotangent, resolution into partial 
fractions, 602 
Taylor expansion for, 624 
Coulomb's law, 422 
Critical point, 240. 242, 347 
Cubical parabola, 28 
Current, 228, 583 
Curvature, 354, 395 
center of, 358, 424, 430 
circle of, 358, 460, 461, 476 
invariance of, 362 
radius of, 358, 424 
sign of, 355 
Curve. area under, 122 
center of mass, 374 
closed, 333, 336, 339 
contact of, 458 
corners of, 347 
distance along, 353 
in polar coordinates, 327 
length of, 348 
normal to, 345, 424 
osculating, 360 
parallel, 438 
parametric representation, 324 
polar, 437 
positive and negative side of, 342, 
346 
secant of, 156 
simple, 333 

Curve, simple closed, 339, 342 
slope of, 158, 161 
tangent to, 156 
Cusp, 168, 344 
of astroid, 430 
of evolute, 424 
Cyclic permutation, 340 
Cycloid, 412, 436 
"common," 328, 344, 347, 376 
evolute of, 428 
Damped harmonic oscillation, 638 
Darboux integral, 199 
Decimal, periodic fractions, 68 
representation of real numbers, 9 
Dedekind cut, 91 
Definite, quadratic expression, 283 
De Moivre's theorem, 105, 551 
Density, 5 
of rational numbers, 93 
Dependent variable, 18 
Derivative, 158 
backward, 167 
forward, 167 
higher, 169, 203 
of a product, 202 
of a quotient, 203 
of a sum, 202 
Difference quotient, 158, 190 
Differences, 472, 473 
Differentiability of functions, 166, 
259 
Differentiable, function, 160, 180 
Differential, 179, 202 
Differential equation, 633 
homogeneous, 635 
integral of, 633 
of cos x, 312 
of exponential function, 223 
of sin x, 312 
Differentiation, 156 
chain rule, 218 
rules for, 201 
Digit, 9 
Directed lines, 340 
Direction, 383 
angle, 161, 340, 383 
cosines, 383, 395 
Dirichlet integral, 309, 558 
Dirichlet series, 568 
Discontinuity, infinite, 35 
jump, 31, 35 
Index 655 
removable singularity, 35, 40 
Discriminant, 283 
Displacement, 362 
Distributive law, 2 
Divergent sequence, 71 
Divergent series, 75 
Domain, 18 
Electric circuit, 228, 583 
Electrical oscillations, 635 
Electricity, quantity of, 423 
Electromotive force, 228, 583 
Ellipse, 378 
area enclosed by, 370 
evolute of, 429 
length of, 437 
rational parameter representation, 
327 
Elliptic function, 300 
Elliptic integral, 299, 321, 378,411, 
437, 550 
Energy, conversation of, 406, 420, 
421 
kinetic, 375, 420 
potential, 421 
Envelope, 424 
Epicycloid, 329 
Equation, algebraic, 103 
Error, calculus of, 490 
round off 486 
truncation 486 
Escape velocity, 417, 423 
Euler's constant, 526, 629 
Euler's formula, 551 
Even function, 29 
Evolute, 359, 424, 427 
cusps of, 425 
of cycloid, 428 
of ellipse, 429 
Exponential function, 51, 151, 152, 
216, 249, 250, 453 
differential equation of, 223 
order of magnitude of, 249 
power series for, 546 
Extension, 24 
Extrapolation, 476 
Extremum, 238 
relative points, 238, 240 

656 
Index 
Factorial, 56, 308 
Falling bodies, 163, 169 
Fejer's kernel, 610 
Fejer's trigonometric approximation, 
610 
Fermat's principle of least time, 245 
Fixed point, 500 
Folium of Descartes, 435 
Force, 397, 398 
elastic, 404 
resultant, 397 
Fourier coefficients, 587, 594, 604 
order of magnitude, of 607 
Fourier integral formula, 6 t 5 
Fourier series. 571, 587 
Fourier transform. 615 
Fractional part. 337 
Fractions. decimal. 9 
Frame of reference. 360. 364 
Free fall, 402 
Frequency, circular. 575, 582 
natural, 638 
of oscillation, 405 
resonance, 644 
Fresnel integral. 311 
Function, 17 
algebraic, 49 
analytic, 545, 553 
average of, 139 
bounded, 101 
concave, 357 
convex, 357 
composite. 217 
compound, 52. 217 
continuous, 98, 100, 101, 166 
differentiability. 166, 180, 259 
elementary, 86, 261 
elliptic, 300 
even, 29 
explicit, 261 
exponential, 51. 151. 216, 453, 
546 
gamma, 308 
"Holder-continuous," 44 
hyperbolic, 228. 363, 552 
integrable. 128 
inverse, 45. 54 
limit of. 82 
linear, 48 
"Lipschitz-continuous," 43 
"Lipschitz-continuous," 
monotone, 
29 
monotonic, 177 
odd, 29 
periodic. 336, 572 
periodic continuations of, 338 
primitive, 187. I 89 
quadratic, 48 
rational, 47 
trigonometric. 49. 165. 274, 299, 
552 
vector. 393 
weight, 142 
Zeta, 559 
Fundamental theorem of calculus, 
185, 187. 188 
Gamma function 308 
Gauss's test. 566 
Geometric mean, 16, 108 
Geometric series, 67, 68 
Gibb's phenomenon. 616 
Graph, 19 
Gravitational acceleration, 413 
Gravitational constant. 413 
Gravity, 398 
center of, 142 
Guldin's rule 374 
Harmonic. mean. 108 
series. 629 
simple. 405 
Harmonics. 577 
Hodograph. 438 
Holder condition. 44 
Holder-continuity, 44, 118 
Holder-exponent. 44 
Homogeneous equation, 636 
Hyperbola. area bounded by, 372 
rational representation. 293 
rectangular, 27. 231 
Hyberbolic cotangent. Taylor series 
for. 623 
Hyperbolic function. 228, 363 
addition theorem for. 231 
exponential expressions for. 552 
invelse 232 
Hypocycloid. 331. 435 
Identity mapping. 54 

Image, 19 
Impedance, 584 
Improper integral, 557 
Inclination, angle of, 341 
Incommensurable, 5 
Indefinite integral, 185, 188, 189 
Independent variable, 18 
Indeterminate expressions, 464 
Indeterminate forms, derivatives of, 
466 
Index, 431, 434 
Inductance, 583 
Induction, 57 
mathematical, 57 
Inequalities, 12 
Cauchy-Schwarz, 15, 197 
geometrical representation, 30 
triangle, 14. 612 
Inertia, moment of, 375 
Infimum, 97 
Infinite sequence. 56 
Infinite series, 75 
Inflection point, 237, 357, 460 
Inflectional tangent, 237 
Initial condition, 313, 399, 639 
Initial state, 634 
Instantaneous direction of motion, 
395 
Integrable function, 128 
Integral, 122 
additivity, 136 
analytic definition, 123 
bounds, 139 
computation of, 482 
Darboux, 199 
definite, 143 
Dirichlet, 311, 558 
elementary, 363 
elliptic, 299. 321, 437, 550 
Fresnel, 311 
improper, 301, 311, 557 
indefinite, 143, 185, 188, 189 
Leibnitz's notation. 125 
of differential equation, 633, 634 
representation, 434 
Riemann. 128, 199 
sign, 125 
test for convergence, 570 
Integrand, 126 
Integration, by parts, 275 
Index 
657 
Integration, constants of, 634 
of rational functions, 282 
Intermediate value, property, 110 
theorem, 44, 100 
Interpolation, 470 
error of, 474 
linear, 182 
polynomial, 470 
Interval, 4 
closed, 4 
nested, 7 
open, 4 
Invariance, 360 
Inverse function, 45, 54 
derivative of. 206 
Involute, 426. 427, 429 
Irrational number, 6, 91. 106 
Isochronous, 411 
Iteration method, 499 
Jensen's inequality, 318 
Jump discontinuity, 31, 35 
Kepler's third law. 415 
Kinetic energy. 375, 420 
Lagrange's form for the remainder 
in Taylor's formula, 449, 452 
Lagrange's 
interpolation 
formula, 
476, 477 
Leibnitz convergence test, 514 
Leibnitz notation for integral, 125 
Leibnitz rule. 203, 315 
Leibnitz-Gregory series. 445, 592 
Lemniscate. 102 
area in, 372, 379 
Length, 395 
alternative definition, 350 
as a parameter. 352 
invariance of, 350 
of curve in polar coordinates, 351 
of ellipse, 437 
L'Hospital's rule, 464 
Limit, definition of 70 
left-hand, 573 
of a function, 82 
of a sequence, 60, 70, 93 
operations, 71 
point, 95 
right-hand, 573 

658 
Index 
Line integrals, 367 
Linear function, 48 
Linear in:erpolation, 182 
Lipschitz-condition, 43 
Lipschitz-continuity, 43 
of differentiable functions, 178 
Logarithm, 51, 185, 250 
addition theorem, 147 
any base, 153 
calculation of, 493 
expansion of, 442 
function, 145 
natural, 145 
order of magnitude of, 249 
Lorentz-transformation, 363 
Maclaurin's theorem, 452 
Magnitude, order of, 248 
Majoranat, 521, 535 
Mapping, affine, 20 
identity, 54 
into, onto, 19 
one-to-one. 29, 54, 55 
perspective. 21 
Maximum, 238, 461 
absolute. 239. 240 
existence of, 101 
norm, 612 
relative, 238 
strict, 238, 243 
value, 240 
Mean, arithmetic, 16, 139 
arithmetic-geometric, 113 
geometric, 16, 108 
harmonic, 108, 109 
value. 141 
value theorem of differential cal-
culus, 173, 191, 222 
value theorem of integral calcu-
lus, 141 
value theorem of integral calcu-
lus generalized, 142 
Minimum, 101, 238, 461 
absolute, 239, 240 
relative, 238 
value, 240 
Modulus, 104 
of continuity, 41, 178 
Moment, 373 
of inertia, 375 
Monotonic 
(monotone) 
function, 
29, 177 
Monotonic (monotone) sequence, 
74, 96 
Motion, circular, 415 
constrained to curve, 400 
equation of, 398 
forced, 635 
Newton's law of, 397 
of falling bodies, 398 
on a given curve, 405 
oscillatory, 409 
uniform with velocity, 162 
Multiplication law. 153 
Natural frequency, 638 
Natural logarithm, 145 
Natural numbers, 1, 2 
Neighborhood, 12 
Nested sequence of intervals, 8 
Newton's 
interpolation 
formula, 
471, 473 
Newton's law of gravitation, 413 
Newton's law of motion, 397, 400 
Newton's method, 495, 502 
Norm, maximum, 612 
mean square. 612 
Normal, positive. 346 
to curve, 345 
Null sequence, 90 
Number, algebraic. 79 
axis. 3 
complex. 103, 104 
conjugate complex, 104 
continuum, 1, 7 
irrational, 6, 91 
natural, 1 
rational. 2. 106 
real, 7, 91 
transcendental. 79 
"0," "0" notation, 253 
Odd function, 29 
Ohm's law, 228, 584, 635 
Open interval, 4 
Operations, rational. 2 
with limits, 71 
Order, 92 
of points, 339, 340 
Order of magnitude, 248 

Order of magnitude, of a function, 
252 
of vanishing function, 252 
Orientation, 339 
counterclockwise, 342 
Orthogonal directions, 390 
Oscillation, 575 
amplitude of, 405, 411 
damped harmonic, 638 
electrical, 635 
frequency of, 405 
period of, 638 
Osculating circle. 460 
Osculating parabolas, 459, 476 
'Ir, 80 
Wallis' product for, 280 
Parabola, 28, 48 
cubical, 28 
Neil's, 168 
osculating, 459, 476 
Parallel curve, 438 
Parallel displacement, 361, 380 
Parameter, change of, 326 
time as, 328 
Parseval's equation, 632 
Parceval's theorem, 614 
Partial fraction, 286 
Partial sum, 75 
Pendulum, cycloidal, 411, 428 
oscillation of, 410 
period of oscillation, 550 
simple, 410 
Period, 337 
of motion, 415 
of oscillation, 638 
of periodic function, 631 
of satellite, 416 
Periodic decimal fractions, 68 
Periodic functions, 572 
Perspective mapping, 21 
Phase, 575 
displacement, 575, 582, 638 
shift, 575 
Point of inflection, 357 
rational, 4 
Polar angle, 384 
Polar coordinates, 102 
area in, 371 
length of curve in, 351 
Polynomials, 47 
interpolation, 470 
trigonometric, 577 
Postulates, 87 
Potential energy, 421-3 
Index 659 
Power series, 441, 450, 540, 554 
for exponential function, 546 
interval of convergence, 541 
Powers, sums of, 628 
with arbitrary exponents, 152 
Pressure atmosphere, 226 
Primes, 56, 111 
series of reciprocal, 561 
Primitive function, 187, 189 
Product, infinite, 559 
symbolic, 217 
Projection, stereographic, 21, 292 
Properties, in the large, 348 
in the small, 348 
Quadratic function, 48 
Quadrature, 482 
Radian measure, 50 
Radius of curvature, see Curvature 
Range, 19 
Rate of change, average, 160 
instantaneous, 160, 162 
Ratio and root tests, 521 
Rational functions, 47 
Rational numbers. 2, 106 
denumerable. 98 
Rational operations, 2 
Rational points, 4 
Real numbers, 7, 91 
binary representation, 11 
completeness, 95 
decimal representation, 9 
not denumerable, 98 
Rectangular hyperbola, 27 
Rectifiability, 349, 436 
Reflection law, 245 
Refraction law, 246 
Relativity, special theory of, 363 
Removable singularity. 35, 40, 453 
Resistance, 583 
Resonance, curve, 644 
frequency, 644 
Restriction, 24 
Riemann integral, 128, 199 

660 Index 
Riemann sum, 128, 301 
Riemann zeta function, 621 
Rolle's general theorem, 470 
Rolle's theorem, 175 
Roots of unity, 105, 106 
Rotation, of axes, 392 
sense of, 341, 342 
Round-off error, 486 
Rule of false position, 497 
Scalar, 379 
Schwarz inequality, 197 
Secant of curve, 156 
Sectionally continuous, 588 
Sectionally smooth, 604 
Self-induction, 228 
Sense of rotation, 341 
on are, 334 
positive, 334 
Sequence, bounded, 71 
convergent, 70 
divergent, 71 
infinite, 56 
limit of, 60, 93 
monotone, 74, 96 
nested, 90 
null, 90 
Series, absolutely convergent, 511, 
516, 518 
binomial, 456, 469, 547 
comparison of, 420 
conditionally 
convergent, 
511, 
517, 518 
convergent, 75, 511 
differentiation of, 538 
Dirichlet, 568 
divergent, 51 
Fourier, 571 
geometric, 67, 68 
harmonic, 513 
hypergeometric, 567 
infinite, 75, 455 
integration of, 536 
majorants, 521 
of reciprocal prime numbers, 561 
operations with, 420 
power, 540 
rearrangement of terms, 518 
sum of infinite, 510 
trigonometric, 572 
Series, 
uniform 
convergence 
of, 
532, 534, 535 
Set, denumerable, 98 
Sgnx, 31, 35 
Simple pendulum, 401, 402, 410 
Simpson's rule, 485, 487 
Sine, infinite product for, 602 
power series for, 455 
Slope of curve, 158 
Snell's law of refraction, 247 
Span, 193 
Speed, 353, 395, 396 
Spring, 423 
Stationary point, 240, 347 
Stereographic projection, 21 
Stirling's formula, 504, 630 
Stirling's series, 630 
Subsequence, 96 
Substitution rule for integrals, 265, 
267 
Successive approximation, 495 
Summation, by parts, 516 
symbol, 75 
Superposition of vibrations, 576 
principle of, 641 
Supremum, 97 
Surface of revolution, 374 
Symbolic product, 52, 385 
Tangent, 460 
direction cosines of, 345, 346, 
354 
direction of, 395 
equation of, 344 
formula, 483, 486 
positive, 346 
to a curve, 156, 161 
Taylor's formula, 446, 448, 449 
Taylor's polynomial, 447, 459 
Taylor's series, 449, 545 
Taylor's theorem, 451 
Topology, 342 
Tractrix, 437 
Transcendental numbers, 79 
Translation, 361, 380 
Trapezoid, formula, 483 
rule, 487 
Triangle inequality, 14, 612 
Trigonometric function, 49, 215, 
299 

Trigonometric function, differential 
equation of, 312 
differentiation of, 205 
exponential expressions for, 552 
inverse, 210 
orthogonality relations of, 274 
representation, 104, 165 
Trigonometric polynomial, 577 
Trigonometric series, 571 
Trochoid, 332, 435, 437 
Truncation error, 486 
Uniform continuity, 41, 100 
Uniform convergence, 529, 532 
Unity, roots of, lOS, 106 
Vectors. 380. 
angle between, 387 
coordinate, 390 
definition of, 380 
derivative of, 393 
exterior product of, 388 
integral of, 393 
length of, 382 
opposite, 382, 384 
parallel construction for sum of, 
385 
position, 382 
resultant of, 385 
scalar product of, 388 
Vectors, sum of, 385 
unit, 390 
Velocity, 395 
average, 162 
components, 361 
Index 661 
of freely falling bodies, 163 
Vibration, 634 
amplitude of, 575 
elastic, 404 
harmonic, 575 
period of. 575 
sinusoidal, 575 
superposition of, 576 
Voltage, 583 
Wallis' formula, 280, 282 
Weierstrass approximation theorem, 
569, 608 
Weierstrass principle. 95, 911 
Weight, factors, 142 
function, 142 
of body, 399 
Weighted average, 142 
Work, 418, 420 
diagram, 419 
Zeta function of Riemann, 559, 570, 
621 
as infinite product, 560 


